19300 99850579 15790
PARADISI IN SOLE Paradisus Terrestris. or A Garden of all sorts of pleasant flowers which our English ayre will permitt to be noursed vp: with A Kitchen garden of all manner of herbes, rootes, & fruites, for meate or sause vsed with vs, and An Orchard of all sorte of fruitbearing Trees and shrubbes fit for our Land together With the right orderinge planting & preseruing of them and their vses & vertues Collected by John Parkinson Apothecary of London 1629 Qui veut parangonner L'artifice a Nature Et nos parcs a L'Eden, indiscret il mesure. Le pas de l'Elephant par le pas du ciron, Et de l'Aigle Le vol parcil du mouscheron. a decorative engraving of a figurative sun, wind and clouds, supported by flower urns, with an oval Garden of Eden with prelapsarian Adam and Eve, surrounded by flowers, trees and animals. A Siritzer
TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. Madame, KNowing your Maiestie so much deligh∣ted with all the faire Flowers of a Gar∣den, and furnished with them as farre be∣yond others, as you are eminent before them; this my VVorke of a Garden, long before this intended to be published, and but now only finished, seemed as it were destined, to bee first offered into your Highnesse hands, as of right challenging the proprietie of Patronage from all others. Accept, I beseech your Maiestie, this speaking Garden, that may informe you in all the parti∣culars of your store, as well as wants, when you cannot see any of them fresh vpon the ground: and it shall further en∣courage him to accomplish the remainder; who, in praying that your Highnesse may enioy the heauenly Paradise, after the many yeares fruition of this earthly, submitteth to be Your Maiesties in all humble deuotion, IOHN PARKINSON.
TO THE COVRTEOVS READER. ALthough the ancient Heathens did appropriate the first inuention of the knowledge of Herbes, and so conse∣quently of Physicke, some vnto Chiron the Centaure, and others vnto Apollo or Aeculapius his sonne; yet wee that are Christians haue out of a better Schoole learned, that God, the Creator of Heauen and Earth, at the beginning when he created Adam, inspired him with the knowledge of all naturall things (which suc∣cessiuely descended to Noah afterwardes, and to his Posterity): for, as he was able to giue names to all the liuing Creatures, according to their seuerall natures; so no doubt but hee had also the knowledge, both what Herbes and Fruits were fit, eyther for Meate or Medicine, for Vse or for Delight. And that Adam might exercise this knowledge, God planted a Garden for him to liue in, (wherein euen in his innocency he was to labour and spend his time) which hee stored with the best and choysest Herbes and Fruits the earth could produce, that he might haue not onely for necessitie whereon to feede, but for pleasure also; the place or garden called Paradise importing as much, and more plainly the words set downe in Genesis the second, which are these; Out of the ground the Lord God made to grow euerie tree pleasant to the sight and good for meate; and in the 24. of Numbers, the Parable of Balaam, mentioning the Aloe trees that God planted; and in other places if there were neede to recite them. But my purpose is onely to shew you, that Paradise was a place (whether you will call it a Garden, or Orchard, or both, no doubt of some large extent) wherein Adam was first placed to abide; that God was the Planter thereof, hauing furnished it with trees and herbes, as well pleasant to the sight, as good for meate, and that hee being to dresse and keepe this place, must of necessity know all the things that grew there∣in, and to what vses they serued, or else his labour about them, and knowledge in them, had been in vaine. And although Adam lost the place for his transgression, yet he lost not the naturall knowledge, nor vse of them: but that, as God made the whole world, and all the Creatures therein for Man, so hee may vse all things as well of pleasure as of necessitie, to bee helpes vnto him to serue his God. Let men therefore, according to their first institution, so vse their seruice, that they also in them may remember their seruice to God, and not (like our Grand-mother Eve) set their affections so strongly on the pleasure in them, as to deserue the losse of them in this Paradise, yea and of Heauen also. For truly from all sorts of Herbes and Flowers we may draw matter at all times not only to magnifie the Creator that hath giuen them such diuersities of formes, sents and colours, that the most cunning
Worke-man cannot imitate, and such vertues and properties, that although wee know many, yet many more lye hidden and vnknowne, but many good instructions also to our selues: That as many herbes and flowers with their fragrant sweete smels doe comfort, and as it were reuiue the spirits, and perfume a whole house; euen so such men as liue vertuously, labouring to doe good, and profit the Church of God and the Common wealth by their paines or penne, doe as it were send forth a pleasing sauour of sweet instructions, not only to that time wherein they liue, and are fresh, but being drye, withered and dead, cease not in all after ages to doe as much or more. Many herbes and flowers that haue small beautie or sauour to com∣mend them, haue much more good vse and vertue: so many men of excellent rare parts and good qualities doe lye hid vnknown and not respected, vntill time and vse of them doe set forth their properties. Againe, many flowers haue a glorious shew of beauty and brauery, yet stinking in smell, or else of no other vse: so many doe make a glorious ostentation, and flourish in the world, when as if they stinke not horribly before God, and all good men, yet surely they haue no other vertue then their outside to commend them, or leaue behind them. Some also rise vp and appear like a Lilly among Thornes, or as a goodly Flower among many Weedes or Grasse, eyther by their honourable authoritie, or eminence of learning or riches, whereby they excell others, and thereby may doe good to many. The frailty also of Mans life is learned by the soone fading of them before their flowring, or in their pride, or soone after, being either cropt by the hand of the spectator, or by a sudden blast wi∣thered and parched, or by the reuolution of time decaying of it owne nature: as also that the fairest flowers or fruits first ripe, are soonest and first gathered. The mutabilitie also of states and persons, by this, that as where many goodly flowers & fruits did grow this yeare and age, in another they are quite pulled or digged vp, and eyther weedes and grasse grow in their place, or some building erected thereon, and their place is no more known. The Ciuill respects to be learned from them are many also: for the delight of the varieties both of formes, colours and properties of Herbes and Flowers, hath euer beene powerfull ouer dull, vnnurtured, rusticke and sauage people, led only by Natures instinct; how much
powerfull is it, or should be in the mindes of generous persons? for it may well bee said, he is not hu∣mane, that is not allured with this obiect. The study, knowledge, and trauel in them, as they haue been entertained of great Kings, Princes and Potentates, without dis∣paragement to their Greatnesse, or hinderance to their more serious and weighty Affaires: so no doubt vnto all that are capable thereof, it is not onely pleasant, but profitable, by comforting the minde, spirits and senses with an harmelesse delight, and by enabling the iudgement to conferre and apply helpe to many dangerous di∣seases. It is also an Instructer in the verity of the genuine Plants of the Ancients, and a Correcter of the many errours whereunto the world by continuance hath bin diuerted, and almost therein fixed, by eradicating in time, and by degrees, the perti∣nacious wilfulnesse of many, who because they were brought vp in their errours, are most vnwilling to leaue them without consideration of the good or euill, the right or wrong, they draw on therewith. And for my selfe I may well say, that had not mine owne paines and studies by a naturall inclination beene more powerfull in mee then any others helpe (although some through an euill disposition and ignorance haue so far traduced me as to say this was rather another mans worke then mine owne, but I leaue them to their folly) I had neuer done so much as I here publish; nor been fit or prepared for a larger, as time may suddenly (by Gods permission) bring to light, if the maleuolent dispositions of degenerate spirits doe not hinder the accomplishment.  But perswading my selfe there is no showre that produceth not some fruit, or no word but worketh some effect, eyther of good to perswade, or of reproofe to euince; I could not but declare my minde herein, let others iudge or say what they please. For I haue alwaies held it a thing vnfit, to conceale or bury that knowledge God hath giuen, and not to impart it, and further others therewith as much as is conue∣nient, yet without ostentation, which I haue euer hated. Now further to informe the courteous Reader, both of the occasion that led me on to this worke, and the other occurrences to it. First, hauing perused many Herbals in Latine, I obserued that most of them haue eyther neglected or not knowne the many diuersities of the flower Plants, and rare fruits are known to vs at this time, and (except Clusius) haue made mention but of a very few. In English likewise we haue some extant, as
Turner and Dodonaeus translated, who haue haue said little of Flowers, Gerard who is last, hath no doubt giuen vs the knowledge of as many as he attained vnto in his time, but since his daies we haue had many more varieties, then he or they euer heard of, as may be perceiued by the store I haue here produced. And none of them haue particularly seuered those that are beautifull flower plants, fit to store a gar∣den of delight and pleasure, from the wilde and vnfit: but haue enterlaced many, one among another, whereby many that haue desired to haue faire flowers, haue not known either what to choose, or what to desire. Diuers Bookes of Flowers also haue been set forth, some in our owne Countrey, and more in others, all which are as it were but handfuls snatched from the plentifull Treasury of Nature, none of them being willing or able to open all sorts, and declare them fully; but the greatest hinderance of all mens delight was, that none of them had giuen any description of them, but the bare name only. To satisfie therefore their desires that are louers of such Delights, I took vpon me this labour and charge, and haue here selected and set forth a Garden of all the chiefest for choyce, and fairest for shew, from among all the seuerall Tribes and Kindreds of Natures beauty, and haue ranked them as neere as I could, or as the worke would permit, in affinity one vnto another. Second∣ly, and for their sakes that are studious in Authors, I haue set down the names haue bin formerly giuen vnto them, with some of their errours, not intending to cumber this worke with all that might bee said of them, because the deciding of the many controuersies, doubts, and questions that concerne them, pertaine more fitly to a ge∣nerall History: yet I haue beene in some places more copious and ample then at the first I had intended, the occasion drawing on my desire to informe others with what I thought was fit to be known, reseruing what else might be said to another time & worke; wherein (God willing) I will inlarge my selfe, the subiect matter requiring it at my hands, in what my small ability can effect. Thirdly, I haue also to embellish this Worke set forth the figures of all such plants and flowers as are materiall and different one from another: but not as some others haue done, that is, a number of the figures of one sort of plant that haue nothing to distinguish them but the co∣lour, for that I hold to be superfluous and waste. Fourthly, I haue also set down the Ʋertues and Properties of them in a briefe manner, rather desiring to giue you the knowledge of a few certaine and true, then to relate, as others haue done, a needless and false multiplicitie, that so there might as well profit as pleasure be taken from them, and that nothing might be wanting to accomplish it fully. And so much for this first part, my Garden of pleasant and delightfull Flowers. My next Garden consisteth of Herbes and Rootes, fit to be eaten of the rich and poor as nourishment and food, as sawce or condiment, as sallet or refreshing, for pleasure or profit; where I doe as well play the Gardiner, to shew you (in briefe, but not at large) the times  and manner of sowing, setting, planting, replanting, and the like (although all these things, and many more then are true, are set down very largely in the seuerall bookes that others haue written of this subiect) as also to shew some of the Kit∣chen vses (because they are Kitchen herbes &c.) although I confesse but very spa∣ringly, not intending a treatise of cookery, but briefly to giue a touch thereof; and also the Physicall properties, to shew somewhat that others haue not set forth; yet not to play the Empericke, and giue you receipts of medicines for all diseases, but only to shew in some sort the qualities of Herbes, to quicken the minds of the stu∣dious. And lastly an Orchard of all sorts of domesticke or forraine, rare and good fruits, fit for this our Land and Countrey, which is at this time better stored and furnished then euer in any age before. I haue herein endeauoured, as in the other Gardens, to set forth the varieties of euery sort in as briefe a manner as possibly could be, without superfluous repetitions of descriptions, and onely with especiall notes of difference in leaues, flowers and fruits. Some few properties also are set downe, rather the chiefest then the most, as the worke did require. And moreouer before euery of these parts I haue giuen Treatises of the ordering, preparing and keeping the seuerall Gardens and Orchard, with whatsoeuer I thought was conue∣nient to be known for euery of them. Thus haue I shewed you both the occasion and scope of this Worke, and herein haue spent my time, paines and charge, which if well accepted, I shall thinke well employed, and may the sooner hasten the fourth Part, A Garden of Simples; which will be quiet no longer at home, then that it can bring his Master newes of faire weather for the iourney. Thine in what he may, IOHN PARKINSON.
Ioanni Parkinsono Pharmacopoeo Londinensi sclertis∣simo Botanico consummatissimo T.D.M. S.P.D. POema panegyricum Opus tuum indefessi laboris, vtili∣tatis eximiae postulat, & meriti iure à me extorqueret (mi Parkinsone) si fauentibus Musis, & secundo Apol∣line in bicipiti somniare Parnasso, & repentè Poetae mihi prodire liceret. In foetus tui bouis auibus in lucem editi, & prolixiorem nepotum seriem promittentis laudes, alii Deopleni Enthousiastae carmine suos pangant elenchos; quos sub figmentis ampullata hyperbolicarum vocum mulcedine, vates ferè auribus mentibusue insinuant. Veritas nuditatis amans, fuco natiuum candorem obumbranti non illustranti perpetuum indixit bellum: In sim∣plicitate, quam assertionum neruosa breuitas exprimit, exultat. Audi quid de te sentiam, Tu mihi sis in posterum Crateuas Brittannus; inter omnes, quotquot mihi hic innotuerunt, peritissimus, exercitatissimus, oculatis∣simus, & emunctissimae naris Botanicus: Cuius opera in fortunata hac Insula rem herbariam tractari, emendari, augeri, & popularibus tuis ver∣naculo sermone ad amussim tradi, non decentiae modo, sed etiam necessi∣tatis est. Macte tua sedulitate (Vir optime) neque te laborum tam arduis lucubrationibus datorum hactenus poeniteat, vel deinceps impendendo∣rum pigeat. Difficilia quae pulchra. Leniet debitae laudis dulcedo vigiliarum acerbitatem, & Olympicum stadium cito pede, à carceribus ad metas ala∣criter decurrentem nobile manet . Sed memento Artem longam, Vitam esse breuem. . Vide quid ad antiquum illum, cuius si non animam, saltem genium induisti, Crateuam scribat Hippocrates, . Nobilissimam Medicinae partem Botanicam esse reputa. Florae nunc litasti & Pomonae, Apollini vt audio propediem HORTO MEDICO facturus. Amabò integrae Vestae sacra conficito, eiusque variegatum multis simplicium morbifugo∣rum myriadibus sinum absolutè pandito, quem sine velo nobis exhibeas. Nulla dies abeat sine linea. Sic tandem fructus gloriae referes vberrimos, quos iustè sudoribus partos, vt in cruda & viridi senectute decerpas diu, iisque longum fruaris opto. Vale. Datum Londini Calendas Octobris anno salutis 1629. Theodorus de Mayerne Eques aurat. in Aula Regum Magnae Britanniae Iacobi & Caroli P. & F. Archiatrorum Comes.
❧ Ad eximium arte & vsu Pharmacopaeum & Botanographum I. Parkinsonum. Gu. Turne∣rus. M.D.HErbarum vires, primus te (magne Britannae) Edocuit medicas, inclytus arte sophus. Io. Gerar∣dus Chirur∣gus.Atque cluens herbis alter, Chironis alumnus, Descripsit plantas, neu cadat vlla salus. Fortunate senex, sis tu nunc tertius Heros Hortos qui reseras, deliciasque soli, Et flores Veneris laetos, herbas que virentes, Arboreos faetus, pharmacum & arte potens. Posteritas iustos posthac tibi solvet honores, Laudabit que tuae dexteritatis opus. Ottuellus Meuerell. D.M. & Collegiae Med. Lond. socius. Amico suo Ioanni Parkinsono. EXtollunt alij quos (Parkinsone) labores Da mihi iam veniam comminuisse tuos. Extremos poteris credi migrasse per Indos: Cum liber haud aliud quam tuus hortus hic est: Ipse habitare Indos tecum facis, haud petis Indos I nunc, & tua me comminuisse refer. Est liber Effigies, tuus hic qui pingitur hortus, Digna manu facies haec, facieque manus! Vidi ego splendentem varigatis vndique gemmis Ʋna fuit Salomon, turba quid ergo fuit? Vt vario splendent Pallacia regia sumptu, Et Procerum turbis Atria tota nitent: Tunc cum festa dies veniam dedit esse superbis Quosque fious texit, nunc tria rura tegunt: Plena tuo pariter spectatur Curia in Horto, Hic Princeps, Dux hic, Sponsaque pulchra Ducis. Quaeque dies est festa dies, nec parcius vnquam Luxuriant, lauta haec; Quotidiana tamen. Ecce velut Patriae Paradisi haud immemor Exul, Hunc naturali pingit amore sibi. Pingit & ad vivum sub eodem nomine, & hic est Fronticuli sudor quem cerebrique dedit: Astat Adam medius Paradiso noster in isto Et species nomen cuique dat ipse suum. Hos cape pro meritis, qui florem nomine donas Aeternum florens tu tibi Nomen habe. Guilielmus Atkins.
Ad Amicum Ioannem Parkinsonum Pharmacopaeum, & Archibotanicum Londinensem. AFrica quas profert Plantas, quas India mittit, Quas tua dat tellus, has tuus hortus habet: Atque harum Species, florendi tempora, vires, Et varias formas iste libellus habet: Nescio plus librum talem mirabor, an hortum Totus inest horto mundus; at iste libro. Parkinsone tuus liber, & labor, & tua sit laus, Herbas dum nobis das; datur herba tibi. Guilielmus Brodus Pharmacopaeus ac Philobotanicus Londinensis. Ad Amicum Ioannem Parkinsonum Pharmacopaeum & Botanicum insignem. Carmen. QVam magno pandis Florae penetralia nixu Atque facis coelo liberiore frui? Omnibus vt placeas, ô quam propensa voluntas, Solicitus que labor nocte dieque premit? Quam magno cultum studio conquirere in hortum Herbarum quicquid mundus in orbe tenet, Immensus sumptus, multosque extensus in annos Te labor afficiunt? & data nulla quies. Talia quaerenti, surgit novus ardor habendi, Nec tibi tot soli munera magna petis; Descriptos vivâ profers sub imagine flores, Tum profers mensae quicquid & hortus alit, Laudatos nobis fructus & promis honores, Profers, quas celebrant nullibi scripta virum, Herbarum species, quibus est quoque grata venustas Sic nos multiplici munere, Amice, beas. Hoc cape pro meritis, florum dum gratia floret, Suntque herbis vires; en tibi Nomen erit. In serum semper tua gloria floreat aevum, Gloria quae in longum non peritura diem. Thomas Iohnson vtriusque Societatis consors.
IOANNIS PARKINSONI PHARMACOPOEI LONDINENSIS EFFIGIES · LXII AETATIS ANNVM A GENTIS · A NATO CHRISTO MDCXXIX portrait of John Parkinson, the author
THE ORDERING OF THE GARDEN OF PLEASVRE. CHAP. I. The situation of a Garden of pleasure, with the nature of soyles, and how to amend the defects that are in many sorts of situations and grounds.
THE seuerall situations of mens dwellings, are for the most part vnauoideable and vnremoueable; for most men cannot appoint forth such a manner of situation for their dwelling, as is most fit to auoide all the inconueniences of winde and weather, but must bee content with such as the place will afford them; yet all men doe well know, that some situations are more excellent than o∣thers: according therfore to the seuerall situation of mens dwel∣lings, so are the situations of their gardens also for the most part. And although diuers doe diuersly preferre their owne seuerall places which they haue chosen, or wherein they dwell. As some those places that are neare vnto a riuer or brooke to be best for the pleasantnesse of the water, the case of transportation of them∣selues, their friends and goods, as also for the fertility of the soyle, which is seldome bad neare vnto a riuers side; And others extoll the side or top of an hill, bee it small or great, for the prospects sake; And againe, some the plaine or champian ground, for the euen leuell thereof: euery one of which, as they haue their commodities accompa∣nying them, so haue they also their discommodities belonging vnto them, according to the Latine Prouerbe, Omne commodum fert suum incommodum. Yet to shew you for eue∣rie of these situations which is the fittest place to plant your garden in, and how to de∣fend it from the iniuries of the cold windes and frosts that may annoy it, will, I hope, be well accepted. And first, for the water side, I suppose the North side of the water to be the best side for your garden, that it may haue the comfort of the South Sunne to lye vpon it and face it, and the dwelling house to bee aboue it, to defend the cold windes and frosts both from your herbes, and flowers, and early fruits. And so likewise I iudge for the hill side, that it may lye full open to the South Sunne, and the house aboue it, both for the comfort the ground shall receiue of the water and raine descending into it, and of defence from winter and colds. Now for the plaine leuell ground, the buil∣dings of the house should be on the North side of the garden, that so they might bee a defence of much sufficiency to safeguard it from many iniurious cold nights and dayes, which else might spoyle the pride thereof in the bud. But because euery one cannot so appoint his dwelling, as I here appoint the fittest place for it to be, euery ones pleasure thereof shall be according to the site, cost, and endeauours they bestow, to cause it come nearest to this proportion, by such helpes of bricke or stone wals to defend it, or by the helpe of high growne and well spread trees, planted on the North side thereof, to keepe it the warmer. And euery of these three situations, hauing the fairest buildings of the house facing the garden in this manner before specified, besides the benefit of shelter it shall haue from them, the buildings and roomes abutting thereon, shall haue recipro∣cally the beautifull prospect into it, and haue both sight and sent of whatsoeuer is ex∣cellent, and worthy to giue content out from it, which is one of the greatest pleasures a garden can yeeld his Master. Now hauing shewed you the best place where this your  garden should be, let me likewise aduise you where it should not be, at least that it is the worst place wherein it may be, if it be either on the West or East side of your house, or that it stand in a moorish ground, or other vnwholsome ayre (for many, both fruits, herbes, and flowers that are tender, participate with the ayre, taking in a manner their chiefest thriuing from thence) or neare any common Lay-stalles, or common Sewers, or else neare any great Brew-house, Dye-house, or any other place where there is much smoake, whether it be of straw, wood, or especially of sea-coales, which of all other is the worst, as our Citie of London can giue proofe sufficient, wherein neither herbe nor tree will long prosper, nor hath done euer since the vse of sea-coales beganne to bee fre∣quent therein. And likewise that it is much the worse, if it bee neare vnto any Barnes or Stackes of corne or hey, because that from thence will continually with the winde bee brought into the garden the strawe and chaffe of the corne, the dust and seede of the hey to choake or pester it. Next vnto the place or situation, let mee shew you the grounds or soyles for it, eyther naturall or artificiall. No man will deny, but the naturall blacke mould is not only the fattest and richest, but farre exceedeth any other either naturall or artificiall, as well in goodnesse as durability. And next thereunto, I hold the sandy loame (which is light and yet firme, but not loose as sand, nor stiffe like vnto clay) to be lit∣tle inferiour for this our Garden of pleasure; for that it doth cause all bulbous and tu∣berous rooted plants to thriue sufficiently therein, as likewise all other flower-plants, Roses, Trees, &c. which if it shall decay by much turning and working out the heart of it, may soone be helped with old stable manure of horses, being well turned in, when it is old and almost conuerted to mould. Other grounds, as chalke, sand, grauell, or clay, are euery of them one more or lesse fertill or barren than other; and therefore doe re∣quire such helpes as is most fit for them. And those grounds that are ouer dry, loose, and dustie, the manure of stall fedde beasts and cattell being buried or trenched into the earth, and when it is thorough rotten (which will require twice the time that the stable soyle of horses will) well turned and mixed with the earth, is the best soyle to temper both the heate and drinesse of them. So contrariwise the stable dung of horses is the best for cold grounds, to giue them heate and life. But of all other sorts of grounds, the stiffe clay is the very worst for this purpose, for that although you should digge out the whole compasse of your Garden, carry it away, and bring other good mould in the stead there∣of, and fill vp the place, yet the nature of that clay is so predominant, that in a small time it will eate out the heart of the good mould, and conuert it to its owne nature, or very neare vnto it: so that to bring it to any good, there must bee continuall labour bestowed thereon, by bringing into it good store of chalke, lime, or sand, or else ashes eyther of wood or of sea-coales (which is the best for this ground) well mixed and turned in with it. And as this stiffe clay is the worst, so what ground soeuer commeth nearest vnto the nature thereof, is nearest vnto it in badnesse, the signes whereof are the ouermuch moy∣sture thereof in Winter, and the much cleauing and chapping thereof in Summer, when the heate of the yeare hath consumed the moysture, which tyed and bound it fast toge∣ther, as also the stiffe and hard working therein: but if the nature of the clay bee not too stiffe, but as it were tempered and mixed with sand or other earths, your old stable soyle of horses will helpe well the small rifting or chapping thereof, to be plentifully bestowed therin in a fit season. Some also do commend the casting of ponds and ditches, to helpe to manure these stiffe chapping grounds. Other grounds, that are ouermoist by springs, that lye too neare the vpper face of the earth, besides that the beds thereof had need to be laid vp higher, and the allies, as trenches and furrowes, to lye lower, the ground it selfe had neede to haue some good store of chalke-stones bestowed thereon, some certaine yeares, if it may be, before it be laid into a Garden, that the Winter frosts may breake the chalke small, and the Raine dissolue it into mould, that so they may bee well mixed together; than which, there is not any better manure to soyle such a moist ground, to helpe to dry vp the moysture, and to giue heate and life to the coldnesse thereof, which doth alwayes accompany these moist grounds, and also to cause it abide longer in heart than any other. For the sandy and grauelly grounds, although I know the well mollified manure of beasts and cattell to be excellent good, yet I know also, that some commend a white Marle, and some a clay to be well spread thereon, and after tur∣ned thereinto: and for the chalkie ground, è conuerso, I commend fatte clay to helpe it. You must vnderstand, that the lesse rich or more barren that your ground is, there nee∣deth  the more care, labour, and cost to bee bestowed thereon, both to order it rightly, & so to preserue it from time to time: for no artificiall or forc't ground can endure good any long time, but that within a few yeares it must be refreshed more or lesse, according as it doth require. Yet you shall likewise vnderstand, that this Garden of pleasure stored with these Out-landish flowers; that is, bulbous and tuberous rooted plants, and other fine flowers, that I haue hereafter described, and assigned vnto it, needeth not so much or so often manuring with soyle, &c. as another Garden planted with the other sorts of English flowers, or a Garden of ordinary Kitchin herbes doth. Your ground likewise for this Garden had neede to bee well cleansed from all annoyances (that may hinder the well doing or prospering of the flowers therein) as stones, weedes, rootes of trees, bushes, &c. and all other things cumbersome or hurtfull; and therefore the earth being not naturally fine enough of it selfe, is vsed to bee sifted to make it the finer, and that either through a hurdle made of sticks, or lathes, or through square or round sieues plat∣ted with fine and strong thin stickes, or with wyers in the bottome. Or else the whole earth of the Garden being course, may be cast in the same manner that men vse to try or fine sand from grauell, that is, against a wall; whereby the courser and more stony, fal∣ling downe from the fine, is to betaken away from the foote of the heape, the finer sand and ground remaining still aboue, and on the heape. Or else in the want of a wall to cast it against, I haue seene earth fined by it selfe in this manner: Hauing made the floore or vpper part of a large plat of ground cleane from stones, &c. let there a reasonable round heape of fine earth be set in the midst thereof, or instead thereof a large Garden flower-pot, or other great pot, the bottome turned vpwards, and then poure your course earth on the top or head thereof, one shouell full after another somewhat gently, and thereby all the course stuffe and stones will fall downe to the bottome round about the heape, which must continually be carefully taken away, and thus you may make your earth as fine as if it were cast against a wall, the heape being growne great, seruing in stead there∣of. Those that will not prepare their grounds in some of these manners aforesaid, shall soone finde to their losse the neglect thereof: for the trash and stones shall so hinder the encrease of their roots, that they will be halfe lost in the earth among the stones, which else might be saued to serue to plant wheresoeuer they please. CHAP. II. The frame or forme of a Garden of delight and pleasure, with the seuerall varieties thereof.
ALthough many men must be content with any plat of ground, of what forme or quantity soeuer it bee, more or lesse, for their Garden, because a more large or conuenient cannot bee had to their habitation: Yet I perswade my selfe, that Gentlemen of the better sort and quality, will prouide such a parcell of ground to bee laid out for their Garden, and in such conuenient manner, as may be fit and answerable to the degree they hold. To prescribe one forme for euery man to follow, were too great presumption and folly: for euery man will please his owne fancie, according to the extent he designeth out for that purpose, be it orbicular or round, triangular or three square, quadrangular or foure square, or more long than broad. I will onely shew you here the seuerall formes that many men haue taken and delighted in, let euery man chuse which him liketh best, or may most fitly agree to that proportion of ground hee hath set out for that purpose. The orbicular or round forme is held in it owne proper existence to be the most absolute forme, containing within it all other formes whatsoeuer; but few I thinke will chuse such a proportion to be ioyned to their habitation, being not accep∣ted any where I think, but for the generall Garden to the Vniuersity at Padoa. The tri∣angular or three square is such a forme also, as is seldome chosen by any that may make another choise, and as I thinke is onely had where another forme cannot be had, neces∣sitie constraining them to be therewith content. The foure square forme is the most vsu∣ally accepted with all, and doth best agree to any mans dwelling, being (as I said before) behinde the house, all the backe windowes thereof opening into it. Yet if it bee longer than the breadth, or broader than the length, the proportion of walkes, squares, and knots may be soon brought to the square forme, and be so cast, as the beauty thereof may diagrams of formal pleasure gardens
bee no lesse than the foure square proportion, or any other better forme, if any be. To forme it therfore with walks, crosse the middle both waies, and round about it also with hedges, with squares, knots and trayles, or any other worke within the foure square parts, is according as euery mans conceit alloweth of it, and they will be at the charge: For there may be therein walkes eyther open or close, eyther publike or priuate, a maze or wildernesse, a rocke or mount, with a fountaine in the midst thereof to conuey water to euery part of the Garden, eyther in pipes vnder the ground, or brought by hand, and emptied into large Cisternes or great Turkie Iarres, placed in conuenient places, to serue as an ease to water the nearest parts thereunto. Arbours also being both gracefull and necessary, may be appointed in such conuenient places, as the corners, or else where, as may be most fit, to serue both for shadow and rest after walking. And because many are desirous to see the formes of trayles, knots, and other compartiments, and because the open knots are more proper for these Out-landish flowers; I haue here caused some to be drawne, to satisfie their desires, not intending to cumber this worke with ouer ma∣nie, in that it would be almost endlesse, to expresse so many as might bee conceiued and set downe, for that euery man may inuent others farre differing from these, or any other can be set forth. Let euery man therefore, if hee like of these, take what may please his mind, or out of these or his own conceit, frame any other to his fancy, or cause others to be done as he liketh best, obseruing this decorum, that according to his ground he do cast out his knots, with conuenient roome for allies and walkes; for the fairer and larger your allies and walkes be, the more grace your Garden shall haue, the lesse harme the herbes and flowers shall receiue, by passing by them that grow next vnto the allies sides, and the better shall your Weeders cleanse both the beds and the allies. CHAP. III. The many sorts of herbes and other things, wherewith the beds and parts of knots are bordered to set out the forme of them, with their commodities and discommodities.
IT is necessary also, that I shew you the seuerall materials, wherewith these knots and trayles are set forth and bordered; which are of two sorts: The one are liuing herbes, and the other are dead materials; as leade, boords, bones, tyles, &c. Of herbes, there are many sorts wherewith the knots and beds in a Garden are vsed to bee set, to shew forth the forme of them, and to preserue them the longer in their forme, as also to be as greene, and sweete herbes, while they grow, to be cut to perfume the house, keeping them in such order and proportion, as may be most conuenient for their seuerall natures, and euery mans pleasure and fancy: Of all which, I intend to giue you the knowledge here in this place; and first, to begin with that which hath beene most anci∣ently receiued, which is Thrift. This is an euerliuing greene herbe, which many take to border their beds, and set their knots and trayles, and therein much delight, because it will grow thicke and bushie, and may be kept, being cut with a paire of Garden sheeres, in some good handsome manner and proportion for a time, and besides, in the Summer time send forth many short stalkes of pleasant flowers, to decke vp an house among o∣ther sweete herbes: Yet these inconueniences doe accompany it; it will not onely in a small time ouergrow the knot or trayle in many places, by growing so thicke and bushie, that it will put out the forme of a knot in many places: but also much thereof will dye with the frosts and snowes in Winter, and with the drought in Summer, whereby many voide places will be seene in the knot, which doth much deforme it, and must therefore bee yearely refreshed: the thicknesse also and bushing thereof doth hide and shelter snayles and other small noysome wormes so plentifully, that Gilloflowers, and other fine herbes and flowers being planted therein, are much spoyled by them, and cannot be helped without much industry, and very great and daily attendance to destroy them. Germander is another herbe, in former times also much vsed, and yet also in many pla∣ces; and because it will grow thicke, and may be kept also in some forme and proportion with cutting, and that the cuttings are much vsed as a strawing herbe for houses, being pretty and sweete, is also much affected by diuers: but this also will often dye and grow out of forme, and besides that, the stalkes will grow too great, hard and stubby, the rootes doe so farre shoote vnder ground, that vpon a little continuance thereof, will  spread into many places within the knot, which it continually they be not plucked vp, they will spoile the whole knot it selfe; and therefore once in three or foure yeares at the most, it must be taken vp and new set, or else it will grow too roynish and cumbersome. Hyssope hath also been vsed to be set about a knot, and being sweet, will serue for strew∣ings, as Germander: But this, although the rootes doe not runne or creep like it, yet the stalkes doe quickly grow great aboue ground, and dye often after the first yeares setting, whereby the grace of the knot will be much lost. Marierome, Sauorie, and Thyme, in the like manner being sweete herbes, are vsed to border vp beds and knots, and will be kept for a little while, with cutting, into some conformity; but all and euery of them serue most commonly but for one yeares vse, and will soone decay and perish: and therefore none of these, no more than any of the former, doe I commend for a good bordering herbe for this purpose. Lauander Cotton also being finely slipped and set, is of many, and those of the highest respect of late daies, accepted, both for the beauty and forme of the herbe, being of a whitish greene mealy colour, for his sent smelling some∣what strong, and being euerliuing and abiding greene all the Winter, will, by cutting, be kept in as euen proportion as any other herbe may be. This will likewise soone grow great and stubbed, notwithstanding the cutting, and besides will now and then perish in some places, especially if you doe not strike or put off the snow, before the Sunne lying vpon it dissolue it: The rarity & nouelty of this herbe, being for the most part but in the Gardens of great persons, doth cause it to be of the greater regard, it must therfore be re∣newed wholly euery second or third yeare at the most, because of the great growing therof. Slips of Iuniper or Yew are also receiued of some & planted, because they are al∣wayes green, and that the Iuniper especially hath not that ill sent that Boxe hath, which I will presently commend vnto you, yet both Iuniper and Yew will soon grow too great and stubbed, and force you to take vp your knot sooner, than if it were planted with Boxe. Which lastly, I chiefly and aboue all other herbes commend vnto you, and being a small, lowe, or dwarfe kinde, is called French or Dutch Boxe, and serueth very well to set out any knot, or border out any beds: for besides that it is euer greene, it being reasonable thicke set, will easily be cut and formed into any fashion one will, according to the nature thereof, which is to grow very slowly, and will not in a long time rise to be of any height, but shooting forth many small branches from the roote, will grow very thicke, and yet not require so great tending, nor so much perish as any of the former, and is onely receiued into the Gardens of those that are curious. This (as I before said) I commend and hold to bee the best and surest herbe to abide faire and greene in all the bitter stormes of the sharpest Winter, and all the great heates and droughts of Summer, and doth recompence the want of a good sweet sent with his fresh verdure, euen pro∣portion, and long lasting continuance. Yet these inconueniences it hath, that besides the vnpleasing sent which many mislike, and yet is but small, the rootes of this Boxe do so much spread themselues into the ground of the knot, and doe draw from thence so much nourishment, that it robbeth all the herbes that grow neare it of their sap and sub∣stance, thereby making all the earth about it barren, or at least lesse fertile. Wherefore to shew you the remedy of this inconuenience of spreading, without either taking vp the Boxe of the border, or the herbes and flowers in the knot, is I thinke a secret knowne but vnto a few, which is this: You shall take a broad pointed Iron like vnto a Slise or Chessill, which thrust downe right into the ground a good depth all along the inside of the border of Boxe somewhat close thereunto, you may thereby cut away the spreading rootes thereof, which draw so much moisture from the other herbes on the inside, and by this meanes both preserue your herbes and flowers in the knot, and your Boxe also, for that the Boxe will be nourished sufficiently from the rest of the rootes it shooteth on all the other sides. And thus much for the liuing herbes, that serue to set or border vp any knot. Now for the dead materials, they are also, as I said before diuers: as first, Leade, which some that are curious doe border their knots withall, causing it to be cut of the breadth of foure fingers, bowing the lower edge a little outward, that it may lye vnder the vpper crust of the ground, and that it may stand the faster, and making the vp∣per edge either plain, or cut out like vnto the battlements of a Church: this fashion hath delighted some, who haue accounted it stately (at the least costly) and fit for their de∣gree, and the rather, because it will be bowed and bended into any round square, angu∣lar, or other proportion as one listeth, and is not much to be misliked, in that the Leade  doth not easily breake or spoile without much iniury, and keepeth vp a knot for a very long time in his due proportion: but in my opinion, the Leade is ouer-hot for Sum∣mer, and ouer-cold for Winter. Others doe take Oaken inch boords, and sawing them foure or fiue inches broad, do hold vp their knot therewith: but in that these boordes cannot bee drawne compasse into any small scantling, they must serue rather for long outright beds, or such knots as haue no rounds, halfe rounds, or compassings in them. And besides, these boordes are not long lasting, because they stand continually in the weather, especially the ends where they are fastned together will soonest rot and pe∣rish, and so the whole forme will be spoyled. To preuent that fault, some others haue chosen the shanke bones of Sheep, which after they haue beene well cleansed and boyled, to take out the fat from them, are stucke into the ground the small end downe∣wards, and the knockle head vpwards, and thus being set side to side, or end to end close together, they set out the whole knot therewith, which heads of bones although they looke not white the first yeare, yet after they haue abiden some frosts and heates will become white, and prettily grace out the ground: but this inconuenience is inci∣dent to them, that the Winter frosts will raise them out of the ground oftentimes, and if by chance the knockle head of any doe breake, or be strucke off with any ones foot, &c. going by, from your store, that lyeth by you of the same sort, set another in the place, hauing first taken away the broken peece: although these will last long in forme and order, yet because they are but bones many mislike them, and indeed I know but few that vse them. Tyles are also vsed by some, which by reason they may bee brought compasse into any fashion many are pleased with them, who doe not take the whole Tyle at length, but halfe Tyles, and other broken peeces set somewhat deepe into the ground, that they may stand fast, and these take vp but little roome, and keepe vp the edge of the beds and knots in a pretty comely manner, but they are often out of frame, in that many of them are broken and spoiled, both with mens feete passing by, the weather and weight of the earth beating them downe and breaking them, but e∣specially the frosts in Winter doe so cracke off their edges, both at the toppes and sides that stand close one vnto another, that they must bee continually tended and re∣paired, with fresh and sound ones put in the place of them that are broken or decayed. And lastly (for it is the latest inuention) round whitish or blewish pebble stones, of some reasonable proportion and bignesse, neither too great nor too little, haue beene vsed by some to be set, or rather in a manner but laide vpon the ground to fashion out the traile or knot, or all along by the large grauelly walke sides to set out the walke, and maketh a pretty handsome shew, and because the stones will not decay with the iniu∣ries of any time or weather, and will be placed in their places againe, if any should be thrust out by any accident, as also that their sight is so conspicuous vpon the ground, especially if they be not hid with the store of herbes growing in the knot; is accounted both for durability, beauty of the sight, handsomnesse in the worke, and ease in the working and charge, to be of all other dead materials the chiefest. And thus, Gen∣tlemen, I haue shewed you all the varieties that I know are vsed by any in our Coun∣trey, that are worth the reciting (but as for the fashion of Iawe-bones, vsed by some in the Low-Countries, and other places beyond the Seas, being too grosse and base, I make no mention of them) among which euery one may take what pleaseth him best, or may most fitly be had, or may best agree with the ground or knot. Moreouer, all these herbes that serue for borderings, doe serue as well to be set vpon the ground of a leuelled knot; that is, where the allies and foot-pathes are of the same leuell with the knot, as they may serue also for the raised knot, that is, where the beds of the knot are raised higher than the allies: but both Leade, Boordes, Bones, and Tyles, are only for the raised ground, be it knot or beds. The pebble stones againe are onely for the le∣uelled ground, because they are so shallow, that as I said before, they rather lye vpon the earth than are thrust any way into it. All this that I haue here set downe, you must vnderstand is proper for the knots alone of a Garden. But for to border the whole square or knot about, to serue as a hedge thereunto, euery one taketh what liketh him best; as either Priuet alone, or sweete Bryer, and white Thorne enterlaced together, and Roses of one, or two, or more sorts placed here and there amongst them. Some also take Lauander, Rosemary, Sage, Southernwood, Lauander Cotton, or some such other thing. Some againe plant Cornell Trees, and plash them, or keepe them lowe, to  forme them into an hedge. And some againe take a lowe prickly shrubbe, that abideth alwayes greene, described in the end of this Booke, called in Latine Pyracantha, which in time will make an euer greene hedge or border, and when it beareth fruit, which are red berries like vnto Hawthorne berries, make a glorious shew among the greene leaues in the Winter time, when no other shrubbes haue fruit or leaues. CHAP. IV. The nature and names of diners Out-landish flowers, that for their pride, beauty, and earlinesse, are to be planted in Gardens of pleasure for delight.
HAuing thus formed out a Garden, and diuided it into his fit and due proporti∣on, with all the gracefull knots, arbours, walkes, &c. likewise what is fit to keepe it in the same comely order, is appointed vnto it, both for the borders of the squares, and for the knots and beds themselues; let vs now come and furnish the inward parts, and beds with those fine flowers that (being strangers vnto vs, and giuing the beauty and brauery of their colours so early before many of our owne bred flowers, the more to entice vs to their delight) are most beseeming it: and namely, with Daffo∣dils, Fritillarias, Iacinthes, Saffron-flowers, Lillies, Flowerdeluces, Tulipas, Anemo∣nes, French Cowslips, or Beares eares, and a number of such other flowers, very beau∣tifull, delightfull, and pleasant, hereafter described at full, whereof although many haue little sweete sent to commend them, yet their earlinesse and exceeding great beau∣tie and varietie doth so farre counteruaile that defect (and yet I must tell you with all, that there is among the many sorts of them some, and that not a few, that doe excell in sweetnesse, being so strong and heady, that they rather offend by too much than by too little sent, and some againe are of so milde and moderate temper, that they scarce come short of your most delicate and dantiest flowers) that they are almost in all places with all persons, especially with the better sort of the Gentry of the Land, as greatly desired and accepted as any other the most choisest, and the rather, for that the most part of these Out-landish flowers, do shew forth their beauty and colours so early in the yeare, that they seeme to make a Garden of delight euen in the Winter time, and doe so giue their flowers one after another, that all their brauery is not fully spent, vntil that Gilliflowers, the pride of our English Gardens, do shew themselues: So that whosoeuer would haue of euery sort of these flowers, may haue for euery moneth seuerall colours and varieties, euen from Christmas vntill Midsommer, or after; and then, after some little respite, vn∣till Christmas againe, and that in some plenty, with great content and without forcing; so that euery man may haue them in euery place, if they will take any care of them. And because there bee many Gentlewomen and others, that would gladly haue some fine flowers to furnish their Gardens, but know not what the names of those things are that they desire, nor what are the times of their flowring, nor the skill and knowledge of their right ordering, planting, displanting, transplanting, and replanting; I haue here for their sakes set downe the nature, names, times, and manner of ordering in a briefe manner, referring the more ample declaration of them to the worke following. And first of their names and natures: Of Daffodils there are almost an hundred sorts, as they are seuerally described hereafter, euery one to be distinguished from other, both in their times, formes, and colours, some being eyther white, or yellow, or mixt, or else being small or great, single or double, and some hauing but one flower vpon a stalke, others many, whereof many are so exceeding sweete, that a very few are sufficient to perfume a whole chamber, and besides, many of them be so faire and double, eyther one vpon a stalke, or many vpon a stalke, that one or two stalkes of flowers are in stead of a whole nose-gay, or bundell of flowers tyed together. This I doe affirme vpon good knowledge and certaine experience, and not as a great many others doe, tell of the wonders of an∣other world, which themselues neuer saw nor euer heard of, except some superficiall relation, which themselues haue augmented according to their owne fansie and con∣ceit. Againe, let me here also by the way tell you, that many idle and ignorant Gardi∣ners and others, who get names by stealth, as they doe many other things, doe call  some of these Daffodils Narcisses, when as all know that know any Latine, that Nar∣cissus is the Latine name, and Daffodill the English of one and the same thing; and therefore alone without any other Epithite cannot properly distinguish seuerall things. I would willingly therefore that all would grow iudicious, and call euery thing by his proper English name in speaking English, or else by such Latine name as euery thing hath that hath not a proper English name, that thereby they may distinguish the seue∣rall varieties of things and not confound them, as also to take away all excuses of mista∣king; as for example: The single English bastard Daffodill (which groweth wilde in many Woods, Groues, and Orchards in England.) The double English bastard Daffo∣dill. The French single white Daffodill many vpon a stalke. The French double yel∣low Daffodill. The great, or the little, or the least Spanish yellow bastard Daffodill, or the great or little Spanish white Daffodill. The Turkie single white Daffodill, or, The Turkie single or double white Daffodill many vpon a stalke, &c. Of Fritillaria, or the checkerd Daffodill, there are halfe a score seuerall sorts, both white and red, both yel∣low and blacke, which are a wonderfull grace and ornament to a Garden in regard of the Checker like spots are in the flowers. Of Iacinthes there are aboue halfe an hundred sorts, as they are specified hereafter; some like vnto little bells or starres, others like vnto little bottles or pearles, both white and blew, sky-coloured and blush, and some starlike of many pretty various formes, and all to giue delight to them that will be cu∣rious to obserue them. Of Crocus or Saffron flowers, there are also twenty sorts; some of the Spring time, others flowring onely in the Autume or Fall, earlier or later than another, some whereof abide but a while, others indure aboue a moneth in their glorious beauty. The Colchicum or Medowe Saffron, which some call the sonne be∣fore the father, but not properly, is of many sorts also; some flowring in the Spring of the yeare, but the most in Autume, whereof some haue faire double flowers very de∣lightfull to behold, and some party coloured both single and double so variable, that it would make any one admire the worke of the Creatour in the various spots and stripes of these flowers. Then haue wee of Lillies twenty seuerall sorts and colours, among whom I must reckon the Crowne Imperiall, that for his stately forme deserueth some speciall place in this Garden, as also the Martagons, both white and red, both blush and yellow, that require to be set by themselues apart, as it were in a small round or square of a knot, without many other, or tall flowers growing neare them. But to tell you of all the sorts of Tulipas (which are the pride of delight) they are so many, and as I may say, almost infinite, doth both passe my ability, and as I beleeue the skill of any other. They are of two especiall sorts, some flowring earlier, and others later than their fel∣lowes, and that naturally in all grounds, wherein there is such a wonderfull variety and mixture of colours, that it is almost impossible for the wit of man to descipher them thoroughly, and to giue names that may be true & seuerall distinctions to euery flower, threescore seuerall sorts of colours simple and mixed of each kind I can reckon vp that I haue, and of especiall note, and yet I doubt not, but for euery one of them there are ten o∣thers differing from them, which may be seen at seuerall times, and in seuerall places: & besides this glory of variety in colors that these flowers haue, they carry so stately & de∣lightfull a forme, & do abide so long in their brauery (enduring aboue three whole mo∣neths from the first vnto the last) that there is no Lady or Gentlewoman of any worth that is not caught with this delight, or not delighted with these flowers. The Anemo∣nes likewise or Windeflowers are so full of variety and so dainty, so pleasant and so delightsome flowers, that the sight of them doth enforce an earnest longing desire in the minde of any one to be a possessour of some of them at the least: For without all doubt, this one kinde of flower, so variable in colours, so differing in forme (being almost as many sorts of them double as single) so plentifull in bearing flowers, and so durable in lasting, and also so easie both to preserue and to encrease, is of it selfe alone almost suf∣ficient to furnish a garden with their flowers for almost halfe the yeare, as I shall shew you in a fit and conuenient place. The Beares eares or French Cowslips must not want their deserued commendations, seeing that their flowers, being many set together vpon a stalke, doe seeme euery one of them to bee a Nosegay alone of it selfe: and besides the many differing colours that are to be seene in them, as white, yellow, blush, purple, red, tawney, murrey, haire colour, &c. which encrease much delight in all sorts of the Gentry of the Land, they are not vnfurnished with a pretty sweete sent,  which doth adde an encrease of pleasure in those that make them an ornament for their wearing. Flowerdeluces also are of many sorts, but diuided into two especiall kindes; the one bearing a leafe like a flagge, whose rootes are tuberous, thicke and short (one kinde of them being the Orris rootes that are sold at the Apothecaries, whereof sweete powders are made to lye among garments) the other hauing round rootes like vnto Onions, and narrow long leaues somewhat like grasse: Of both these kindes there is much variety, especially in their colours. The greater Flagge kinde is frequent enough and dispersed in this Land, and well doth serue to decke vp both a Garden and House with natures beauties: But the chiefe of all is your Sable flower, so fit for a mourning habit, that I thinke in the whole compasse of natures store, there is not a more patheticall, or of greater correspondency, nor yet among all the flowers I know any one comming neare vnto the colour of it. The other kinde which hath bulbous or Onion like rootes, diuersifieth it selfe also into so many fine colours, being of a more neate shape and succinct forme than the former, that it must not bee wanting to furnish this Garden. The Hepatica or Noble Liuerwoort is another flow∣er of account, whereof some are white, others red, or blew, or purple, somewhat re∣sembling Violets, but that there are white threads in the middest of their flowers, which adde the more grace vnto them; and one kinde of them is so double, that it re∣sembleth a double thicke Dasie or Marigold, but being small and of an excellent blew colour, is like vnto a Button: but that which commendeth the flower as much as the beauty, is the earlinesse in flowring, for that it is one of the very first flowers that open themselues after Christmas, euen in the midst of Winter. The Cyclamen or Sowe∣bread is a flower of rare receipt, because it is naturally hard to encrease, and that the flowers are like vnto red or blush coloured Violets, flowring in the end of Summer or beginning of Autumne: the leaues likewise hereof haue no small delight in their plea∣sant colour, being spotted and circled white vpon greene, and that which most prefer∣reth it, is the Physicall properties thereof for women, which I will declare when I shall shew you the seuerall descriptions of the varieties in his proper place. Many o∣ther sorts of flowers there are fit to furnish this Garden, as Leucoium or Bulbous Vio∣let, both early and late flowring. Muscari or Muske Grape flower. Starre flowers of di∣uers sorts. Phalangium or Spiderwort, the chiefe of many is that sort whose flowers are like vnto a white Lilly. Winter Crowfoote or Wolfes bane. The Christmas flow∣er like vnto a single white Rose. Bell flowers of many kindes. Yellow Larkes spurre, the prettiest flower of a score in a Garden. Flower-gentle or Floramour. Flower of the Sunne. The Maruaile of Peru or of the world. Double Marsh Marigold or dou∣ble yellow Buttons, much differing and farre exceeding your double yellow Crow∣foote, which some call Batchelours Buttons. Double French Marigolds that smell well, and is a greater kinde than the ordinary, and farre surpasseth it. The double red Ranunculus or Crowfoote (farre excelling the most glorious double Anemone) and is like vnto our great yellow double Crowfoote. Thus hauing giuen you the know∣ledge of some of the choisest flowers for the beds of this Garden, let me also shew you what are fittest for your borders, and for your arbours. The Iasmine white and yel∣low. The double Honysockle. The Ladies Bower, both white, and red, and purple single and double, are the fittest of Outlandish plants to set by arbours and banqueting houses, that are open, both before and aboue to helpe to couer them, and to giue both sight, smell, and delight. The sorts of Roses are fittest for standards in the hedges or borders. The Cherry Bay or Laurocerasus. The Rose Bay or Oleander. The white and the blew Syringa or Pipe tree, are all gracefull and delightfull to set at seuerall distances in the borders of knots; for some of them giue beautifull and sweete flowers. The Pyracantha or Prickly Corall tree doth remaine with greene leaues all the yeare, and may be plashed, or laid downe, or tyed to make a fine hedge to border the whole knot, as is said before. The Wilde Bay or Laurus Tinus, doth chiefly desire to be shel∣tered vnder a wall, where it will best thriue, and giue you his beautifull flowers in Win∣ter for your delight, in recompence of his fenced dwelling. The Dwarfe Bay or Mese∣reon, is most commonly either placed in the midst of a knot, or at the corners thereof, and sometimes all along a walke for the more grace. And thus to fit euery ones fancy, I haue shewed you the variety of natures store in some part for you to dispose of them to your best content.
CHAP. V. The nature and names of those that are called vsually English flowers.
THose flowers that haue beene vsually planted in former times in Gardens of this Kingdome (when as our forefathers knew few or none of those that are re∣cited before) haue by time and custome attained the name of English flowers, although the most of them were neuer naturall of this our Land, but brought in from other Countries at one time or other, by those that tooke pleasure in them where they first saw them: and I doubt not, but many other sorts than here are set downe, or now knowne to vs, haue beene brought, which either haue perished by their negligence or want of skill that brought them, or else because they could not abide our cold Win∣ters; those onely remaining with vs that haue endured of themselues, and by their en∣creasing haue beene distributed ouer the whole Land. If I should make any large dis∣course of them, being so well knowne to all, I doubt I should make a long tale to small purpose: I will therefore but briefly recite them, that you may haue them together in one place, with some little declaration of the nature and quality of them, and so passe to other matters. And first of Primroses and Cowslips, whereof there are many pret∣tie varieties; some better knowne in the West parts of this Kingdome, others in the North, than in any other, vntill of late being obserued by some curious louers of vari∣eties, they haue been transplanted diuersly, and so made more common: for although we haue had formerly in these parts about London greene Primroses vsually, yet we neuer saw or heard of greene Cowslips both single and double but of late dayes, and so likewise for Primroses to be both single and double from one roote, and diuers vp∣on one stalke of diuers fashions, I am sure is not vsuall: all which desire rather to bee planted vnder some hedge, or fence, or in the shade, than in the Sunne. Single Rose Campions, both white, red, and blush, and the double red Rose Campion also is knowne sufficiently, and will abide moderate Sunne as well as the shade. The flower of Bristow or None-such is likewise another kinde of Campion, whereof there is both white flowring plants and blush as well as Orange colour, all of them being single flowers require a moderate Sunne and not the shadow: But the Orange colour None-such with double flowers, as it is rare and not common, so for his brauery doth well deserue a Master of account that will take care to keepe and preserue it. Batchelours Buttons both white and red, are kindes of wilde Campions of a very double forme, and will reasonably well like the Sunne but not the shade. Wall-flowers are common in euery Garden, as well the ordinary double as the single, and the double kinde desi∣reth no more shade than the single, but the greater kindes both double and single must haue the Sunne. Stock-Gilloflowers likewise are almost as common as Wall-flowers, especially the single kindes in euery womans Garden, but the double kindes are much more rare, and possessed but of a few, and those onely that will bee carefull to pre∣serue them in Winter; for besides that the most of them are more tender, they yeeld no seede as the single kindes doe to preserue them, although one kinde from the sow∣ing of the seed yeeld double flowers: They will all require the comfort of the Sunne, especially the double kindes, and to be defended from cold, yet so as in the Summer they doe not want water wherein they much ioy, and which is as it were their life. Queenes Gilloflowers (which some call Dames Violets, and some Winter Gilloflow∣ers, are a kinde of Stock-Gilloflower) planted in Gardens to serue to fill vp the parts thereof for want of better things, hauing in mine opinion neither sight nor sent much to commend them. Violets are the Springs chiefe flowers for beauty, smell, and vse, both single and double, the more shadie and moist they stand the better. Snapdragon are flowers of much more delight, and in that they are more tender to keep, and will hardly endure the sharpe Winters, vnlesse they stand well defended, are scarce seene in many Gardens. Columbines single and double, of many sorts, fashions, and co∣lours, very variable both speckled and party coloured, are flowers of that respect, as that no Garden would willingly bee without them, that could tell how to haue them, yet the rarer the flowers are, the more trouble to keepe; the ordinary sorts on the con∣trary  part will not be lost, doe what one will. Larkes heeles, or spurres, or toes, as in seuerall Countries they are called, exceed in the varietie of colours, both single and double, any of the former times; for vntill of late dayes none of the most pleasant co∣lours were seene or heard of: but now the single kindes are reasonable well disperst ouer the Land, yet the double kindes of all those pleasant colours (and some other also as beautifull) which stand like little double Roses, are enioyed but of a few: all of them rise from seed, and must be sowne euery yeare, the double as well as the single. Pansyes or Hartes eases of diuers colours, and although without sent, yet not without some respect and delight. Double Poppies are flowers of a great and goodly propor∣tion, adorning a Garden with their variable colours to the delight of the beholders, wherein there is some speciall care to be taken, lest they turne single; and that is, if you see them grow vp too thicke, that you must pull them vp, and not suffer them to grow within lesse than halfe a yard distance, or more one from another. Double Daisies are flowers not to be forgotten, although they be common enough in euery Garden, be∣ing both white and red, both blush and speckled, or party coloured, besides that which is called Iacke an Apes on horsebacke, they require a moist and shadowie place; for they are scorched away, if they stand in the Sunne in any dry place. Double Ma∣rigolds also are the most common in all Gardens. And so are the French Marigolds that haue a strong heady sent, both single and double, whose glorious shew for colour would cause any to beleeue there were some rare goodnesse or vertue in them. These all are sometimes preserued in the Winter, if they bee well defended from the cold. But what shall I say to the Queene of delight and of flowers, Carnations and Gillo∣flowers, whose brauery, variety, and sweete smell ioyned together, tyeth euery ones affection with great earnestnesse, both to like and to haue them? Those that were knowne, and enioyed in former times with much acceptation, are now for the most part lesse accounted of, except a very few: for now there are so many other varieties of later inuention, that troubleth the other both in number, beauty, and worth: The names of them doe differ very variably, in that names are imposed and altered as eue∣rie ones fancy will haue them, that carryed or sent them into the seuerall Countries from London, where their truest name is to be had, in mine opinion. I will here but giue you the names of some, and referre you to the worke ensuing for your further knowledge. The red and the gray Hulo. The old Carnation, differing from them both. The Gran Pere. The Cambersiue. The Sauadge. The Christall. The Prince. The white Carnation, or Delicate. The ground Carnation. The French Carnation. The Douer. The Oxford. The Bristow. The Westminster. The Daintie. The Gra∣nado, and many other Gilloflowers too tedious to recite in this place, because I haue amply declared them in the booke following. But there is another sort of great de∣light and varietie, called the Orange tawny Gilloflower, which for the most part hath risen from seed, and doth giue seed in a more plentifull manner than any of the for∣mer sorts, and likewise by the sowing of the seed there hath been gained so many va∣rieties of that excellent worth and respect, that it can hardly be expressed or beleeued, and called by diuers names according to the marking of the flowers; as The Infanta. The Stript Tawny. The Speckled Tawny. The Flackt Tawny. The Griseld Tawny, and many others, euery one to bee distinguished from others: Some also haue their flowers more double and large than others, and some from the same seed haue single flowers like broad single Pinkes: the further relation of them, viz. their order to sowe, encrease, and preserue them, you shall haue in the subsequent discourse in a place by it selfe. Pinkes likewise both single and double are of much variety, all of them very sweete, comming neare the Gilloflowers. Sweete Williams and Sweete Iohns, both single and double, both white, red, and spotted, as they are kindes of wilde Pinkes, so for their grace and beauty helpe to furnish a Garden, yet desire not to stand so open to the Sunne as the former. Double and single Peonies are fit flowers to furnish a Garden, and by reason of their durability, giue out fresh pleasure euery yeare without any fur∣ther trouble of sowing. And lastly, Hollihocks both single and double, of many and sundry colours, yeeld out their flowers like Roses on their tall branches, like Trees, to sute you with flowers, when almost you haue no other to grace out your Garden: the single and double doe both yeeld seed, and yet doe after their seeding abide many yeares. Thus haue I shewed you most of the English, as well as (I did before) the Out∣landish  flowers, that are fit to furnish the knots, trailes, beds, and borders of this Gar∣den. Roses onely, as I said before, I reserue to circle or encompasse all the rest, because that for the most part they are planted in the outer borders of the quarters, and some∣times by themselues in the middle of long beds, the sorts or kindes whereof are many, as they are declared in their proper place: but the White Rose, the Red, and the Damaske, are the most ancient Standards in England, and therefore accoun∣ted naturall. CHAP. VI. The order and manner to plant and replant all the sorts of Out-landish flowers spoken of before, as well those with bulbous rootes, as others with stringie rootes. WHereas it is the vsuall custome of most in this Land, to turne vp their Gar∣dens, and to plant them againe in the Spring of the yeare, which is the best time that may bee chosen for all English flowers, yet it is not so for your Out-landish flowers. And herein indeede hath beene not onely the errour of a great many to hinder their rootes from bearing out their flowers as they should, but also to hinder many to take delight in them, because as they say they will not thriue and prosper with them, when as the whole fault is in the want of knowledge of the fit and conuenient time wherein they should bee planted. And because our English Gar∣diners are all or the most of them vtterly ignorant in the ordering of these Out-landish flowers, as not being trained vp to know them, I haue here taken vpon mee the forme of a new Gardiner, to giue instructions to those that will take pleasure in them, that they may be the better enabled with these helpes I shall shew them, both to know how they should be ordered, and to direct their Gardiners hat are ignorant thereof, rightly to dispose them according to their naturall qualities. And I doe wishall Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, whom it may concerne for their owne good, to bee as carefull whom they trust with the planting and replanting of these fine flowers, as they would be with so many Iewels; for the rootes of many of them being small, and of great va∣lue, may be soone conueyed away, and a cleanly tale faire told, that such a roote is rotten, or perished in the ground if none be seene where it should be, or else that the flower hath changed his colour, when it hath been taken away, or a counterfeit one hath beene put in the place thereof; and thus many haue been deceiued of their dain∣tiest flowers, without remedy or true knowledge of the defect. You shall therefore, if you will take the right course that is proper for these kindes of flowers, not set or plant them among your English flowers; for that when the one may be remoued, the other may not be stirred: but plant those rootes that are bulbous, or round like Onions, ey∣ther in knots or beds by themselues which is the best, or with but very few English or Out-landish flower plants that haue stringie rootes: For you must take this for a gene∣rall rule, that all those rootes that are like Lillies or Onions, are to bee planted in the moneths of Iuly or August, or vnto the middle or end of September at the furthest, if you will haue them to prosper as they should; and not in the Spring of the yeare, when other gardening is vsed. Yet I must likewise giue you to vnderstand, that if Tulipas, and Daffodils, and some other that are firme and hard rootes, and not limber or spongie, being taken vp out of the ground in their fit season, that is, in Iune, Iuly, and August, and likewise kept well and dry, may bee reserued out of the ground vntill Christmas or after, and then (if they could not be set sooner) being set, will thriue rea∣sonable well, but not altogether so well as the former, being set long before: but if you shall remoue these bulbous rootes againe, either presently after their planting ha∣uing shot their small fibres vnder the round rootes, and sprung likewise vpwards, or before they be in flower at the soonest (yet Tulipas, Daffodils, and many other bul∣bous, may be safely remoued being in flower, and transplanted into other places, so as they be not kept too long out of the ground) you shall much endanger them either vt∣terly to perish, or to be hindered from bearing out their flowers they then would haue
borne, and for two or three years after from bearing flowers againe. For the order of their planting there are diuers wayes, some whereof I will shew you in this place: Your knot or beds being prepared fitly, as before is declared, you may place and order your rootes therein thus, Eyther many rootes of one kind set together in a round or cluster, or longwise crosse a bed one by another, whereby the beauty of many flowers of one kinde being together, may make a faire shew well pleasing to many; Or else you may plant one or two in a place dispersedly ouer the whole knot, or in a proportion or dia∣meter one place answering another of the knot, as your store will suffer you, or your knot permit: Or you may also mingle these rootes in their planting many of diuers sorts together, that they may giue the more glorious shew when they are in flower; and that you may so doe, you must first obserue the seuerall kindes of them, which doe flower at one and the same time, and then to place them in such order and so neare one vnto another, that their flowers appearing together of seuerall colours, will cause the more admiration in the beholders: as thus, The Vernall Crocus or Saffron flowers of the Spring, white, purple, yellow, and stript, with some Vernall Colchicum or Medow Saffron among them, some Deus Caninus or Dogges teeth, and some of the small early Leucoium or Bulbous Violet, all planted in some proportion as neare one vnto ano∣ther as is fit for them, will giue such a grace to the Garden, that the place will seeme like a peece of tapestry of many glorious colours, to encrease euery ones delight: Or else many of one sort together, as the blew, white and blush Grape flowers in the same manner intermingled, doe make a maruellous delectable shew, especially because all of them rise almost to an equall height, which causeth the greater grace, as well neare hand as farre of. The like order may be kept with many other things, as the Hepatica, white, blew, purple, and red set or sowne together, will make many to beleeue that one roote doth beare all those colours: But aboue and beyond all others, the Tulipas may be so matched, one colour answering and setting of another, that the place where they stand may resemble a peece of curious needle-worke, or peece of painting: and I haue knowne in a Garden, the Master as much commended for this artificiall forme in placing the colours of Tulipas, as for the goodnesse of his flowers, or any other thing. The diuers sorts and colours of Anemones or Winde-flowers may be so ordered like∣wise, which are very beautifull, to haue the seuerall varieties planted one neare vnto another, that their seuerall colours appearing in one place will be a very great grace in a Garden, or if they be dispersed among the other sorts of flowers, they will make a glorious shew. Another order in planting you may obserue; which is this, That those plants that grow low, as the Aconitum Hyemale or Winter-wolues bane, the Vernall Crocus or Saffron-flowers of diuers sorts, the little early Leucoium or Bulbous Vio∣let, and some such other as rise not vp high, as also some Anemones may be very well placed somewhat neare or about your Martagons, Lillies, or Crownes Imperiall, both because these little plants will flower earlier than they, and so will bee gone and past, before the other greater plants will rise vp to any height to hinder them; which is a way may well be admitted in those Gardens that are small, to saue roome, and to place things to the most aduantage. Thus hauing shewed you diuers wayes and orders how to plant your rootes, that your flowers may giue the greater grace in the Garden, let mee shew you likewise how to set these kindes of rootes into the ground; for many know not well eyther which end to set vpwards or downewards, nor yet to what depth they should be placed in the ground. Daffodils if they be great rootes, will re∣quire (as must bee obserued in all other great plants) to bee planted somewhat deeper then the smaller of the same kinde, as also that the tops or heads of the rootes be about two or three fingers breadth hid vnderground. The Tulipas likewise if you set them deepe, they will be the safer from frosts if your ground be cold, which will also cause them to be a little later before they be in flower, yet vsually if the mould be good, they are to be set a good hand breadth deep within the ground, so that there may be three or foure inches of earth at the least aboue the head, which is the smaller end of the roote: for if they shall lye too neare the vpper face or crust of the earth, the colds & frosts will pierce and pinch them the sooner. After the same order and manner must Hyacinthes, whether great or small, and other such great rootes be planted. Your greater rootes, as Martagons, Lillies, and Crownes Imperiall, must be set much deeper then any other bulbous roote, because they are greater rootes then others, and by themselues also, as
is most vsuall either in some square, round, triangle, or other small part in the Garden, because they spread and take vp a very great deale of ground. All of them likewise are to be set with the broad end of the roote downewards, and the small end vpwards, that is, both Lillies, Daffodils, Hyacinthes, and Tulipas, and all other sorts of round rootes, which shew one end to bee smaller than another. But the Colchicum or Me∣dow-Saffron onely requireth an exception to this generall rule, in regard the roote thereof hath a small eminence or part on the one side thereof, which must bee set or planted downeward, and not vpward; for you shall obserue, if the roote lye a little moist out of the ground, that it will shoote fibres out at the small long end thereof, al∣though you may perceiue when you take it vp, that the fibres were at the other broad end or side of the roote. As for the Crowne Imperiall, which is a broad round roote and flat withall, hauing a hole in the middle, for the most part quite thorow, when it is taken vp in his due time out of the ground, you shall perceiue the scales or cloues of the rootes to bee a little open on the vpperside, and close and flat on the vnderside, which will direct you which part to set vpward, as also that the hole is bigger aboue then it is below. The Persian Lilly is almost like vnto the Crowne Imperiall, but that the roote thereof is not so flat, and that it hath a smaller head at the one part, whereby it may be discerned the plainer how to be set. The Fritillaria is a small white root di∣uided as it were into two parts, so that many haue doubted, as formerly in the Crowne Imperiall, what part to set vppermost; you shall therefore marke, that the two parts of the roote are ioyned together at the bottome, where it shooteth out fibres or small stringie rootes, as all other sorts of bulbous rootes doe, and withall you shall see, that betweene the two parts of the roote a small head will appeare, which is the burgeon that will spring vp to beare leaues and flowers. In the rootes of Anemones there are small round swelling heads, easie enough to be obserued if you marke it, which must be set vpwards. All other sorts of stringie rooted plants (and not bulbous or tuberous rooted) that lose their greene leaues in Winter, will shew a head from whence the leaues and flowers will spring, and all others that keepe their greene leaues, are to bee planted in the same manner that other herbes and flower-plants are accustomed to be. But yet for the better thriuing of the stringie rooted plants, when you will plant them, let me informe you of the best way of planting, and the most sure to cause any plant to comprehend in the ground without failing, and is no common way with any Gardiner in this Kingdome, that euer I heard or knew, which is thus: Presuming that the stringie rooted plant is fresh and not old gathered, and a plant that being remoued will grow againe, make a hole in the ground large enough where you meane to set this roote, and raise the earth within the hole a little higher in the middle then on the sides, and set the roote thereon, spreading the strings all abroad about the middle, that they may as it were couer the middle, and then put the earth gently round about it, pressing it a little close, and afterwards water it well, if it be in Summer, or in a dry time, or o∣therwise moderately: thus shall euery seuerall string of the roote haue earth enough to cause it to shoote forth, and thereby to encrease farre better than by the vsuall way, which is without any great care and respect to thrust the rootes together into the ground. Diuers other flower plants are but annuall, to bee new sowne euery yeare; as the Maruaile of the world, the Indian Cresses, or yellow Larkes heeles, the Flower of the Sunne, and diuers other: they therefore that will take pleasure in them, that they may enioy their flowers the earlier in the yeare, and thereby haue ripe seede of them while warme weather lasteth, must nurse vp their seedes in a bed of hot dung, as Me∣lons and Cowcumbers are, but your bed must be prouided earlier for these seeds, than for Melons, &c. that they may haue the more comfort of the Summer, which are to be carefully tended after they are transplanted from the hot bed, and couered with straw from colds, whereby you shall not faile to gaine ripe seed euery yeare, which other∣wise if you should misse of a very kindly & hot Summer, you should neuer haue. Some of these seedes neede likewise to be transplanted from the bed of dung vnder a warme wall, as the Flower of the Sunne, and the Maruaile of the world, and some others, and that for a while after their transplanting, as also in the heate of Summer, you water them at the roote with water that hath stood a day or two in the Sunne, hauing first laid a round wispe of hay or such other thing round about the roote, that so all helpes may further their giuing of ripe seede. One or two rules more I will giue you concerning
these dainty flowers, the first whereof is this, That you shall not bee carefull to water any of your bulbous or tuberous rooted plants at any time; for they all of them do bet∣ter prosper in a dry ground than in a wet, onely all sorts of tuberous rooted Flower de∣luces vpon their remouall had neede of a little water, and some will doe so also to such Tulipas and other bulbous rootes as they transplant, when they are in flower, and this is I grant in some sort tolerable, if it bee not too much, and done onely to cause the stalke and flower to abide sometime the longer before they wither, but else in no other case to be permitted. The second rule is, That I would aduise you to water none of your dainty flowers or herbes, with any water that hath presently before been drawne out of a well or pumpe, but onely with such water that hath stood open in the Sunne in some cisterne, tubbe, or pot for a day at the least, if more the better: for that water which is presently drawne out of a well, &c. is so cold, that it presently chilleth & kil∣leth any dainty plant be it younger or elder grown, wherof I haue had sufficient proofe: and therfore I giue you this caution by mine own experience. Thus haue I directed you from point to point, in all the particulars of preparing & planting that belong to this Garden, sauing only that yet I would further enforme you, of the time of the flowring of these Out-landish plants, according to the seuerall moneths in the yeare, that euery one may know what flowers euery moneth yeeldeth, and may chuse what them liketh best, in that they may see hat there is no moneth, but glorieth in some peculiar sorts of rare flowers. I would likewise rather in this place shew you, the true and best manner & order to encrease and preserue all sorts of Gilloflowers & Carnations, then ioyne it with the Chapter of Gilloflowers in the worke following, because it would in that place take vp too much roome. And lastly, I must of necessity oppose three sundry errours, that haue possessed the mindes of many both in former and later times, which are, that any flower may be made to grow double by art, that was but single before by nature: And that one may by art cause any flower to grow of what colour they will: And that any plants may be forced to flower out of their due seasons, either earlier or later, by an art which some can vse. All which being declared. I then suppose enough is spoken for an introduction to this worke, referring many other things to the seuerall directions in the Chapters of the booke. CHAP. VII. The seuerall times of the flowring of these Out-landish flowers, according to the seuerall moneths of the yeare. I Intend in this place onely to giue you briefly, the names of some of the chiefest of these Out-landish flowers, according to the seuerall moneths of the yeare wherein they flower, that euery one seeing what sorts of flowers euery moneth yeeldeth, may take of them which they like best. I begin with Ianuary, as the first moneth of the yeare, wherein if the frosts be not extreme, you shall haue these flowers of plants; the Christmas flower or Helleborus niger verus, Winter wolues bane or Aconitum hye∣male, Hepatica or Noble Liuer wort blew and red, and of shrubbes, the Laurus Tinus or Wilde Bay tree, and Mesereon or the dwarfe Bay: but because Ianuarie is often∣times too deepe in frosts and snow, I therefore referre the Hepaticas vnto the moneth following, which is February, wherein the weather beginneth to be a little milder, and then they will flower much better, as also diuers sorts of Crocus or Saffron flow∣er will appeare, the little early Summer foole or Leucoium bulbosum, and towards the latter end thereof the Vernall Colchicum, the Dogges tooth Violet or Deus Ca∣minus, and some Anemones, both single and double, which in some places will flower all the Winter long. March will yeeld more varieties; for besides that it holdeth some of the flowers of the former moneth, it will yeeld you both the double blew He∣patica, and the white and the blush single: then also you shall haue diuers other sorts of Crocus or Saffron flowers, Double yellow Daffodils, Orientall Iacinths and o∣thers, the Crowne Imperiall, diuers sorts of early Tulipas, some sorts of French Cow∣slips, both tawney, murry, yellow, and blush, the early Fritillaria or checkerd Daffo∣dill,
and some other sorts of early Daffodils, and many sorts of Anemones. In Aprill commeth on the pride of these strangers; for herein you may behold all the sorts of Auricula Vrsi or Beares Eares, many sorts of Anemones, both single and double, both the sorts of Tulipas, the earlier vntill the middle of the moneth, and the later then beginning; which are of so many different colours, that it is almost impossible to expresse them, the white, red, blacke, and yellow Fritillarias, the Muscari or Muske Grape flower, both ash colour and yellow. Diuers other sorts of Iacinths and Daffo∣dils, both single and double, the smaller sorts of Flowerdeluces, the Veluet Flower∣deluce and double Honysuckles, with diuers others. May likewise at the beginning seemeth as glorious as Aprill, although toward the end it doth decline, in regard the heate of the Sunne hath by this time drawne forth all the store of natures tenderest dainties, which are vsually spent by the end of this moneth, and then those of stronger constitution come forward. Herein are to bee seene at the beginning the middle flow∣ring Tulipas, and at the end the later sort: some kindes of Daffodils, the Day Lillies, the great white Starre flower, the Flowerdeluce of Constantinople or the mourning Sable flower, the other sorts of Flowerdeluces. Single and double white Crowfoote, and single and double red Crowfoot, the glory of a Garden: the early red Martagon, the Persian Lilly, the yellow Martagon, the Gladiolus or Corne flagge, both white, red, and blush: the double yellow Rose, and some other sorts of Roses. In Iune doe flower the white and the blush Martagon, the Martagon Imperiall, the mountaine Lil∣lies, and the other sorts of white and red Lillies, the bulbous Flowerdeluces of diuers sorts, the red flowred Ladies bower, the single and double purple flowred Ladies bow∣er, the white Syringa or Pipetree, for the blew Pipe tree flowreth earlier, the white and the yellow Iasmin. Iuly holdeth in flower some of the Ladies bowers and Ias∣ besides doth glory in the Female Balsame apple, the Indian Cresses or yel∣low ar purres, the purple Flower-gentle and the Rose Bay. In August begin some of the Autumne bulbous flowers to appeare, as the white and the purple Col∣chicum or Medow Saffron, the purple mountaine Crocus or Saffron flower, the little Autumne Leucoium and Autumne Iacinth, the Italian Starrewort, called of some the purple Marigold, the Meruaile of Peru or of the world, the Flower of the Sne, the great blew Bell-flower, the great double French Marigold. September flourisheth with the Flower of the Sunne; the Meruaile of the world, the purple Marigold, and blew Bell-flower spoken of before, and likewise the other sorts of Medow Saffron, and the double kinde likewise, the siluer Crocus, the Autumne yellow Daffodill, Cycla∣men also or Sowbread shew their flowers in the end of this moneth. October also will shew the flowers of Cyclamen, and some of the Medow Saffrons. In Nouember, as also sometimes in the moneth before, the party coloured Medow Saffron may bee seene, that will longest hold his flower, because it is the latest that sheweth it selfe, and the ash coloured mountaine Crocus. And euen December it selfe will not want the true blacke Hellebor or Christmas flower, and the glorious shew of the Laurus Tinus or wilde Bay tree. Thus haue I shewed you some of the flowers for euery moneth, but I referre you to the more ample declarion of them and all the others, vnto the work following. CHAP. VIII. The true manner and order to encrease and preserue all sorts of Gilloflowers, as well by slippes as seedes. BEcause that Carnations and Gilloflowers bee the chiefest flowers of account in all our English Gardens, I haue thought good to entreate somewhat amply of them, and that a part by it selfe, as I said a little before, in regard there is so much to be said concerning them, and that if all the matters to be entreated of should haue beene inserted in the Chapter of Gilloflowers, it would haue made it too tedi∣ous and large, and taken vp too much roome. The particular matters whereof I mean in this place to entreate are these: How to encrease Gilloflowers by planting and by
sowing, and how to preserue them being encreased, both in Summer from noysome and hurtfull vermine that destroy them, and in Winter from frosts, snowes, and windes, that spoile them. There are two wayes of planting, whereby to encrease these faire flowers; the one is by slipping, which is the old and ready vsuall way, best knowne in this Kingdome; the other is more sure, perfect, ready, and of later inuen∣tion, videlicet, by laying downe the branches. The way to encrease Gilloflowers by slipping, is so common with all that euer kept any of them, that I thinke most persons may thinke meidle, to spend time to set downe in writing that which is so well known vnto all: Yet giue me leaue to tell them that so might imagine, that (when they haue heard or read what I haue written thereof, if they did know fully as much before) what I here write, was not to informe them, but such as did not know the best, or so good a way as I teach them: For I am assured, the greatest number doe vse, and follow the most vsuall way, and that is not alwaies the best, especially when by good experience a better way is found, and may be learned; and therefore if some can doe a thing better than others, I thinke it is no shame to learne it of them. You shall not then (to take the surest course) take any long spindled branches, nor those branches that haue any young shootes from the ioynts on them, nor yet sliue or teare any slippe or branch from the roote; for all these waies are vsuall and common with most, which causeth so many good rootes to rot and perish, and also so many slippes to be lost, when as for the most part, not the one halfe, or with some, not a third part doth grow and thriue of those slippes they set. And although many that haue store of plants, doe not so much care what hauocke they make to gaine some, yet to saue both labour and plants, I doe wish them to obserue these orders: Take from those rootes from whence you intend to make your encrease, those shootes onely that are reasonable strong, but yet young, and not either too small and slender, or hauing any shootes from th
vpon them; cut these slippes or shootes off from the stemme or roote with a knife, as conueniently as the shoote or branch will permit, that is, either close vnto the maine branch, if it be short, or leauing a ioynt or two behinde you, if it be long enough, at which it may shoote anew: When you haue cut off your slippes, you may either set them by and by, or else as the best Gardiners vse to doe, cast them into a tubbe or pot with water for a day or two, and then hauing prepared a place conuenient to set them in, which had neede to bee of the finest, richest, and best mould you can prouide, that they may thriue therein the better, cut off your slippe close at the ioynt, and ha∣uing cut away the lowest leaues close to the stalke, and the vppermost euen at the top, with a little sticke make a little hole in the earth, and put your slippe therein so deep, as that the vpper leaues may be wholly aboue the ground, (some vse to cleane the stalke in the middle, and put a little earth or clay within the cleft, but many good and skil∣full Gardiners doe not vse it), put the earth a little close to the slippe with your finger and thumbe, and there let it rest, and in this manner doe with as many slippes as you haue, setting them somewhat close together, and not too farre in sunder, both to saue ground and cost thereon, in that a small compasse will serue for the first planting, and also the better to giue them shadow: For you must remember in any case, that these slippes new set, haue no sight of the Sunne, vntill they be well taken in the ground, and shot aboue ground, and also that they want not water, both vpon the new planting and after. When these slippes are well growne vp, they must be transplanted into such other places as you thinke meete; that is, either into the ground in beds, or other∣wise, or into pots, which that you may the more safely doe, after you haue well wate∣red the ground, for halfe a day before you intend to transplant them, you shall sepa∣rate them seuerally, by putting down a broad pointed knife on each side of the slippe, so cutting it out, take euery one by it selfe, with the earth cleauing close vnto the root, which by reason of the moisture it had formerly, and that which you gaue presently before, will be sufficient with any care had, to cause it to hold fast vnto the roote for the transplanting of it: for if the earth were dry, and that it should fall away from the roote in the transplanting, it would hazzard and endanger the roote very much, i it did thriue at all. You must remember also, that vpon the remouing of these slips, you shadow them from the heate of the Sunne for a while with some straw or other thing, vntill they haue taken hold in their new place. Thus although it bee a little more la∣bour and care than the ordinary way is, yet it is surer, and will giue you plants that  will be so strongly growne before Winter, that with the care hereafter specified, you shall haue them beare flowers the next yeare after, and yeeld you encrease of slippes also. To giue you any set time, wherein these slippes will take roote, and begin to shoote aboue ground, is very hard to doe; for that euery slip, or yet euery kinde of Gil∣loflower is not alike apt to grow; nor is euery earth in like manner fit to produce and bring forward the slippes that are set therein: but if both the slippe be apt to grow, and the earth of the best, fit to produce, I thinke within a fortnight or three weekes, you shall see them begin to put forth young leaues in the middle, or else it may be a moneth and more before you shall see any springing. The best time likewise when to plant, is a speciall thing to be knowne, and of as great consequence as any thing else: For if you slippe and set in September, as many vse to doe, or yet in August, as some may thinke will doe well, yet (vnlesse they be the most ordinary sorts, which are likely to grow at any time, and in any place) the most of them, if not all, will either assuredly perish, or neuer prosper well: for the more excellent and dainty the Gilloflower is, the more tender for the most part, and hard to nurse vp will the slippes be. The best time there∣fore is, that you cut off such slippes as are likely, and such as your rootes may spare, from the beginning of May vntill the middle of Iune at the furthest, and order them as I haue shewed you before, that so you may haue faire plants, plenty of flowers, and encrease sufficient for new supply, without offence or losse of your store. For the en∣riching likewise of your earth, wherein you shall plant your slippes, that they may the better thriue and prosper, diuers haue vsed diuers sorts of manure; as stable soyle of horse, beasts or kine, of sheepe, and pigeons, all which are very good when they are thoroughly turned to mould, to mixe with your other earth, or being steeped in water, may serue to water the earth at times, and turned in with it. And some haue likewise proued Tanners earth, that is, their barke, which after they haue vsed, doth lye on heapes and rot in their yards, or the like mould from wood-stackes or yards; but espe∣cially, and beyond all other is commended the Willow earth, that is, that mould which is found in the hollow of old Willow trees, to be the most principall to mixe with other good earth for this purpose. And as I haue now giuen you directions for the first way to encrease them by slipping, so before I come to the other way, let mee giue you a caueat or two for the preseruing of them, when they are beginning to runne vtterly to decay and perish. The one is, that whereas many are ouer greedy to haue their plants to giue them flowers, and therefore let them runne all to flower, so farre spending themselues thereby, that after they haue done flowring, they grow so weake, hauing out spent themselues, that they cannot possibly be preserued from the iniuries of the succeeding Winter; you shall therefore keepe the kinde of any sort you are de∣lighted withall, if you carefully looke that too many branches doe not runne vp and spindle for flowers, but rather either cut some of them downe, before they are run vp too high, within two or three ioynts of the rootes; or else plucke away the innermost leaues where it springeth forwards, which you see in the middle of euery branch, be∣fore it be runne vp too high, which will cause them to breake out the faster into slips and suckers at the ioynts, to hinder their forward luxurie, and to preserue them the longer: The other is, If you shall perceiue any of your Gilloflower leaues to change their naturall fresh verdure, and turne yellowish, or begin to wither in anie part or branch thereof, it is a sure signe that the roote is infected with some cancker or rottennesse, and will soone shew it selfe in all the rest of the branches, whereby the plant will quickly be lost: to preserue it therefore, you shall be time, before it be runne too farre, (for otherwise it is impossible to saue it) either couer all or most of the branches with fresh earth, or else take the fairest slippes from it, as many as you can possibly, and cast them into a pot or tubbe with water, and let them there abide for two or three daies at the least: the first way hath recouered many, being taken in time. Thus you shall see them recouer their former stiffenesse and colour, and then you may plant them as you haue beene heretofore directed; and although many of them may perish, yet shall you haue some of them that will grow to continue the kinde againe. The other or second way to encrease Gilloflowers by planting, is, as I said before, by in laying or laying downe the branches of them, and is a way of later inuention, and as frequently vsed, not onely for the tawney or yellow Gilloflower, and all the varie∣ties therof, but with the other kinds of Gilloflowers, whereof experience hath shewed  that they will likewise take if they be so vsed; the manner whereof is thus: You must choose out the youngest, likeliest, and lowest branches that are nearest the ground (for the vpper branches will sooner breake at the ioynt, than bend downe so low into the earth, without some pot with earth raised vp vnto them) and cut it on the vnderside thereof vpwards at the second ioynt next vnto the roote, to the middle of the branch, and no more, and not quite thorough in any case, and then from that second ioynt vn∣to the third, slit or cut the branch in the middle longwise, that so it may be the more easily bended into the ground, the cut ioynt seeming like the end of a slippe, when you haue bended downe the branch where it is cut into the ground (which must bee done very gently for feare of breaking) with a little sticke or two thrust slopewise, crosse ouer it, keepe it downe within the earth, and raise vp sufficient earth ouer it, that there it may lye and take roote, which commonly will be effected within sixe weekes or two moneths in the Summer time, and then (or longer if you doubt the time too short for it to take sufficient roote) you may take or cut it away, and transplant it where you thinke good, yet so as in any case you shadow it from the heate of the Sunne, vn∣till it haue taken good hold in the ground. The other way to encrease Gilloflowers, is by sowing the seede: It is not vsuall with all sorts of Gilloflowers to giue seede, but such of them as doe yeeld seede may be encreased thereby, in the same manner as is here set downe. The Orange tawney Gilloflower and the varieties thereof is the most vsuall kinde, (and it is a kinde by it selfe, how various soeuer the plants be that rise from the seede) that doth giue seede, and is sowne, and from thence ariseth so many varieties of colours, both plaine and mixt, both single and double, that one can hardly set them downe in writing: yet such as I haue obserued and marked, you shall finde expressed in the Chapter of Gilloflowers in the worke following. First therefore make choise of your seede that you intend to sowe (if you doe not desire to haue as many more single flowers as double) that it bee taken from double flowers, and not from single, and from the best colours, howsoeuer some may boast to haue had double and stript flowers from the seede of a single one; which if it were so, yet one Swallow (as we say) maketh no Summer, nor a thing comming by chance cannot bee reckoned for a certaine and constant rule; you may be assured they will not vsually doe so: but the best, fairest, and most double flowers come alwaies, or for the most part, from the seede of those flowers that were best, fairest, and most double, and I doe aduise you to take the best and most double: for euen from them you shall haue single ones e∣now, you neede not to sowe any worser sort. And againe, see that your seede bee new, of the last yeares gathering, and also that it was full ripe before it was gathered, lest you lose your labour, or misse of your purpose, which is, to haue faire and double flowers. Hauing now made choise of your seede, and prepared you a bedde to sowe them on, the earth whereof must be rich and good, and likewise sifted to make it the finer; for the better it is, the better shall your profit and pleasure bee: hereon, being first made leuell, plaine, and smooth, sowe your seede somewhat thinne, and not too thicke in any case, and as euenly as you can, that they be not too many in one place, and too few in another, which afterwards couer with fine sifted earth ouer them about one fingers thicknesse; let this be done in the middle of Aprill, if the time of the yeare be temperate, and not too cold, or else stay vntill the end of the moneth: after they are sprung vp and growne to be somewhat bigge, let them bee drawne forth that are too close and neare one vnto another, and plant them in such place where they shall continue, so that they stand halfe a yard of ground distance asunder, which after the planting, let be shadowed for a time, as is before specified; and this may bee done in the end of Iuly, or sooner if there because. I haue not set downe in all this discourse of planting, transplanting, sowing, setting, &c. any mention of watering those slips or plants, not doubting but that euery ones reason will induce them to thinke, that they cannot prosper without watering: But let this Caueat be a sufficient remembrance vnto you, that you neuer water any of these Gilloflowers, nor yet indeede any other fine herbe or plant with cold water, such as you haue presently before drawne out from a pumpe or Well, &c. but with such water as hath stood open in the aire in a cisterne, tubbe, or pot, for one whole day at the least; if it be two or three daies it will be neuer the worse, but rather the better, as I haue related before: yet take especiall heede that you doe not giue them too much to ouer-glut them at any time, but temperately to ir∣rorate,  bedew or sprinkle them often. From the seedes of these Gilloflowers hath ri∣sen both white, red, blush, stamell, tawny lighter and sadder, marbled, speckled, stri∣ped, flaked, and that in diuers manners, both single and double flowers, as you shall see them set downe in a more ample manner in the Chapter of Gilloflowers. And thus much for their encrease by the two wayes of planting and sowing: For as for a third way, by grafting one into or vpon another, I know none such to be true, nor to be of any more worth than an old Wiues tale, both nature, reason, and experience, all contesting against such an idle fancy, let men make what ostentation they please. It now resteth, that we also shew you the manner how to preserue them, as well in Sum∣mer from all noysome and hurtfull things, as in the Winter and Spring from the sharp and chilling colds, and the sharpe and bitter killing windes in March. The hurtfull things in the Summer are especially these, too much heate of the Sunne which scorch∣eth them, which you must be carefull to preuent, by placing boughes, boords, clothes or mats, &c. before them, if they bee in the ground; or else if they bee in pots, to remoue into them into the shadow, to giue them refreshing from the heate, and giue them water also for their life: too much water, or too little is another annoyance, which you must order as you see there is iust cause, by withholding or giuing them wa∣ter gently out of a watering pot, and not cast on by dishfuls: Some also to water their Gilloflowers, vse to set their pots into tubbes or pots halfe full of water, that so the water may soake in at the lower holes in each flower pot, to giue moisture to the roots of the Gilloflowers onely, without casting any water vpon the leaues, and assuredly it is an excellent way to moisten the rootes so sufficiently at one time, that it doth saue a great deale of paines many other times. Earwickes are a most infestuous vermine, to spoyle the whole beauty of your flowers, and that in one night or day; for these crea∣tures delighting to creepe into any hollow or shadowie place, doe creepe into the long greene pods of the Gilloflowers, and doe eate away the white bottomes of their leaues, which are sweete, whereby the leaues of the flowers being loose, doe either fall away of themselues before, or when they are gathered, or handled, or presently wither within the pods before they are gathered, and blowne away with the winde. To auoide which inconuenience, many haue deuised many waies and inuentions to destroy them, as pots with double verges or brimmes, containing a hollow gutter be∣tweene them, which being filled with water, will not suffer these small vermine to passe ouer it to the Gilloflowers to spoile them. Others haue vsed old shooes, and such like hollow things to bee set by them to take them in: but the best and most vsuall things now vsed, are eyther long hollow canes, or else beasts hoofes, which being turned downe vpon stickes ends set into the ground, or into the pots of earth, will soone draw into them many Earwickes, lying hid therein from sunne, winde, and raine, and by care and diligence may soone bee destroyed, if euery morning and eue∣ning one take the hoofes gently off from the stickes, and knocking them against the ground in a plain allie, shake out all the Earwicks that are crept into them, which quick∣ly with ones foot may be trode to peeces. For sodain blasting with thunder and lighte∣ning, or fierce sharpe windes, &c. I know no other remedy, vnlesse you can couer them therefrom when you first foresee the danger, but patiently to abide the losse, whatsoeuer some haue aduised, to lay litter about them to auoide blasting; for if any shall make tryall thereof, I am in doubt, he shall more endanger his rootes thereby, be∣ing the Summer time, when any such feare of blasting is, than any wise saue them from it, or doe them any good. For the Winter preseruation of them, some haue aduised to couer them with Bee-hiues, or else with small Willow stickes, prickt crossewise into the ground ouer your flowers, and bowed archwise, and with litter laid thereon, to couer the Gilloflowers quite ouer, after they haue beene sprinkled with sope ashes and lyme mixt together: and this way is commended by some that haue written there∣of, to be such an admirable defence vnto them in Winter, that neither Ants, nor Snailes, nor Earwickes shall touch them, because of the sope ashes and lyme, and ney∣ther frosts nor stormes shall hurt them, because of the litter which so well will defend them; and hereby also your Gilloflowers will bee ready to flower, not onely in the Spring very early, but euen all the Winter. But whosoeuer shall follow these directi∣ons, may peraduenture finde them in some part true, as they are there set downe for the Winter time, and while they are kept close and couered; but let them bee assured,  that all such plants, or the most part of them, will certainely perish and dye before the Summer be at an end: for the sope ashes and lyme will burne vp and spoile any herbe; and againe, it is impossible for any plant that is kept so warme in Winter, to abide ey∣ther the cold or the winde in the Spring following, or any heate of the Sun, but that both of them will scorch them, and carry them quite away. One great hurt vnto them, and to all other herbes that wee preserue in Winter, is to suffer the snow to lye vpon them any time after it is fallen, for that it doth so chill them, that the Sunne afterward, although in Winter, doth scorch them and burne them vp: looke therefore vnto your Gilloflowers in those times, and shake or strike off the snow gently off from them, not suffering it to abide on them any day or night if you can; for assure your selfe, if it doth not abide on them, the better they will be. The frosts likewise is ano∣ther great annoyance vnto them, to corrupt the rootes, and to cause them to swell, rot, and breake: to preuent which inconuenience, I would aduise you to take the straw or litter of your horse stable, and lay some thereof about euery roote of your Gillo∣flowers (especially those of the best account) close vnto them vpon the ground, but be as carefull as you can, that none thereof lye vpon the greene leaues, or as little as may be, and by this onely way haue they been better defended from the frosts that spoile them in Winter, then by any other that I haue seen or knowne. The windes in March, and Sunneshine dayes then, are one of the greatest inconueniences that happeneth vn∣to them: for they that haue had hundreds of plants, that haue kept faire and greene all the Winter vntill the beginning or middle of March, before the end thereof, haue had scarce one of many, that either hath not vtterly perished, or been so tainted, that quickly after haue not been lost; which hath happened chiefly by the neglect of these cautions before specified, or in not defending them from the bitter sharpe windes and sunne in this moneth of March. You shall therefore for their better preseruation, be∣sides the litter laid about the rootes, which I aduise you not to remoue as yet, shelter them somewhat from the windes, with eyther bottomlesse pots, pales, or such like things, to keep away the violent force both of windes and sun for that moneth, and for sometime before & after it also: yet so, that they be not couered close aboue, but open to receiue ayre & raine. Some also vse to wind withes of hey or straw about the rootes of their Gilloflowers, and fasten them with stickes thrust into the ground, which serue very well in the stead of the other. Thus haue I shewed you the whole preserua∣tion of these worthy and dainty flowers, with the whole manner of ordering them for their encrease: if any one haue any other better way, I shall be as willing to learne it of them, as I haue beene to giue them or any others the knowledge of that I haue here set downe. CHAP. IX. That there is not any art whereby any flower may be made to grow double, that was naturally single, nor of any other sent or colour than it first had by nature; nor that the sowing or planting of herbes one deeper than other, will cause them to be in flower one after another, euery moneth in the yeare.
THe wonderfull desire that many haue to see faire, double, and sweete flowers, hath transported them beyond both reason and nature, feigning and boasting often of what they would haue, as if they had it. And I thinke, from this desire and boasting hath risen all the false tales and reports, of making flowers double as they list, and of giuing them colour and sent as they please, and to flower likewise at what time they will, I doubt not, but that some of these errours are ancient, and continued long by tradition, and others are of later inuention: and therefore the more to be con∣demned, that men of wit and iudgement in these dayes should expose themselues in their writings, to be rather laughed at, then beleeued for such idle tales. And although in the contradiction of them, I know I shall vndergoe many calumnies, yet notwith∣standing, I will endeauour to set downe and declare so much, as I hope may by reason  perswade many in the truth, although I cannot hope of all, some being so strongly wedded to their owne will, and the errours they haue beene bred in, that no reason may alter them. First therefore I say, that if there were any art to make some flowers to grow double, that naturally were single, by the same art, all sorts of flowers that are single by nature, may be made to grow double: but the sorts of flowers that are single by nature, whereof some are double, were neuer made double by art; for many sorts abide still single, whereof there was neuer seene double: and therefore there is no such art in any mans knowledge to bring it to passe. If any man shall say, that because there are many flowers double, whereof there are single also of the same kin, as for example, Violets, Marigolds, Daisyes, Daffodils, Anemones, and many other, that therefore those double flowers were so made by the art of man: viz. by the obseruati∣on of the change of the Moone, the constellations or coniunctions of Planets, or some other Starres or celestiall bodies. Although I doe confesse and acknowledge, that I thinke some constellations, and peraduenture changes of the Moone, &c. were appointed by the God of nature, as conducing and helping to the making of those flowers double, that nature hath so produced; yet I doe deny, that any man hath or shall euer be able to proue, that it was done by any art of man, or that any man can tell the true causes and seasons, what changes of the Moone, or constellations of the Pla∣nets, wrought together for the producing of those double flowers, or can imitate na∣ture, or rather the God of nature, to doe the like. If it shall bee demanded, From whence then came these double flowers that we haue, if they were not so made by art? I answer, that assuredly all such flowers did first grow wilde, and were so found dou∣ble, as they doe now grow in Gardens, but for how long before they were found they became double, no man can tell; we onely haue them as nature hath produced them, and so they remaine. Againe, if any shall say, that it is likely that these double flowers were forced so to be, by the often planting and transplanting of them, because it is ob∣serued in most of them, that if they stand long in any one place, and not be often re∣moued, they will grow still lesse double, and in the end turne single. I doe confesse, that Facilior est descensus quàm ascensus, and that the vnfruitfulnesse of the ground they are planted in, or the neglect or little care had of them, or the growing of them too thicke or too long, are oftentimes a cause of the diminishing of the flowers doublenesse; but withall you shall obserue, that the same rootes that did beare double flowers (and not any other that neuer were double before) haue returned to their for∣mer doublenesse againe, by good ordering and looking vnto: single flowers haue only beene made somewhat fairer or larger, by being planted in the richer and more fruit∣full ground of the Garden, than they were found wilde by nature; but neuer made to grow double, as that which is naturally so found of it selfe: For I will shew you mine owne experience in the matter. I haue been as inquisitiue as any man might be, with euery one I knew, that made any such report, or that I thought could say any thing therein, but I neuer could finde any one, that could assuredly resolue me, that he knew certainly any such thing to be done: all that they could say was but report, for the ob∣seruation of the Moone, to remoue plants before the change, that is, as some say, the full of the Moone, others the new Moone, whereupon I haue made tryall at many times, and in many sorts of plants, accordingly, and as I thought fit, by planting & tran∣splanting them, but I could neuer see the effect desired, but rather in many of them the losse of my plants. And were there indeed such a certaine art, to make single flowers to grow double, it would haue beene knowne certainly to some that would practise it, and there are so many single flowers, whereof there were neuer any of the kinde seene double, that to produce such of them to be double, would procure both credit and coyne enough to him that should vse it; but Vltra posse non est esse: and therefore let no man beleeue any such reports, bee they neuer so ancient; for they are but meere tales and fables. Concerning colours and sents, the many rules and directions extant in ma∣nie mens writings, to cause flowers to grow yellow, red, greene, or white, that neuer were so naturally, as also to be of the sent of Cinamon, Muske, &c. would almost per∣swade any, that the matters thus set downe by such persons, and with some shew of probability, were constant and assured proofes thereof: but when they come to the triall, they all vanish away like smoake. I will in a few words shew you the matters and manners of their proceedings to effect this purpose: First (they say) if you shall steepe  your seedes in the lees of red Wine, you shall haue the flowers of those plants to be of a purple colour. If you will haue Lillies or Gilloflowers to be of a Scarlet red colour, you shall put Vermillion or Cynaber betweene the rinde and the small heads growing about the roote: if you will haue them blew, you shall dissolue Azur or Byse between the rinde and the heads: if yellow, Orpiment: if greene, Vardigrease, and thus of any other colour. Others doe aduise to open the head of the roote, and poure into it any colour dissolued, so that there be no fretting or corroding thing therein for feare of hurting the roote, and looke what colour you put in, iust such or neare vnto it shall the colour of the flower bee. Some againe doe aduise to water the plants you would haue changed, with such coloured liquor as you desire the flower to be of, and they shall grow to be so. Also to make Roses to bee yellow, that you should graft a white Rose (some say a Damaske) vpon a Broome stalke, and the flower will be yellow, sup∣posing because the Broome flower is yellow, therefore the Rose will be yellow. Some affirme the like, if a Rose be grafted on a Barbery bush, because both the blossome and the barke of the Barbery is yellow, &c. In the like manner for sents, they haue set downe in their writings, that by putting Cloues, Muske, Cinamon, Benzoin, or any other such sweete thing, bruised with Rose water, between the barke and the body of trees, the fruit of them will smell and taste of the same that is put vnto them; and if they bee put vnto the toppe of the rootes, or else bound vnto the head of the roote, they will cause the flowers to smell of that sent the matter put vnto them is of: as also to steep the seeds of Roses, and other plants in the water of such like sweet things, and then to sowe them, and water them morning and euening with such like liquor, vntill they be growne vp; besides a number of such like rules and directions set downe in bookes, so confidently, as if the matters were without all doubt or question: when∣as without all doubt and question I will assure you, that they are all but meere idle tales & fancies, without all reason or truth, or shadow of reason or truth: For sents and colours are both such qualities as follow the essence of plants, euen as formes are also; and one may as well make any plant to grow of what forme you will, as to make it of what sent or colour you will; and if any man can forme plants at his will and pleasure, he can doe as much as God himselfe that created them. For the things they would adde vnto the plants to giue them colour, are all corporeall, or of a bodily substance, and whatsoeuer should giue any colour vnto a liuing and growing plant, must be spi∣rituall: for no solide corporeall substance can ioyne it selfe with the life and essence of an herbe or tree, and the spirituall part of the colour thereof is not the same with the bodily substance, but is a meere vapour that riseth from the substance, and feedeth the plant, whereby it groweth, so that there is no ground or colour of reason, that a substantiall colour should giue colour to a growing herbe or tree: but for sent (which is a meere vapour) you will say there is more probability. Yet consider also, that what sweete sent soeuer you binde or put vnto the rootes of herbes or trees, must be either buried, or as good as buried in the earth, or barke of the tree, whereby the substance will in a small time corrupt and rot, and before it can ioyne it selfe with the life, spirit, and essence of the plant, the sent also will perish with the substance: For no heterogeneall things can bee mixed naturally together, as Iron and Clay; and no other thing but homogeneall, can be nourishment or conuertible into the substance of man or beast: And as the stomach of man or beast altereth both formes, sents, and colours of all digestible things; so whatsoeuer sent or colour is wholsome, and not poysonfull to nature, being receiued into the body of man or beast, doth neither change the bloud or skinne into that colour or sent was receiued: no more doth any colour or sent to any plant; for the plants are onely nourished by the moisture they draw naturally vn∣to them, be it of wine or any other liquor is put vnto them, and not by any corporeall substance, or heterogeneall vapour or sent, because the earth like vnto the stomach doth soone alter them, before they are conuerted into the nature and substance of the plant. Now for the last part I vndertooke to confute, that no man can by art make all flowers to spring at what time of the yeare hee will; although, as I haue here before shewed, there are flowers for euery moneth of the yeare, yet I hope there is not any one, that hath any knowledge in flowers and gardening, but knoweth that the flowers that appeare and shew themselues in the seuerall moneths of the yeare, are not one and the same, and so made to flower by art; but that they are seuerall sorts of plants, which  will flower naturally and constantly in the same moneths one yeare, that they vse to doe in another, or with but little alteration, if the yeares proue not alike kindly: As for example, those plants that doe flower in Ianuary and February, will by no art or industry of man be caused to flower in Summer or in Autumne; and those that flower in Aprill and May, will not flower in Ianuary or February; or those in Iuly, August, &c. either in the Winter or Spring: but euery one knoweth their owne appointed na∣turall times, which they constantly obserue and keepe, according to the temperature of the yeare, or the temper of the climate, being further North or South, to bring them on earlier or later, as it doth with all other fruits, flowers, and growing greene herbes, &c. except that by chance, some one or other extraordinarily may be hinde∣red in their due season of flowring, and so giue their flowers out of time, or else to giue their flowers twice in the yeare, by the superaboundance of nourishment, or the mildnesse of the season, by moderate showers of raine, &c. as it sometimes also hap∣peneth with fruits, which chance, as it is seldome, and not constant, so we then terme it but Lusus naturae: or else by forcing them in hot stoues, which then will perish, when they haue giuen their flowers or fruits. It is not then, as some haue written, the sow∣ing of the seedes of Lillies, or any other plants a foote deepe, or halfe a foote deepe, or two inches deepe, that will cause them to be in flower one after another, as they are sowne euery moneth of the yeare; for it were too grosse to thinke, that any man of reason and iudgement would so beleeue. Nor is it likewise in the power of any man, to make the same plants to abide a moneth, two, or three, or longer in their beauty of flowring, then naturally they vse to doe; for I thinke that were no humane art, but a supernaturall worke. For nature still bendeth and tendeth to perfection, that is, after flowring to giue fruit or seede; nor can it bee hindered in the course thereof without manifest danger of destruction, euen as it is in all other fruit-bearing creatures, which stay no longer, then their appointed time is naturall vnto them, without apparent damage. Some things I grant may be so ordered in the planting, that according to that order and time which is obserued in their planting, they shall shew forth their faire flowers, and they are Anemones, which will in that manner, that I haue shewed in the worke following, flower in seuerall moneths of the yeare; which thing as it is incident to none or very few other plants, and is found out but of late, so likewise is it knowne but vnto a very few. Thus haue I shewed you the true solution of these doubts: And although they haue not beene amplified with such Philosophicall argu∣ments and reasons, as one of greater learning might haue done, yet are they truely and sincerely set downe, that they may serue tanquam galcatum, against all the calumnies and obiections of wilfull and obdurate persons, that will not be reformed. As first, that all double flowers were so found wilde, being the worke of nature alone, and not the art of any man, by planting or transplanting, at or before the new or full Moone, or any other obseruation of time, that hath caused the flower to grow double, that na∣turally was single: Secondly, that the rules and directions, to cause flowers to bee of contrary or different colours or sents, from that they were or would be naturally, are meere fancies of men, without any ground of reason or truth. And thirdly, that there is no power or art in man, to cause flowers to shew their beauty diuers moneths before their naturall time, nor to abide in their beauty longer then the appointed naturall time for euery one of them.
THE GARDEN OF PLEASANT FLOWERS. CHAP. I. Corona Imperialis. The Crowne Imperiall.
BEcause the Lilly is the more stately flower among ma∣nie: and amongst the wonderfull varietie of Lillies, knowne to vs in these daies, much more then in former times, whereof some are white, others blush, some pur∣ple, others red or yellow, some spotted, others with∣out spots, some standing vpright, others hanging or turning downewards, The Crowne Imperiall for his stately beautifulness, deserueth the first place in this our Garden of delight, to be here entreated of before all o∣ther Lillies: but because it is so well knowne to most persons, being in a manner euery where common, I shall neede onely to giue you a relation of the chiefe parts thereof (as I intend in such other things) which are these: The roote is yellowish on the outside, composed of fewer, but much thicker scales, then any other Lilly but the Persian, and doth grow sometimes to be as great as a pretty bigge childes head, but somewhat flat withall, from the sides whereof, and not from the bottome, it shooteth forth thicke long fibres, which perish euery yeare, hauing a hole in the midst thereof, at the end of the yeare, when the old stalke is dry and withered, and out of the which a new stalke doth spring againe (from a bud or head to be seen within the hollownesse on the one side) the yeare following: the stalke then filling vp the hollownesse, riseth vp three or foure foote high, being great, round, and of a purplish colour at the bot∣tome, but greene aboue, beset from thence to the middle thereof with many long and broad greene leaues, very like to the leaues of our ordinary white Lilly, but somewhat shorter and narrower, confusedly without order, and from the middle is bare or na∣ked without leaues, for a certaine space vpwards, and then beareth foure, sixe, or tenne flowers, more or lesse, according to the age of the plant, and the fertility of the soyle where it groweth: The buddes at the first appearing are whitish, standing vpright a∣mong a bush or tuft of greene leaues, smaller then those below, and standing aboue the flowers, after a while they turne themselues, and hang downewards euerie one vpon his owne footestalke, round about the great stemme or stalke, sometimes of an euen depth, and other while one lower or higher than another, which flowers are neare the forme of an ordinary Lilly, yet somewhat lesser and closer, consisting of sixe leaues of an Orange colour, striped with purplish lines and veines, which adde a great grace to the flowers: At the bottome of the flower next vnto the stalke, euery  leafe thereof hath on the outside a certaine bunch or eminence, of a darke purplish co∣lour, and on the inside there lyeth in those hollow bunched places, certaine cleare drops of water like vnto pearles, of a very sweete taste almost like sugar: in the midst of each flower is a long white stile or pointell, forked or diuided at the end, and sixe white chiues tipt with yellowish pendents, standing close about it: after the flowers are past, appeare sixe square seede vessels standing vpright, winged as it were or welted on the edges, yet seeming but three square, because each couple of those welted edges are ioyned closer together, wherein are contained broad, flat, and thinne seedes, of a pale brownish colour, like vnto other Lillies, but much greater and thicker also. The stalke of this plant doth oftentimes grow flat, two, three, or foure fingers broad, and then beareth many more flowers, but for the most part smaller then when it beareth round stalkes. And sometimes it happeneth the stalke to be diuided at the top, carry∣ing two or three tufts of greene leaues, without any flowers on them. And sometimes likewise, to beare two or three rowes or crownes of flowers one aboue another vpon one stalke, which is seldome and scarce seene, and besides, is but meere accidentall: the whole plant and euery part thereof, as well rootes, as leaues and flowers, doe smell somewhat strong as it were the sauour of a Foxe, so that if any doe but come neare it, he cannot but smell it, which yet is not vnwholsome. I haue not obserued any variety in the colour of this flower, more then that it will be fairer in a cleare open ayre, and paler, or as it were blasted in a muddy or smoakie ayre. And although some haue boasted of one with white flowers, yet I could neuer heare that any such hath endured in one vniforme colour. The Place. This plant was first brought from Constantinople into these Christian Countries, and by the relation of some that sent it, groweth naturally in Persia. The Time. It flowreth most commonly in the end of March, if the weather be milde, and springeth not out of the ground vntill the end of February, or begin∣ning of March, so quicke it is in the springing: the heads with seed are ripe in the end of May. The Names. It is of some called Lilium Persicum, the Persian Lilly: but because wee haue another, which is more vsually called by that name, as shall be shewed in the next Chapter, I had rather with Alphonsus Pancius the Duke of Flo∣rence his Physitian, (who first sent the figure thereof vnto Msr. Iohn de Brancion) call it Corona Imperialis, The Crowne Imperiall, then by any o∣ther name, as also for that this name is now more generally receiued. It hath been sent also by the name Tusai, and Tuschai, and Turfani, or Turfanda, being, as it is like, the Turkish names. The Vertues. For any Physicall Vertues that are in it, I know of none, nor haue heard that any hath been found out: notwithstanding the strong sent would perswade it might be applyed to good purpose. CHAP. II. Lilium Persicum. The Persian Lilly. THe roote of the Persian Lilly is very like vnto the root of the Crowne Imperi∣all, and losing his fibres in like maner euery yeare, hauing a hole therin likewise where the old stalke grew, but whiter, rounder, and a little longer, smaller, and not stinking at all like it, from whence springeth vp a round whitish greene stalke, not
1 Corona Imperialis. The Crowne Imperiall. 2 Liliu Persicum. The Persian Lilly. 3 Martagon Imperiale. The Martagon Imperiall. depiction of flowers
much lower than the Crowne Imperiall, but much smaller, beset from the bottome to the middle thereof, with many long and narrow leaues, of a whitish or blewish greene colour, almost like to the leafe of a Tulipa: from the middle vpwards, to the toppe of the stalke, stand many flowers one aboue another round about it, with leaues at the foote of euery one of them, each whereof is pendulous or hanging downe the head, like vnto the Crowne Imperiall, and not turning vp any of the flowers againe, but smaller than in any other kinde of Lilly, yea not so bigge as the flower of a Fritillaria, consisting of sixe leaues a peece, of a dead or ouerworne purplish colour, hauing in the midst a small long pointell, with certaine chiues tipt with yellow pendents: after the flowers are past (which abide open a long time, and for the most part flower by de∣grees, the lowest first, and so vpwards) if the weather be temperate, come sixe square heads or seede vessels, seeming to be but three square, by reason of the wings, very like to the heads of the Crowne Imperiall, but smaller and shorter, wherein are contained such like flat seed, but smaller also, and of a darker colour. The Place. This was, as it is thought, first brought from Persia vnto Constantinople, and from thence, sent vnto vs by the meanes of diuers Turkie Merchants, and in especiall, by the procurement of Mr. Nicholas Lete, a worthy Mer∣chant, and a louer of all faire flowers. The Time. It springeth out of the ground very neare a moneth before the Crowne Imperiall, but doth not flower till it bee quite past (that is to say) not vntill the latter end of Aprill, or beginning of May: the seed (when it doth come to perfection, as it seldome doth) is not ripe vntill Iuly. The Names. It hath been sent by the name of Pennachio Persiano, and wee thereupon doe most vsually call it Lilium Persicum, The Persian Lilly. Clusius saith it hath been sent into the Low-Countries vnder the name of Susam giul, and he thereupon thinking it came from Susis in Persia, called it Lilium Susia∣num, The Lilly of Susis. The Vertues. Wee haue not yet heard, that this hath beene applyed for any Physicall respect. CHAP. III. Martagon Imperiale, siue Lilium Montanum maius, The Martagon Imperiall. VNder this title of Lilium Montanum, or Lilium Siluestre, I do comprehend only those kindes of Lillies, which carry diuers circles of greene leaues set together at certaine distances, round about the stalke, and not sparsedly as the two for∣mer, and as other kindes that follow, doe. And although there bee many of this sort, yet because their chiefest difference is in the colour of the flower, wee will containe them all in one Chapter, and begin with the most stately of them all, because of the number of flowers it beareth vpon one stalke. The Imperiall Lilly hath a scaly roote, like vnto all the rest of the Lillies, but of a paler yellow colour, closely compact or set together, being short and small oftentimes, in comparison of the greatnesse of the
stemme growing from it. The stalke is brownish and round at the bottome, and some∣times flat from the middle vpwards, three foote high or more, beset at certaine distan∣ces with rondles or circles of many broad leaues, larger and broader for the most part than any other of this kinde, and of a darke green colour: It hath two or three, and sometimes foure of these rondles or circles of leaues, and bare without any leafe be∣tweene; but aboue toward the tops of the stalkes, it hath here and there some leaues vpon it, but smaller than any of the other leaues: at the toppe of the stalke come forth many flowers, sometime three or foure score, thicke thrust, or confusedly set together, and not thinne or sparsedly one aboue another, as in the lesser of this kinde of Moun∣taine Lilly. It hath been sometimes also obserued in this kinde, that it hath borne ma∣nie flowers at three seuerall spaces of the stalke, one aboue another, which hath made a goodly shew; each flower whereof is pendulous, hanging downe, and each leafe of the flower turning vp againe, being thicke or fleshy, of a fine delayed purple colour, spotted with many blackish or brownish spots, of a very pleasant sweet sent, which ma∣keth it the more acceptable: in the middle of the flower hangeth downe a stile or pointell, knobbed or buttoned at the end with sixe yellow chiues, tipt with loose pen∣dents of an Orient red or Vermillion colour, which will easily sticke like dust vpon any thing that toucheth them: the heads or seede vessels are small and round, with small edges about them, wherein is contained flat browne seede like other Lillies, but lesser. The root is very apt to encrease or set of, as we call it, wherby the plant seldome commeth to so great a head of flowers, but riseth vp with many stalkes, and then carry fewer flowers. Of this kinde there is sometimes one found, that beareth flowers without any spots:Martagon Imperiale flore non pun∣ctato. the leaues whereof and stalke likewise are paler, but not else differing. Martagon flore albo. The White Martagon. We haue also some other of this kind, the first wherof hath his stalke & leafe greener than the former, the stalke is a little higher, but not bearing so thicke a head of flowers, although much more plentifull than the lesser Mountaine Lilly, being altogether of a fine white colour, without any spots, or but very few, and that but sometimes also: the pendents in the middle of this flower are not red, as the former, but yellow; the roote of this, and of the other two that follow, are of a pale yellow colour, the cloues or scales of them being brittle, and not closely compact, yet so as if two, and sometimes three scales or cloues grew one vpon the head or vpper part of another; which diffe∣rence is a speciall note to know these three kindes, from any other kinde of Mountaine Lilly, as in all old rootes that I haue seene, I haue obserued, as also in them that are rea∣sonably well growne, but in the young rootes it is not yet so manifest. Martagon flore albo maculato. The White spotted Martagon. The second is like vnto the first in all things, saue in this, that the flowers hereof are not altogether so white, and besides hath many reddish spots on the inside of the leaues of the flower, and the stalke also is not so greene but brownish. Martagon flore carneo. The blush Martagon. A third sort there is of this kinde, whose flowers are wholly of a delayed flesh co∣lour, with many spots on the flowers, and this is the difference hereof from the former. Lilium Montanum siue siluestre minus. The lesser Mountaine Lilly.
The lesser Mountaine Lilly is so like in root vnto the greater that is first described, that it is hard to distinguish them asunder; but when this is sprung vp out of the ground, which is a moneth after the first: it also carrieth his leaues in rondles about the stalke, although not altogether so great nor so many. The flowers are more thinly set on the stalkes one aboue another, with more distance betweene each flower than the former, and are of a little deeper flesh colour or purple, spotted in the same manner. The buds 1 Martagon flore albo. The white Martagon. 2 Martagon sine Lilium Canadense maculatum. The spotted Martagon, or Lilly of Canada. 3 Martagon Pomponeum. The Martagon Pompony, or early red Martagon. depiction of flowers
or heads of flowers, in some of these before they be blowne, are hoary white, or hairie, whereas in others, there is no hoarinesse at all, but the buddes are smooth and purplish: in others, things this differeth not from the former. Of this sort also there is one that hath but few spots on the flowers,Lilium Mon∣tanum non ma∣culatum. whose colour is somewhat paler than the other. Martagon Canadense maculatum. The spotted Martagon of Canada. Although this strange Lilly hath not his flowers hanging downe, and turning vp a∣gain, as the former kinds set forth in this Chapter; yet because the green leaues stand at seuerall ioynts as they do, I must needs insert it here, not knowing where more fitly to place it. It hath a small scaly roote, with many small long fibres thereat, from whence riseth vp a reasonable great stalke, almost as high as any of the former, bearing at three or foure distances many long and narrow greene leaues, but not so many or so broad as the former, with diuers ribbes in them: from among the vppermost rundle of leaues breake forth foure or fiue flowers together, euery one standing on a long slender foote stalke, being almost as large as a red Lilly, but a little bending downewards, and of a faire yellow colour, spotted on the inside with diuers blackish purple spots or strakes, hauing a middle pointell, and sixe chiues, with pendents on them. The Place. All these Lillies haue been found in the diuers Countries of Germany, as Austria, Hungaria, Pannonia, Stiria, &c. and are all made Denisons in our London Gardens, where they flourish as in their owne naturall places. The last was was brought into France from Canada by the French Colonie, and from thence vnto vs. The Time. They flower about the later end of Iune for the most part, yet the first springeth out of the ground a moneth at the least before the other, which are most vsually in flower before it, like vnto the Serotine Tulipas, all of them being early vp, and neuer the neere. The Names. The first is vsually called Martagon Imperiale, the Imperiall Martagon, and is Lilium Montanum maius, the greatest Mountaine Lilly; for so it deser∣ueth the name, because of the number of flowers vpon a head or stalke. Some haue called it Lilium Sarasenicum, and some Hemerocallis, but neither of them doth so fitly agree vnto it. The second is Lilium Montanum maius flore albo, and of some Martagon Imperiale flore albo, but most vsually Martagon flore albo, the white Marta∣gon. The second sort of this second kinde, is called Martagon flore albo ma∣culato, the spotted white Martagon. And the third, Martagon flore carneo, the blush Martagon. The third kinde is called Lilium Montanum, the Mountaine Lilly, and some adde the title inus, the lesser, to know it more distinctly from the o∣ther. Some also Lilium Siluestre, as Clusius, and some others, and of Mat∣thiolus Martagon. Of diuers women here in England, from the Dutch name, Lilly of Nazareth. The last hath his title Americanum & Canadense, and in English accordingly.
CHAP. IV. 1. Martagon Pomponeum sine Lilium rubrum praecox, vel Lilium Macedonicum. The early red Martagon, or Martagon Pompony. AS in the former Chapter we described vnto you such Lillies, whose flowers be∣ing pendulous, turne their leaues backe againe, and haue their greene leaues, set by spaces about the stalke: so in this wee will set downe those sorts, which carry their greene leaues more sparsedly, and all along the stalke, their flowers hang∣ing downe, and turning vp againe as the former, and begin with that which is of grea∣test beauty, or at least of most rarity. 1. Martagon Pomponeum angusti folium praecox.1. This rare Martagon hath a scaly root closely compact, with broader and thinner scales than others, in time growing very great, and of a more deepe yellow colour then the former, from whence doth spring vp a round greene stalke in some plants, and flat in others, two or three foote high, bearing a number of small, long, and narrow greene leaues, very like vnto the leaues of Pinkes, but greener, set very thicke together, and without order about the stalke, vp almost vnto the toppe, and lesser by degrees vpwards, where stand many flowers, according to the age of the plant, and thriuing in the place where it groweth; in those that are young, but a few, and more sparsedly, and in others that are old many more, and thicker set: for I haue reckoned threescore flowers and more, growing thicke together on one plant with mee, and an hundred flowers on another: these flowers are of a pale or yellowish red colour, and not so deep red as the red Martagon of Constantinople, hereafter set down, nor fully so large: yet of the same fashion, that is, euery flower hanging downe, and turning vp his leaues againe. It is not so plentifull in bearing of seede as the other Lillies, but when it doth, it differeth not but in being lesse. 2. Martagon angusti folium magis seroti∣num.There is another, whose greene leaues are not so thicke set on the stalke, but else differeth not but in flowring a fortnight later. There is another also of this kind, so like vnto the former in root, stalk, flower, & ma∣ner of growing,3. Martagon Pomponeum latifolium prae∣cox. that the difference is hardly discerned; but consisteth chiefly in these two points: First, that the leaues of this are a little broader and shorter then the former; and secondly, that it beareth his flowers a fortnight earlier than the first. In the colour or forme of the flower, there can no difference bee discerned, nor (as I said) in any o∣ther thing. All these Lillies doe spring very late out of the ground, euen as the yellow Martagons doe, but are sooner in flower then any others. 4. Martagon flore phaeniceo.A fourth kinde hereof hath of late been knowne to vs, whose leaues are broader and shorter then the last, and the flowers of a paler red, tending to yellow, of some cal∣led a golden red colour: but flowreth not so early as they. 2. Lilium rubrum Byzantinum, siue Martagon Constantinopolitanum. The red Martagon of Constantinople. 1. The red Martagon of Constantinople is become so common euery where, and so well knowne to all louers of these delights, that I shall seeme vnto them to lose time, to bestow many lines vpon it; yet because it is so faire a flower, and was at the first so highly esteemed, it deserueth his place and commendations, howsoeuer encreasing the plenty hath not made it dainty. It riseth out of the ground early in the spring, be∣fore many other Lillies, from a great thicke yellow scaly root, bearing a round brow∣nish stalke, beset with many faire greene leaues confusedly thereon, but not so broad as the common white Lilly, vpon the toppe whereof stand one, two, or three, or more flowers, vpon long footestalkes, which hang downe their heads, and turne vp their leaues againe, of an excellent red crimson colour, and sometimes paler, hauing a long pointell in the middle, compassed with sixe whitish chiues, tipt with loose yellow pendents, of a reasonable good sent, but somewhat faint. It likewise beareth seede in heads, like vnto the other, but greater.
Martagon Constantinopolitanum maculatum. The red spotted Martagon of Constantinople. We haue another of this kinde, that groweth somewhat greater and higher, with a larger flower, and of a deeper colour, spotted with diuers blacke spots, or strakes and lines, as is to be seene in the Mountaine Lillies, and in some other hereafter to be de∣scribed; but is not so in the former of this kinde, which hath no shew of spots at all. The whole plant as it is rare, so it is of much more beauty then the former. 2. Martagon Pannonicum, siue Exoticum flore spadiceo. The bright red Martagon of Hungarie. Although this Martagon or Lilly bee of another Countrey, yet by reason of the neerenesse both in leafe and flower vnto the former, may more fitly be placed next vn∣to them, then in any other place. It hath his roote very like the other, but the leaues are somewhat larger, and more sparsedly set vpon the stalke, else not much vnlike: the flowers bend downe, and turne vp their leaues againe, but somewhat larger, and of a bright red, tending to an Orenge colour, that is, somewhat yellowish, and not crimson, like the other. 3. Martagon Luteum punctatum. The Yellow spotted Martagon. 1. This Yellow Martagon hath a great scaly or cloued roote, and yellow, like vnto all these sorts of turning Lillies, from whence springeth vp a round greene strong stalke, three foote high at the least, confusedly set with narrow long greene leaues, white on the edges vp to the very toppe thereof almost, hauing diuers flowers on the head, turning vp againe as the former doe, of a faint yellowish, or greenish yellow co∣lour, with many blacke spots or strakes about the middle of the leafe of euery flower, and a forked pointell, with sixe chiues about it, tipt with reddish pendents, of a heauie strong smell, not very pleasant to many. It beareth seede very plentifully, in great heads, like vnto the other former Lillies, but a little paler. 2. Martagon Luteum non maculatum. The Yellow Martagon without spots. The other yellow Martagon differeth in no other thing from the former, but onely that it hath no spots at all vpon any of the leaues of the flowers; agreeing with the for∣mer, in colour, forme, height, and all things else. 3. Martagon Luteum serotinum. The late flowring Yellow Martagon. There is yet another yellow Martagon, that hath no other difference then the time of his flowring, which is not vntill Iuly, vnlesse in this, that the flower is of a deeper yellow colour. The Place. The knowledge of the first kindes of these early Martagons hath come from Italy, from whence they haue bin sent into the Low-Countries, and to vs, and, as it seemeth by the name, whereby they haue bin sent by some into these parts, his originall should be from the mountaines in Macedonia. The second sort is sufficiently knowne by his name, being first brought from Constantinople, his naturall place being not farre from thence, as it is likely. But the next sort of this second kinde, doth plainly tell vs his place of birth to be the mountaines of Pannonia or Hungarie. The third kindes grow on the Pyrenaean mountaines, where they haue been searched out, and found by diuers louers of plants, as also in the King∣dome of Naples.
The Time. The first early Martagons flower in the end of May, or beginning of Iune, and that is a moneth at the least before those that come from Con∣stantinople, which is the second kinde. The two first yellow Martagons flower somewhat more early, then the early red Martagons, and sometimes at the same time with them. But the third yellow Martagon, as is said, flow∣reth a moneth later or more, and is in flower when the red Martagon of Constantinople flowreth. And although the early red and yellow Marta∣gons, spring later then the other Martagons or Lillies, yet they are in flower before them. The Names. The first early red Lillies or Martagons haue beene sent vnto vs by seue∣rall names, as Martagon Pomponeum, and thereafter are called Martagon of Pompony, and also Lilium or Martagon Macedonicum, the Lilly or Marta∣gon of Macedonia. They are also called by Clusius Lilium rubrum praecox, the one angustiore folio, the other latiore folio. And the last of this kinde hath the title flore phaeniceo added or giuen vnto it, that is, the Martagon or Lilly of Macedonia with gold red flowers. The Martagons of Constantinople haue beene sent by the Turkish name Zufiniare, and is called Martagon, or Lilium Byzantinum by some, and He∣merocallis Chalcedonica by others; but by the name of the Martagon of Con∣stantinople they are most commonly receiued with vs, with the distinction of maculatum to the one, to distinguish the sorts. The last kinde in this classis, hath his name in his title, as it hath been sent vnto vs. The Yellow Martagons are distinguished in their seuerall titles, as much as is conuenient for them. CHAP. V. Lilium Aureum & Lilium Rubrum. The Gold and Red Lillies. THere are yet some other kindes of red Lillies to bee described, which differ from all the former, and remaine to be spoken of in this place. Some of them grow high, and some lowe, some haue small knots, which wee call bulbes, growing vpon the stalkes, at the ioynts of the leaues or flowers, and some haue none: all which shall be intreated of in their seuerall orders. Lilium pumilum cruentum. The dwarfe red Lilly. The dwarfered Lilly hath a scaly roote, somewhat like vnto other Lillies, but white, and not yellow at all, and the cloues or scales thicker, shorter, and fewer in number, then in most of the former: the stalke hereof is not aboue a foote and a halfe high, round and greene, set confusedly with many faire and short greene leaues, on the toppe of which doe stand sometimes but a few flowers, and sometimes many of a faire purplish red colour, and a little paler in the middle, euery flower standing vpright, and not hanging downe, as in the former, on the leaues whereof here and there are some blacke spots, lines or markes, and in the middle of the flower a long pointell, with some chiues about it, as is in the rest of these Lillies.
Lilium rubrum multiplici flore.This kinde is sometimes found to yeeld double flowers, as if all the single flowers should grow into one, and so make it consist of many leaues, which notwithstanding 1 Martagon rubrum siue luteum. The red or the yellow Martagon. 2 Lilium Bulbiferum. The red bul∣bed Lilly. 3 Lilium aureum. The gold red Lilly. 4 Lilium album. The white Lilly. depiction of flowers
his so continuing sundry yeares, vpon transplanting, will redire ad ingentum, that is, quickly come againe to his old by as or forme. Lilium Aureum. The Gold red Lilly. The second red Lilly without bulbes groweth much higher then the first, and al∣most as high as any other Lilly: the roote hereof is white and scaly, the leaues are somewhat longer, and of a darke or sad greene colour; the flowers are many and large, standing vpright as all these sorts of red Lillies doe, of a paler red colour ten∣ding to an Orenge on the inside, with many blacke spots, and lines on them, as in the former, and more yellow on the outside: the seede vessels are like vnto the roundish heads of other Lillies, and so are the seedes in them likewise. 1. Lilium minus bulbiferum. The dwarfe bulbed Lilly. The first of the Lillies that carrieth bulbes on the stalke, hath a white scaly roote like the former; from whence riseth vp a small round stalke, not much higher then the first dwarfe Lilly, seeming to be edged, hauing many leaues thereon of a sad green colour set about it, close thrust together: the greene heads for flowers, will haue a kind of woollinesse on them, before the flowers begin to open, and betweene these heads of flowers, as also vnder them, and among the vppermost leaues, appeare small bulbes or heads, which being ripe if they be put into the ground, or if they fall of themselues, will shoote forth leaues, and beare flowers within two or three yeares like the mother plant, and so will the bulbes of the other hereafter described: the flowers of this Lilly are of a faire gold yellow colour, shadowed ouer with a shew of purple, but not so red as the first, or the next to bee described. This Lilly will shoote strings vnder ground, like as the last red Lilly will doe also, whereat will grow white bulbed roots, like the rootes of the mother plant, thereby quickly encreasing it selfe. 2. Lilium Cruentum bulbiferum. The Fierie red bulbed Lilly. The second bulbed Lilly riseth vp with his stalke as high as any of these Lillies, carrying many long and narrow darke greene leaues about it, and at the toppe many faire red flowers, as large or larger then any of the former, and of a deeper red colour, with spots on them likewise, hauing greater bulbes growing about the toppe of the stalke and among the flowers, then any else. Lilium Cruentum flore pleno. The Fierie red double Lilly. The difference of this doth chiefly consist in the flower, which is composed of ma∣nie leaues, as if many flowers went to make one, spotted with black spots, and without any bulbes when it thus beareth, which is but accidentall, as the former double Lilly is said to be. 3. Lilium maius bulbiferum. The greater bulbed red Lilly. The third red Lilly with bulbes, riseth vp almost as high as the last, and is the most common kinde we haue bearing bulbes. It hath many leaues about the stalke, but not of so sad a greene colour as the former: the flowers are of as pale a reddish yellow co∣lour as any of the former, and comming neerest vnto the colour of the Gold red Lilly. This is more plentifull in bulbes, and in shooting strings, to encrease rootes vnder ground, then the others. The Place.
These Lillies doe all grew in Gardens, but their naturall places of grow∣ing is the Mountaines and the Vallies neere them in Italy, as Matthiolus  saith: and in many Countries of Germany, as Hungarie, Austria, Stiria, and Bohemia, as Clusius and other doe report. The Time. They flower for the most part in Iune, yet the first of these is the earliest of all the rest. The Names. All these Lillies are called Lilia Rubra, Red Lillies: Some call them Lilium Aureum, Lilium Purpureum, Lilium Puniceum, & Lilium Cruentum. Some also call them Martagon Chimistarum. Clusius calleth these bulbed Lillies Martagon Bulbiferum. It is thought to be Hyacinthus Poetarum, but I referre the discussing thereof to a fitter time. Wee haue, to distinguish them most fitly (as I take it) giuen their proper names in their seuerall titles. CHAP. VI. Lilium Album. The White Lilly. NOw remaineth onely the White Lilly, of all the whole family or stocke of the Lillies, to bee spoken of, which is of two sorts. The one is our common or vulgar White Lilly; and the other, that which was brought from Constanti∣nople. Lilium Album vulgare. The ordinary White Lilly. The ordinary White Lilly scarce needeth any description, it is so well knowne, and so frequent in euery Garden; but to say somewhat thereof, as I vse to doe of euery thing, be it neuer so common and knowne; it hath a cloued or scaly roote, yellower and bigger then any of the red Lillies: the stalke is of a blackish greene colour, and riseth as high as most of the Lillies, hauing many faire, broad, and long greene leaues thereon, larger and longer beneath, and smaller vpon the stalke vpwards; the flowers are many or few, according to the age of the plant, fertility of the soile, and time of standing where it groweth: and stand vpon long greene footstalkes, of a faire white colour, with a long pointell in the middle, and white chiues tipt with yellow pendents about it; the smell is somewhat heady and strong. Lilium Album Byzantinum. The White Lilly of Constantinople. The other White Lilly, differeth but little from the former White Lilly, either in roote, leafe, or flower, but only that this vsually groweth with more number of flow∣ers, then euer we saw in our ordinary White Lilly: for I haue seene the stalke of this Lilly turne flat, of the breadth of an hand, bearing neere two hundred flowers vpon a head, yet most commonly it beareth not aboue a dozen, or twenty flowers, but smal∣ler then the ordinary, as the greene leaues are likewise. The Place. The first groweth onely in Gardens, and hath not beene declared where it is found wilde, by any that I can heare of. The other hath beene sent from Constantinople, among other rootes, and therefore is likely to grow in some parts neere thereunto. The Time.
They flower in Iune or thereabouts, but shoote forth greene leaues in  Autumne, which abide greene all the Winter, the stalke springing vp be∣tweene the lower leaues in the Spring. The Names. It is called Lilium Album, the White Lilly, by most Writers; but by Po∣ets Rosa Iunonis, Iuno's Rose. The other hath his name in his title. The Vertues. This Lilly aboue all the rest, yea, and I thinke this onely, and none of the rest is vsed in medicines now adayes, although in former times Empe∣ricks vsed the red; and therefore I haue spoken nothing of them in the end of their Chapters, reseruing what is to be said in this. This hath a mollify∣ing, digesting, and cleansing quality, helping to suppurate tumours, and to digest them, for which purpose the roote is much vsed. The water of the flowers distilled, is of excellent vertue for women in trauell of childe bea∣ring, to procure an easie deliuery, as Matthiolus and Camerarius report. It is vsed also of diuers women outwardly, for their faes to cleanse the skin, and make it white and fresh. Diuers other properties there are in these Lillies, which my purpose is not to declare in this place. Nor is it the scope of this worke; this that hath been said is sufficient: for were it not, that I would giue you some taste of the quaities of plants (as I said in my Preface) as I goe along with them, a generall worke were fitter to declare them then this. CHAP. VII. Fritillaria. The checkerd Daffodill. ALthough diuers learned men do by the name giuen vnto this delightfull plant, thinke it doth in some things partake with a Tulipa or Daffodill, and haue therefore placed it betweene them; yet I, finding it most like vnto a little Lilly, both in roote, stalke, leafe, flower, and seede, haue (as you see here) placed it next vnto the Lillies, and before them. Hereof there are many sorts found out of late, as white, red, blacke, and yellow, besides the purple, which was first knowne; and of each of them there are also diuers sorts: and first of that which is most frequent, and then of the rest, euery one in his place and order. 1. Frillaria vulgaris. The common checkerd Daffodill.
The ordinary checkerd Daffodill (as it is vsually called, but might more properly be called the small checkerd Lilly) hath a small round white roote, and somewhat flat, made as it were of two cloues, and diuided in a maner into two parts, yet ioyning together at the bottome or seate of the roote, which holdeth them both together: from betweene this cleft or diuision, the budde for the stalke &c. appeareth, which in time riseth vp a foote, or a foote and a halfe high, being round and of a brownish greene colour, especially neere vnto the ground, whereon there standeth dispersedly foure or fiue narrow long and greene leaues, being a little hollow: at the toppe of the stalke, betweene the vpper leaues (which are smaller then the lowest) the flower shew∣eth it selfe, hanging or turning downe the head, but not turning vp againe any of his leaues, as some of the Lillies before described doe; (sometimes this stalke beareth two flowers, and very seldome three) consisting of sixe leaues, of a reddish purple co∣lour, spotted diuersly with great spots, appearing like vnto square checkers, of a dee∣per colour; the inside of the flower is of a brighter colour then the outside, which hath some greennesse at the bottome of euery leafe: within the flower there appeare 1 Fritillaria vulgaris. The common Fritillaria. 2 Fritillaria flore atrorubente. The darke red Fritillaria. 4 Fritillaria alba. The white Fritillaria. 7 Fritillaria lutea punctata. The yellow checkerd Fritillaria. 8 Fritillaria lutea Italica. The great yellow Italian Fritillaria. 10 Fritillaria lutea Lusitanica. The small yellow Fritillaria of Portugall. 11 Fritillaria Pyrenaea. The blacke Fritillaria. 12 Fritillaria vmbellifera. The Spanish blacke Fritillaria. depiction of flowers
sixe chiues tipt with yellow pendents, and a three-forked stile or pointell compassing a greene head, which when the flower is past, riseth vpright againe, and becommeth the seede vessell, being somewhat long and round, yet hauing a small shew of edges, flat at the head, like the head of a Lilly, and without any crowne as the Tulipa hath, wherein is contained pale coloured flat seede, like vnto a Lilly, but smaller. Fritillaria vul∣garis pallidior, praecox, & se∣rotina.There is some variety to be seene in this flower; for in some the colour is paler, and in others againe of a very high or deepe colour: sometimes also they haue eight leaues, and sometimes ten or twelue, as if two flowers were made one, which some thereupon haue called a Double Fritillaria. Some of them likewise doe flower very early, euen with or before the early flowring Tulipas; and some againe flower not vntill a moneth or more after the former. 2. Fritillaria flore atrorubente. The bloud red Fritillaria. The roote of this Fritillaria is somewhat rounder and closer then the former, from whence the stalke riseth vp, being shorter and lower then in any other of these kindes, hauing one or two leaues thereon, and at the top thereof two or three more set closer together, which are broader, shorter, and whiter then any of them before, almost like vnto the leaues of the yellow Fritillaria, from among which toppe leaues commeth forth the flower, somewhat bending downe, or rather standing forth, being larger then any of the former, and almost equall in bignesse vnto the yellow Fritillaria, of a duskie gray colour all ouer on the outside, and of a very darke red colour on the inside, diuersly spotted or straked: this very hardly encreaseth by the roote, and as seldome giueth ripe seede, but flowreth with the other first sorts, and before the blacke, and a∣bideth lesse time in flower then any. 3. Fritillaria maxima purpurea siuerubra. The great purple or red Fritillaria. This great Fritillaria hath his roote equall to the bignesse of the rest of his parts, from whence riseth vp one, & oftentimes two stalks, hauing one, two or three flowers a peece on them, as nature and the seasons are fitting: euery one of these flowers are larger and greater then any of the former described, and pendulous as they are, of a sad red or purplish colour, with many thwart lines on them, and small long markes, which hardly seeme checkerwise, nor are so eminent or conspicuous as in the former: the stalke is strong and high, whereon are set diuers long whitish greene leaues, larger and broader then those of the former. 4. Fritillaria alba. The white Fritillaria. The white Fritillaria is so like vnto the first, that I shall not neede to make another description of this: it shall (I hope) be sufficient to shew the chiefe differences, and so proceed to the rest. The stalke and leaues of this are wholly greene, whereby it may easily be knowne from the former, which, as is said, is brownish at the bottome. The flower is white, without almost any shew of spot or marke in it, yet in some the markes are somewhat more plainly to beseene, and in some againe there is a shew of a faint kinde of blush colour to be seene in the flower, especially in the inside, the bottomes of the leaues of euery flower sometimes are greenish, hauing also a small list of greene, comming downe towards the middle of each leafe: the head or seede vessell, as also the seede and the roote, are so like vnto the former, that the most cunning cannot di∣stinguish them. 5. Fritillaria flore duplici albicante. The double blush Fritillaria.
This Fritillaria hath a round flattish white roote, very like vnto the last Fritillaria, bearing a stalke with long greene leaues thereon, little differing from it, or the first or∣dinary Fritillaria: the flower is said to be constant, composed of many leaues, being ten at the least, and most vsually twelue, of a pale whitish purple colour, spotted like vnto the paler ordinary Fritillaria that is early, so that one would verily thinke it were  but an accidentall kinde thereof, whereas it is (as is said before) held to bee constant, continuing in this manner. 6. Fritillaria flore luteo puro. The pure yellow Fritillaria. The pure yellow Fritillaria hath a more round, and not so flat a whitish roote as the former kindes, and of a meane bignesse; from the middle riseth vp a stalke a foote and a halfe high, and sometimes higher, whereon are set without order diuers long and somewhat broad leaues of a whitish greene colour, like vnto the leaues of the blacke Fritillaria, but not aboue halfe so broad: the flower is somewhat small and long, not much vnlike to the blacke for shape and fashion, but that the leaues are smaller and rounder pointed, of a faint yellowish colour, without any shew of spots or checkers at all, eyther within or without the flower, hauing some chiues and yellow pendents in the middle, as is to be seene in all of them: the seede is like the first kinde. 7. Fritillaria flore luteo vario siue punctato. The checkerd yellow Fritillaria. This Fritillaria groweth not much lower then the former, and brownish at the ri∣sing vp, hauing his leaues whiter, broader, and shorter then it, and almost round poin∣ted. The flower is greater, and larger spread then any other before, of a faire pale yel∣low colour, spotted in very good order, with fine small checkers, which adde a won∣derfull pleasing beauty thereunto: it hath also some lists of greene running downe the backe of euery leafe. It seldome giueth seede; the roote also is like the other, but not so flat. 8. Fritillaria lutea maxima Italica. The great yellow Italian Fritillaria. This kinde of Fritillaria riseth vp with a round and browne greene stalke, whereon are set diuers leaues somewhat broad and short, which compasse the stalke at the bot∣tome of them, of a darke greene colour; at the toppe of the stalke, which bendeth a little downewards, doe most vsually stand three or foure leaues, betweene which com∣meth forth most vsually but one flower, which is longer then the last, hanging downe the head as all the others doe, consisting of sixe leaues, of a darke yellowish purple colour, spotted with some small red checkers. This kinde flowreth late, and not vn∣till all the rest are past. 9. Fritillaria Italorum polyanthos flore paruo. The small Italian Fritillaria. This small Italian Fritillaria carrieth more store of flowers on the stalke, but they are much smaller, and of a yellowish greene colour, spotted with long and small darke red checkers or markes: the stalke hath diuers small short greene leaues thereon, vnto the very toppe. 10. Fritillaria lutea Iuncifoliu Lufitanica. The small yellow Fritillaria of Portugall. The leaues of this Fritillaria are so small, narrow and long, that it hath caused them to take the name of rushes, as if you should call it, The rush leafed Fritillaria, which stand on a long weake round stalke, set without order: the flower is small and yellow, but thicker checkerd with red spots then any of the other yellow Fritillaria's; the stalk of the flower, at the head thereof, being also of a yellowish colour. 11. Fritillaria Pyrenaea fiue Apenniuea. The blacke Fritillaria.
The roote of this kinde doth often grow so great, that it seemeth like vnto the roote of a small Crowne Imperiall: the stalke is strong, round, and high, set without order, with broader and whiter greene leaues then any of the former, bearing one, two, or three flowers; sometimes at the toppe, being not so large as those of the ordinary pur∣ple Fritillaria, but smaller, longer, and rounder, sometimes a little turning vp the brims or edges of the leaues againe, and are of a yellowish shining greene colour on  the inside, sometimes spotted with red spots almost through the whole inside of the flower, vnto the very edge, which abideth of a pale yellow colour, and sometimes there are very few spots to be seene, and those from the middle onely on the inside (for on the outside there neuer appeareth any spots at all in this kinde) and sometimes with no shew of spots at all, sometimes also of a more pale greene, and sometime of a more yellow colour: the outside of the flowers doe likewise vary, for in some the out∣side of the leaues are of a darke sullen yellow, &c. else more pale yellow, and in other of a darke purplish yellow colour, which in some is so deepe, and so much, that it ra∣ther seemeth blacke then purple or yellow, and this especially about the bottome of the flower, next vnto the stalke, but the edges are still of a yellowish greene: the head of seede, and the seede likewise is like vnto the former, but bigger in all respects. 12. Fritillaria Hispanica vmbellifera. The Spanish blacke Fritillaria. This Fritillaria is no doubt of kindred to the last recited, it is so like, but greater in all parts thereof, as if growing in a more fruitfull soile, it were the stronger and lustier to beare more store of flowers: the flowers grow foure or fiue from the head together, hanging downe round about the stalke, like vnto a Crowne Imperiall, and are of a yellowish greene colour on the inside, spotted with a few red spots, the outside being blackish as the former. The Place. The first of these plants was first brought to our knowledge from France, where it groweth plentifully about Orleance; the other sorts grow in di∣uers other Countries, as some in Portugall, Spaine, Italy, &c. as their names doe import, and as in time they haue been obserued by those that were cu∣rious searchers of these rarities, haue been sent to vs. The Time. The early kindes doe flower in the beginning of Aprill or thereabouts, according to the mildenesse or sharpenesse of the precedent Winter. The other doe flower after the first are past, for a moneths space one after ano∣ther, and the great yellow is very late, not flowring vntill about the middle or end of May. The Names. This hath receiued diuers names: some calling it Flos Meleagridis, the Ginny Hen Flower, of the variety of the colours in the flower, agreeing with the feathers of that Bird. Some call it Narcissus Caparonius, of the name of the first inuentor or finder thereof, called Noel Caperon, an Apothecary dwelling in Orleance, at the time he first found it, and was shortly after the finding thereof taken away in the Massacre in France. It is now generally called Fritillaria, of the word Fritillus, which diuers doe take for the Chesse borde or table whereon they play, whereunto, by reason of the resemblance of the great squares or spots so like it, they did presently referre it. It is called by Lobel Lilionarcissus purpureus variegatus, & tessulatus, making it a kinde of Tulipa; but as I said in the beginning of the Chapter, it doth most neerely resemble a small pendulous Lilly, and might therefore rightly hold the name of Lilium variegatum, or in English, the checkerd Lilly. But be∣cause the errour which first referred it to a Daffodill, is growne strong by custome of continuance, I leaue to euery one their owne will, to call it in English eyther Fritillaria, as it is called of most, or the checkerd Daffodill, or the Ginnie Hen flower, or, as I doe, the checkerd Lilly. I shall not neede in this place further to explaine the seuerall names of euery of them, hauing giuen you them in their titles.
The Vertues. I haue not found or heard by any others of any property peculiar in this plant, to be applied either inwardly or outwardly for any disease: the chiefe or onely vse thereof is, to be an ornament for the Gardens of the cu∣rious louers of these delights, and to be worne of them abroad, which for the gallant beauty of many of them, deserueth their courteous entertain∣ment, among many other the like pleasures. CHAP. VIII. Tulipa. The Turkes Cap. NExt vnto the Lillies, and before the Narcissi or Daffodils, the discourse of Tu∣lipas deserueth his place, for that it partaketh of both their natures; agreeing with the Lillies in leaues, flowers, and seede, and somewhat with the Daffo∣dils in rootes. There are not onely diuers kindes of Tulipas, but sundry diuersities of colours in them, found out in these later dayes by many the searchers of natures va∣rieties, which haue not formerly been obserued: our age being more delighted in the search, curiosity, and rarities of these pleasant delights, then any age I thinke before. But indeede, this flower, aboue many other, deserueth his true commendations and acceptance with all louers of these beauties, both for the stately aspect, and for the ad∣mirable varietie of colours, that daily doe arise in them, farre beyond all other plants that grow, in so much, that I doubt, although I shall in this Chapter set downe the varieties of a great many, I shall leaue more vnspoken of, then I shall describe; for I may well say, there is in this one plant no end of diuersity to be expected, euery yeare yeelding a mixture and variety that hath not before been obserued, and all this arising from the sowing of the seede. The chiefe diuision of Tulipas, is into two sorts: Prae∣coces, early flowring Tulipas, and Serotinae, late flowring Tulipas. For that sort which is called Mediae or Dubiae, that is, which flower in the middle time betweene them both, and may be thought to be a kinde or sort by it selfe, as well as any of the other two: yet because they doe neerer participate with the Serotinae then with the Praecoces, not onely in the colour of the leafe, being of the same greennesse with the Serotinae, and most vsually also, for that it beareth his stalke and flower, high and large like as the Serotinae doe; but especially, for that the seede of a Media Tulipa did neuer bring forth a Praecox flower (although I know Clusius, an industrious, learned, and painfull searcher and publisher of these rarities, saith otherwise) so farre as euer I could, by mine owne care or knowledge, in sowing their seede apart, or the assurance of any o∣thers, the louers and sowers of Tulipa seede, obserue, learne, or know: and because also that the seede of the Serotinae bringeth forth Medias, and the seede of Medias Sero∣tinae, they may well bee comprehended vnder the generall title of Serotinae: But be∣cause they haue generally receiued the name of Media, or middle flowring Tulipas, to distinguish betweene them, and those that vsually doe flower after them; I am con∣tent to set them downe, and speake of them seuerally, as of three sorts. Vnto the place and ranke likewise of the Praecoces, or early flowring Tulipas, there are some other seuerall kinds of Tulipas to be added, which are notably differing, not onely from the former Praecox Tulipa, but euery one of them, one from another, in some speciall note or other: as the Tulipa Boloniensis flore rubro, the red Bolonia Tulipa. Tulipa Boloniensis flore luteo, the yellow Bolonia Tulipa. Tulipa Persica, the Persian Tulipa. Tulipa Cre∣tica, the Candie Tulipa, and others: all which shall bee described and entreated of, e∣uery one apart by it selfe, in the end of the ranke of the Praecoces, because all of them flower much about their time. To begin then with the Praecox, or early flowring Tu∣lipas, and after them with the
Medias and Serotines, I shall for the better method, diuide their flowers into foure primary or principall colours, that is to say, White, Purple, Red, and Yellow, and vnder euery one of these colours, set downe the seuerall varie∣ties  of mixtures we haue seene and obserued in them, that so they may be both the bet∣ter described by me, and the better conceiued by others, and euery one placed in their proper ranke. Yet I shall in this, as I intend to doe in diuers other plants that are va∣riable, giue but one description in generall of the plant, and then set downe the vari∣etie of forme or colour afterwards briefly by themselues. Tulipa praecox. The early flowring Tulipa. The early Tulipa (and so all other Tulipas) springeth out of the ground with his leaues folded one within another, the first or lowest leafe riseth vp first, sharpe poin∣ted, and folded round together, vntill it be an inch or two aboue the ground, which then openeth it selfe, shewing another leafe folded also in the bosome or belly of the first, which in time likewise opening it selfe, sheweth forth a third, and sometimes a fourth and a fifth: the lower leaues are larger then the vpper, and are faire, thicke, broad, long, and hollow like a gutter, and sometimes crumpled on the edges, which will hold water that falleth thereon a long time, of a pale or whitish greene colour, (and the Mediae and Serotinae more greene) couered ouer as it were with a mealinesse or hoarinesse, with an eye or shew of rednesse towards the bottome of the leaues, and the edges in this kinde being more notable white, which are two principall notes to know a Praecox Tulipa from a Media or Serotina: the stalke with the flower riseth vp in the middle, as it were through these leaues, which in time stand one aboue another, com∣passing it at certaine vnequall distances, and is often obserued to bend it selfe crooked∣ly downe to the ground, as if it would thrust his head thereinto, but turning vp his head (which will be the flower) againe, afterwards standeth vpright, sometimes but three or foure fingers or inches high, but more often halfe a foote, and a foot high, but the Medias, and Serotinas much higher, carrying (for the most part) but one flower on the toppe thereof, like vnto a Lilly for the forme, consisting of sixe leaues, greene at the first, and afterwards changing into diuers and sundry seuerall colours and varie∣ties, the bottomes likewise of the leaues of these sometimes, but most especially of the Mediae, being as variable as the flower, which are in some yellow, or green, or blacke, in others white, blew, purple, or tawnie; and sometimes one colour circling another: some of them haue little or no sent at all, and some haue a better then others. After it hath been blowne open three or foure dayes or more, it will in the heate of the Sunne spread it selfe open, and lay it selfe almost flat to the stalke: in the middle of the flower standeth a greene long head (which will be the seed vessell) compassed about with sixe chiues, which doe much vary, in being sometimes of one, and sometimes of another colour, tipt with pendents diuersly varied likewise: the head in the middle of the flower groweth after the flower is fallen, to be long, round, and edged, as it were three square, the edges meeting at the toppe, where it is smallest, and making as it were a crowne (which is not seen in the head of any Lilly) and when it is ripe, diuideth it selfe on the inside into sixe rowes, of flat, thinne, brownish, gristly seede, very like vnto the seede of the Lillies, but brighter, stiffer, and more transparent: the roote be∣ing well growne is round, and somewhat great, small and pointed at the toppe, and broader, yet roundish at the bottome, with a certaine eminence or seate on the one side, as the roote of the Colchicum hath; but not so long, or great, it hath also an hollownesse on the one side (if it haue borne a flower) where the stalke grew, (for al∣though in the time of the first springing vp, vntill it shew the budde for flower, the stalke with the leaues thereon rise vp out of the middle of the roote; yet when the stalke is risen vp, and sheweth the budde for flower, it commeth to one side, making an impression therein) couered ouer with a brownish thin coate or skin, like an Onion, hauing a little woollinesse at the bottome; but white within, and firme, yet composed of many coates, one folding within another, as the roote of the Daffodils be, of a rea∣sonable good taste, neyther very sweete, nor yet vnpleasant. This description may well serue for the other Tulipas, being Medias or
Serotinas, concerning their springing and bearing, which haue not any other great variety therein worth the note, which is not expressed here; the chiefe difference resting in the variety of the colours of the flower, and their seuerall mixtures and markes, as I said before: sauing onely, that the flowers of some are great and large, and of others smaller, and the leaues of some long 1 Tulipa praecox alba siue rubra, &c. vnius coloris. The early white or red Tulipa, &c. being of one colour. 2 Tulipa praecox purpurea oris albis. The early purple Tulipa with white edges, or the Prince. 3 Tulipa praecox variegata. The early stript Tulipa. 4 Tulipa praecox rubra otis luteis. The early red Tulipa with yellow edges, or the Duke. depiction of flowers
and pointed, and of others broad and round, or bluntly pointed, as shall bee shewed in the end of the Chapter: I shall therefore onely expresse the colours, with the mixture or composure of them, and giue you withall the names of some of them, (for it is impossible I thinke to any man, to giue seuerall names to all varieties) as they are called by those that chiefly delight in them with vs. Tulipa praecox Alba. The early White Tulipa. 1 Niuea tota interdum purpureis staminibus, vel saltem luteis, fundo puro haud lu∣teo. 1 The flower whereof is either pure snow white, with purple sometimes, or at least with yellow chiues, without any yel∣low bottome. 2 Alba siue niuea fundo luteo. 2 Or pure white with a yellow bottome. 3 Albida. 3 Or milk white that is not so pure white. 4 Alba, venis caeruleis in dorso. 4 White with blew veines on the outside. 5 Alba purpureis oris. Harum flores vel constantes, vel dispergentes. 5 White with purple edges. Some of these a∣biding constant, & others sprea∣ding or running. 6 Alba carneis oris. Harum flores vel constantes, vel dispergentes. 6 White with blush edges. Some of these a∣biding constant, & others sprea∣ding or running. 7 Alba sanguineis oris. Harum flores vel constantes, vel dispergentes. 7 White with red edges. Some of these a∣biding constant, & others sprea∣ding or running. 8 Alba oris magnis carneis, & venis intro re∣spicientibus. 8 White with great blush edges, and some strakes running from the edge inward. 9 Alba extra, carnei vero coloris intus, or as habens carneas saturatiores. 9 White without, and somewhat blush within, with edges of a deeper blush. 10 Albida, oris rubris, vel oris purpu∣reis. 10 Whitish, or pale white with red or pur∣ple edges. 11 Albida purpurascentibus maculis extra, in∣tuc vero carnei vinacissimi. 11 Whitish without, with some purplish veins & spots, & of a liuely blush within. 12 Alba, purpureis maculis aspersa extra, in∣tus vero alba purpurantibus oris. 12 White without, spotted with small pur∣ple spots, and white within with purple edges. 13 Dux Alba, i. e. coceineis & albis vari∣at flammis, à medio ad oras intercursan∣tibus. 13 A white Duke, that is, parted with white & crimson flames, from the mid∣dle of each leafe to the edge. 14 Princessa, i.e. argentei coloris maculis pur∣purascentibus. 14 The Princesse, that is, a siluer colour spotted with fine deepe blush spots. 15 Regina pulcherrima, albis & sanguineis aspersa radijs & punctis. 15 The Queen, that is, a fine white sprink∣led with bloud red spots, and greater strakes. Tulipa praecox purpurea. The early purple Tulipa. 1 Purpurea satura rubescens, vel violacea. 1 A deep reddish purple, or more violet. 2 Purpurea pallida, Columbina dicta. 2 A pale purple, called a Doue colour. 3 Persici coloris saturi. 3 A deep Peach colour. 4 Persici coloris pallidioris. 4 A paler Peach colour. 5 Paoniae floris coloris. 5 A Peony flower colour. 6 Rosea. 6 A Rose colour. 7 Chermesiua peramaena. 7 A Crimson very bright. 8 Chermesiua parum striata. 8 A Crimson stript with a little white.
9 Princeps, i.e. purpurea saturatior vel dilu∣tior, oris albis magnis vel paruis, fundo lu∣teo, vel albo orbe, quae multum variatur, & colore, & oris, ita vt purpurea ele∣gans oris magnis albis, dicta est, Princeps excellens, & 9 A Prince or Bracklar, that is, a deepe or pale purple, with white edges, greater or smaller, and a yellow bottome, or circled with white, which varieth much, both in the purple & edges, so that a faire deep purple, with great white edges, is called, The best or chiefe Prince, and 10 Princeps Columbina, purpurea diluti∣or. 10 A paler purple with white edges, called a Doue coloured Prince. 11 Purpurea Chermesiua, rubicandioris colo∣ris, albidis vel albis oris. 11 A Crimson Prince or Bracklar. 12 Purpurea, vel obsoleta albidis oris Prin∣ceps Brancion. 12 A Brancion Prince, or purple Brancion. 13 Purpurea diluta, oris dilutioris purpurei coloris. 13 A purple with more pale purple edges. 14 Purpurea in exterioribus, carnei vero ad medium intus, oris albis, fundoluteo. 14 Purple without, and blush halfe way within, with white edges, and a yellow bottome. 15 Purpurea albo plumata extra, oris albis, purpurascens intus, fundo luteo, vel orbe albo. 15 Purple feathered with white on the out side, with white edges, and pale purple within, the ground being a little yellow, or circled with white. 16 Alia, minus elegans plumata, minoribus{que} oris albidis. 16 Another very neere vnto it, but not so fairely feathered, being more obscure, and the edges not so great or whitish. Tulipa praecox rubra. The early red Tulipa. 1 Rubra vulgaris fundo luteo, & aliquando nigro. 1 An ordinary red, with a yellow, & some∣times a blacke bottome. 2 Rubra satura oris luteis paruis, dicta Roan. 2 A deep red, with a small edge of yellow, called a Roane. 3 Baro, i.e. rubra megis intensa, oris luteis paruis. 3 A Baron, that is, a faire red with a small yellow edge. 4 Dux maior & minor, i.e. rubra magis aut minus elegans satura, oris luteis maximis, vel minoribus, & fundo luteo magno. Alia alijs est magis amoena, in alijs etiam fundo nigro vel obscuro viridi. 4 A Duke, a greater and a lesser, that is, a more or less faire deep red, with greater or lesser yellow edges, and a great yel∣low bottome. Some of this sort are much more or lesse faire then others, some also haue a blacke or darke greene bottome. 5 Ducissa, i.e. Duci similis, at plus lutei quàm rubri, oris magnis luteis, & rubore magis aut minus intus in gyrum acto, fundo item luteo magno. 5 A Dutchesse, that is like vnto the Duke, but more yellow then red, with greater yellow edges, and the red more or lesse circling the middle of the flower on the inside, with a large yellow bottome. 6 Testamentum Brancion, i.e. rubra sangui∣nea satura, aut minus rubra, oris pallidis, magnis vel paruis: alia alijs magis aut mi∣nus elegans diuer simodo. 6 A Testament Brancion, or a Brancion Duke, that is, a faire deepe red, or lesse red, with a pale yellow or butter co∣loured edge, some larger others smal∣ler: and some more pleasing then others, in a very variable manner.
7 Flambans, ex rubore & flauedine radiata, vel striata fundo luteo. 7 A Flambant, differing from the Dut∣chesse; for this hath no such great yel∣low edge, but streaks of yellow through the leafe vnto the very edge. 8 Mali Aurantij coloris, ex rubore, & flaue∣dine integrè, non separatim mixta, oris luteis paruis, vel abs{que} oris. 8 An Orenge colour, that is, a reddish yel∣low, or a red and yellow equally mixed, with small yellow edges, and some∣times without. 9 Minij, siue Cinabaris coloris, i.e. ex pur∣purea, rubedine, & flauedine radiata, vn∣guibus luteis, & aliquando oris. 9 A Vermillion, that is, a purplish red, streamed with yellow, the bottome yellow, and sometimes the edges. 10 Rex Tuliparum, i.e. ex sanguineo & aureo radiatim mixta, à flammea diuersa, fundo luteo, orbe rubro. 10 The Kings flower, that is, a crimson or bloud red, streamed with a gold yel∣low, differing from the Flambant, the bottome yellow, circled with red. 11 Tunica Morionis, i.e. ex rubore & aureo separatim diuisa. 11 A Fooles coate, parted with red and yellow guardes. Tulipa praecox lutea. The early yellow Tulipa. 1 Lutea siue flaua. 1 A faire gold yellow without mixture. 2 Pallida lutea siue straminea. 2 A strawe colour. 3 Aurea, oris rubicundis. 3 A faire yellow with reddish edges. 4 Straminea, oris rubris. 4 A strawe colour, with red edges. 5 Aurea, rubore perfusa extra. 5 A faire yellow, reddish on the outside onely. 6 Aurea, vel magis pallida, rubore in gyrum acta simillima Ducissae, nisi minus rube∣dinis habet. 6 A gold or paler yellow, circled on the inside a little with red, very like the Dutchesse, but that it hath lesse red therein. 7 Aurea, extremitatibus rubris, dici potest, Morionis Pilaeus praecox. 7 A gold yellow with red toppes, and may be called, The early Fooles Cap.
Tulipa de Caffa. The Tulipa of Caffa. There is another sort or kinde of early Tulipa, differing from the former, whose pale greene leaues being as broad and large as they, and sometimes crumpled or wa∣ued at the edges, in some haue the edges onely of the said leaues for a good breadth, of a whitish or whitish yellow colour, and in others, the leaues are listed or parted with whitish yellow and greene: the stalke riseth not vp so high as the former, and beareth a flower at the toppe like vnto the former, in some of a reddish yellow colour, with a russet coloured ground or bottome, and in others, of other seuerall colours: the seede and roote is so like vnto others of this kinde, that they cannot be distinguished. There is (as I doe heare) of this kinde, both Praecoces, and Serotinae, early flowring, and late flowring, whereof although wee haue not so exact knowledge, as of the rest, yet I thought good to speake so much, as I could hitherto vnderstand of them, and giue others leaue (if I doe not) hereafter to amplifie it. Tulipa Boloniensis, siue Bombycina flore rubro major. The greater red Bolonia Tulipa. There are likewise other kindes of early Tulipas to bee spoken of, and first of the red Bolonia Tulipa; the roote whereof is plainly discerned, to be differing from all o∣thers: for that it is longer, and not hauing so plaine an eminence at the bottome there∣of, as the former and later Tulipas, but more especially because the toppe is plenti∣fully stored with a yellowish silke-like woollinesse: the outside likewise or skinne is of a brighter or paler red, not so easie to be pilled away, and runneth vnder ground both downeright and sidewise (especially in the Countrey ground and ayre, where it will encrease aboundantly, but not either in our London ayre, or forc't grounds) somewhat like vnto the yellow Bolonia Tulipa next following. It shooteth out of the ground with broad and long leaues, like the former; but neither so broad, nor of so white or mealy a greene colour as the former, but more darke then the late flowring Tulipa, so that this may bee easily discerned by his leafe from any other Tulipa aboue the ground, by one that is skilfull. It beareth likewise three or foure leaues vpon the stalke, like the former, and a flower also at the toppe of the same fashion, but that the leaues hereof are alwayes long, and somewhat narrow, hauing a large blacke bot∣tome, made like vnto a cheuerne, the point whereof riseth vp vnto the middle of the leafe, higher then any other Tulipa; the flower is of a pale red colour, nothing so liuely as in the early or late red Tulipas, yet sweeter for the most part then any of them, and neerest vnto the yellow Bolonia Tulipa, which is much about the same sent. Tulipa pumilio rubra, siue Bergomensis rubra media & minor. The dwarfe red Bergomo Tulipa, a bigger and a lesser. There are two other sorts hereof, and because they were found about Bergomo, do carry that name, the one bigger or lesser then another, yet neither so great as the for∣mer, hauing very little other difference to bee obserued in them, then that they are smaller in all parts of them. Tulipa Boloniensis flore luteo. The yellow Bolonia Tulipa. The roote of this Tulipa may likewise bee knowne from the former red (or any o∣ther Tulipa) in that it seldome commeth to bee so bigge, and is not so woolly at the toppe, and the skinne or outside is somewhat paler, harder, and sharper pointed: but the bottome is like the former red, and not so eminent as the early or late Tulipas. This beareth much longer and narrower leaues then any (except the Persian & dwarfe yellow Tulipas) and of a whitish greene colour: it beareth sometimes but one flower on a stalke, and sometimes two or three wholly yellow, but smaller, & more open then the other kinds, and (as I said) smelleth sweete, the head for seede is smaller then in o∣thers, and hath not that crowne at the head thereof, yet the seed is like, but smaller.
Tulipa Narbonensis, siue Monspeliensis vel pumilio. The French or dwarfe yellow Tulipa. This Tulipa is very like vnto the yellow Bolonia Tulipa, both in roote, leafe, and flower, as also in the colour thereof, being yellow: the onely difference is, that it is in all things lesser and lower, and is not so apt to beare, nor so plentifull to encrease by the roote. Tulipa Italica maior & minor. The Italian Tulipa the greater and the lesser. Both these kindes of Tulipas doe so neere resemble the last kinde, that I might al∣most say they were the same, but that some difference which I saw in them, maketh mee set them apart; and consisteth in these things, the stalkes of neither of both these rise so high, as of the first yellow Bolonia Tulipa: the leaues of both sorts are writhed in and out at the edges, or made like a waue of the sea, lying neerer the ground, and the flower being yellow within, is brownish or reddish on the backe, in the middle of the three outer leaues the edges appearing yellow. Both these kindes doe differ one from the other in nothing, but in that one is bigger, and the other smaller then the o∣ther which I saw with Iohn Tradescante, my very good friend often remembred. Tulipa Lusitanica, siue pumilio versicolor. The dwarfe stript Tulipa. This dwarfe Tulipa is also of the same kindred with the three last described; for there is no other difference in this from them, then that the flower hath some red veins running in the leaues thereof. There are two other sorts of dwarfe Tulipas with white flowers, whereof Lobel hath made mention in the Appendix to his Aduersaria; the one whereof is the same that Clusius setteth forth, vnder the title of Pumilio altera: but because I haue not seen either of them both, I speake no further of them. Tulipa pumilio alba. The white dwarfe Tulipa. But that white flower that Iohn Tradescante shewed me, and as hee saith, was deli∣uered him for a white Pumilio, had a stalke longer then they set out theirs to haue, and the flower also larger, but yet had narrower leaues then other sorts of white Tu∣lipas haue. Tulipa Bicolor. The small party coloured Tulipa. Vnto these kindes, I may well adde this kinde of Tulipa also, which was sent out of Italy, whose leaues are small, long, and narrow, and of a darke greene colour, some∣what like vnto the leaues of an Hyacinth: the flower is small also, consisting of sixe leaues, as all other Tulipas doe, three whereof are wholly of a red colour, and the o∣ther three wholly of a yellow. Tulipa Persica. The Persian Tulipa.
This rare Tulipa, wherewith we haue beene but lately acquainted, doth most fitly deserue to be described in this place, because it doth so neerely participate with the Bolonia and Italian Tulipas, in roote, leafe, and flower: the roote hereof is small, co∣uered with a thicke hard blackish shell or skinne, with a yellowish woollinesse both at the toppe, and vnder the shell. It riseth out of the ground at the first, with one very long and small round leafe, which when it is three or foure inches high, doth open it selfe, and shew forth another small leafe (as long almost as the former) breaking out of the one side thereat, and after it a third, and sometimes a fourth, and a fift; but each shorter then other, which afterwards be of the breadth of the dwarfe yellow Tulipa, or somewhat broader, but much longer then any other, and abiding more hollow, and of the colour of the early Tulipas on the inside: the stalke riseth vp a foot and a halfe 1 Tulipa Bombycina flore rubro. The red Bolonia Tulipa. 2 Tulipa Boloniensis flore luteo. The yellow Bolonia Tulipa. 3 Tulipa pupilio rubra fiue lutea. The red or yellow dwarfe Tulipa. 4 Folium Tulipa de Caffa per totum striatum. The leafe of the Tulipa of Caffa striped throughout the whole leafe. 5 Folium Tulipa de Caffa per oras striatum. The leafe of the Tulipa of Caffa striped at the edges onely. 6 Tulipa Perfica. The Persian Tulipa. 7 Tulipa Cretica. The Tulipa of Candie. 8 Tulipa Armeniaca. The Tulipa of Armenia. depiction of flowers
high sometimes, bearing one flower thereon, composed of sixe long and pointed leaues of the forme of other small Tulipas, and not shewing much bigger then the yel∣low Italian Tulipa, and is wholly white, both inside and outside of all the leaues, ex∣cept the three outtermost, which haue on the backe of them, from the middle toward the edges, a shew of a brownish blush, or pale red colour, yet deeper in the midst, and the edges remaining wholly white: the bottomes of all these leaues are of a darke or dun tawnie colour, and the chiues and tippes of a darkish purple or tawnie also. This doth beare seed but seldome in our Country, that euer I could vnderstand, but when it doth, it is small like vnto the Bolonia or dwarfe yellow Tulipas, being not so plentifull also in parting, or setting of by the roote as they, and neuer groweth nor abideth so great as it is brought vnto vs, and seldome likewise flowreth after the first yeare: for the rootes for the most part with euery one grow lesse and lesse, decaying euery yeare, and so perish for the most part by reason of the frosts and cold, and yet they haue been set deepe to defend them, although of their owne nature they will runne downe deep into the ground. Tulipa Býzantina duobus floribus Clusij. The small Tulipa of Constantinople. The small Tulipa of Constantinople, beareth for the most part but two leaues on the stalke, which are faire and broad, almost like vnto the Candy Tulipa, next here∣unto to be described: the stalke it selfe riseth not aboue a foote high, bearing some∣times but one flower, but most commonly two thereon, one below another, and are no bigger then the flowers of the yellow Bolonia Tulipa, but differing in colour; for this is on the outside of a purplish colour, mixed with white and greene, and on the inside of a faire blush colour, the bottome and chiues being yellow, and the tippes or pendents blackish: the roote is very like the yellow Bolonia Tulipa. Tulipa Cretica. The Tulipa of Candie. This Tulipa is of later knowledge with vs then the Persian, but doth more hardly thriue, in regard of our cold climate; the description whereof, for so much as wee haue knowledge, by the sight of the roote and leafe, and relation from others of the flower, (for I haue not yet heard that it hath very often flowred in our Country) is as followeth. It beareth faire broad leaues, resembling the leaues of a Lilly, of a greenish colour, and not very whitish: the stalke beareth thereon one flower, larger and more open then many other, which is eyther wholly white, or of a deepe red colour, or else is variably mixed, white with a fine reddish purple, the bottomes being yellow, with purplish chiues tipt with blackish pendents: the roote is small, and somewhat like the dwarfe yellow Tulipa, but somewhat bigger. Tulipa Armeniaca. The Tulipa of Armenia. This small Tulipa is much differing from all the former (except the small or dwarfe white Tulipas remembred by Lobel and Clusius, as is before set downe) in that it beareth three or foure small, long, and somewhat narrow greene leaues, altogether at one ioynt or place; the stalke being not high, and naked or without leaues from them to the toppe, where it beareth one small flower like vnto an ordinary red Tulipa, but somewhat more yellow, tending to an Orenge colour with a blacke bottome: the roote is not much bigger then the ordinary yellow Bolonia Tulipa, before set downe. And these are the sorts of this first Classis of early Tulipas. Tulipa media. The meaner or middle flowring Tulipa.
For any other, or further description of this kinde of Tulipa, it shall not neede, ha∣uing giuen it sufficiently in the former early Tulipa, the maine difference consisting first in the time of flowring, which is about a moneth after the early Tulipas, yet some more some lesse: for euen in the Praecoces, or early ones, some flower a little earlier, and later then others, and then in the colours of the flowers; for wee haue obserued many  colours, and mixtures, or varieties of colours in the Medias, which we could neuer see in the Praecoces, and so also some in the Praecoces, which are not in the Medias: yet there is farre greater varieties of mixture of colours in these Medias, then hath been obser∣ued in all the Praecoces, (although Clusius saith otherwise) eyther by my selfe, or by any other that I haue conuersed with about this matter, and all this hath happened by the sowing of the seede, as I said before. I will therefore in this place not trouble you with any further circumstance, then to distinguish them, as I haue done in the former early Tulipas, into their foure primary colours, and vnder them, giue you their seuerall varieties and names, for so much as hath come to my knowledge, not doubting, but that many that haue trauelled in the sowing of the seed of Tulipas many yeares, may obserue each of them to haue some variety that others haue not: and therefore I thinke no one man can come to the knowledge of all particular distinctions. Tulipa media alba. The white meane flowring Tulipa. 1 Niuea, fundo albo vel luteo. 1 A snow white, with a white or yellow bottome. 2 Argentea, quasi alba cineracea fundo lute∣scente, purpureis staminibus. 2 A siluer colour, that is, a very pale or whitish ashe colour, with a yellowish bottome and purple chiues. 3 Margaritna alba, carneo dilutissima. 3 A Pearle colour, that is, white, with a wash or shew of blush. 4 Alba, fundo caeruleo vel nigro. 4 A white, with a blew or black bottome. 5 Albida. 5 A Creame colour. 6 Alb, oris rubris. Haec tria genera in aliquibus constan∣ter tenent oras, in aijs dispergunt. 6 A white, with red edges. These three sorts doe hold their edges constant in some, but well spread in o∣thers. 7 Alba, purpureis oris. Haec tria genera in aliquibus constan∣ter tenent oras, in aijs dispergunt. 7 A white, with purple edges. These three sorts doe hold their edges constant in some, but well spread in o∣thers. 8 Alba, oris coccineis. Haec tria genera in aliquibus constan∣ter tenent oras, in aijs dispergunt. 8 A white, with crimson edges. These three sorts doe hold their edges constant in some, but well spread in o∣thers. 9 Albida primum, deinde albidior, oris pur∣pureis, & venis intrò respicientibus, dicta nobis Hackquenay. 9 A pale or whitish yellow, which after a few dayes groweth more white, with purplish red edges, and some streakes running inward from the edge, which we call an Hackney. 10 Alba, sanguineo colore variata, fundo vel albissimo, vel alio. 10 A white mixed with a bloud red very variably, and with a pure white, or o∣ther coloured bottome. 11 Alba, radiatim disposita flammis, & ma∣culis coccineis. 11 A white, streamed with crimson flames, and spots through the whole flower. 12 Alba, purpurea rubedine plumata, diuer∣sarum specierum, quae cum superiore, vel albo, vel luteo, vel paruo caeruleo constant fundo, quae constanter tenent punctatos co∣lores, & non dispergunt, sed post trium aut quatuor dierum spatium pulchriores appa∣rent. 12 A white, speckled with a reddish pur∣ple, more or lesse, of diuers sorts, with white, yellow, or blew bottomes, all which doe hold their markes constant, and doe not spread their colours, but shew fairer after they haue stood blown three or foure dayes. 13 Panni argentei coloris, i.e. alba, plumata, punctata, striata, vel diuersimodè variata, rubedine dilutiore, vel saturatiore purpu∣rea, interius vel exterius, vel vtrin{que}, diuersarum specierum. 13 A cloth of siluer of diuers sorts, that is, a white spotted, striped, or otherwise marked with red or purple, in some pa∣ler, in some deeper, either on the inside, or on the outside, or on both. 14 Tunica morionis alba varia, i.e. ex albo & purpureo striata diuersimodè, fundo albo vel alio. 14 A white Fooles coate of diuers sorts, that is, purple or pale crimson, and white, as it were empaled together, ey∣ther with a white ground or other, whereof there is great variety. 15 Holias alba vel albida, abs{que} fundo, vel fundo purpureo caruleo, vel caeruleo albo cir∣cundato, diuersè signata, vel variata intus ad medietatem foliorum, sursum in orbem vt plurimum, vel ad oras pertingens am∣plas & albas. Hae species tantoperè multi∣plicantur, vt vix sint explicabiles. 15 A white Holias, that is, a faire white, or paler white, eyther without a bottome, or with a blewish purple bottome, or blew and white circling the bottome, and from the middle vpwards, speckled and straked on the inside for the most part, with bloud red or purplish spots and lines vnto the very edges, which abide large and white. Of this kinde there are found very great varieties, not to be expressed.
Tanta est buius varietas, vel multitudine, vel striarum paucitate & distinctione, vel fundis variantibus, vt ad tadium esset per∣scribere. Of this sort there is so much variety, some being larger or fairer marked then o∣thers, their bottomes also varying, that it is almost impossible to express them. Tulipa media purpurea. The meane flowring purple Tulipa. 1 Purpurea satura. 1 A faire deep purple. 2 Purpurea dilutior, diuersarum specierum, quarum Rosea vna, Carnea sit altera. 2 A paler purple, of many sorts, whereof a Rose colour is one, a Blush another. 3 Persici coloris, duarum aut trium specierum. 3 A Peach colour of two or three sorts. 4 Chermesina, obscura, aut pallida. 4 A Crimson, deepe, or pale. 5 Stamela, intenfior aut remissior. 5 A Stamell, darke or light. 6 Xerampelina. 6 A Murrey. 7 Purpurea, striata. 7 A purple, stript and spotted. 8 Persici saturi, vel diluti coloris, vndulata, vel radiata. 8 A Peach colour, higher or paler, waued or stript. 9 Columbiua, oris & radijs albis. 9 A Doue colour, edged and straked with white. 10 Purpurea rubra, oris albis, similis Praecoci, dicta Princeps. 10 A faire red purple, with white edges, like vnto the early Tulipa, called a Prince 11 Chermesina, vel Heluola, lineis albis in medio, & versus oras, fundo caeruleo, vel albo, item{que} albo orbe. 11 A faire Crimson, or Claret wine co∣lour, with white lines both in the mid∣dle, and towards the edges, most haue a blew bottome, yet some are white, or circled with white. 12 Purpurea remissior, aut intensior, oris al∣bis, paruis aut magnis, vt in Principe prae∣coci, fundo vel caeruleo orbe albo, vel albo orbe caruleo amplo. 12 A light or deepe purple, with white edges, greater or smaller, like the early Prince, the bottomes eyther blew cir∣cled with white, or white circled with a large blew. 13 Holias Heluola, sanguineis guttis intus à medio sursum in orbem, fundo caeruleo. 13 A purple Holias, the colour of a pale Claret wine, marked and spotted with bloud red spots, round about the mid∣dle of each leafe vpward on the inside onely, the bottome being blew. 14 Tunica Morionis purpurea rubra satura, albido striata, quam in alba saturatior, fundo ex caeruleo & albo. 14 A Crimson Fooles Coate, a darke crimson, and pale white empaled toge∣ther, differing from the white Fooles Coate, the bottome blew and white. 15 Purpurea rubra satura vel diluta, albo vel albedine, punctata vel striata diuer simodè, dicta Cariophyllata. 15 A deeper or paler reddish purple, spot∣ted or striped with a paler or purer white, of diuers sorts, called the Gillo∣flower Tulipa.
1 Tulipa rubra & lutea varia The Fooles Coate red and yellow. 2 Tulipa Holeas alba abs{que}; fundo. The white Holeas without a bottome. 3 Tulipa argentea, vl punctata, &c. The cloth of siluer, or other spotted Tulipa. 4 Tulipa alba flammis coccineis. The white Fooles Coate. 5 Tulipa Holea alba, &c. jundo purpureo, &c. A white Holeas, &c. with a purple bottome, &c. 6 Tulipa rubra & lutea flammea, &c. A red and yellow flamed Tu∣lipa, &c. 7 Tulipa alba striata & punctata. A white striped and spotted Tulipa. 8 Tulipa altera variata, &c. Another variable Tulipa. depiction of flowers
Tulipa media rubra. The meane flowring red Tulipa. 1 Rubra communis, fundo luteo, vel ni∣gro. 1 A faire red which is ordinary, with a yel∣low or blacke bottome. 2 Mali Aurantij coloris. 2 A deepe Orenge colour. 3 Cinabaris coloris. 3 A Vermillion. 4 Lateritij coloris. 4 A pale red, or Bricke colour. 5 Rubra, luteo aspersa. 5 A Gingeline colour. 6 Rubra, oris luteis. 6 A red with small yellow edges. 7 Testamentum Brancion rubra satura, oris pallidis, diuersarum specierum, rubore va∣riantium, & orarum amplitudine. 7 A Testament Brancion of diuers sorts, differing both in the deepnesse of the red, and largenesse of the pale coloured edges. 8 Cinabaris radiata, magis aut minus sero∣tina. 8 A Vermillion flamed, flowring later or earlier. 9 Rubra purpurasceus obsoleta, exteriori∣bus folijs, perfusa luteo intus, oris pallidis luteis. 9 A dead purplish red without, and of a yellowish red within, with pale yellow edges. 10 Rubra purpurascens elegans extra, & in∣tus lutescens, oris pallidis luteis, fundo lu∣teo vel viridi. 10 A bright Crimson red on the outside, more yellowish on the inside, with pale yellow edges, and a bottome yellow or greene. 11 Rubra flambans coccinea, crebris maculis luteis abs{que} fundo. 11 A red Flambant, spotted thicke with yellow spots without any bottome. 12 Flambans elegantior rubra, i.e. radijs lu∣teis intercursantibus ruborem 12 A more excellent red Flambant, with flames of yellow running through the red. 13 Flambans remissior vtro{que} colore. 13 A pale coloured Flambant. 14 Panni aurei coloris. 14 A cloth of gold colour. 15 Tunica Morionis verior, seu Palto du Sot. optima, tenijs amplis amoenis & crebris, ex rubro & flauo separatim diuisis & excur∣rentibus, flos constans. 15 A true Fooles Coate, the best is a faire red & a faire yellow, parted into guards euery one apart, varied through eery leafe to the very edge, yet in most abi∣ding constant. 16 Tunica Morinis altera, tenijs minoribus & minus frequentibus, magis aut minus alia alijs inconstans. 16 Another Fooles Coate, not so fairely marked, nor so much, some of these are more or lesse constant in their marks, & some more variable then others. 17 Tunica Morionis pallida, i.e. tenijs vel strijs frequentioribus in vtro{que} colore palli∣dis, flos est constans & elegans. 17 A pale Fooles Coate, that is, with pale red, and pale yellow guardes or stripes very faire and constant. 18 Pileus Morionis, radijs luteis, in medio foliorum latis, per ruborem excurrentibus, fundo luteo, apicibus luteis, & tribus exte∣rioribus folijs luteis oris rubris, vel abs{que} oris. 18 A Fooles Cappe, that is, with lists or stripes of yellow running through the middle of euery leafe of the red, broa∣der at the bottome then aboue, the bot∣tome being yellow, the three outer leaues being yellow with red edges, or without.
1 Tulipa tricolor. A Tulipa of three colours. 2 Tulipa Macedonica, siue de Caffa varia. The Tulipa of Caffa purple, with pale white stripes. 3 Tulipa Heluola charmefina versicolor. A pure Claret wine colour variable. 4 Tulipa Caryophyllata Wilmeri. Mr. Wilmers Gilloflower Tulipa. 5 Tulipa Chermesina flammis albi. A Crimson with white flames. 6 Tulipa Goliah. A kind of Zwisser called Goliah. 7 Tulipa le Zwisse. A Tulipa called the Zwisser. 8 Tulipa alba flammis coccineis Another white Flambant or Fooles Coate. 9 Tulipa Cinnabarina albo flammata. The Vermillion flamed. 10 Tulipa plumata rubra & lutea. The feathered Tulipa red and yellow. depiction of flowers
19 Le Suisse, tenijs radiata magnis ex rubore & pallore. 19 A Swisse, paned with a faire red and pale white or strawe colour. 20 Altera dicta Goliah à floris magnitudine, tenijs radiata simillima le Suisse, nisi ru∣ber & albedo sint elegantiores. 20 A Goliah, so called of the bignesse of the flower, most like to the Swisse in the marks and guardes, but that the red and white is more liuely. 21 Holias rubra, i.e. sanguinea argenteis ra∣dijs, & guttis in orbem dispositis, praeser∣tim interiùs, fundo viridi saturo. 21 A red Holias. A bloud red stript with siluer white veines and spots, with a darke green bottome. 22 Holias coccinea, rubra coccinea, albo radi∣ata in orbem, circa medium foliorum in∣teriùs, fundo albo. 22 A Crimson red Holias, that is, a faire purplish red, spotted with white circle∣wise about the middle of the inner leaues, and a white bottome. 23 Aliae huic similis, fundo albo & caeru∣leo. 23 Another like thereunto, with a blew and white bottome. Tulipa media lutea. The meane flowring yellow Tulipa. 1 Lutea, siue Aurea vulgaris. 1 A faire gold yellow. 2 Straminea. 2 A Strawe colour. 3 Sulphurea. 3 A Brimstone colour pale yellowish greene. 4 Mali Aurantij pallidi coloris. 4 A pale Orenge colour. 5 Lutea dilutè purpurea striata, aurei panni pallidi instar, 5 A pale cloth of gold colour. 6 Pallidè lutea fuscedine adumbrata. 6 A Custard colour a pale yellow shadow∣ed ouer with a browne. 7 Flaua, oris rubris magnis, aut paruis. 7 A gold yellow with red edges, greater or smaller. 8 Straminea oris rubris magnis intensis, vel paruis remissis. 8 A Strawe colour with red edges, deeper or paler, greater or smaller. 9 Obscura & fuliginosa lutea, instar Folij decidui, ideo{que} Folium mortuum appela∣tur. 9 A sullen or smoakie yellow, like a dead leafe that is fallen, and therefore called, Fueille mort. 10 Flaua, rubore perfusa, etiamque stri∣ata per totum, dorso coccineo, oris pal∣lidis. 10 A yellow shadowed with red, and stri∣ped also through all the leaues, the backside of them being of a red crim∣son, and the edges pale. 11 Pallidè lutea, perfusa & magis aut minus rubore striata, fundo vel luteo, vel vi ridi. 11 A pale yellow, shadowed and striped with red, in some more in some lesse, the bottomes being either yellow or green. 12 Testamentum Clusij, i.e. lutea pallida fu∣ligine obfusca, exteriùs & interiùs ad or as vs{que} pallidas, per totum vero floris medi∣um, maculis interiùs aspersa instar om∣nium aliarum Holias, dorso obscuriore, fundo viridi. 12 A Testamentum Clusij, that is, a shadow∣ed pale yellow, both within & without, spotted round about the middle on the inside, as all other Holias are, the backe of the leaues being more obscure or sha∣dowed with pale yellow edges, and a greene bottome.
13 Flambans lutea, diuersimodè intus magis aut minus striata, vel in alijs extra ma∣culata rubore, fundo vt plurimum nigro, vel in alijs luteo. 13 A yellow Flambant of diuers sorts, that is, the whole flower more or lesse strea∣med or spotted on the inside, and in some on the outside with red, the bot∣tome in most being blacke, yet in some yellow. 14 Flambans pallidior & elegantior. 14 A paler yellow Flambant more beau∣tifull. 15 Holias lutea intensior vel remissior di∣uersimodè, in orbem radiata interius, ru∣bris maculis ad supremas vs{que} oras, aliquo∣ties crebrè, aliàs parcè, fundo viridi, vel tanetto obscuro. 15 A yellow Holias, paler or deeper yel∣low very variable, spotted on the inside round about the middle, with red sometimes plentifully, or else sparing∣ly, with a green or dark tawny bottome. 16 Holias straminea rubore striata & puncta∣ta, instar alba Holias. 16 A strawe coloured Holias, spotted and streamed with red, as is to bee seene in the white Holias. 17 Tunica Morionis lutea, alijs dicta Flam∣mea, in qua color flavus magis & conspicuus rubore, diuersimodè radiata. 17 A yellow Fooles coate, of some called a flame colour, wherein the yellow is more then the red, diuersly streamed. Huc reddenda esset viridium Tuliparum classis, quae diuersarum etiam constat spe∣cierum. Vna viridis intensior, cuius flos semper ferè semiclausus manet stami∣nibus fibriatis. Altera remissior, instar Psittaci pennarum viridium, luteo variata oris albis. Tertia adhuc dilutiori viridi∣tate oris purpureis. Quarta, cujus folia equaliter purpura diluta, & viriditate diuisa sunt. Quinta, folijs longissimis stellaemodo expansis, ex rubore & viridi∣tate coacta. Vnto these may be added the greene Tuli∣pa, which is also of diuers sorts. One ha∣uing a great flower of a deepe green co∣lour, seldome opening it selfe, but abi∣ding alwaies as it were halfe shut vp and closed, the chiues being as it were feathered. Another of a paler or yel∣lowish green, paned with yellow, and is called, The Parret, &c. with white edges. A third of a more yellowish green, with red or purplish edges. A fourth, hath the leaues of the flower equally almost parted, with greene and a light purple colour, which abiding a long time in flower, groweth in time to be fairer marked: for at the first it doth not shew it selfe so plainely diuided. Some call this a greene Swisser. A fifth hath the longest leaues standing like a starre, consisting of greene and purple. Tulipa Serotina. The late flowring Tulipa. The late flowring Tulipa hath had his description expressed in the precedent dis∣course, so that I shall not neede to make a repetition of what hath already beene set downe. The greatest matter of knowledge in this kinde is this, That it hath no such plentifull variety of colours or mixtures in his flowers, as are in the two former sorts, but is confined within these limits here expressed, as farre as hath come to our know∣ledge. Tulipa Serotina. The late flowring Tulipa. Rosea intensior, aut remissior. A Rose colour deeper or paler. Rubra vulgaris, aut saturatior, & quasi nigricaus, fundo luteo vel nigro, vel ni∣gro orbe, aureo incluso, dicta Oculus So∣lis. An ordinary red, or else a deeper red like blacke bloud, with a blacke or yellow bottome, or blacke circled with yel∣low, called the Suns eye. Lutea communis. An ordinary yellow. Lutea oris rubris. A yellow with red edges. Lutea guttis sanguineis, fundo nigro vel vario. A yellow with red spots and veines, the bottome blacke or discoloured.
There yet remaine many obseruations, concerning these beautifull flowers, fit to be knowne, which could not, without too much prolixity, be comprehended within the body of the description of them; but are reserued to bee intreated of a part by them∣selues. All sorts of Tulipas beare vsually but one stalke, and that without any branches: but sometimes nature is so plentifull in bearing, that it hath two or three stalkes, and sometimes two, or more branches out of one stalke (euery stalke or branch bearing one flower at the toppe) but this is but seldome seene; and when it doth happen once, it is hardly seene againe in the same roote, but is a great signe, that the roote that doth thus, being an old roote, will the same yeare part into diuers rootes, whereof euery one, being of a reasonable greatnesse, will beare both his stalke and flower the next yeare, agreeing with the mother plant in colour, as all the of-sets of Tulipas doe for the most part: for although the young of-sets of some doe vary from the maine roote, euen while it groweth with them, yet being separated, it will bee of the same colour with the mother plant. There groweth oftentimes in the Medias, and sometimes also in the Praecoces, but more seldome, a small bulbe or roote, hard aboue the ground, at the bottome of the stalke, and betweene it and the lower leafe, which when the stalke is dry, and it ripe, being put into the ground, will bring forth in time a flower like vnto the mother plant, from whence it was taken. The flowers also of Tulipas consist most commonly of sixe leaues, but sometimes they are seene to haue eight or tenne, or more leaues; but vsually, those rootes beare but their ordinary number of sixe leaues the next yeare: the head for seede then, is for the most part foure square, which at all other times is but three square, or when the flower wanteth a leafe or two, as sometimes also it doth, it then is flat, hauing but two sides. The forme of the flower is also very variable; for the leaues of some Tulipas are all sharpe pointed, or all blunt and round pointed, and many haue the three outer leaues sharpe pointed, and the three inner round or pointed, and some contrariwise, the three outermost round pointed, and the three inner sharpe pointed. Againe, some haue all the leaues of the flowers long and narrow, and some haue them broader and shorter. Some Praecoces also haue their flowers very large and great, equall vnto eyther the Media, or Serotina, which most commonly are the largest, and others haue them as small as the Bolonia Tulipa. The bottomes of the leaues of the flowers are also variably diuersified, and so are both the chiues or threeds that stand vp about the head, and the tips or pendents that are hanging loose on the toppes of them; and by the difference of the bottomes or chiues, many flowers are distinguished, which else are very like in colour, and alike also marked. For the smell also there is some diuersity; for that the flowers of some are very sweete, of others nothing at all, and some betweene both, of a small sent, but not offen∣siue: and yet some I haue obserued haue had a strong ill sent; but how to shew you to distinguish them, more then by your owne sense, I cannot: for the seedes of sweete smelling Tulipas doe not follow their mother plant, no more then they doe in the colour.
And lastly, take this, which is not the least obseruation, worth the noting, that I haue obserued in many: When they haue beene of one entire colour for diuers yeares, yet in some yeare they haue altered very much, as if it had not beene the same, viz. from a purple or stamell, it hath beene variably either parted, or mixed, or striped with white, eyther in part, or through the whole flower, and so in a red or yellow flower, that it hath had eyther red or yellow edges, or yellow or red spots, lines, veines, or flames, running through the red or yellow colour, and sometimes it hath happened, that three leaues haue been equally parted in the middle with red and yel∣low, the other three abiding of one colour, and in some the red had some yellow in it, and the yellow some red spots in it also; whereof I haue obserued, that all such flow∣ers, not hauing their originall in that manner, (for some that haue such or the like markes from the beginning, that is, from the first and second yeares flowring, are con∣stant, and doe not change) but as I said, were of one colour at the first, doe shew the  weaknesse and decay of the roote, and that this extraordinary beauty in the flower, is but as the brightnesse of a light, vpon the very extinguishing thereof, and doth plainly declare, that it can doe his Master no more seruice, and therefore with this iollity doth bid him good night. I know there is a common opinion among many (and very con∣fidently maintained) that a Tulipa with a white flower, hath changed to beare a red or yellow, and so of the red or yellow, and other colours, that they are likewise incon∣stant, as though no flowers were certaine: but I could neuer either see or heare for certaine any such alteration, nor any other variation, but what is formerly expressed. Let not therefore any iudicious be carried away with any such idle conceit, but rather suspect some deceit in their Gardeners or others, by taking vp one, and putting in an∣other in the place, or else their owne mistaking. Now for the sowing, planting, transplanting, choise, and ordering of Tulipas, which is not the least of regard, concerning this subiect in hand, but (as I think) would be willingly entertained; What I haue by my best endeauours learned, by mine owne paines in almost forty yeares trauell, or from others informations, I am willing here to set downe; not doubting, but that some may adde what hath not come to my knowledge. First, in the sowing of seedes of Tulipas, I haue not obserued (whatsoeuer others haue written) nor could of certainty learne of others, that there doth arise from the seedes of Praecoces any Medias or Serotine Tulipas, (or but very seldome) nor am cer∣tainly assured of any: but that the seedes of all Praecoces (so they be not doubtfull, or of the last flowring sorts) will bring Praecoces: And I am out of doubt, that I neuer saw, nor could learne, that euer the seede of the Medias or Serotines haue giuen Praecoces; but Medias or Serotines, according to their naturall kinde. But if there should bee any degeneration, I rather incline to thinke, that it sooner commeth to passe (à meliore ad peius, for facilis est descensus, that is) that Praecoces may giue Medias, then that Medias or Serotines should giue Praecoces. For the choise of your seede to sowe. First, for the Praecoces, Clusius saith, that the Praecox Tulipa, that beareth a white flower, is the best to giue the greatest variety of co∣lours. Some among vs haue reported, that they haue found great variety rise from the seede of the red Praecox, which I can more hardly beleeue: but Clusius his experience hath the greater probability, but especially if it haue some mixture of red or purple in it. The purple I haue found to be the best, next thereunto is the purple with white edges, and so likewise the red with yellow edges, each of them will bring most of their owne colours. Then the choise of the best Medias, is to take those colours that are light, rather white then yellow, and purple then red; yea white, not yellow, pur∣ple, not red: but these againe to be spotted is the best, and the more the better; but withall, or aboue all in these, respect the ground or bottome of the flower, (which in the Praecox Tulipa cannot, because you shall seldome see any other ground in them but yellow) for if the flower be white, or whitish, spotted, or edged, and straked, and the bottome blew or purple (such as is found in the Holias, and in the Cloth of siluer, this is beyond all other the most excellent, and out of question the choisest of an hundred, to haue the greatest and most pleasant variety and rarity. And so in degree, the meaner in beauty you sowe, the lesser shall your pleasure in rarities be. Bestowe not your time in sowing red or yellow Tulipa seede, or the diuers mixtures of them; for they will (as I haue found by experience) seldome be worth your paines. The Serotina, or late flow∣ring Tulipa, because it is seldome seene, with any especiall beautifull variety, you may easily your selues ghesse that it can bring forth (euen as I haue also learned) no raritie, and little or no diuersity at all.
The time and manner to sowe these seedes is next to be considered. You may not sowe them in the spring of the yeare, if you hope to haue any good of them; but in the Autumne, or presently after they be thorough ripe and dry: yet if you sowe them not vntill the end of October, they will come forward neuer the worse, but rather the bet∣ter; for it is often seene, that ouer early sowing causeth them to spring out of the ground ouer early, so that if a sharpe spring chance to follow, it may goe neere to spoile all, or the most of your seede. Wee vsually sowe the same yeares seede, yet if you chance to keepe of your owne, or haue from others such seed, as is two years old, they will thriue and doe well enough, especially if they were ripe and well gathered:  You must not sowe them too thicke, for so doing hath lost many a pecke of good seede, as I can tell; for if the seede lye one vpon another, that it hath not roome vpon the sprouting, to enter and take roote in the earth, it perisheth by and by. Some vse to tread downe the ground, where they meane to sowe their seede, and hauing sowne them thereon, doe couer them ouer the thicknesse of a mans thumbe with fine sifted earth, and they thinke they doe well, and haue good reason for it: for considering the nature of the young Tulipa rootes, is to runne downe deeper into the ground, euery yeare more then other, they thinke to hinder their quicke descent by the fastnesse of the ground, that so they may encrease the better. This way may please some, but I doe not vse it, nor can finde the reason sufficient; for they doe not consider, that the stiffenesse of the earth, doth cause the rootes of the young Tulipas to bee long before they grow great, in that a stiffe ground doth more hinder the well thriuing of the rootes, then a loose doth, and although the rootes doe runne downe deeper in a loose earth, yet they may easily by transplanting be holpen, and raised vp high enough. I haue also seene some Tulipas not once remoued from their sowing to their flowring; but if you will not lose them, you must take them vp while their leafe or stalke is fresh, and not withered: for if you doe not follow the stalke downe to the roote, be it neuer so deepe, you will leaue them behinde you. The ground also must be respected; for the finer, softer, and richer the mould is, wherein you sowe your seede, the greater shall be your encrease and varietie: Sift it therefore from all stones and rubbish, and let it be either fat naturall ground of it selfe, or being muckt, that it bee thoroughly rotten: but some I know, to mend their ground, doe make such a mixture of grounds, that they marre it in the making. After the seede is thus sowne, the first yeares springing bringeth forth leaues, little bigger then the ordinary grasse leaues; the second yeare bigger, and so by degrees euery yeare bigger then other. The leaues of the Praecoces while they are young, may be discerned from the Medias by this note, which I haue obserued. The leaues of them doe wholly stand vp aboue the ground, shewing the small footstalkes, whereby euerie leafe doth stand, but the leaues of the Medias or Serotines doe neuer wholly appeare out of the ground, but the lower part which is broad, abideth vnder the vpper face of the earth. Those Tulipas now growing to bee three yeares old, (yet some at the se∣cond, if the ground and ayre be correspondent) are to bee taken vp out of the ground, wherein yee shall finde they haue runne deepe, and to be anew planted, after they haue been a little dryed and cleansed, eyther in the same, or another ground againe, pla∣cing them reasonable neare one vnto another, according to their greatnesse, which be∣ing planted and couered ouer with earth againe, of about an inch or two thicknesse, may be left vntaken vp againe for two yeare longer, if you will, or else remoued euery yeare after, as you please; and thus by transplanting them in their due season (which is still in the end of Iuly, or beginning of August, or thereabouts) you shall according to your seede and soyle, haue some come to bearing, in the fifth yeare after the flow∣ring, (and some haue had them in the fourth, but that hath beene but few, and none of the best, or in a rich ground) some in the sixth and seuenth, and some peraduenture, not vntill the eighth or tenth yeare: but still remember, that as your rootes growe grea∣ter, that in re-planting you giue them the more roome to be distant one from another, or else the one will hinder, if not rot the other. The seede of the Praecoces, doe not thriue and come forward so fast as the Medias or Serotines, nor doe giue any of-sets in their running downe as the Medias doe, which vsually leaue a small roote at the head of the other that is runne downe euery yeare; and besides, are more tender, and require more care and attendance then the Medias, and therefore they are the more respected. This is a generall and certaine rule in all Tulipas, that all the while they beare but one leafe, they will not beare flower, whether they bee seedlings, or the of-sets of elder rootes, or the rootes themselues, that haue heretofore borne flowers; but when they shew a second leafe, breaking out of the first, it is a certaine signe, that it will then beare a flower, vnlesse some casualty hinder it, as frost or raine, to nip or spoile the bud, or other vntimely accident befall it.
To set or plant your best and bearing Tulipas somewhat deeper then other rootes, I hold it the best way; for if the ground bee either cold, or lye too open to the cold  Northerne ayre, they will be the better defended therein, and not suffer the frosts or cold to pierce them so soone: for the deepe frosts and snowes doe pinch the Praecoces chiefly, if they bee too neare the vppermost crust of the earth; and therefore many, with good successe, couer ouer their ground before Winter, with either fresh or old rotten dung, and that will maruellously preserue them. The like course you may hold with seedlings, to cause them to come on the forwarder, so it bee after the first yeares sowing, and not till then. To remoue Tulipas after they haue shot forth their fibres or small strings, which grow vnder the great round rootes, (that is, from September vntill they bee in flower) is very dangerous; for by remouing them when they haue taken fast hold in the ground, you doe both hinder them in the bearing out their flower, and besides, put them in hazzard to perish, at least to bee put backe from bearing for a while after, as oftentimes I haue proued by experience: But when they are now risen to flower, and so for any time after, you may safely take them vp if you will, and remoue them without danger, if you haue any good regard vnto them, vnlesse it be a young bearing roote, which you shall in so doing much hinder, because it is yet tender, by reason it now beareth his first flower. But all Tulipa roots when their stalke and leaues are dry, may most safely then be taken vp out of the ground, and be so kept (so that they lye in a dry, and not in a moist place) for sixe moneths, without any great harme: yea I haue knowne them that haue had them nine moneths out of the ground, and haue done rea∣sonable well, but this you must vnderstand withall, that they haue not been young but elder rootes, and they haue been orderly taken vp and preserued. The dryer you keep a Tulipa roote the better, so as you let it not lye in the sunne or winde, which will pierce it and spoile it. Thus Gentlewomen for your delights, (for these pleasures are the delights of lea∣sure, which hath bred your loue & liking to them, and although you are herein predo∣minant, yet cannot they be barred from your beloued, who I doubt not, wil share with you in the delight as much as is fit) haue I taken this paines, to set downe, and bring to your knowledge such rules of art, as my small skill hath enabled mee withall concer∣ning this subiect, which of all other, seemed fittest in this manner to be enlarged, both for the varietie of matter, and excellency of beautie herein, and also that these rules set forth together in one place, might saue many repetitions in other places, so that for the planting and ordering of all other bulbous rootes, and the sowing the seedes of them, you may haue recourse vnto these rules, (tanquam ad normam & examen) which may serue in generall for all other, little diuersitie of particulars needing exception. The Place. The greater Tulipas haue first beene sent vs from Constantinople, and other parts of Turkie, where it is said they grow naturally wilde in the Fields, Woods, and Mountaines; as Thracia, Macedonia, Pontus about the Euxine Sea, Cappadocia, Bithynia, and about Tripolis and Aleppo in Syria also: the lesser haue come from other seuerall places, as their names doe descipher it out vnto vs; as Armenia, Persia, Candye, Portugall, Spaine, Italy, and France. They are all now made Denizens in our Gar∣dens, where they yeeld vs more delight, and more encrease for their pro∣portion, by reason of the culture, then they did vnto their owne naturals. The Time.
These doe flower some earlier, some later, for three whole moneths to∣gether at the least, therein adorning out a Garden most gloriously, in that being but one kinde of flower, it is so full of variety, as no other (except the Daffodils, which yet are not comparable, in that they yeeld not that allu∣ring pleasant variety) doe the like besides. Some of the Praecoces haue beene in flower with vs, (for I speake not of their owne naturall places, where the Winters are milder, and the Spring earlier then ours) in the moneth of Ia∣nuary, when the Winter before hath beene milde, but many in February,  and all the Praecoces, from the beginning to the end of March, if the yeare be kindly: at what time the Medias doe begin, and abide all Aprill, and part of May, when the Serotines flower and fade; but this, as I said, if the yeare be kindly, or else each kinde will be a moneth later. The seede is ripe in Iune and Iuly, according to their early or late flowring. The Names. There haue beene diuers opinions among our moderne Writers, by what name this plant was knowne to the ancient Authors. Some would haue it be Cosmosandalos, of the Ancient. Dodonaeus referreth it to of Theophrastus, in his seuenth Booke and thirteenth Chapter: but thereof he is so briefe, that besides the bare name, wee cannot finde him to make any further relation of forme, or quality. And Bauhinus, vpon Matthiolus Commentaries of Dioscorides, and in his Pinax also, followeth his opini∣on. Camerarius in his Hortus Medicus is of opinion, it may be referred to the Helychrysum of Crateua. Gesner, as I thinke, first of all, and after him Lobel, Camerarius, Clusius and many others, referre it to the Satyrium of Dioscorides: and surely this opinion is the most probable for many rea∣sons. First, for that this plant doth grow very frequent in many places of Greece, and the lesser Asia, which were no doubt sufficiently knowne both to Theophrastus, and Dioscorides, and was accounted among bulbous rootes, although by sundry names. And secondly, as Dioscorides setteth forth his Satyrium, so this most commonly beareth three leaues vpon a stalke (although sometimes with vs it hath foure or fiue) like vnto a Lilly, whereof some are often seen to be both red, in the first springing, and also vpon the decaying, especially in a dry time, and in a dry ground: the flower likewise of some is white, and like a Lilly; the roote is round, and as white within as the white of an egge, couered with a browne coate, hauing a sweetish, but not vnpleasant taste, as any man without danger many try. This description doth so liuely set forth this plant, that I thinke wee shall not neede to be any longer in doubt, where to finde Dioscorides his Saty∣rium Triphyllum, seeing wee haue such plenty growing with vs. And thirdly, there is no doubt, but that it hath the same qualities, as you shall hereafter heare further. And lastly, that plant likewise that beareth a red flower, may very well agree with his Erythronium; for the descriptions in Dioscorides are both alike, as are their qualities, the greatest doubt may be in the seede, which yet may agree vnto Lin or Flaxe as fitly, or rather more then many other plants doe, in many of his comparisons, which yet wee re∣ceiue for currant. For the seede of Tulipas are flat, hard, and shining as the seede of Linum or Flaxe, although of another colour, and bigger, as Dio∣scorides himselfe setteth it downe. But if there should be a mistaking in the writing of  for , in the Greeke Text, as the slippe is both easie and likely, it were then out of all question the same: for the seede is very like vnto the seede of Lillies, as any man may easily discerne that know them, or will compare them. It is generally called by all the late Writers, Tulipa, which is deriued from the name Tulpan, whereby the Turkes of Dalmatia doe entitle their head Tyres, or Caps; and this flower being blowne, laide open, and inuerted, doth very well resemble them. We haue receiued the early kinde from Constantinople, by the name of Cafa lale, and the other by the name of Cauela lale. Lobel and others doe call it Lilio-narcissus, be∣cause it doth resemble a Lilly in the leafe, flower, and seede, and a Daffodill in the roote. We call it in English the Turkes Cap, but most vsually Tulipa, as most other Christian Countries that delight therein doe. Daleschampius calleth it Oulada. The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that his first Satyrium is profitable for them that  haue a convulsion in their necke, (which wee call a cricke in the necke) if it be drunke in harsh (which we call red) wine. That the roots of Tulipas are nourishing, there is no doubt, the pleasant, or at least the no vnpleasant taste, may hereunto perswade; for diuers haue had them sent by their friends from beyond Sea, and mistaking them to bee Onions, haue vsed them as Onions in their pottage or broth, and neuer found any cause of mislike, or any sense of euill quality produced by them, but accounted them sweete Onions. Further, I haue made tryall of them my selfe in this manner. I haue pre∣serued the rootes of these Tulipas in Sugar, as I haue done the rootes of E∣ringus, Orchis, or any other such like, and haue found them to be almost as pleasant as the Eringus rootes, being firme and sound, fit to be presented to the curious; but for force of Venereous quality, I cannot say, either from my selfe, not hauing eaten many, or from any other, on whom I haue bestowed them: but surely, if there be any speciall propertie in the rootes of Orchis, or some other tending to that purpose, I thinke this may as well haue it as they. It should seeme, that Dioscorides doth attribute a great Venereous faculty to the seede, whereof I know not any hath made any especiall ex∣periment with vs as yet. CHAP. IX. Narcissus. The Daffodill. THere hath beene great confusion among many of our moderne Writers of plants, in not distinguishing the manifold varieties of Daffodils; for euery one almost, without consideration of kinde or forme, or other speciall note, gi∣ueth names so diuersly one from another, that if any one shall receiue from seuerall places the Catalogues of their names (as I haue had many) as they set them down, and compare the one Catalogue with the other, he shall scarce haue three names in a dozen to agree together, one calling that by one name, which another calleth by another, that very few can tell what they meane. And this their confusion, in not distinguishing the name of Narcissus from Pseudonarcissus, is of all other in this kinde the greatest and grossest errour. To auoide therefore that gulfe, whereof I complaine that so manie haue bin endrenched; and to reduce the Daffodils into such a methodicall order, that euery one may know, to what Classis or forme any one doth appertaine, I will first diuide them into two principall or primary kindes: that is, into Narcissos, true Daffo∣dils, and Pseudonarcissos, bastard Daffodils: which distinction I hold to be most neces∣sarie to be set downe first of all that euery one may be named without confusion vnder his owne primary kind, and then to let the other parts of the subdiuision follow, as is proper to them, and fittest to expresse them. Now to cause you to vnderstand the difference betweene a true Daffodill and a false, is this; it consisteth onely in the flow∣er, (when as in all other parts they cannot bee distinguished) and chiefly in the middle cup or chalice; for that we doe in a manner onely account those to bee Pseudonarcissos, bastard Daffodils, whose middle cup is altogether as long, and sometime a little longer then the outter leaues that doe encompasse it, so that it seemeth rather like a trunke or long nose, then a cup or chalice, such as almost all the Narcissi, or true Daffodils haue; I say almost, because I know that some of them haue their middle cup so small, that we rather call it a crowne then a cup; and againe, some of them haue them so long, that they may seem to be of the number of the Pseudonarcissi, or bastard Daffodils: but yet may easily be knowne from them, in that, although the cup of some of the true Daffodils be great, yet it is wider open at the brim or edge, and not so long and narrow all alike as the bastard kindes are, and this is the chiefe and onely way to know how to seuer these kindes, which rule holdeth certaine in all, except that kinde which is called Narccissus luncifolius reflexo flora, whose cup is narrow, and as long as the leaues that turne vp againe.
Secondly, I will subdiuide each of these again apart by themselues, into foure sorts; and first the Narcissos, or true Daffodils into Latifolios, broad leafed Daffodils. Angustifolios, narrow leafed Daffodils. Iuncifolios, Rushe Daffodils, and Marinos, Sea Daffodils. These sorts againe doe comprehend vnder them some other diuisions, whereby they may the better be distinguished, and yet still bee referred to one of those foure former sorts: as Monanthos, that is, Daffodils that beare but one flower, or two at the most vpon a stalke, and Polyanthos, those that beare many flowers together vpon a stalke: as also Simplici flore, those that beare single flowers, and Multiplici flore, or flore pleno, that is, haue double flowers. Vernales, those that flower in the Spring, and among them some that are earlier; and therefore called Praecoces, early flowring Daffodils, and Autumnales, those that flower in Autumne onely. And lastly, with the Pseudonarcissos, or bastard Daffodils, I will keepe the same or∣der, to distinguish them likewise into their foure seuerall sorts; and as with the true Daffodils, so with these false, describe vnder euery sort: first, those that beare single flowers, whether one or many vpon a stalke; and then those that beare double flow∣ers, one or many also. As for the distinctions of maior and minor, greater and lesser, and of maximus and minimus, greatest and least, they doe not onely belong to these Daffodils; and therefore must be vsed as occasion permitteth, but vnto all other sort of plants. To begin therefore, I thinke fittest with that stately Daffodill, which for his excellency carrieth the name of None such. 1. Narcissus latifolius omnium maximus, amplo calice flauo, siue Nompareille. The great None such Daffodill, or Incomparable Daffodill. This Narcissus Nompareille hath three or foure long and broad leaues, of a grayish greene colour, among which riseth vp a stalke two foote high at the least, at the toppe whereof, out of a thinne skinnie huske, as all Daffodils haue, commeth forth one large single flower, and no more vsually, consisting of sixe very pale yellow large leaues, almost round at the point, with a large cuppe in the middle, somewhat yellower then the leaues, the bottome whereof next vnto the stalke is narrow and round, rising wider to the mouth, which is very large and open, and vneuenly cut in or indented about the edges. The cup doth very well resemble the chalice, that in former dayes with vs, and beyond the Seas is still vsed to hold the Sacramentall Wine, that is with a nar∣rower bottome, and a wide mouth. After the flower is past, sometimes there com∣meth (for it doth not often) a round greene head, and blacke round seede therein, like vnto other Daffodils, but greater. The roote is great, as other Daffodils that beare large flowers, and is couered ouer with a brownish coate or skinne. The flower hath little or no sent at all. Flore geminatoThis doth sometimes bring forth a flower with ten or twelue leaues, and a cup much larger, as if it would be two, euen as the flower seemeth. 2. Narcissus omnium maximus flore & calice flauo. The great yellow Incomparable Daffodill. This other kinde differeth neither in forme, nor bignesse of leafe or flower from the former, but in the colour of the circling leaues of the flower, which are of the same yellow colour with the cup. Flore geminato.This doth sometimes degenerate and grow luxurious also, bringing forth two flow∣ers vpon a stalke, each distinct from other, and sometimes two flowers thrust together, as if they were but one, although it be but seldome; for it is not a peculiar kinde that is constant, yearly abiding in the same forme.
3. Narcissus maximus griseus calice flauo. The gray Peerlesse Daffodill. This Peerlesse Daffodill well deserueth his place among these kindes, for that it doth much resemble them, and peraduenture is but a difference raised from the seede of the former, it is so like in leafe and flower, but that the leaues seeme to be somewhat greater, and the sixe outer leaues of the flower to be of a glistering whitish gray colour, and the cup yellow, as the former, but larger. 4. Narcissus latifolius flauo flore amplo calice, siue Mattenesse. The lesser yellow Nompareille, or the Lady Mattenesses Daffodill. The leaues of this Daffodill, are somewhat like vnto the leaues of the first kind, but not altogether so long or broad: the stalke likewise riseth not vp fully so high, and beareth one flower like the former, but lesser, and both the cuppe and the leaues are of one colour, that is, of a pale yellow, yet more yellow then in the former: the cup of this also is lesser, and a little differing; for it is neither fully so small in the bottome, nor so large at the edges, nor so crumpled at the brimmes, so that all these differences doe plainly shew it to be another kinde, quite from the former. The Place. The places of none of these are certainly knowne to vs where they grow naturally, but we haue them onely in our Gardens, and haue beene sent, and procured from diuers places. The Time. They flower sometimes in the end of March, but chiefly in Aprill. The Names. The first and second haue been sent vs by the name of Narcisse Nompare∣ille, as it is called in French; and in Latine, Narcissus omnium maximus amplo calice flauo, and Narcissus Incomparabilis, that is, the Incomparable Daffodill, or the greatest Daffodill of all other, with a large yellow cuppe: but assu∣redly, although this Daffodill doth exceed many other, both in length and bignesse, yet the great Spanish bastard Daffodill, which shall be spoken of hereafter, is in my perswasion oftentimes a farre higher and larger flower; and therefore this name was giuen but relatiuely, we may call it in English, The great None such Daffodill, or the Incomparable Daffodill, or the great Peerlesse Daffodill, or the Nompareille Daffodill, which you will: for they all doe answer either the French or the Latine name; and because this name Nomparcille is growne currant by cstome, I know not well how to alter it. The third kinde may passe with the title giuen it, without con∣troule. The last is very well knowne beyond the Seas, especially in the Low Countries, and those parts, by the Lady Mattenesse Daffodill, because Clusius receiued it from her. We may call it in English, for the correspon∣dency with the former, The lesser yellow Nompareille, or Peerlesse Daffo∣dill, or the Lady Mattenesse Daffodill, which you will. Narcissus Indicus flore rubro, dictus Iacobaeus. The Indian Daffodill with a red flower. This Indian Daffodill is so differing, both in forme, not hauing a cuppe, and in co∣lour, being red, from the whole Family of the Daffodils (except the next that follow∣eth, and the Autumne Daffodils) that some might iustly question the fitnesse of his place here. But because as all the plants, whether bulbous or other, that come from
the Indies, either East or West (although they differ very notably, from those that grow in these parts of the world) must in a generall suruey and muster be ranked euery one, as neere as the surueiours wit will direct him, vnder some other growing with vs, that is of neerest likenesse; Euen so vntill some other can direct his place more fitly, I shall require you to accept of him in this, with this description that followeth, which I must tell you also, is more by relation then knowledge, or sight of the plant it selfe. This Daffodill hath diuers broad leaues, somewhat like vnto the common or ordinary white Daffodill, of a grayish greene colour; from the sides whereof, as also from the middle of them, rise vp sometimes two stalkes together, but most vsually one after an∣other (for very often it flowreth twice in a Summer) and often also but one stalke a∣lone, which is of a faint reddish colour, about a foote high or more, at the toppe whereof, out of a deepe red skinne or huske, commeth forth one flower bending downewards, consisting of sixe long leaues without any cup in the middle, of an ex∣cellent red colour, tending to a crimson; three of these leaues that turne vpwards, are somewhat larger then those three that hang downewards, hauing sixe threads or chiues in the middle, tipt with yellow pendents, and a three forked stile longer then the rest, and turning vp the end thereof againe: the roote is round and bigge, of a brownish colour on the outside, and white within. This is set forth by Aldinus, Car∣dinall Farnesius his Physitian, that at Rome it rose vp with stalkes of flowers, be∣fore any leaues appeared. The Place. Time, and Names. This naturally groweth in the West Indies, from whence it was brought into Spaine, where it bore both in Iune and Iuly, and by the Indians in their tongue named AZCAL XOCHITL, and hath beene sent from Spaine, vnto diuers louers of plants, into seuerall parts of Christendome, but haue not thriued long in these transalpine colder Countries, so far as I can heare. Narcissus Trapezunticus flore luteo praecocissimus. The early Daffodill of Trebizond. Because this Daffodill is so like in flower vnto the former, although differing in co∣lour, I thought it the fittest place to ioyne it the next thereunto. This early Daffodill hath three or foure short very greene leaues, so like vnto the leaues of the Autumne Daffodill, that many may easily bee deceiued in mistaking one for another, the diffe∣rence consisting chiefly in this, that the leaues of this are not so broad or so long, nor rise vp in Autumne: in the midst of these leaues riseth vp a short green stalke, an hand∣full high, or not much higher vsually, (I speake of it as it hath often flowred with mee, whether the cause be the coldnesse of the time wherein it flowreth, or the nature of the plant, or of our climate, I am in some doubt; but I doe well remember, that the stalkes of some plants, that haue flowred later with me then the first, haue by the grea∣ter strength, and comfort of the Sunne, risen a good deale higher then the first) bearing at the top, out of a whitish thinne skinne striped with greene, one flower a little ben∣ding downewards, consisting of sixe leaues, laid open almost in the same manner with the former Indian Daffodill, whereof some doe a little turne vp their points againe, of a faire pale yellow colour, hauing sixe white chiues within it, tipt with yellow pen∣dents, and a longer pointell: the roote is not very great, but blackish on the outside, so like vnto the Autumne Daffodill, but that it is yellow vnder the first or outermost coate, that one may easily mistake one for another. The Place. It was sent vs from Constantinople among other rootes, but as wee may ghesse by the name, it should come thither from Trapezunte or Trebizond. The Time.
It flowreth sometimes in December, if the former part of the Winter 1 Narcissus Nopareille. The incomparable Daffodill. 2 Narcissus Mattenese. The lesser yellow Nomparelle Daffodill. 3 Nar∣cissus Iacobaeus flore rubro. The red Indian Daffodill. 4 Narcissus Trapezunticus. The early Daffodill of Trabesond. 5 Narcissus Montanus albus apophysious traeditus. The white winged Daffodill. 6 Narcissus Montanus, siue Nompareille totus albus. The white Nompareille, or Peerlesse Daffodill. 7 Narcissus albus oblongo calice. The white Daffodill with a long cup. depiction of flowers
haue been milde; but most vsually about the end of Ianuary, or else in Fe∣bruarie the beginning or the end. The Names. Wee doe vsually call it from the Turkish name, Narcissus Trapezunticus, and some also call it Narcissus vernus praecox, as Clusius doth, in English, The early Daffodill of Trebizond. Narcissus Montanus albus apophysibus praeditus. The white Mountaine Daffodill with eares, or The white winged Daffodill. This Mountaine Daffodill riseth vp with three or foure broad leaues, somewhat long, of a whitish greene colour, among which riseth vp a stalke a foote and a halfe high, whereon standeth one large flower, and sometimes two, consisting of sixe white leaues a peece, not very broad, and without any shew of yellownesse in them, three whereof haue vsually each of them on the backe part, at the bottome vpon the one side of them, and not on both, a little small white peece of a leafe like an eare, the other three hauing none at all: the cup is almost as large, or not much lesse then the small Nompareille, small at the bottome, and very large, open at the brimme, of a faire yel∣low colour, and sometimes the edges or brimmes of the cup will haue a deeper yel∣low colour about it, like as if it were discoloured with Saffron: the flower is verie sweete, the roote is great and white, couered with a pale coate or skinne, not verie blacke, and is not very apt to encrease, seldome giuing of-sets; neither haue I euer ga∣thered seede thereof, because it passeth away without bearing any with me. Narcissus Montanus, siue Nompareille totus albus ample calice. The white Nompareille Daffodill. This white Nompareille Daffodill, is in roote and leafe very like vnto the former mountain or winged Daffodill, but that they are a little larger: the stalke from among the leaues riseth vp not much higher then it, bearing at the top one large flower, com∣posed of sixe long white leaues, each whereof is as it were folded halfe way together, in the middle whereof standeth forth a large white cup, broader at the mouth or brims then at the bottome, very like vnto the lesser Nompareille Daffodill before remem∣bred, which hath caused it to be so entituled: the sent whereof is no lesse sweete then the former. The Place. The naturall places of these Daffodils are not certainly knowne to vs; but by the names they carry, they should seeme to bee bred in the Moun∣taines. The Time. These flower not so early as many other kindes doe, but rather are to bee accounted among the late flowring Daffodils; for they shew not their flowers vntill the beginning of May, or the latter end of Aprill, with the soonest. The Names. The names set downe ouer the heads of either of them be such, whereby they are knowne to vs: yet some doe call the first Narcissus auriculatus, that is to say, The Daffodill with eares: and the other, Narcissus Nompareille totus albus, that is to say, The white Nompareille, or Peerlesse Daffodill.
1. Narcissus albus oblongo calice luteo praecox minor. The small early white Daffodill with a long cup. The leaues of this early Daffodill are broad, very greene, and not whitish as others, three or foure standing together, about a foote long or better, among which riseth vp a greene stalke, not full so high as the leaues, bearing one flower at the toppe thereof of a reasonable bignesse, but not so great as the later kindes that follow are, consisting of six whitish leaues, but not perfect white, hauing a shew of a Creame colour appearing in them; in the middle is a long round yellow cup, about halfe an inch long or better. The smell of this flower is reasonable sweete, the roote is of a reasonable bignesse, yet lesser then the rootes of the later kindes. 2. Narcissus pallidus oblongo calice flauo praecox. The early Strawe coloured Daffodill with a long cup. The leaues of this Daffodill are as greene as the former, but much narrower; and the leaues of the flower are more enclining to yellow, but yet very pale, as if it were a light strawe colour, and seeme to bee a little more narrow and pointed then the for∣mer: the cup of this, is as long and yellow as the precedent. The smell whereof is very like the former, yet neither of them being so sweete as those that follow. 3. Narcissus albus oblongo calice luteo serotinus maior. The great late flowring white Daffodill with a long cup. This later flowring Daffodill hath his leaues somewhat narrow & long, of a grayish or whitish greene colour, among which the stalke riseth vp a foote and a halfe high, bearing one flower at the toppe, made of six white leaues, hauing the cup in the mid∣dle thereof as long as the former, and of a deepe yellow: the edges of this cuppe are sometimes plaine, and sometimes a little crumpled; they are often also circled at the brimmes with a Saffron colour, and often also without it, the smell whereof is very pleasant, and not heady: the roote hereof is reasonable bigge, and couered ouer ra∣ther with a pale then blackish skinne. This flower doth sometimes alter his forme into eight leaues, which being narrow and long, seeme like a white starre, compassing a yellow trunke. 4. Narcissus totus pallidus oblongo calice serotinus minor. The late pale coloured Daffodill with a long cup. There is another of this kinde, whose flower is wholly of a pale white, or yellowish colour, differing neither in leafe nor roote from the former. 5. Narcissus pallidus oblongo calice flauo serotinus. The Strawe coloured late flowring Daffodill with a long yellow cup. The chiefe difference of this Daffodill from the former, consisteth in the colour of the top of the flower, which is of a more yellow colour, and a little larger then the former, and the brimmes or edges of the cup of a deeper yellow, or Saffron colour. The smell of this is no lesse sweete then in the former. 6. Narcissus albus oblongo calice flauo serotinus, duobus floribus in caule. The late white Daffodill with a long cup, and two flowers on a stalke. This Daffodill is surely a kinde of it selfe, although it be so like the former, abiding constant in his forme and manner of flowring, vsually bearing without missing two flowers vpon a stalke, very like vnto the former great white kinde, that one cannot know any greater matter of difference betweene them, then that it beareth two flowers on a stalke: the cuppes whereof are seldome touched with any shew of Saffron colour on them at the brimmes or edges, as some of the former haue.
The Place. All these Daffodils doe grow on the Pyrenaean mountaines, and haue been sought out, and brought into these parts, by those curious or couetous searchers of these delights, that haue made vs partakers of them. The Time. The former kindes flower earlier by a fortnight then the later, the one in the later end of March, and the other not vntill the middle of Aprill. The Names. Their names are giuen to euery one of them in their seuerall titles, as fitly as may best agree with their natures; and therefore I shall not neede to speake any further of them. Narcissus medioluteus vulgaris. The common white Daffodill called Primrose Peerlesse. This Daffodill is so common in euery Countrey Garden almost through England, that I doubt I shall but spend my time in vaine, to describe that which is so well knowne, yet for their sakes that know it not, I will set downe the description of it in this manner. It hath long limber and broad leaues, of a grayish greene colour, a∣mong which riseth vp a stalke, bearing at the toppe out of a skinnie huske sometimes but one flower, but most commonly two flowers, and seldome three or more, but lar∣ger for the most part, then any that beare many flowers vpon a stalke, of a pale whitish Creame colour, tending somewhat neare vnto the colour of a pale Primrose (which hath caused our Countrey Gentlewomen, I thinke, to entitle it Primrose Peerlesse) with a small round flat Crowne, rather then a cup in the middle, of a pale yellow co∣lour, with some pale chiues standing therein, being of a sweete, but stuffing sent: the roote is reasonable great, and encreasing more then a better plant. Narcissus mediocroceus serotinus. The late flowring white Daffodill. This Daffodill hath much smaller leaues, and shorter then the last, the stalke also riseth not so high by much, and beareth but one flower thereon, of a pure white co∣lour, made of six small leaues, and somewhat narrow, standing seuerally one from another, and not so close together as the former, but appearing like a starre: the cup is small and round, of a pale yellow colour, but saffrony about the brims, hauing six small pale chiues in the middle, the smell whereof is much sweeter then in the former. The Place. The first is thought to grow naturally in England, but I could neuer heare of his naturall place. I am sure it is plentifull enough in all Country Gar∣dens, so that wee scarce giue it place in our more curious parkes. The se∣cond liueth onely with them that delight in varieties. The Time. The first Daffodill flowreth in the middle time, being neither of the earliest, nor of the latest; but about the middle, or end of Aprill. The o∣ther flowreth with the latest in May. The Names. I shall not neede to trouble you with further repetitions of names, they hauing been set downe in their titles, which are proper to them.
1 Narcissus vulgaris medio luteus. The common white Daffodill, or Primrose Peerlesse. 2 Narcissus medio purpureus maximus. The great white purple ringe Daffodill. 3 Narcissus medio purpurous praecox. The early purple ringed Daffodill. 4 Narcissus medio purpureus stellarus. The starry purple ringed Daffodill. 5 Narcissus Persicus. The Persian Daffodill. 6 Narcissus Autumnalis minor. The lesser Winter Daffodill. 7 Narcissus Autumnalis maior. The greater Winter Daffodill. depiction of flowers
1. Narcissus medio purpureus praecox. The early purple ringed Daffodill. This early Daffodill hath many long grayish greene leaues, somewhat narrower and stiffer then the former common white Daffodill, among which riseth vp a long naked hollow stalke (as all other Daffodils haue) bearing at the toppe one flower, and seldome two, made of sixe long white leaues, standing close together about the stalke; the cup is yellow, and so flat, that it might rather bee called a crowne: for it standeth very close to the middle, and very open at the brimmes, circled with a reddish or pur∣ple coloured ring, hauing certaine chiues in the middle of it also. The smell hereof is very sweete, exceeding many other. 2. Narcissus medio purpureus serotinus. The late purple ringed Daffodill. The leaues of this Daffodill are alwayes broader then the former early one, and some are very neare twice as broad: the flower is very like the former, being large, and his leaues standing close one to the side of another; the ring likewise that compas∣seth the yellow coronet, is sometimes of a paler reddish purple, and sometimes as deepe a red as the former: so that it differeth not in any other materiall point, then that it flowreth not vntill the other is past and gone. The sent of this is like the for∣mer, the roote hereof is greater, as well as the leafe and flower. 3. Narcissus medio purpureus maximus. The great white purple ringed Daffodill. There is another kinde, whose flower (as well as leaues and rootes) is larger then any other of this kinde, which onely maketh it a distinct sort from the other: it flow∣reth also with the later sort of these purple ringed Daffodils. 4. Narcissus medio purpureus stellaris. The starry purple ringed Daffodill. This Daffodill hath his leaues a little narrower and greener then the former sorts, the flower also of this hath his sixe white leaues not so broad, but narrower, and see∣ming longer then they, not closing together, but standing apart one from another, ma∣king it seeme like a white starre: it hath also a yellow coronet in the middle, circled about with purple, like the former. This doth smell nothing so sweete as the first, but yet hath a good sent. The Place. The first, third, and fourth of these Daffodils, haue alwayes beene sent vs from Constantinople among other bulbous rootes, so that wee know no further of their naturall places. The second groweth in many places of Europe, both in Germany, France, and Italy, as Clusius hath noted. The Time. The first flowreth very early in March, euen with the first Daffodils. The second, third, and fourth, about a moneth after. The Names. The early and starre Daffodils, haue been sent vs by the Turkish name of Deuebohini, and Serincade. But their names, they haue receiued since, to bee endenizond with vs, are set downe in their seuerall titles. Narcissus Persicus. The Persian Daffodill.
This Persian Daffodill differeth from all other kindes of Daffodils in his manner of  growing, for it neuer hath leaues and flowers at one time together, wherein it is like vnto a Colchicum, yet in roote and leafe it is a Daffodill. The roote is a little blackish on the outside, somewhat like the roote of the Autumne Daffodill, from whence riseth vp a naked foote stalke, bearing one pale yellow flower, breaking through a thinne skinne, which first enclosed it, composed of six leaues, the three outermost being a little larger then the rest, in the middle of the flower there are six small chiues, and a longer pointell. The whole flower is of an vnpleasant sent: After the flower is past, come vp the leaues, sometimes before Winter, but most vsually after the deepe of Winter is past with vs, in the beginning of the yeare, which are broad, long, and of a pale greene colour, like the leaues of other Daffodils, but not greene as the Autumne Daffodill is, and besides they doe a little twine themselues, as some of the Pancratium, or bastard Sea Daffodils doe. Narcissus Autumnalis maior. The greater Autumne or Winter Daffodill. The greater Autumne Daffodill riseth vp with three or foure faire broad and short leaues at the first, but afterwards grow longer, of a very deepe or darke greene colour, in the middle of which riseth vp a short, stiffe, round footestalke, bearing one faire yel∣low flower on the head thereof (inclosed at the first in a thinne skinne, or huske) and consisteth of six leaues as the former, with certaine chiues in the middle, as all or most other Daffodils haue, which passeth away without shew of any seed, or head for seed, although vnder the head there is a little greene knot, which peraduenture would beare seede, if our sharpe Winters did not hinder it. The roote is great and round, couered ouer with a blackish skinne or coate. Narcissus Autumnalis minor. The lesser Autumne or Winter Daffodill. Clusius setteth downe, that the manner of the flowring of this lesser Daffodill, is more like vnto the Persian Daffodill, then vnto the former greater Autumne kind; but I doe finde that it doth in the same sort, as the greater kinde, rise vp with his leaues first, and the flowers a while after: the flower of this is lesser, and a little paler then the flower of the greater kinde, but consisting in like sort of six leaues, narrow and sharpe pointed; the greene leaues also are almost of as deepe a greene colour, as the greater kinde, but smaller and narrower, and a little hollow in the middle. The roote is also alike, but lesser, and couered with a blackish skinne as the former. This hath some∣times borne blacke round seede in three square heads. The Place. The Persian Daffodill hath beene sent sometimes, but very seldome, a∣mong other rootes from Constantinople, and it is probable by the name whereby it was sent, that it should naturally grow in Persia. The other two haue likewise beene sent from Constantinople, and as it is thought, grow in Thracia, or thereabouts. The Time. They all doe flower much about one time, that is, about the end of Sep∣tember, and in October. The Names. The first hath been sent by the name of Serincade Persiana, and thereupon is called Narcissus Persicus, The Persian Daffodill. The other two haue been thought by diuers to be Colchica, and so haue they called them, vpon no other ground, but that their flower is in forme and time somewhat like Colchicum, when as if they had marked them bet∣ter, they might plainly discerne, that in all other things they did resemble Daffodils; but now the names of Clchicum luteum maius, & minus, is quite
lost, time hauing worne them out, and they are called by most Herbarists now adayes, Narcissus Autumnalis maior & minor, The greater and the lesser Autumne Daffodill. Thus farre haue I proceeded with those Daffodils, that hauing broad leaues, beare but one single flower, or two at the most vpon a stalke: And now to proceed with the rest, that haue broad leaues, and beare single flowers, but many vpon a stalke. Narcissus Africanus aureus maior. The great yellow Daffodill of Africa. This braue and stately Daffodill hath many very long and broad leaues, of a better greene colour, then many others that are grayish, among which appeareth a stalke, not rising to the height of the leaues, bearing at the toppe out of a skinnie hose many faire, goodly, and large flowers, to the number of ten or twelue, if the roote bee well growne, and stand in a warme place, euery one being larger then any of the French, Spanish, or Turkie Daffodils, that beare many single flowers vpon a stalke, and com∣meth neere vnto the bignesse of the English Daffodill, called Primrose Peerlesse, be∣fore described, or that French kinde hereafter described, that beareth the largest flowers, many vpon a stalke (which some would make to bee a kinde of that English Daffodill, but bearing more flowers) and of a faire shining yellow colour, hauing large, round, and open cups or boules, yellower then the outer leaues; and is of so ex∣ceeding sweete a sent, that it doth rather offend the senses by the aboundance thereof: the roote is great, and couered with a blackish browne coate or skinne. Narcissus Africanus aureus minor. The lesser Barbary Daffodill. This lesser kinde is very neere the same with the former, but that it lacketh some∣what of his statelinesse of height, largenesse or flower and cup (being of a paler yel∣low) and beauty of colour, for it beareth neither of these equall vnto the former, but is in them all inferiour. And thus by this priuatiue, you may vnderstand his positiue, and that shall be sufficient at this time. Narcissus Byzantinus totus luteus. The yellow Turkie Daffodill. Whereas the last described, came short of the beauty of the former, so this lacketh of that beauty is in the last; for this, although it haue very long leaues, and a high stalke, yet the flowers are neither so many, as not being aboue foure or fiue, nor so large, being not much greater then the ordinary French Daffodill hereafter descri∣bed, nor the colour so faire, but much paler, and the cup also smaller; and herein con∣sisteth the chiefest differences betweene this, and both the other, but that the sent of this is also weaker. The Place. The first and the second grow in Barbary, about Argier, and Fez, as by the relation of them, that haue brought them into these parts, wee haue been enformed. The last hath been often brought from Constantinople among other va∣rieties of Daffodils, but from whence they receiued them, I could neuer learne. The Time. These Daffodils do flower very early, euen with the first sort of Daffo∣dils, I meane after they haue been accustomed vnto our climate: for often∣times vpon their first bringing ouer, they flower in Ianuary or February, especially if they be preserued from the frosts, and kept in any warme place; for they are very tender, and will soone perish, being left abroad. The Names.
The first is called by diuers in French, Narcisse d'Algiers, and in many  places of the Low Countries, Narcissen van Heck, or Narcissus Heckius; by diuers others Narcissus Africanus aureus maior, we may call it in English, The great African Daffodill, or the great Barbary Daffodill, or the great yellow Daffodill of Argiers, which you please. The second hath no other variation of name, then a diminutiue of the former, as is set downe in the title. The third is no doubt the same, that Clusius setteth downe in the twelfth Chapter of his second Booke of the History of more rare plants, and ma∣keth the fourth sort, which came from Constantinople, and may also be the same, which he maketh his fifth, which (as he saith) he receiued from Do∣ctour Simor Touar of Seuill in Spaine. Wee call it, from the place from whence we receiued it, Narcissus Byzantinus, with the addition of totus lu∣teus, to put a difference from other sorts that come from thence also: in En∣glish, The yellow single Daffodill of Turkie. Narcissus Sulphureus maior. The greater Lemon coloured Daffodill. The greater of these Daffodils, beareth three or foure greene and very long leaues, a foote and a halfe long at the least, among which riseth vp a round, yet crested stalke, not so high as the leaues, bearing fiue or sixe single flowers thereon, euery one of them being greater then the ordinary French or Italian Daffodils, with many flowers vpon a stalke; of a faint, but yet pleasant yellow colour at the first, which after they haue been in flower a fortnight or thereabouts, change into a deeper, or more sullen yellow colour: the cup in the middle is likewise larger, then in those formerly named, and of a deeper yellow colour then the outer leaues, hauing onely three chiues within it. The smell is very pleasant. Narcissus Sulphureus minor. The lesser Lemon coloured Daffodill. This lesser Daffodill hath broader and shorter leaues then the former, of the colour of other Daffodils, and not greene like the former: the stalke of this riseth vp higher then the leaues, bearing foure or fiue flowers vpon shorter footestalkes, and no bigger then the French Daffodill, of a pale yellow, which most doe call a Brimstone colour, the cup or rather crowne in the middle, is small, and broad open, of a little deeper yel∣low, hauing many chiues within it, and is as it were sprinkled ouer with a kinde of mealinesse. The smell of this is not full so pleasant as the former. The Place. Both these haue been gathered on the Pyrenaean Mountaines, and both likewise haue been sent out of Italy. The Time. They both flower in the middle time of the Daffodils flowring, that is, in Aprill. The Names. They haue their Latine names expressed in their titles, and so are their English also, if you please so to let them passe; or else according to the La∣tine, you may call them, The greater and the lesser Brimstone coloured Daffodils; some haue called them Narcissus Italicus, but the Italians them∣selues haue sent them by the name of Narcisso Solfarigno. Narcissus totus albus polyanthos. The milke white Daffodill many vpon a stalke.
The leaues of this Daffodill are of a meane size, both for length and breadth, yet somewhat greener then in the ordinary sorts, that haue some whitenesse in them: the  flowers are many vpon the stalke, as small for the most part, as any of these kindes that beare many together, being wholly of a milke, or rather snow white colour, both the cuppe, which is small, and the outer leaues that compasse it; after which come small heads, wherein is contained round blacke seede, as all other Daffodils doe, although some greater, and others lesser, according to the proportion of the plants: the roote is couered ouer with a blackish skinne or coate; the smell is very sweete. There are two other sorts more of this kinde, the differences whereof are, that the one hath his leaues somewhat broader, and the flowers greater then the former: And the other smaller leaues and flowers also, whose cups being small, are neuer seene fully open, but as it were halfe closed at the brimmes. Narcissus latifolius totus albus, mediocri calice reflexus. The milke white Daffodill with the great cup. There is yet another sort of these milke white Daffodils, whose leaues are as broad as any of the former, and whose cup in the middle of the flower, is somewhat larger then in any of the lesser sorts, and lesser then in the greater kinde: but the leaues of the flowers doe a little turne themselues vpwards, which maketh a chiefe difference. The Place. These Daffodils grow in Spaine, from whence I receiued many that flourished a while, but perished by some fierce cold Winters: they likewise grow in France, from whence many also haue been brought vnto vs. They haue likewise been sent from Constantinople to vs, among other kindes of Daffodils. The Time. They that come from Constantinople, for the most part doe flower earlier then the other, euen after they are accustomed to our ayre. Some of them flower notwithstanding in the end of March, the rest in Aprill. The Names. They are vsually called Narcissus totus albus polyanthos, adding thereunto the differences of maior, medius, and minor, that is, The milke white Daffo∣dill, the greater, the middle, and the lesser; for so some doe distinguish them. The last, for distinction, hath his name in his title sufficient to ex∣presse him. 1. Narcissus Narbonensis, siue medio luteus praecox, The early French Daffodill. The leaues of this Daffodill, spring vp out of the ground a moneth or two some∣times before the other of this kinde, that follow; being also shorter, and narrower: the stalke likewise is not very high, bearing diuers flowers at the top, breaking through a thinne skinne, as is vsuall with all the Daffodils, euery one whereof is small, consi∣sting of six white leaues, and a small yellow cup in the middle, which is of a prettie small sent, nothing so strong as many others: the roote is great and round, and sel∣dome parteth into of-sets, euen as all the other that follow, bearing many single flow∣ers, doe. 2. Narcissus Narbonensis vulgaris. The ordinary French Daffodill. This Daffodill hath long and broad greene leaues, a little hollowish in the middle, and edged on both sides; the stalke is a foote and a halfe high, bearing at the toppe di∣uers flowers, somewhat larger then the former, consisting of six white leaues, some∣what round; the cup is yellow in the middle, small and round, like vnto an Acorne cuppe, or a little fuller in the middle: this is the forme of that sort which was first
1 Narcissus Africanus aureus maior. The great yellow Daffodill of Africa. 2 Narcissus Africanus luteus minor. The lesser yellow Daffodill of Africa. 3 Narcissus Narbonensis medio luteus. The French Daffodill. 4 Narcissus Pisanus, vel totus albus. The Italian Daffodill, or the all white Daffodill. 5 Narcissus Mussart. Mussart his Daffodill. 6 Narcissus Anglicus polyanthos. The great English Daffodill. depiction of flowers
brought vnto vs: But since there is found out some, whose cup is shorter, others flat∣ter, some of a paler, others of a deeper yellow colour, and some that haue their cuppe longer then the rest. The rootes of them all are couered with a blackish skin or coate. 3. Narcissus Narbonensis maior amplo flore. The French Daffodill with great flowers. The leaues of this Daffodill are somewhat like vnto the last, but not so broad, yet full as long, and spring sooner out of the ground, yet not so early as the first of these kindes: the stalke hereof is flatter, and riseth higher, bearing foure or fiue flowers, much larger then any of this kinde; for euery one of them doth equall the English Daffodill, before described, but whiter then it, and the yellow cup larger, and more open then in any of the rest. The roote of this is not so great, or round, as the former, but is more plentifull in of-sets, then any other of these French, or Italian kindes. 4. Narcissus Pisaenus. The Italian Daffodill. This Italian Daffodill hath his leaues as large, or larger then the second French Daffodill, and his stalke somewhat higher, bearing many white flowers, very like vn∣to the common French Daffodill, but somewhat larger also; and the yellow cup in the middle likewise is larger, and rounder, then is vsually seen in any of the French kinds, except the last with the greatest flowers. 5. Narcissus mediocroceus polyanthos. The French Daffodill with Saffron coloured cups. This French Daffodill hath diuers leaues of a grayish greene colour, not so broad or long as the last recited Daffodill, but comming neerer vnto the second French kinde, the flowers likewise are white, and many vpon a stalke, like thereunto, but the yellow cup is somewhat large, and circled with a Saffron like brimme or edge, which maketh the chiefest difference. 6. Narcissus mediocroceus alter, dictus Mussart. Mussart his Daffodill. The affinity between this & the last, (for it is not the same to be expressed vnder one title) hath made me ioyne it next vnto it, yet because it hath a notable difference, it deserueth a place by himselfe. The leaues are large and long, and the flowers, being white, are larger also then in any other, except the greatest, but the cup hereof is small and short, rather seeming a coronet then a cup, of a deepe Saffron colour all about the brimmes or edges. 7. Narcissus Anglicus polyanthos. The great English Daffodill. This Daffodill hath his leaues not much broader or longer, then the French kinde with great flowers, before described, the stalke with flowers riseth not fully so high as it, bearing many flowers thereon, not altogether so white, yet whiter then the former English Daffodill, called Primrose Peerlesse, but nothing so large, and with short, broad, and almost round leaues, standing close one vnto another: the yellow cup in the middle is bowle fashion, being somewhat deeper then in any of the former kinds, but not much greater: the smell hereof is very sweete and pleasant. 8. Narcissus Narbonensis, siue medio luteus serotinus maior. The greater late flowring French Daffodill. The roote as well as the leaues of this Daffodill, are greater, larger, broader, and longer then in any other of the former French, or Italian kindes; the stalke is as high as any of them, bearing at the toppe fiue or sixe white flowers, standing open spread like a starre, and not close together, euery one whereof is large, and round pointed,
the cup is yellow, small and short, yet not lying flat to the flower, but a little standing out with some threads in the middle, as all the former Daffodils haue. This is not so sweete as the earlier kindes. 9. Narcissus medioluteus alter serotinus calice breui. The lesser late flowring French Daffodill. This Daffodill is of the same kinde with the last described, the onely difference is, that it is lesser, and the yellow cuppe in the middle of the flower, is somewhat shorter then the former, although the former be shorter then many others, otherwise it diffe∣reth not, no not in time; for it flowreth late as the former doth. The Place. These Daffodils haue been brought vs from diuers places: The first and second grow naturally in many places of Spaine, that are open to the Sea: they grow likewise about Mompelier, and those parts in France. They haue been likewise sent among many other sorts of Daffodils from Constantino∣ple, so that I may thinke, they grow in some places neere thereunto. The fourth groweth plentifully in Italy, about Pisa in Tuscane, from whence we haue had plants to furnish our Gardens. The seuenth is accounted beyond Sea to be naturall of our Country, but I know not any with vs that haue it, but they haue had it from them. The rest haue been brought at diuers times, but wee know no further of their naturall places. The Time. The first flowreth earlier then any of the rest by a moneth, euen in the beginning of March, or earlier, if the weather be milde. The other in Aprill, some a little before or after another. The late kinds flower not vntill May. The Names. There can be no more said of the names of any of them, then hath beene set out in their titles; for they distinguish euery sort as fitly as we can: onely some doe call the first two sorts, by the name of Donax Narbonensis. After all these Daffodils, that hauing broad leaues beare single flowers, either one or many vpon a stalke, I shall now goe on to set forth those broad leafed Daffodils, that carry double flowers, either one or many vpon a stalke together, in the same order that we haue vsed before. 1. Narcissus albus multiplex. The double white Daffodill. The leaues of this Daffodill are not very broad, but rather of a meane size, being of the same largenesse with the leaues of the purple ringed Daffodill, the stalke riseth vp to be a foote and a halfe high, bearing out of a thinne white skinne or hose, one flower and no more, consisting of many leaues, of a faire white colour, the flower is larger then any other double white Daffodill, hauing euery leafe, especially the outermost, as large almost as any leafe of the single Daffodill with the yellow cup, or purple ring. Sometimes it happeneth, that the flower is very little double, and almost single, but that is either in a bad ground, or for that it hath stood long in a place without remo∣uing; for then it hath such a great encrease of rootes about it, that it draweth away in∣to many parts, the nourishment that should be for a few: but if you doe transplant it, taking away the of-sets, and set his rootes single, it will then thriue, and beare his flower as goodly and double, as I haue before described it: and is very sweete. 2. Narcissus mediopurpureus multiplex. The double purple ringed Daffodill.
There is little difference in the leaues of this kinde, from the leaues of the single pur∣ple  ringed Daffodill; for it is probable it is of the same kinde, but by natures gift (and not by any humane art) made more plentifull, which abideth constant, and hath not that dalliance, which oftentimes nature sheweth, to recreate the senses of men for the present, and appeareth not againe in the same forme: the chiefest difference is, that the flower (being but sometimes one on a stalke, and sometimes two) consisteth of six white outer leaues, as large as the leaues of the single kinde, hauing many small yellow peeces, edged with purple circles round about them, instead of a cup; and in the mid∣dle of these peeces, stand other six white leaues, lesser then the former, and a yellow cup edged with a purple circle likewise, parted into peeces, and they comprehend a few other white leaues, smaller then any of the other, hauing among them some bro∣ken peeces of the cup, with a few chiues also in the middle of the flower. The flower is very sweete. There is of this kinde another, whose flower hath not so plaine a distinction, of a triple rowe of leaues in it: but the whole flower is confusedly set together, the outer leaues being not so large, and the inner leaues larger then the former; the broken yel∣low cuppe, which is tipt with purple, running diuersly among the leaues; so that it sheweth a fairer, and more double flower then the former, as it is indeed. 3. Narcissus medioluteus corona duplici. The Turkie Daffodill with a double crowne. This Daffodill hath three or foure leaues, as large and long almost, as the great double Daffodill of Constantinople next following hath: the stalke likewise is very neere as great, but as high altogether, bearing at the toppe foure or fiue flowers, the leaues whereof are as large, as of the first or second kinde of French Daffodils, before described, but not altogether of so pure a white colour; and being six in number, stand like the former single French Daffodils, but that the yellow cup in the middle of this is thicke and double, or as it were crumpled together, not standing very high to be con∣spicuous, but abiding lowe and short, so that it is not presently marked, vnlesse one looke vpon it precisely; yet is exceeding sweete. The roote is like vnto the roote of the purple ringed Daffodill, or somewhat bigger. 4. Narcissus Chalcedonicus flore pleno albo polyanthos. The double white Daffodill of Constantinople. This beautifull and goodly Daffodill (wherewith all Florists greatly desire to bee acquainted, as well for the beauty of his double flowers, as also for his superaboun∣ding sweete smell, one stalke with flowers being instead of a nosegay) hath many very broad, and very long leaues, somewhat greener then gray, among which riseth vp a strong round stalke, being sometimes almost flat, and ribbed, bearing foure or fiue, or more white flowers at the toppe, euery one being very great, large, and double, the leaues being confusedly set together, hauing little peeces of a yellow cup running a∣mong them, without any shew of that purple ring that is in the former, and fall a∣way without bearing seed, euen as all, or most other double flowers doe: the smell is so exceeding sweet and strong, that it will soone offend the senses of any, that shall smell much vnto it: the roote is great and thicke, couered with a blackish coate. 5. Narcissus Chalcedonicus simbriatus multiplex polyanthos. The great double purple ringed Daffodill of Constantinople. This Daffodill differeth very little or nothing in leafe from the former, the onely difference is in the flowers, which although they bee double, and beare many vpon a stalke, like vnto them, yet this hath the peeces of the yellow cuppes tipt with purple, as if they were shred or scattered among the white leaues, whereas the other hath only the yellow, without any shew of purple tips vpon them: the smell of this is as strong as of the other.
1 Narcissus albus multiplex. The double white Daffodill. 2 Narcissus medioluteus corona duplici. The Turkie Daffodill with a double crowne. 3 Narcissus mediopurpureus multiplex. The double purple ringed Daffodill. 4 Narcissus Chalcedonicus flore pleno albo polyanthos. The double white Daffodill of Constantinople. depiction of flowers
6. Narcissus Cyprius flore pleno luteo polyanthos. The double yellow Daffodill of Cyprus. The leaues of this Daffodill are almost as broad and long as the former, the stalke is a foot high and more, bearing foure or fiue flowers on the top, euery one very double, and of a fine pale yellow colour, of a strong heady sent. The root of this is also like the former. The Place. The first of these Daffodils, was first brought into England by Mr. Iohn de Franqueuille the elder, who gathered it in his owne Countrey of Cam∣bray, where it groweth wilde, from whose sonne, Mr. Iohn de Franqueuille, now liuing, we all haue had it. The rest haue come from Constantinople at seuerall times; and the last is thought to come from Cyprus. Wee haue it credibly affirmed also, that it groweth in Barbary about Fez and Argiers. Some of the double white kindes grow in Candy, and about Aleppo also. The Time. The Turkie kindes doe for the most part all flower early, in the end of March, or beginning of Aprill at the furthest, and the first double, about the middle or end of Aprill. The Names. All these Daffodils, except the first, haue had diuers Turkish names set vpon the packets, wherein they haue been sent, but there is small regard of certainty to be expected from them; for that the name Serincade, without any more addition, which is a single Daffodill, hath beene imposed vpon that parcell of rootes, that haue borne most of them double flowers of di∣uers sorts; and the name Serincade Catamer lale, which signifieth a double flowred Daffodill, hath had many single white flowers, with yellow cups, and some whose flowers haue been wholly white, cuppe and all, and some purple ringed, and double also among them. Their names, whereby they are knowne and called with vs, are, as fitly as may be, imposed in their titles: And this I hope shall suffice, to haue spoken of these sorts of Daffodils. Hauing finished the discourse of the former sort of broad leafed Daffodils, it is fit to proceede to the next, which are Angustifolios Narcissos, those Daffodils that haue narrow leaues, and first to set downe those that beare single flowers, whether one or many flowers vpon a stalke, and then those that beare double flowers in the same man∣ner. Narcissus Virgineus. The Virginia Daffodill. This plant I thought fittest to place here in the beginning of this Classis, not finding where better to shroud it. It hath two or three long, and very narrow leaues, as greene as the leaues of the great Leucoium bulbosum, and shining withall, which grow some∣times reddish, especially at the edges: the stalke riseth vp a spanne high, bearing one flower and no more on the head thereof, standing vpright like a little Lilly or Tulipa, made of six leaues, wholly white, both within and without, except that at the bottome next to the stalke, and a little on the backside of the three outer leaues, it hath a small dash or shew of a reddish purple colour: it hath in the middle a few chiues, standing about a small head pointed; which head groweth to bee small and long, containing small blackish flat seede: the roote is small, long, and round, a little blackish on the outside, and white on the inside.
The Place. This bulbous plant was brought vs from Virginia, where they grow a∣boundantly; but they hardly thriue and abide in our Gardens to beare flowers. The Time. It flowreth in May, and seldome before. The Names. The Indians in Virginia do call it Attamusco, some among vs do call it Lilionarcissus Virginianus, of the likenesse of the flower to a Lilly, and the leaues and roote to a Daffodill. Wee for breuity doe call it Narcissus Virgi∣neus, that is, The Daffodill of Virginia, or else you may call it according to the former Latine name, The Lilly Daffodill of Virginia, which you will; for both names may serue well to expresse the plant. Narcissus angustifolius albidus praecox oblongo calice. The early white narrow leafed Daffodill with a long cup. This Daffodill hath three or foure narrow, long, and very greene leaues, a foote long for the most part: the stalke riseth not vp so high as the leaues, whereon standeth one flower, not altogether so great as the late flowring Daffodill, with a long cuppe, described before among the broad leafed ones, which consisteth of six pale coloured leaues, not pure white, but hauing a wash of light yellow among the white: the cuppe in the middle is round and long, yet not so long as to bee accounted a bastard Daffo∣dill, within which is a middle pointell, compassed with six chiues, hauing yellow mealy pendents. The Place. This Daffodill groweth with the other sorts of broad leafed ones, on the Pyrenaean Mountaines, from whence they haue beene brought vnto vs, to furnish our Gardens. The Time. It flowreth early, a moneth before the other sorts of the same fashion, that is, in the beginning of March, if the time be milde, which the other before spoken of doe not. The Names. It hath no other name that I know, then is expressed in the title. 2. Narcissus mediocroceus tenuifolius. The small Daffodill with a Saffron crown. This small Daffodill hath foure or fiue narrow leaues about a spanne long, among which riseth vp a stalke some nine inches high, bearing at the toppe one small white flower, made of six leaues, with a small yellow cup in the middle, shadowed ouer at the brimmes with a Saffron colour: the roote is small, round, and little long withall, couered with a blackish skinne or coate. 3. Narcissus minimus mediopurpureus. The least purple ringed Daffodill.
This little Daffodill hath small narrow leaues, shorter by much then any of the pur∣ple ringed Daffodils, before described: the stalke and flower keepe an equall propor∣tion to the rest of the plant, being in forme and colour of the flower, like vnto the  Starre Daffodill before recited, but vnlike in the greatnesse: this also is to bee obser∣ued, that the purple colour that circleth the brimmes of the cuppe, is so small, that sometimes it is not well perceiued. 4. Narcissus minimus Iuncifolij flore. The least Daffodill of all. This least Daffodill hath two or three whitish greene leaues, narrower then the two last recited Daffodils, and shorter by halfe, being not aboue two or three inches long, the stalke likewise is not aboue three or foure inches high, bearing one single flower at the toppe, somewhat bigger then the smalnesse of the plant should seeme to beare, very like vnto the least Rush Daffodill, and of the same bignesse, or rather somewhat bigger, being of a faint yellow colour, both leaues, and cup, or crowne, (if you please so to call it); for the middle part is spread very much, euen to the middle of the leaues almost, and lyeth flat open vpon the flower: the roote is small, euen the smallest of any Daffodill, and couered with a blackish skinne or coate. The Place. The first of these Daffodils haue beene brought vs from the Pyrenaean Mountaines, among a number of other rare plants, and the last by a French man, called Francis le Veau, the honestest roote-gatherer that euer came o∣uer to vs. The second was sent to Mr. Iohn de Franqueuille, before remem∣bred, who imparted it to mee, as hee hath done many other good things; but his naturall place wee know not. The Time. They all flower about the latter end of Aprill. The Names. Being brought without names, wee haue giuen them their names accor∣ding to their face and fashion, as they are set downe in their titles. Narcissus Autumnalis minor albus. The little white Autumne Daffodill. This little Autumne Daffodill riseth with his flowers first out of the ground, without any leaues at all. It springeth vp with one or two stalkes about a finger long, euery one bearing out of a small huske one small white flower, laid open abroad like vnto the Starre white Daffodill, before spoken of: in the middle of the flower is a small yel∣low cup of a meane size, and after the flower is past, there commeth in the same place a small head, containing small, round, blacke seede, like vnto the Autumne Hyacinth: the leaues come vp after the seede is ripe and gone, being small and narrow, not much bigger then the Autumne Hyacinth: the roote is small and blackish on the outside. The Place. This Daffodill groweth in Spaine, where Clusius saw it, and brought it into these parts. The Time. It flowreth in the beginning of Autumne, and his seede is ripe in the end of October in those hot Countries, but in ours it will scarce abide to shew a flower. The Names.
The Spaniards, as Clusius reporteth, call it Tnada, and he vpon the sight 1 Narcissus Virgineus. The Virginian Daffodill. 2 Narcissus minimus Iuncifolij flore. The least Daffodill of all. 3 Narcissus Autumnalis minor albus. The little white Autumne Daffodill. 4 Narcissus albus Autumnalis medio obsoletus. The white Autumne Daffodill with a sullen crown. 5 Narcissus Iuncifolius maximus amplo calice. The great Iunquilia with the largest flower or cup. 6 Narcissus totus albus flore plano Virginianus. The double white Daffodill of Virginia. depiction of flowers
thereof, Narcissus Autumnalis minor albus, and wee in English thereafter, The little white Autumne Daffodill. Narcissus albus Autumnalis medio obsoletus. The white Autumne Daffodill with a sullen crowne. This Autumne Daffodill hath two or three leaues at the most, and very narrow, so that some doe reckon it among the Rush Daffodils, being somewhat broad at the bot∣tome, and more pointed at the toppe, betweene these leaues commeth vp the stalke, bearing vsually two flowers and no more at the toppe, made of sixe white leaues a peece, pointed and not round: the cup is small and round, like vnto the cup or crowne of the least Rush Daffodill, of a yellow colour at the bottome, but toward the edge of a dunne or sullen colour. Narcissus angustifolius luteus semper florens Caccini. The yellow Italian Daffodill of Caccini. This Daffodill beareth a number of small, long, narrow, and very greene leaues, broader then the leaues of any Rush Daffodill, among which rise vp diuers stalkes, bearing at the head two or three flowers a peece, each of them being small and yellow, the cup or crowne is small also, of a deeper yellow then the flower. The Nobleman of Florence, who first sent this plant to Christian Porret at Leyden, after the death of Ca∣rolus Clusius, writeth that euery stalke doth beare with him more store of flowers, then are formerly set downe, and that it neuer ceaseth to beare flowers, but that after one or moe stalkes haue been in flower together, and are past, there succeed other in their places. The Place. The first is naturall of Spain, the naturall place of the other is not known to vs. The Time. The times of the flowring, are set downe both in the title and in the de∣scriptions; the one to be in Autumne, the other to be all the Summer long. The Names. The Latine names are imposed on them, as are fittest for them, and the last by that honourable man that sent it, which is most fit to continue, and not to bee changed. But wee, to let it bee knowne by an English name to English people, haue entituled it, The yellow Italian Daffodill of Caccini: if any man can giue it a more proper name, I shall bee therewith right well content. Narcissus angustifolius, siue Iuncifolius maximus amplo calice. The great Iunquilia with the large flower or cup. Although this Daffodill importeth by his name, not to be of this family, but of the next, considering it is so like vnto them, but bigger; yet I haue thought good to place it in the end of these narrow leafed Daffodils, as being indifferent, whether it should bee referred to this or to that. For this carrieth diuers long greene leaues, like vnto the other Rush Daffodils, but thicker and broader, so that it may with∣out any great errour, bee reckoned among these narrow leafed Daffodils, bearing at the toppe two or three very faire large flowers, with a large and more open cuppe, then in any other of the Rush Daffodils, both of them of a faire yellow colour, yet the cuppe a little deeper then the flower, and a little crumpled about the edges, and hath a pretty sharpe sent: the roote is greater and longer then the other Rush Daffo∣dill, and couered likewise with a blackish coate.
The Place. We haue this in Gardens onely, and haue not heard of his naturall place. The Time. It flowreth in Aprill. The Names. I leaue it indifferent, as I said, whether you will call it Narcissus angustifo∣lius, or Iuncifolius magno calice, or maximus, because it is the greatest of all the rest of that kinde. Narcissus totus albus flore pleno Virginianus. The double white Daffodill of Virginia. The roote of this Daffodill, is very like vnto the former single Virginia Daffodill, set forth in the first place of this ranke of narrow leafed Daffodils, but that it is a little bigger and rounder, being a little long withall, and blackish also on the outside, as that is: from whence riseth vp two leaues, somewhat broader then the former: but of a like greennesse: the stalke riseth vp betweene these two leaues, about a span high, or not much higher, bearing one faire double snow white flower, very like in the fashion vnto the pale yellow double Daffodill, or bastard Daffodill of Robinus, hereafter de∣scribed: For it is in the like manner laid open flat, and composed of six rowes of leaues, euery rowe lying in order iust opposite, or one before another, whereof those six leaues that make the first or outermost course, are the greatest, and all the rest lying, as I said, one vpon or before another, are euery rowe smaller then others from the middle of this flower, thrusteth forth a small long pointed forke or horne, white as the flower is. The Place. The place is named to be Virginia, but in what part it is not known to vs. The Time. It flowreth in the end of Aprill. The Names. It may be that this doth grow among the former single kinde, and called by the same name Attamusco, for that the plant is not much differing, yet hereof I am not certaine: But we, from the forme and countenance of the plant, doe call it Narcissus Virginianus, The Virginian Daffodill, and be∣cause it beareth a double flower, it hath the title of double added vnto it. The third order of Daffodils, I said in the beginning, was of Iuncifolios, Rush Daffo∣dils, which are now next to be entreated of, I shall herein keepe the same order I vsed in the former; but because I finde none of this order, that beare but one flower vpon a stalke, I must begin with those that beare many. 1. Narcissus Iuncifolius albus. The white Iunquilia.
This white Rush Daffodill hath small long leaues, a little broader, and of a whi∣ter greene colour then the ordinary yellow Rush Daffodils: the stalke riseth vp halfe a foote high or more, bearing two or three small white flowers vpon a stalke, yet somewhat bigger then the common yellow Rush Daffodill, hauing a small round cuppe in the middle, white also as the leaues are. The feede is small,  blacke, and round, as other seedes of Daffodils are: the roote is small and round, co∣uered with a blackish coate. Narcissus Iuncifolius albus magno calice. The white Iunquilia with a great cup. There is of this kinde another sort, that hath the cup in the middle of the flower, a little larger then the other, but in all other things alike. 2. Narcissus Iuncifolius flore albo reflexo. The white turning Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. This turning white Daffodill hath foure or fiue long greene leaues, yet shorter and broader then the ordinary yellow Iunquilia, and fully as greene also, from among which riseth vp a slender greene stalke, a foote high, bearing out of a thinne skinnie huske, three or foure, or more snow white flowers, standing vpon long greene foot∣stalkes, euery flower hanging downe his head, and turning vp his six narrow and long leaues, euen to the very foot-stalke againe: from the middle of the flower hangeth downe a long round cuppe, as white as the leaues, within which are contained three small white chiues, tipt with yellow, and a small long pointell, thrusting out beyond the brimmes of the cup: after the flowers are past, there come vp in their places small three square heads, wherein is contained very small, round, and blacke shining seede: the roote is small, round, and a little long withall, couered with a blackish browne coate or skin. The flower is quite without any good sent, or indeed rather none at all. 3. Narcissus Iuncifolius flore luteoreflexo. The yellow turning Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. The leaues of this Rush Daffodill are greater and longer then the former, and of a paler greene colour: the stalke riseth somewhat higher, bearing two or three flowers thereon wholly of a gold yellow colour, both the cuppe and the leaues that turne vp againe. 4. Narcissus Iuncifolius calice albo reflexis folijs luteis. The yellow turning Iunquilia with a white cup. This Daffodill hath his long rush-like leaues standing vpright as the former, be∣tweene which riseth vp a greene stalke, about a foote high or more, bearing two or three flowers thereon, whose turning leaues are of a faire pale yellow, and the cuppe pale white, and not so pure a white as the former. 5. Narcissus Iuncifolius calice luteo reflexis folijs albidis. The white turning Iunquilia with a yellow cup. As the last had the leaues of the flower that turne vp againe yellow, and the cuppe whitish, so this hath contrariwise the turning leaues of a whitish yellow, and the long cup yellower, else in his long green leaues, or any other thing, there is small difference. 6. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus magno calice. The Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill with a great cup. This Rush Daffodill hath bigger leaues, and longer then the ordinary yellow Rush Daffodill, being a little flat on the oneside, and round on the other, but of the same greennesse with all the rest: the stalke riseth vp two foote high, bearing two, and sometimes three flowers thereon, being of a faire yellow colour, with a large open cup in the middle, of a little deeper yellow colour, like vnto the great Iunquilia with the large flower, before set downe, whereof this is a kinde, no doubt; but that is larger and greater then this, both in leafe, flower, cup, &c. and this onely somewhat lesse in all parts then that.
1 Narcissus Iuncifolius albus. The white Iunquilia. 2 Narcissus Iuncifolius flore albo reflex. The white turning Iunquilia. 3 Narcissus Iuncifolius calice luteo reflexis folijs albis. The yellow turning Iunquilia. 4 Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus magno calice. The yellow Iunquilia with a great cuppe. 5 Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus maior vulgaris. The ordinary yellow Iunquilia. 6 Narcissus Iuncifolius Autumalis flore viridi. The greene Autumne Iunquilia. 7 Narcissus angustifolius aureus multiplex. The golden double narrow leafed Daffodill. 8 Narcissus Iuncifolius flore pleno. The double Iun∣quilie. depiction of flowers
7. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus vulgaris maior. The ordinary Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. This ordinary Rush Daffodill hath foure or fiue long greene round leaues, like vnto Rushes, whereof it tooke the name: among these leaues riseth vp the stalke, round and greene, a foote and a halfe high very often, bearing at the toppe three or foure flowers all yellow, but much smaller then the last, and so is the cup also: the seede is small and blacke, inclosed in small cornered heads; the roote is blackish on the outside. The smell of the flower is very sweete in all these sorts of Rush Daffodils. 8. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus medius. The smaller Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. The leaues of this Daffodill are like vnto the former, but smaller and rounder, the stalke riseth not vp so high, nor are the flowers so great, but the leaues of the flower are a little rounder, and not so pointed as in the former, in all things else alike, sauing lesser. 9. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus minor. The least Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. This least Daffodill hath fiue or six small greene leaues, a little broader, and not so long as the last, among which riseth vp a stalke almost a foote high, bearing one or two small flowers at the toppe, of a paler yellow colour then the former, with a yellow open cuppe, or crowne rather in the middle, bigger then in either of the last two: the roote is very small and blacke, like vnto the last in roundnesse and colour. 10. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus albicantibus lineis distinctus. The yellow Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill with white lines. This Rush Daffodill hath round, greene, and long leaues, like vnto the ordinary Rush Daffodill, with a stalke bearing two or three yellow flowers, hauing leaues some∣what round at the point or end, with a line or strake of white in the middle of euerie one of them, the cup is short, and crowne fashion, a little crumpled about the brims: the seede, roote, or any thing else differeth not. 11. Narcissus Iuncifolius Autumnalis flore viridi. The Autumne Rush Daffodill with a greene flower. This strange Rush Daffodill (I call it strange, not onely because it differeth from all others of this kinde, but also because there are but few in these parts that haue had it, and fewer that doe still enioy it, in that it is perished withall that had it) hath but one onely leafe, very long, round, and greene, in all that euer I saw growing, which bea∣reth no flower while that greene leafe is fresh, and to bee seene: but afterwards the stalke riseth vp, being like vnto the former greene leafe, round, naked, and greene vp to the toppe, where two or three flowers breake forth out of a small thin skinne, euery one consisting of six small and narrow greene leaues, very sharpe pointed at the end, and as it were ending in a small pricke or thorne: in the middle whereof is a small round cup, or rather crowne, of the same colour with the leaues and stalke, which flower smelleth very sweete, somewhat like vnto the rest of the Rush Daffodils: this sheweth not his flower vntill October, and the frosts quickly following after their flowring, cause them soone to perish. 12. Narcissus angustifolius aureus multiplex. The golden double narrow leafed Daffodill. The leaues of this Daffodill are very narrow, and of a whitish greene colour, not aboue foure or fiue inches long, from among which riseth vp a stalke about a foote high, bearing at the top one flower, consisting of some outer leaues, which are of a yel∣low
colour, and of many other leaues in the middle being smaller, and set thicke and round together of a more yellow gold colour, but with some whiter leaues among them, the middle part a little pointing forth: the flower standeth long before it doth perfect his colour, and abideth long in flower before the colour decay: the roote is in fashion almost like the ordinary Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. I acknowledge this Daffodill hath not his proper place; but because the figure is set in this table, let it thus passe at this time. 13. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus flore pleno. The double Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. The double Rush Daffodill hath his long greene leaues round, like the leaues of the common or ordinary Rush Daffodill, and of the same bignesse, among which riseth vp a long slender greene stalke, bearing two or three, seldome more small flowers, yellow and double, that is, with diuers rowes of leaues, hauing the yellow cup such as is in the single flower, broken into small shreads or peeces, running among the leaues of the flower, which peeces in some flowers are not so easily seene, being smaller then in others, this beareth no button or head vnder the flower for seede, his roote is round and blackish, browne on the outside, so like vnto the common Rush Daffodill, that it is almost impossible to know the one from the other. There is another of this kinde, whose flowers are smaller, and not so double, one,Alter minori flore. two, or three at the most vpon a stalke, and of lesse beauty by much. The Place. All these Rush Daffodils, doe for the most part grow in Spaine and France, and on the Pyrenaean Mountaines, which are betweene Spaine and France, which Mountains are the Nourseries of many of the finest flowers, that doe adorne the Gardens of these louers of natures pride, and gathered in part by industrious, learned, generous men, inhabiting neare thereunto, and in part by such as make a gaine of their labours, bestowed vpon these things. Onely that with the greene flower was gathered in Barbary, and imparted vnto vs from France. The Time. They flower in the Spring, that is, in March and Aprill, except such whose time is set downe to be in Autumne. The Names. Their names are specified in their titles, and therefore I shall not need to set downe any further repetitions. To conclude therefore this discourse of true Daffodils, there remaineth to speake of the Sea Daffodils, which (as I said in the beginning) is but one, that is frequent, and doth abide with vs. But there bee some others found about the Cape of good Hope, and in the West Indies, and brought into these parts rather for ostentation, then con∣tinuance, where they haue flowred onely once (if peraduenture so often) so that being such strangers, of so remote Countries, and of so diuers natures, I shall but shew you some of them, rather cursorily then curiously; and but onely for your satisfaction, giue you knowledge of two or three of them, that there haue beene seene such in flower, and that they are scarce to bee seene againe, except they bee fetcht a new euery yeare that they be seene. Narcissus Marinus, siue tertius Matthioli. The great white Sea Daffodill, or Matthiolus his third Daffodill.
The roote of this Daffodill by long continuance, standing in one place without be∣ing remoued, groweth to be much greater and larger, then any other Daffodill what∣soeuer,  and as bigge as any meane Squilla or Sea Onion roote, hauing many long, thicke, and white fibres, or long rootes, diuersly branched, and spread vnder the vp∣per part of the earth, beside some others that grow downward, and perish not euery yeare, as the fibres of all, or most of the other Daffodils doe; and therefore this plant will not thriue, and beare flowers, if it be often transplanted, but rather desire to a∣bide in one place without remouing, as I said, and that not to be ouershadowed, or co∣uered with other herbes standing too neare it, which then will flourish, and beare a∣boundantly: from this roote, which is couered with many blackish coates, ariseth six or seuen, or more leaues, twice so broad almost, as any of the former Daffodils, but not so long by halfe as many of them, being but short, in comparison of the breadth, and of a white greene colour; from the middle of which leaues, as also from the sides sometimes, springeth vp one or two, or more stalkes, roundish and thicke, and some∣times a little flat and cornered, a foote high or somewhat more, bearing at the toppe, out of a skinnie huske, eight, ten, twelue, or more very large flowers, consisting of six white leaues a peece, spread or laid open, with a white short cuppe or crowne in the middle, lying flat vpon the leaues, cut or diuided into six corners (and not whole, as the cuppe or crowne of any other single Daffodill) from euery of which edges, or corners of this cup or crowne, standeth one white long thread, a little crooked or tur∣ning vp at the end, tipt with a yellow pendent, and some other white threads tipt with yellow pendents, standing also in the middle: after the flower is past, there come vp great three square heads, wherein the seede is contained, which is great, blacke, and round, like vnto the seede of other Daffodils, but greater: the flower hath a reasona∣ble good sent, but not very strong. The Place. It was first found by the Sea side, in the Isle of Sardinia, and on the high Mountaines also of the same Isle, where it hath borne by report, thirty fiue flowers vpon a stalke: it groweth likewise about Illyricum, and in diuers other places. The Time. It springeth later out of the ground then any other Daffodill, that is to say, not vntill the later end of March, or beginning of Aprill, and flowreth in the end of May, or the beginning of Iune: the seede is ripe in the end of Iuly, or beginning of August. The Names. The first that hath made mention of this Daffodill, was Matthiolus, who placed it in the third place among his Daffodils, and is most vsually now a∣dayes called, Narcissus tertius Matthioli, Matthiolus his third Daffodill, the rather, because Clusius vpon a more mature deliberation, first referred it thereunto, but called it at the first, Lilionarcissus Hemerocallidis facie, and, as hee saith, Iacobus Plateau (who first sent him the figure hereof, with the description) called it Lilionarcissus Orientalis, but Clusius vpon certaine in∣formation, that it grew in the places aforesaid, misliked the name of Orien∣talis, and added Hemerocallis, which yet is not fit, for that his Hemerocallis Valentina, is a plaine Pancration or Sea bastard Daffodill, whose middle cup is longer then the cup of any true Daffodill, which (as I said in the be∣ginning of this Chapter) is the chiefest note of difference, betweene a true and a bastard Daffodill. I receiued the seede of this Daffodill among many other seedes of rare plants, from the liberality of Mr. Doctor Flud, one of the Physitians of the Colledge in London, who gathered them in the Vni∣uetsity Garden at Pisa in Italy, and brought them with him, returning home from his trauailes into those parts, by the name of Martagon rarissimum, (and hauing sowne them, expected fourteene yeares, before I saw them beare a flower, which the first yeare that it did flower, bore foure stalkes of
1 Narcissus tertius Matthioli. The great white Sea Daffodill. 2 Narcissus Indicus autumnalis. The Indian Autumne Daffodill. 3 Narcissus marinus Africanus. The Sea Daffodill of Africa. 4 Narcissus marinus exo∣ticus. The strange Sea Daffodill. depiction of flowers
flowers, with euery one of them eight or ten flowers on them) which of all other names, doth least answer the forme or qualities of this plant. It may most fitly be called Narcissus marinus maximus, in English, The great Sea Daffodill, both because it is a true Daffodill, and the greatest of all other, and also because it hath not been found, but in Islands, or else in other pla∣ces neare the Sea. Lobelius entituleth it Pancratium Indicum alterum vernum, siue Narcissus Indicus alter facie Pancratij Monspeliaci, but all this is wide from the matter, as may easily be known, by that that hath been said before. It is generally (as I said before) called of all Narcissus tertius Matthioli, Matthi∣olus his third Daffodill, which may either so passe with vs, or as I called it, The great Sea Daffodill, which you will, & so Clusius doth lastly entitle it. 1. Pancratium Indicum, aut Narcissus Indicus Autumnalis quorundam Lobelij. The Indian Autumne Daffodill of Lobel. This plant hath in my opinion, a farre nearer resemblance vnto an Hyacinthus, then vnto any Daffodill: But because Lobel hath so set it forth, I will so publish it vnto you, leauing it to iudgement. The roote is, as he saith, a span long, and of the thick∣nesse of a mans arme, couered with many white shells, whereof the outermost are of a darke red or Chesnut colour: the flowers rise vp in September, and October, being eight or ten in number, euery one by it selfe vpon a small footstalke, made of six leaues a peece, somewhat long, narrow, and pointed, like vnto the flowers of the English Colchicum, or Medowe Saffron, of a whitish yellow dunne colour, with six long threads in the middle: the greene leaues are long and broad, and broad pointed. 2. Narcissus Marinus Africanus, siue Exoticus Lobelij. The Sea Daffodill of Africa. The roote of this strange plant (which of some likenesse is called a Daffodill) is very great, made as it were of many scaly cloues, from whence riseth vp a small short stalke, bearing hard aboue the ground two faire broad greene pointed leaues, more long then broad, so compassing the stalke at the bottome, that it seemeth to run through them: the stalke is spotted with diuers discoloured spots, and is bare or naked from these two leaues vnto the toppe, where it beareth one faire double flower, like vnto a double A∣uemone, of a delayed reddish colour, tending to a blush, with many threads set about the middle head. 3. Narcissus Marinus Exoticus. The strange Sea Daffodill This strange Sea Daffodill, hath fiue or six large and long leaues of a palegreene co∣lour, from among which riseth vp a strong and bigge stalke, bearing at the toppe, out of a thinne hose or skinne, many very large flowers, made of six long and pointed leaues a peece, of a blewish purple colour, with a large round open cup in the middle, of a sadder colour then the leaues: the roote is very great, yet like vnto other great Daffodils, the outer skins whereof are of a darke browne colour. The Place. The Indian Daffodils grew in the vpper part of Hispaniola in the West Indies, and brought hither, where they all soone perished. The other grew neare the Cape of good Hope, and was brought into the parts of Holland and thereabouts, from whence we had it, & perished also. The last is vnknowne where it was gathered. The Time. The first flowred in Autumne, as it is said. The other in the first Summer of their bringing. And so did the last, but the same rootes will not flower with vs againe.
The Names. So much hath been said of their names in their titles, as hath come to our knowledge; and therefore let that suffice. Thus hauing gone through the whole Family of the true Daffodils, (for so much as hath come to our knowledge) and set them downe euery one by his name, and in his order; it is fit that we speake of their bastard brethren, and shew you them also, in the same order held with the former, as neare as the plenty of variety herein, which is not the like with the former, will giue leaue, that when you know them both by face and name, you may the better know to place or distinguish of others, that haue not passed vnder this rod. Pseudonarcissus aureus Hispanicus maximus. The great yellow Spanish bastard Daffodill. The roote of this kinde of Daffodill is reasonable great, and blackish on the out∣side, desiring to be deepe in the ground; and therefore will runne downe, where it will then encrease into many of-sets, from whence rise vp many thicke, long, and stiffe leaues, of a grayish greene colour, among which riseth vp a round strong stalke, some∣times three foote high or better, bearing at the toppe one onely faire great yellow flower, standing forth right, and not pendulous, consisting of six short and somewhat broad leaues, with a very great, large, and long trunke, of an equall largenesse, but open at the mouth, and turning vp the brimmes a little, which are somewhat crum∣pled: after the flower is past, there commeth in the place a three square head, contai∣ning round blacke seede, like vnto other Daffodils. Pseudonarcissus Pyrenaeus Hispanico & Anglico similis. The Mountaine bastard Daffodill of diuers kindes. There is much variety in this kinde of bastard Daffodill: For one sort hath verie broad and whitish greene leaues, somewhat short in comparison of others, that are of that breadth: the flower is wholly yellow, but a little paler then the former Spanish kinde, hauing the leaues of his flower long, and somewhat narrow, standing like wings about the middle trunke, which is as long as the leaues, and smaller then in many other of this kinde, but a little yellower then the wings. Another sort hath narrower green leaues then this last, and longer, the flower is all yellow, but the trunke is larger, wider, and more open at the mouth then the former, and almost as large as the former Spa∣nish, but not so high as the last. A third hath the wings of the flower of a Strawe co∣lour, but the trunke is long and narrow, of a faire yellow. A fourth hath such like flowers, but that it is shorter, both the wings and the trunke: Some likewise haue the wings of the flower longer, then the long trunke, and some shorter. Some also are all yellow, and some haue their wings onely a little more pale or white, like the English kinde: Some againe haue their trunkes long and narrow, others haue them larger and wider open, and crumpled at the brimmes; so that it is needlesse, to spend a great deale of time and labour vpon such smally respected flowers, but that in the beholding of them, we may therein admire the worke of the Creatour, who can frame such diuersity in one thing: But this is beside the text, yet not impertinent. Pseudonarcissus pallidus praecox. The early Strawe coloured bastard Daffodill.
The leaues of this Daffodill are of a meane size, betweene the broadest and the nar∣rower kindes, of a grayish greene colour, and not very long: the stalke riseth vp a foot high or more, whereon standeth one large great flower, equalling the greatest Spanish bastard Daffodill, before described, in the largenesse of his trunke, and hauing the brimmes turned vp a little, which maketh it seeme the larger: the wings or outer leaues are in a maner as short, as they are in the greatest Spanish kinde, (and not long flagging down, like vnto the Mountain kinds) and stand straight outright: all the whole flower is  of one euen colour, that is, of a fine pale yellow, somewhat like vnto the colour of a Lemon peele or rinde, but somewhat whiter, which vsually we call a Strawe colour: the greatnesse of the flower, the earlinesse of the flowring, and the difference of colour from all the rest of this kinde, hath made me entreate of it apart by it selfe, as being no lesse worthy. Pseudonarcissus Hispaenicus flore albo maior. The great white Spanish bastard Daffodill. This bastard Daffodill hath diuers leaues rising vp together, long and broad, some∣what like vnto the first Spanish kinde, but a little broader, and of a whiter greene co∣lour, yet not so white, as in the lesser Spanish white kindes, hereafter described: among these leaues riseth vp a round strong stalke, about two foote high, bearing one white flower at the toppe, bending downe the head, as all these white kindes doe, but is not of so pure a white, as the lesser kindes that follow, yet whiter then the greatest white Spanish kinde, next of all to be described: the whole flower, as well trunke as wings, is much larger then the lesser white kindes, and almost equalling the first Spanish yel∣low, but a little longer and narrower, a little crumpled and turning vp at the brimmes: the head and seede are like the first; the roote is greater and thicker then the first Spa∣nish, and doth not encrease so much, nor is couered with a blacke, but rather with a whitish coate. Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus maximus albidus. The greatest Spanish white bastard Daffodill. This kinde of bastard Daffodill is very like the last mentioned Daffodill, both in leaues and flowers, but larger in both: the flower of this is not full so white, but hath some shew of palenesse therein, and more vpon the first opening of the flower then af∣terwards, and is as great altogether, as the great Spanish yellow, at the least with a longer, and somewhat narrower trunke: the seede is like vnto the former, and so is the roote also, but greater, being white on the outside, and not blacke. Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus flore albo medius & minor. The two lesser white Spanish bastard Daffodils. There are two other of these kindes of white Spanish Daffodils, one greater or les∣ser then the other, but neither of them so great as the former. The leaues of both are of a whitish greene colour, one a little broader then the other: the flowers of both are pure white, and bending downe the heads, that they almost touch the stalke againe, the greater flower hath the longer and narrower trunke; and the lesser flower, the shorter and wider open, yet both a little crumpled at the edges or brimmes: the rootes of both are like one vnto another, but differ in the greatnesse. From the seede of these haue sprung much variety, few or none keeping either colour or height with the mo∣ther plants. Pseudonarcissus Anglicus vulgaris. Our common English wilde bastard Daffodill. This bastard Daffodill is so common in all England, both in Copses, Woods, and Orchards, that I might well forbeare the description thereof, and especially, in that growing wilde, it is of little respect in our Garden: but yet, left I bee challenged of ignorance in common plants, and in regard of some variety therein worth the mark∣ing, I will set downe his description and variety as briefly as I may: It hath three or foure grayish greene leaues, long and somewhat narrow, among which riseth vp the stalke, about a span high or little higher, bearing at the toppe, out of a skinnie huske, as all other Daffodils haue, one flower (although sometimes I haue seene two toge∣ther) somewhat large, hauing the six leaues that stand like wings, of a pale yellow co∣lour, and the long trunke in the middle of a faire yellow, with the edges or brimmes a little crumpled or vneuen: after the flower is past, it beareth a round head, seeming three square, containing round blacke seede; the roote is somewhat blackish on the outside.
1 Pseudarcissus Hispanicus maximus urcus. The great yellow Spanish bastard Daffodill. 2 Pseudonarcissus Pyrnaeus viformis. The Mountaine ba∣stard Daffodill of diuers kindes. 3 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus maior albus The greater white Spanish bastard Daffodill. 4 Pseudonarcissus Hispani∣cus minor albus The lesser Spanish white bastard Daffodill. 5 Pseudonarcissus tub sexangulari. The six cornered bastard Daffodill. 6 Pseudnarcissus maximus aureus, siue Roseus Tradescanti. Iohn Tradescants great Rose Daffodill. 7 Pseudnarcissus aureus Anglicus maximus. Master Wilmers great double Daffodill 8 Pseudnarcissus Hispanicus aureus flore pleno. The double Spanish Daffodill, or Parkinsons double Daffodill. 9 Pseudonarcissus Gallicus maior flore plen. The greater double French Daffodill. 10 Pseudonrcissus Anglicus flore plen. The double English Daffodill, or Gerrards double Daffodill. depiction of flowers
But there is another of this kinde like vnto the former, whose further description you haue here before; the wings of which flower are much more white then the for∣mer, and in a manner of a milke white colour, the trunke remaining almost as yellow as the former, and not differing in any thing else. Pseudonarcissus tubo sexangulari. The six cornered bastard Daffodill. This kinde of Daffodill hath two or three long, and somewhat broader leaues then the last, between which commeth forth a stalke, bearing one flower somewhat large, hauing the six outer leaues of a pale yellow colour, and the long trunke plaited or cor∣nered all along vnto the very edge into six parts, of a little deeper yellow then the wings. The Place. The first great Spanish kinde was brought out of Spaine. The rest from the Pyrenaean Mountaines, onely the last sauing one is plentifull in our owne Countrey, but the white sort of that kinde came with the rest from the same Mountaines. The Time. The pale or third kinde, and the English bee the most early, all the rest flower in Aprill, and the greatest yellow somewhat earlier, then the other greater or lesser white. The Names. Their seuerall names are expressed in their titles sufficient to distinguish them, and therefore there needeth no more to be said of them. 1. Pseudonarcissus aureus maximus flore pleno, siue Roseus Tradescanti. The greatest double yellow bastard Daffodill, or Iohn Tradescant his great Rose Daffodill. This Prince of Daffodils (belongeth primarily to Iohn Tradescant, as the first foun∣der thereof, that we know, and may well bee entituled the Glory of Daffodils) hath a great round roote, like vnto other Daffodils, couered with a brownish outer skinne or peeling, from whence riseth vp foure or fiue somewhat large and broad leaues, of a grayish greene colour, yet not fully so long and large as the next following Daffodill: from the middle whereof riseth vp a stalke almost as high and great as it, bearing at the toppe (out of a skinnie huske) one faire large great flower (the budde, before it breake open, being shorter and thicker in the middle, and ending in a longer and shar∣per point then any of the other Daffodils) very much spread open, consisting of smal∣ler and shorter leaues then the next, but more in number, and thicker and rounder set together, making it seeme as great and double as any Prouince Rose, and intermixt with diuers yellow and pale leaues, as it were in rowes one vnder another. It abideth long in flower, and spreadeth, by standing long, to be the broadest in compasse of any of the Daffodils, but falleth away at the last without giuing any seede, as all double Daffodils doe. 2. Pseudonarcissus aureus Anglicus maximus. Mr. Wilmers great double Daffodill.
The other great double Daffodill doth so neare resemble our ordinary English double kinde, that I doe not finde therein any greater difference, then the largenesse both of leaues and flowers, &c. and the statelinesse of growth. It beareth three or foure large, long, and broad leaues, somewhat longer and broader then the former, and of a whitish greene colour: the stalke riseth to bee two foote high, growing (in a fruitfull and fat soyle) strong, and somewhat round, bearing at the toppe, out of a thin skinne, one great and faire double flower, each leafe whereof is twice as large and  broad as the former, diuersly intermixt with a rowe of paler, and a rowe of deeper yellow leaues, wholly dispersed throughout the flower, the pale colour as well as the deeper yellow, in this as in the other small English kinde, growing deeper by stan∣ding: sometimes the leaues hereof are scattered, and spread wholly, making it shew a faire, broad, open flower: and sometimes the outer leaues stand separate from the middle trunke, which is whole and vnbroken, and very thicke of leaues: and some∣times the middle trunke will bee halfe broken, neither expressing a full open double flower, nor a close double trunke, as it is likewise seene in the small English kinde, as shall bee declared in his place: this beareth no seede; the roote hereof is thicke and great, and encreaseth as well as any other Daffodill. 3. Pseudonarcissus aureus Hispanicus flore pleno. The great double yellow Spanish bastard Daffodill, or Parkinsons Daffodill. This double Spanish Daffodill hath diuers leaues rising from the roote, stiffer, nar∣rower, and not of so whitish a greene colour as the former, but more sullen or grayish, plainely resembling the leaues of the single great kinde, from whence this hath risen: the stalke hereof likewise riseth almost as high as it, and neare the height of the last re∣cited double, bearing one double flower at the toppe, alwayes spread open, and neuer forming a double trunke like the former, yet not so faire and large as it, the outermost leaues whereof being of a greenish colour at the first, and afterward more yellow, doe a little turne themselues backe againe to the stalke, the other leaues are some of a pale yellow, and others of a more gold yellow colour, those that stand in the middle are smaller, and some of them shew as if they were hollow trunked, so that they seeme to be greenish, whitish, yellow, and gold yellow, all mixed one among another: the root is great, round, and whitish on the inside, couered with darke coloured skinnes or peelings. I thinke none euer had this kinde before my selfe, nor did I my selfe euer see it before the yeare 1618. for it is of mine own raising and flowring first in my Garden. 4. Pseudonarcissus Gallicus maior flore pleno. The greater double French bastard Daffodill. This greater double Daffodill, hath his whitish greene leaues longer and broader then the smaller French kinde, hereafter following, to bee described, and broader, longer, and more limber then the double English kinde: the stalke riseth vp not much higher, then the smaller French kinde, but a little bigger, bearing at the top one great double flower, which when it is fully and perfectly blowne open (which is but sel∣dome; for that it is very tender, the leaues being much thinner, and thereby continu∣ally subiect, vpon any little distemperature of the time, to cleaue so fast one vnto an∣other, that the flower cannot blow open faire) is a faire and a goodly flower, larger by halfe then the smaller kinde, and fuller of leaues, of the same pale whitish yellow, or Lemon colour, with the lesser, or rather a little whiter, and not set in the same order of rowes as it is, but more confusedly together, and turning backe the ends of the outer∣most leaues to the stalke againe, and hauing the bottome of the flower on the backside somewhat greene, neither of which is found in the lesser kinde: the roote is very like vnto the lesser kinde, but a little bigger and longer. 5. Pseudonarcissus Anglicus flore pleno. The double English bastard Daffodill, or Gerrards double Daffodill.
The leaues of this double Daffodill are very like vnto the single kinde, being of a whitish greene colour, and somewhat broad, a little shorter and narrower, yet stiffer then the former French kinde: the stalke riseth vp about a foote high, bearing at the toppe one very double flower, the outermost leaues being of the same pale colour, that is to bee seene in the wings of the single kinde; those that stand next them, are some as deepe a yellow as the trunke of the single, and others of the same pale colour, with some greene stripes on the backe of diuers of the leaues: thus is the whole flower variably intermixt with pale and deepe yellow, and some greene stripes among them,  when it is fully open, and the leaues dispersed and broken. For sometimes the flower sheweth a close and round yellow trunke in the middle, separate from the pale outer wings, which trunke is very double, shewing some pale leaues within it, dispersed among the yellow: And sometimes the trunke is more open, or in part broken, shew∣ing forth the same colours intermixt within it: the flower passeth away without gi∣uing any seede, as all other bulbous rootes doe that beare double flowers: the roote is small, very like vnto the French double kindes, especially the lesser, that it is verie hard to know the one from the other. The Place. The first and greatest kinde, we had first from Iohn Tradescante (as I said before) whether raised from seed, or gained from beyond Sea, I know not. The second we first had from Vincent Sion, borne in Flanders, dwelling on the Banke side, in his liues time, but now dead; an industrious and wor∣thy louer of faire flowers, who cherished it in his Garden for many yeares, without bearing of any flowers vntill the yeare 1620. that hauing flowred with him, (and hee not knowing of whom hee receiued it, nor hauing euer seene the like flower before) he sheweth it to Mr. Iohn de Franqueuille, of whom he supposed he had receiued it, (for from beyond Sea he neuer recei∣ued any) who finding it to bee a kinde neuer seene or knowne to vs before, caused him to respect it the more, as it is well worthy. And Mr. George Wilmer of Stratford Bowe Esquire, in his liues time hauing likewise recei∣ued it of him (as my selfe did also) would needes appropriate it to himselfe, as if he were the first founder thereof, and call it by his owne name Wil∣mers double Daffodill, which since hath so continued. The third is of mine owne fostering or raising, as I said before; for assu∣redly, it is risen from the seede of the great Spanish single kinde, which I sowed in mine owne Garden, and cherished it, vntill it gaue such a flower as is described. The fourth is not certainly knowne where his originall should be: Some thinke it to be of France, and others of Germany. The last is assuredly first naturall of our owne Countrey, for Mr. Gerrard first discouered it to the world, finding it in a poore womans Garden in the West parts of England, where it grew before the woman came to dwell there, and, as I haue heard since, is naturall of the Isle of Wight. The Time. They doe all flower much about one time, that is, from the middle or end of March, as the yeare is forward, vnto the middle of Aprill. The Names. Vpon the three first I haue imposed the names in Latine, as they are ex∣pressed in their titles: and for the English names, if you please, you may let them passe likewise as they are expressed there also, that thereby euery one may be truely distinguished, and not confounded. The fourth, besides the name in the title, is called of some Narcissus Germanicus, which whether it be of Germany, or no, I know not; but that the name should import so much. The last doth vsually carry Mr. Gerrards name, and called Gerrards double Daffodill. 1. Pseudonarcissus augustifolius flore flauescente tubo quasi abscisso. The narrow leafed bastard Daffodill with the clipt trunke.
This kinde of Daffodill hath long and narrow grayish greene leaues, bearing one single flower at the toppe of his stalke, like vnto the former single bastard kindes, be∣fore  specified, hauing his outer leaues of a pale yellow colour, and his trunke of a dee∣per yellow: the chiefe differences in this from the former, is in the leaues, being nar∣row, and then in the trunke of the flower, which is not crumpled or turned vp, as most of the other are; and that the brimmes or edges of the flower is as if it had beene clipt off, or cut euen. 2. Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus medius & minor luteus. The two lesser Spanish yellow bastard Daffodils. These two lesser kindes of Spanish Daffodils, doe but differ in greatnesse the one from the other, and not in any thing else; so that in declaring the one, you may vn∣derstand the other to bee a little greater. The lesser then hath three or foure narrow short whitish greene leaues, from among which commeth forth a short stalke, not a∣boue an hand breadth, or halfe a foote high, bearing one single flower, not fully stan∣ding outright, but a little bending downe, consisting of six small leaues, standing as wings about a small, but long trunke, a little crumpled at the brimmes: the whole flower, as well leaues as trunke, are of one deepe yellow colour, like vnto the great Spanish kinde: the roote is but small, and couered with a darkish coate. The other is in all parts greater, and (as I said) differeth not else. 3. Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus luteus minimus. The least Spanish yellow bastard Daffodill. The leaues of this small kinde are smaller and shorter then the former, seldome ex∣ceeding the length of three inches, and very narrow withall, but of the same grayish greene colour with the former: euery flower standeth vpon a small and short foote∣stalke, scarce rising aboue the ground; so that his nose, for the most part, doth lye or touch the ground, and is made after the same fashion, and of the same colour with the former, but much smaller, as his roote is so likewise. 4. Pseudonarcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno. The lesser French double bastard Daffodill. The rootes of this lesser French kinde (if I may lawfully call it, or the greater kinde before specified, a bastard Daffodill; for I somewhat doubt thereof, in that the flower of either is not made after the fashion of any of the other bastard Daffodils, but doth more nearely resemble the forme of the double white Daffodill, expressed before a∣mong the true Daffodils) are like vnto the double English kinde, as also to the former double greater French kinde, and the leaues are of the same whitish greene colour also, but narrower and not longer: the stalke riseth a little higher then the English, and not fully so high as the greater French, bearing one faire double flower thereon, of a pale yellow or Lemon colour, consisting of six rowes of leaues, euery rowe growing smaller then other vnto the middle, and so set and placed, that euery leafe of the flower doth stand directly almost in all, one vpon or before another vnto the middle, where the leaues are smallest, the outermost being the greatest, which maketh the flower seeme the more beautifull: this and the greater kinde hath no trunke, or shew of any other thing in the middle, as all or most of the other former double bastard Daffodils haue, but are flowers wholly composed of leaues, standing double euen to the middle. The Place. The first is vndoubtedly a naturall of the Pyrenaean Mountaines. The Spanish kindes grew in Spaine, and The French double kinde about Orleance in France, where it is said to grow plentifully. The Time. The first flowreth at the end of March.
The Spanish kindes are the most early, flowring betimes in March. The French double doth flower presently after. The Names. More cannot bee said or added, concerning the names of any of these Daffodils, then hath been set downe in their titles: onely the French kinde is most vsually called Robinus his Daffodill. Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius albus. The white bastard Rush Daffodill, or Iunquilia. This bastard Rush Daffodill hath two or three long and very greene leaues, very like vnto the small yellow Rush Daffodill, formerly described, but not altogether so round, among which riseth vp a short stalke, seldome halfe a foote high, bearing at the toppe, out of a small skinnie huske, one small white flower, sometime declining to a pale colour, hauing six small and short leaues, standing about the middle of the trunke, which is long, and much wider open at the mouth, then at the bottome: the small outer leaues or wings are a little tending to greene, and the trunke (as I said) is either white, or whitish, hauing the brimmes a little vneuen: the seede is small, blacke, and round, like vnto other Rush Daffodils, but smaller. Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus maior. The greater yellow Iunquilia, or bastard Daffodill. The leaues of this greater kinde are longer, greater, and a little broader then the former; the stalke also is higher, and the flower larger, more open at the mouth and crumpled, then the white, but wholly of a yellow colour: the seede and the roots are bigger, according to the proportion of the plant. Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus minor. The lesser yellow bastard Iunquilia. This is so like vnto the last in all things, that I shall not neede to trouble you with repetitions of the same things formerly spoken; the chiefest difference is the smalnesse of the plant in all parts. Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus serotinus. The late yellow bastard Iunquilia. There is likewise a third kinde, as great as the greater yellow, and in all his parts ex∣pressing and equalling it, but is accounted the fairer, and flowreth somewhat later. The Place. The Pyrenaean Hils haue afforded vs all these varieties, and wee preserue them carefully; for they are all tender. The Time. All these flower in Aprill, except the last, which is a moneth later. The Names. The French and Lowe-Countrey men call them Trompettes, that is, Trumpets, from the forme of the trunke; wee sometimes call them also by that name, but more vsually bastard Iunquilia's. Pseudonarcissus marinus albus, Pancratium vulgo. The white Sea bastard Daffodill.
The Sea bastard Daffodill (to conclude this Chapter, and the discourse of Daffo∣dils) 1 Pseudonarcissus tubo uasi abscisso. The bastard Daffodill with the clipt trunke. 2 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus minor. The lesser Spanish bastard Daffodill. 3 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus minimus. The least Spanish bastard Daffodill. 4 Pseudonarcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno. The lesser double French ba∣stard Daffodi 5 Pcatium flore albo. The white Sea bastard Daffodil. 6 Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus maior. The greater yellow bastard unqui∣lia 7 Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus minor. The lesser yellow bastard Iunquilia. 8 Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus serotinus. The late yellow bastard Iunquitis Leucoium bulbosum pracox maius. The great early bulbous Violet. † Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus. The lesser early bulbous Violet. 10 Leucoium balbosum autumnale. The small Autumne bulbous Violet. 11 Leucoium bulbosum maius serotinum. The great late flowring bulbous Violet. depiction of flowers
hath diuers broad whitish greene leaues, but not very long, among which riseth vp a stiffe round stalke, at the top whereof breaketh out of a great round skinny huske, fiue or six flowers, euery one made somewhat of the fashion of the great bastard Rush Daffodill; but greater, and wholly white; the six leaues, being larger and longer then in the Rush kinde, and extending beyond the trunke, are tipt with greene at the point of each leafe, and downe the middle likewise on the backside. The trunke is longer, larger, and wider open at the mouth, cut in or indented at the brims or edges, and small at the bottome, with diuers white threeds in the middle, and is very sweet: vnder the flower is a round greene head, which groweth very great, hauing within it, when it is ripe, flat and blacke seede: the roote is great and white. Flore luteo, & flore ubr.It is reported, that there are found other sorts; some that beare yellow flowers, and others that beate red: but we haue seene none such, and therefore I can say no more of them. The Place. This kinde groweth neare the Sea side, both in Spaine, Italy, and France, within the Straights, and for the most part, vpon all the Leuant shoare and Islands also, but will seldome either flower, or abide with vs in these colder Countries, as I haue both seene by those that I receiued from a friend, and heard by others. The Time. It flowreth in the end of Summer, that is, in August and September. The Name. Diuers doe call it Pancratium, as the learned of Mompeher, and others, with the addition of flore Lilij, after they had left their old errour, in taking it to be Scylla, and vsing it for Scylla, in the Trochisces that go into Androma∣chus Treakle. The learned of Valentia in Spaine, as Clusius saith, doe call it Hemerocallis, thinking it to be a Lilly; and Clusius doth thereupon call it, Hemerocallis Valentina: but in my opinion, all these are deceiued in this plant; for it is neither a Lilly, to haue the name of Hemerocallis giuen vnto it, nor Scylla, nor Pancratium, as many doe yet call it: for certainly this is a kinde of Daffodill; the forme both of roote, leafe, and flower, doth assure me that haue seene it, and not Pancratium, which (as Dioscorides testifieth) is a kinde of Scylla, and in his time called Scylla, with a red roote, and a leafe like a Lilly, but longer, and was vsed both with the same preparation and quantity, and for the same diseases that Scylla was vsed, but that his force was weaker: all which doth plainly shew the errours that many learned men haue been conuersant in, and that all may see how necessary the knowledge of Herbarisme is to the practice of Physicke; And lest the roote of this Sea bastard Daffodill bee vsed in the stead of an wholsome remedy, which (as Clusius maketh mention) was deadly to him that did but cut his meate with that knife, which had immediately before cut this roote, and done in malice by him, that knew the force thereof, to kill his fellow, it working the more forceably by the euill attracting quality of the iron. The Vertues.of Daffodils in generall. Howsoeuer Dioscorides and others, doe giue vnto some of them speci∣all properties, both for inward and outward diseases, yet know I not any in these dayes with vs, that apply any of them as a remedy for any griefe, whatsoeuer Gerrard or others haue written.
CHAP. X. Leucoium bulbosum. The bulbous Violet. HAuing thus set downe the whole family, both of the true and bastard Daffo∣dils, I should next set in hand with the Hyacinths; but because Leucoium bul∣bosum, The bulbous Violet is a plant that doth challenge a place next vnto the Daffodils; as most nearly partaking with them, and a little with the Hyacinthes, I must of necessity interpose them, and shew their descriptions and differences, whereof some are early, of the first Spring, others later, and some of the Autumne. Leucoium bulbosum praecox maius. The greater early bulbous Violet. This bulbous Violet hath three or foure very greene, broad, flat, and short leaues, among which riseth vp a naked greene stalke, bearing out of a small skinny hose (as the former Daffodils doe) one white flower, hanging downe his head by a very small foot-stalke, made of six leaues, of an equall length, euery one whereof is tipt at the end with a small greenish yellow spot: after the flower is past, the head or seed-vessell groweth to be reasonable great, somewhat long and round, wherein is contained hard round seede, which being dry, is cleare, and of a whitish yellow colour: the roote is somewhat like a Daffodill roote, and couered with a blackish outside or skinne. Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus. The lesser early bulbous Violet. This lesser kinde riseth vp with two narrow grayish greene leaues, between which commeth forth the stalke, fiue or six inches high, bearing one small pendulous flower, consisting of three white leaues, which are small and pointed, standing on the out∣side, and hauing three other shorter leaues, which seeme like a cup in the middle, being each of them round at the ends, and cut in the middle, making the forme of an heart, with a greene tippe or spot at the broad end or edge: the seede is whitish, inclosed in long and round heads, like the former, but lesser: the roote is like a small Daffodill, with a blackish gray coate, and quickly diuideth into many of-sets. There is another of this kinde,Minus Byzan∣tinum. that came among other bulbous rootes from Con∣stantinople, and differeth in nothing from it, but that it is a little greater, both in root, leafe, and flower. The Place. The two first are found in many places of Germany, and Hungary. The third, as I said, was brought from Constantinople. The Time. The two lesser sorts doe most commonly flower in February, if the wea∣ther be any thing milde, or at the furthest in the beginning of March, but the first is seldome in flower, before the other be well neare past, or altoge∣ther. The Names. Lobel and Dodonaeus call the lesser kinde Leucoium triphyllum, and Leu∣conarcissolirion triphyllum, of the three leaues in the flower. Some doe call it Viola bulbosa alba. The first or greater kinde is called by Lobel, Leuconar∣cissolirion paucioribus floribus; and by Dodonaeus, Leucoium bulbosum hexa∣phyllum. We doe most vsually call them, Leucoium bulbosum praecox maius, & minus, The greater, or the lesser early bulbous Violet. In Dutch, Somer Sottekens, and not Druiskens, which are Grape-flowers, as some haue thought.
1. Leucoium bulbosum Vernum minimum. The small bulbous Violet of the Spring. This small Leucoium sendeth forth his small and long greene leaues, like haires in Autumne, and before Winter, which abide greene vntill Aprill, and then wither away quite, and about May there ariseth vp a naked slender stalke, at the toppe whereof breake forth two small white flowers, made of six leaues a peece, hanging downe their heads, the three inner leaues being a little larger then the three outward, a little ed dish neare the stalke, and very sweet: the root is small and round, and coered with a darke coate. 2. Leucoium bulbosum Autumnle. The small Autumne bulbous Violet. As the former small Leucoium sprang vp with his leaues without flowers in Au∣tumne, so this contrariwise, riseth vp with his slender brownish stalke of flowers in Autumne, before any greene leaues appeare, whereon stand two or three very small snow white pendulous flowers, consisting of six leaues a peece, and a little reddish at the bottome of the flower next vnto the stalke, so like vnto the former, that one would take them to be both one: after which, there grow small browne heads, containing small, blacke, round seed; after the flower is past, and the seede is ripening, and some∣times after the heads are ripe, the leaues begin to spring vp, which when they are full growne, are long, greene, and as small, or smaller then the leaues of the Autumne Hy∣acinth, which abide all the Winter, and Spring following, and wither away in the be∣ginning of Summer: the roote is small, long, and white. 3. Leucoium maius bulbosum serotinum. The great late flowring bulbous Violet. The late bulbous Violet hath three or foure broad flat greene leaues, very like vnto the first, but longer, among which riseth vp a flattish stalke, being thicker in the mid∣dle then at both edges, on the toppe whereof stand three or foure flowers, hanging downe their heads, consisting of six leaues a peece, all of an equall length and bignesse, wholly white, except that each leafe hath a greene tippe at the end of them: the seede hereof is blacke and round; the roote is reasonable great and white. The Place. The two former small ones were first found in Spaine, and Portugall, and sent to me by Guillaume Boel; but the first was so tender, that scarce one of a score sprang with me, or would abide. The greatest haue beene found wilde in Germany and Austria. The Time. The small ones haue their times expressed in their titles and descripti∣ons, the last flowreth not vntill May. The Names. These names that are set downe in their titles, doe passe with all Herba∣rists in these daies. The Vertues. Wee haue not knowne these plants vsed Physically, either inwardly or outwardly, to any purposes in these dayes.
CHAP. XI. Hyacinthus. The Hyacinth or Iacinth. THe Iacinths are next to be entreated of, whereof there are many more kindes found out in these later times, then formerly were knowne, which for order and method sake, I will digest vnder seuerall sorts, as neare as I can, that a∣uoiding confusion, by enterlacing one among another, I may the better put euery sort vnder his owne kinde. Hyacinthus Indicus maior tuberosa radice. The greater Indian knobbed Iacinth. I haue thought fittest to begin with this Iacinth, both because it is the greatest and highest, and also because the flowers hereof are in some likenesse neare vnto a Daffo∣dill, although his roote be tuberous, and not bulbous as all the rest are. This Indian Iacinth hath a thicke knobbed roote (yet formed into seuerall heads, somewhat like vnto bulbous rootes) with many thicke fibres at the bottome of them; from the di∣uers heads of this roote arise diuers strong and very tall stalkes, beset with diuers faire, long, and broad leaues, ioyned at the bottome close vnto the stalke, where they are greatest, and grow smaller to the very end, and those that grow higher to the toppe, being smaller and smaller, which being broken, there appeare many threeds like wooll in them: the toppes of the stalkes are garnished with many faire large white flowers, each whereof is composed of six leaues, lying spread open, as the flowers of the white Daffodill, with some short threeds in the middle, and of a very sweete sent, or rather strong and headie. Hyacinthus Indicus minor tuberosa radice. The smaller Indian knobbed Iacinth. The roote of this Iacinth is knobbed, like the roote of Arum or Wake Robin, from whence doe spring many leaues, lying vpon the ground, and compassing one another at the bottome, being long and narrow, and hollow guttered to the end, which is small and pointed, no lesse woolly, or full of threeds then the former: from the middle of these leaues riseth vp the stalke, being very long and slender, three or foure foot long, so that without it be propped vp, it will bend downe, and lye vpon the ground, where∣on are set at certaine distances many short leaues, being broad at the bottome, where they doe almost compasse the stalke, and are smaller toward the end where it is sharpe pointed: at the top of the stalke stand many flowers, with a small peece of a green leafe at the bottome of euery foot-stalke, which seeme to bee like so many white Orientall Iacinths, being composed of six leaues, which are much thicker then the former, with six chiues or threeds in the middle, tipt with pale yellow pendents. The Place. They both grow naturally in the West Indies, from whence being first brought into Spaine, haue from thence been dispersed vnto diuers louers of plants. The Time. They flower not in these cold Countries vntill the middle of August, or not at all, if they bee not carefully preserued from the iniury of our cold Winters; and then if the precedent Summer be hot, it may be flower a mo∣neth sooner. The Names.
Clusius calleth the lesser (for I thinke hee neuer saw the first) Hyacinthus  Indicus tuberosa radice, that is in English, The Indian Iacinth with a tuberous roote: Some would call these Hyacinthus Eriophorus Indicus, that is, The In∣dian woolly Iacinth, because they haue much wooll in them when they are broken; yet some doe doubt that they are not two plants seuerall, as of greater and lesser, but that the greatnesse is caused by the fertility of the soyle wherein it grew. 1. Hyacinthus Botroides maior Moschatus, siue Muscari flore flauo. The great yellow Muske Grape-flower, or yellow Muscari. This Muske Iacinth or Grape-flower, hath fiue or six leaues spread vpon the ground in two or three heads, which at the first budding or shooting forth out of the ground, are of a reddish purple colour, and after become long, thicke, hollow, or guttered on the vpperside, of a whitish greene colour, and round and darke coloured vnderneath: in the middle of these heads of leaues, rise vp one or two hollow weake brownish stalkes, sometimes lying on the ground with the weight of the flowers, (but especially of the seede) yet for the most part standing vpright, when they are laden towards the toppe, with many bottle-like flowers, which at their first appearing, and vntill the flowers begin to blow open, are of a browne red colour, and when they are blowne, of a faire yellow colour, flowring first below, and so vpwards by degrees, euery one of these flowers is made like vnto a little pitcher or bottle, being bigge in the belly, and small at the mouth, which is round, and a little turned vp, very sweete in smell, like vnto Muske, whereof it tooke the name Muscari; after the flowers are past, there come three square thicke heads, puffed vp as if it were bladders, made of a spongie sub∣stance, wherein are here and there placed blacke round seed: the roote is long, round, and very thicke, and white on the outside, with a little woollinesse on them, being bro∣ken, and full of a slimie iuice, whereunto are annexed thicke, fat, and long fibres, which perish not as most of the other Iacinths; and therefore desireth not to bee often remoued, as the other sorts may. 2. Hyacinthus Botroides maior Moschatus, seu Muscari flore cineritio. The Ashcoloured Muske Grape-flower, or Muscari. This Muscari differeth not in rootes, or forme of leaues or flowers from the former, the chiefe differences are these: the leaues hereof do not appeare so red at the first bud∣ding out of the ground, nor are so darke when they are fully growne; the stalke also most vsually hath more store of flowers thereon, the colour whereof at the first bud∣ding is a little duskie, and when they are full blowne, are of a bleake, yet bright ash∣colour, with a little shew of purple in them, and by long standing change a little more gray; being as sweete, or as some thinke, more sweete then the former: the roote (as I said) is like the former, yet yeeldeth more encrease, and will better endure our cold clymate, although it doth more seldome giue ripe seede. 3. Hyacinthus Botroides maior Moschatus, siue Muscari flore rubro. The red Muske Grape-flower. This kinde (if there be any such, for I am in some doubt thereof) doth chiefly differ in the colour of the flower from the first, in that this should beare flowers when they are blowne, of a red colour tending to yellownesse. 4. Hyacinthus Botroides maior Moschatus, siue Muscari flore albo. The white Muske Grape-flower. This also is said to haue (if there bee such an one) his leaues like vnto the second kinde, but of a little whiter greene, and the flowers pale, tending to a white: the roots of these two last are said vsually not to grow to be so great as of the former two. The Place.
The rootes of the two first sorts, haue been often sent from Constantino∣ple, 1 Hyacinthus Indicus maior tuberosa radice. The greater Indian knobbed Iacinth. 2 Hyacinthus Indicus minor tuberosa radice. The lesser Indian knobbed Iacinth. 3 Muscari flore flauo. The yellow Muscari. 4 Muscari flore cineritio. The ashcoloured Muscari. 5 Hyacinthus Botroides caruleus nus. The skie coloured Grape-flower. 6. Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo. The white Grape flower. 7 Hyacinthus Botroides ramosus. The branched Grape-flower. depiction of flowers
among many other sorts of rootes, and it may be come thither from be∣yond the Bosphorus in Asia; we haue them in our Gardens. The other two sorts are sprung (it is probable, if they be in rerum natura) from the seede of the two former; for we could neuer get such from Con∣stantinople, as if the Turkes had neuer knowledge of any such. The Time. They flower in March or Aprill, as the yeare is temperate, but the first is soonest vp out of the ground. The Names. The two former haue beene sent from Turkie by the name of Muschoro∣mi and Dipcadi. Matthiolus calleth it Bulbus vomitorius, saying that no root doth more prouoke vomit then it. Caspar Bauhinus doth most properly call it Hyacinthus Moschatus. It is most generally called Muscari, by all Her∣barists and Florists, yet because it doth so neerely resemble the Grape-flower, I haue named it Hyacinthus Botroides maior Muschatus, to put a diffe∣rence from the lesser Grape-flowers that follow; in English, The great Muske Grape-flower, or Muscari. Hyacinthus Botroides minor caeruleus obscurus. The darke blew Grape-flower. This Grape-flower hath many small, fat, and weake leaues lying vpon the ground, which are somewhat brownish at their first comming vp, and of a sad greene after∣wards, hollow on the vpperside, and round vnderneath, among which rise vp round, smooth, weake stalkes, bearing at the toppe many small heauie bottle-like flowers, in shape like the former Muscari, but very thicke thrust together, smaller, and of a very darke or blackish blew colour, of a very strong smell, like vnto Starch when it is new made, and hot: the root is round, and blackish without, being compassed with a num∣ber of small rootes, or of-sets round about it, so that it will quickly choke a ground, if it be suffered long in it. For which cause, most men doe cast it into some by corner, if they meane to preserue it, or cast it out of the Garden quite. Alter maior.There is another of this kinde that is greater, both in leafe and flower, and differeth not in colour or any thing else. Hyacinthus Botroides caeruleus amoenus. The skie coloured Grape-flower. This Iacinth springeth vp with fewer leaues then the first, and not reddish, but green at his first appearing; the leaues, when they are full growne, are long and hollow, like the former, but greener, shorter, and broader, standing vpright, and not lying along vpon the ground as they doe: the flowers grow at the toppe of the stalke, more spar∣sedly set thereon, and not so thicke together, but like a thinne bunch of grapes, and bottle-like as the former, of a perfect blew or skie-colour, euery flower hauing some white spots about the brimmes of them: this hath a very sweet smell, nothing like the former: this roote is whiter, and doth not so much encrease as the former, yet plenti∣full enough. Hyacinthus Botroides ramosus. The branched Grape-flower. Of this kinde, there is another found to grow with many branches of flowers, brea∣king out from the sides of the greater stalkes or branches: the leaues as all the rest of the plant is greater then the former. Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo. The white Grape-flower.
The white Grape-flower hath his greene leaues a little whiter, then the blew or  skie coloured Grape-flower, his flowers are very pure white, alike sparsedly set on the stalkes, but a little lower and smaller then it, in all other things there is no difference. Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo rubente. The blush Grape-flower. The roote of this Grape-flower groweth greater, then either the skie coloured, or white Grape-flower, and seldome hath any small rootes or of-sets, as the other haue: his leaues also are larger, and somewhat broader; the flowers are of a pale, or bleake blush colour out of a white, and are a little larger, and grow a little higher and fuller of flowers then the white. The Place. They naturally grow in many places both of Germany and Hungary; in Spaine likewise, and on Mount Baldus in Italy, and Narbone in France, a∣bout the borders of the fields: we haue them in our Gardens for delight. The Time. These flower from the beginning of March, or sooner sometimes, vn∣till the beginning of May. The Names. They are most commonly called Botroides, but more truely Botryodes, of  the Greeke word, which signifieth a bunch or cluster of grapes: Lobelius calleth the white one, Dipcadi flore albo, transferring the name Dip∣cadi, whereby the Muscari is called to this Iacinth, as if they were both one. Their seuerall names, whereby they are knowne and called, are set downe in their titles. The Dutchmen call them Driuekens, as I said before. Some English Gentlewomen call the white Grape-flower Pearles of Spaine. 1. Hyacinthus Comosus albus. The white haired Iacinth. This Iacinth doth more neerly resemble the Grape-flowers, then the faire haired Iacinths that follow, whereof it beareth the name, in that it hath no haire or threeds at the toppe of the stalke or sides, as they: and therefore I haue placed it next vnto them, and the other to follow it, as being of another kinde. The root hereof is blackish, a little long and round, from whence rise vp three or foure leaues, being smooth and whitish, long, narrow, and hollow, like a trough or gutter on the vpperside: among which the stalke riseth vp a foote high or more, bearing at the toppe diuers small flow∣ers, somewhat like the former, but not so thicke set together, being a little longer, and larger, and wider at the mouth, and as it were diuided into six edges, of a darke whitish colour, with some blacker spots about the brimmes on the inside: the heads or seede-vessels are three square, and somewhat larger, then the heads of any of the former lesser Grape-flowers, wherein is contained round blacke seede. 2. Hyacinthus Comosus Byzantinus. The Turkie faire haired Iacinth. This other Iacinth which came from Constantinople, is somewhat like the former, but that it is bigger, both in roote, and leafe, and flower, and bearing greater store of flowers on the head of the stalke: the lower flowers, although they haue short stalkes at their first flowring, yet afterwards the stalkes grow longer, and those that are lower, stand out further then those that are highest, whose foot-stalkes are short, and al∣most close to the stemme, and of a more perfect purple then any below, which are of a duskie greenish purple colour: the whole stalke of flowers seem like a Pyramis, broad belowe, and small aboue, or as other compare it, to a water sprinkle; yet neither of both these Iacinths haue any threeds at the tops of the stalkes, as the other following haue.
3. Hyacinthus Comosus maior purpureus. The great purple faire haired Iacinth. This faire haired Iacinth hath his leaues softer, longer, broader, and lesse hollow then the former, lying for the most part vpon the ground: the stalke riseth vp in the midst of the leaues, being stronger, higher, and bearing a greater and longer head of flowers also then they: the flowers of this stand not vpon such long foote-stalkes, but are shorter below, and close almost to the stalke aboue, hauing many bright purplish blew threeds, growing highest aboue the flowers, as it were in a bush together, euery one of these threeds hauing a little head at the end of them, somewhat like vnto one of the flowers, but much smaller: the rest of the flowers below this bush, are of a sadder or deader purple, and not so bright a colour, and the lowest worst of all, rather encli∣ning to a greene, like vnto the last Turkie kinde: the whole stalke with the flowers vp∣on it, doth somewhat resemble a long Purse tassell, and thereupon diuers Gentlewo∣men haue so named it: the heads and seede are like vnto the former, but greater: the roote is great and white, with some rednesse on the outside. 4. Hyacinthus Comosus ramosus purpureus. The faire haired branched Iacinth. The leaues of this Iacinth are broader, shorter, and greener then of the last, not lying so weakly on the ground, but standing somewhat more vpright: the stalke riseth vp as high as the former, but branched out on euery side into many tufts of threeds, with knappes, as it were heads of flowers, at the ends of them, like vnto the head of threeds at the toppe of the former Iacinth, but of a little darker, and not so faire a blewish purple colour: this Iacinth doth somewhat resemble the next Curld haire Ia∣cinth, but that the branches are not so fairely composed altogether of curled threeds, nor of so excellent a faire purple or Doue colour, but more duskie by much: the roote is greater and shorter then of the next, and encreaseth faster. 5. Hyacinthus Pennatus, siue Comosus ramosus elegantior. The faire Curld-haire Iacinth. This admirable Iacinth riseth vp with three or foure leaues, somewhat like vnto the leaues of the Muske Grape-flower, but lesser; betweene which riseth vp the stalke a∣bout a foote high, or somewhat more, bearing at the toppe a bush or tuft of flowers, which at the first appearing, is like vnto a Cone or Pineapple, and afterwards opening it selfe, spreadeth into many branches, yet still retaining the forme of a Pyramis, be∣ing broad spread below, and narrow vp aboue: each of these branches is againe diui∣ded into many tufts of threeds or strings, twisted or curled at the ends, and of an ex∣cellent purple or Doue colour, both stalkes and haires. This abideth a great while in his beauty, but afterwards all these flowers (if you will so call them) do fall away with∣out any seede at all, spending it selfe as it should seeme in the aboundance of the flow∣ers: the roote is not so great as the last, but white on the outside. The Place. The two first haue been sent diuers times from Constantinople, the third is found wilde in many places of Europe, and as well in Germany, as in Italy. The two last are onely with vs in Gardens, and their naturall pla∣ces are not knowne vnto vs. The Time. The three former kindes doe flower in Aprill, the two last in May. The Names.
The first and second haue no other names then are expressed in their ti∣tles. 1 Hyacinthus Comosus albus. The white haired Iacinth. 2 Hyacinthus Comosus Byzantinus. The Turkie faire haired Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus Comosus maior purpureus. The purple faire haired Iacinth, or Purse tassels. 4 Hyacinthus Comosus ramosus, siue Calamistratus. The faire haired branched Iacinth. 5 Hyacinthus Pennatus, siue Comosus elegantior. The faire curld haire Iacinth. depiction of flowers
The third is called of some onely Hyacinthus maior, and of others Hya∣cinthus comosus maior: We call it in English, The purple faire haired Iacinth, because of his tuft of purple threeds, like haires at the toppe, and (as I said) of diuers Gentlewomen, purple tassels. The fourth is called by some as it is in the title, Hyacinthus comosus ramosus, and of others Hyacinthus Calami∣stratus. And the last or fifth is diuersly called by diuers, Fabius Columna in his Phytobasanos the second part, calleth it Hyacinthus Sannesius, because hee first saw it in that Cardinals Garden at Rome. Robin of Paris sent to vs the former of the two last, by the name of Hyacinthus Pennatus, and Hyacinthus Calamistratus, when as others sent the last by the name Pennatus, and the o∣ther by the name of Calamistratus; but I thinke the name Cincinnatus is more fit and proper for it, in that the curled threeds which seeme like haires, are better expressed by the word Cincinnus, then Calamistrum, this signifying but the bodkin or instrument wherewith they vse to frisle or curle the haire, and that the bush of haire it selfe being curled. Some also haue giuen to both these last the names of Hyacinthus Comosus Parnassi, the one fairer then the other. Of all these names you may vse which you please; but for the last kinde, the name Cincinnatus, as I said, is the more proper, but Pennatus is the more common, and Calamistratus for the former of the two last. 1. Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, siue praecox flore albo. The white Winter Orientall Iacinth. This early Iacinth riseth vp with his greene leaues (which are in all respects like to the ordinary Orientall Iacinths, but somewhat narrower) before Winter, and some∣times it is in flower also before Winter, and is in forme and colour a plaine white Ori∣entall Iacinth, but somewhat lesser, differing onely in no other thing, then the time of his flowring, which is alwayes certaine to be long before the other sorts. 2. Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, siue praecox flore purpureo. The purple Winter Orientall Iacinth. The difference of colour in this flower causeth it to bee distinguished, for else it is of the kindred of the Orientall Iacinths, and is, as the former, more early then the rest that follow: Vnderstand then, that this is the same with the former, but hauing fine blewish purple flowers. 3. Hyacinthus Orientalis maior praecox, dictus Zumbul Indi. The greatest Orientall Iacinth, or Zumbul Indi. The roote of this Orientall Iacinth, is vsually greater then any other of his kinde, and most commonly white on the outside, from whence rise vp one or two great round stalkes, spotted from within the ground, with the lower part of the leaues also vpward to the middle of the stalkes, or rather higher, like vnto the stalkes of Dragons, but darker; being set among a number of broad, long, and somewhat hollow greene leaues, almost as large as the leaues of the white Lilly: at the toppe of the stalkes stand more store of flowers, then in any other of this kinde, euery flower being as great as the greatest sort of Orientall Iacinths, ending in six leaues, which turne at the points, of a faire blewish purple colour, and all standing many times on one side of the stalkes, and many times on both sides. 4. Hyacinthus Orientalis vulgaris diuersorum colorum. The ordinary Orientall Iacinth.
The common Orientall Iacinth (I call it common, because it is now so plenti∣full in all Gardens, that it is almost not esteemed) hath many greene leaues, long, somewhat broad and hollow, among which riseth vp a long greene round stalke, beset from the middle thereof almost, with diuers flowers, standing on both sides  of the stalkes, one aboue another vnto the toppe, each whereof next vnto the foote-stalke is long, hollow, round, and close, ending in six small leaues laid open, and a little turning at the points, of a very sweete smell: the colours of these flowers are diuers, for some are pure white, without any shew of other colour in them: another is almost white, but hauing a shew of blewnesse, especially at the brims and bottomes of the flowers. Others againe are of a very faint blush, tending towards a white: Some are of as deepe a purple as a Violet; others of a purple tending to red∣nesse, and some of a paler purple. Some againe are of a faire blew, others more wat∣chet, and some so pale a blew, as if it were more white then blew: after the flowers are past, there rise vp great three square heads, bearing round blacke seede, great and shining: the roote is great, and white on the outside, and oftentimes purplish also, flat at the bottome, and small at the head. There is a kinde of these Iacinths,Flore purpuro violaceo lineis albicantis in dorso. Floribus antror∣sum respicienti∣bus. Serotinus ere∣ctis floribus diuersorum co∣lorum. whose flowers are of a deepe purplish Violet co∣lour, hauing whitish lines downe the backe of euery leafe of the flower, which turne themselues a little backwards at the points. There is another, whose flowers stand all opening one way, and not on all sides, but are herein like the great Zumbul Indi, before set out. There is againe another kinde which flowreth later then all the rest, and the flow∣ers are smaller, standing more vpright, which are either white or blew, or mixt with white and purple. 5. Hyacinthus Orientalis folioso caule. The bushy stalked Orientall Iacinth. This strange Iacinth hath his rootes, leaues, and flowers, like vnto the former Ori∣entall Iacinths: the onely difference in this is, that his stalke is not bare or naked, but hath very narrow long leaues, growing dispersedly, and without order, with the flow∣ers thereon, which are blew, and hauing for the most part one leafe, and sometimes two at the foote, or setting on of euery flower, yet sometimes it happeneth, some flow∣ers to be without any leafe at the bottome, as nature, that is very variable in this plant, listeth to play: the heads and seede are blacke and round, like the other also. 6. Hyacinthus Orientalis flore duplici. The bleake Orientall Iacinth once double. This double Iacinth hath diuers long leaues, like vnto the other Orientall Iacinths, almost standing vpright, among which riseth vp a stalke, brownish at the first, but growing greene afterwards, bearing many flowers at the toppe, made like the flowers of the former Iacinths, and ending in six leaues, greene at the first, and of a blewish white when they are open, yet retaining some shew of greennesse in them, the brims of the leaues being white; from the middle of each flower standeth forth another small flower, consisting of three leaues, of the same colour with the other flower, but with a greene line on the backe of each of these inner leaues: in the middle of this lit∣tle flower, there stand some threeds tipt with blacke: the smell of this flower is not so sweete as of the forme; the heads, seede, and rootes are like the former. 7. Hyacinthus Orientalis flore pleno caeruleo, vel purpuro vilaceo. The faire double blew, or purple Orientall Iacinth. The leaues of these Iacinths are smaller, then the leaues of most of the other for∣mer sorts; the stalkes are shorter, and smaller, bearing but three or foure flowers on the heads of them for the most part, which are not composed like the last, but are more faire, full, and double of leaues, where they shew out their full beauties, and of a faire blew colour in some, and purple in others, smelling pretty sweete; but these doe sel∣dome beare out their flowers faire; and besides, haue diuers other flowers that will be either single, or very little double vpon the same stalke. 8. Hyacinthus Orientalis candidissimus flore pleno. The pure white double Orientall Iacinth.
This double white Iacinth hath his leaues like vnto the single white Orientall Ia∣cinth;  his stalke is likewise long, slender, and greene, bearing at the toppe two or three flowers at the most, very double and full of leaues, of a pure white colour, with∣out any other mixture therein, hanging downe their heads a little, and are reasonable sweete. I haue this but by relation, not by sight, and therefore I can giue no further assurance as yet. The Place. All these Orientall Iacinths, except the last, haue beene brought out of Turkie, and from Constantinople: but where their true originall place is, is not as yet vnderstood. The Time. The two first (as is said) flower the earliest, sometimes before Christmas, but more vsually after, and abide a great while in flower, in great beauty, especially if the weather be milde, when as few or no other flowers at that time are able to match them. The other greatest kinde flowreth also earlier then the rest that follow, for the most part. The ordinary kindes flower some in March, and some in Aprill, and some sooner also; and so doe the double ones likewise. The bushy stalked Iacinth flowreth much about the same time. The Names. The former two sorts are called Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, and Hya∣cinthus Orientalis praecox flore albo, or caeruleo. The third is called of many Zumbul Indicum, or Zumbul Indi, and corruptly Simboline; of others, and that more properly, Hyacinthus Orientalis maior praecox. The Turkes doe call all Iacinths Zumbul, and by adding the name of Indi, or Arabi, do shew from what place they are receiued. In English, The greatest Orientall Ia∣cinth; yet some doe call it after the Turkish name Zumbul Indi, or Simboline, as is said before. The rest haue their names set downe in their titles, which are most fit for them. Hyacinthus Hispanicus minor Orientalis facie. The little Summer Orientall Iacinth. This little Iacinth hath foure or fiue long narrow greene leaues, lying vpon the ground, among which riseth vp a slender smooth stalke, about a spanne high or more, bearing at the toppe many slender bleake blew flowers,Flore caeruleo. with some white stripes and edges to be seene in most of them, fashioned very like vnto the flowers of the Orien∣tall Iacinth, but much smaller: the flower hath no sent at all; the seede is like the seede of the English Iacinth, or Hares-bels: the roote is small and white. Flore albo.There is another of this kinde, differing in nothing but in the colour of the flower, which is pure white. Flore rubente.There is also another, whose flowers are of a fine delayed red colour, with some deeper coloured veines, running along the three outer leaues of the flower, differing in no other thing from the former. The Place. These plants haue been gathered on the Pyrenaean Mountaines, which are next vnto Spaine, from whence, as is often said, many rare plants haue likewise been gathered. The Time. They flower very late, euen after all or most of the Iacinths, in May for the most part.
1 Hyacinthus Orientalis brumalis. The Winter Orientall Iacinth. 2 Zumbul Indi. The greatest Orientall Ia∣cinth. 3 Hyacinthus Orientalis vulgaris. The ordinary Orientall Iacinth. 4 Hyacinthus Orientalis folioso caule. The bushy stalked Orientall Iacinth. 5 Hyacinthus Orientalis flore duplij. The Orientall Iacinth once double. 6 Hyacinthus Orientalis flore pleno caeruleo. The faire double blew Orientall Iacinth. depiction of flowers
The Names. They are called eyther Hyacinthus Hispanicus minor Orientalis facie, as it is in the title, or Hyacinthus Orientalis facie, that is to say, The lesser Spanish Iacinth, like vnto the Orientall: yet some haue called them, Hyacinthus Orientalis serotinus minor, The lesser late Orientall Iacinth, that thereby they may be knowne from the rest. Hyacinthus Hispanicus obsoletus. The Spanish dunne coloured Iacinth. This Spanish Iacinth springeth very late out of the ground, bearing foure or fiue short, hollow, and soft whitish greene leaues, with a white line in the middle of euery one of them, among which rise vp one or more stalkes, bearing diuers flowers at the toppes of them, all looking one way, or standing on the one side, hanging downe their heads, consisting of six leaues, three whereof being the outermost, lay open their leaues, and turne back the ends a little again: the other three which are innermost, do as it were close together in the middle of the flower, without laying themselues open at all, being a little whitish at the edges: the whole flower is of a purplish yellow co∣lour, with some white and green as it were mixed among it, of no sent at all: it beareth blacke and flat seede in three square, great, and bunched out heads: the roote is reaso∣nable great, and white on the outside, with many strong white fibres at it, which pe∣rish not yearely, as the fibres of many other Iacinths doe, and as it springeth late, so it holdeth his greene leaues almost vntill Winter. Mauritanicus.There hath been another hereof brought from about Fez and Marocco in Barbary, which in all respects was greater, but else differed little. Maximus Aethiopicus.There was another also brought from the Cape of good Hope, whose leaues were stronger and greener then the former, the stalke also thicker, bearing diuers flowers, confusedly standing vpon longer foote-stalkes, yet made after the same fashion, but that the three inner leaues were whitish, and dented about the edges, otherwise the flowers were yellow and greenish on the inside. The Place. These plants grow in Spaine, Barbary, and Ethiopia, according as their names and descriptions doe declare. The Time. The first flowreth not vntill Iune; for, as I said, it is very late before it springeth vp out of the ground, and holdeth his leaues as is said, vntill Sep∣tember, in the meane time the seede thereof ripeneth. The Names. They haue their names according to the place of their growing; for one is called Hyacinthus Hispanicus obsoletioris coloris. The other is called also Hyacinthus Mauritanicus. And the last, Hyacinthus Aethiopicus obsoletus. In English, The Spanish, Barbary, or Ethiopian Iacinth, of a dunne or duskie colour. Hyacinthus Anglicus Belgicus, vel Hispanicus. English Hares-bels, or Spanish Iacinth.
Our English Iacinth or Hares-bels is so common euery where, that it scarce nee∣deth any description. It beareth diuers long and narrow greene leaues, not standing vpright, nor yet fully lying vpon the ground; among which springeth vp the stalke, bearing at the toppe many long and hollow flowers, hanging downe their heads all  forwards for the most part, parted at the brimmes into six parts, turning vp their points a little againe, of a sweetish, but heady sent, somewhat like vnto the Grape-flower: the heads for seede are long and square, wherein is much blacke seede: the colour of the flowers are in some of a deeper blew, tending to a purple; in others of a paler blew, or of a bleake blew, tending to an ash colour: Some are pure white, and some are party coloured, blew and white; and some are of a fine delayed purplish red or blush colour, which some call a peach colour. The rootes of all sorts agree, and are alike, being white and very slimie; some whereof will be great and round, others long and slender, and those that lye neare the toppe of the earth bare, will be greene. Hyacinthus Hispanicus maior flore campanulae instar. The greater Spanish bell-flowred Iacinth. This Spanish bell-flowred Iacinth, is very like the former English or Spanish Ia∣cinth, but greater in all parts, as well of leaues as flowers, many growing together at the toppe of the stalke, with many short greene leaues among them, hanging downe their heads, with larger, greater, and wider open mouths, like vnto bels, of a darke blew colour, and no good sent. The Place. The first groweth in many places of England, the Lowe-Countries, as we call them, and Spaine, but the last chiefly in Spaine. The Time. They flower in Aprill for the most part, and sometimes in May. The Names. Because the first is more frequent in England, then in Spain, or the Lowe-Countries, it is called with vs Hyacinthus Anglicus, The English Iacinth; but it is also called as well Belgicus, as Hispanicus: yet Dodonaeus calleth it Hyacinthus non scriptus, because it was not written of by any Authour be∣fore himselfe. It is generally knowne in England by the name of Hare-bels. The other Spanish Iacinth beareth his name in his title. Hyacinthus Eriophorus. The Woolly Iacinth. This Woolly Iacinth hath many broad, long, and faire greene leaues, very like vn∣to some of the Iacinths, but stiffer, or standing more vpright, which being broken, doe yeeld many threeds, as if a little fine cotton wooll were drawne out: among these leaues riseth vp a long greene round stalke, a foote and a halfe high or more, whereon is set a great long bush of flowers, which blowing open by degrees, first below, and so vpwards, are very long in flowring: the toppe of the stalke, with the flowers, and their little footstalkes, are all blew, euery flower standing outright with his stalke, and spreading like a starre, diuided into six leaues, hauing many small blew threeds, stan∣ding about the middle head, which neuer gaue ripe seede, as farre as I can heare of: the root is white, somewhat like the root of a Muscari, but as full of wooll or threeds, or rather more, then the leaues, or any other part of it. The Place. This hath been sent diuers times out of Turkie into England, where it continued a long time as well in my Garden as in others, but some hard frosty Winters caused it to perish with me, and diuers others, yet I haue had it againe from a friend, and doth abide fresh and greene euery yeare in my Garden.
The Time. This flowred in the Garden of Mr. Richard Barnesley at Lambeth, onely once in the moneth of May, in the yeare 1606. after hee had there preser∣ued it a long time: but neither he, nor any else in England that I know, but those that saw it at that time, euer saw it beare flower, either before or since. The Names. It is called by diuers Bulbus Eriophorus, or Laniferus, that is, Woolly Bul∣bous; but because it is a Iacinth, both in roote, leafe, and flower, and not a Narcissus, or Daffodill, it is called Hyacinthus Eriophorus, or Laniferus, The Woolly Iacinth. It is very likely, that Theophrastus in his seuenth Book & thirteenth Chapter, did meane this plant, where hee declareth, that gar∣ments were made of the woolly substance of a bulbous roote, that was ta∣ken from between the core or heart of the roote (which, as hee saith, was vsed to be eaten) and the outermost shels or peelings; yet Clusius seemeth to fasten this woolly bulbous of Theophrastus, vpon the next Iacinth of Spaine. Hyacinthus Stellatus Baeticus maior, vulgò Perûanus. The great Spanish Starry Iacinth, or of Peru. This Iacinth (the greatest of those, whose flowers are spread like a starre, except the two first Indians) hath fiue or six, or more, very broad, and long greene leaues, spread vpon the ground, round about the roote, which being broken are woolly, or full of threeds, like the former: in the middle of these leaues riseth vp a round short stalke, in comparison of the greatnesse of the plant (for the stalke of the Orientall Iacinth is sometimes twice so high, whose roote is not so great) bearing at the toppe a great head or bush of flowers, fashioned in the beginning, before they bee blowne or sepa∣rated, very like to a Cone or Pineapple, and begin to flower belowe, and so vpwards by degrees, euery flower standing vpon a long blackish blew foote-stalke, which when they are blowne open, are of a perfect blew colour, tending to a Violet, and made of six small leaues, laid open like a starre; the threeds likewise are blewish, tipt with yel∣low pendents, standing about the middle head, which is of a deeper blew, not hauing any good sent to be perceiued in it, but commendable only for the beauty of the flow∣ers: after the flowers are past, there come three square heads, containing round blacke seede: the roote is great, and somewhat yellowish on the outside, with a knobbe or bunch at the lower end of the roote, (which is called the seate of the roote) like vnto the Muscari, Scylla, and many other bulbous rootes, at which hang diuers white, thicke, and long fibres, whereby it is fastened in the ground, which perish not euery yeare, but abide continually, and therefore doth not desire much remouing. Hyacinthus Stellatus Baticus, siue Perûanus flore albo. The great white Spanish starry Iacinth. This other Spanish Iacinth is in most parts like vnto the former, but that his leaues are not so large, nor so deep a greene: the stalks of flowers likewise hath not so thicke a head, or bush on it, but fewer and thinner set: the flowers themselues also are whitish, yet hauing a small dash of blush in them: the threeds are whitish, tipt with yellow pen∣dents: the seede and rootes are like vnto the former, and herein consisteth the diffe∣rence betweene this and the other sorts. Hyacinthus Stellatus Baticus, siue Perûanus flore carneo. The great blush coloured Spanish Starry Iacinth.
This likewise differeth little from the two former, but onely in the colour of the 1 Hyacinthus Orientalis facie. The little Summer Orientall Iacinth. 2 Hyacinthus Mauritanicus. The Barbary Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus obsoletus Hispa∣nicus. The Spanish duskie Iacinth. 4 Hyacinthus Hispanicus flore campanulae. The greater Spanish bel-flowred Iacinth. 5 Hyacinthus Anglicus. The English Iacinth or Harebels. 6 Hyacinthus Eriophorus. The Woolly Iacinth. 7 Hyacinthus Stellaris Baticus maior, fine Peruanus. The great Spanish Starry Iacinth, or of Peru. depiction of flowers
flowers; for this being found growing among both the other, hath his head of flow¦ers as great and large as the first, but the buds of his flowers, before they are open, are of a deepe blush colour, which being open, are more delayed, and of a pleasant pale purple, or blush colour, standing vpon purplish stalkes: the heads in the middle are whitish, and so are the threeds compassing it, tipt with yellow. The Place. These doe naturally grow in Spaine, in the Medowes a little off from the Sea, as well in the Island Gades, vsually called Cales, as likewise in other parts along the Sea side, as one goeth from thence to Porto Santa Maria, which when they be in flower, growing so thicke together, seeme to couer the ground, like vnto a tapistry of diuers colours, as I haue beene credibly enformed by Guillaume Boel, a Freeze-lander borne, often before and hereafter remembred, who being in search of rare plants in Spaine, in the yeare of our Lord 1607. after that most violent frosty Winter, which peri∣shed both the rootes of this, and many other fine plants with vs, sent mee ouer some of these rootes for my Garden, and affirmed this for a truth, which is here formerly set downe, and that himselfe gathered those he sent mee, and many others in the places named, with his owne hands; but hee saith, that both that with the white, and with the blush flowers, are farre more rare then the other. The Time. They flower in May, the seede is ripe in Iuly. The Names. This hath beene formerly named Eriophorus Peruanus, and Hyacinthus Stellatus Peruanus, The Starry Iacinth of Peru, being thought to haue grown in Peru, a Prouince of the West Indies; but he that gaue that name first vn∣to it, eyther knew not his naturall place, or willingly imposed that name, to conceale it, or to make it the better esteemed. It is most generally recei∣ued by the name Hyacinthus Peruanus, from the first imposer thereof, that is, the Iacinth of Peru: but I had rather giue the name agreeing most fitly vnto it, and call it as it is indeede Hyacinthus Stellatus Baeticus, The Spanish Starry Iacinth; and because it is the greatest that I know hath come from thence, I call it, The great Starry Iacinth of Spaine, or Spanish Iacinth. Hyacinthus Stellatus vulgaris, siue Bifolius Fuchsij. The common blew Starry Iacinth. This Starry Iacinth (being longest knowne, and therefore most common) riseth out of the ground, vsually but with two browne leaues, yet sometimes with three, inclo∣sing within them the stalke of flowers, the buds appearing of a darke whitish colour, as soone as the leaues open themselues, which leaues being growne, are long, and hol∣low, of a whitish greene on the vpper side, and browne on the vnder side, and halfe round, the browne stalke rising vp higher, beareth fiue or sixe small starre-like flowers thereon, consisting of six leaues, of a faire deepe blew, tending to a purple. The seede is yellowish, and round, contained in round pointed heads, which by rea∣son of their heauinesse, and the weaknesse of the stalke, lye vpon the ground, and often perish with wet and frosts, &c. The roote is somewhat long, and couered with a yel∣lowish coate. Hyacinthus stellatus flore albo. The white Starry Iacinth. The white Starry Iacinth hath his leaues like the former, but greene and fresh, not browne, and a little narrower also: the buddes for flowers at the first appeare a little blush, which when they are blowne, are white, but yet retaine in them a small shew of that blush colour.
We haue another, whose flowers are pure white, and smaller then the other,Flore niueo. the leaues whereof are of a pale fresh greene, and somewhat narrower. Hyacinthus Stellatus flore rubente. The blush coloured Starry Iacinth. The difference in this from the former, is onely in the flowers, which are of a faire blush colour, much more eminent then in the others, in all things else alike. Hyacinthus Stellatus Martius, siue praecox caeruleus. The early blew Starry Iacinth. This Iacinth hath his leaues a little broader, of a fresher greene, and not browne at all, as the first blew Iacinth of Fuchsius last remembred: the buds of the flowers, while they are enclosed within the leaues, and after, when the stalke is gowne vp, doe re∣maine more blew then the buds of the former: the flowers, when they are blowne o∣pen, are like the former, but somewhat larger, and of a more liuely blew colour: the roote also is a little whiter on the outside. This doth more seldome beare seede then the former. Hyacinthus Stellatus praecox flore albo. The white early Starry Iacinth. There is also one other of this kinde, that beareth pure white flowers, the green leafe thereof being a little narrower then the former, and no other difference. Hyacinthus Stellatus praecox flore suaue rubente. The early blush coloured Starry Iacinth. This blush coloured Iacinth is very rare, but very pleasant, his flowers being as large as the first of this last kinde, and somewhat larger then the blush of the other kinde: the leaues and rootes differ not from the last recited Iacinth. The Place. All these Iacinths haue beene found in the Woods and Mountaines of Germany, Bohemia, and Austria, as Fuchsius and Gesner doe report, and in Naples, as Imperatus and others doe testifie. Wee cherish them all with great care in our Gardens, but especially the white and the blush of both kindes, for that they are more tender, and often perish for want of due re∣gard. The Time. The common kindes, which are first expressed, flower about the middle of February, if the weather bee milde, and the other kindes sometimes a fortnight after, that is, in March, but ordinarily much about the same time with the former. The Names. The first is called in Latine Hyacinthus Stellatus vulgaris, and Hyacinthus Stellatus bifolius, and Hyacinthus Stellaris Fuchsij, and of some Hyacinthus Stellatus Germanicus; wee might very well call the other kinde, Hyacinthus Stellatus vulgaris alter, but diuers call it Praecox, and some Martius, as it is in the title. In English they may bee seuerally called: the first, The common; and the other, The early Starry Iacinth (notwithstanding the first flowreth before the other) for distinction sake. The Hyacinthus seemeth to be called
Vacinium of Virgil in his Eclogues; for hee alwayes reckoneth it among the flowers that were vsed to decke Garlands, and neuer among fruits, as some would haue it. But in that hee calleth it Vacinium nigrum, in seuerall places, that doth very fitly answer the  common receiued custome of those times, that called all deepe blew co∣lours, such as are purples, and the like, blacke; for the Violet it selfe is like∣wise called blacke in the same place, where he calleth the Vacinium blacke; so that it seemeth thereby, that he reckoned them to be both of one colour, and we know the colour of the Violet is not blacke, as we doe distinguish of blacke in these dayes. But the colour of this Starry Iacinth, being both of so deepe a purple sometimes, so neare vnto a violet colour, and also more frequent, then any other Iacinth with them, in those places where Virgil liued, perswadeth me to thinke, that Virgil vnderstood this Starry Iacinth by Vacinium: Let others iudge otherwise, if they can shew greater probabi∣litie. 1. Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus nigra radice. The Starry Iacinth of Turkie with the blacke roote. This Starry Iacinth of Constantinople hath three or foure fresh greene, thinne, and long leaues, of the bignesse of the English Iacinth, but not so long, betweene which ri∣seth vp a slender lowe stalke, bearing fiue or six small flowers, dispersedly set thereon, spreading open like a starre, of a pale or bleake blew colour: the leaues of the flowers are somewhat long, and stand as it were somewhat loosly, one off from another, and not so compactly together, as the flowers of other kindes: it seldome beareth ripe seede with vs, because the heads are so heauie, that lying vpon the ground, they rotte with the wet, or are bitten with the frosts, or both, so that they seldome come to good: the roote is small in some, and reasonable bigge in others, round, and long, white within, but couered with deepe reddish or purplish peelings, next vnto it, and darker and blacker purple on the outside, with some long and thicke white fibres, like fingers hanging at the bottome of them, as is to be seene in many other Iacinths: the roote it selfe for the most part doth runne downewards, somewhat deep into the ground. 2. Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus maior. The greater Starry Iacinth of Constantinople. This Iacinth may rightly be referred to the former Iacinth of Constantinople, and called the greater, it is so like thereunto, that any one that knoweth that, will soone say, that this is another of that sort, but greater as it is in all his parts, bearing larger leaues by much, and more store, lying vpon the ground round about the roote: it beareth many lowe stalkes of flowers, as bleake, and standing as loosly as the former: onely the roote of this, is not black on the outside, as the other, but three times bigger. 3. Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus alter, sie flore boraginis. The other Starry Iacinth of Constantinople. This other Iacinth hath for the most part onely foure leaues, broader and greener then the first, but not so large or long as the second: the stalke hath fiue or six flowers vpon it, bigger and rounder set, like other starry Iacinths, of a more perfect or deeper blew then either of the former, hauing a whitish greene head or vmbone in the mid∣dle, beset with six blew chiues or threeds, tipt with blacke, so closly compassing the vmbone, that the threeds seeme so many prickes stucke into a clubbe or head; some therefore haue likened it to the flower of Borage, and so haue called it: after the flow∣ers are past, come vp round white heads, wherein is contained round and white seede: the roote is of a darke whitish colour on the outside, and sometimes a little reddish withall. The Place. The first and the last haue beene brought from Constantinople; the first among many other rootes, and the last by the Lord Zouch, as Lobel witnesseth. The second hath been sent vs out of the Lowe-Countries, but from whence they had it, we do not certainly know. They growe with vs in our Gardens sufficiently.
The Time. These flower in Aprill, but the first is the earliest of the rest, and is in flower presently after the early Starry Iacinth, before described. The Names. The former haue their names in their titles, and are not knowne vnto vs by any other names that I know; but as I said before, the last is called by some, Hyacinthus Boraginis flore. The first was sent out of Turkie, by the name of Susam giul, by which name likewise diuers other things haue beene sent, so barren and barbarous is the Turkish tongue. Hyacinthus Stellatus Aestivus maior. The greater Summer Starry Iacinth. This late Iacinth hath diuers narrow greene leaues, lying vpon the ground, some∣what like the leaues of the English Iacinth, but stiffer and stronger; among which ri∣seth vp a round stiffe stalke, bearing many flowers at the toppe thereof, and at euery foote-stalke of the flowers a small short leafe, of a purplish colour: the flowers are starre-like, of a fine delayed purplish colour, tending to a pale blew or ash colour, stri∣ped on the backe of euery leafe, and hauing a pointed vmbone in the middle, with some whitish purple threeds about it, tipt with blew: the seede is blacke, round, and shining, like vnto the seede of the English Iacinth, but not so bigge: the roote is round and white, hauing some long thicke rootes vnder it, besides the fibres, as is vsuall in many other Iacinths. Hyacinthus Stellatus Aestivus minor. The lesser Summer Starry Iacinth. This lesser Iacinth hath diuers very long, narrow, and shining greene leaues, spread vpon the ground round about the roote, among which riseth vp a very short round stalke, not aboue two inches high, carrying six or seuen small flowers thereon, on each side of the stalke, like both in forme and colour vnto the greater before described, but lesser by farre: the seede is blacke, contained in three square heads: the roote is small and white, couered with a browne coate, and hauing some such thicke rootes among the fibres, as are among the other. The Place. Both these Iacinths grow naturally in Portugall, and from thence haue been brought, by such as seeke out for rare plants, to make a gaine and pro∣fit by them. The Time. They both flower in May, and not before: and their seed is ripe in Iuly. The Names. Some doe call these Hyacinthus Lusitanicus, The Portugall Iacinth. Clu∣sius, who first set out the descriptions of them, called them as is expressed in their titles; and therefore we haue after the Latine name giuen their English, according as is set downe. Or if you please, you may call them, The grea∣ter and the lesser Portugall Iacinth. Hyacinthus Stellaris flore cinereo. The ash coloured Starry Iacinth. This ash coloured Iacinth, hath his leaues very like vnto the leaues of the English Iacinth, and spreading vpon the ground in the same manner, among which rise vp one or two stalkes, set at the toppe with a number of small starre-like flowers, bushing big∣ger
below then aboue, of a very pale or white blew, tending to an ash colour, and very sweete in smell: the seede is blacke and round, like vnto the seede of the English Ia∣cinth, and so is the roote, being great, round, and white; so like, I say, that it is hard to know the one from the other. The Place. The certaine originall places of growing thereof, is not knowne to vs. The Time. It flowreth in Aprill. The Names. Some doe call this Hyacinthus Someri, Somers Iacinth, because as Lobel saith, he brought it first into the Lowe-Countries, eyther from Constanti∣nople, or out of Italy. Hyacinthus Stellatus Lilifolio & radice caeruleo. The blew Lilly leafed Starre Iacinth. This Iacinth hath six or seuen broad greene leaues, somewhat like vnto Lilly leaues, but shorter (whereof it tooke his name as well as from the roote) spread vpon the ground, and lying close and round: before the stalke riseth out from the middle of these leaues, there doth appeare a deepe hollow place, like a hole, to bee seene a good while, which at length is filled vp with the stalke, rising thence vnto a foote or more high, bearing many starre-like flowers at the toppe, of a perfect blew colour, neare vnto a Violet, and sometimes of paler or bleake blew colour, hauing as it were a small cuppe in the middle, diuided into six peeces, without any threeds therein: the seede is blacke and round, but not shining: the roote is somewhat long, bigge belowe, and small aboue, like vnto the small roote of a Lilly, and composed of yellow scales, as a Lilly, but the scales are greater, and fewer in number. Hyacinthus Stellatus Lilifolius albus. The white Lilly leafed Starre Iacinth. The likenesse of this Iacinth with the former, causeth me to be briefe, and not to repeate the same things againe, that haue already been expressed: You may therefore vnderstand, that except in the colour of the flower, which in this is white, there is no difference betweene them. Flore arneo.I heare of one that should beare blush coloured flowers, but I haue not yet seene any such. The Place. These Iacinths haue been gathered on the Pyrenaean Hils, in that part of France that is called Aquitaine, and in some other places. The Time. These flower in Aprill, and sometimes later. The Names. Because the roote is so like vnto a Lilly, as the leafe is also, it hath most properly beene called Hyacinthus Stellatus Lilifolio & radice, or for breuity Lilifolius, that is, The Starry Lilly leafed Iacinth. It is called Sarahug by the Inhabitants where it groweth, as Clusius maketh the re∣port from Venerius, who further faith, that by experience they haue found the cattell to swell and dye, that haue eaten of the leaues thereof.
1 Hyacinthus stellatus praecox caruleus. The early blew starry Iacinth. 2 Hyacinthus stellatus pracox albus. The early white starry Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus stella∣tus Byzantinus nigra radice. The Turkie starry Iacinth with a blacke roote. 4 Hyacinthus Byzantinus alter siue flore Borginis. The other starry Iacinth of Constantinople. 5 Hyacinthus astibus maior. The greater Summer starry Iacinth. 6 Hyacinthus stellatus flore re. The ash coloured starry Iacinth. 7 Hy∣acinthus stellatus Lilifolius. The Lilly leafed starre Iacinth. 8 Hyacinthus Autumnalis. The Autumne Iacinth. 9 Scilla alba siue Hyacinthus marinus. The Sea Onion or Squill. depiction of flowers
Hyacinthus Autumnalis maior. The greater Autumne Iacinth. The greater Autumne Iacinth hath fiue or six very long and narrow greene leaues, lying vpon the ground; the stalkes are set at the toppe with many starre-like flowers, of a pale blewish purple colour, with some pale coloured threeds, tipt with blew, standing about the head in the middle, which in time growing ripe, containeth therein small blacke seede, and roundish: the roote is great and white on the outside. Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor. The lesser Autumne Iacinth. This lesser Iacinth hath such like long and small leaues, but narrower then the for∣mer: the stalke is not full so high, but beareth as many flowers on it as the other, which are of a pale or bleake purple colour, very like vnto it also: the roote and seed are like the former, but smaller. These both for the most part, beare their flowers and seede before the greene leaues rise vp much aboue the ground. Flore albo.There is a kinde hereof found that beareth white flowers, not differing in any other thing from the smaller purple kinde last mentioned. The Place. The first and last are onely kept in Gardens, and not knowne to vs where their naturall place of growing wilde may be. The second groweth wilde in many places of England. I gathered diuers rootes for my Garden, from the foote of a high banke by the Thames side, at the hither end of Chelsey, before you come at the Kings Barge-house. The Time. The greatest flowreth in the end of Iuly, and in August. The other in August and September, you shall seldome see this plant with flowers and greene leaues at one time together. The Names. They haue their names giuen them, as they are expressed in their titles, by all former Writers, except Daleschampius, or hee that set forth that great worke printed at Lyons; for hee contendeth with many words, that these plants can bee no Iacinths, because their flowers appeare before their leaues in Autumne, contrary to the true Iacinth, as he saith: and therefore he would faine haue it referred to Theophrastus bulbus in libro primo cap. 12. and calleth it his Tiphyum mentioned in that place, as also Bulbus aestivus Dale∣champij. Howsoeuer these things may carry some probability in them, yet the likenesse both of rootes, and flowers especially, hath caused very lear∣ned Writers to entitle them as is set downe, and therefore I may not but let them passe in the like manner. The Vertues. Both the rootes and the leaues of the Iacinths are somewhat cold and drying, but the seede much more. It stayeth the loosnesse of the belly. It is likewise said to hinder young persons from growing ripe too soone, the roote being drunke in wine. It helpeth them also whose vrine is stopt, and is auaileable for the yellow Iaundise; but as you heare some are deadly to cattell, I therefore wish all to bee well aduised which of these they will vse in any inward physicke. Scilla alba. The Sea Onion or Squill.
As I ended the discourse of both the true and the bastard Daffodils, with the Sea  kindes of both sorts; so I thinke it not amisse, to finish this of the Iacinths with the de∣scription of a Sea Iacinth, which (as you see) I take to be the Scilla, or Sea Onion, all his parts so nearely resembling a Iacinth, that I know not where to ranke him better then in this place, or rather not any where but here. You shall haue the description thereof, and then let the iudicious passe their sentence, as they thinke meetest. The Squill or Sea Onion (as many doe call it) hath diuers thicke leaues, broad, long, greene and hollowish in the middle, and with an eminent or swelling ribbe all along the backe of the leafe, (I relate it as I haue seene it, hauing shot forth his leaues in the ship by the way, as the Mariners that brought diuers rootes from out of the Straights, did sell them to mee and others for our vse) lying vpon the ground, somewhat like vnto the leaues of a Lilly: these spring vp after the flowers are past, and the seed ripe, they abiding all the Winter, and the next Spring, vntill the heate of the Summer hath spent and consumed them, and then about the end of August, or beginning of Septem∣ber the stalke with flowers ariseth out of the ground a foote and a halfe high, bearing many starre-like flowers on the toppe, in a long spike one aboue another, flowring by degrees, the lowest first, and so vpwards, whereby it is long in flowring, very like, as well in forme as bignesse, to the flowers of the great Starre of Bethlehem (these flow∣ers I haue likewise seene shooting out of some of the rootes, that haue been brought in the like manner:) after the flowers are past, there come vp in their places thicke and three square heads, wherin is contained such like flat, black, and round seed, as the Spa∣nish duskie Iacinth before described did beare, but greater: the root is great & white, couered with many peelings or couerings, as is plainly enough seen to any that know them, and that sometimes wee haue had rootes, that haue beene as bigge as a pretty childes head, and sometimes two growing together, each whereof was no lesse then is said of the other. Scilla rubra siue Pancratium verum. The red Sea Onion. The roote of this Squill, is greater oftentimes then of the former, the outer coates or peelings being reddish, bearing greater, longer, stiffer, and more hollow leaues, in a manner vpright: this bringeth such a like stalke and flowers, as the former doth, as Fabianus Ilges, Apothecary to the Duke of Briga, did signifie by the figure thereof drawne and sent to Clusius. The Place. They grow alwayes neare the Sea, and neuer farre off from it, but often on the very baich of the Sea, where it washeth ouer them all along the coasts of Spaine, Portugal, and Italy, and within the Straights in many places: it will not abide in any Garden farre from the Sea, no not in Italy, as it is related. The Time. The time wherein they flower, is expressed to be in August and Septem∣ber: the seede to be ripe in October and Nouember, and the greene leaues to spring vp in Nouember and December. The Names.
These are certainly the true kindes of Scilla that should bee vsed in medi∣cines, although (as Clusius reporteth) the Spaniards forbade him to taste of the red Squill, as of a most strong and present poison. Pliny hath made more sorts then can be found out yet to this day with vs: that Scilla that is called Epimenidia, because it might be eaten, is thought to be the great Orni∣thogalum, or Starre of Bethlehem. Pancratium is, I know, and as I said be∣fore, referred to that kinde of bastard Sea Daffodill; which is set forth be∣fore in the end of the history of the bastard Daffodils; and diuers also would make the Narcissus tertius Matthioli, which I call the true Sea Daffo∣dill, to be a Pancratium; but seeing Dioscorides (and no other is against him)  maketh Pancratium to be a kinde of Squill with reddish rootes, I dare not vphold their opinion against such manifest truth. The Vertues. The Squill or Sea Onion is wholly vsed physically with vs, because wee can receiue no pleasure from the sight of the flowers. Pliny writeth, that Pithagoras wrote a volume or booke of the properties thereof, for the sin∣gular effects it wrought; which booke is lost, yet the diuers vertues it hath is recorded by others, to be effectuall for the spleene, lungs, stomach, liuer, head and heart; and for dropsies, old coughs, Iaundise, and the wormes; that it cleareth the sight, helpeth the tooth-ache, cleanseth the head of scurfe, and running sores; and is an especiall Antidote against poison: and therefore is vsed as a principall ingredient into the Theriaca Andromachi, which we vsually call Venice Treakle. The Apothecaries prepare hereof, both Wine, Vinegar, and Oxymel or Syrupe, which is singular to extenu∣ate and expectorate tough flegme, which is the cause of much disquiet in the body, and an hinderer of concoction, or disgestion in the stomach, besides diuers other wayes, wherein the scales of the rootes, being dryed, are vsed. And Galen hath sufficiently explained the qualities and properties thereof, in his eight Booke of Simples. CHAP. XII. Ornithogalum. Starre of Bethlehem. AFter the Family of the Iacinths, must needes follow the kindes of Starre-flow∣ers, or Starres of Bethlehem, as they are called, for that they doe so nearely re∣semble them, that diuers haue named some of them Iacinths, and referred them to that kindred: all of them, both in roote, leafe, and flower, come nearer vnto the Iacinths, then vnto any other plant. They shall therefore bee next described, euery one in their order, the greatest first, and the rest following. Ornithogalum Arabicum. The great Starre-flower of Arabia.
This Arabian Starre-flower hath many broad, and long greene leaues, very like vn∣to the leaues of the Orientall Iacinth, but lying for the most part vpon the ground, among which riseth vp a round greene stalke, almost two foote high, bearing at the toppe diuers large flowers, standing vpon long foote-stalkes, and at the bottome of euery one of them a small short pointed greene leafe: these flowers are made of six pure white leaues a peece, laid open as large as an ordinary Daffodill, but of the forme of a Starre Iacinth, or Starre of Bethlehem, which close as they doe euery night, and open themselues in the day time, especially in the Sunne, the smell whereof is pretty sweete, but weake: in the middle of the flower is a blackish head, composed with six white threeds, tipt with yellow pendents: the seede hath not beene obserued with vs: the roote is great and white, with a flat bottome, very impatient of our cold Winters, so that it seldome prospereth or abideth with vs; for although sometimes it doe abide a Winter in the ground, yet it often lyeth without springing blade, or any thing else a whole yeare, and then perisheth: or if it doe spring, yet many doe not beare, and most after their first bearing doe decay and perish. But if any be desirous, to know how to preserue the roote of this plant, or of many other bulbous rootes that are tender, such as the great double white Daffodill of Constantinople, and other fine Daffodils, that come from hot Countries; let them keepe this rule: Let either the roote be planted in a large pot, or tubbe of earth, and housed all the Winter, that so it may bee defended from the frosts; Or else (which is the easier way) keepe the roote out of the ground euery yeare, from September, after the leaues and stalkes are past, vntill February, in  some dry, but not hot or windy place, and then plant it in the ground vnder a South wall, or such like defended place, which will spring, and no doubt prosper well there, in regard the greatest and deepest frosts are past after February, so that seldome any great frosts come after, to pierce so deepe as the roote is to be set, or thereby to doe any great harme to it in such a place. The Place. This hath been often sent out of Turkie, and likewise out of Italy; I had likewise two rootes sent mee out of Spaine by Guillaume Boel before re∣membred, which (as hee said) hee gathered there, but they prospered not with me, for want of the knowledge of the former rule. It may be likely that Arabia is the place, from whence they of Constantinople receiue it. The Time. It flowreth in May, if it be of the first yeares bringing; or in Iune, if it haue been ordered after the manner before set downe. The Names. It hath been sent out of Italy by the name of Lilium Alexandrinum, The Lilly of Alexandria, but it hath no affinity with any Lilly. Others call it Hyacinthus Arabicus; and the Italians, Iacintho del pater nostro: but it is no Ia∣cinth neither, although the flowers be like some of them. Some also would referre it to a Narcissus or Daffodill, and it doth as little agree with it, as with a Lilly, although his flowers in largenesse and whitenesse resemble a Daffodill. Clusius hath most fitly referred it to the stocke or kindred of Ornithogala, or Starres of Bethlehem, as wee call them in English, and from the Turkish name, Zumbul Arabi, entituled it Ornithogalum Arabicum, although Zumbul, as I haue before declared, is with them, a Iacinth, wee may call it in English, The Arabian Starre-flower, or Starre of Bethlehem, or the great Starre-flower of Arabia. 1. Ornithogalum maximum album. The greatest white Starre-flower, or Starre of Bethlehem. This great Starre-flower hath many faire, broad, long, and very fresh green leaues, rising vp very early, and are greater, longer, and greener then the leaues of any Ori∣entall Iacinth, which doe abide greene, from the beginning or middle of Ianuary, or before sometimes, vntill the end of May, at which time they begin to fade, and the stalke with the head of flowers beginneth to rise, so that it will haue either few or no leaues at all, when the flowers are blowne: the stalke is strong, round, and firme, rising two foote high or more, bearing at the toppe a great bush of flowers, seeming at the first to be a great greene eare of corne, for it is made spike-fashion, which when the flowers are blowne, doth rise to be very high, slender or small at the head aboue, and broad spread and bushing below, so that it is long in flowring; for they flower below first, and so vpwards by degrees: these flowers are snow white, without any line on the backside, and is therein like vnto the former, as also in whitenesse, but nothing so large, with a white vmbone or head in the middle, beset with many white threeds, tipt with yellow: the seede is blacke and round, contained in three square heads: the roote is great, thicke, and short, and somewhat yellowish on the outside, with a flat bottome, both like the former, and the next that followeth. 2. Ornithogalum maius spicatum album. The great white spiked Starre-flower.
This spiked Starre-flower in his growing, is somewhat like vnto the last described,  but springeth not vp so early, nor hath his leaues so greene, or large, but hath broad, long, whitish greene hollow leaues, pointed at the end, among which riseth vp the stalke, which is strong and high, as the former, hauing a great bush of flowers at the toppe, standing spike-fashion, somewhat like the former, flowring in the same maner by degrees, first below, and so vpwards; but it is not so thicke set with flowers, nor so farre spread at the bottome as it, the flowers also are not so white, and each of the leaues of them haue a greene line downe the backe, leauing the edges on both sides white: after the flowers are past, the heads for seede grow three square, like the other, bearing such like blacke seede therein: the roote hereof is vsually bigger then the last, and whiter on the outside. 3. Ornithogalum Pannonicum. The Hungarian Starre-flower. This Hungarian Starre-flower shooteth out diuers narrow, long, whitish greene leaues, spread vpon the ground before Winter, which are very like vnto the leaues of Gilloflowers, and so abide aboue ground, hauing a stalke rising in the middle of them the next Spring, about halfe a foote high or thereabouts, bearing many white flowers at the toppe, with greene lines downe the backe of them, very like vnto the ordi∣nary Starres of Bethlehem: the roote is greater, thicker, and longer then the ordinary Starres, and for the most part, two ioyned together, somewhat grayish on the outside. 4. Ornithogalum vulgare. The Starre of Bethlehem. The ordinary Starre of Bethlehem is so common, and well knowne in all coun∣tries and places, that it is almost needlesse to describe it, hauing many greene leaues with white lines therein, and a few white flowers set about the toppe of the stalke, with greenish lines downe the backe: the roote is whitish, and encreaseth aboundantly. 5. Asphodelus bulbosus Galeni, siue Ornithogalum maius flore subuirescente. The bulbous Asphodill, or greene Starre-flower. Diuers haue referred this plant vnto the Asphodils, because (as I thinke) the flowers hereof are straked on the backe, and the leaues long and narrow, like vnto the Aspho∣dils; but the roote of this being bulbous, I rather (as some others doe) ioyne it with the Ornithogala, for they also haue strakes on the backe of the flowers. It hath many whitish greene leaues, long and narrow, spread vpon the ground, which spring vp in the beginning of the yeare, and abide vntill May, and then they withering, the stalke springeth vp almost as high as the first, hauing many pale yellowish greene flowers, but smaller, and growing more sparsedly about the stalke vpon short foot-stalkes, but in a reasonable long head spike-fashion: the seede is like vnto the second kinde, but smal∣ler: the roote is somewhat yellowish, like the first great white kinde. The Place. The first is onely nursed in Gardens, his originall being not well knowne, yet some attribute it vnto Pannonia or Hungary. The second hath been found neare vnto Barcinone, and Toledo in Spaine. The third was found in Hungary by Clusius. Our ordinary euery where in the fields of Italy and France, and (as it is said) in England also. And the last groweth likewise by the corne fields in the vpper Hungary. The Time. They flower in Aprill and May, and sometimes in Iune. The Names.
The first is called by Clusius Ornithogalum maximum album, because it is 1 Ornithogalum Arabicum. The great starre-flower of Arabia. 2 Ornithogalum maximum album The greatest white starre flower. 3 Ornithogalum maius spi∣catum album. The great white spiked starre flower. 4 Ornithogalum Pannonicum album. The Hungarian starre-flower. 5 Asphodalus bulbosus Galeni, siue Or∣nithogalum maius subuirescente flore. The bulbed Asphodill, or greene starre flower. 6 Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus. The little starre-flower of Spaine. 7 Ornithogalum luteum. The yellow starre-flower of Bethlehem. 8 Ornithogalum Neapolitanum. The starre-flower of Naples. depiction of flowers
greater then the next, which hee tooke formerly for the greatest: but it might more fitly, in my iudgement, bee called Asphodelus bulbosus albus (if there be any Asphodelus bulbosus at all) because this doth so nearly resemble that, both in the early springing, and the decay of the greene leaues, when the stalkes of flowers doe rise vp. Diuers also doe call it Ornithogalum Pan∣nonicum maximum album. The second hath his name in his title, as most authors doe set it downe, yet in the great Herball referred to Dalechampius, it is called Ornithogalum magnum Myconi. The third hath his name from the place of his birth, and the other from his popularity, yet Dodonaeus calleth it Bulbus Leucanthemos. The last is called by diuers Asphodelo-hyacinthinus, and Hyacintho-aspho∣delus Galeni. Dodonaeus calleth it Asphodelus faemina, and Asphodelus bul∣bosus. But Lobel, and Gerrard from him, and Dodonaeus, doe make this to haue white flowers, whereas all that I haue seene, both in mine owne, and in others Gardens, bore greenish flowers, as Clusius setteth it truely downe▪ Lobel seemeth in the description of this, to confound the Ornithogalum of Mompelier with it, and calleth it Asphodelus hyacinthinus forte Galeni, and saith that some would call it Pancratium Monspeliense, and Asphodelus Galeni. But as I haue shewed, the Ornithogalum spicatum and this, doe plainly differ the one from the other, and are not both to be called by one name, nor to be reckoned one, but two distinct plants. Ornithogalum Aethiopicum. The Starre-flower of Aethiopia. The leaues of this plant are a foote long, and at the least an inch broad, which being broken, are no lesse woolly then the woolly Iacinth: the stalke is a cubit high, strong and greene; from the middle whereof vnto the toppe, stand large snow white flow∣ers, vpon long, greene, thicke foot-stalkes, and yellowish at the bottome of the flower; in the middle whereof stand six white threeds, tipt with yellow chiues, compassing the head, which is three square, and long containing the seede: the roote is thicke and round, somewhat like the Asphodelus Galeni. The Place. This plant was gathered by some Hollanders, on the West side of the Cape of good Hope. The Time. It flowred about the end of August with those that had it. The Names. Because it came from that part of the continent beyond the line, which is reckoned a part of Aethiopia, it is thereupon so called as it is set downe. Ornithogalum Neopolitanum. The Starre-flower of Naples. This beautifull plant riseth out of the ground very early, with foure or fiue hollow pointed leaues, standing round together, of a whitish greene colour, with a white line downe the middle of euery leafe on the inside, somewhat narrow, but long, (Fabius Columna saith, three foot long in Italy, but it is not so with vs) in the middle of these leaues riseth vp the stalke, a foote and a halfe high, bearing diuers flowers at the toppe, euery one standing in a little cuppe or huske, which is diuided into three or foure parts, hanging downe very long about the heads for seede: after the flower is past, these flowers doe all hang downe their heads, and open one way, although their little foot-stalkes come forth on all sides of the greater stalke, being large, and composed of six long leaues, of a pure white on the inside, and of a blewish or whitish greene colour
on the outside, leauing the edges of euery leafe white on both sides: in the middle of these flowers stand other small flowers, each of them also made of six small white leaues a peece, which meeting together, seeme to make the shew of a cuppe, within which are contained six white threeds, tipt with yellow, and a long white pointell in the middle of them, being without any sent at all: after the flowers are past, come vp great round heads, which are too heauie for the stalke to beare; and therefore lye downe vpon the leaues or ground, hauing certaine lines or stripes on the outside, wherein is contained round, blacke, rough seede: the roote is great and white, and somewhat flat at the bottome, as diuers of these kindes are, and doe multiply as plen∣tifully into small bulbes as the common or any other. The Place. This Starre-flower groweth in the Medowes in diuers places of Naples, as Fabius Columna, and Ferrantes Imperatus doe testifie, from whence they haue been sent. And Matthiolus, who setteth out the figure thereof among his Daffodils, had (it should seeme) seene it grow with him. The Time. It flowreth in May, although it begin to spring out of the ground often∣times in Nouember, but most vsually in Ianuary: the seede is ripe in Iuly. The Names. Matthiolus reckoneth this (as is said) among the Daffodils, for no other respect, as I conceiue, then that he accounted the middle flower to bee the cuppe or trunke of a Daffodill, which it doth somewhat resemble, and set∣teth it forth in the fourth place, whereupon many doe call it Narcissus quar∣tus Matthioli, The fourth Daffodill of Matthiolus. Fabius Columna calleth it Hyacinthus aruorum Ornithogali flore. Clusius (to whom Imperatus sent it, in stead of the Arabian which hee desired) calleth it of the place from whence he receiued it, Ornithogalum Neopolitanum, and we thereafter call it in English, The Starre-flower of Naples. Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus. The little Starre-flower of Spaine. Clusius hath set forth this plant among his Ornithogala or Starre-flowers, and al∣though it doth in my minde come nearer to a Hyacinthus, then to Ornithogalum, yet pardon it, and let it passe as he doth. From a little round whitish roote, springeth vp in the beginning of the yeare, fiue or six small long green leaues, without any white line in the middle of them, among which rise vp one or two small stalkes, an hand length high or better, bearing seuen or eight, or more flowers, growing as it were in a tuft or vmbell, with small long leaues at the foote of euery stalke, the lower flowers being equall in length with the vppermost, of a pale whitish blew or ash colour, with a strake or line downe the backe of euery leafe of them, with some white threeds standing a∣bout a blewish head in the middle: these flowers passe away quickly, and giue no seed, so that it is not knowne what seede it beareth. The Place. This groweth in Spaine, and from thence hath been brought to vs. The Time. It flowreth in May. The Names. It hath no other name then is set down in the title, being but lately found out.
1. Ornithogalum album vnifolium. The white starre-flower with one blade. This little starre-flower I bring into this place, as the fittest in my opinion where to place it, vntill my minde change to alter it. It hath a very small round white roote, from whence springeth vp one very long and round greene leafe, like vnto a rush, but that for about two or three inches aboue the ground, it is a little flat, and from thence springeth forth a small stalke not aboue three or foure inches high, bearing at the top thereof three or foure small white flowers, consisting of six leaues a peece, within which are six white chiues, tipt with yellow pendents, standing about a small three square head, that hath a white pointell sticking as it were in the middest thereof: the flower is pretty and sweete, but not heady. Ornithogalum luteum. The yellow Starre of Bethlehem. This yellow Starre-flower riseth vp at the first, with one long, round, greenish leafe, which openeth it selfe somewhat aboue the ground, and giueth out another small leafe, lesser and shorter then the first, and afterward the stalke riseth from thence also, being foure or fiue inches high, bearing at the toppe three or foure small green leaues, and among them foure or fiue small yellow starre-like flowers, with a greenish line or streake downe the backe of euery leafe, and some small reddish yellow threeds in the middle: it seldome giueth seede: the roote is round, whitish, and somewhat cleare, very apt to perish, if it bee any little while kept dry out of the ground, as I haue twice tryed to my losse. The Place. The first grew in Portugall, and Clusius first of all others desciphers it. The other is found in many places both of Germany and Hungary, in the moister grounds. The Time. The first flowreth in May: the other in Aprill, and sometimes in March. The Names. Carolus Clusius calleth the first Bulbus vnifolius, or Bolbine, but referreth it not to the stocke or kindred of any plant; but (as you see) I haue ranked it with the small sorts of Ornithogalum, and giue it the name accordingly. The other is referred for likenesse of forme, and not for colour, vnto the Ornithogala, or Starres of Bethlehem. It is called by Tragus and Fuchsius Bulbus siluestris, because of the obuiousnesse. Cordus taketh it to be Sisyrin∣chium. Lacuna calleth it Bulbus esculentus. Lobel and others in these dayes generally, Ornithogalum luteum, and wee thereafter in English, The yellow Starre-flower, or Starre of Bethlehem. The Vertues. The first kinde being but lately found out, is not knowne to be vsed. The rootes of the common or vulgar, are (as Matthiolus saith) much eaten by poore people in Italy, either rawe or roasted, being sweeter in taste then any Chesnut, and seruing as well for a necessary food as for delight. It is doubtfull whether any of the rest may be so vsed; for I know not any in our Land hath made any experience. There are many other sorts of Starre-flowers, which are fitter for a generall then this History; and therefore I referre them thereunto.
CHAP. XIII. Moly. Wilde Garlicke. VNto the former Starre-flowers, must needes bee ioyned another tribe or kind∣red, which carry their straked flowers Starre-fashion, not spikewise, but in a tuft or vmbell thicke thrust or set together. And although diuers of them smell not as the former, but most of their first Grandfathers house, yet all doe not so; for some of them are of an excellent sent. Of the whole Family, there are a great many which I must leaue, I will onely select out a few for this our Garden, whose flowers for their beauty of statelinesse, forme, or colour, are fit to bee entertained, and take place therein, euery one according to his worth, and are accepted of with the louers of these delights. 1. Moly Homericum, vel potius Theophrasti. The greatest Moly of Homer. Homers Moly (for so it is most vsually called with vs) riseth vp most commonly with two, and sometimes with three great, thicke, long, and hollow guttured leaues, of a whitish greene colour, very neare the colour of the Tulipa leafe, hauing some∣times at the end of some of the leaues, and sometimes apart by it selfe, a whitist round small button, like vnto a small bulbe, the like whereof also, but greater, doth grow be∣tweene the bottome of the leaues and the stalke neare the ground, which being plan∣ted when it is ripe, will grow into a roote of the same kinde: among these leaues riseth vp a round, strong, and tall stalke, a yard high or better, bare or naked vnto the toppe, where it beareth a great tuft or vmbell of pale purplish flowers, all of them almost standing vpon equall foot-stalkes, or not one much higher then another, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, striped downe the backe with a small pale line, hauing a round head or vmbone with some threeds about it in the midst: These flowers doe abide a great while blowne before they vade, which smell not very strong, like any Onion or Garlicke, but of a faint smell: and after they are past come the seede, which is blacke, wrapped in white close huskes: the roote groweth very great, sometimes bigger then any mans closed fist, smelling strong like Garlicke, whitish on the outside, and greene at the toppe, if it be but a while bare from the earth about it. 2. Moly Indicum siue Caucafon. The Indian Moly. The Indian Moly hath such like thicke large leaues, as the Homers Moly hath, but shorter and broader, in the middle whereof riseth vp a short weake stalke, almost flat, not hauing any flowers vpon it, but a head or cluster of greenish scaly bulbes, inclo∣sed at the first in a large thinne skinne, which being open, euery bulbe sheweth it selfe, standing close one vnto another vpon his foot-stalke, of the bignesse of an Acorne, which being planted, will grow to bee a plant of his owne kinde: the roote is white and great, couered with a darke coate or skinne, which encreaseth but little vnder ground; but besides that head, it beareth small bulbes aboue the ground, at the bot∣tome of the leaues next vnto the stalke, like vnto the former. The Place. Both these doe grow in diuers places of Spaine, Italy, and Greece; for the last hath been sent out of Turkie among other rootes. Ferrantes Impe∣ratus a learned Apothecary of Naples, sent it to diuers of his friends in these parts, and hath described it in his naturall history among other plants, printed in the Italian tongue. It grew also with Iohn Tradescante at Canterbury, who sent me the head of bulbes to see, and afterwards a roote, to plant it in my Garden.
The Time. The first flowreth in the end of May, and abideth vnto the midst of Iuly, and sometimes longer. The other beareth his head of bulbes in Iune and Iuly. The Names. We haue receiued them by their names expressed in their titles, yet the last hath also been sent by the name of Ornithogalum Italicum, but as all may easily see, it is not of that kindred. 1. Moly montanum Pannonicum bulbiferum primum. The first bulbed Moly of Hungary. This first Hungarian Moly hath three or foure broad and long greene leaues, folded together at the first, which after open themselues, and are carried vp with the stalke, standing thereon one aboue another, which is a foote high; at the toppe whereof doe grow a few sad reddish bulbes, and betweene them long footstalkes, bearing flowers of a pale purplish colour; after which followeth blacke seede, inclosed in roundish heads: the roote is not great, but white on the outside, very like vnto the roote of Serpents Moly, hereafter described, encreasing much vnder ground, & smelling strong. 2. Moly montanum Pannonicum bulbiferum secundum. The second bulbed Moly of Hungary. The second Moly hath narrower greene leaues then the former: the stalke is about the same height, and beareth at the toppe a great cluster of small greene bulbes, which after turne of a darker colour; from among which come forth long foot-stalks, where∣on stand purplish flowers: the roote is couered with a blackish purple coate or skinne. 3. Moly Serpentinum. Serpents Moly. This Moly must also be ioyned vnto the bulbous Molyes, as of kindred with them, yet of greater beauty and delight, because the bulbes on the heads of the small stalkes are redder, and more pleasant to behold: the stalke is lower, and his grassie winding leaues, which turne themselues (whereof it tooke the name) are smaller, and of a whi∣ter greene colour: it beareth among the bulbes purplish flowers also, but more beau∣tifull, the sent whereof is nothing so strong: the roote is small, round, and whitish, en∣creasing into a number of small rootes, no bigger then pease round about the greater roote. 4. Moly caule & folijs triangularibus. The three cornered Moly. This three square Moly hath foure or fiue long, and somewhat broad pale greene leaues, flat on the vpper side, and with a ridge downe the backe of the leafe, which ma∣keth it seeme three square: the stalke which riseth vp a foote and a halfe high or bet∣ter, is three square or three cornered also, bearing at the toppe out of a skinnie huske diuers white flowers, somewhat large and long, almost bell-fashion, with stripes of greene downe the middle of euery leafe, and a few chiues tipt with yellow in the middle about the head, wherein when it is ripe, is inclosed small blacke seede: the roote is white on the outside, and very like the yellow Moly; both roote, leafe, and flower hath a smacke, but not very strong of Garlicke. 5. Moly Narcissinis folijs. Daffodill leafed Moly.
This Moly hath many long, narrow, and flat greene leaues, very like vnto the leaues of a Daffodill, from whence it tooke his name (or rather of the early greater Leucoium 1 Moly Homericum vel potius Theophrasti. The greatest Moly of Homer. 2 Moly Indicum siue Caucafon. The Indian Moly. 3 Moly Pannonicum bulbiserum. The bulbed Moly of Hungary. 4 Moly Serpentinum. Serpents Moly. 5 Moly purpureum Neapolitanum The purplish Moly of Naples. 6 Moly caule & folijs triangularibus. The three cornered Moly. 7 Moly latifolium flore luteo. The yellow Moly. 8 Moly Dioscorideum Hispanicum The Spanish Moly of Dioscorides. 9 Moly Zibettinum vel Moschatinum. The sweete smelling Moly of Mompelier. 10 Moly sertinum Coniferum. The late Pineapple Moly. depiction of flowers
bulbosum, or bulbed Violet before described, ioyned next vnto the Daffodils, because it is so like them) among which riseth vp two or three stalkes sometimes, each of a foot and a halfe high, bearing at the toppe, inclosed in a skinny hose, as all the Molyes haue, a number of small purplish flowers, which doe not long abide, but quickly fade: the seede is blacke as others are; the roote is sometimes knobbed, and more often bulbed, hauing in the knobs some markes of the old stalkes to be seene in them, and smelleth somewhat like Garlicke, whereby it may be knowne. 6. Moly montanum latifolium luteo flore. The yellow Moly. The yellow Moly hath but one long and broad leafe when it doth not beare flower, but when it will beare flower, it hath two long and broad leaues, yet one alwaies longer and broader then the other, which are both of the same colour, and neare the bignesse of a reasonable Tulipa leafe: betweene these leaues groweth a slender stalke, bearing at the toppe a tuft or vmbell of yellow flowers out of a skinnie hose, which parteth three wayes, made of six leaues a peece, laid open like a Starre, with a greenish backe or outside, and with some yellow threeds in the middle: the seede is blacke, like vnto others: the roote is whitish, two for the most part ioyned together, which encreaseth quickly, and smelleth very strong of Garlicke, as both flowers and leaues doe also. 7. Moly Pyrenaeum purpureum. The purple mountaine Moly. This purple Moly hath two or three leaues, somewhat like the former yellow Moly, but not so broad, nor so white: the stalke hath not so many flowers thereon, but more sparingly, and of an vnpleasant purple colour: the roote is whitish, smelling somewhat strongly of Garlicke, but quickly perisheth with the extremity of our cold Winters, which it will not abide vnlesse it be defended. 8. Moly montanum latifolium purpureum Hispanicum. The purple Spanish Moly. This Moly hath two broad and very long greene leaues, like vnto the yellow Moly, in this, that they doe compasse one another at the bottome of them, between which riseth vp a strong round stalke, two foote high or more, bearing at the toppe, out of a thinne huske, a number of faire large flowers vpon long foot-stalkes, consisting of six leaues a peece, spread open like a Starre, of a fine delayed purple or blush colour, with diuers threeds of the same colour, tipt with yellow, standing about the middle head: betweene the stalke and the bottome of the leaues it hath some small bulbes growing, which being planted, will soone spring and encrease: the roote also being small and round, with many fibres thereat, hath many small bulbes shooting from them; but neither roote, leafe, nor flower, hath any ill sent of Garlicke at all. 9. Moly purpureum Neapolitanum. The purple Moly of Naples. The Neapolitan Moly hath three or foure small long greene leaues set vpon the stalke after it is risen vp, which beareth a round head of very fine purple flowers, made of six leaues a peece, but so closing together at the edge, that they seeme like vnto small cuppes, neuer laying themselues open, as the other doe; this hath some sent of his originall, but the roote more then any part else, which is white and round, quickly encreasing as most of the Molyes doe. 10. Moly pyxidatum argenteum Hispanicum. The Spanish siluer cupped Moly. This Spanish Moly hath two or three very long rush like leaues, which rise vp with the stalke, or rather vanish away when the stalke is risen vp to bee three foote high or more, bearing a great head of flowers, standing close at the first, but afterwards sprea∣ding much one from another, euery flower vpon a long foote-stalke, being of a white
siluer colour, with stripes or lines on euery side, and fashioned small and hollow, like a cuppe or boxe: the seede I could neuer obserue, because it flowreth so late, that the Winter hindereth it from bearing seede with vs: the roote is small and round, white, and in a manner transparent, at least so shining, as if it were so, and encreaseth nothing so much, as many of the other sorts: this hath no ill sent at all, but rather a pretty smell, not to bee misliked. 11. Moly serotinum Coniferum. The late Pineapple Moly. This late Moly that was sent me with the last described, and others also from Spain, riseth vp with one long greene leafe, hollow and round vnto the end, towards this end on the one side, breaketh out a head of flowers, enclosed in a thinne skinne, which after it hath so stood a good while, (the leafe in the meane time rising higher, and growing harder, becommeth the stalke) breaketh, and sheweth a great bush or head of buds for flowers, thicke thrust together, fashioned very like vnto the forme of a Pineapple (from whence I gaue it the name) of the bigness of a Walnut: after this head hath stood in this manner a moneth or thereabouts, the flowers shew themselues to bee of a fine delayed or whitish purple colour, with diuers stripes in euery of them, of the same cup-fashion with the former, but not opening so plainly, so that they cannot bee discerned to bee open, without good heede and obseruation. It flowreth so late in Autumne, that the early frosts doe quickly spoile the beauty of it, and soone cause it to rotte: the roote is small and round, and shining like the last, very tender also, as not able to abide our sharpe Winters, which hath caused it vtterly to perish with me. 12. Moly Dioscorideum. Dioscorides his Moly. The roote of this small Moly is transparent within, but couered with a thicke yel∣lowish skinne, of the bignesse of an Hasell Nut, or somewhat bigger, which sendeth forth three or foure narrow grassie leaues, long and hollow, and a little bending down∣wards, of a whitish greene colour, among which riseth vp a slender weake stalke, a foot and a halfe high, bearing at the toppe, out of a thinne skinne, a tuft of milke white flowers, very like vnto those of Ramsons, which stand a pretty while in their beauty, and then passe away for the most part without giuing any seede: this hath little or no sent of Garlicke. We haue another of this sort that is lesser, and the flowers rounder pointed. 13. Moly Dioscorideum Hispanicum. The Spanish Moly of Dioscorides. This Moly came vnto me among other Molyes from Spaine, and is in all things like vnto the last described, but fairer, larger, and of much more beauty, as hauing his white flowers twice as great as the former; but (as it seemeth) very impatient of our Winters, which it could not at any hand endure, but quickly perished, as some others that came with it also. 14. Moly Moschatinum vel Zibettinum Monspeliense. The sweete smelling Moly of Mompelier. This sweete Moly, which I haue kept for the last, to close vp your senses, is the smallest, and the finest of all the rest, hauing foure or fiue small greene leaues, almost as fine as haires, or like the leaues of the Feather-grasse: the stalke is a∣bout a foote high, bearing fiue or six or more small white flowers, laid open like Starres, made of six leaues a peece, of an excellent sweete sent, resem∣bling Muske or Ciuet; for diuers haue diuersly censured of it. It flowreth late in the yeare, so that if the precedent Summer bee either ouer moist, or the Au∣tumne ouer early cold, this will not haue that sweete sent, that it will haue in a hot drie time, and besides must be carefully respected: for it will hardly abide the extremity of our sharpe Winters.
The Place. The places of these Molyes, are for the most part expressed in their ti∣tles, or in their descriptions. The Time. The time is set downe, for the most part to bee in Iune and Iuly, the rest later. The Names. To make further relation of names then are expressed in their tiles, were needlesse; let these therefore suffice. The Vertues. All these sorts of Molyes are small kindes of wilde Garlicke, and are to be vsed for the same purposes that the great Garden Garlicke is, although much weaker in their effects. For any other especiall property is in any of these, more than to furnish a Garden of variety, I haue not heard at all. And thus much may suffice of these kindes for our Garden, reseruing manie others that might be spoken of, to a generall worke, or to my Garden of Simples, which as God shall enable me, and time giue leaue, may shew it self to the world, to abide the iudicious and criticke censures of all. CHAP. XIIII. Asphodelus. The Asphodill. THere remaine some other flowers, like vnto the last described, to be specified, which although they haue no bulbous rootes, yet I thinke them fittest to bee here mentioned, that so I may ioyne those of neerest similitude together, vn∣till I haue finished the rest that are to follow. 1. Asphodelus maior albus ramosus. The great white branched Asphodill. The great white Asphodill hath many long, and narrow, hollow three square leaues, sharpe pointed, lying vpon the ground round about the roote: the stalke is smooth, round, and naked without leaues, which riseth from the midst of them, di∣uided at the toppe into diuers branches, if the plant bee of any long continuance, or else but into two or three small branches, from the sides of the maine great one, whereon doe stand many large flowers Starre-fashion, made of six leaues a peece, whitish on the inside, and straked with a purplish line downe the backside of euery leafe, hauing in the middle of the flowers some small yellow threeds: the seede is blacke, and three square, greater then the seede of Bucke wheate, contained in roundish heads, which open into three parts: the roote is composed of many tube∣rous long clogges, thickest in the middle, and smaller at both ends, fastened together at the head, of a darke grayish colour on the outside, and yellow within. 2. Asphodelus albus non ramosus. The white vnbranched Aspodill.
The vnbranched Asphodill is like vnto the former, both in leaues and flowers, but that the flowers of this are whiter, and without any line or strake on the backe side,  and the stalkes are without branches: the rootes likewise are smaller, and fewer, but made after the same fashion. 3. Asphodelus maior flore carneo. The blush coloured Asphodill. This Asphodill is like to the last in forme of leaues and branches, and differeth in this, that his leaues are marked with some spots, and the flowers are of a blush or flesh colour, in all other things alike. 4. Asphodelus minimus albus. The least white Asphodill. This least Asphodill hath foure or fiue very narrow long leaues, yet seeming three square like the greatest, bearing a small stalke, of about a foote high among them, without any branches, and at the toppe a few white flowers, straked both within and without, with a purplish line in the middle of euery leafe. The rootes are such like tu∣berous clogges as are in the former, but much lesser. 5. Asphodelus albus minor siue Fistulosus. The little hollow white Aspnodill. This little white Asphodill hath a number of leaues growing thicke together, thicker and greener then those of the small yellow Asphodill, or Kings Speare next following, among which riseth vp diuers round stalkes, bearing flowers from the mid∣dle to the toppe, Starre-fashion, with small greene leaues among them, which are white on the inside, and striped on the backe with purple lines, like vnto the first de∣scribed: the seede, and heads containing them, are three square, like the seede of the little yellow Asphodill: the rootes of this kinde are not glandulous, as the former, but stringie, long and white: the whole plant is very impatient of our cold Winters, and quickly perisheth, if it be not carefully preserued, both from the cold, and much wet in the Winter, by housing it; and then it will abide many yeares: for it is not an annu∣all plant, as many haue thought. 6. Asphodelus luteus minor, siue Hastula regia. The small yellow Asphodill, or Kings speare. This small yellow Asphodill, which is vsually called the Kings speare, hath many long narrow edged leaues, which make them seeme three square, of a blewish or whi∣tish greene colour: the stalke riseth vp three foote high oftentimes, beset with small long leaues vp vnto the very flowers, which grow thicke together spike-fashion one aboue another, for a great length, and wholly yellow, laid open like a Starre, some∣what greater then the last white Asphodill, and smaller then the first, which when they are past yeeld round heads, containing blacke cornered seede, almost three square: the rootes are many long yellow strings, which spreading in the ground, doe much encrease. The Place. All these Asphodils doe grow naturally in Spaine and France, and from thence were first brought vnto vs, to furnish our Gardens. The Time. All the glandulous rooted Asphodils doe flower some in May, and some in Iune; but the two last doe flower, the yellow or last of them in Iuly, and the former white one in August and September, and vntill the cold and winter hinder it. The Names.
Their seuerall names are giuen them in their titles, as much as is fit for  this discourse. For to shew you that the Greekes doe call the stalke of the great Asphodill , and the Latines Albucum, or what else belongeth to them, is fitter for another worke, vnto which I leaue them. The bastard Asphodils should follow next in place, if this worke were fit for them; but because I haue tyed my selfe to expresse onely those flowers and plants, that for their beauty, or sent, or both, doe furnish a Garden of Pleasure, and they haue none, I leaue them to a generall History of plants, or that Garden of Simples before spoken of, and will describe the Lilly Asphodils, and the Phalangia or Spider-worts, which are remaining of those, that ioyne in name or fashion, and are to be here inserted, before I passe to the rest of the bulbous rootes. 1. Liliasphodelus phaeniceus. The gold red Day Lilly. Because the rootes of this and the next, doe so nearely agree with the two last reci∣ted Asphodils, I haue set them in this place, although some doe place them next after the Lillies, because their flowers doe come nearest in forme vnto Lillies; but whether you will call them Asphodils with Lilly flowers, as I thinke it fittest, or Lillies with Asphodill rootes, or Lillies without bulbous rootes, as others doe, I will not contend. The red Day Lilly hath diuers broad and long fresh greene leaues, folded at the first as it were double, which after open, and remaine a little hollow in the middle; among which riseth vp a naked stalke three foot high, bearing at the toppe many flow∣ers, one not much distant from another, and flowring one after another, not hauing lightly aboue one flower blown open in a day, & that but for a day, not lasting longer, but closing at night, and not opening againe; whereupon it had his English name, The Lilly for a day: these flowers are almost as large as the flowers of the white Lilly, and made after the same fashion, but of a faire gold red, or Orange tawny colour. I could neuer obserue any seede to follow these flowers; for they seeme the next day after they haue flowred, (except the time be faire and dry) to bee so rotten, as if they had lyen in wet to rotte them, whereby I thinke no seede can follow: the rootes are many thicke and long yellow knobbed strings, like vnto the small yellow Asphodill rootes, but somewhat greater, running vnder ground in like sort, and shooting young heads round about. 2. Liliashodelus luteus. The yellow Day Lilly. I shall not neede to make a repetition of the description of this Day Lilly, hauing giuen you one so amply before, because this doth agree thereunto so nearely, as that it might seeme the same; these differences onely it hath, the leaues are not fully so large, nor the flower so great or spread open, and the colour thereof is of a faire yel∣low wholly, and very sweet, which abideth blowne many daies before it fade, and hath giuen blacke round seede, growing in round heads, like the heads of the small yellow Asphodill, but not so great. Clusius hath set downe, that it was reported, that there should be another Liliaspho∣dill with a white flower, but we can heare of none such as yet; but I rather thinke, that they that gaue that report might be mistaken, in thinking the Sauoye Spider-wort to be a white Liliasphodill, which indeede is so like, that one not well experienced, or not well regarding it, may soone take one for another. The Place. Their originall is many moist places in Germany. The Time. They flower in May and Iune. The Names.
They are called by some Liliago, and Lilium non bulbosum, and Liliaspho∣delus. 1 Asphodelus maior albus ramosus. The great white branched Asphodill. 2 Asphodelus minor albus seu fiflulosus. The little hollow white Asphodill. 3 Asphodelus minor luteus, siue Hastula regia. The small yellow Asphodill, or Kings speare. 4 Liliasphodelus luteus. The yellow Day Lilly. 5 Liliasphodelus phaeniceus. The gold red Day Lilly. depiction of flowers
In English we call them both Day Lillies, but the name doth not so well agree with the last, as with the first, for the causes aboue specified. The Vertues. The rootes of Asphodill hath formerly beene had in great account, but now is vtterly neglected; yet by reason of their sharpenesse they open and cleanse, and therefore some haue of late vsed them for the yellow Iaundise. The Day Lillies haue no physicall vse that I know, or haue heard. CHAP. XV. Phalangium. Spider-wort. THese plants doe so nearely resemble those that are last set forth, that I thinke none that knowes them, will doubt, but that they must follow next vnto them, being so like vnto them, and therefore of the fairest of this kinde first. 1. Phalangium Allobrogicum. The Sauoye Spider-wort. The Sauoye Spider-wort springeth vp with foure or fiue greene leaues, long and narrow, yet broader at the bottome, narrower pointed at the end, and a little hollow in the middle; among which riseth vp a round stiffe stalke, a foote and a halfe high, bearing at the toppe one aboue another, seuen or eight, or more flowers, euery one as large almost as the yellow Day Lilly last described, but much greater then in any o∣ther of the Spider-worts, of a pure white colour, with some threeds in the middle, tipt with yellow, and a small forked pointell: after the flowers are past, the heads or seede vessels grow almost three square, yet somewhat round, wherein is contained blackish seede: the rootes are many white, round, thicke, brittle strings, ioyned toge∣ther at the head, but are nothing so long, as the rootes of the other Phalangia or Spi∣der-worts. 2. Phalangium maius Italicum. album. The great Italian Spider-wort. This great Spider-wort hath diuers long and narrow leaues spread vpon the ground, and not rising vp as the former, and not so broad also as the former, but somewhat larger then those that follow: the stalke is bigger, but seldome riseth vp so as the next, whereof this is a larger kinde, hauing a long vnbranched stalke of white flower, laid open like starres as it hath, but somewhat greater: the rootes are long and white, like the next, but somewhat larger. 3. Phalangium non ramosum vulgare. Vnbranched Spider-wort. The leaues of this Spider-wort doe seeme to bee little bigger or longer then the leaues of grasse, but of a more grayish green colour, rising immediately from the head or tuft of rootes; among which rise vp one or two stalkes, sometimes two or three foote long, beset toward the toppe with many white Starre-like flowers, which after they are past turne into small round heads, containing blacke feede, like vnto the seed of the little yellow Asphodill, but lesser: the rootes are long white strings, running vnder ground. 4. Phalangium ramosum. Branched Spider-wort. The branched Spider-wort hath his leaues somewhat broader then the former, and of a more yellowish greene colour: the stalke hereof is diuersly branched at the top, bearing many white flowers, like vnto the former, but smaller: the seedes and rootes are like the former in all things.
1 Phalangium Allobrogicum. The Sauoye Spider-wort. 2 Phalangium non ramosum. Vn∣branched Spider-wort. 3 Phalangium ramosum. Branched Spider-wort. 4 Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum. Iohn Tradescante's Spider-wort. depiction of flowers
The Place. The first groweth on the Hils neare vnto Sauoye, from whence diuers, allured with the beauty of the flower, haue brought it into these parts. The second came vp in my Garden, from the seede receiued out of Italy. The others grow in Spaine, France, &c. The Time. The vnbranched Spider-wort most commonly flowreth before all the other, and the branched a moneth after it: the other two about one time, that is, towards the end of May, and not much after the vnbranched kinde. The Names. The first (as I said before) hath beene taken to be a white Lilliasphodill, and called Liliasphodelus flore albo; but Clusius hath more properly entitu∣led it a Phalangium, and from the place of his originall, gaue him his other denomination, and so is called of most, as is set downe in the title. The other haue no other names then are expressed in their titles, but only that Cordus calleth them Liliago; and Dodonaeus, lib. 4. hist. plant. would make the branched kinde to bee Moly alterum Plinij, but without any good ground. The Vertues. The names Phalangium and Phalangites were imposed on these plants, because they were found effectuall, to cure the poyson of that kinde of Spi∣der, called Phalangium, as also of Scorpions and other Serpents. Wee doe not know, that any Physitian hath vsed them to any such, or any other pur∣pose in our dayes. 5. Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum Ioannis Tradescant. The soon fading Spider-wort of Virginia, or Tradescant his Spider-wort. This Spider-wort is of late knowledge, and for it the Christian world is indebted vnto that painfull industrious searcher, and louer of all natures varieties, Iohn Trade∣scant (sometimes belonging to the right Honourable Lord Robert Earle of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England in his time, and then vnto the right Honourable the Lord Wotton at Canterbury in Kent, and lastly vnto the late Duke of Buckingham) who first receiued it of a friend, that brought it out of Virginia, thinking it to bee the Silke Grasse that groweth there, and hath imparted hereof, as of many other things, both to me and others; the description whereof is as followeth: From a stringie roote, creeping farre vnder ground, and rising vp againe in many places, springeth vp diuers heads of long folded leaues, of a grayish ouer-worne greene colour, two or three for the most part together, and not aboue, compassing one another at the bottome, and abiding greene in many places all the Winter; other∣where perishing, and rising anew in the Spring, which leaues rise vp with the great round stalke, being set thereon at the ioynts, vsually but one at a ioynt, broad at the bottome where they compasse the stalke, and smaller and smaller to the end: at the vpper ioynt, which is the toppe of the stalke, there stand two or three such like leaues, but smaller, from among which breaketh out a dozen, sixteene, or twenty, or more round green heads, hanging downe their heads by little foot-stalkes, which when the flower beginneth to blow open, groweth longer, and standeth vpright, hauing three small pale greene leaues for a huske, and three other leaues within them for the flower, which lay themselues open flat, of a deepe blew purple colour, hauing an vmbone or small head in the middle, closely set about with six reddish, hairy, or feathered threeds, tipt with yellow pendents: this flower openeth it selfe in the day, & shutteth vsually at
night, and neuer openeth againe, but perisheth, and then hangeth downe his head a∣gaine; the greene huske of three leaues, closing it selfe againe into the forme of a head, but greater, as it was before, the middle vmbone growing to bee the seede vessell, wherein is contained small, blackish, long seede: Seldome shall any man see aboue one, or two at the most of these flowers blowne open at one time vpon the stalke, whereby it standeth in flowring a long time, before all the heads haue giuen out their flowers. The Place. This plant groweth in some parts of Virginia, and was deliuered to Iohn Tradescant. The Time. It flowreth from the end of May vntill Iuly, if it haue had greene leaues all the Winter, or otherwise, vntill the Winter checke his luxuriousnesse. The Names. Vnto this plant I confesse I first imposed the name, by considering duely all the parts thereof, which vntill some can finde a more proper, I desire may still continue, and to call it Ephemerum Virginianum Tradescanti, Iohn Tradescante's Spider-wort of Virginia, or Phalangium Ephemerum Virginia∣num, The soone fading or Day Spider-wort of Virginia. The Vertues. There hath not beene any tryall made of the properties since wee had it, nor doe we know whether the Indians haue any vse thereof. CHAP. XVI. Colchicum. Medowe Saffron. TO returne to the rest of the bulbous and tuberous rooted plants, that remaine to bee entreated of, the Colchica or Medowe Saffrons are first to bee handled, whereof these later dayes haue found out more varieties, then formerly were knowne; some flowring in the Spring, but the most in Autumne, and some bearing double, but the greatest part single flowers: whereof euery one in their order, and first of our owne Country kindes. 1. Colchicum Anglicum album. The white English Medowe Saffron.
It is common to all the Medowe Saffrons, except that of the Spring, and one other, to beare their flowers alone in Autumne or later, without any green leaues with them, and afterwards in February, their greene leaues: So that I shall not neede to make ma∣nie descriptions, but to shew you the differences that consist in the leaues, and colours of the flowers; and briefly to passe (after I haue giuen you a full description of the first) from one vnto another, touching onely those things that are note worthy. The white English Medowe Saffron then doth beare in Autumne three or foure flowers at the most, standing seuerally vpon weake foote-stalkes, a fingers length or more aboue the ground, made of six white leaues, somewhat long and narrow, and not so large as most of the other kindes, with some threeds or chiues in the middle, like vnto the Saffron flowers of the Spring, wherein there is no colour of Saffron, or vertue to that effect: after the flowers are past and gone, the leaues doe not presently follow, but the roote remaineth in the ground without shew of leafe aboue ground, most part of the Winter, and then in February there spring vp three or foure large and long greene  leaues, when they are fully growne vp, standing on the toppe of a round, weake, green, and short foote-stalke, somewhat like the leaues of white Lillies, but not so large, and in the middest of these leaues, after they haue been vp some time, appeare two or three loose skinny heads, standing in the middle of the leaues vpon short, thicke, greene stalkes, and being ripe, conteine in them round small brownish seede, that lye as it were loose therein, and when the head is dry, may bee heard to rattle being shaken: the roote is white within, but couered with a thicke blackish skinne or coate, hauing one side thereof at the bottome longer then the other, with an hollownesse also on the one side of that long eminence, where the flowers rise from the bottome, and shooting downe from thence a number of white fibres, whereby it is fastened in the ground: the greene leaues afterwards rising from the top or head of the roote. 2. Colchicum Anglicum purpureum. The purple English Medowe Saffron. There is no difference at all in this Medowe Saffron from the former, but only in the colour of the flowers, which as they were wholly white in the former, so in this they are of a delayed purple colour, with a small shew of veines therein. 3. Colchicum Pannonicum album. The white Hungary Medowe Saffron. The greatest difference in this Colchicum from the former English white one, is, that it is larger both in roote, leafe, and flower, and besides, hath more store of flowers to∣gether, and continuing longer in beauty, without fading so soone as the former, and are also somewhat of a fairer white colour. 4. Colchicum Pannonicum purpureum. The purple Hungary Medowe Saffron. This purple Medowe Saffron is somewhat like vnto the white of this kinde, but that it beareth not so plentifully as the white, nor doth the roote grow so great; but the flowers are in a manner as large as they, and of the like pale delayed purple colour, or somewhat deeper, as is in the purple English, with some veines or markes vpon the flowers, making some shew of a checker on the out side, but not so conspicuous, as in the true checkerd kindes. Wee haue a kinde hereof is party coloured with white streakes and edges, which abide constant, and hath been raised from the seede of the former. 5. Colchicum Byzantinum. Medowe Saffron of Constantinople. This Medowe Saffron of Constantinople hath his leaues so broad and large, that hardly could any that neuer saw it before, iudge it to be a Colchicum; for they are much larger then any Lilly leaues, and of a darke greene colour: the flowers are correspon∣dent to the leaues, larger and more in number then in any of the former purple kindes, of the same colour with the last purple kinde, but of a little deeper purple on the in∣side, with diuers markes running through the flowers, like vnto it, or vnto checkers, but yet somewhat more apparantly: the roote is in the middle greater and rounder then the others, with a longer eminence, whereby it may easily bee knowne from all other sorts. 6. Colchicum Lusitanicum Fritillaricum. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Portugall.
The flowers of this Medowe Saffron are larger and longer then the flowers of either the English or Hungarian, and almost as large as the last before mentioned, and of the same colour, but a little deeper, the spots and markes whereof are somewhat more easie to be seene euen a farre off, like vnto the flower of a Fritillaria, from whence it tooke his significatiue name: the leaues of this Medowe Saffron doe rise vp sooner then in any other of the Autumne kindes; for they are alwayes vp before Winter, and are foure or fiue in number, short rather then long, broad belowe, and pointed at the end, canaled or hollow, and standing round aboue the ground, one encompassing an∣other at the bottome, like the great Spanish Starre Iacinth, called the Iacinth of Peru, 1 Colchi um Pannonicum. The Hungarian Medow Saffron. 2 Colchicum Byzantinum. Medowe Saffron of Constantinople 3 Colchi∣cum usitanicum Fritillaricum. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Portugall 4 Colchicum Neapolitanum Fritillaricum. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Naples. 5 Colchicum Fritillaricum Chiense. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Chio or Sio. 6 Colchicum He∣modactylum. Physicall Medowe Saffron. depiction of flowers
but shorter, and of a pale or grayish greene colour, differing from the colour of all the other Medowe Saffrons: the roote is like the roote of the English or Hungarian without any difference, but that it groweth somewhat greater. It is one of the first Me∣dowe Saffrons that flower in the Autumne. 7. Colchicum Neapolitanum Fritillaricum. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Naples. This checkerd Medowe Saffron of Naples, is very like vnto the last recited chec∣kerd Saffron of Portugall, but that the flower is somewhat larger, yet sometimes very little, or not at all: the greatest marke to distinguish them is, that the flowers of this are of a deeper colour, and so are the spots on the flowers likewise, which are so con∣spicuous, that they are discerned a great way off, more like vnto the flowers of a deepe Fritillaria, then the former, and make a goodlier and a more glorious shew: the leaues of this doe rise vp early after the flowers, and are somewhat longer, of a darker greene colour, yet bending to a grayish colour as the other, not lying so neatly or round, but stand vp one by another, being as it were folded together: neither of both these last named checkerd Medowe Saffrons haue giuen any seede in this Countrey, that euer I could learne or heare of, but are encreased by the roote, which in this is like the for∣mer, but a little bigger. 8. Colchicum Fritillaricum Chiense. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Chio or Sio. This most beautifull Saffron flower riseth vp with his flowers in the Autumne, as the others before specified doe, although not of so large a size, yet farre more pleasant and delightfull in the thicke, deepe blew, or purple coloured beautifull spots therein, which make it excell all others whatsoeuer: the leaues rise vp in the Spring, being smaller then the former, for the most part three in number, and of a paler or fresher greene colour, lying close vpon the ground, broad at the bottome, a little pointed at the end, and twining or folding themselues in and out at the edges, as if they were in∣dented. I haue not seene any seede it hath borne: the roote is like vnto the others of this kinde, but small and long, and not so great: it flowreth later for the most part then any of the other, euen not vntill Nouember, and is very hard to be preserued with vs, in that for the most part the roote waxeth lesse and lesse euery yeare, our cold Country being so contrary vnto his naturall, that it will scarce shew his flower; yet when it flowreth any thing early, that it may haue any comfort of a warme Sunne, it is the glorie of all these kindes. 9. Colchicum versicolor. The party coloured Medowe Saffron. The flowers of this Medowe Saffron most vsually doe not appeare, vntill most of the other Autumne sorts are past, except the last, which are very lowe, scarce rising with their stalkes three fingers breadth aboue the ground, but oftentimes halfe hid within the ground: the leaues whereof are smaller, shorter, and rounder, then in any of the other before specified, some being altogether white, and others wholly of a very pale purple, or flesh colour; and some againe parted, the one halfe of a leafe white, and the other halfe of the same purple, and sometimes striped purple and white, in di∣uers leaues of one and the same flower: and againe, some will be the most part of the leafe white, and the bottome purple, thus varying as nature list, that many times from one roote may be seene to arise all these varieties before mentioned: these flowers doe stand long before they fade and passe away; for I haue obserued in my Garden some that haue kept their flower faire vntill the beginning of Ianuary, vntill the extremitie of the Winter frosts and snowes haue made them hide their heads: the leaues there∣fore accordingly doe rise vp after all other, and are of a brownish or darke greene co∣lour at their first springing vp, which after grow to be of a deepe greene colour: the roote is like the former English or Hungarian kindes, but thicker and greater for the most part, and shorter also.
10. Colchicum variegatum alterum. Another party coloured Medowe Saffron. There is another, whose party coloured flowers rise a little higher, diuersly striped and marked, with a deeper purple colour, and a pale or whitish blush throughout all the leaues of the flower. 11. Colchicum montanum Hispanicum minus. The little Spanish Medowe Saffron. The flowers of this little Medowe Saffron are narrower and smaller then any of the former, and of a deeper reddish purple colour then either the English or Hungarian kindes: the greene leaues also are smaller then any other, lying on the ground, of a deepe or sad greene colour, rising vp within a while after the flowers are past, and doe abide greene all the Winter long: the roote is small and long, according to the rest of the plant, and like in forme to the others. 12. Colchicum montanum minus versicolore flore. The small party coloured Medowe Saffron. This little kinde differeth not from the Spanish kinde last set forth, but in the varie∣tie of the flower, which is as small as the former; the three inner leaues being almost all white, and the three outer leaues some of them pale or blush, and some party co∣loured, with a little greene on the backe of some of them. 13. Colchicum Hermodactilum. Physicall Medowe Saffron. This Physicall Medowe Saffron springeth vp with his leaues in Autumne, before his flowers appeare beyond the nature of all the former kindes, yet the flower doth, after they are vp, shew it selfe in the middle of the greene leaues, consisting of six white leaues, with diuers chiues in the middle, and passeth away without giuing any seede that euer I could obserue; the greene leaues abide all the Winter and Spring follow∣ing, decaying about May, and appeare not vntill September, when (as I said) the flow∣ers shew themselues presently after the leaues are sprung vp. 14. Colchicum atropurpureum. The darke purple Medowe Saffron. The greatest difference in this kinde consisteth in the flower, which at the first ap∣pearing is as pale a purple, as the flower of the former Hungarian kinde: but after it hath stood in flower two or three dayes, it beginneth to change, and will after a while become to bee of a very deepe reddish purple colour, as also the little foote-stalke whereon it doth stand: the flower is of the bignesse of the Hungarian purple, and so is the greene leafe: the seede and roote is like the English purple kinde. 15. Colchicum atropurpureum variegatum. The party coloured darke purple Medowe Saffron. We haue of late gained another sort of this kinde, differing chiefly in the flower, which is diuersly striped thorough euery leafe of the flower, with a paler purple co∣lour, whereby the flower is of great beauty: this might seeme to bee a degeneration from the former, yet it hath abiden constant with me diuers yeares, and giueth seede as plentifully as the former. 16. Colchicum flore pleno. Double flowred Medowe Saffron. The double Medowe Saffron is in roote and leafe very like vnto the English kinde: the flowers are of a fine pale or delayed purple colour, consisting of many leaues set thicke together, which are somewhat smaller, as in the English flower, being narrow and long, and as it were round at the points, which make a very double flower, hauing
some chiues with their yellow tips, dispersed as it were among the leaues in the mid∣dle: it flowreth in September, a little after the first shew of the earlier Medowe Saf∣frons are past. 17. Colchicum variegatum pleno flore. The party coloured double Medowe Saffron. We haue another of these double kinds (if it be not the very same with the former, varying in the flower as nature pleaseth oftentimes; for I haue this flower in my garden, as I here set it forth, euery yeare) whose flowers are diuersified in the partition of the colours, as is to be seene in the single party coloured Medowe Saffron before descri∣bed, hauing some leaues white, and others pale purple, and some leaues halfe white and halfe purple, diuersly set or placed in the double flower, which doth consist of as many leaues as the former, yet sometime this party coloured flower doth not shew it selfe double like the former, but hath two flowers, one rising out of another, making each of them to be almost but single flowers, consisting of eight or ten leaues a peece: but this diuersity is not constant; for the same roote that this yeare appeareth in that manner, the next yeare will returne to his former kinde of double flowers againe. 18. Colchicum Vernum. Medowe Saffron of the Spring. This Medowe Saffron riseth vp very early in the yeare, that is, in the end of Ianu∣arie sometimes, or beginning, or at the furthest the middle of February, presently af∣ter the deepe Frosts and Snowes are past, with his flowers inclosed within three greene leaues, which opening themselues as soone almost as they are out of the ground, shew their buds for flowers within them very white oftentimes, before they open farre, and sometimes also purplish at their first appearing, which neuer shew aboue two at the most vpon one roote, and neuer rise aboue the leaues, nor the leaues much higher then they, while they last: the flower consisteth of six leaues, long and narrow, euery leafe being diuided, both at the bottome and toppe, each from other, and ioyned together onely in the middle, hauing also six chiues, tipt with yellow in the middle, euery chiue being ioyned to a leafe, of a pale red or deepe blush colour, when it hath stood a while blowne, and is a smaller flower then any Medowe Saffron, except the small Spanish kindes onely, but continueth in his beauty a good while, if the extremity of sharpe Frosts and Windes doe not spoile it: the leaues wherein these flowers are enclosed, at their first comming vp, are of a brownish greene colour, which so abide for a while, especially on the outside, but on the inside they are hollow, and of a whitish or grayish greene colour, which after the flowers are past, grow to bee of the length of a mans longest finger, and narrow withall: there riseth vp likewise in the middle of them the head or seede vessell, which is smaller and shorter, and harder then any of the former, wherein is contained small round browne seede: the roote is small, somewhat like vn∣to the rootes of the former, but shorter, and not hauing so long an eminence on the one side of the bottome. 19. Colchicum Vernum atropurpureum. Purple Medowe Saffron of the Spring. The flower of this Medowe Saffron, is in the rising vp of his leaues and flowers to∣gether, and in all things else, like vnto the former, onely the flowers of this sort are at their first appearing of a deeper purple colour, and when they are blowne also are much deeper then the former, diuided in like manner, both at the bottome and toppe as the other, so that they seeme, like as if six loose leaues were ioyned in the middle part, to make one flower, and hath his small chiues tipt with yellow, cleaning in like manner to euery leafe. The Place.
All these Medowe Saffrons, or the most part of them, haue their places expressed in their titles; for some grow in the fields and medowes of the champion grounds, others on the mountaines and hilly grounds. The English kindes grow in the West parts, as about Bathe, Bristow, Warmi∣ster, 1 Colchicum montamum Hispanicum. The little Spanish Medowe Saffron. 2 Colchicum montanum minus versicolore flore. The small party coloured Medowe Saffron. 3 Colchicum versicolor. The party coloured Medowe Saffron. 4 Colchicum variegatum alterum. Another party coloured Meadowe Saffron. 5 Col∣chicum atropurpureum. The darke purple Medowe Saffron. 6 Colchicum atropurpureum variegatum. The variable darke purple Meadowe Saffron. 7 Colchi∣cum vernum, Medowe Saffron of the spring. 8 Colchicum flore pleno. Double Medowe Saffron. depiction of flowers
and other places also. The double kindes are thought to come out of Germany. The Time. Their times likewise are declared in their seuerall descriptions: those that are earliest in Autumne, flower in August and September, the later in October, and the latest in the end of October, and in Nouember. The other are said to bee of the Spring, in regard they come after the deepe of Winter (which is most vsually in December and Ianuary) is past. The Names. The generall name to all these plants is Colchicum, whereunto some haue added Ephemerum, because it killeth within one dayes space; and some Strangulatorium. Some haue called them also Bulbus agrestis, and Filius ante Patrem, The Sonne before the Father, because (as they thinke) it giueth seede before the flower: but that is without due consideration; for the root of this (as of most other bulbous plants) after the stalke of leaues and seede are dry, and past, may be transplanted, and then it beginneth to spring and giue flowers before leaues, (and therein onely it is differing from other plants) but the leaues and seede follow successiuely after the flowers, before it may be remoued againe; so that here is not seede before flowers, but con∣trarily flowers vpon the first planting or springing, and seede after, as in all other plants, though in a diuers manner. The Colchicum Hermodactilum may seeme very likely to bee the Colchicum Orientale of Matthiolus, or the Colchicum Alexandrinum of Lobelius: And some thinke it to be the true Hermodactilus, and so call it, but it is not so. We doe generally call them all in English Medowe Saffrons, or Colchicum, ac∣cording to the Latine, giuing to euery one his other adiunct to know it by. The Vertues. None of these are vsed for any Physicall respect, being generally held to be deadly, or dangerous at the least. Only the true Hermodactile (if it be of this tribe, and not this which is here expressed) is of great vse, for paines in the ioynts, and of the hippes, as the Sciatica, and the like, to be taken in∣wardly. Costaeus in his Booke of the nature of plants, saith, that the rootes of our common kindes are very bitter in the Spring of the yeare, and sweet in Autumne, which Camerarius contradicteth, saying, that he found them bitter in Autumne, which were (as he saith) giuen by some imposters to di∣uers, as an antidote against the Plague. CHAP. XVII. Crocus. Saffron. THere are diuers sorts of Saffrons, whereof many doe
ower in the Spring time, and some in Autumne, among whom there is but one onely kinde, that is called tame or of the Garden, which yeeldeth those blades or chiues that are vsed in meates and medicines, and many wayes profitable for other respects, none of the rest, which are all wilde kindes, giuing any blade equall vnto those of the tame kinde, or for any other vse, then in regard of their beautifull flowers of seuerall varie∣ties, and as they haue been carefully sought out, and preserued by diuers, to furnish a Garden of dainty curiosity. To entreate therefore of these, I must, to obserue an or∣derly declaration, diuide them into two primary families: the former shall be of those that yeeld their pleasant flowers in the Spring of the yeare, and the other that send out  their colours in the Autumne, among whom that Rex pomarij (as I may so call it) the tame or manured kinde, properly called of the Garden, is to be comprehended, for that it giueth his pleasant flowers at that time among others. I shall againe distribute those of the Spring time into three chiefe colours, that is, into white, purple, and yel∣low, and vnder euery one of them, comprehend the seuerall varieties that doe belong vnto them; which course I will also hold with those of the Autumne, that thus being rightly ranked, they may the more orderly be described. 1. Crocus Vernus albus purus minor. The smaller pure white Saffron flower of the Spring. This small Saffron flower springeth vp in the beginning of the yeare, with three or foure small greene leaues, somewhat broader, but much shorter then the true Saffron leaues, with a white line downe the middle of euery leafe: betweene these leaues, out of a white skinne, riseth vp one or two small flowers, made of six leaues a peece, as all the rest in generall are, of a pure white colour, without any mixture in it, which abide not in flower aboue a weeke, or rather lesse, so sodainly is the pleasure of this, and the purple lost: it flowreth not for the most part, vntill a moneth after the yellow Crocus appeareth in flower, and the ordinary stript Crocus is past: the seede is small, round, and reddish, yet not so red as the seede of the yellow, contained in three square heads, yet seldome beareth, but encreaseth by the roote plentifully enough, which is small, round, and flat at the bottome, somewhat white on the outside, but whiter within, shooting out small sprouts on euery side of the roote, which is the best note to know this kinde and the lesser purple, which are both alike, from all other rootes of Saffron flowers. 2. Crocus albus maior multiflorus. The great snow white Crocus. This greater Saffron flower riseth vp vsually with three or foure greene leaues, larger then the former, with a white line in euery one of them: the flowers are grea∣ter, and more in number, rising together, but flowring one after another, of a pure snow white colour, and abiding but little longer in flower then the former. 3. Crocus albus maior alter dictus Masiacus. The great white Saffron flower or Crocus of Mesia. This great white Crocus of Mesia, riseth vp out of the ground, almost as early as the first sort of the yellow, with foure or fiue leaues, being very like vnto the leaues of the yellow Crocus, and as large, with white lines in them: the flowers also are as large as the flowers of the yellow, and many also rising one after another like vnto it, but not of so pure a white colour, as the former or last described, but rather tending to a Milky or Creame colour: the roote is not couered with any reddish, but rather pale skinnes or coates. 4. Crocus albus Maesiacus fundo violaceo. The great white Crocus of Mesia with a blew bottome. There is another of this kinde, like vnto the former in all things, sauing that the bot∣tomes of the flowers of this kinde, with some part of the stalke next the flower, are of a pale shining purple colour, and rising vp a pretty way into the flower; whereas another also of this kind, hath a little shew or marke of blew, and not purple, at the bottome of the flower onely, which maketh a difference. 5. Crocus albus fundo purpureo. The white Crocus with a purple bottome. This Saffron flower is of the same kinde with the first, both in roote, leafe, and flower, in none of them differing from it, but in that the bottome of this flower, with that part of the short foote-stalke next vnto it, is of a violet or purple colour, and sometimes hauing here and there some purple small lines, or spots on the white leaues: it flowreth also with the first white, or somewhat later.
6. Crocus vernus albus striatus. The white stript Crocus. This stript Saffron flower is likewise neare the same first kind, or first white Crocus, hauing the like leaues and flowers, somewhat larger, but as soone fading almost as it: but herein this flower differeth, that it hath pale blewish lines and spots in all the leaues thereof, and more principally in the three outer leaues: the root is also white on the outside, like the first white, but greater, with young ones growing round about it. 7. Crocus vernus albus polyanthos versicolor. The greater party coloured white Crocus. The greater party coloured Saffron flower, hath his greene leaues like vnto the se∣cond great white Crocus before mentioned, hauing more flowers then any of the for∣mer, except the first great white, the leaues whereof haue greater stripes then the last recited Crocus, but of a purple Violet colour, making each leafe seeme oftentimes to haue as much purple as white in them: the roote hereof is somewhat like the second white, but of a little more duskie colour on the outside, and not budding out on the sides at all, or very little. 8. Crocus vernus albus versicolor. The lesser party coloured white Crocus. The leaues and flowers of this other party coloured Crocus, are for bignesse in a manner equall with the last, but hath not so many flowers rising together from the roote: the flower is finely marked with blew strakes on the white flower, but nothing so much as in the former: the roote also is like the last. 9. Crocus Episcopalis. The Bishops Crocus. This party coloured or Bishops Saffron flower, is very like both in leaues and rootes vnto the Neapolitane blew Crocus, but somewhat greater: the flowers doe abide not so long time blowne, and hath all the leaues either wholly white, with blew stripes on both sides of them, or wholly of a fine delayed blew Violet colour, and the three in∣nermost more blew and finely striped, both on the inside and outside of them, and sometimes it hath been seen to haue three leaues white, and three leaues of a pale blew. 10. Crocus vernus striatus vulgaris. The ordinary stript Crocus. There is another sort of stript Saffron flower, which is most common and plenti∣full in most Gardens, which I must needes bring vnder the ranke of these white kinds, although it differre very notably, both in roote, leafe, and flower, from all of them: the leaues of this rise vp sooner then the yellow or white Crocus, lying spread vpon the ground for the most part, but narrower then any of the former: among these leaues spring vp diuers flowers, almost as large as the former great white Crocus, of a very bleake or pale purple colour, tending to white on the inside, and in many almost white; with some small whitish chiues tipt with yellow in the middle: the three outer leaues are of a yellowish white colour on the backe side of them, stript euery one of them with three broad stripes, of a darke murrey or purple colour, and a little sprinkled with some small purple lines, on both sides of those stripes; but on the inside, of the same pale purple or white colour with the rest: the seede hereof is somewhat darker colou∣red then of the white, and is more liberall in bearing: the roote is differing from all the former, being rounder and bigger then any of them, except the kindes of Misia, yet somewhat flat withall, not hauing any shootes from the sides, but setting off into rootes plentifully, hauing a round circle compassing the bottome of the roote, which easily falleth away, when it is taken vp out of the ground, and couered with a browne coate, somewhat neare the colour of the yellow Crocus, but not altogether so bright: it flowreth vsually the first of all these sorts, or with the first of the early yel∣lowes.
1 Crocus vernus albus minor. The small white Saffron flower of the spring. 2 Crocus vernus Masiacus albus. The great white Crocus of Misia. 3 Crocus vernus albus striatur. The white stript Crocus. 4 Crocus vernus albus polyanthos versicolor. The party coloured white Crocus. 5 Crocus albus fundo purpure. The white Crocus with a purple bottome. 6 Crocus vernus Neapolitanus. The great blew Crocus of Naples. 7 Crocus vernus purpureus maximus. The great purple Crocus. 8 Crocus vernus purpureus striatus. The purple stript Crocus. 9 Crocus vernus purpureus Capillarifolio. The purple Crocus with small leaues. 10 Crocus vernus flavus striatus. The yellow stript Crocus. 11 Crocus vernus luteus versicolor. The cloth of gold Crocus. depiction of flowers
11. Crocus vernus striatus Turcicus. The Turkie stript Crocus. There is another of this kinde, whose flower is a little larger, and of a deeper purple colour, both on the inside and outside; the greene leafe also is bigger, and of a more whitish colour. 12. Crocus vernus Capillarifolio albus. The white Crocus with small leaues. This white Crocus is in all things like vnto the purple of the same kinde, but that the flower of this is wholly white: the full description therefore hereof, you shall haue in that purple with small leaues, of this kinde hereafter set downe, whereunto I referre you. 13. Crocus vernus purpureus minor. The smaller purple Crocus. The smaller purple Saffron flower of the Spring, hath his greene leaues so like vnto the first white flowred Saffron, that they can hardly be distinguished, onely they seem to bee a little narrower: the flower is also much about the same bignesse, or a little bigger, and seldome beareth aboue one flower from a roote, euen as the first doth, of a deepe purple Violet colour, the bottome of the flower, with the vpper part of the stalke next thereunto, being of a deeper or blacker purple; in the middle of the flower are some pale chiues tipt with yellow pendents, and a longer pointell, diuided or for∣ked at the toppe: the roote of this is in all things so like vnto the first white, that it is impossible for the most cunning and conuersant in them, to know the one from the o∣ther. This beareth seede very sparingly, as the white doth, and is reddish like vnto it, but recompenseth that defect with a plentifull encrease by the roote: it likewise flow∣reth at the very same time with the white, and endureth as small a time. 14. Crocus vernus purpureus maximus. The greatest purple Crocus. This great purple Crocus is of the same kinde with the next described, as well in roote as leafe, but greater; for the greene leaues hereof are the greatest and broadest of all other Crocus, with a large white line in the middle of euery one: it springeth vp much later then the former, and doth not shew his flower vntill the other bee past a good while: the flowers also are the largest of all these Crocus of the Spring time, and equalling, if not surpassing that purple kinde that flowreth in Autumne, hereafter set forth, of a very faire and deepe Violet colour, almost as deepe as the former: the seed vessels are large also and white, wherein is contained pale reddish seede, like vnto the next blew kinde, but somewhat greater: the roote is (as I said before) like vnto the next, that is, flat and round, with a duskie coloured outside, whose head for springing in it is as hardly discerned. Alter Apicibus albidis.We haue one of this kinde, the toppes onely of whose purple flower are whitish, for the breadth of halfe the naile of a mans hand, which abideth constant euery yeare in that manner, and therefore is a difference fit to be remembred. 15. Crocus vernus Neapolitanus siue caeruleus maior. The greater blew Crocus of Naples. This great blew Crocus riseth vp with diuers greene leaues, broader then any of the former (except the last) with a white line running downe the inside of euery leafe, as in the former, among which riseth vp, out of diuers great long white skinnes, diuers large flowers, but not fully so great as the former, consisting of six leaues, of a paler blew or Violet colour then in the former, hauing in the middle of the flowers a few pale threeds, tipt with yellow, and a longer pointell of a gold yellow colour, forked or diuided at the toppe, smelling sweeter then in the former, and abiding a great while longer, being in flower vsually euen with the stript yellow Crocus, or before the for∣mer purple, and yeelding more plenty of seede: the roote hereof is not very great, but a little darke on the outside, being round and flat withall, that one can hardly know which is the vpperside thereof.
This kinde differeth very little from the former, either in roote, leafe, or flower,Crocus Neapo∣litanus praco∣cior. for the bignesse or colour, but that it seemeth to be a little bleaker or paler blew, be∣cause it flowreth a little earlier. 16. Crocus vernus purpureus striatus. The stript purple Crocus. The leaues of this stript purple Saffron flower, are as large and broad as the last, of rather a little longer: the flowers also are as plentifull, and as large, of a fine delayed purple colour on the outside, with three broad strakes or lines downe the backe of the three outer leaues, and of a little deeper purple on the inside, as the other three leaues are also of a deeper purple colour, and are striped with the same deepe purple about the ground, or bottome of the leaues: this sometimes yeelde three square heads, containing in them brownish seede: the roote is like vnto the last, and flowreth much about the time of the former. 17. Crocus vernus purpureus versicolor. The siluer stript purple Crocus. This stript Saffron flower, is in leaues and flowers somewhat like vnto the last stript purple, but a little smaller: the flowers are of a little deeper purple through the whole leaues, striped with white lines, both on the leaues, and towards the edges, which ma∣keth a peculiar difference from all the rest: the roote of this is not so flat, though like it, and couered with a darke ash coloured skinne: it flowreth about the same time. 18. Crocus purpureus flammeus maior. The greater purple flame coloured Crocus. The greene leaues of this Crocus or Saffron flower, are of a reasonable breadth and length, and of a pleasant fresh greennesse, with a faire broad white line downe the middle of them, but rising not out of the ground so early as the next described Cro∣cus: the flowers are likewise of a meane bignesse, of a pale purple on the outside, somewhat whitish, especially the three outer leaues; but on the inside of a deeper pur∣ple, and striped with great stripes like flames, hauing some chiues in the middle, and a longer one also feathered a little at the toppe: the roote is white on the outside, some∣what flat and round, but not so flat as the Neapolitane Crocus before described. 19. Crocus purpureus flammeus minor. The lesser purple flame coloured Crocus. This Crocus hath almost as broad and long greene leaues as the former, and of the same verdure, which rise vp earlier then it, and is in flower likewise somewhat before it, being smaller for size by a little, but of as deepe a purple on the outside, as on the inside, flamed with faire broad stripes from the middle of the leaues, or somewhat lower vnto the edges: each of these giue seed that is of a pale reddish colour: the root is very like vnto the former, but a little lesser. 20. Crocus vernus purpureus Capillarifolio. The purple Crocus with small leaues.
This small kinde of Saffron flower riseth out of the ground, with two or three long and small green leaues, very like vnto the leaues of the fine Fether-Grasse hereafter de∣scribed, standing vpright at the first, but afterwards lying vpon the ground; among which come the flowers, sometimes three, but most vsually two vpon one stalke, if the roote be not young, which then will beare but one on a stalke, which is very short, so that the flowers scarce arise aboue the ground, yet laying themselues open in the day time, if it be faire, and the Sunne doe shine, otherwise they keepe close, and doe not open at all: and after one flower is past, which doth not last aboue three or foure dayes at the most, the others follow, which are of a bleake blewish purple in the mid∣dle of the flower, and of a deeper purple towards the ends or points of the leaues, but of a more sullen or darke purple on the outside of them, and yellowish at the bottome, with some yellow chiues in the middle: the seede is small and darker coloured then any of the former Crocus, contained also in smaller heads, standing one by another  vpon the same short foote-stalke, which then riseth vp a little higher, shewing the ma∣ner of the standing of the flowers, which in their flowring time could not so easily bee discerned: the roote is very small and round, hauing one side at the bottome lower then the other, very like the roote of a Colchicum or Medowe Saffron, and somewhat neare resembling also the hoofe of an horse foote, couered with a very thicke skinne, of a darke or blackish browne colour: this flowreth the last of all the former sorts of Saffron flowers, euen when they are all past. 21. Crocus vernus purpureus striatus Capillarifolio. The stript purple Crocus with small leaues. This small stript purple Saffron flower hath such like leaues, as the last described hath, betweene which riseth the flower vpon as short a foote-stalke, consisting of six leaues like the former, of a faire purple colour on the outside of the three outer leaues, with three lines or strakes downe euery leafe, of a deeper purple colour, and on the in∣side of a paler purple, as the other three leaues are also, with some chiues tipt with yel∣low pendents, and a forked pointell in the middle: the roote of this is somewhat bigger then the former, and rounder, but couered with as thicke and as browne a skinne: it flowreth about the same time with the former. 22. Crocus vernus luteus siue Maesiacus. The yellow Crocus. The yellow Crocus or Saffron flower, riseth vp with three or foure leaues out of the ground, being somewhat neare the breadth of the great purple kindes, with a white line in them, as in most of the rest: the flowers stand in the middle of these leaues, and are very large, of a gold yellow colour, with some chiues, and a forked point in the middle: the seede hereof is of a brighter colour then in any of the other: the roote is great and round, as great or greater then a Wall Nut sometimes, and couered with red∣dish skinnes or coates, yeelding more store of flowers then most of the former, and be∣ginning to blowe with the first sorts, or presently after, but outlast many of them, and are of a pleasant good sent. Flore aureo.Of this kinde we haue some, whose flowers are of a deeper gold yellow colour then others, so that they appeare reddish withall. Flore pallido.And we haue also another sort, whose flowers are very pale, betweene a white and a yellow, not differing in any thing else. Flore viridante luteo.And another smaller, whose flower hath a shew of greennesse in the yellow, and more greene at the bottome. 23. Crocus vernus flavus striatus. The yellow stript Crocus. This kinde of yellow stript Crocus or Saffron flower, riseth vp with more store of narrower and greener leaues then the former, and after the leaues are spread, there rise vp many yellow flowers from among them, which are not of so faire and bright a yel∣low colour, but more dead and sullen, hauing on the backside of each of the three out∣termost leaues, three small stripes, of an ouer-worne or dull purple colour, with some chiues and a pointell in the middle: the roote of this kinde, is very like the roote of the former yellow, but somewhat smaller and shorter, and couered with the like red∣dish skinnes, but a little sadder: it flowreth not so early as the former yellow, but abi∣deth almost as long as it. 24. Crocus vernus luteus versicolor primus. The best cloth of gold Crocus. The fairest cloth of gold Crocus or Saffron flower, riseth vp very early, euen with the first, or the first of all other Crocus, with three or foure very narrow and short leaues, of a whiter colour then any of the former, which by and by after doe shew forth the flowers, rising from among them out of the same white skinne, which in∣cludeth the leaues, but are not so plentifull as the former yellow, being but two or three at the most, of a faire gold yellow colour, yet somewhat paler then the first, ha∣uing
on the backe of euery of the three outer leaues, three faire and great stripes, of a faire deepe purple colour, with some small lines at the sides or edges of those pur∣ple stripes; on the inside of these flowers, there is no signe or shew of any line or spot, but wholly of a faire gold yellow, with chiues and a fethertopt pointell in the middle: the seede hereof is like the former, but not so red: the roote of this kinde is easily knowne from the roote of any other Saffron flower, because the outer peelings or shels being hard, are as it were netted on the outside, hauing certaine ribbes, rising vp higher then the rest of the skinnes, diuided in the forme of a net-worke, of a darke browne colour, and is smaller and rounder then the former yellow, and not encreasing so plentifully by the roote. 25. Crocus vernus luteus versicolor alter. The second cloth of gold, or Duke Crocus. There is no difference either in roote, leafe, or colour of flower, or time of flowring in this sort from the last before mentioned; for the flower of this is of the same big∣nesse and colour, the only note of difference is in the marking of the three outer leaues, which haue not three stripes like the former, but are wholly of the same deepe purple colour on the backe of them, sauing that the edges of them are yellow, which is the forme of a Duke Tulipa, and from thence it tooke the name of a Duke Crocus. 26. Crocus vernus versicolor pallideluteus. The pale cloth of gold Crocus. We haue a third sort of this kinde of cloth of gold Crocus, which hath leaues and flowers like the former, but differeth in this, that the colour of the flower is of a paler yellow by much, but stript in the same manner as the first, but with a fainter purple colour: the roote also is netted like them, to shew that this is but a variation of the same kinde. 27. Crocus vernus versicolor albidoluteus. The cloth of siluer Crocus. The chiefest note of difference in this Saffron flower is, that being as large a flower as any of the former of this kinde, it is of so pale a yellowish white, that it is more white then yellow, which some doe call a butter colour: the three outer leaues are striped on the backe of them, with a paler purple blew shining colour, the bottome of the flower, and the vpper part of the stalke, being of the same purple blew colour: the roote of this is also netted as the other, to shew it is a variety of the same kinde. And thus much for those Saffron flowers that come in the Spring time; now to those that flower in Autumne onely: and first of the true Saffron. 1. Crocus verus sativus Autumnalis. The true Saffron. The true Saffron that is vsed in meates and medicines, shooteth out his narrow long greene leaues first, and after a while the flowers in the middle of them appeare about the end of August, in September and October, according to the soile, and climate where they growe; these flowers are as large as any of the other former or later sorts, composed of six leaues a peece, of a murrey or reddish purple colour, hauing a shew of blew in them: in the middle of these flowers there are some small yellow chiues standing vpright, which are as vnprofitable, as the chiues in any other of the wilde Saffrons, before or hereafter specified; but besides these, each flower hath two, three, or foure greater and longer chiues, hanging downe vpon or betweene the leaues, which are of a fierie red colour, and are the true blades of Saffron, which are vsed phy∣sically or otherwise, and no other: All these blades being pickt from the seuerall flow∣ers, are laid and pressed together into cakes, and afterwards dryed very warily on a Kill to preserue them; as they are to be seene in the shops where they are sold. I neuer heard that euer it gaue seede with any: the roote groweth often to be as great, or grea∣ter then a green Wall Nut, with the outer shell on it, couered with a grayish or ash-co∣loured skin, which breaketh into long hairie threeds, otherwise then in any other roote of Crocus.
2. Crocus Byzantinus argenteus. The siluer coloured Autumne Crocus. This Saffron flower springeth vp in October, and seldome before, with three or foure short greene leaues at the first, but growing longer afterwards, and in the midst of them, presently after they haue appeared, one flower for the most part, and sel∣dome two, consisting of six leaues, the three outermost whereof are somewhat larger then the other three within, and are of a pale bleake blew colour, almost white, which many call a siluer colour, the three innermost being of a purer white, with some yel∣low chiues in the middle, and a longer pointell ragged or fethered at the toppe: this very seldome beareth seede, but when the yeare falleth out to bee very milde; it is small, round, and of a darke colour: the roote is pretty bigge, and rounder then any other Crocus, without any flat bottome, and couered with a darke russet skinne. 3. Crocus Pyrenaeus purpureus. The purple mountaine Crocus. This purple Saffron flower of the Autumne, riseth vp but with one flower vsually, yet sometimes with two one after another, without any leaues at all, in September, or sometimes in August, standing vpon a longer foote-stalke then any kinde of Saffron flower, either of the Spring or Autumne, and is as large as the flower of the greatest purple Saffron flower of the Spring, of a very deepe Violet purple colour, which de∣cayeth after it hath stood blowne three or foure dayes, and becommeth more pale, hauing in the middle some yellow chiues, and a long fether topt pointell, branched, and rising sometimes aboue the edges of the flowers: about a moneth after the flowers are past, and sometimes not vntill the first of the Spring, there riseth vp three or foure long and broad greene leaues, with a white line in euery one of them, like vnto the first purple Vernall kindes, which abide vntill the end of May or Iune: the roote is small and white on the outside, so like vnto the roote of the lesser Vernall purple or white Crocus, that it cannot be distinguished, vntill about the end of August, when it doth begin to shoot, and then by the early shooting vp a long white sprout for flower, it may be knowne. I neuer could obserue it to giue any seede, the Winter (as I thinke) comming on it so quickly after the flowring, being the cause to hinder it. 4. Crocus montanus Autumnalis. The Autumne mountaine Crocus. The mountaine Saffron flower springeth vp later then any of the former, and doth not appeare vntill the middle or end of October, when all the flowers of the former are past, appearing first with three or foure short greene leaues, like vnto the Byzantine Crocus, and afterwards the flowers betweene them, which are of a pale or bleake blew tending to a purple, the foote-stalkes of them bring so short, that they scarce appeare aboue ground at the first, but after two or three dayes they grow a little higher: the roote is very great and flat bottomed, couered with a grayish duskie coate or skinne, and encreaseth very little or seldome. The Place. The seuerall places of these Saffron flowers, are in part set downe in their titles; the others haue beene found out, some in one Countrey, and some in another, as the small purple and white, and stript white in Spaine: the yellow in Mesia about Belgrade, the great purple in Italy; and now by such friends helpes as haue sent them, they prosper as well in our Gardens, as in their naturall places. Yet I must giue you this to vnderstand, that some of these formerly expressed, haue been raised vp vnto vs by the sowing of their seede. The Time.
Their seuerall times are likewise expressed in their descriptions; for some shew forth their pleasant flowers in the Spring, wherein for the three first 1 Crocus vernus luteus vulgaris. The common yellow spring Crocus. 2 Crocus verus sativus Autumnalis. The true Saffron. 3 Cro∣cus Byzantinus argenteus. The siluer coloured Autumne Crocus. 4 Crocus Pyrenaeus purpureus. The purple mountaine Crocus. 5 Crocus montanus Autumnalis. The Autumne mountaine Crocus. 6 Sisyrinchium maius. The greater Spanish Nut. depiction of flowers
moneths, our Gardens are furnished with the varietie of one sort or ano∣ther: the rest in Autumne, that so they might procure the more delight, in yeelding their beauty both early and late, when scarce any other flowers are found to adorne them. The Names. I shall not neede to trouble you with an idle tale of the name of Crocus, which were to little purpose, nor to reiterate the former names imposed vpon them; let it suffice that the fittest names are giuen them, that may di∣stinguish them one from another; onely this I must giue you to vnderstand, that the gold yellow Crocus or Saffron flower, is the true Crocus Maesiacus, as I shewed before; and that neither the yellow stript, or cloth of gold (which wee so call after the Dutch name Gaud Laken) is the true Maesiacus, as some suppose; and that the great white Saffron flower, by reason of his likenesse vnto the gold yellow, is called Crocus albus Maesiaci facie, or facie lutei, that is, The white Saffron flower that is like the Maesiacus or yellow. The Vertues. The true Saffron (for the others are of no vse) which wee call English Saffron, is of very great vse both for inward and outward diseases, and is very cordiall, vsed to expell any hurtfull or venemous vapours from the heart, both in the small Pockes, Measels, Plague, Iaundise, and many other diseases, as also to strengthen and comfort any cold or weake members. CHAP. XVIII. Sisyrinchium. The Spanish Nut. I Can doe no otherwise then make a peculiar Chapter of this plant, because it is neither a Crocus, although in the roote it come somewhat neare vnto that kinde that is netted; but in no other part agreeing with any the delineaments of a Saffron flower, and therefore could not be thrust into the Chapter amongst them: neither can I place it in the forefront of the Chapter of the Iris bulbosa, or bulbous Flowerdeluces, because it doth not belong to that Family: and although the flower thereof doth most resemble a Flowerdeluce, yet in that no other parts thereof doe fitly agree thereunto, I haue rather chosen to seate it by it selfe betweene them both, as partaking of both natures, and so may serue in stead of a bridge, to passe from the one to the other, that is, from the Crocus or Saffron flower, to the Iris bulbosa or bulbous rooted Flowerde∣luce, which shall follow in the next Chapter by themselues. The Spanish Nut hath two long and narrow, soft and smooth greene leaues, lying for the most part vpon the ground, and sometimes standing vp, yet bending downe∣wards; betweene these leaues riseth vp a small stalke, halfe a foote high, hauing diuers smooth soft greene leaues vpon it, as if they were skinnes, through which the stalke passeth; at the toppe whereof stand diuers flowers, rising one after another, and not all flowring at once: for seldome shall you haue aboue one flower blowne at a time, each whereof doth so quickly passe and fade away, that one may well say, that it is but one dayes flower, or rather the flower of a few houres: the flower it selfe hath nine leaues, like vnto a Flowerdeluce, whereof the three that fall downe, haue in each of them a yellow spot: the other three, which in the Flowerdeluces are hollow and ridged, couering the other three that fall downe, in this stand vpright, and are parted at the ends: the three that stand vp in the middle are small and short; the whole flower is smaller then any Flowerdeluce, but of sundry colours; for some are of an excellent skie colour blew, others of a Violet purple, others of a darker purple colour, and some white, and many others mixed, either pale blew and deepe purple, or white and blew
mixed or striped together very variably, quickly fading as I said before: the seede is enclosed in small cods, so thinne and transparent, that one may easily see, and tell the seeds as they lye, which are of a brownish red colour: the roote is small, blackish and round, wrapped in a thicke skinne or huske, made like vnto a net, or somewhat like vnto the roote of the cloth of gold Crocus: when the plant is in flower, it is found to haue two rootes one aboue another, whereof the vppermost is firme and sound, and the vndermost loose and spongie, in like manner as is found in the rootes of diuers Or∣chides or Satyrions, Bee-flowers and the like, and without any good taste, or sweet∣nesse at all, although Clusius saith otherwise. Sisyrinchium Mauritanicum. The Barbary Nut. There is another of this kinde, not differing from the former in any other notable part, but in the flower, which in this is of a delayed purplish red colour, hauing in each of the three lower leaues a white spot, in stead of the yellow in the former, but are as soone fading as they. The Place. The former doe grow very plentifully in many parts both of Spaine and Portugall, where Guillaume Boel, a Dutch man heretofore remembred often in this Booke, found them; of the sundry colours specified, whereas Clusius maketh mention but of one colour that he found. The other was found in that part of Barbary, where Fez and Morocco do stand, and brought first into the Lowe-Countries: but they are both very tender, and will hardly abide the hard Winters of these colder regions. The Time. The first flowreth in May and Iune, the last not vntill August. The Names. The name Sisyrinchium is generally imposed vpon this plant, by all au∣thors that haue written thereof, thinking it to bee the right Sisyrinchium of Theophrastus: but concerning the Spanish name Nozelha, which Clusius saith it is called by in Spaine, I haue beene credibly enformed by the afore∣named Boel, that this roote is not so called in those parts; but that the small or common stript Crocus is called Nozelha, which is sweete in taste, and desired very greedily by the Shepheards and Children, and that the roote of this Sisyrinchium or Spanish Nut, is without any taste, and is not eaten. And againe, that there is not two kindes, although it grow greater, and with more flowers, in those places that are neare the Sea, where both the washing of the Sea water, and the moisture and ayre of the Sea, causeth the ground to bee more fertile. This I thought good, from the true relation of a friend, to giue the world to vnderstand, that truth might expell errour. The Vertues. These haue not been knowne to bee vsed to any Physicall purpose, but wholly neglected, vnlesse some may eate them, as Clusius reporteth.
CHAP. XIX. Iris bulbosa. The bulbous Flowerdeluce. THe Flowerdeluces that haue bulbous rootes are of two sorts, the one greater then the other: the greater bearing larger and broader leaues and flowers, and the lesser narrower. But before I giue you the descriptions of the vsuall grea∣ter kindes, I must needes place one or two in the fore-front that haue no fellowes; the one is called of Clusius, his broad leafed Flowerdeluce, and the other a Persian, some∣what like vnto it, which although they differ notably from the rest, yet they haue the nearest resemblance vnto those greater kindes, that come next after them. Iris bulbosa prima latifolia Clusij. Clusius his first great bulbous Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce hath diuers long and broad leaues, not stiffe, like all the other, but soft and greenish on the vpperside, and whitish vnderneath; among which rise vp sometimes seuerall small, short, slender stalkes, and sometimes but one, not aboue halfe a foote high, bearing at the top one flower a peece, somewhat like vnto a Flow∣erdeluce, consisting of nine leaues, whereof those three that stand vpright, are shorter and more closed together, then in other sorts of Flowerdeluces; the other three that fall downe, turne vp their ends a little, and those three, that in other Flowerdeluces doe couer them at the bottome, stand like the vpright leaues of other Flowerdeluces, but are parted into two ends, like vnto two small eares: the whole flower is of a faire blew, or pale skie colour in most, with a long stripe in the middle of each of the three falling leaues, and in some white, but more seldome: the roote is reasonable great, round and white, vnder the blackish coates wherewith it is couered, hauing many long thicke white rootes in stead of fibres, which make them seeme to be Asphodill rootes. The flower is very sweete. Iris bulbosa Persica. The Persian bulbous Flowerdeluce. This Persian Flowerdeluce is somewhat like vnto the former, both in roote and in leafe, but that the leaues are shorter and narrower, and the flower being much about the same fashion, is of a pale blew russetish colour, each of the three lower falling leaues are almost wholly of a browne purple colour, with a yellow spot in the middle of them: this as it is very rare, so it seldome beareth flowers with vs. The Place. The first groweth in many places of Spaine and Portugall, from whence I and others haue often had it for our Gardens, but by reason of the tender∣nesse thereof, it doth hardly endure the sharpnesse of our cold Winters, vn∣lesse it be carefully preserued. The other is said to come from Persia, and therefore it is so entituled, and is as tender to be kept as the other. The Time. The first flowreth most vsually not vntill May with vs, yet many times sooner: but in Ianuary and February, as Clusius saith, in the naturall pla∣ces thereof. The other is as early oftentimes when it doth flower with vs. The Names.
Because Clusius by good iudgement referreth the first to the greater  kindes of Flowerdeluces, and placeth it in the fore ranke, calling it Iris bul∣bosa latifolia prima, that is, The first broad leafed Flowerdeluce, and all o∣thers doe the like, I haue (as you see) in the like manner put it before all the other, and keepe the same name. The Spaniards, as he saith, called it Lirio espadanal, and they of Corduba, Lirios azules. The other hath no other name then as it is in the title. 1. Iris bulbosa maior siue Anglica caerulea. The blew English bulbous Flowerdeluce. This bulbous Flowerdeluce riseth vp early, euen in Ianuary oftentimes, with fiue or six long and (narrow, in comparison of any great breadth, but in regard of the other kinde) broad whitish green leaues, crested or straked on the backside, and halfe round, the inside being hollow like a trough or gutter, white all along the inside of the leafe, and blunt at the end; among which riseth vp a stiffe round stalke, a cubit or two foot high, at the toppe whereof, out of a skinnie huske, commeth forth one or two flowers, consisting of nine leaues a peece, three whereof that are turned downewards, are lar∣ger and broader then the other, hauing in each of them a yellow spot, about the mid∣dle of the leafe, other three are small, hollow, ridged or arched, couering the lower part next the stalke of those falling leaues, turning vp their ends, which are diuided into two parts, other three stand vpright, and are very small at the bottome of them, and broader toward the toppe: the whole flower is of a faire blew colour; after the flowers are past, come vp three square heads, somewhat long, and lanke, or loose, containing in them round yellowish seede, which when it is ripe, will rattle by the sha∣king of the winde in the dry huskes: the roote of this kinde is greater and longer then any of the smaller kindes with narrow leaues, couered with diuers browne skinnes, which seeme to be fraught with long threeds like haires, especially at the small or vp∣per end of the roote, which thing you shall not finde in any of the smaller kindes. 2. Iris bulbosa maior purpurea & purpur violacea. The paler or deeper purple great bulbous Flowerdeluce. These purple Flowerdeluces differ not from the last described, either in roote or leafe: the chiefest difference consisteth in the flowers, which in these are somewhat larger then in the former, and in the one of a deepe blew or Violet purple colour, and in the other of a deepe purple colour, in all other things alike. There is also another, in all other things like vnto the former, but only in the flower,Flore cinereo. which is of a pale or bleake blew, which we call an ash-colour. 3. Iris bulbosa maior purpurea variegata siue striata. The great purple stript bulbous Flowerdeluce. There is another of the purple kinde, whose flower is purple, but with some veines or stripes of a deeper Violet colour, diuersly running through the whole leaues of the flower. And another of that bleake blew or ash-colour,Flore cinereo striata purpu∣reo. Flore purpueo orbe cinereo. with lines and veines of purple in the leaues of the flowers, some more or lesse then other. And againe another, whose flower is of a purple colour like vnto the second, but that round about that yellow spot, in the middle of each of the three falling leaues (as is vsuall in all the bulbous Flowerdeluces) there is a circle of a pale blew or ash-colour, the rest of the leafe remaining purple, as the other parts of the flower is. 4. Iris bulbosa maior flore rubente. The great peach coloured bulbous Flowerdeluce. There is another of these greater kindes, more rare then any of the former, not differing in roote, leafe, or flower, from the former, but onely that the flower in this is of a pale reddish purple colour, comming somewhat neare vnto the colour of a peach blossome.
5. Iris bulbosa maior siue latifolia alba. The great white bulbous Flowerdeluce. The great white bulbous Flowerdeluce, riseth not vp so early out of the ground as the blew or purple doth, but about a moneth or more after, whose leaues are some∣what larger, and broader then of the others: the stalke is thicker and shorter, bea∣ring vsually two very large and great flowers, one flowring a little before the other, yet oftentimes both in flower together in the end, of a bleake blewish white colour, which wee call a siluer colour, while they are in the budde, and before they be blowne open, but then of a purer white, yet with an eye or shew of that siluer colour remai∣ning in them, the three falling leaues being very large, and hauing that yellow spot in the middle of each of them: the seedes are likewise inclosed in heads, like vnto the blew or purple kindes, but larger, and are of a reddish yellow colour like them: the roote likewise is not differing, but greater. 6. Iris bulbosa maior alba variegata. The great white stript bulbous Flowerdeluce. This white stript Flowerdeluce, is in roote, leafe, and flower, and in manner of growing, like vnto the former white Flowerdeluce; the onely difference is in the marking of the flower, being diuers from it: for this hath in the white flower great veines, stripes, or markes, of a Violet blew colour, dispersed through the leaues of the flower very variably, which addeth a superexcellent beauty to the flower. 7. Iris bulbosa maior siue latifolia versicolor. The great party coloured bulbous Flowerdeluce. There is no difference in this from the former, but in the flower, which is of a whi∣tish colour in the three falling leaues, hauing a circle of ash-colour about the yellow spot, the three rigged leaues being likewise whitish, but ridged and edged with that ash-colour, and the three vpright leaues of a pale blewish white colour, with some veines therein of a blewish purple. Varietas.There hath beene brought vnto vs diuers rootes of these kindes, with the dryed flowers remaining on them, wherein there hath beene seene more varieties, then I can well remember to expresse, which variety it is very probable, hath risen by the sowing of the seeds, as is truely obserued in the narrower leafed kinde of Flowerdeluce, in the Tulipa, and in some other plants. Flore luteo.Wee haue heard of one of this kinde of broad leafed Flowerdeluces, that should beare a yellow flower, in the like manner as is to be seene in the narrow leafed ones: but I haue not seene any such, and therefore I dare report no further of it, vntill time hath discouered the truth or falshood of the report. The Place. Lobelius is the first reporter, that the blew Flowerdeluce or first kinde of these broad leafed Flowerdeluces, groweth naturally in the West parts of England; but I am in some doubt of the truth of that report: for I ra∣ther thinke, that some in their trauels through Spaine, or other parts where it groweth, being delighted with the beauty of the flower, did gather the rootes, and bring them ouer with them, and dwelling in some of the West parts of England, planted them, and there encreasing so plentifully as they doe, they were imparted to many, thereby in time growing common in all Countrey folkes Gardens thereabouts. They grow also, and all the other, and many more varieties, about Tho∣louse, from whence Plantinianus Gassanus both sent and brought vs them, with many other bulbous rootes, and rare plants gathered there∣abouts.
1 Iris bulbosa latifolia prima Clusii. Clusius his first great bulbous Flowerdeluce. 2 Iris bulbosa maior caerulea siue Anglica. The great blew or English bulbous Flowerdeluce. 3 Iris bulbosa maior purpurea variegata. The great purple stript bulbous Flowerdeluce. 4 Iris bulbosa angustifolia maior alba. The greater white narrow leafed bulbous Flowerdeluce. 5 Iris bulbosa angustifolia versicolor. The party coloured narrow leafed bulbous Flower∣deluce. 6 Iris bulbosa angustifolia Africana. The purple African bulbous narrow leafed Flowerdeluce depiction of flowers
The Time. These doe flower vsually in the end of May, or beginning of Iune, and their seede is ripe in the end of Iuly or August. The Names. Lobel calleth the first English blew Flowerdeluce, Hyacinthus Poetarum flore Iridis, & propter Hyacinthinum colorem, id est violaceum dictus: but I know not any great good ground for it, more then the very colour; for it is nei∣ther of the forme of a Lilly, neither hath it those mourning markes imprin∣ted in it, which the Poet faineth to bee in his Hyacinth. It is most truely called an Iris, or Flowerdeluce (and there is great difference betweene a Lilly and a Flowerdeluce, for the formes of their flowers) because it answe∣reth thereunto very exactly, for the flower, and is therefore called vsually by most, either Iris bulbosa Anglica, or Iris bulbosa maior siue latifolia, for a diffe∣rence betweene it, and the lesser with narrow leaues: In English, eyther The great English bulbous Flowerdeluce, or the great broad leafed bul∣bous Flowerdeluce, which you will, adding the other name, according to the colour. And thus much for these broad leafed bulbous Flowerdeluces, so much as hath come to our knowledge. Now to the seuerall varieties of the narrow leafed bulbous Flowerdeluces, so much likewise as we haue been acquainted with. Iris bulbosa minor siue angustifolia alba. The smaller white or narrow leafed bulbous Flowerdeluce. This first Flowerdeluce, which beareth the smaller flower of the two white ones, that are here to bee described, springeth out of the ground alwaies before Winter, which after breaketh forth into foure or fiue small and narrow leaues, a foote long or more, of a whitish greene on the inside, which is hollow and chanalled, and of a blewish greene colour on the outside, and round withall: the stalke of this kinde is longer and slenderer then the former, with some shorter leaues vpon it, at the toppe whereof, out of short skinny leaues, stand one or two flowers, smaller, shorter, and rounder then the flowers of the former broad leafed Flowerdeluces, but made after the same proportion with nine leaues, three falling downewards, with a yellow spot in the middle, other three are made like a long arch, which couer the lower part next the stalke of those falling leaues, and turne vp at the ends of them, where they are di∣uided into two parts: the other three stand vpright, betweene each of the three falling leaues, being somewhat long and narrow: the flower is wholly (sauing the yellow spot) of a pure white colour, yet in some hauing a shew of some blew throughout, and in others towards the bottome of the three vpright leaues: after the flowers are past, there rise vp so many long cods or seede vessels, as there were flowers, which are longer and smaller then in the former, and a little bending like a Cornet, with three round squares, and round pointed also, which diuiding it selfe when the seede is ripe into three parts, doe shew six seuerall cells or places, wherein is contained such like round reddish yellow seedes, but smaller then the former: the roote is smaller and shorter then the former, and without any haires or threeds, couered with browne thin skinnes, and more plentifull in giuing encrease. Iris bulbosa anguistifolia alba flore maiore. The greater white narrow leafed bulbous Flowerdeluce. I shall not neede to make a seuerall description to euery one of these Flowerdeluces that follow, for that were but to make often repetition of one thing, which being once done, as it is, may well serue to expresse all the rest, and but onely to adde the espe∣ciall
differences, either in leafe or flower, for bignesse, colour, or forme, as is expedient to expresse and distinguish them seuerally. This greater white bulbous Flowerdeluce is like vnto the last described in all parts, sauing that it is a little larger and higher, both in leafe, stalke, and flower, and much whiter then any of these mixed sorts that follow, yet not so white as the former: the roote hereof is likewise a little bigger and rounder in the middle. Albesens. Milke white.There is another, whose falling leaues haue a little shew of yellownesse in them, and so are the middle ridges of the arched leaues, but the vpright leaues are more white, not differing in roote or leafe from the first white. Argentea. Siluer colour.And another, whose falls are of a yellowish white, like the last, the ar∣ched leaues are whiter, and the vpright leaues of a blewish white, which we call a siluer colour. Albida. Whitish.Another hath the fals yellowish, and sometimes with a little edge of white about them, and sometimes without; the vpright leaues are whitish, as the arched leaues are, yet the ridge yellower. Albida labris luteis. White with yellow fals. Albida angu∣stior. The narrow white.Another hath his fals yellow, and the vpright leaues white, all these flowers are about the same bignesse with the first. But we haue another, whose flower is smaller, and almost as white as the second, the lower leaues are small, and doe as it were stand outright, not hauing almost any fal at all, so that the yellow spot seemeth to be the whole leafe, the arched leaues are not halfe so large as in the former, and the vp∣right leaues bowe themselues in the middle, so that the tops doe as it were meete together. And another of the same, whose falling leaues are a little more eminent and yellow, with a yellower spot. Aurea siue lu∣tea Hispanica. The Spanish yellow.We haue another kinde that is called the Spanish yellow, which riseth not vp so high, as ordinarily most of the rest doe, and is wholly of a gold yellow colour. Pallide lutea. Straw colour.There is another, that vsually riseth higher then the former yellow, and is wholly of a pale yellow, but deeper as the spot. Albida lutea. Pale Straw co∣lour. Mauritanica flaua serotina minor. The small Bar∣bary yellow. Versicolor His∣panica caerulea labris albis. The party co∣loured SpanishThere is also another like vnto the pale yellow, but that the falling leaues are whiter then all the rest of the flower. There is a smaller or dwarfe kinde, brought from the backe parts of Bar∣bary, neare the Sea, like vnto the yellow, but smaller and lower, and in stead of vpright leaues, hath small short leaues like haires: it flowreth very late, after all others haue almost giuen their seede. We haue another sort is called the party coloured Spanish bulbous Flow∣erdeluce, whose falling leaues are white, the arched leaues of a whitish sil∣uer colour, and the vpright leaues of a fine blewish purple. Yet sometimes this doth vary; for the falling leaues will haue either an edge of blew, circling the white leaues, the arched leaues being a little blewer,Diuersitas. The diuersity or variation of this flower. and the vpright leaues more purple. Or the fals will be almost wholly blew, edged with a blewer colour, the arched leaues pale blew, and the vpright leaues of a purplish blew Violet colour. Or the fals white, the arched leaues pale white, as the vpright leaues are. Or not of so faire a blewish purple, as the first sort is. Some of them also will haue larger flowers then others, and be more li∣berall in bearing flowers: for the first sort, which is the most ordinary, sel∣dome beareth aboue one flower on a stalke, yet sometimes two. And of the others there are some that wil beare vsually two and three flowers, yet some againe will beare but one. All these kindes smell sweeter then many of the other,Caerulea siue purpurea minor Lusitanica prae∣cox. The small early purple Portugall. although the most part be without sent.
There is another kinde, that is smaller in all the parts thereof then the former, the stalke is slender, and not so high, bearing at the toppe one or two small flowers, all wholly of a faire blewish purple, with a yellow spot  in euery one of the three falling leaues, this vsually flowreth early, euen with the first bulbous Flowerdeluces. Purpurea ma∣ior. The greater purple.We haue another purple, whose flower is larger, and stalke higher, and is of a very reddish purple colour, a little aboue the ground, at the foote or bottome of the leaues and stalke: this flowreth with the later sort of Flow∣erdeluces. Purpurea serotina The late purple.There is another, whose flower is wholly purple, except the yellow spot, and flowreth later then any of the other purples. Purpura rubescens labris caeruleis. A reddish purple with blew fals. Purpura rubescens labris albido caru∣leis. A reddish purple with whitish blew fals. Purpurea labris luteis. Party coloured purple & yellow Purpurea labris ex albido caruleo & luteo mixtis. Party coloured purple with stript yellow fals. Sub purpurea labris luteis. Pale purple with yellow fals. A paler purple. Subcaerulea labris luteis. Party coloured blew and yellow Criis coloris el∣gantioris. A faire haire co∣lour. Altera obsoletior. A dull haire co∣lour.There is yet another purple, whose vpright leaues are of a reddish pur∣ple, and the falling leaues of a blew colour. And another of a reddish purple, whose falling leaues are of a whitish blew colour, in nothing else differing from the last. Another hath his falling leaues of a faire gold yellow, without any stripe, yet in some there are veines running through the yellow leaues, and some haue an edge of a sullen darke colour about them: the vpright leaues in e∣uery of these, are of a Violet purple. Another is altogether like this last, but that the falling leaues are of a pale blew and yellow, trauersing one the other, and the arched leaues of a pale purplish colour. Another hath his vpright leaues of a paler purple, and the falling leaues yellow. And another little differing from it, but that the arched leaues are whitish. Another whose vpright leaues are of a pale blew, and the falling leaues yellow. And another of the same sort, but of a little paler blew. We haue another sort, whose vpright leaues are of a faire brownish yel∣low colour, which some call a Fuille mort, and others an haire colour; the falling leaues yellow. And another of the same colour, but somewhat deader. Iris bulbosa Africana serpentariae caule. The purple or muricy bulbous Barbary Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce as it is more strange (that is, but lately knowne and possessed by a few) so it is both more desired, and of more beauty then others. It is in all respects, of roote, leafe, and flower, for the forme like vnto the middle sort of these Flowerdeluces, onely the lowest part of the leaues and stalke, for an inch or therea∣bouts, next vnto the ground, are of a reddish colour, spotted with many spots, and the flower, being of a meane size, is of a deepe purplish red or murrey colour the whole flower throughout, except the yellow spot in the middle of the three lower or falling leaues, as is in all others. Purpura caeru∣lea obsoleta la∣bris fuscis. The duskie party coloured purple.And lastly, there is another sort, which is the greatest of all these nar∣row leafed Flowerdeluces, in all the parts of it; for the roote is greater then any of the other, being thicke and short: the leaues are broader and longer, but of the same colour: the stalke is stronger and higher then any of them, bearing two or three flowers, larger also then any of the rest, whose falling leaues are of a duskie yellow, and sometimes with veines and bor∣ders about the brimmes, of another dunne colour, yet hauing that yellow spot that is in all: the arched leaues are of a sullen pale purplish yellow, and the vpright leaues of a dull or duskie blewish purple colour: the heads or hornes for seede are likewise greater, and so is the seede also a little. The Place. These Flowerdeluces haue had their originall out of Spaine and Portu∣gall, as it is thought, except those that haue risen by the sowing, and those which are named of Africa.
The Time. These flower in Iune, and sometimes abide vnto Iuly, but vsually not so early as the former broad leafed kindes, and are soone spoiled with wet in their flowring. The Names. The seuerall names, both in Latine and English, are sufficient for them as they are set downe; for we know no better. The Vertues. There is not any thing extant or to be heard, that any of these kindes of Flowerdeluces hath been vsed to any Physicall purposes, and serue onely to decke vp the Gardens of the curious. And thus much for these sorts of bulbous Flowerdeluces, and yet I doubt not, but that there are many differences, which haue risen by the sowing of the seede, as many may obserue from their owne labours, for that euery yeare doth shew forth some va∣riety that is not seene before. And now I will conuert my discourse a while likewise, to passe through the seuerall rankes of the other kindes of tuberous rooted Flowerde∣luces, called Flagges. CHAP. XX. Iris latifolia tuberosa. The Flagge or Flowerdeluce. THere are two principall kindes of tuberous or knobby rooted Flowerdeluces, that is, the fall and the dwarfe, or the greater and the lesser; the former called Iris maior or latifolia, and the other Iris minor, or rather Chamaeiris; and each of these haue their lesser or narrow leafed kindes to bee comprehended vnder them: Of all which in their order. And first of that Flowerdeluce, which for his excellent beau∣tie and raritie, deserueth the first place. Iris Chalcedonica siue Susiana maior. The great Turkie Flowerdeluce.
The great Turkie Flowerdeluce, hath diuers heads of long and broad fresh greene leaues, yet not so broad as many other of those that follow, one folded within ano∣ther at the bottome, as all other of these Flowerdeluces are: from the middle of some one of those heads (for euery head of leaues beareth not a flower) riseth vp a round stiffe stalke, two foote high, at the toppe whereof standeth one flower (for I neuer ob∣serued it to beare two) the largest almost, but rarest of all the rest, consisting of nine leaues, like the others that follow, but of the colour almost of a Snakes skinne, it is so diuersly spotted; for the three lower falling leaues are very large, of a deepe or darke purple colour, almost blacke, full of grayish spots, strakes, and lines through the whole leaues, with a blacke thrume or freeze in the middle of each of them: the three arched leaues that couer them, are of the same darke purple colour, yet a little paler at the sides, the three vpper leaues are very large also, and of the same colour with the lower leaues, but a little more liuely and fresh, being speckled and straked with whiter spots and lines; which leaues being laid in water, will colour the water into a Violet colour, but if a little Allome be put therein, and then wrung or pressed, and the iuice of these leaues dryed in the shadow, will giue a colour almost as deepe as Indico, and may serue for shadowes in limming excellent well: the flower hath no sent that can be per∣ceiued, but is onely commendable for the beauty and rarity thereof: it seldome bea∣reth seedes in these cold Countries, but when it doth, it is contained in great heads,  being brownish and round, but not so flat as in other sorts, the roots are more browne on the outside, and growing tuberous thicke, as all other that are kept in Gardens. Iris Chalcedonica siue Susiana minor. The lesser Turkie Flowerdeluce. There is another hereof little differing, but that the leafe is of a more yellowish greene colour, and the flower neither so large or faire, nor of so perspicuous markes and spots, nor the colour of that liuely (though darke) lustre. The Place. These haue been sent out of Turkie diuers times among other things, and it should seeme, that they haue had their originall from about Susis, a chiefe Citie of Persia. The Time. They flower in May most vsually, before any of the other kindes. The Names. They haue been sent vnto vs, and vnto diuers other in other parts, from Constantinople vnder the name of Alaia Susiana, and thereupon it hath been called, both of them and vs, either Iris Chalcedonica, or Susiana, and for distinction maior or minor: In English, The Turkie Flowerdeluce, or the Ginnie Hen Flowerdeluce, the greater or the lesser. Iris alba Florentina. The white Flowerdeluce. The great white Flowerdeluce, hath many heads of very broad and flat long leaues, enclosing or folding one within another at the bottome, and after a little diuided one from another toward the top, thin edged, like a sword on both sides, and thicker in the middle: from the middle of some of these heads of leaues, riseth vp a round stiffe stalk, two or three foot high, bearing at the top one, two, or three large flowers, out of seue∣rall huskes or skins, consisting of nine leaues, as all the other do, of a faire white colour, hauing in the middle of each of the three falling leaues, a small long yellow frize or thrume, as is most vsuall in all the sorts of the following Flowerdeluces, both of the greater and smaller kindes: after the flowers are past, come the seed, inclosed in thicke short pods, full fraught or stored with red roundish and flat seede, lying close one vpon another: the roote is tuberous or knobby, shooting out from euery side such like tube∣rous heads, lying for the most part vpon or aboue the ground, and fastened within the ground with long white strings or fibres, which hold them strongly, and encreaseth fast.Flore pallido. There is another like vnto this last in all things, sauing that the colour of the flower is of a more yellowish white, which we vsually call a Straw colour. Iris alba maior Versicolor. The white party coloured Flowerdeluce. This variable Flowerdeluce is like vnto the former, but that the leaues are not so large and broad, the flower hereof is as large almost, and as white as the former, but it hath a faire list or line of a blewish purple downe the backe of euery one of the three vpright leaues, and likewise round about the edges, both of the vpper and lower leaues, and also a little more purplish vpon the ridge of the arched leaues, that couer the falling leaues: the roote hereof is not so great as of the former white, but a little slenderer and browner. Iris Dalmatica maior. The great Dalmatian Flowerdeluce.
This greater Flowerdeluce of Dalmatia, hath his leaues as large and broad as any of the Flowerdeluces whatsoeuer, his stalke and flower doe equall his other propor∣tion,  onely the colour of the flower is differing, being of a faire watchet or bleake blew colour wholly, with the yellow frize or thrum downe the middle of the lower or falling leaues, as before is said to be common to all these sorts of Flowerdeluces; in all other parts it little differeth, sauing onely this is obserued to haue a small shew of a purplish red about the bottome of the greene leaues. Iris purpurea siue vulgaris. The common purple Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce, which is most common in Gardens, differeth nothing at all from those that are formerly described, either in roote, leafe, or flower for the forme of them, but onely that the leaues of this are not so large as the last, and the flower it selfe is of a deep purple or Violet colour, and sometimes a little declining to rednesse, especially in some places. Sometimes this kinde of Flowerdeluce will haue flowers of a paler purple colour,Purpurea pal∣lidior versico∣lor. comming neare vnto a blew, and sometimes it will haue veines or stripes of a deeper blew, or purple, or ash-colour, running through all the vpper and lower leaues. There is another like vnto this, but more purple in the fals,Caerulea labris purpureis. and more pale in the vpright leaues. Iris Asiatica caerulea. The blew Flowerdeluce of Asia. This Flowerdeluce of Asia, is in largenesse of leaues like vnto the Dalmatian, but beareth more store of flowers on seuerall branches, which are of a deeper blew co∣lour, and the arched leaues whitish on the side, and purplish on the ridges, but in other things like vnto it. There is another neare vnto this, but that his leaues are a little narrower,Purpurea. and his flowers a little more purple, especially the vpper leaues. Iris Damascena. The Flowerdeluce of Damasco. This is likewise altogether like the Flowerdeluce of Asia, but that it hath some white veines in the vpright leaues. Iris Lusitanica biflora. The Portugall Flowerdeluce. This Portugall Flowerdeluce is very like the common purple Flowerdeluce, but that this is not so large in leaues, or flowers, and that it doth often flower twice in a yeare, that is, both in the Spring, and in the Autumne againe, and besides, the flowers haue a better or sweeter sent, but of the like purple or Violet colour as it is, and com∣ming forth out of purplish skins or huskes. Iris Camerarij siue purpurea versicolor maior. The greater variable coloured purple Flowerdeluce. The greater of the variable purple Flowerdeluces, hath very broad leaues, like vn∣to the leaues of the common purple Flowerdeluce, and so is the flower also, but diffe∣ring in colour, for the three lower leaues are of a deepe purple colour tending to red∣nesse, the three arched leaues are of the colour with the vpper leaues, which are of a pale or bleake colour tending to yellownesse, shadowed ouer with a smoakie purplish colour, except the ridges of the arched leaues, which are of a more liuely purple co∣lour. Iris purpurea versicolor minor. The lesser variable purple Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce differeth not in any thing from the last, but onely that it hath narrower greene leaues, and smaller and narrower flowers, else if they be both con∣ferred together, the colours will not seeme to varie the one from the other any whit at all. There is another somewhat neare vnto these two last kindes,Altera minus fuliginea. whose huskes from
whence the flowers doe shoot forth, haue purple veines in them, and to haue the fal∣ling purplish leaues, and the three vpright leaues are not so smoakie, yet of a dun pur∣ple colour. Iris caerulea versicolor. The blew party coloured Flowerdeluce. This party coloured Flowerdeluce hath his leaues of the same largenesse, with the lesser variable purple Flowerdeluce last described, and his flowers diuersly marked: for some haue the fals blew at the edges, and whitish at the bottome, the arched leaues of a yellowish white, and the vpright leaues of a whitish blew, with yellowish edges. Some againe are of a darker blew, with brownish spots in them. And some are so pale a blew, that we may well call it an ash colour: And lastly, there is another of this sort, whose vpright leaue are of a faire pale blew, with yellowish edges, and the falling leaues parted into two colours, sometimes equally in the halfe, each side sutable to the other in colour: And sometimes hauing the one leafe in that manner: And some∣times but with a diuers coloured list in them; in the other parts both of flower and leafe, like vnto the other. Iris lutea variegata. The yellow variable Flowerdeluce. This yellow variable Flowerdeluce loseth his leaues in Winter, contrary to all the former Flowerdeluces, so that his roote remaineth vnder ground without any shew of leafe vpon it: but in the beginning of the Spring it shooteth out faire broad leaues, falling downwards at the points or ends, but shorter many times then any of the for∣mer, and so is the stalke likewise, not rising much aboue a foote high, whereon are set two or three large flowers, whose falling leaues are of a reddish purple colour, the three that stand vpright of a smoakie yellow, the arched leaues hauing their ridges of a bleake colour tending to purple, the sides being of the former smoakie yellow colour, with some purplish veines at the foote or bottome of all the leaues: the roote groweth somewhat more slender and long vnder ground, and of a darker colour then manie of the other. Another sort hath the vpright leaues of a reasonable faire yellow, and stand more vpright, not bowing downe as most of the other, and the purple fals haue pale edges. Some haue their greene leaes party coloured,Varietas. white and greene, more or lesse, and so are the huskes of the flower, the arched leaues yellow, as the vpright leaues are, with purplish veines at the bottome. And some haue both the arched and vpright leaues of so pale a yellow, that we may almost call it a straw colour, but yellower at the bot∣tome, with purple veines, and the falling leaues purple, with two purple spots in them. And these are the sorts of the greater tuberous or Flagge Flowerdeluces that haue come to our knowledge: the next hereunto are the lesser or narrow leased kindes to be described; and first of the greatest of them. 1. Iris angustifolia Tripolitana aurea. The yellow Flowerdeluce of Tripoly. This Flowerdeluce I place in the forefront of the narrow leafed Flowerdeluces, for the length of the leaues, compared with the breadth of them; it may fitly bee cal∣led a narrow leafed Flowerdeluce, although they be an inch broad, which is broader then any of them that follow, or some of those are set downe before, but as I said, the length make them seem narrow, and therfore let it take vp his roome in this place, with the description that followeth. It beareth leaues a yard long, or not much lesse, and an inch broad, as is said before, or more, of a sad greene colour, but not shining: the stalke riseth vp to be foure or Fiue foote high, being strong and round, but not very great, bearing at the toppe two or three long and narrow gold yellow flowers, of the fashion of the bulbous Flowerdeluces, as the next to bee described is, without any mixture or variation therein: the heads for seede are three square, containing within them many flat cornered seedes: the roote is long and blackish, like vnto the rest that follow, but greater and fuller.
1 Iris Chalcedonica siue Susiana maior. The great Turkie Flowerdeluce. 2 Iris alba Florentina. The white Flowerdeluce. 3 Iris lati¦folia variegata. The variable Flowerdeluce. 4 Chamaeiris latifolia maier. The greater dwarfe Flowerdeluce. depiction of flowers
2. Iris angustifolia maior caerulea. The greater blew Flowerdeluce with narrow leaues. This kinde of Flowerdeluce hath his leaues very long and narrow, of a whitish greene colour, but neither so long or broad as the last, yet broader, thicker and stiffer then any of the rest with narrow leaues that follow: the stalke riseth sometimes no higher then the leaues, and sometimes a little higher, bearing diuers flowers at the top, successiuely flowring one after another, and are like vnto the flowers of the bulbous Flowerdeluces, but of a light blew colour, and sometimes deeper: after the flowers are past, rise vp six cornered heads, which open into three parts, wherein is contained browne seede, almost round: the roote is small, blackish and hard, spreading into many long heads, and more closely growing or matting together. 3. Iris angustifolia purpurea marina. The purple narrow leafed Sea Flowerdeluce. This Sea Flowerdeluce hath many narrow hard leaues as long as the former, and of a darke greene colour, which doe smell a little strong: the stalke beareth two or three flowers like the former, but somewhat lesse, and of a darke purple or Violet co∣lour: in seede and roote it is like the former. 4. Iris angustifolia purpurea versicolor. The variable purple narrow leafed Flowerdeluce. The leaues of this Flowerdeluce are very like the former Sea Flowerdeluce, and do a little stinke like them; the flowers are differing, in that the vpper leaues are wholly purple or violet, and the lower leaues haue white veines, and purple running one a∣mong another: the seede and rootes differ not from the former purple Sea kinde. 5. Iris angustifolia minor Pannonica siue versicolor Clusij. The small variable Hungarian Flowerdeluce of Clusius. This Hungarian Flowerdeluce (first found out by Clusius, by him described, and of him tooke the name) riseth vp with diuers small tufts of leaues, very long, narrow, and greene, growing thicke together, especially if it abide any time in a place; among which riseth vp many long round stalkes, higher then the leaues, bearing two or three, or foure small flowers, one aboue another, like the former, but smaller and of greater beauty: for the lower leaues are variably striped with white and purple, without any thrume or fringe at all; the vpper leaues are of a blewish fine purple or Violet colour, & so are the arched leaues, yet hauing the edges a little paler: the heads for seede are smaller, and not so cornered as the other, containing seedes much like the former, but smaller: the roote is blacke and small, growing thicker and closer together then any other, and strongly fastened in the ground, with a number of hard stringie rootes: the flowers are of a reasonable good sent. 6. Iris angustifolia maior flore duplici. The greater double blew Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce, differeth not either in roote or leafe from the first great blew Flowerdeluce of Clusius, but onely in that the leaues grow thicker together, and that the flowers of this kinde are as it were double with many leaues confusedly set toge∣ther, without any distinct parts of a Flowerdeluce, and of a faire blew colour with many white veines and lines running in the leaues; yet oftentimes the stalke of flowers hath but two or three small flowers distinctly set together, rising as it were out of one huske. 7. Iris angustifolia minor alba Clusij. The small white Flowerdeluce of Hungary.
This likewise differeth little from the former Hungarian Flowerdeluce of Clusius, 1 Iris angustifolia Tripolitana. The yellow Flowerdeluce of Tripoli. 2 Iris angustifolia maior carulea. The greater blew Flowerdeluce with narrow leaues. 3 Iris angustifolia minor Pannonica siue versicolor Clusti. The small variable Hungarian Flowerdeluce o Clusis. 4 Iris angustifolia maior flore duplici The greater double blew Flowerdeluce. 5 Chamairis angustifolia minor. The lesser Grasse Flowerdeluce. 6 Iris tuberosa. The veluet Flowerdeluce. depiction of flowers
but that the leafe is of a little paler greene colour, and the flower is of a faire whitish colour, with some purple at the bottome of the leaues. Next after these narrow leafed Flowerdeluces, are the greater and smaller sorts of dwarfe kindes to follow; and lastly, the narrow or grasse leafed dwarfe kindes, which will finish this Chapter of Flowerdeluces. 1. Chamaeiris latifolia maior alba. The greater white dwarfe Flowerdeluce. This dwarfe Flowerdeluce hath his leaues as broad as some of the lesser kindes last mentioned, but not shorter; the stalke is very short, not aboue halfe a foote high or thereabouts, bearing most commonly but one flower, seldome two, which are in some of a pure white, in others paler, or somewhat yellowish through the whole flower, ex∣cept the yellow frize or thrume in the middle of euery one of the falling leaues: after the flowers are past, come forth great heads, containing within them round pale seed: the roote is small, according to the proportion of the plant aboue ground, but made after the fashion of the greater kindes, with tuberous peeces spreading from the sides, and strong fibres or strings, whereby they are fastened in the ground. 2. Chamaeiris latifolia maior purpurea. The greater purple dwarfe Flowerdeluce. There is no difference either in roote, leafe, or forme of flower in this from the for∣mer dwarfe kinde, but onely in the colour of the flower, which in some is of a very deepe or blacke Violet purple, both the toppes and the fals: in others the Violet pur∣ple is more liuely, and in some the vpper leaues are blew, and the lower leaues purple, yet all of them haue that yellow frize or thrume in the middle of the falling leaues, that the other kindes haue. Altera.There is another that beareth purple flowers, that might be reckoned, for the smal∣nesse and shortnesse of his stalke, to the next kinde, but that the flowers and leaues of this are as large as any of the former kindes of the smaller Flowerdeluces. 3. Chamaeiris latifolia minor alba. The lesser white dwarfe Flowerdeluce. There is also another sort of these Flowerdeluces, whose leaues and flowers are lesse, and wherein there is much variety. The leaues of this kinde, are all for the most part somewhat smaller, narrower, and shorter then the former: the stalke with the flower vpon it scarce riseth aboue the leaues, so that in most of them it may be rather called a foote-stalke, such as the Saffron flowers haue, and are therefore called of ma∣nie , without stalkes; the flowers are like vnto the first described of the dwarfe kindes, and of a whitish colour, with a few purplish lines at the bottome of the vpper leaues, and a list of greene in the falling leaues. Stramia.Another hath the flowers of a pale yellow, called a Straw colour, with whitish stripes and veines in the fals, and purplish lines at the bottome of the vpper leaues. 4. Chamaeiris latifolia minor purpurea. The lesser purple dwarfe Flowerdeluce. The difference of this from the former, consisteth more in the colour then forme of the flower, which is of a deep Violet purple, sometimes paler, and sometimes so deep, that it almost seemeth blacke: And sometimes the fals purplish, and the vpper leaues blew. Some of these haue a sweete sent, and some none. Caerulea.There is another of a fine pale or delayed blew colour throughout the whole flower. 5. Chamaeiris latifolia minor suaeuerubens. The lesser blush coloured dwarfe Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce hath the falling leaues of the flower of a reddish colour, and the thrumes blew: the vpper and arched leaues of a fine pale red or flesh colour, cal∣led a blush colour; in all other things it differeth not, and smelleth little or nothing at all.
6. Chamaeiris latifolia minor lutea versicolor. The lesser yellow variable dwarfe Flowerdeluce. The falling leaues of this Flowerdeluce are yellowish, with purple lines from the middle downewards, sometimes of a deeper, and sometimes of a paler colour, and white thrumes in the middle, the vpper leaues are likewise of a yellowish colour, with purple lines in them: And sometimes the yellow colour is paler, and the lines both in the vpper and lower leaues of a dull or dead purple colour. 3. Chamaeiris latifolia minor caerulea versicolor. The lesser blew variable dwarfe Flowerdeluce. The vpper leaues of this flower are of a blewish yellow colour, spotted with purple in the broad part, and at the bottome very narrow: the falling leaues are spread ouer with pale purplish lines, and a small shew of blew about the brimmes: the thrume is yellow at the bottome, and blewish aboue: the arched leaues are of a blewish white, be∣ing a little deeper on the ridge. And sometimes the vpper leaues are of a paler blew rather whitish, with the yellow: both these haue no sent at all. 8. Chamaeiris marina purpurea. The purple dwarfe Sea Flowerdeluce. This small Flowerdeluce is like vnto the narrow leafed Sea Flowerdeluce before described, both in roote, leafe, and flower, hauing no other difference, but in the smal∣nesse and lownesse of the growing, being of the same purple colour with it. 9. Chamaeiris angustifolia maior. The greater Grasse Flowerdeluce. This Grasse Flowerdeluce hath many long and narrow darke greene leaues, not so stiffe as the former, but lither, and bending their ends downe againe, among which rise vp diuers stalkes, bearing at the toppe two or three sweete flowers, as small as any of them set downe before, of a reddish purple colour, with whitish yellow and purple strakes downe the middle of the falling leaues: the arched leaues are of a horse flesh colour all along the edges, and purple vpon the ridges and tips that turne vp againe: vnder these appeare three browne aglets, like vnto birds tongues: the three vpper leaues are small and narrow, of a perfect purple or Violet colour: the heads for seede haue sharper and harder cornered edges then the former: the seedes are somewhat grayish like the former, and so are the rootes, being small, blacke, and hard, growing thicke together, fastened in the ground with small blackish hard strings, which hardly shoote againe if the roote be remoued. 10. Chamaeiris angustifolia minor. The lesser Grasse Flowerdeluce. This Flowerdeluce is in leaues, flowers, and rootes so like the last described, that but onely it is smaller and lower, it is not to be distinguished from the other. And this may suffice for these sorts of Flowerdeluces, that furnish the Gardens of the curious louers of these varieties of nature, so farre forth as hath passed vnder our knowledge. There are some other that may be referred hereunto, but they belong to another hi∣story; and therefore I make no mention of them in this place. The Place. The places of most of these are set downe in their seuerall titles; for some are out of Turkie, others out of Hungaria, Dalmatia, Illyria, &c. as their names doe import. Those that grow by the Sea, are found in Spaine and France.
The Time. Some of these do flower in Aprill, some in May, and some not vntill Iune. The Names. The names expressed are the fittest agreeing vnto them, and therefore it is needlesse againe to repeate them. Many of the rootes of the former or greater kindes, being dryed are sweete, yet some more then other, and some haue no sent at all: but aboue all the rest, that with the white flower, called of Florence, is accounted of all to be the sweetest root, fit to be vsed to make sweete powders, &c. calling it by the name of Orris rootes. Iris tuberosa. The Veluet Flowerdeluce. Vnto the Family of Flowerdeluces, I must needes ioyne this peculiar kinde, because of the neare resemblance of the flower, although it differ both in roote and leafe; lest therefore it should haue no place, let it take vp a roome here in the end of the Flower∣deluces, with this description following. It hath many small and foure square leaues, two foote long and aboue sometimes, of a grayish greene colour, stiffe at the first, but afterwards growing to their full length, they are weak and bend downe to the ground: out of the middle, as it were of one of these leaues, breaketh out the stalke, a foot high and better, with some leaues thereon, at the toppe whereof, out of a huske riseth one flower, (I neuer saw more on a stalke) consisting of nine leaues, whereof the three that fall downe are of a yellowish greene colour round about the edges, and in the middle of so deepe a purple, that it seemeth to be blacke, resembling blacke Veluet: the three arched leaues, that couer the lower leaues to the halfe, are of the same greenish colour that the edges and backside of the lower leaues are: the three vppermost leaues, if they may be called leaues, or rather short peeces like eares, are green also, but wherein a glimpse of purple may be seene in them: after the flower is past, there followeth a round knob or whitish seede vessell, hanging downe by a small foote-stalke, from be∣tweene the huske, which is diuided as it were into two leaues, wherein is contained round white seede. The roote is bunched or knobbed out into long round rootes, like vnto fingers, two or three from one peece, one distant from another, and one longer then another, for the most part of a darkish gray colour, and reddish withall on the outside, and somewhat yellowish within. The Place. It hath beene sent out of Turkie oftentimes (as growing naturally there∣abouts) and not knowne to grow naturally any where else. The Time. It flowreth in Aprill or May, sometimes earlier or later, as the Spring falleth out to be milde or sharpe. The Names. Matthiolus contendeth to make it the true Hermodactylus, rather from the shew of the rootes, which (as is said) are like vnto fingers, then from any other good reason: for the rootes hereof eyther dry or greene, do nothing resemble the true Hermodactyli that are vsed in Physicke, as any that know∣eth them may easily perceiue, either in forme or vertue. It is more truely referred to the Flowerdeluces, and because of the tuberous rootes, called Iris tuberosa, although all the Flowerdeluces in this Chapter haue tuberous
rootes, yet this much differing from them all. In English it is vsually called, The Veluet Flowerdeluce, because the three falling leaues seeme to be like smooth blacke Veluet. The Vertues. Both the rootes and the flowers of the great Flowerdeluces, are of great vse for the purging and cleansing of many inward, as well as outward disea∣ses, as all Authors in Physicke doe record. Some haue vsed also the greene rootes to cleanse the skinne, but they had neede to be carefull that vse them, lest they take more harme then good by the vse of them. The dryed rootes called Orris (as is said) is of much vse to make sweete powders, or other things to perfume apparrell or linnen. The iuice or decoction of the green roots doth procure both neezing to be snuft vp into the nostrils, and vomi∣ting very strongly being taken inwardly. CHAP. XXI. Gladiolus. Corne Flagge. NExt vnto the Flagges or Flowerdeluces, come the Gladioli or Corne Flagges to bee entreated of, for some resemblance of the leaues with them. There are hereof diuers sorts, some bigger and some lesser, but the chiefest difference is in the colour of the flowers, and one in the order of the flowers. Of them all in their seuerall orders. Gladiolus Narbonensis. The French Corne Flagge. The French Corne Flagge riseth vp with three or foure broad, long, and stiffe greene leaues, one as it were out of the side of another, being ioyned together at the bottome, somewhat like vnto the leaues of Flowerdeluces, but stiffer, more full of ribbes, and longer then many of them, and sharper pointed: the stalke riseth vp from among the leaues, bearing them on it as it riseth, hauing at the toppe diuers huskes, out of which come the flowers one aboue another, all of them turning and opening themselues one way, which are long and gaping, like vnto the flowers of Foxegloue, a little arched or bunching vp in the middle, of a faire reddish purple colour, with two white spots within the mouth thereof, one on each side, made like vnto a Lozenge that is square and long pointed: after the flowers are past, come vp round heads or seede vessels, wherein is contained reddish flat seede, like vnto the seede of the Fritil∣laria, but thicker and fuller: the roote is somewhat great, round, flat, and hard, with a shew as if it were netted, hauing another short spongie one vnder it, which when it hath done bearing, and the stalke dry, that the roote may be taken vp, sticketh close to the bottome, but may be easily taken away, hauing vsually a number of small rootes encreased about it, the least whereof will quickly grow, so that if it be suffered any long time in a Garden, it will rather choake and pester it, then be an ornament vnto it. Gladiolus Italicus binis floribus ordinibus. The Italian Corne Flagge. The Italian Corne Flagge is like vnto the French in roote, leafe, and flower, with∣out any other difference, then that the roote is smaller and browner, the leafe and stalke of a darker colour, and the flowers (being of a little darker colour like the for∣mer, and somewhat smaller) stand out on both sides of the stalke. Gladiolus Byzantinus. Corne Flagge of Constantinople.
This Corne Flagge that came first from Constantinople, is in all things like vnto the French Corne Flagge last described, but that it is larger, both in rootes, leaues, and  flowers, and likewise that the Flowers of this, which stand not on both sides, are of a deeper red colour, and flower later, after all the rest are past: the roote hereof being netted as plainly as any of the former, is as plentifull also to giue encrease, but is more tender and lesse able to abide our sharpe cold Winters. Gladiolus flore rubente. Blush Corne Flagge. This blush kinde is like vnto the French Corne Flagge in all respects, sauing onely that the flowers are of a pale red colour, tending to whitenesse, which wee vsually call a blush colour. Gladiolus flore albo. White Corne Flagge. This white Corne Flagge also differeth not from the last, but onely that the rootes are whiter on the outside, the leaues are greener, without any brownnesse or darknesse as in the former, and the flowers are snow white. Gladiolus purpureus minor. The small purple Corne Flagge. This also differeth not from any of the former, but onely in the smalnesse both of leafe, stalke, and flowers, which stand all on the one side, like vnto the French kinde, and of the same colour: the roote of this kinde is netted more then any other. The Place. They grow in France and Italy, the least in Spaine, and the Byzantine, as it is thought, about Constantinople, being (as is said) first sent from thence. Iohn Tradescante assured mee, that hee saw many acres of ground in Barbary spread ouer with them. The Time. They all flower in Iune and Iuly, and the Byzantine latest, as is said be∣fore. The Names. It hath diuers names; for the Latines call it Gladiolus, of the forme of a sword, which the leafe doth resemble. The Romanes Segetalis, because it groweth in the Corne fields. Some call it Victorialis rotunda, to put a diffe∣rence between it, and the longa, which is a kinde of Garlicke. Plinie saith, that Gladiolus is Cypirus, but to decide that controuersie, and many others, belongeth to another discourse, this being intended only for pleasure. Ger∣rard mistaketh the French kinde for the Italian. The Vertues. The roote being bruised, and applyed with Frankinsense (and often of it selfe without it) in the manner of a pultis or plaister, is held of diuers to be singular good to draw out splinters, thornes, and broken bones out of the flesh. Some take it to be effectuall to stirre vp Venerie, but I somewhat doubt thereof: For Galen in his eighth Booke of Simples, giueth vnto it a drawing, digesting, and drying faculty.
1 Gladiolus Narbonensis. The French Corne Flagge. 2 Gladiolus Italicus. The Italian Corne Flagge. 3 Gladiolus Byzantinus. Corne Flagge of Constantinople. 4 Palma Christi was. The great male handed Satyrion. 5 Orchis Hermaphroditica candida. The white Butterflie Orchis. 6 Orchis Melitias siue apifera. The Bee flower or Bee Orchis. 7 Deus Caninus flore purpurante. Dogges tooth Violet with a pale purplish flower. 8 Deus Caninus flore albo. Dogges tooth Violet with a white flower. depiction of flowers
CHAP. XXII. Orchis siue Satyrium. Bee flowers. ALthough it is not my purpose in this place, to giue a generall history of all the sorrs of Orchides, Satyrions, and the rest of that kinde; yet because many of them are very pleasant to behold, and, if they be planted in a conuenient place, will abide some time in Gardens, so that there is much pleasure taken in them: I shall intrude some of them for curiosities sake, to make vp the prospect of natures beautifull variety, and only entreate of a few, leauing the rest to a more ample declaration. 1. Satyrium Basilicum siue Palma Christi mas. The greater male handed Satyrion. This handed Satyrion hath for the most part but three faire large greene leaues, neare vnto the ground, spotted with small blackish markes: from among which riseth vp a stalke, with some smaller leaues thereon, bearing at the toppe a bush or spike of flowers, thicke set together, euery one whereof is made like a body, with the belly broader belowe then aboue, where it hath small peeces adioyned vnto it: the flower is of a faire purple colour, spotted with deeper purple spots, and hauing small peeces like hornes hanging at the backes of the flowers, and a small leafe at the bottome of the foote-stalke of euery flower: the rootes are not round, like the other Orchides, but somewhat long and flat, like a hand, with small diuisions belowe, hanging downe like the fingers of a hand, cut short off by the knockles, two alwayes growing together, with some small fibres or strings aboue the heads of these rootes, at the bottome of the stalke. 2. Satyrium Basilicum siue Palma Christi faemina. The female handed Satyrion. This female Satyrion hath longer and narrower leaues then the former, and spotted with more and greater spots, compassing the stalke at the bottome like the other: this beareth likewise a bush of flowers, like vnto the other, but that each of these haue heads like hoods, whereas the former haue none: in some they are white with purple spots, and in others of a reddish purple, with deep or darke coloured spots: the roots are alike. 3. Orchis Hermaphroditica candida. The white Butterflie Orchis. The rootes of this kinde take part with both the sorts of Orchis and Satyrium, being neither altogether round, nor fully handed, and thereupon it tooke the name, to sig∣nifie both kindes: the leaues are two in number, seldome more, being faire and broad, like vnto the leaues of Lillies, without any spot at all in them: at the toppe of the stalke stand many white flowers, not so thicke set as the first or second, euery one being fashioned like vnto a white Butterflie, with the wings spread abroad. 4. Orchis Melitias siue apifera. The Bee flower or Bee Orchis. This is a small and lowe plant for the most part, with three or foure small narrow leaues at the bottome: the stalke is seldome aboue halfe a foote high, with foure or fiue flowers thereon one aboue another, hauing round bodies, and somewhat flat, of a kind of yellowish colour, with purple wings aboue them, so like vnto an honey Bee, that it might soone deceiue one that neuer had seene such a flower before: the roots are two together, round and white, hauing a certaine muccilaginesse or clamminesse within them, without any taste almost at all, as all or the most part of these kindes haue. 5. Orchis Sphegodes. Gnats Satyrion.
The leaues of this Orchis are somewhat larger then of the Bee flower, the stalke also  somewhat higher: the flowers are fewer on the toppe, but somewhat larger then of the Bee flowers, made to the resemblance of a Gnat or great long Flie: the rootes are two round bulbes, as the other are. 6. Orchis Myodes. Flie Orchis. The Flie Orchis is like vnto the last described, both in leafe and roote, the diffe∣rence is in the flower, which is neither so long as the Gnat Satyrion, nor so great as the Bee Orchis, but the neather part of the Flie is blacke, with a list of ash-colour crossing the backe, with a shew of legges hanging at it: the naturall Flie seemeth so to bee in loue with it, that you shall seldome come in the heate of the day, but you shall finde one sitting close thereon. The Place. These grow in many places of England, some in the Woods, as the But∣terflie, and the two former handed Satyrions: others on dry bankes and barren balkes in Kent, and many other places. The Time. They flower for the most part in the beginning or middle of May, or thereabouts. The Names. Their seuerall names are expressed in their titles, so much as may suffice for this discourse. The Vertues. All the kindes of Orchis are accounted to procure bodily lust, as well the flowers distilled, as the rootes prepared. The rootes boyled in red Wine, and afterwards dryed, are held to bee a singular good remedie against the bloody Fire. CHAP. XXIII. Dens Caninus. Dogs tooth Violet. VNto the kindes of Orchides, may fitly be ioyned another plant, which by many is reckoned to be a Satyrium, both from the forme of roote and leafe, and from the efficacy or vertue correspondent thereunto. And although it cannot be the Satyrium Erythronium of Dioscorides, as some would entitle it, for that as I haue shewed before, his Satyrium tryphillum is the Tulipa without all doubt; yet because it differeth very notably, and carrieth more beauty and respect in his flower then they, I shall entreate thereof in a Chapter by it selfe, and set it next vnto them. Dens Caninus flore albo. Dogs tooth Violet with a white flower.
The white Dogs tooth hath for his roote a white bulbe, long and small, yet vsually greater then either of the other that follow, bigger belowe then aboue, with a small peece adioyning to the bottome of it, from whence rise vp in the beginning of the Spring, after the Winter frosts are past, two leaues for the most part (when it will flower, or else but one, and neuer three together that euer I saw) closed together when they first come vp out of the ground, which inclose the flower betweene them: the leaues when they are opened do lay themselues flat on the ground, or not much aboue it, one opposite vnto the other, with the stalke and the flower on it standing betweene them, which leaues are of a whitish greene colour, long and narrow, yet broader in the  middle then at both ends, growing lesse by degrees each way, spotted and striped all ouer the leaues with white lines and spots: the stalke riseth vp halfe a foote high or more, bearing at the toppe one flower and no more, hanging downe the head, larger then any of the other of this kinde that follow, made or consisting of six white long and narrow leaues, turning themselues vp againe, after it hath felt the comfort of the Sunne, that they doe almost touch the stalke againe, very like vnto the flowers of Cy∣clamen or Sowebread: it hath in the middle of the flower six white chiues, tipt with darke purple pendents, and a white three forked stile in the middle of them: the flower hath no sent at all, but commendable onely for the beauty and forme thereof: after the flower is past, commeth in the place a round head seeming three square, contai∣ning therein small and yellowish seede. Dens Caninus flore purpurascente. Dogs tooth with a pale purple flower. This other Dogs tooth is like vnto the former, but lesser in all parts, the leafe whereof is not so long, but broad and short, spotted with darker lines and spots: the flower is like the other, but smaller, and of a delayed purple colour, very pale some∣times, and sometimes a little deeper, turning it selfe as the other, with a circle round about the vmbone or middle, the chiues hereof are not white, but declining to purple: the roote is white, and like vnto the former, but lesser, as is said before. Dens Caninus flore rubro. Dogs tooth with a red flower. This is in all things like vnto the last, both for forme and bignesse of flower and leafe: the chiefe difference consisteth in this, that the leaues hereof are of a yellowish mealy greene colour, spotted and streaked with redder spots and stripes, and the flower of a deeper reddish purple colour, and the chiues also more purplish then the last, in all other things it is alike. The Place. The sorts of Dens Caninus doe growe in diuers places; some in Italy on the Euganean Hils, others on the Apenine, and some about Gratz, the chiefe Citie of Stiria, and also about Bayonne, and in other places. The Time. They flower in March most vsually, and many times in Aprill, accor∣ding to the seasonablenesse of the yeare. The Names. Clusius did call it first Dentali, and Lobel, and from him some others Sa∣tyrium, and Erythronium, but I haue said enough hereof in the beginning of the Chapter. It is most commonly called Dens Caninus, and we in English, either Dogs tooth, or Dogs tooth Violet. Gesner called it Hermodactylus, and Matthiolus Pseudohermodactylus. The Vertues. The roote hereof is held to bee of more efficacy for venereous effects, then any of the Orchides and Satyrions. They of Stiria vse the rootes for the falling sicknesse. Wee haue had from Virginia a roote sent vnto vs, that wee might well iudge, by the forme and colour thereof being dry, to be either the roote of this, or of an Orchis, which the naturall people hold not onely to be singu∣lar to procure lust, but hold it as a secret, loth to reueale it.
CHAP. XXIIII. Cyclamen. Sowebread. THe likenesse of the flowers, and the spotting of the leaues of the Dens Caninus, with these of the Cyclamen or Sowebread, maketh mee ioyne it next there∣unto: as also that after the bulbous rooted plants I might begin with the tube∣rous that remaine, and make this plant the beginning of them. Of this kinde there are diuers sorts, differing both in forme of leaues and time of flowring: for some doe flower in the Spring of the yeare, others afterwards in the beginning of Summer: but the most number in the end of Summer, or beginning of Autumne or Haruest, whereof some haue round leaues, others cornered like vnto Iuie, longer or shorter, greater or smaller. Of them all in order, and first of those that come in the Spring. 1. Cyclamen Vernum flore purpureo. Purple flowred Sowebread of the Spring. This Sowebread hath a smaller roote then most of the others, yet round and blac∣kish on the outside, as all or most of the rest are (I speake of them that I haue seene; for Clusius and others doe report to haue had very great ones) from whence rise vp di∣uers round, yet pointed leaues, and somewhat cornered withall, greene aboue, and spotted with white spots circlewise about the leafe, and reddish vnderneath, which at their first comming vp are folded together; among which come the flowers, of a red∣dish purple colour and very sweete, euery one vpon a small, long, and slender reddish foote-stalke, which hanging downe their heads, turne vp their leaues againe: after the flowers are past, the head or seede vessell shrinketh downe, winding his footestalke, and coyling it selfe like a cable, which when it toucheth the ground, there abideth hid among the leaues, till it be growne great and ripe, wherein are contained a few small round seedes, which being presently sowne, will growe first into round rootes, and af∣terwards from them shoote forth leaues. 2. Cyclamen Vernum flore albo. White flowred Sowebread of the Spring. The white flowring Sowebread hath his leaues like the former, but not fully so much cornered, bearing small snow white flowers, as sweete as the other: and herein consisteth the chiefest difference, in all other things it is alike. 3. Cylamen Vernum Creticum flore albo. White Candy Sowebread of the Spring. This Sowebread is somewhat like the former white kinde, but that the leaues grow much larger and longer, with more corners at the edges, and more eminent spots on them: the flowers also somewhat longer and larger, and herein consisteth the whole difference. 4. Cyclamen Aestivum. Summer Sowebread. Summer Sowebread hath round leaues like vnto the Romane Sowebread, but some∣what cornered, yet with shorter corners then the Iuie leafed Sowebread, full of white spots on the vpperside of the leaues, and very purple vnderneath, sometimes they haue fewer spots, and little or no purple vnderneath: the flowers hereof are as small, as purple, and as sweete, as the purple Sowebread of the Spring time: the roote hereof is likewise small, blacke, and round. 5. Cyclamen Romanum rotundifolium. Romane Sowebread with round leaues.
The Romane Sowebread hath round leaues, somewhat like vnto the common Sowebread, but not fully so round pointed at the ends, a little cornered sometimes also, or as it were indented, with white spots round about the middle of the leaues,  and very conspicuous, which make it seeme the more beautifull: the flowers appeare in Autumne, and are shorter, and of a deeper purplish red colour then the Iuie Sowe∣bread, rising vp before the leaues for the most part, or at least with them, and little or nothing sweete: the roote is round and blacke, vsually not so flat as it, but growing sometimes to bee greater then any other kinde of Sowebread. There is sometimes some variety to be seene, both in the leaues and flowers of this kinde; for that some∣time the leaues haue more corners, and either more or lesse spotted with white: the flowers likewise of some are larger or lesser,Varietas. longer or rounder, paler or deeper colou∣red one then another. This happeneth most likely from the sowing of the seede, cau∣sing the like variety as is seene in the Iuie leafed Sowebread. It doth also many times happen from the diuersity of soyles and countries where they grow: the seed of this, as of all the rest, is small and round, contained in such like heads as the former, stan∣ding almost like the head of a Snake that is twined or folded within the body thereof. This and the other Autumnall kindes, presently after their sowing in Autumne, shoote forth leaues, and so abide all the Winter, according to their kinde. 6. Cyclamen folio hederae autumnale. Iuie leafed Sowebread. The Iuie leafed Sowebread groweth in the same manner that the former doth, that is, bringeth forth flowers with the leaues sometimes, or most commonly before them, whose flowers are greater then the common round leafed Sowebread, somewhat longer then the former Romane or Italian Sowebreads, and of a paler purple colour, almost blush, without that sweete sent as is in the first kinde of the Spring: the greene leaues hereof are more long then round, pointed at the ends, and hauing also one or two corners on each side, sometimes much spotted on the vpperside with white spots and marks, and sometimes but a little or not at all; and so likewise sometimes more or lesse purple vnderneath: all the leaues and flowers doe stand vsually euery one seue∣rally by themselues, vpon their owne slender foote-stalkes, as most of all the other kindes doe:Varietas. but sometimes it happeneth, that both leaues and flowers are found grow∣ing from one and the same stalke, which I rather take to be accidentall, then naturall so to continue: the seede hereof is like the former kindes, which being sowne produceth variety, both in the forme of the leaues, and colour and smell of the flowers: some be∣ing paler or deeper, and some more or lesse sweete then others: the leaues also, some more or lesse cornered then others: the root groweth to be great, being round and flat, and of a blackish browne colour on the outside. 7. Cyclamen autumnale hederaefolio flore albo. Iuie leafed Sowebread with white flowers. There is one of this kinde, whose leaues are rounder, and not so much cornered as the former, flowring in Autumne as the last doth, and whose flowers are wholly white, not hauing any other notable difference therein. 8. Cyclamen autumnale angustifolium. Long leafed Sowebread. This kinde of Sowebread may easily be knowne from all the other kindes, because his leafe is longer and narrower then others, fashioned at the bottome thereof with points, somewhat like vnto Arum or Wake Robin leaues: the flowers are like the former sorts for forme, but of a purple colour. There is also another of this kinde in all things like the former, but that the flowers are white. 9. Cyclamen Antiochenum Autumnale flore purpureo duplici. Double flowred Sowebread of Antioch. This Sowebread of Antioch with double flowers, hath his leaues somewhat round, like vnto the leaues of the Summer Sowbread, but with lesse notches or corners, & full of white spots on them: it beareth flowers on stalks, like vnto others, & likewise some stalks that haue two or three flowers on them, which are very large, with ten or twelue
1 Cyclamen Ʋernum flore purpureo. Purple flowred Sowebread of the Spring. 2 Cyclamen astivum. Summer Sowebread. 3 Folium Cyclaminis Cretici ver∣alis flore candido. A leafe of Candie Sowebread. 4 Cyclamen Romanum Autumnale. Romane Sowebread of the Autumne. 5 Cyclamen hederafolio Autumnale. Iuie leafed Autumne Sowebread. 6 Folium Cyclaminis Autumnalis flore albo. A leafe of the Autumne Sowebread with a white flower. 7 Folium Cyclaminis angustifolij Autumnalis. A leafe of the long leafed Sowebread. 8 Cyclamen Antiochenum Autumnale flore amplo purpureo duplici The double flowred Sowebread of Antioch. 9 Cyclamen vulgare folis rundo. The common round leafed Sowebread. depiction of flowers
leaues a peece, of a faire Peach colour, like vnto the flowers of purple Sowebread of the Spring, and deeper at the bottome. There are of this kinde some, whose flowers appeare in the Spring, and are as large and double as the former, but of a pure white colour. There are of these Sowebreads of Antioch, that haue but single flowers, some ap∣pearing in the Spring, and others in Autumne. 10. Cyclamen vulgare folio rotundo. The common Sowebread. The common Sowebread (which is most vsed in the Apothecaries Shops) hath many leaues spread vpon the ground, rising from certaine small long heads, that are on the greater round rootes, as vsually most of the former sorts doe, being in the like manner folded together, and after spread themselues into round greene leaues, some∣what like vnto the leaues of Asarum, but not shining, without any white spots on the vpperside for the most part, or but very seldome, and reddish or purplish vnderneath, and very seldome greener: the flowers stand vpon small foot-stalkes, and shew them∣selues open for the most part, before any leaues doe appeare, being smaller and shorter then those with Iuie leaues, and of a pale purple colour, yet sometimes deeper, hang∣ing downe their heads, and turning vp their leaues againe, as all others doe, but more sweete then many other of the Autumne flowers: after the flowers are past, come the heads turning or winding themselues downe in like manner as the other do, hauing such like seede, but somewhat larger, and more vneuen, or not so round at the least: the roote is round, and not flat, of a browner colour, and not so blacke on the outside as many of the others. The Place. The Sowebreads of the Spring doe both grow on the Pyrenaean Moun∣taines in Italy, and in Candy, and about Mompelier in France; Antioch in Syria also hath yeelded some both of the Spring and Autumne. Those with round and Iuie leaues grow in diuers places both of France and Italy: and the common in Germany, and the Lowe-Countries. But that Autumne Sowebread with white flowers, is reported to grow in the Kingdome of Naples. I haue very curiously enquired of many, if euer they found them in any parts of England, neare or farther off from the places where they dwell: but they haue all affirmed, that they neuer found, or euer heard of any that haue found of any of them. This onely they haue assured, that there groweth none in the places, where some haue reported them to grow. The Time. Those of the Spring doe flower about the end of Aprill, or beginning of May. The other of the Summer, about the end of Iune or in Iuly. The rest some in August, and September, others in October. The Names. The Common Sowebread is called by most Writers in Latine, Panis Poreinus, and by that name it is knowne in the Apothecaries shops, as also by the name Arthanita, according to which name, they haue an ointment so called, which is to be made with the iuice hereof. It is also called by di∣uers other names, not pertinent for this discourse. The most vsuall name, whereby it is knowne to most Herbarists, is Cyclamen (which is the Greeke word) or as some call it Cyclaminus, adding thereunto their other seuerall titles. In English, Sowebread. The Vertues.
The leaues and rootes are very effectuall for the spleene, as the Oint∣ment before remembred plainly proueth, being vsed for the same purpose,  and that to good effect. It is vsed also for women in long and hard trauels, where there is danger, to accelerate the birth, either the roote or the leafe being applyed. But for any amorous effects, I hold it meere fabulous. CHAP. XXV. Anemone. Windeflower and his kindes. THe next tuberous rooted plants that are to follow (of right in my opinion) are the Anemones or Windeflowers, and although some tuberous rooted plants, that is, the Asphodils, Spiderworts, and Flowerdeluces haue beene before in∣serted, it was, both because they were in name or forme of flowers sutable to them whom they were ioyned vnto, and also that they should not be seuered and entreated of in two seuerall places: the rest are now to follow, at the least so many of them as be beautifull flowers, fit to furnish a Florists Garden, for natures delightsome varieties and excellencies. To distinguish the Family of Anemones I may, that is, into the wilde kindes, and into the tame or mannured, as they are called, and both of them noursed vp in Gardens; and of them into those that haue broader leaues, and into those that haue thinner or more iagged leaues: and of each of them, into those that beare single flowers, and those that beare double flowers. But to describe the infinite (as I may so say) variety of the colours of the flowers, and to giue to each his true distinction and denomination, Hic labor, hoc opus est, it farre passeth my ability I confesse, and I thinke would grauell the best experienced this day in Europe (and the like I said concerning Tulipas, it being as contingent to this plant, as is before said of the Tulipa, to be with∣out end in yeelding varieties:) for who can see all the varieties that haue sprung from the sowing of the seede in all places, seeing the variety of colours risen from thence, is according to the variety of ayres & grounds wherein they are sowne, skill also helping nature in ordering them aright. For the seede of one and the same plant sowne in di∣uers ayres and grounds, doe produce that variety of colours that is much differing one from another; who then can display all the mixtures of colours in them, to set them downe in so small a roome as this Book? Yet as I haue done (in the former part of this Treatise) my good will, to expresse as many of each kinde haue come to my know∣ledge, so if I endeauour the like in this, I hope the courteous wil accept it, and hold me excused for the rest: otherwise, if I were or could be absolute, I should take from my self and others the hope of future augmentation, or addition of any new, which neuer will be wanting. To begin therefore with the wilde kinds (as they are so accounted) I shall first entreate of the Pulsatillas or Pasque flowers, which are certainly kindes of wilde Anemones, both in leafe and flower, as may well be discerned by them that are iudici∣ous (although some learned men haue not so thought, as appeareth by their writings) the rootes of them making one speciall note of difference, from the other sorts of wilde Anemones. 1. Pulsatilla Anglica purpurea. The purple Pasque flower. The Pasque or Passe flower which is of our owne Country, hath many leaues lying on the ground, somewhat rough or hairie, hard in feeling, and finely cut into many small leaues, of a darke greene colour, almost like the leaues of Carrets, but finer and smaller, from among which rise vp naked stalkes, rough or hairie also, set about the middle thereof with some small diuided leaues compassing them, and rising aboue these leaues about a spanne, bearing euery one of them one pendulous flower, made of six leaues, of a fine Violet purple colour, but somewhat deepe withall, in the middle whereof stand many yellow threeds, set about a middle purple pointell: after the flower is past, there commeth vp in the stead thereof a bushie head of long seedes, which are small and hoarie, hauing at the end of euery one a small haire, which is gray likewise: the roote is small and long, growing downewards into the ground, with a tuft of haire at the head thereof, and not lying or running vnder the vpper crust there∣of, as the other wilde Anemones doe.
2. Pulsatilla Danica. The Passe flower of Denmarke. There is another that was brought out of Denmarke, very like vnto the former, but that it is larger both in roote and leafe, and flower also, which is of a fairer purple co∣lour, not so deepe, and besides, will better abide to bee mannured then our English kinde will, as my selfe haue often proued. Vtriusque flore albo & flore duplici.Of both these sorts it is said, that some plants haue bin found, that haue borne white flowers. And likewise one that bore double flowers, that is, with two rowes of leaues. 3. Pulsatilla flore rubro. The red Passe flower. Lobel, as I take it, did first set forth this kinde, being brought him from Syria, the leaues whereof are finer cut, the flower smaller, and with longer leaues, and of a red colour. 4. Pulsatilla flore luteo. The yellow Passe flower. The yellow Passe flower hath his leaues cut and diuided, very like vnto the leaues of the first kinde, but somewhat more hairie, greene on the vpperside, and hairie vn∣derneath: the stalke is round and hoary, the middle whereof is beser with some small leaues, as in the other, from among which riseth vp the stalke of the flower, consisting of six leaues of a very faire yellow colour on the inside, and of a hoary pale yellow on the outside; after which followeth such an head of hairie thrummes as in the former: the roote is of the bignesse of a mans finger. 5. Pulsatilla flore albo. The white Passe flower. The white Passe flower (which Clusius maketh a kinde of Anemone, and yet as hee saith himselfe, doth more nearely resemble the Pulsatilla) hath, from amongst a tuft or head of haires, which grow at the toppe of a long blacke roote, many leaues standing vpon long stalkes, which are diuided as it were into three wings or parts, and each part finely cut and diuided, like vnto the Passe flower of Denmarke, but somewhat harder in handling, greenish on the vpperside, and somewhat gray vnderneath, and very hairie all ouer: among these leaues rise vp the stalkes, beset at the middle of them with three leaues, as finely cut and diuided as those belowe, from aboue which standeth the flower, being smaller, and not so pendulous as the former, but in the like manner consisting of six leaues, of a snow white colour on the inside, and a little browner on the outside, with many yellow thrums in the middle: after the flower is past, riseth vp such a like hoary head, composed as it were of many haires, each whereof hath a small seede fastened vnto it, like as the former Passe flowers haue. The Place. The first is found in many places of England, vpon dry bankes that lye open to the Sunne. The second was first brought, as I take it, by Doctor Lobel from Den∣marke, & is one of the two kinds, that Clusius saith are common in Germa∣nie, this bearing a paler purple flower, and more early then the other, which is the same with our English, whose flower is so darke, that it almost see∣meth blacke. The red kinde, as Lobel saith, came from Syria. The yellow Passe flower, which Clusius maketh his third wilde Anemone, was found very plentifully growing at the foote of St. Bernards Hill, neare vnto the Cantons of the Switzers. The white one groweth on the Alpes neare Austria, in France likewise, and other places.
1 Pulsatilla purpurea cum folio, semine, & radice. The purple Pasque flower with leafe, seed, and root. 2 Pulsatilla luteo flore. The yellow Pasque flower. 3 Pulsatilla rubro Syriaca Lobelij Red Pasque flower of Lobel. 4 Pulsatilla rubra Swertij Swertz his red Pasque flower. 5 Pulsatilla flore albo. White Pasque flower. 6 Anemone siluestris alba Matthioli. The wilde white broad leafed Windflower. 7 Anemone siluestris tenuifolia alba. The wilde single white Windflower 8 Anemone siluestris tenuifolia lutea. The yellow wilde thin leafed Windflower. 9 Anemone siluestris trifolia Dodonaei. The three-leafed wilde Windflower. 10 Anemone siluestris flore pleno albo. The double white wilde Windflower. 11 Anemone siluestris flore pleno purpureo. The double purple wilde Windflower. * Semen separatim divulsum. The seed separated. † Radix cum folio inferiore. The roote with a lower leafe. depiction of flowers
The Time. All of them doe flower early in the yeare, that is, in the beginning of A∣prill, about which time most commonly Easter doth fall. The Names. Their proper names are giuen to each in their seuerall titles, being all of them kindes of wilde Anemones, as I said in the beginning of the Chapter, and so for the most part all Authors doe acknowledge them. We call them in English, because they flower about Easter, Pasque Flower, which is the French name for Easter, or Euphoniae gratia, Passe Flower, which may passe currant, without any further descant on the name, or else Pulsatilla, if you will, being growne old by custome. The Vertues. The sharpe biting and exulcerating quality of this plant, causeth it to be of little vse, notwithstanding Ioachimus Camerarius saith in his Hortus Me∣dicus, that in Borussia, which is a place in Italy, as I take it, the distilled wa∣ter hereof is vsed with good successe, to be giuen to them that are troubled with a Tertian Ague; for he saith that it is medicamentum , that is, a medicine of force to helpe obstructions. Anemone siluestris latifolia alba siue tertia Matthioli. The white wilde broad leafed Windflower. This Windflower hath diuers broad greene leaues, cut into diuisions, and dented about, very like vnto a broad leafed Crowfoote, among which riseth vp a stalke, ha∣uing some such like cut leaues in the middle thereof, as growe below, but smaller; on the toppe whereof standeth one large white flower, consisting of fiue leaues for the most part, with some yellow threads in the middle, standing about such a greene head as is in the tame or garden Anemones, which growing greater after the flower is past, is composed of many small seedes, wrapped in white wooll, which as soone as they are ripe, raise themselues vp from the bottome of the head, and flye away with the winde, as the other tame or garden kindes doe: the roote is made of a number of long blacke strings, encreasing very much by running vnderground, and shooting vp in di∣uers places. Anemone siluestris tenuifolia lutea. The yellow wilde thin leafed Windflower. The yellow wilde Anemone riseth vp with one or two small round naked stalkes, bearing about the middle of them, small, soft, and tender iagged leaues, deeply cut in and indented on the edges about, from aboue which doth grow the stalke, bearing small yellow flowers, standing vpon weake foote-stalkes, like vnto a small Crowfoot, with some threads in the middle: the roote is long and small, somewhat like vnto the roote of Pollipodie, creeping vnder the vpper crust of the earth: this kinde is lower, and springeth somewhat earlier then the other wilde kindes that follow. Anemone siluestris tenuifolia alba simplex. The single white thin leafed wilde Windflower.
This white wilde Anemone riseth vp with diuers leaues vpon seuerall long stalkes; which are somewhat like vnto the former, but that they are somewhat harder, and not so long, nor the diuisions of the leaues so finely snipt about the edges, but a little broader, and deeper cut in on euery side: the flowers hereof are larger and broader then the former, white on the inside, and a little purplish on the outside, especially at  the bottome of the flower next vnto the stalke: the roote of this is very like vnto the last. There is another of this kinde, whose flowers are purple,Purpurea. in all other things it is like vnto the white. And likewise another, with a blush or carnation coloured flower.Coccinea siue suaue rubens. There is one that is onely nursed vp with vs in Gardens, that is somewhat like vnto these former wilde Anemones in roote and leafe, but that the flower of this, being pure white within, and a little purplish without,Peregrina alba. consisting of eight or nine small round pointed leaues, hath sometimes some leaues vnder the flower, party coloured white and greene: the flower hath likewise a greene head, like a Strawberry, compassed a∣bout with white threads, tipt with yellow pendents. And another of the same kinde with the last,Peregrina viri∣dis. whose flower consisting of eight o nine leaues, is of a greenish colour, except the foure outermost leaues, which are a lit∣tle purplish, and diuided at the points into three parts; the middle part is of a greenish white colour, with a greene head in the middle as the other. Anemone siluestris trifolia Dodonaei. The three leafed wilde Windflower. This wilde Anemone hath his rootes very like vnto the former kindes; the leaues are alwaies three set together at the toppe of slender stalkes, being small and indented a∣bout, very like vnto a three leafed Grasse, but smaller: the flower consisteth of eight small leaues, somewhat like vnto a Crowfoote, but of a whitish purple or blush colour, with some white threads, and a greene rough head in the middle. Anemone siluestris flore pleno albo. The double white wilde Windflower. This double kinde is very like vnto the single white kinde before described, both in his long running rootes, and thin leaues, but somewhat larger: the flowers hereof are very thicke and double, although they be small, and of a faint sweete sent, very white after it is full blowne for fiue or six dayes, but afterwards it becommeth a little purplish on the inside, but more on the outside: this neuer giueth seede (although it haue a small head in the middle) like as many other double flowers doe. Anemone siluestris flore pleno purpureo. The double purple wilde Windflower. This double purple kinde hath such like iagged leaues as the last described hath, but more hoarie vnderneath: the flower is of a fine light purple toward the points of the leaues, the bottomes being of a deeper purple, but as thicke, and full of leaues as the former, with a greene head in the middle, like vnto the former: this kinde hath small greene leaues on the stalkes vnder the flowers, cut and diuided like the lower leaues. The Place. The first broad leafed Anemone groweth in diuers places of Austria and Hungary. The yellow in diuers woods in Germany, but not in this Coun∣trey that euer I could learne. The other single wilde kindes, some of them are very frequent throughout the most places of England, in Woods, Groues, and Orchards. The double kindes were found, as Clusius saith, in the Lowe-Countries, in a Wood neare Louaine. The Time. They flower from the end of March (that is the earliest) and the begin∣ning of Aprill, vntill May, and the double kindes begin within a while after the single kinds are past. The Names. They are called Ranunculi siluarum, and
Ranunculi nemorum, and as Clu∣sius  would haue them, Leimonia of Theophrastus; they are generally called of most Herbarists Anemones siluestres, Wilde Anemones or Windflowers. The Italians call them Gengeuo salnatico, that is, Wilde Ginger, because the rootes are, besides the forme, being somewhat like small Ginger, of a bi∣ting hot and sharpe taste. Anemone Lusitanica siue hortensis latifolia flore simplici luteo. The single Garden yellow Windflower or Anemone. This single yellow Anemone or Windflower hath diuers broad round leaues, some∣what diuided and endented withall on the edges, brownish at the first rising vp out of the ground, and almost folded together, and after of a sad greene on the vpperside, and reddish vnderneath; among which rise vp small slender stalkes, beset at the mid∣dle of them with two or three leaues, more cut and diuided then those belowe, with small yellow flowers at the toppe of them, consisting of ten or twelue leaues a peece, hauing a few yellow threads in the middle of them, standing about a small greene head, which in time growing ripe hath small flat seede, inclosed within a soft wooll or downe, which is easily blowne away with the winde: the roote groweth downe∣ward into the ground, diuersly spread with branches here and there, of a brownish yel∣low on the outside, and whitish within, so brittle, that it can hardly bee touched with∣out breaking. Anemone latifolia flore luteo duplici. The double yellow Anemone or Windflower. This double yellow Anemone hath such broad round leaues as the single kinde hath, but somewhat larger or ranker: the stalkes are beset with larger leaues, more deeply cut in on the edges: the flowers are of a more pale yellow, with some purplish veines on the outside, and a little round pointed; but they are all on the inside of a faire yellow colour, consisting of two rowes of leaues, whereof the innermost is the narrower, with a small greene head in the middle, compassed with yellow threads as in the former: the roote is like the roote of the single; neither of these haue any good sent, and this springeth vp and flowreth later then the single kinde. Anemone latifolia purpurea stellata siue papaveracea. The purple Starre Anemone or Windflower. The first leaues of this purple Anemone, which alwayes spring vp before Winter, (if the roote be not kept too long out of the ground,) are somewhat like the leaues of Sanicle or Selfe-heale, but the rest that follow are more deeply cut in and iagged; a∣mong which rise vp diuers round stalkes, beset with iagged leaues as all other Anemo∣nes are, aboue which leaues, the stalkes rising two or three inches high, beare one flower a peece, composed of twelue leaues or more, narrow and pointed, of a bleake purple or whitish ash-colour, somewhat shining on the outside, and of a fine purple co∣lour tending to a murrey on the inside, with many blackish blew threads or thrummes in the middle of the flower, set about a head, whereon groweth the seede, which is small and blacke, inclosed in soft wooll or downe, which flieth away with the winde, carrying the seede with it, if it be not carefully gathered: the roote is blackish on the outside, and white within, tuberous or knobby, with many fibres growing at it. Anemone purpurea Stellata altera. Another purple Starre Anemone. There is so great diuersity in the colours of the flowers of these broad leafed kinds of Anemones or Windflowers, that they can very hardly be expressed, although in their leaues there is but little or no difference. I shall not neede therefore to make seuerall descriptions of euery one that shall be set downe; but it will be sufficient, I thinke, to giue you the distinctions of the flowers: for as I said, therein is the greatest and chie∣fest difference. This other Starre Anemone differeth not from the former in leafe or flower, but onely that this is of a more pale sullen colour on the outside, and of a paler purple colour on the inside.
1 Anemone latifolia flore luteo simplici. The single yellow Anemone. 2 Anemone latifolia flore luteo duplici. The double yellow Anemone. 3 Ane∣mone latifolia flore purpureo Stellaeto. The purple Starre Anemone. 4 Anemone latifolia purpurea dilutior. The pale purple Starre Anemone. 5 Ane∣mone latifolia flore miniate dilut. The pale red Anemone. 6 Anemone latifolia coccinea Cardinalis dicta. The Cardinall Anemone. 7 Anemone lati∣folia incarnata Hispanica. The Spanish incarnate Anemone. 8 Anemone latifolia Pao simplex dicta. The lesser Orenge tawney Anemone. 9 Ane∣mone latifolia flore carneo. The carnation Anemone. 10 Anemone latifolia Arantiaca siue Pauo maior. The double Orenge tawney Anemone. 11 A∣nemone Superitica siue Cyparissia. The double Anemone of Cyprus. 12 Anemone latifolia flore pleno albicante. The double pale blush Anemone. 13 Anemone Chalcedonica maxima. The great Spanish Marigold Anemone. 14 Anemone Caumeni siue Perfica. The double Persian Anemone. Anemon latifolia ra. The roote of a great Anemone. depiction of flowers
Viola purpureaThere is another, whose flower hath eight leaues, as many of them that follow haue (although diuers sorts haue but six leaues in a flower) and is of a Violet purple, and therefore is called, The Violet purple Anemone. Varietas.Of all these three sorts last described, there be other that differ only in ha∣uing white bottomes, some smaller and some larger. Purpurea stri∣ata.There is also another of the same Violet purple colour with the former, but a little paler, tending more to rednesse, whose flowers haue many white lines and stripes through the leaues, and is called, The purple stript Anemone. Carnea viva∣cissima simplex.There is another, whose greene leaues are somewhat larger, and so is the flower likewise, consisting of eight leaues, and sometimes of more, of the colour of Carnation silke, sometimes pale and sometimes deeper, with a whitish circle about the bottome of the leaues, which circle in some is larger, and more to be seene then in others, when the flower layeth it selfe open with the heate of the Sunne, hauing blewish threads in the middle. This may be called, the Carnation Anemone, Perficiviolacea.We haue another, whose flower is betweene a Peach colour and a Vio∣let, which is vsually called a Gredeline colour. Cochenille.And another of a fine reddish Violet or purple, which we call, The Co∣chenille Anemone. Cardinalis.And another of a rich crimson red colour, and may be called, The Car∣dinall Anemone. Sanguinea.Another of a deeper, but not so liuely a red, called, The bloud red Ane∣mone. Cramesina.Another of an ordinary crimson colour, called, The crimson Anemone. Coccinea.Another of a Stamell colour, neere vnto a Scarlet. Incarnata.Another of a fine delayed red or flesh colour, and may bee called, The Incarnadine Anemone. Incarnata His∣panica.Another whose flower is of a liuely flesh colour, shadowed with yellow, and may be called, The Spanish Incarnate Anemone. Rubescens.Another of a faire whitish red, which we call, The Blush Anemone. Moschutella.Another whose flower consisteth of eight leaues, of a darke whitish co∣lour, stript all ouer with veines of a fine blush colour, the bottomes being white, this may be called, The Nutmegge Anemone. Enfumata.Another whose flower is of a pale whitish colour, tending to a gray, such as the Monkes and Friers were wont to weare with vs, and is called, A Monkes gray. Pauo maior simplici flore.There is another, whose leafe is somewhat broader then many or most of the Anemones, comming neare vnto the leafe of the great double O∣renge coloured Anemone; the flower whereof is single, consisting of eight large or broad leaues, very neare vnto the same Orenge colour, that is in the double flower hereafter described, but somewhat deeper. This is vsu∣ally called in Latine, Pauo maior simplici flore, and we in English, The great single Orenge tawnie Anemone. Pauo minor.There is likewise of this kinde another, whose flower is lesser, and called, The lesser Orenge tawnie Anemone.
Varietas mag∣na ex seminio.There is besides these expressed, so great a variety of mixt colours in the flowers of this kinde of Anemone with broad leaues, arising euery yeare from the sowing of the seede of some of the choisest and fittest for that purpose, that it is wonderfull to obserue, not onely the variety of single colours, but the mixture of two or three colours in one flower, besides the diuersity of the bottomes of the flowers, some hauing white or yellowish bottomes, and some none, and yet both of the same colour; and likewise in the thrums or threads in the middle: But the greatest wonder of beauty is in variety of double flowers, that arise from among the other single ones, some hauing two or three rowes of leaues in the flowers, and some so thicke of leaues as a double Marigold, or double Crowfoote, and of the same seuerall colours that are in the single flowers, that it is almost impossi∣ble to expresse them seuerally, and (as is said before) some falling out to bee double in one yeare, which will proue single or lesse double in an∣other,  yet very many abiding constant double as at the first; and therefore let this briefe recitall be sufficient in stead of a particular of all the colours. Anemone Chalcedonica maxima versicolor. The great double Windflower of Constantinople. This great Anemone of Constantinople hath broader and greener leaues then any of the former kindes, and not so much diuided or cut in at the edges, among which rise vp one or two stalkes, (seldome more from one roote) hauing some leaues about the middle of the stalke, as other Anemones haue, and bearing at the toppes of the stalkes one large flower a peece, very double, whose outermost leaues being broadest, are greenish at the first, but afterwards red, hauing sometimes some greene abiding still in the leaues, and the red striped through it: the other leaues which are within these are smaller, and of a perfect red colour; the innermost being smallest, are of the same red colour, but turned somewhat inward, hauing no thrummes or threads in the mid∣dle, as the former haue, and bearing no seede: the roote is blackish on the outside, and white within, thicke and tuberous as the other kindes, but thicker set and close toge∣ther, not shooting any long slender rootes as others doe. Some Gentlewomen call this Anemone, The Spanish Marigold. Anemone Chalcedonica altera siue Pano maior flore duplici. The great double Orenge tawney Anemone. This other great Anemone of Constantinople hath his large leaues so like vnto the last, that one can hardly distinguish them asunder; the stalke hath also such like leaues set vpon it, bearing at the toppe a faire large flower, consisting of many leaues set in two or three rowes at the most, but not so thicke or double as the last, yet seeming to be but one thicke rowe of many small and long leaues, of an excellent red or crim∣son colour, wherein some yellow is mixed, which maketh that colour is called an O∣renge tawney; the bottomes of the leaues are red, compassed with a whitish circle, the thrummie head in the middle being beset with many darke blackish threads: the roote is like the former. Anemone Superitica siue Cyparissia. The double Anemone of Cyprus. This Anemone (which the Dutchmen call Superitz, and as I haue beene enformed, came from the Isle of Cyprus) hath leaues very like the last double Anemone, but not altogether so large: the flower consisteth of smaller leaues, of colour very neare vnto the last double Orenge coloured Anemone, but more thicke of leaues, and as double as the first, although not so great a flower, without any head in the middle, or thrums about it as is in the last, and differeth not in the roote from either of them both. Somewhat like vnto this kinde, or as it were betweene this and the first kinde of these great double Anemones, we haue diuers other sorts, bearing flowers very thicke and double; some of them being white, or whitish, or purple, deeper or paler, and some of a reddish colour tending to Scarlet or a Carnation colour, and some also of a blush or flesh colour, and diuers other colours, and all of them continue constant in their colours. Anemone Cacumeni Maringi siue Persica. The double Persian Anemone. This rare Anemone, which is said to come out of Persia to Constantinople, and from thence to vs, is in leafe and roote very like vnto the former double Anemones before described; onely the flower hereof is rather like vnto the second great double Orenge coloured Anemone, vsually called Pauo maior flore pleno, being composed of three rowes of leaues, the outtermost rowe consisting of ten or twelue larger leaues, and those more inward lesser and more in number, but all of them variably mixed with white, red, and yellow, hauing the bottomes of the leaues white: but instead of a middle head with thrums about it, as the other hath, this hath a few narrow leaues, of a deepe yellow colour in the middle of the flower, standing vpright.
Hauing thus farre proceeded in the two parts of the kindes of Anemones or Wind∣flowers, it remaineth to entreate of the rest, which is those Anemones which haue thin cut leaues, whereof some haue reckoned vp thirty sorts with single flowers, which I confesse I haue not seene; but so many as haue come to my knowledge, I shall here set downe. Anemone tenuifolia siue Geranifolia caerulea. The Watchet Anemone or Storkes bill leafed Windflower. This first Windflower with thin cut leaues, riseth not out of the ground vntil the great Winter frost be past, that is, about the middle or end of February, and are somewhat brownis t their first appearing, but afterwards spread into wings of greene leaues, somwhat broader then the rest that follow, diuided into three parts, & each part into ree leaues, euery one cut in about the edges, one standing against another vpon a long slender foote-stalke, and the end leafe by it selfe: among these riseth vp two or three greene stalkes, garnished with such like thin leaues as are at the bottome, from aboue which rise the flowers, but one vpon a stalke, consisting of fourteene or fifteene small pale blew or watchet leaues, lesser then any of the single kindes that follow, compassing many whitish threads, and a small greene head in the middle, somewhat like the head of the wilde Crowfoote, wherein is contained such like seede: the roote is blackish without, thrusting out into long tuberous peeces, somewhat like vnto some of the broad leafed Anemones. Alba.Of this kinde there is another, whose leaues are not browne at their first rising, but greene, and the flowers are white, in other things not differing. Anemone tenuifolia purpurea vulgaris. The ordinary purple Anemone with thin leaues. This purple Anemone which is most common, and therefore the lesse regarded, hath many winged leaues standing vpon seuerall stalkes, cut and diuided into diuers leaues, much like vnto the leaues of a Carrot; among which rise vp stalkes with some leaues thereon (as is vsuall to the whole Family of Anemones, both wilde and tame, as is before said;) at the toppes whereof stand the flowers, made of six leaues most vsu∣ally, but sometimes they will haue seuen or eight, being very large, and of a perfect purple Violet colour, very faire and liuely: the middle head hath many blackish thrums or threads about it, which I could neuer obserue in my Gardens to beare seed: the roote is smaller, and more spreading euery way into small long flat tuberous parts, then any other kindes of single or double Anemones. Carnea pallida.There is another very like in leafe and roote vnto the former, but the flower is nothing so large, and is whitish, tending to a blush colour, and of a deeper blush colour toward the bottome of the flower, with blackish blew thrums in the middle, and giueth no seede that I could euer obserue. Carnea viuida vnguibus albis.There is likewise another like vnto the last in leafe and flower, but that the flower is larger then it, and is of a liuely blush colour, the leaues hauing white bottomes. Alba venis pur∣pureis.And another, whose flower is white, with purple coloured veines and stripes through euery leafe, and is a lesser flower then the other. Anemone tenuifolia coccinea simplex. The single Scarlet Anemone with thin leaues. The leaues of this Scarlet Windflower are somewhat like vnto the former, but a lit∣tle broader, and not so finely cut and diuided: the flower consisteth of six reasonable large leaues, of an excellent red colour, which we call a Scarlet; the bottomes of the leaues are large and white, and the thrums or threads in the middle of a blackish pur∣ple colour: the roote is tuberous, but consisting of thicker peeces, somewhat like vnto the rootes of the broad leafed Anemones, but somewhat browne, and not so blacke, and most like vnto the roote of the double Scarlet Anemone. Coccinea abs{que} vnguibus.There is another of this kinde, whose flower is neare vnto the same co∣lour, but this hath no white bottomes at all in his leaues.
Fo hlose∣riceo.We haue another which hath as large a flower as any single, and is of an Orient deepe red crimson Veluet colour. Sanguinea.There is another of a deeper red colour, and is called, The bloud red single Anemone. Rubra fundo luteo. Coccinea dilu∣tior.And another, whose flower is red with the bottomes yellow. Another of a perfect crimson colour, whereof some haue round pointed leaues, and others sharpe pointed, and some a little lighter or deeper then others. Alba stamini∣bus purpureis.There is also one, whose flower is pure white with blewish purple thrums in the middle. Carnea Hispa∣nica.And another, whose flower is very great, of a kinde of sullen blush co∣lour, but yet pleasant, with blewish threads in the middle. Alba carneis venis. Alba purpureis vnguibus.And another with blush veines in euery leafe of the white flower. And another, the flower whereof is white, the bottomes of the leaues being purple. Purpurascens.Another whose flower consisteth of many small narrow leaues, of a pale purple or blush colour on the outside, and somewhat deeper within. Facie florum pomi simplex.There is another like in leafe and roote vnto the first Scarlet Anemone, but the flower hereof consisteth of seuen large leaues without any bot∣tomes, of a white colour, hauing edges, and some large stripes also of a car∣nation or flesh colour to bee seene in them, marked somewhat like an Ap∣ple blossome, and thereupon it is called in Latine, Anemone tenuifolia sim∣plex alba instar florum pomi, or facie florum pomi, that is to say in English, The single thin leafed Anemone with Apple blossome flowers. Multiplex.I haue heard that there is one of this kinde with double flowers. 1. Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo pleno vulgaris. The common double red or Scarlet Anemone. The leaues of this double Anemone are very like vnto the leaues of the single Scar∣let Anemone, but not so thin cut and diuided as that with the purple flower: the flower hereof when it first openeth it selfe, consisteth of six and sometimes of seuen or eight broad leaues, of a deepe red, or excellent Scarlet colour, the middle head being thick closed, and of a greenish colour, which after the flower hath stood blowne some time, doth gather colour, and openeth it selfe into many small leaues, very thicke, of a more pale red colour, and more Stamell like then the outer leaues: the root of this is thicke and tuberous, very like vnto the root of the single Scarlet Anemone. 2. Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo pleno variegata. The party coloured double Crimson Anemone. We haue a kinde hereof, varying neither in roote, leafe, or forme of flower from the former, but in the colour, in that this will haue sometimes the outer broad leaues party coloured, with whitish or blush coloured great streakes in the red leaues both in∣side and outside; as also diuers of the middle or inner leaues striped in the same man∣ner: the roote hereof giueth fairer flowers in some yeares then in others, and some∣times giue flowers all red againe. 3. Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo saturo pleno. The double crimson Veluet Anemone. Wee haue another also, whose flower is of a deepe Orenge tawny crimson colour, neare vnto the colour of the outer leaues, of the lesser French Marigold, and not diffe∣ring from the former in any thing else. 4. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno suauerubente. The greater double blush Anemone.
There is small difference to be discerned, either in the roote or leaues of this from  the former double Scarlet Anemone, sauing that the leaues hereof are a little broader, and seeme to bee of a little fresher greene colour: the flower of this is as large almost, and as double as the former, and the inner leaues likewise almost as large as they, be∣ing of a whitish or flesh colour at the first opening of them, but afterwards become of a most liuely blush colour; the bottomes of the leaues abiding of a deeper blush, and with long standing, the tops of the leaues will turne almost wholly white againe. 5. Anemone tenuifolia flore albo pleno. The double white Anemone. This double white Anemone differeth little from the former blush Anemone, but in that it is smaller in all the parts thereof, and also that the flower hereof being wholly of a pure white colour, without any shew of blush therein, hath the middle thrummes much smaller and shorter then it, and not rising vp so high, but seeme as if they were chipped off euen at the toppes. 6. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno albicante. The lesser double blush Anemone. This small double blush Anemone differeth very little from the double white last recited, but onely in the colour of the flower: for they are both much about the big∣nesse one of another, the middle thrums likewise being as small and short, and as euen aboue, onely the flower at the first opening is almost white, but afterwards the outer leaues haue a more shew of blush in them, and the middle part a little deeper then they. 7. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno purpureo violaceo. The double purple Anemone. This double purple Anemone is also of the same kindred with the first double red or Scarlet Anemone for the form or doublenesse of the flower, consisting but of six or se∣uen leaues at the most in this our Country, although in the hotter it hath ten or twelue, or more as large leaues for the outer border, and as large small leaues for the inner middle also, and almost as double, but of a deepe purple tending toward a Violet co∣lour, the outer leaues being not so deepe as the inner: the roote and leafe commeth neare vnto the single purple Anemone before described, but that the roote spreadeth not so small and so much. 8. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno purpureo caeruleo. The double blew Anemone. This Anemone differeth not in any thing from the former double purple, but onely that the flower is paler, and more tending to a blew colour. 9. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno roseo. The double Rose coloured Anemone. The double Rose coloured Anemone differeth also in nothing from the former double purple, but onely in the flower, which is somewhat smaller, and not so thicke and double, and that it is of a reddish colour, neare vnto the colour of a pale red Rose, or of a deepe coloured Damaske. 10. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno carneo viuacissimo. The double Carnation Anemone. This Anemone, both in roote, leafe, and flower, commeth nearest vnto the former double white Anemone, for the largenesse and doublenesse of the flower, and in the smalnesse of the middle thrums, and euennesse at the toppes of them, being not so large and great a flower as the double purple, either in the inner or outter leaues, but yet is very faire, thicke and double, and of a most liuely Carnation silke colour, very deepe, both the outer leaues and middle thrums also so bright, that it doth as it were amaze, and yet delight the minde of the beholder, but by long standing in the Sun, waxe a lit∣tle paler, and so passe away as all the most beautifull flowers doe.
1 Anemone tenuifolia fimplex purpurea. The single purple Anemone with thin cut leaues. 2 Anemone tenuifolia simplex alba pura. The single pure white Anemone. 3 Anemone tenuifolia simplex chermesina. The single bright Crimson Anemone. 4 Anemone tenuifolia simplex sanguinea. The single bloud red Anemone. 5 Anemone tenuifolia simplex facie florum pomi. The single Apple bloome Anemone. 6 Anemone tenuifolia simplex purpurascens. The single purplish blush Anemone. 7 Anemone tenuifolia simplex alba vnguibus carneis. The single white Anemone with blush bot∣tomes 8 Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coccineo. The double red or ordinary Scarlet Anemone. 9. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno rubrfusca coma Amaantina. The double purple Veluet Anemone. 10 Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno purpuro violaceo. The double blewish purple Anemone. 11 Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno incarnedini coloris sricei vivacissimi. The double Carnation Anemone, or of a liuely Carnation silke colour. depiction of flowers
11. Anemone tenuifolia flore rubrofusco pleno coma Amarantina. The double purple Veluet Anemone. This double Veluet Anemone is in all things like the last described Carnation A∣nemone, but somewhat larger, the difference consisteth in the colour of the flower, which in this is of a deep or sad crimson red colour for the outer leaues, and of a deep purple Veluet colour in the middle thrums, resembling the colour of the lesser Ama∣ranthus purpureus, or Purple flower gentle hereafter described, whereof it tooke the name, which middle thrums are as fine and small, and as euen at the toppes as the white or last Carnation Anemones. 12. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno tricolor. The double purple Veluet Anemone of three colours. This double Anemone also is very like the last described Anemone, but that in the middle of the purple thrums, there thrusteth forth a tuft of threads or leaues of a more light crimson colour. And thus much for the kindes of Anemones or Windflowers, so farre forth as haue hitherto come to our knowledge; yet I doubt not, but that more varieties haue beene elsewhere collected, and will be also in our Countrey daily and yearly obserued by diuers, that raise them vp from sowing the seede, wherein lyeth a pretty art, not yet fa∣miliarly knowne to our Nation, although it be very frequent in the Lowe-Countries, where their industry hath bred and nourished vp such diuersities and varieties, that they haue valued some Anemones at such high rates, as most would wonder at, and none of our Nation would purchase, as I thinke. And I doubt not, if wee would be as curious as they, but that both our ayre and soyle would produce as great variety, as euer hath been seene in the Lowe-Countries; which to procure, if any of our Nati∣on will take so much paines in sowing the seedes of Anemones, as diuers haue done of Tulipas: I will set them downe the best directions for that purpose that I haue learned, or could by much search and tryall attaine vnto; yet I must let them vnderstand thus much also, that there is not so great variety of double flowers raised from the seede of the thin leafed Anemones, as from the broad leafed ones. First therefore (as I said before) concerning Tulipas, there is some speciall choice to be made of such flowers, whose seed is fittest to be taken. Of the Latifolias, the double Orenge tawney seede being sowne, yeeldeth pretty varieties, but the purples, and reds, or crimsons, either Latifolias or Tenuifolias, yeeld small variety, but such as draw nearest to their originall, although some be a little deeper or lighter then others. But the light colours be they which are the chiefe for choice, as white, ash-colour, blush or carnation, light orenge, simple or party coloured, single or double, if they beare seede, which must bee carefully gathered, and that not before it bee thorough ripe, which you shall know by the head; for when the seede with the wollinesse beginneth to rise a little of it selfe at the lower end, it must bee then quickly gathered, lest the winde carry it all away. After it is thus carefully gathered, it must be laid to dry for a weeke or more, which then being gently rubbed with a little dry sand or earth, will cause the seede to be somewhat better separated, although not thoroughly from the woollinesse or downe that compasseth it. Within a moneth at the most after the seede is thus gathered and prepared, it must be sowne; for by that meanes you shall gaine a yeare in the growing, ouer that you should doe if you sowed it in the next Spring.
If there remaine any woollinesse in the seede, pull it in sunder as well as you can, and then sowe your seede reasonable thin, and not too thicke, vpon a plaine smooth bed of fine earth, or rather in pots or tubbes, and after the sowing, sift or gently straw ouer them some fine good fresh mould, about one fingers thicknesse at the most for the first time: And about a moneth after their first springing vp, sift or straw ouer them in like manner another fingers thicknesse of fine earth, and in the meane time if the weather proue dry, you must water them gently and often, but not to ouerglut them with moisture; and thus doing, you shall haue them spring vp before Winter, and  grow pretty strong, able to abide the sharpe Winter in their nonage, in vsing some little care to couer them loosely with some fearne, or furse, or beane hame, or straw, or any such, which yet must not lye close vpon them, nor too farre from them neither. The next Spring after the sowing, if you will, but it is better if you stay vntill Au∣gust, you may then remoue them, and set them in order by rowes, with sufficient di∣stance one from another, where they may abide, vntill you see what manner of flower each plant will beare, which you may dispose of according to your minde. Many of them being thus ordered (if your mould be fine, loose, and fresh, not sto∣nie, clayish, or from a middin) will beare flowers the second yeare after the sowing, and most or all of them the third yeare, if the place where you sowe them, be not an∣noyed with the smoake of Brewers, Dyers, or Maultkils, which if it be, then will they neuer thriue well. Thus much haue I thought good to set downe, to incite some of our owne Nation to be industrious; and to helpe them forward, haue giuen such rules of directions, that I doubt not, but they will vpon the tryall and view of the variety, proceede as well in the sowing of Anemones as of Tulipas. I cannot (Gentlewomen) withhold one other secret from you, which is to informe you how you may so order Anemones, that after all others ordinarily are past, you may haue them in flower for two or three moneths longer then are to be seene with any other, that vseth not this course I direct you. The ordinary time to plant Anemones, is most commonly in August, which will beare flower some peraduenture before Winter, but most vsually in February, March, and Aprill, few or none of them abiding vntill May; but if you will keepe some roots out of the ground vnplanted, vntill February, March, and Aprill, and plant some at one time, and some at another, you shall haue them beare flower according to their planting, those that shall be planted in February, will flower about the middle or end of May, and so the rest accordingly after that manner: And thus may you haue the pleasure of these plants out of their naturall seasons, which is not permitted to be en∣ioyed in any other that I know, Nature being not so prone to bee furthered by art in other things as in this. Yet regard, that in keeping your Anemone rootes out of the ground for this purpose, you neither keep them too dry, nor yet too moist, for sprou∣ting or rotting; and in planting them, that you set them not in too open a sunny place, but where they may be somewhat shadowed. The Place. I shall not need to spend much time in relating the seuerall places of these Anemones, but onely to declare that the most of them that haue not beene raised from seed, haue come from Constantinople to vs; yet the first broad leafed or yellow Anemone, was first found in Portugall, and from thence brought into these parts. And the first purple Starre Anemone in Germa∣nie, yet was the same sent among others from Constantinople also. And the first thin cut leafed Anemone came first out of Italy, although many of that sort haue come likewise from Constantinople. And so haue the double red or Scarlet Anemones, and the great double blush, which I first had by the gift of Mr. Humfrey Packington of Worcestershire Esquire, at Haruing∣ton. The Time. The times of their flowring are sufficiently expressed in the descripti∣ons, or in the rules for planting. The Names. The Turkish names whereby the great double broad leafed kindes haue beene sent vnto vs, were Gial Catamer, and Giul Catamer lale; And Bi∣nizade, Binizante, and Galipoli lale for the thinne cut leafed Anemones. All Authors haue called them
Anemones, and are the true Herba venti.  Wee call them in English eyther Anemones, after the Greeke name, or Windflowers, after the Latine. The Vertues. There is little vse of these in Physicke in our dayes, eyther for inward or outward diseases; onely the leaues are vsed in the Ointment called Marcia∣tum, which is composed of many other hot herbes, and is vsed in cold griefes, to warme and comfort the parts. The roote, by reason of the sharpenesse, is apt to drawe downe rheume, if it be tasted or chewed in the mouth. CHAP. XXVI. Aconitum. Wolfebane. THere be diuers sorts of Wolfebanes which are not fit for this booke, but are reserued for a generall History or Garden of Simples, yet among them there are some, that notwithstanding their euill quality, may for the beauty of their flowers take vp a roome in this Garden, of whom I meane to entreate in this place: And first of the Winter Wolfesbane, which for the beauty, as well as the earlinesse of his flowers, being the first of all other, that shew themselues after Christmas, deser∣ueth a prime place; and therefore for the likenesse of the rootes vnto the Anemones, I ioyne it next vnto them. 1. Aconitum Hyemale. The Winters Wolfesbane. This little plant thrusteth vp diuers leaues out of the ground, in the deepe of Win∣ter oftentimes, if there be any milde weather in Ianaury, but most commonly after the deepe frosts, bearing vp many times the snow vpon the heads of the leaues, which like vnto the Anemone, doe euery leafe rise from the roote vpon seuerall short foote∣stalkes, not aboue foure fingers high, some hauing flowers in the middle of them, (which come vp first most vsually) and some none, which leaues stand as it were round, the stalke rising vp vnder the middle of the leafe, deeply cut in and gashed to the middle stalke almost, of a very faire deepe greene colour, in the middle whereof, close vnto the leafe, standeth a small yellow flower, made of six leaues, very like a Crowfoote, with yellow threads in the middle: after the flower is fallen, there rise vp diuers small hornes or cods set together, wherein are contained whitish yellow round seede. The roote is tuberous, so like both for shape and colour vnto the rootes of A∣nemones, that they will easily deceiue one not well experienced, but that it is browner and smoother without, and yellow within, if it be broken. 2. Aconitum flore albido, siue Aconitum luteum Ponticum. The whitish yellow Wolfesbane. This Wolfesbane shooteth not out of the ground vntill the Spring be well begun, and then it sendeth forth great broad greene leaues, deeply cut in about the edges, not much vnlike the leaues of the great wilde Crowfoote, but much greater; from a∣mong which leaues riseth vp a strong stiffe stalke, three foote high, hauing here and there leaues set vpon it, like vnto the lowest, but smaller; the toppe of the stalke is di∣uided into three or foure branches, whereon are set diuers pale yellow flowers, which turne at the last to be almost white, in fashion like almost vnto the flowers of the Hel∣met flower, but much smaller, and not gaping so wide open: after the flowers are past come vp diuers short poddes, wherein is contained blacke seede: the roote is made of a number of darke browne strings, which spread and fasten themselues strongly in the ground.
3. Napellus verus flore caeruleo. Blew Helmet flower or Monkes hood. The Helmet flower hath diuers leaues of a fresh greene colour on the vpperside, and grayish vnderneath, much spread abroad, and cut into many slits and notches, more then any of the Wolfebanes; the stalke riseth vp two or three foot high, beset to the top with the like leaues, but smaller: the toppe is sometimes diuided into two or three branches, but more vsually without, whereon stand many large flowers one a∣boue another, in forme very like vnto a Hood or open Helmet, being composed of fiue leaues, the vppermost of which and the greatest, is hollow, like vnto an Helmet or Headpeece, two other small leaues are at the sides of the Helmet, closing it like cheekes, and come somewhat vnder, and two other which are the smallest hang down like labels, or as if a close Helmet were opened, and some peeces hung by, of a perfect or faire blew colour, (but grow darker▪ hauing stood long) which causeth it be so nou∣rished vp in Gardens, that their flowers, as was vsuall in former times, and yet is in many Countrey places, may be laid among greene herbes in windowes and roomes for the Summer time: but although their beauty may be entertained for the vses afore∣said, yet beware they come not neare your tongue or lippes, lest they tell you to your cost, they are not so good as they seeme to be: in the middest of the flower, when it is open and gapeth wide, are seene certaine small threads like beards, standing about a middle head, which when the flower is past, groweth into three or foure, or more small blackish pods, containing in them blacke seede: the rootes are brownish on the out∣side, and white within, somewhat bigge and round aboue, and small downewards, somewhat like vnto a small short Carrot roote, sometimes two being ioyned at the head together. But the name Napellus anciently giuen vnto it, doth shew they referred the forme of the roote vnto a small Turnep. Anthora. The wholsome Helmet flower, or counterpoison Monkes hood. This wholsome plant I thought good to insert, not onely for the forme of the flow∣er, but also for the excellent properties thereof, as you shall haue them related here∣after. The rootes hereof are small and tuberous, round and somewhat long, ending for the most part in a long fibre, and with some other small threads from the head downeward: from the head whereof riseth vp diuers greene leaues, euery one seue∣rally vpon a stalke, very much diuided, as finely almost as the leaues of Larkes heeles or spurres: among which riseth vp a hard round stalke, a foote high and better, with some such leaues thereon as grow belowe, at the toppe whereof stand many small yellowish flowers, formed very like vnto the former whitish Wolfesbane, bearing many blacke seedes in pods afterwards in the like manner. Many more sorts of varieties of these kindes there are, but these onely, as the most specious, are noursed vp in Florists Gardens for pleasure; the other are kept by such as are Catholicke obseruers of all natures store. The Place. All these grow naturally on Mountaines, in many shadowie places of the Alpes, in Germany, and elsewhere. The Time. The first flowreth (as is said) in Ianuary, and February, and sometimes vntill March be well spent, and the seede is soone ripe after. The other three flower not vntill Iune and Iuly. The Names.
The first is vsually called Aconitum hyemale Belgarum. Lobelius calleth it  Bulbosus vnifolius Batrachoides, Aconitum Elleboraceum, and Ranunculus Mo∣nophyllos, and some by other names. Most Herbarists call it Aconitum hye∣male, and we in English thereafter, Winters Wolfesbane; and of some, Yel∣low Aconite. The second is called by most Writers, Aconitum luteum Ponticum: Some also Lupicida, Luparia, and Canicida, of the effect in killing Wolues and Dogs: And some, because the flower is more white then yellow, doe call it Aconitum flore albido, we call it in English, The whitish yellow Aconite, or Wolfesbane, but some after the Latine name, The yellow Wolfesbane. The third is called generally Napellus, and Verus, because it is the true Napellus of the ancient Writers, which they so termed from the forme of a Turnep, called Napus in Latine. The fourth is called Aconitum Salutiferum, Napellus Moysis, Antora and Anthora, quasi Antithora, that is, the remedy against the poisonfull herbe Thora, in English according to the title, eyther wholsome Helmet flower, or counterpoison Monkes hood. The Vertues. Although the first three sorts of plants be very poisonfull and deadly, yet there may bee very good vse made of them for sore eyes (being carefully applyed, yet not to all sorts of sore eyes neither without discretion) if the distilled water be dropped therein. The rootes of the counterpoison Monkes hood are effectuall not onely against the poison of the poisonfull Helmet flower, and all others of that kinde, but also against the poison of all venemous beasts, the plague or pe∣stilence, and other infectious diseases, which raise spots, pockes, or markes in the outward skinne, by expelling the poison from within, and defending the heart as a most soueraigne Cordiall. It is vsed also with good successe against the wormes of the belly, and against the paines of the Wind collick. CHAP. XXVII. Ranunculus. The Crowfoote. NExt vnto the Aconites, of right are to follow the Ranunculi, or Crowfeete, for the nearenesse both of forme, of leaues, and nature of the plants, although lesse hurtfull, yet all of them for the most part being sharpe and exulcerating, and not without some danger, if any would be too bold with them. The whole Family of the Ranunculi is of a very large extent, and I am constrained within the limits of a Gar∣den of Pleasure; I must therefore select out onely such as are fit for this purpose, and set them here downe for your knowledge, leauing the rest for that other generall worke, which time may perfect and bring to light, if the couetous mindes of some that should be most affected towards it, doe not hinder it: or if the helpe of generous spirits would forward it. 1. Ranunculus montanus albus humilior. The lowe white mountaine Crowfoot. This lowe Crowfoote hath three or foure broad and thicke leaues, almost round, yet a little cut in and notched about the edges, of a fine greene and shining colour on the vpperside, and not so green vnderneath, among which riseth a small short stalke, bearing one snow white flower on the toppe, made of fiue round pointed leaues, with diuers yellow threads in the middle, standing about a greene head, which in time groweth to be full of seede, in forme like vnto a small greene Strawberry: the roote is composed of many white strings. Duplici flore.There is another of this lowe kinde, whose leaues are somewhat more deeply cut in on the edges, and the flower larger, and sometimes a little double, as it were with two rowes of leaues, in other things not differing from the former.
2. Ranunculus montanus albus maior vel elatior. The great single white mountaine Crowfoote. The leaues of this Crowfoote are large and greene, cut into three, and sometimes into fiue speciall diuisions, and each of them besides cut or notched about the edges, somewhat resembling the leaues of the Globe Crowfoote, but larger: the stalke is two foote and a halfe high, hauing three small leaues set at the ioynt of the stalke, where it brancheth out into flowers, which stand foure or fiue together vpon long foote-stalkes, made of fiue white leaues a peece, very sweete, and somewhat larger then the next white Crowfoote, with some yellow threads in the middle compassing a greene head, which bringeth seede like vnto other wilde Crowfeete: the roote hath many long thicke whitish strings, comming from a thicke head. 3. Ranunculus montanus albus minor. The lesser single white Crowfoote. This Crowefoote hath faire large spread leaues, cut into fiue diuisions, and some∣what notched about the edges, greene on the vpperside, and paler vnderneath, hauing many veines running through the leaues: the stalke of this riseth not so high as the former, although this be reasonable tall, as being neare two foote high, spread into many branches, bearing such like white flowers, as in the former, but smaller: the seede of this is like the former, and so are the rootes likewise. 4. Ranunculus albus flore pleno. The double white Crowfoot. The double white Crowfoote is of the same kinde with the last single white Crow∣foote, hauing such like leaues in all respects: the onely difference is in the flowers, which in this are very thicke and double. Some doe make mention of two sorts of double white Crowfeete, one somewhat lower then another, and the lower like∣wise bearing more store of flowers, and more double then the higher: but I con∣fesse, I haue neuer seene but one sort of double, which is the same here expressed, not growing very high, and reasonably well stored with flowers. 5. Ranunculus praecox Rutaefolio siue Coriandrifolio. The early Coriander leafed Crowfoote. This Crowfoote hath three or foure very greene leaues, cut and diuided into many small peeces, like vnto the wing of leaues of Rue, or rather like the lower leaues of the Coriander (for they well resemble either of them) euery of them standing vpon a long purplish stalke, at the toppe whereof groweth the flower alone, being composed or made of twelue small white leaues, broad pointed, and a little endented at the ends, somewhat purplish on the outside, and white on the inside, sustained by diuers small greene leaues, which are in stead of a cup or huske: in the middle of the flower are many small white threads, tipt with yellow pendents, standing about a small greene head, which after groweth to bee full of seedes like a Strawberry, which knobs giue small blackish seede: the roote is white and fibrous. 6. Ranunculus Thalictrifolio maior. The great colombine leafed Crowfoot. The lower leaues of this Crowfoote haue long stalkes, and are very like vnto the smaller leaues of Colombines, or the great Spanish Thalictrum, which hath his leaues very like vnto a Colombine, foure or fiue rising from the roote: the stalke riseth a∣bout a foote and a halfe high, somewhat reddish, beset here and there with the like leaues, at the toppe whereof stand diuers small white flowers, made of fiue leaues a peece, with some pale white threads in the middle: the seede is round and reddish, contained in small huskes or hornes: the roote is made of a bush or tuft of white strings.
7. Ranunculus Thalictrifolio minor Asphodeli radice. The small white Colombine leafed Crowfoote. This small Crowfoote hath three or foure winged leaues spread vpon the ground, standing vpon long stalkes, and consisting of many small leaues set together, spreading from the middle ribbe, euery leafe somewhat resembling both in shape and colour the smallest and youngest leaues of Colombines: the flowers are white, standing at the toppe of the stalkes, made of fiue round leaues: the root hath three or foure thick, short, and round yellowish clogs hanging at the head, like vnto the Asphodill roote. The great Herball of Lyons, that goeth vnder the name of Daleschampius, saith, that Dr. Myconus found it in Spaine, and sent it vnder the name of Oenanthe; and therefore Ioannes Molineus who is thought to haue composed that booke, set it among the vm∣belliferous plants, because the Oenanthes beare vmbels of flowers and seede, and haue tuberous or cloggy rootes; but with what iudgement, let others say, when they haue compared the vmbels of flowers and seede of the Oenanthes, with the flowers and seede of this plant, and whether I haue not more properly placed it among the Ranun∣culi or Crowfeete, and giuen it a denomination agreeable to his forme. 8. Ranunculus Globosus. The Globe Crowfoot. This Crowfoote (which in the Northerne countries of England where it groweth plentifully, is called Locker goulous) hath many faire, broad, darke greene leaues next the ground, cut into fiue, sixe, or seuen diuisions, and iagged besides at the edges; among which riseth vp a stalke, whereon are set such like leaues as are belowe, but smaller, diuided toward the toppe into some branches, on the which stand seuerall large yellow flowers, alwayes folded inward, or as a close flower neuer blowing o∣pen, as other flowers doe, consisting of eleuen leaues for the most part, set or placed in three rowes, with many yellow threads in the middle, standing about a greene rough head, which in time groweth to be small knops, wherein are contained blacke seede: the roote is composed of many blackish strings. 9. Ranunculus protensis flore multiplici. The double yellow field Crowfoot. There is little or no difference in the leaues of this double Crowfoot, from those of the single kindes that growe in euery medowe, being large and diuided into foure or fiue parts, and indented about the edges, but they are somewhat smaller, and of a fresher greene: the flowers stand on many branches, much diuided or separated, being not very great, but very thicke and double: the roote runneth and cree∣peth vnder ground like as the single doth. 10. Ranunculus Anglicus maximus multiplex. The Garden double yellow Crowfoot or Batchelours buttons. This great double Crowfoote, which is common in euery Garden through Eng∣land, hath many great blackish greene leaues, iagged and cut into three diuisions, each to the middle ribbe: the stalkes haue some smaller leaues on them, and those next vn∣der the branches long and narrow: the flowers are of a greenish yellow colour, very thicke and double of leaues, in the middle whereof riseth vp a small stalke, bearing an∣other double flower, like to the other, but smaller: the roote is round, like vnto a small white Turnep, with diuers other fibres annexed vnto it. 11. Ranunculus Gramineus. Grasse leafed Crowfoot.
The leaues of this Crowfoote are long and narrow, somewhat like vnto Grasse, or rather like the leaues of single Gilloflowers or Pinckes, being small and sharpe poin∣ted, a little hollow, and of a whitish greene colour: among these leaues rise vp diuers slender stalkes, bearing one small flower at the toppe of each, consisting of fiue yellow 1 Aconitum Hyemale. Winter Wolfesbane. 2 Aconitum flore albido siue luteum Ponticum. The whitish yellow Wolfesbane. 3 Napellus verus. Blew Helmets or Monkes hood. 4 Anthora. The counterpoison Monkes hood. 5 Ranunculus humilis albus simplex. The single white low Crowfoot. 6 Ranunculus humilis albus duplici flore. The double lowe white Crowfoot. 7 Ranunculus Coriandrifolio The early Coriander leafed Crowfoot. 8 Ranunculus montanus elatior albus. The great single white mountain Crowfoot. 9 Ranunculus montanus albus flore pleno The double white mountain Crowfoot. 10 Ranunculus Thalictrifolio minor. The lesser Colombine leafed Crowfoot. 11 Ranunculus globosus. The globe Crowfoot. depiction of flowers
leaues, with some threads in the middle: the roote is composed of many thicke, long, round white strings. There is another of this kinde that beareth flowers with two rowes of leaues, as if it were double, differing in nothing else. 12. Ranunculus Lusitanicus Autumnalis. The Portugall Autumne Crowfoot. This Autumne Crowfoote hath diuers broad round leaues lying on the ground, set vpon short foote-stalkes, of a faire greene colour aboue, and grayish vnderneath, snipt all about the edges, hauing many veines in them, and sometimes swelling as with bli∣sters or bladders on them; from among which rise vp two or three slender and hairy stalkes, bearing but one small yellow flower a peece, consisting of fiue and sometimes of six leaues, and sometimes of seuen or eight, hauing a few threads in the middle, set about a small greene head, like vnto many of the former Crowfeete, which bringeth small blacke seede: the roote is made of many thicke short white strings, which seeme to be grumous or kernelly rootes, but that they are somewhat smaller, and longer then any other of that kinde. 13. Ranunculus Creticus latifolius. The broad leafed Candy Crowfoot. This Crowfoote of Candy, hath the greatest and broadest leaues of all the sorts of Crowfeete, being almost round, and without any great diuisions, but onely a few notches about the edges here and there, as large or larger sometimes then the palme of a mans hand; among which riseth vp the stalke, not very high when it doth first flower, but afterwards, as the other flowers doe open themselues, the stalke groweth to be a foote and a halfe high, or thereabouts, hauing some leaues on it, deeply cut in or diuided, and bearing many faire yellow flowers, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, being somewhat whitish in the middle, when the flower hath stood blowne a little time: the roote is composed of a number of small kernelly knobs, or long graines, set thicke together. This flowreth very early, being vsually in flower before the end of March, and oftentimes about the middle thereof. 14. Ranunculus Creticus albus. The white Candy Crowfoote. The leaues of this Crowfoote are very like vnto the leaues of the red Crowfoote of Tripoli or Asia, hereafter set downe, being somewhat broad and indented about the edges, some of the leaues being also cut in or gashed, thereby making it as it were three diuisions, of a pale greene colour, with many white spots in them: the stalke ri∣seth vp a foote high, with some leaues on it, more diuided then the lower, and diuided at the toppe into two and sometimes into three branches, each of them bearing a faire snow white flower, somewhat large, included at the first in a brownish huske or cup of leaues, which afterwards stand vnder the flowers, consisting of fiue white large round pointed leaues, in the middle whereof is set many blackish purple thrums, compassing a small long greene head, composed of many scales or chaffie whitish huskes, when they are ripe, which are the seede, but vnprofitable in all that euer I could obserue: the rootes are many small graines or kernels, set together as in the former, and much about the same colour, that is, of a darke or duskie grayish colour, but much smaller. Alba purpureis ris & venis.There is another of this kinde, whose flowers haue purple edges, and sometimes some veines of the same purple in the leaues of the flowers, not differing in any other thing from the former. Alba ris ru∣bris.And another, whose edges of the flowers are of a bright red colour. 15. Ranunculus Creticus flore argenteo. The Argentine, or cloth of siluer Crowfoot. The greene leaues of this Crowfoote are as small and thinne, cut in or diuided on the edges, as the last two sorts; the stalke riseth vp somewhat higher, and diuided into some branches, bearing at the toppe of euery of them one flower, somewhat smaller then the former, composed of six, seuen, and sometimes of eight small round pointed
1 Ranunculus gramineus flore simplii & duplici. The single and the double grasse Crowfoot. 2 Ranunculus Lusitanicus Autumnalis. The Portugall Autumne Crowfoot. 3 Ranunculus Creticus latifolius. The broad leafed Candy Crowfoot. 4 Ranunculus Anglicus maximus multiplex. The double English Crowfoot. 5 Ranunculus praetensis flore multiplici. The double yellow field Crowfoot. 6 Ranunculus Creticus albus. The white Candy Crowfoot. 7 Ranunculus Asiaticus flore albo vel pallido vari. The white or the straw coloured Crowfoot with red top r edges. 8 Ranunculus Tri∣politanus flore rubro simplici. The single red Crowfoot of Tripoli. 9 Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro ampl. The large single red Crowfoot of Asia. 10 Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro pleno. The double red Crowfoot of Asia. 11 Caltha palustris flore pleno. Double Marsh Marigold or Batchelours buttons. depiction of flowers
leaues, of a whitish yellow blush colour on the inside wholly, except sometimes a lit∣tle stript about the edges: but the outside of euery leafe is finely stript with crimson stripes, very thicke, somewhat like vnto a Gilloflower: in the middle riseth vp a small blacke head, compassed about with blackish blew threads or thrums, which head is as vnfruitfull for seede in our Countrey as the former. This flower hath no such greene leaues vnder it, or to enclose it before it be blowne open as the former: the rootes are in all things like the former. 16. Ranunculus Asiaticus siue Tripolitanus flore rubro. The single red Crowfoote of Asia or Tripoli. The lower leaues of this red Crowfoote are alwayes whole without diuisions, be∣ing onely somewhat deeply indented about the edges, but the other that rise after them are more cut in, sometimes into three, and sometimes into fiue diuisions, and notched also about the edges: the stalke riseth higher then any of the former, and hath on it two or three smaller leaues, more cut in and diuided then those belowe: at the toppe whereof standeth one large flower, made of fiue leaues, euery one being nar∣rower at the bottome then at the toppe, and not standing close and round one to an∣other, but with a certaine distance betweene, of a duskie yellowish red colour on the outside, and of a deepe red on the inside, the middle being set with many thrums of a darke purple colour: the head for seede is long, and scaly or chaffie, and idle in like manner as the rest: the roote is made of many graines or small kernels set together, and closing at the head, but spreading it selfe, if it like the ground, vnder the vpper crust of the earth into many rootes, encreasing from long strings, that runne from the middle of the small head of graines, as well as at the head it selfe. 17. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore amplo rubro. The large single red Crowfoot of Asia. There hath come to vs out of Turkie, together with the former, among many other rootes, vnder the same title, a differing sort of this Crowfoote, whose leaues weare broader, and much goaler; the flower also larger, and the leaues thereof broader, sometimes eight in a flower, standing round and close one to another, which maketh the fairer shew: in all other things it is like the former. 18. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro vario simplici. The red stript single Crowfoote of Asia. This party coloured Crowfoote differeth not eyther in roote or leafe from the for∣mer, the chiefest difference is in the flower, which being red, somewhat like the for∣mer, hath yet some yellow stripes or veines through euery leafe, sometimes but little, and sometimes so much, that it seemeth to bee party coloured red and yellow: this sort is very tender; for we haue twice had it, and yet perished with vs. 19. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore luteo vario simplici. The yellow stript single Crowfoote of Asia. There is little difference in the roote of this Crowfoote from the last described, but the leaues are much different, being very much diuided, and the flower is large, of a fine pale greenish yellow colour, consisting of six and seuen, and sometimes of eight or nine round leaues; the toppes whereof haue reddish spots, and the edges sometimes also, with such purplish thrums in the middle that the other haue. None of these for∣mer Crowfeete with kernelly rootes, haue euer beene found to haue giuen so good seed in England, as that being sowne, any of them would spring vp; for hereof tryall hath been often made, but all they haue lost their labour, that haue bestowed their paines therein, as farre as I know.
20. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro pleno. The double red Crowfoote of Asia. The double red Crowfoote hath his rootes and leaues so like vnto the single red kinde, that none can perceiue any difference, or know the one from the other, vntill the budde of the flower doe appeare, which after it is any thing forward, may be per∣ceiued to be greater and fuller then the budde of the single kinde. This kinde beareth most vsually but one faire large double flower on the toppe of the stalke, composed of many leaues, set close together in three or foure rowes, of an excellent crimson colour, declining to Scarlet, the outter leaues being larger then the inner; and in stead of thrummes, hath many small leaues set together: it hath likewise six small narrow greene leaues on the backside of the flower, where the stalke is fastened to the flower. There is of this double kinde another sort,Polifero flore. whose flower is of the same colour with the former, but out of the middle of the flower ariseth another double flower, but smaller. The Place. These plants grow naturally in diuers Countries; some in France, and Germany, and some in England, some in Spaine, Portugall, and Italy, and some haue been sent out of Turkie from Constantinople, and some from o∣ther parts, their titles for the most part descrying their Countries. The Time. Some of them flower early, as is set downe in their descriptions, or ti∣tles. The others in Aprill and May. The white Candy Crowfoote, and the other single and double sorts of Asia, about the same time, or somewhat later, and one in Autumne, as it is set downe. The Names. The names that are giuen seuerally to them may well serue this worke, that thereby they may bee distinguished one from another: For to set downe any further controuersie of names, how fitly or vnfitly they haue beene called, and how variably by diuers former Writers, is fitter for a ge∣nerall History, vnto which I leaue what may be said, both concerning these and the rest: Onely this I would giue you to vnderstand, that the Turkie kindes haue been sent to vs vnder the names of Terobolos for the single, and Terobolos Catamer lale for the double, and yet oftentimes, those that haue been sent for double, haue proued single, so little fidelity is to bee found among them. The Vertues. All or most of these plants are very sharpe and exulcerating, yet the care and industry of diuers learned men haue found many good effects in many of them. For the rootes and leaues both of the wilde kindes, and of some of these of the Garden, stamped and applyed to the wrists, haue driuen a∣way the fits in Feuers. The roote likewise of the double English kinde is applyed for pestilent sores, to helpe to breake them, by drawing the ve∣nome to the place. They helpe likewise to take away scarres and markes in diuers places of the body.
CHAP. XXVIII. Caltha palustris flore pleno. Double Marsh Marigold. AS an appendix to the Crowfeete, I must needes adde this plant, yet seuerally by it selfe, because both it and his single kinde are by most adioyned there∣unto, for the neare resemblance both in shape and sharpenesse of quality. The single kinde I leaue to the Ditch sides, and moist grounds about them, as the fittest pla∣ces for it, and onely bring the double kinde into my Garden, as fittest for his goodly proportion and beauty to be entertained, and haue place therein. The double Marsh Marigold hath many broad and round greene leaues, a little en∣dented about the edges, like vnto the single kinde, but not altogether so large, especi∣ally in a Garden where it standeth not very moist: the stalkes are weake, round, hol∣low, and greene, diuided into three or foure branches at the toppe, with leaues at the seuerall ioynts, whereon stand very double flowers, of a gold yellow colour: the fiue outer leaues being larger then any of the rest that are encompassed by them, which fall away after they haue stood blowne a great while (for it endureth in flower a mo∣neth or more, especially if it stand in a shadowie place) without bearing any seed: the rootes are composed of many thicke, long, and round whitish strings, which runne downe deep into the ground, and there are fastened very strongly. The Place. This plant groweth naturally in diuers Marshes, and moist grounds in Germany, yet in some more double then in others; it hath long agoe beene cherished in our Gardens. The Time. It flowreth in Aprill or May, as the yeare proueth earlier or later: all his leaues doe in a manner quite perish in Winter, and spring anew in the end of February, or thereabouts. The Names. There is great controuersie among the learned about the single kinde, but thereof I shall not neede to speake in this place; if God permit I may in a fitter. This is called generally in Latine, Caltha palustris multi∣plex, or flore pleno. And wee in English (after the Latine, which take Caltha to be that which wee vsually call Calendula, a Marigold) The dou∣ble Marsh Marigold. The Vertues. The roote hereof is sharpe, comming neare vnto the quality of the Crowfeete, but for any speciall property, I haue not heard or found any.
CHAP. XXIX. Hepatica nobilis siue trifolia. Noble Liuerwort. NExt vnto the Crowfeete are to follow the Hepaticas, because of the likenesse with them, seeming to be small Crowfeete in all their parts, but of another and more wholsome kinde. Their diuersity among themselues consisteth chiefly in the colour of the flowers, all of them being single, except one which is very thicke and double. 1. Hepatica flore caeruleo simplici maior. The great single blew Hepatica or noble Liuerwort. The flowers of this Hepatica doe spring vp, blow open, and sometimes shed and fall away, before any leaues appeare or spread open. The rootes are composed of a bush of blackish strings, from the seuerall heads or buttons whereof, after the flow∣ers are risen and blowne, arise many fresh greene leaues, each seuerally standing vpon his foot-stalke, folded together, and somewhat browne and hairy at their first com∣ming, which after are broad, and diuided at the edges into three parts: the flowers likewise stand euery one vpon his owne seuerall foote-stalke, of the same height with the leaues for the most part, which is about foure or fiue fingers breadth high, made of six leaues most vsually, but sometimes it will haue seuen or eight, of a faire blew co∣lour, with many white chiues or threads in the middle, standing about a middle green head or vmbone, which after the flower is fallen groweth greater, and sheweth many small graines or seede set close together (with three small greene leaues compassing them vnderneath, as they did the flower at the bottome) very like the head of seed of manie Crowfeete. 2. Hepatica minor flore pallido caeruleo. The small blew Hepatica. The leaues of this Hepatica are smaller by the halfe then the former, and grow more aboundantly, or bushing thicke together: the flowers (when it sheweth them, for I haue had the plant halfe a score yeares, and yet neuer saw it beare flower aboue once or twice) are of a pale or bleake blew colour, not so large as the flowers of the former. 3. Hepatica flore purpureo. Purple Hepatica or noble Liuerwort. This Hepatica is in all things like vnto the first, but onely the flowers are of a deeper blew tending to a Violet purple: and therefore I shall not neede to reiterate the former description. 4. Hepatica flore albo minor. The lesser white Hepatica. The flowers of this Hepatica are wholly white, of the bignesse of the red or purple, and the leaues somewhat smaller, and of a little whiter or paler greene colour, else in all other things agreeing with the former. 5. Hepatica alba magno flore. The great white Hepatica. There is no other difference herein from the last, but that the flower being as white, is as large as the next. 6. Hepatica albida siue argentea. Ash-coloured or Argentine Hepatica.
Both the leaues and the flowers of this Hepatica are larger then any of the former, except the last: the flowers hereof at the first opening seeme to bee a of blush ash-co∣lour, which doe so abide three or foure dayes, decaying still vntill it turne almost  white, hauing yet still a shew of that blush ash-colour in them, till the very last. 7. Hepatica alba straminibus rubris. White Hepatica with red threads. There is no difference between this Hepatica and the first white one, sauing that the threads in the middle of the flower, being white, as in the former, are tipt at the ends with a pale reddish colour, which adde a great beauty to the flowers. 8. Hepatica flore rubro. Red Hepatica or noble Liuerwort. The leaues of this Hepatica are of a little browner red colour, both at their first comming vp, and afterwards, especially in the middle of the leafe more then any of the former: the flowers are in forme like vnto the rest, but of a bright blush, or pale red colour, very pleasant to behold, with white threads or chiues in the middle of them. 9. Hepatica flore purpureo multiplici siue pleno. The double purple Hepatica. The double Hepatica is in all things like vnto the single purple kinde, sauing onely that the leaues are larger, and stand vpon longer foote-stalkes, and that the flowers are small buttons, but very thicke of leaues, and as double as a flower can be, like vnto the double white Crowfoote before described, but not so bigge, of a deepe blew or pur∣ple colour, without any threads or head in the middle, which fall away without gi∣uing any seede. 10. Hepatica flore caeruleo pleno. The double blew Hepatica. In the colour of this flower, consisteth the chiefest difference from the last, except one may say it is a little lesse in the bignesse of the flower, but not in doublenesse of leaues. The Place. All these plants with single flowers grow naturally in the Woods, and shadowie Mountaines of Germany in many places, and some of them in Italy also. The double kinde likewise hath been sent from Alphonsus Pan∣tius out of Italy, as Clusius reporteth, and was also found in the Woods, neare the Castle of Starnbeg in Austria, the Lady Heusenstains possession, as the same Clusius reporteth also. The Time. These plants doe flower very early, and are of the first flowers that shew themselues presently after the deepe frosts in Ianuary, so that next vnto the Winter Wolfesbane, these making their pride appeare in Winter, are the more welcome early guests. The double kinde flowreth not altogether so early, but sheweth his flower, and abideth when the others are past. The Names. They haue obtained diuers names; some calling them Hepatica, Hepatica nobilis, Hepaticum trifolium, Trifolium nobile, Trifolium aureum, and some Tri∣nitas, and Herba Trinitatis. In English you may call them either Hepatica, after the Latine name, as most doe, or Noble Liuerwort, which you please. The Vertues. These are thought to coole and strengthen the liuer, the name importing as much; but I neuer saw any great vse of them by any the Physitians of our London Colledge, or effect by them that haue vsed them in Physicke in our Country.
1 Hepatica flore albo amplo simplici. The large white Hepatica. 2 Hepatica flore rubro simplici. The red Hepatica. 3 Hepatica flore purpureo pleno. The double purple Hepatica. 4 Geranium tuberosum. Knobbed Cranes bill. 5 Geranium Batrachoides flore albo vel caeruleo. The blew or white Crowfoote Cranes bill. 6 Geranium Hematodes. The red Rose Cranes bill. 7 Geranium Romanum striatum. The variable stript Cranes bill. 8 Geranium Creticum. Candy Cranes bill. depiction of flowers
CHAP. XXX. Geranium. Storkes bill or Cranes bill. AS was said before concerning the Crowfeet, of their large extent and restraint, the like may be said of the Storkes bils or Cranes bils; for euen of these as of them, I must for this worke set forth the descriptions but of a few, and leaue the rest to a generall worke. 1. Geranium tuberosum vel bulbosum. Bulbous or knobbed Cranes bill. The knobbed Cranes hath three or foure large leaues spread vpon the ground, of a grayish or rather dusty greene colour, euery one of them being as it were of a round forme, but diuided or cut into six or seuen long parts or diuisions, euen vnto the mid∣dle, which maketh it seeme to be so many leaues, each of the cuts or diuisions being deeply notched or indented on both sides; among which riseth vp a stalke a foote high or better, bearing thereon diuers pale but bright purple flowers, made of fiue leaues a peece, after which come small heads with long pointed beakes, resembling the long bill of a Storke or Crane, or such like bird, which after it is ripe, parteth at the bottome where it is biggest, into foure or fiue seedes, euery one whereof hath a peece of the beake head fastened vnto it, and falleth away if it bee not gathered: the roote is tuberous and round, like vnto the roote of the Cyclamen or ordinary Sowbread almost, but smaller, and of a darke russet colour on the outside, and white within, which doth encrease vnder ground, by certaine strings running from the mother root into small round bulbes, like vnto the rootes of the earth Chesnut, and will presently shoote leaues, and quickly grow to beare flowers, but will not abide to be kept long dry out of the ground, without danger to be vtterly spoiled. Geranium Batrachoides flore caeruleo. The blew Crowfoote Cranes bill. This Crowfoote Cranes bill hath many large leaues, cut into fiue or six parts or di∣uisions, euen to the bottome, and iagged besides on the edges, set vpon very long slender foote-stalkes, very like the leaues of the wilde Crowfoot; from among which rise vp diuers stalkes with great ioynts, somewhat reddish, set with leaues like the for∣mer: the toppes of the stalkes are spread into many branches, whereon stand diuers flowers, made of fiue leaues a peece, as large as any of the wilde or field Crowfeete, round pointed, of a faire blew or watchet colour, which being past, there doe arise such heads or bils, as other of the Cranes bils haue: the roote is composed of many reddish strings, spreading in the ground, from a head made of diuers red heads, which lye oftentimes eminent aboue the ground. Geranium Batrachoides flore albo. The white Crowfoote Cranes bill. This Cranes bill is in leafe and flower altogether like the former, the onely diffe∣rence betweene them consisteth in the colour of the flower, which in this is wholly white, and as large as the former: but the roote of this hath not such red heads as the other hath. Geranium Batrachoides flore albo & caeruleo vario. The party coloured Crowfoote Cranes bill. The flowers of this Cranes bill are variably striped and spotted, and sometimes di∣uided, the one halfe of euery leafe being white, and the other halfe blew, sometimes with lesser or greater spots of blew in the white leafe, very variably, and more in some years then in others, that it is very hard to expresse all the varieties that may be obser∣ued in the flowers, that blow at one time. In all other parts of the plant, it is so like vnto the former, that vntill it be in flower, the one cannot be knowne from the other.
5. Geranium Batrachoides alterum flore purpureo. Purple Crowfoote Cranes bill. This purple Cranes bill hath many leaues rising from the roote, set vpon long foot-stalkes, somewhat like vnto the other, yet not so broad, but more diuided or cut, that is, into seuen or more slits, euen to the middle, each whereof is likewise cut in on the edges more deeply then the former; the stalkes are somewhat knobbed at the ioynts, set with leaues like vnto the lower, and bearing a great tuft of buds at the toppes of the branches, which breake out into faire large flowers, made of fiue purple leaues, which doe somewhat resemble the flower of a Mallow, before it be too full blowne, each whereof hath a reddish pointell in the middle, and many small threads compassing it, this vmbell or tuft of buds doe flower by degrees, and not all at once, and euery flower abideth open little more then one day, and then sheddeth, so that euery day yeeldeth fresh flowers, which because they are so many, are a long while before they are all past or spent: after the flowers are past, there arise small beake heads or bils, like vnto the other Cranes bils, with small turning seede: the roote is composed of a great tuft of strings, fastened to a knobby head. 6. Geranium Romanum versicolor siue striatum. The variable stript Cranes bill. This beautifull Cranes bill hath many broad yellowish greene leaues arising from the roote, diuided into fiue or six parts, but not vnto the middle as the first kindes are: each of these leaues hath a blackish spot at the bottome corners of the diuisions, the whole leafe as well in forme as colour and spots, is very like vnto the leafe of the Ge∣ranium fuscum, or spotted Cranes bill, next following to be described, but that the leaues of this are not so large as the other: from among these leaues spring vp sundry stalkes a foote high and better, ioynted and knobbed here and there, bearing at the tops two or three small white flowers, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, so thickly & va∣riably striped with fine small reddish veines, that no green leafe that is of that bignesse can shew so many veines in it, nor so thick running as euery leafe of this flower doth: in the middle of the flower standeth a small pointell, which when the flower is past doth grow to be the seed vessell, wheron is set diuers small seeds, like vnto the small seedes of other Cranes bils: the root is made of many small yellow threads or strings. 7. Geranium fuscum siue maculatum. Swart tawny or spotted Cranes bill. The leaues of this Cranes bill are in all points like the last described, as well in the forme and diuisions as colour of the leaues, being of a yellowish greene colour, but larger and stronger by much: the stalkes of this rise much higher, and are ioynted or knobbed with reddish knees or ioynts, on the tops whereof stand not many although large flowers, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, each whereof is round at the end, and a little snipt round about, and doe bend or turne themselues backe to the stalkewards, making the middle to be highest or most eminent; the colour of the flower is of a darke or deepe blackish purple, the bottome of euery leafe being whiter then the rest; it hath also a middle pointell standing out, which afterwards bring forth seede like vnto o∣thers of his kinde: the roote consisteth of diuers great strings, ioyned to a knobby head. 8. Geranium Hematodes. The red Rose Cranes bill.
This Cranes bill hath diuers leaues spread vpon the ground, very much cut in or diuided into many parts, and each of them againe slit or cut into two or three peeces, standing vpon slender long foote-stalkes, of a faire greene colour all the Spring and Summer, but reddish in Autumne: among these leaues spring vp slender and weake stalkes, beset at euery ioynt (which is somewhat reddish) with two leaues for the most part, like vnto the lower: the flowers grow seuerally on the toppe of the stalkes, and not many together in bunches or branches, as in all other of the Cranes bils, euery flower being as large as a single Rose Campion flower, consisting of fiue large leaues,  of a deeper red colour then in any other Cranes bill at the first opening, and will change more blewish afterwards: when the flower is past, there doth arise such like beakes as are in others of the same kinde, but small: the roote is hard, long, and thicke, with diuers branches spreading from it, of a reddish yellow colour on the outside, and whitish within, which abideth and perisheth not, but shooteth forth some new greene leaues, which abide all the Winter, although those that turne red doe fall away. Geranium Creticum. Candy Cranes bill. Candy Cranes bill beareth long and tender stalkes, whereon growe diuers broad and long leaues, cut in or iagged on the edges: the toppes of the stalkes are branched into many flowers, made of fiue leaues of a reasonable bignesse, and of a faire blew or watchet colour, with a purplish pointell in the middle, which being past, there fol∣low beake heads like other Cranes bils, but greater, containing larger, greater, and sharper pointed seede, able to pierce the skinne, if one be not warie of it: the roote is white and long, with some fibres at it, and perisheth when it hath perfected his seede, and will spring of it owne sowing many times, if the Winter be not too sharpe, other∣wise (being annuall) it must be sowne in the Spring of the yeare. The Place. Most of these Cranes bils are strangers vnto vs by nature, but endenizond in our English Gardens. It hath beene reported vnto mee by some of good credit, that the second or Crowfoot Cranes bill hath been found naturally growing in England, but yet I neuer saw it, although I haue seen many sorts of wilde kindes in many places. Matthiolus saith that the first groweth in Dalmatia and Illyria very plentifully. Camerarius, Clusius, and others, that most of the rest grow in Germany, Bohemia, Austria, &c. The last hath his place recorded in his title. The Time. All these Cranes bils doe for the most part flower in Aprill, and May, and vntill the middle of Iune. The variable or stript Cranes bill is vsually the latest of all the rest. The Names. The first is vsually called Geranium tuberosum, of some Geranium bulbosum, of the likenesse of the roote vnto a bulbe: It is without controuersie Gera∣nium primum of Dioscorides. The second is called Geranium Gratia Dei, of others, Geranium caeruleum. The blew Cranes bill Lobel calleth it Batra∣choides, because both leafe and flower are like vnto a Crowfoote; and the af∣finity with the Cranes bils in the seede causeth it rather to be referred to them then to the Crowfeete. The stript Cranes bill is called by some Ge∣ranium Romanum. The last sauing one is called Geranium Haematodes, or Sanguineum, of Lobel Geranium Gruinal Haematodes supinum radice repente. In English it may be called after the Greek and Latine, The bloudy Cranes bill, but I rather call it, The Rose Cranes bill, because the flowers are as large as single Roses, or as the Rose Campion. Some of them are called in many places of England Bassinets. The Vertues. All the kindes of Cranes bils are accounted great wound herbes, and ef∣fectuall to stay bleedings, yet some more then others. The Emperickes of Germanie, as Camerarius saith, extoll it wonderfully, for a singular reme∣die against the Stone, both in the reines and bladder.
CHAP. XXXI. Sanicula guttata maior. Spotted Sanicie. HAuing long debated with my selfe, where to place this & the other plants that follow in the two next Chapters, I haue thought it not amisse for this worke to set them downe here, both before the Beares eares, which are kindes of Sanicle, as the best Authors doe hold, and after the Cranes bils, both for some quali∣ties somewhat resembling them, and for some affinity of the flowers with the former. The spotted Sanicle hath many small round leaues, bluntly endented about the edges, somewhat like vnto the leaues of our white Saxifrage, of a full greene colour aboue, and whitish hairy, and somewhat reddish withall vnderneath: the stalkes are set here and there with the like leaues, rising a foote and a halfe high or more, very much diuided at the toppe into sundry small branches, bearing many very small white flowers, consisting of fiue small leaues, wherein are many small red spots to be seene, as small as pins points, of a pretty sweete sent, almost like Hawthorne flowers, in the middle whereof are many small threads compassing a head, which when it is ripe con∣taineth small blacke seede: the roote is scaly, or couered with a chaffie matter, hauing many small white fibres vnderneath, whereby it is fastened in the ground. There is another of this kinde, like both in roote, leafe, and flower to the former,Minor non gut∣tata. the onely difference is, that this is lesser then the former, and hath no spots in the flower, as the other hath. We haue also another smaller kinde then the last, both in leafe and flower,Minus guttata. the leaues whereof are smaller, but rounder, and more finely snipt or indented about the edge, like the teeth of a fine sawe: the stalke is little aboue a span high, hauing many small white flowers spotted as the first, but with fewer spots. The Place. These growe in the shadowie Woods of the Alpes, in diuers places, and with vs they more delight in the shade then the sunne. The Time. All these Sanicles doe flower in May, and continue flowring vntill Iune, and the seede soone ripeneth after: the rootes abide all the Winter, with some leaues on them, springing a fresh in the beginning of the yeare. The Names. The former two are called by Clusius Sanicula montana, and by others Sanicula guttata: by Lobel Geum Alpinum. The third or last hath been sent vs vnder the name of Sanicula montana altera minor. The Vertues. The name imposed on these plants doe certainly assure vs of their ver∣tues, from the first founders, that they are great healers, and from their taste, that they are great binders.
CHAP. XXXII. Cotyledon altera Matthioli. Spotted Nauelwort. THis spotted Nauelwort, as many doe call it, hath many thicke small leaues, not so broad as long, of a whitish greene colour, lying on the ground in circles, after the manner of the heads of Houseleeke, and dented about the edges; from the middle whereof sometimes (for it doth not flower euery yeare in many places) ari∣seth vp a stalke, scarce a foote high, beset with such like leaues as are belowe, but some∣what longer: from the middle of the stalke vp to the top it brancheth forth diuersly, with a leafe at euery ioynt, bearing three or foure flowers on euery branch, consisting of fiue white leaues, spotted with small red spots, like vnto the spotted Sanicle, but with fewer and greater spots, hauing a yellowish circle or eye in the bottome of euery flower, and many whitish threads with yellowish tips in it: the seede is small and blacke, contained in small round heads: the roote is small, long, and threadie, shooting out such heads of leaues, which abide all the Winter, those that beare flower perishing. Cotyledon altera minor. Small dented Nauelwort. There is another like vnto that before described in most things, the differences be these: It hath shorter leaues then the former, and dented about the edges in the like manner: the flowers hereof are white, but greater, made of six leaues, and most vsu∣ally without any spots at all in them, some are seene to haue spots also: the heads or seede vessels are more cornered then the former. Cotyledon altera flore rubro stellato. Small red flowred Nauelwort. This hath also many heads of leaues, but more open, which are longer, greener, and sharper pointed then eyther of the former, somewhat reddish also, and not dented a∣bout the edges, but yet a little rough in handling: the stalke ariseth from among the leaues, being somewhat reddish, and the leaues thereon are reddish pointed, diuided at the toppe into many branches, with diuers flowers thereon, made of twelue small long leaues, standing like a starre, of a reddish purple colour, with many threads there∣in, set about the middle head, which is diuided at the toppe into many small ends, like pods or hornes, containing therein very small seede: the root is small like the former. Sedum serratum flore rubente maculato. The Princes Feather. This kinde of Sengreene is composed of heads of larger, broader, and thinner leaues then any of the former, of a sadder greene colour, somewhat vneuenly enden∣ted about the edges, and not so close set together, but spreading forth into seuerall heads like as the former sorts doe, although not so plentifully; from the middle of diuers of which heads rise vp brownish or reddish stalkes, set with smaller leaues there∣on to the middle thereof, and then brancheth forth into seuerall sprigs, set with diuers small reddish flowers consisting of fiue leaues a peece, the innerside of which are of a pale red, somewhat whitish, spotted with many small bloud red spots, as small almost as pins points, with some small threads in the middle, standing about a small greene head, which turneth into the seede vessell, parted foure wayes at the head, wherein is contained small blackish seede: the rootes are small threads, which spread vnder the ground, and shoote vp seuerall heads round about it. The Place. All these growe in Germany, Hungarie, Austria, the Alpes, and other such like places, where they cleaue to the rocke it selfe, that hath but a crust of earth on it to nourish them. They will abide in Gardens reasonable well, if they be planted in shadowie places, and not in the sun.
1 Sanicula guttata. Spotted Sanicle. 2 Cotyledon altera Matthioli. Spotted Nauelwort. 3 Cotyledon altera minor. Small den∣ted Nauelwort. 4 Cotyledon altera flore rubro stellato. Small red flowred Nauelwort. 5 Sedum serratum flore rubente macu∣lato. The Princes Feather. 6 Soldanella Aspina. Blew Moonwort. depiction of flowers
The Time. They flower for the most part in the end of May, and sometimes sooner or later, as the yeare falleth out. The Names. The first is called by Matthiolus, Cotyledon altera Dioscoridis, and Vmbili∣cus alter, but it is not the true Cotyledon altera of Dioscorides; for Sedum vulgare maius, Our common Houseleeke, by the consent of the best mo∣derne Writers, is the true Cotyledon altera of Dioscorides, or Vmbili∣cus Veneris alter. I hold it rather to bee a kinde of small Houseleeke, as the other two likewise are. The second is called by some Aizoum or Se∣dum minus serratum. The third hath his name in his title. Wee doe call them Nauelworts in English rather then Houseleekes, Euphoniae gratia. The last may be called dented Sengreene with reddish spotted flowers, but some of our English Gentlewomen haue called it, The Princes Feather, which al∣though it be but a by-name, may well serue for this plant to distinguish it, and whereby to be knowne. The Vertues. They are all held to be cold and moist, like vnto other Houseleekes. CHAP. XXXIII. Soldanella Alpina. Mountaine Soldanella or blew Moonewort. THis beautifull plant hath many round and hard leaues, set vpon long foote∣stalkes, a little vneuenly cut about the edges, greene on the vpperside, and of a grayish greene vnderneath, and sometime reddish like the leaues of Sowbread, which because they doe somewhat resemble the leaues of Soldanella marina, which is the Sea Bindweede, tooke the name thereof: the stalkes are slender, small, round, and reddish, about a span high, bearing foure or fiue flowers at the toppe, euery one hang∣ing downe their heads, like vnto a Bell flower, consisting but of one leafe (as most of the Bindweeds doe) plated into fiue folds, each of them ending in a long point, which maketh the flower seem to haue fiue leaues, each whereof is deeply cut in on the edges, and hauing a round greene head in the middle, with a pricke or pointell at the end thereof: the flower is of a faire blew colour, sometimes deeper or paler, or white, as nature listeth without any smell at all: the middle head, after the flower is fallen, riseth to be a long round pod, bearing that pricke it had at the end thereof, wherein is con∣tained small greenish seede: the roote hath many fibres shooting from a long round head or roote. The Place. This groweth on the Alpes, which are couered with snow the greatest part of the yeare, and will hardly abide transplanting. The Time. In the naturall places it flowreth not vntill the Summer moneths, Iune, Iuly, and August, after the snow is melted from the Hils, but being brought into Gardens, it flowreth in the beginning of Aprill, or there∣abouts.
The Names. This plant, by reason of the likenesse of leaues with Soldanella, as was before said, is called by many Soldanella, but yet is no Bindweede; and therefore I rather call it in English a Mountaine Soldanella, then as Gerrard doth, Mountaine Bindweede. It is likewise called by some, Lunaria minor caerulea, The lesser blew Lunary or Moonwort, and so I would rather haue it called. The Vertues. They that imposed the name of Lunaria vpon this plant, seeme to referre it to the wound or consolidating herbes, but because I haue no further re∣lation or experience, I can say no more thereof vntill tryall hath taught it. Some also from the name Soldanella, which is giuen it, because of the like∣nesse of the leaues, haue vsed it to help the Dropsie, for which the Sea plant is thought to be effectuall. CHAP. XXXIIII. Auricula Vrsi. Beares eares. THere are so many sundry and seuerall sorts of Beares eares, the variety consi∣sting as well in the differing colours of the flowers, as the forme and colour of the leaues, that I shall not comprehend and set downe vnto you all the di∣uersities by many, that are risen vp to those that haue beene industrious in the sow∣ing of the seedes of the seuerall sorts of them; yet if you accept of these that I doe here offer vnto you, I shall giue you the knowledge of others, as time, occasion, and the view of them shall enable me. And because they are without all question kinds of Cowslips, I haue set them downe before them in the first place, as being of more beau∣tie and greater respect, or at the least of more rarity vnto vs. To dispose them therefore into order, I shall ranke them vnder three principall colours, that is to say, Red or Pur∣ple, White, and Yellow, and shew you the varieties of each of them (for so many as are come to my knowledge) apart by themselues, and not promiscuously as many o∣thers haue done. 1. Auricula Vrsi flore purpureo. Purple Beares eare, or The Murrey Cowslip. This purple Beares eare or Cowslip hath many greene leaues, somewhat long and smooth, narrow from the bottome of the leafe to the middle, and broad from thence to the end, being round pointed, and somewhat snipt or endented about the edges; in the middle of these leaues, and sometimes at the sides also, doe spring round greene stalkes foure or fiue fingers high, bearing at the top many flowers, the buds whereof, before they are blowne, are of a very deepe purple colour, and being open, are of a bright, but deepe purple, vsually called a Murrey colour, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, cut in at the end as it were into two, with a whitish ring or circle at the bottome of each flower, standing in small greene cups, wherein after the flowers are fallen, are contained very small heads, not rising to the height of the cups, bearing a small pricke or pointell at the toppe of them, wherein is little blackish seede: the roote hath many whitish strings fastened to the maine long roote, which is very like vnto a Primrose or Cowslip roote, as it is in all other parts besides. 2. Auricula Vrsi purpurea abs{que} orbe. The murrey Cowslip without eyes.
There is another of this kinde, whose leafe is somewhat lesse, as the flower is also,  but of the same colour, and sometimes somewhat redder, tending to a Scarlet, without any circle at the bottome of the flower, in no other things differing from it. 3. Auricula Vrsi minor flore tannetto. Tawney Beares eares. The leaues of this kinde haue a greater shew of mealinesse to be seene in them, and not much smaller then the former, yet snipt or endented about the ends like vnto them: the flowers are many, of the same fashion with the former, but smaller, each whereof is of as deepe a murrey or tawnie colour when it is blowne, as the buds of the former are before they are blowne, hauing a white circle at the bottome of the flower, and yellowish in the middle belowe the circle. 4. Auricula Vrsi flore rubro saturo orbe luteo. Deepe or bloud red Beares eares with eyes. This kinde hath small and long greene leaues, nothing mealy, but snipt about the edges, from the middle of the leaues forwards to the ends: the flowers hereof are of a deepe red colour, tending to a bloud red, with a deepe yellow circle, or rather bot∣tome in the middle. Auricula Vrsi flore rubro sa∣ture absque orbe.There is another of this kinde, whose leaues are somewhat mealy, and smaller then any (that I haue seene) that haue mealy leaues: the flowers are of the same deepe red colour with the last described, yet hath no circle or bottome of any other colour at all. 5. Auricula Vrsi flore purpuro caeruleo. The Violet coloured Beares eare. We haue another, whose leaues are somewhat mealy and large; the flowers where∣of are of a paler purple then the first, somewhat tending to a blew. 6. Auricula Vrsi flore obsoleto magno. The Spaniards blush Beares eare. This great Beares eare hath as large leaues as any other of this kindred whatsoeuer, and whitish or mealy withall, somewhat snipt about the edges, as many other of them are: the flowers stand at the toppe of a strong and tall stalke, larger then any of the o∣ther that I haue seene, being of a duskie blush colour, resembling the blush of a Spani∣ard, whose tawney skinne cannot declare so pure a blush as the English can; and there∣fore I haue called it the Spaniards blush. 7. Auricula Vrsi flore rubello. Scarlet or light red Beares eares. The leaues of this kinde are very like the leaues of the first purple kinde, but that they are not so thicke; of a little paler greene colour, and little or nothing snipt about the edges: the flowers are of a bright, but pale reddish colour, not halfe so deepe as the two last with white circles in the bottomes of them, in other things this differeth not from others. 8. Auricula Vrsi Roseo colore. The Rose coloured Beares eare. We haue another, whose leafe is a little mealy, almost as large as any of the former, whose flowers are of a light red colour, very neare the colour of an ordinary Damaske Rose, with a white eye at the bottome. 9. Auricula Vrsi flore caeruleo folio Boraginis. Blew Beares eares with Borage leaues.
This plant is referred to the kindred or family of the Beares eares, onely for the forme of the flower sake, which euen therein it doth not assimilate to the halfe; but because it hath passed others with that title, I am content to insert it here, to giue you 1 Auricula Vrsi flore purpureo. Purple Cowslips or Beares eares. 2 Auricula Vrsi flore annetto. Tawney Beares eare. 3 Au∣ricula Vrsi flore & folio Boraginis. Blew Beares eares with Borage leaues. 4 Auricula Vrsi flore carneo Blush Beares eare. 5 Auricula Vrsi maxima lutea flore eleganti. The greatest faire yellow Beares eares with eyes. 6 Auricula Vrsi altera flore luteo. The yellow Beares eare. 7 Auricula Vrsi crinis coloris siue flore fusco. The haire coloured Beares eare. 8 Cortusa Matthioli. Beares eare Sanicle. depiction of flowers
the knowledge thereof, and rather to satisfie others then my selfe with the place there∣of: the description whereof is as followeth: It hath diuers broad rough hairy leaues spread vpon the ground, somewhat like vnto the leaues of Borage for the roughnesse, but not for the largenesse; the leaues hereof being somewhat rent in some places at the edges: from among these leaues rise vp one, or two, or more brownish, round, and hairy stalkes, a span high or thereabouts, bearing at the toppes three or foure flowers a peece, consisting of fiue large pointed leaues, of a faire blew or light azur colour, with some small yellow threads in the middle, standing in small greene cups: the roote is long and brownish, hauing many small fibres annexed vnto it. 10. Auricula Vrsi maior flore albo. The great white Beares eare. This white Beares eare hath many faire whitish greene leaues, somewhat paler then the leaues of any of the kindes of Beares eares, and a little snipt about the ends, as ma∣nie other are: among these leaues rise vp stalkes foure or fiue inches high, bearing at the toppe many flowers like vnto the small yellow Beares eare hereafter set downe, of a pale whitish colour, tending to yellow at the first opening of the flower, which after two or three dayes change into a faire white colour, and so continue all the while it flowreth: the roote is like the purple kinde, as all or most of the rest are, or very little differing. 11. Auricula Vrsi minor flore albo. The lesser white Beares eare. The lesser Beares eare hath smaller leaues, of a little darker green colour: the stalke and flowers are likewise lesser then the former, and haue no shew of yellownesse at all, eyther in budde or flower, but is pure white, differing not in other things from the rest. 12. Auricula Vrsi maxima lutea flore eleganti. The greatest faire yellow Beares eare with eyes. This yellow Beares eare hath many faire large thicke leaues, somewhat mealy or hoary vpon the greennesse, being larger then any other kinde, except the sixth, and the next yellow that followeth, smooth about the edges, and without any endenting at all: the stalke is great, round, and not higher then in other of the former, but bearing ma∣nie more flowers thereon then in any other kinde, to the number of thirty many times, standing so round and close together, that they seeme to be a Nosegay alone, of the same fashion with the former, but that the leaues are shorter and rounder, yet with a notch in the middle like the rest, of a faire yellow colour, neither very pale nor deepe, with a white eye or circle in the bottome, about the middle of euery flower, which giueth it the greater grace: the seede is of a blackish browne colour, like vnto others, but contained in greater round heads then any other, with a small pointell sticking in the middle: the roote is greater and thicker then any other, with long strings or fibres like vnto the other sorts, but greater. 13. Auricula Vrsi maior lutea folio in cauo. The greater yellow Beares eare. This greater yellow Beares eare hath his leaues larger, and more mealy or hoarie then the last, or any other of these kindes: the flowers are not so many, but longer, and not so thicke thrusting together as the first, but of a deeper yellow colour, without any eye or circle in the middle. 14. Auricula Vrsi maior flore pallido. The great Straw coloured Beares eare. This hath almost as mealy leaues as the last, but nothing so large; the flowers are of a faire strawe colour, with a white circle at the bottome of them, these three last haue no shew or shadow of any other colour in any part of the edge, as some others that follow haue.
15. Auricula Vrsi minor flore pallente. The lesser straw coloured Beares eare. We haue another, whose leafe is lesse mealy, or rather pale green, and a little mealy withall; the flowers whereof are of a paler yellow colour then the last, and beareth al∣most as many vpon a stalke as the first great yellow. 16. Auricula Vrsi minor lutea. The lesser yellow Beares eares. The leaues of this Beares eare are nothing so large as either of the three former yel∣low kindes, but rather of the bignesse of the first white kinde, but yet a little larger, thicker, and longer then it, hauing vnder the greennesse a small shew of mealinesse, and somewhat snipt about the edges: the flowers are of a pale yellow colour, with a little white bottome in them: the seed and rootes are like vnto the other kindes. 17. Auricula Vrsi flore flauo. The deepe yellow or Cowslip Beares eare. This kinde hath somewhat larger leaues then the last, of a yellowish greene colour, without any mealinesse on them, or endenting about the edges, but smooth and whole: the flowers are not larger but longer, and not laide open so fully as the former, but of as deepe a yellow colour as any Cowslip almost, without any circle in the bottome: neither of these two last haue any shew of other colour then yellow in them, sauing the white in the eye. 18. Auricula Vrsi versicolor prima siue flore rubescente. The blush Beares eare. The blush Beares eare hath his leaues as large, and as hoary or mealy as the third greater yellow, or straw coloured Beares eare; among which riseth vp a stalke about foure inches high, bearing from six to twelue, or more faire flowers, somewhat larger then the smaller yellow Beares eare before described, hauing the ground of the flower of a darke or dunne yellow colour, shadowed ouer a little with a shew of light purple, which therefore we call a blush colour, the edges of the flower being ript with a little deeper shew of that purple colour, the bottome of the flower abiding wholly yellow, without any circle, and is of very great beauty, which hath caused me to place it in the forefront of the variable coloured Beares eares. And although some might thinke it should be placed among the first ranke of Beares eares, because it is of a blush colour, yet seeing it is assuredly gained from some of the yellow kindes by sowing the seede, as many other sorts are, as may be seene plainly in the ground of the flower, which is yellow, and but shadowed ouer with purple, yet more then any of the rest that follow; I thinke I haue giuen it his right place: let others of skill & experience be iudges herein. 19. Auricula Vrsi crinis coloris. Haire coloured Beares eares. The leaues of this kinde are more mealy like then the last blush kinde, but somewhat longer and larger, and snipt about the edges in the same manner, from the middle of the leafe forwards: the flower is vsually of a fine light browne yellow colour, which wee doe vsually call an Haire colour, and sometimes browner, the edges of the flower haue a shew or shadow of a light purple or blush about them, but more on the outside then on the inside. 20. Auricula Vrsi versicolor lutea. The yellow variable Beares eare. This variable Beares eare hath his greene leaues somewhat like vnto the deepe yel∣low, or Cowslip Beares eare before described, but somewhat of a fresher greene, more shining and smaller, and snipt about the edges towards the ends, as many of those be∣fore are: the flowers are of a faire yellow colour, much laid open when it is full blowne, that it seemeth almost flat, dasht about the edges onely with purple, being more yellow in the bottome of the flower, then in any other part.
21. Auricula Vrsi versicolor lutescente viridi flore. The variable green Beares eare. This kinde of Beares eare hath greene leaues, very like vnto the last described, and snipt in the like manner about the edges, but in this it differeth, that his leaues do turne or fold themselues a little backwards: the flowers are of a yellowish greene colour, more closed then the former, hauing purplish edges, especially after they haue stood blowne some time, and haue little or none at the first opening: these haue no circles at all in them. Many other varieties are to be found, with those that are curious conseruers of these delights of nature, either narurally growing on the mountaines in seuerall places, from whence they (being searched out by diuers) haue been taken and brought, or else raised from the seede of some of them, as it is more probable: for seuerall varieties haue beene obserued (and no doubt many of these before specified) to bee gotten by sowing of the seedes, euery yeare lightly shewing a diuersity, not obserued before, ei∣ther in the leafe, diuers from that from whence it was taken, or in the flowers. I haue onely set downe those that haue come vnder mine owne view, and not any by relation, euen as I doe with all or most of the things contained in this worke. The Place. Many of these goodly plants growe naturally on mountaines, especially the Alpes, in diuers places; for some kindes that growe in some places, doe not in others, but farre distant one from the other. There hath likewise some beene found on the Pyrenaean mountaines, but that kinde with the blew flower and Borage leafe, hath beene gathered on the mountaines in Spaine, and on the Pyrenaeans next vnto Spaine. The Time. They all flower in Aprill and May, and the seede is ripe in the end of Iune, or beginning of Iuly, and sometimes they will flower againe in the end of Summer, or in Autumne, if the yeare proue temperate, moist, and rainie. The Names. It is very probable, that none of these plants were euer knowne vnto the ancient Writers, because we cannot be assured, that they may be truely re∣ferred vnto any plant that they name, vnlesse we beleeue Fabius Columna, that it should be Alisma of Dioscorides, for thereunto hee doth referre it. Diuers of the later Writers haue giuen vnto them diuers names, euery one according to his owne conceit. For Gesner calleth it Lunaria arthritica, and Paralytica Alpina. Matthiolus accounteth it to bee of the kindred of the Sanicles, and saith, that in his time it was called by diuers Herbarists, Auri∣cula Vrsi, which name hath since bin receiued as most vsuall. We in English call them Beares eares, according to the Latine, or as they are called by di∣uers women, French Cowslips; they may be called Mountaine Cowslips, if you will, for to distinguish betweene them and other Cowslips, whereof these are seuerall kindes. Sanicula Alpina siue Cortusa Matthioli. Beares eare Sanicle.
I cannot chuse but insert this delicate plant in the end of the Beares eares, for that it is of so neare affinity, although it differ much in the forme of the leaues, the descrip∣tion whereof is in this manner: The leaues that spring vp first are much crumpled, and as it were folded together, which afterwards open themselues into faire, broad, and roundish leaues, somewhat rough or hairy, not onely cut into fine diuisions, but some∣what notched also about the edges, of a darke greene colour on the vpperside, and  more whitish greene vnderneath; amongst these leaues riseth vp one or two naked round stalkes, fiue or six inches high, bearing at the toppes diuers small flowers, some∣what sweete, like vnto the first purple Beares eare, hanging downe their heads, cons∣sting of fiue small pointed leaues a peece, of a darke reddish purple colour, with a white circle or bottome in the middle, and some small threads therein: after the flow∣ers are past, there come small round heads, somewhat longer then any of the Beares eares, standing vpright vpon their small foot-stalkes, wherein is contained small round and blackish seede: the roote consisteth of a thicke tuft of small whitish threads, ra∣ther then rootes, much enterlaced one among another: the leaues of this plant dye downe euery yeare, and spring vp a new in the beginning of the yeare, whereas all the Beares eares doe hold their leaues greene all the Winter, especially the middlemost, which stand like a close head, the outermost for the most part perishing after seed time. The Place. This groweth in many shadowie Woods both of Italy and Germany; for both Clusius hath described it, finding it in the Woods of Austria and Stiria; and Matthiolus setteth it downe, hauing receiued it from Anthonius Cortusus, who was President of the Garden at Padua, and found it in the woody mountaines of Vicenza, neare vnto Villestagna, whereon (as Mat∣thiolus saith) there is found both with white flowers as well as with blew, but such with white flowers or blew we neuer could see or heare further of. The Time. It flowreth much about the time of the Beares eares, or rather a little la∣ter, and the seede is ripe with them. The Names. Clusius calleth it Sanicula montana, and Sanicula, Alpina, and referreth it to the Auricula Vrsi, or Beares eare, which it doth most nearly resemble: but Matthiolus referreth it to the Cariophyllata or Auens, making it to be of that tribe or family, and calleth it Cortusa of him that first sent it him. Wee may call it eyther Cortusa, as for the most part all Herbarists doe, or Beares eare Sanicle as Gerrard doth. The Vertues. All the sorts of Beares eares are Cephalicall, that is, conducing helpe for the paines in the head, and for the giddinesse thereof, which may happen, eyther by the sight of steepe places subiect to danger, or otherwise. They are accounted also to be helping for the Palsey, and shaking of the ioynts; and also as a Sanicle or wound-herbe. The leaues of the Cortusa taste a lit∣tle hot, and if one of them bee laide whole, without bruising, on the cheeke of any tender skind woman, it will raise an orient red colour, as if some fucus had beene laide thereon, which will passe away without any manner of harme, or marke where it lay: This is Cortusus his obserua∣tion. Camerarius in his Hortus Medicus saith, that an oyle is made thereof, that is admirable for to cure wounds.
CHAP. XXXV. Primula veris & Paralysis. Primroses and Cowslips. WE haue so great variety of Primroses and Cowslips of our owne Country breeding, that strangers being much delighted with them, haue beene often furnished into diuers Countries, to their good content: And that I may set them downe in some methodicall manner, as I haue done other things, I will first set downe all the sorts of those we call Primroses, both single and double, and af∣terwards the Cowslips with their diuersities, in as ample manner as my knowledge can direct me. And yet I know, that the name of Primula veris or Primrose is indiffe∣rently conferred vpon those that I distinguish for Paralyses or Cowslips. I doe there∣fore for your better vnderstanding of my distinction betweene Primroses and Cow∣slips, call those onely Primroses that carry but one flower vpon a stalke, be they single or double, except that of Master Hesket, and that with double flowers many vpon a stalke, set out in Gerards Herball, which is his onely, not found (as I thinke) in rerum natura, I am sure, such a one I could neuer heare of: And those Cowslips, that beare many flowers vpon a stalke together constantly, be they single or double also. I might otherwise distinguish them also by the leafe; that all the Primroses beare their long and large broad yellowish greene leaues, without stalkes most vsually; and all the Cowslips haue small stalkes vnder the leaues, which are smaller, and of a darker greene, as vsually, but that this distinction is neither so certaine and generall, nor so well knowne. 1. Primula veris flore albo. The single white Primrose. The Primrose that groweth vnder euery bush or hedge, in all or most of the Woods, Groues, and Orchards of this Kingdome, I may well leaue to his wilde habitation, being not so fit for a Garden, and so well knowne, that I meane not to giue you any further relation thereof: But we haue a kinde hereof which is somewhat smaller, and beareth milke white flowers, without any shew of yellownesse in them, and is more vsually brought into Gardens for the rarity, and differeth not from the wilde or ordi∣nary kinde, either in roote or leafe, or any thing else, yet hauing those yellow spots, but smaller, and not so deepe, as are in the other wilde kinde. 2. Primula veris flore viridi simplici. The single greene Primrose. The single greene Primrose hath his leaues very like vnto the greater double Prim∣rose, but smaller, and of a sadder greene colour: the flowers stand seuerally vpon long foot-stalkes, as the first single kinde doth, but larger then they, and more laide open, of the same, or very neare the same yellowish greene colour that the huske is of, so that at the first opening, the huske and the flower seeme to make one double greene flower, which afterwards separating themselues, the single flower groweth aboue the huske, and spreadeth it selfe open much more then any other single Primrose doth, growing in the end to be of a paler greene colour. 3. Primula veris flore viridante & albo simplici. The single greene and white Primrose. The leaues of this differ in a manner nothing from the former, neither doth the flower but only in this, that out of the large yellowish green huskes, which contain the flowers of the former, there commeth forth out of the middle of each of them either a small peece of a whitish flower, or else a larger, sometimes making vp a whole flower, like an ordinary Primrose. 4. Primula veris flore viridi duplici. The double greene Primrose.
This double Primrose is in his leaues so like the former single greene kindes, that 1 Primula veris flore albo. The white Primrose. 2 Primula veris flore viridi & albo simplici. The green and white Primrose. 3 Primula veris flore virid duplies. The double green Primrose. 4 Primula veris Hesketi. Master Heskets double Primrose. 5 Primula veris flore pleno vulgaris. The ordinary double Primrose. 6 Paralysis veris flore viridante simplici. The single green Cowslip. 7 Paralysis flore geminato odorato Double Cowslips or hose in hose. 8 Paralysis inodora flore geminato. Double Oxelips hose in hose. 9 Paralysis flore & calice crispo. Curld Cowslips or Gaskins. 10 Paralysis minor angustifolia flore rubro. Red Birds eyen. 11 Paralysis hortensis flore pleno vulgaris. Double Paigles. 12 Paralysis satu. The foolish Cowslip, or lacke an Apo on horse backe. 13 Paralysis flore viridi roseo calamistrate. The double greene feathered Cowslip. depiction of flowers
the one cannot be knowne from the other vntill it come to flower, and then it beareth vpon euery stalke a double green flower, of a little deeper green colour then the flower of the former single kinde consisting but of two rowes of short leaues most vsually, and both of an equall height aboue the huske, abiding a pretty time in flower, especi∣ally if it stand in any shadowed place, or where the Sun may come but a while vnto it. 5. Primula veris Hesketi flore multiplici separatim diuiso. Master Heskets double Primrose. Master Heskets double Primrose is very like vnto the small double Primrose, both in leafe, roote, and heigth of growing, the stalke not rising much higher then it, but bearing flowers in a farre different manner; for this beareth not only single flowers vpon seuerall stalkes, but somtimes two or three single flowers vpon one stalk, and also at the same time a bigger stalke, and somewhat higher, hauing one greene huske at the toppe thereof, sometimes broken on the one side, and sometimes whole, in the middle whereof standeth sometimes diuers single flowers, thrust together, euery flower to be seene in his proper forme, and sometimes there appeare with some whole flowers o∣thers that are but parts of flowers, as if the flowers were broken in peeces, and thrust into one huske, the leaues of the flowers (being of a white or pale Primrose colour, but a little deeper) seldome rising aboue the height of the very huske it selfe; and sometimes, as I haue obserued in this plant, it will haue vpon the same stalke, that bea∣reth such flowers as I haue here described vnto you, a small flower or two, making the stalke seeme branched into many flowers, whereby you may perceiue, that it will vary into many formes, not abiding constant in any yeare, as all the other sorts doe. 6. Primula hortensis flore pleno vulgaris. The ordinary double Primrose. The leaues of this Primrose are very large, and like vnto the single kind, but some∣what larger, because it groweth in gardens: the flowers doe stand euery one seuerally vpon slender long footestalkes, as the single kinde doth, in greenish huskes of a pale yellow colour, like vnto the field Primrose, but very thicke and double, and of the same sweete sent with them. 7. Primula veris flore duplici. The small double Primrose. This Primrose is both in leafe, roote, and flower, altogether like vnto the last double Primrose, but that it is smaller in all things; for the flower riseth not aboue two or three fingers high, and but twice double, that is, with two rowes of leaues, yet of the very same Primrose colour that the former is of. 8. Paralysis vulgaris pratensis flore flauo simplici odorato. The Common field Cowslip. The common fielde Cowslip I might well forbeare to set downe, being so plentifull in the fields: but because many take delight in it, and plant it in their gardens, I will giue you the description of it here. It hath diuers green leaues, very like vnto the wilde Primrose, but shorter, rounder, stiffer, rougher, more crumpled about the edges, and of a sadder greene colour, euery one standing vpon his stalke, which is an inch or two long: among the leaues rise vp diuers round stalkes, a foote or more high, bearing at the toppe many faire yellow single flowers, with spots of a deeper yellow, at the but∣tome of each leafe, smelling very sweete. The rootes are like to the other Primroses, hauing many fibres annexed to the great roote. 9. Paralysis altera odorata flore pallido polyanthos. The Primrose Cowslip.
The leaues of this Cowslip are larger then the ordinary fielde Cowslip, and of a darke yellowish greene colour: the flowers are many standing together, vpon the toppes of the stalkes, to the number of thirty sometimes vpon one stalke, as I haue counted them in mine owne Garden, and sometimes more, euery one hauing a longer  foote stalke then the former, and of as pale a yellowish colour almost as the fielde Primrose, with yellow spots at the bottome of the leaues, as the ordinary hath, and of as sweet a sent. 10. Paralysis flore viridante simplici. The single greene Cowslip. There is little difference in leafe or roote of this from the first Cowslip, the chiefest varietie in this kinde is this, that the leaues are somewhat greener, and the flowers be∣ing in all respects like in forme vnto the first kinde, but somewhat larger, are of the same colour with the greene huskes, or rather a little yellower, and of a very small sent; in all other things I finde no diuersitie, but that it standeth much longer in flower before it fadeth, especially if it stand out of the Sunne. 11. Paralysis flore & calice crispo. Curl'd Cowslips or Gallegaskins. There is another kinde, whose flowers are folded or crumpled at the edges, and the huskes of the flowers bigger than any of the former, more swelling out in the middle, as it were ribbes, and crumpled on the sides of the huskes, which doe somewhat resemble mens hose that they did weare, and tooke the name of Gallegaskins from thence. 12. Paralysis flore geminato odorato. Double Cowslips one within another, or Hose in Hose. The only difference of this kinde from the ordinary field Cowslip is, that it beareth one single flower out of another, which is as a greene huske, of the like sent that the first hath, or somewhat weaker. 13. Paralysis flore flauo simplici inodoro absque calicibus. Single Oxe lippes. This kinde of Cowslip hath leaues much like the ordinary kinde, but somewhat smaller: the flowers are yellow like the Cowslip, but smaller, standing many vpon a stalke, but bare or naked, that is, without any huske to containe them, hauing but little or no sent at all; nor differing in any thing else from the ordinary Cowslip. 14. Paralysis flore geminato inodora. Double Oxelips Hose in Hose. As the former double Cowslip had his flowers one within another, in the very like manner hath this kinde of Cowslip or Oxelippe, sauing that this hath no huske to containe them, no more then the former single Oxelippe hath, standing bare or naked, of the very same bignesse each of them, and of the same deepe yellow colour with it, hauing as small a sent as the former likewise. Wee haue another of this kinde, whose leaues are somewhat larger,Flore pallidiore and so are the flowers also, but of a paler yellow colour. 15. Paralysis inodora calicibus dissectis. Oxelips with iagged huskes. This kinde differeth not from the first Oxelip in the smalnesse of the greene leaues, but in the flower, which standing many together on a reasonable high stalke, and being very small and yellow, scarce opening themselues or layde abroade as it, hath a greene huske vnder each flower, but diuided into sixe seuerall small long peeces. 16. Paralysis flore fatuo. The Franticke, or Foolish Cowslip: Or Iacke an apes on horse backe. Wee haue in our gardens another kinde, not much differing in leaues from the for∣mer Cowslip, and is called Fantasticke or Foolish, because it beareth at the toppe of the stalke a bush or tuft of small long greene leaues, with some yellow leaues, as it were peeces of flowers broken, and standing among the greene leaues. And sometimes
some stalkes among those greene leaues at the toppe (which are a little larger then when it hath but broken peeces of flowers) doe carry whole flowers in huskes like the single kinde. 17. Paralysis minor flore rubro. Red Birds eyes. This little Cowslippe (which will hardly endure in our gardens, for all the care and industrie we can vse to keepe it) hath all the Winter long, and vntill the Spring begin to come on, his leaues so closed together, that it seemeth a small white head of leaues, which afterwards opening it selfe, spreadeth round vpon the ground, and hath small long and narrow leaues, snipt about the edges, of a pale greene colour on the vpper∣side, & very white or mealy vnderneath, among these leaues rise vp one or two stalks, small & hoary, halfe a foot high, bearing at the top a bush or tuft of much smaller flow∣ers, standing vpon short foot stalkes, some what like vnto Cowslips, but more like vnto the Beares eares, of a fine reddish purple colour, in some deeper, in others paler, with a yellowish circle in the bottomes of the flowers, like vnto many of the Beares eares, of a faint or small sent: the seede is smaller than in any of the former kindes, and so are the rootes likewise, being small, white and threddy. 18. Paralyis minor flore albo. White Birds eyes. This kinde differeth very little or nothing from the former, sauing that it seemeth a little larger both in leafe and flower, and that the flowers hereof are wholly white, without any great appearance of any circle in the bottome of them, vnlesse it be well obserued, or at least being nothing so conspicuous, as in the former. Flore geminato.These two kindes haue sometimes, but very seldome, from among the middle of the flowers on the stalke, sent out another small stalke, bearing flowers theron likewise. 19. Paralysis hortensis flore pleno. Double Paigles or Cowslips. The double Paigle or Cowslip hath smaller and darker greene leaues then the sin∣gle kinde hath, and longer stalkes also whereon the leaues doe stand: it beareth diuers flowers vpon a stalke, but not so many as the single kinde, euery one whereof is of a deeper and fairer yellow colour then any of the former, standing not much aboue the brimmes of the huskes that hold them, consisting of two or three rowes of leaues set round together, which maketh it shew very thicke and double, of a prettie small sent, but not heady. 20. Paralysis flore viridante pleno. Double greene Cowslips. This double greene Cowslip is so like vnto the single greene kinde formerly ex∣pressed, that vntill they be neare flowring, they can hardly be distinguished: but when it is in flower, it hath large double flowers, of the same yellowish greene colour with the single, and more laid open then the former double Paigle. 21. Paralysis flore viridante siue calamistrato. The greene Rose Cowslip, or double greene feathered Cowslip. There is small difference in the leaues of this double kinde from the last, but that they are not of so darke a greene: the chiefest difference consisteth in the flowers, which are many, standing together at the toppes of the stalkes, but farre differing from all other of these kindes: for euery flower standing vpon his owne stalke, is composed of many very small and narrow leaues, without any huske to containe them, but spreading open like a little Rose, of a pale yellowish greene colour, and without any sent at all, abiding in flower, especially if it stand in a shadowie place out of the sunne, aboue two moneths, almost in as perfect beauty, as in the first weeke. The Place.
All these kindes as they haue been found wilde, growing in diuers places  in England, so they haue been transplanted into Gardens, to be there nouri∣shed for the delight of their louers, where they all abide, and grow fairer then in their naturall places, except the small Birds eyes, which will (as I said) hardly abide any culture, but groweth plentifully in all the North Countries, in their squally or wet grounds. The Time. These doe all flower in the Spring of the yeare, some earlier and some later, and some in the midst of Winter, as they are defended from the colds and frosts, and the mildnesse of the time will permit: yet the Cowslips doe alwayes flower later then the Primroses, and both the single and double greene Cowslips latest, as I said in their descriptions, and abide much after all the rest. The Names. All these plants are called most vsually in Latine, Primulae veris, Primulae pratenses, and Primulae siluarum, because they shew by their flowring the new Spring to bee comming on, they being as it were the first Embassadours thereof. They haue also diuers other names, as Herba Paralysis, Arthritica, Herba Sancti Petri, Claues Sancti Petri, Verbasculum odoratum, Lunaria arthri∣tica, Phlomis, Alisma siluarum, and Alismatis alterum genus, as Fabius Co∣lumna calleth them. The Birds eyes are called of Lobel in Latine, Paraly∣tica Alpina, Sanicula angustifolia, making a greater and a lesser. Others call them Sanicula angustifolia but generally they are called Primula veris minor. I haue (as you see) placed them with the Cowslips, putting a difference be∣tweene Primroses and Cowslips. And some haue distinguished them, by calling the Cowslips, Primula veris Elatior, that is, the Taller Primrose, and the other Humilis, Lowe or Dwarfe Primroses. In English they haue in like manner diuers names, according to seuerall Countries, as Primroses, Cow∣slips, Oxelips, Palsiewort, and Petty Mulleins. The first kindes, which are lower then the rest, are generally called by the name of Primroses (as I thinke) throughout England. The other are diuersly named; for in some Countries they call them Paigles, or Palsieworts, or Petty Mulleins, which are called Cowslips in others. Those are vsually called Oxelips, whose flowers are naked, or bare without huskes to containe them, being not so sweete as the Cowslip, yet haue they some little sent, although the Latine name doth make them to haue none. The Franticke, Fantasticke, or Foolish Cowslip, in some places is called by Country people, Iacke an Apes on horse-backe, which is an vsuall name with them, giuen to many other plants, as Daisies, Marigolds, &c. if they be strange or fantasticall, diffe∣ring in the forme from the ordinary kinde of the single ones. The smallest are vsually called through all the North Country, Birds eyen, because of the small yellow circle in the bottomes of the flowers, resembling the eye of a bird. The Vertues. Primroses and Cowslips are in a manner wholly vsed in Cephalicall dis∣eases, either among other herbes or flowers, or of themselues alone, to ease paines in the head, and is accounted next vnto Betony, the best for that pur∣pose. Experience likewise hath shewed, that they are profitable both for the Palsie, and paines of the ioynts, euen as the Beares eares are, which hath caused the names of Arthritica, Paralysis, and Paralytica, to bee giuen them. The iuice of the flowers is commended to cleanse the spots or marks of the face, whereof some Gentlewomen haue found good experience.
CHAP. XXXVI. Pulmonaria. Lungwort, or Cowslips of Ierusalem. ALthough these plants are generally more vsed as Pot-herbes for the Kitchen, then as flowers for delight, yet because they are both called Cowslips, and are of like forme, but of much lesse beauty, I haue ioyned them next vnto them, in a distinct Chapter by themselues, and so may passe at this time. 1. Pulmonaria maculosa. Common spotted Cowslips of Ierusalem. The Cowslip of Ierusalem hath many rough, large, and round leaues, but pointed at the ends, standing vpon long foot stalkes, spotted with many round white spots on the vppersides of the sad greene or browne leaues, and of a grayer greene vnderneath: among the leaues spring vp diuers browne stalkes, a foote high, bearing many flowers at the toppe, very neare resembling the flowers of Cowslips, being of a purple or red∣dish colour while they are buds, and of a darke blewish colour when they are blowne, standing in brownish greene huskes, and sometimes it hath beene found with white flowers: when the flowers are past, there come vp small round heads, containing blacke seed: the roote is composed of many long and thicke blacke strings. 2. Pulmonaria altera non maculosa. Vnspotted Cowslips of Ierusalem. The leaues of this other kinde are not much vnlike the former, being rough as they are, but smaller, of a fairer greene colour aboue, and of a whiter greene vnderneath, without any spots at all vpon the leaues: the flowers also are like the former, and of the same colour, but a little more branched vpon the stalkes then the former: the rootes also are blacke like vnto them. 3. Pulmonaria angustifolia. Narrow leafed Cowslips of Ierusalem. The leaues hereof are somewhat longer, but not so broad, and spotted with whitish spots also as the former: the stalke hereof is set with the like long hairy leaues, but smaller, being a foote high or better, bearing at the toppe many flowers, standing in huskes like the first, being somewhat reddish in the bud, and of a darke purplish blew colour when they are blowne open: the seede is like the former, all of them doe well resemble Buglosse and Comfrey in most parts, except the roote, which is not like them, but stringie, like vnto Cowslips, yet blacke. The Place. The Cowslips of Ierusalem grow naturally in the Woods of Germany, in diuers places, and the first kinde in England also, found out by Iohn Goodier, a great searcher and louer of plants, dwelling at Maple-durham in Hampshire. The Time. They flower for the most part very early, that is, in the beginning of Aprill. The Names. They are generally called in Latine, Pulmonaria, and maculosa, or non ma∣culosa, is added for distinctions sake. Of some it is called Symphitum macu∣losum, that is, spotted Comfrey. In English it is diuersly called; as spotted Cowslips of Ierusalem, Sage of Ierusalem, Sage of Bethlehem, Lungwort,
and spotted Comfrey, and it might bee as fitly called spotted Buglosse, whereunto it is as like as vnto Comfrey, as I said before. The Vertues. It is much commended of some, to bee singular good for vlcered lungs, that are full of rotten matter. As also for them that spit bloud, being boy∣led and drunke. It is of greatest vse for the pot, being generally held to be good, both for the lungs and the heart. CHAP. XXXVII. 1. Buglossum & Borrago. Buglosse and Borage. ALthough Borage and Buglosse might as fitly haue been placed, I confesse, in the Kitchen Garden, in regard they are wholly in a manner spent for Physi∣call properties, or for the Pot, yet because anciently they haue been entertai∣ned into Gardens of pleasure, their flowers hauing been in some respect, in that they haue alwaies been enterposed among the flowers of womens needle-worke, I am more willing to giue them place here, then thrust them into obscurity, and take such of their tribe with them also as may fit for this place, either for beauty or rarity. The Garden Buglosse and Borage are so well knowne vnto all, that I shall (I doubt) but spend time in waste to describe them; yet not vsing to passe ouer any thing I name and appropriate to this Garden so sleightly, they are thus to bee knowne: Buglosse hath many long, narrow, hairy, or rough sad greene leaues, among which rise vp two or three very high stalks, branched at the top, whereon stand many blew flowers, consi∣sting of fiue small round pointed leaues, with a small pointell in the middle, which are very smooth, shining, and of a reddish purple while they are buds, and not blowne o∣pen, which being fallen, there groweth in the greene huske, wherein the flower stood, three or foure roundish blacke seedes, hauing that thread or pointell standing still in the middle of them: the roote is blacke without, and whitish within, long, thicke, and full of slimie iuice (as the leaues are also) and perisheth not euery yeare, as the roote of Borage doth. 2. Borrago. Borage. Borage hath broader, shorter, greener, and rougher leaues then Buglosse, the stalkes hereof are not so high, but branched into many parts, whereon stand larger flowers, and more pointed at the end then Buglosse, and of a paler blew colour for the most part (yet sometimes the flowers are reddish, and sometimes pure white) each of the flowers consisting of fiue leaues, standing in a round hairy whitish huske, diuided into fiue parts, and haue a small vmbone of fiue blackish threads in the middle, standing out pointed at the end, and broad at the bottome: the seed is like the other: the root is thicker and shorter then the roote of Buglosse, somewhat blackish without also, and whitish within, and perisheth after seede time, but riseth of it owne seede fallen, and springeth in the beginning of the yeare. 3. Borrago semper virens. Euerliuing Borage. Euerliuing Borage hath many broad greene leaues, and somewhat rough, more re∣sembling Comfrey then Borage, yet not so large as either; the stalkes are not so high as Borage, and haue many small blew flowers on them, very like to the flowers of Buglosse for the forme, and Borage for the colour: the rootes are blacke, thicker then either of them, somewhat more spreading, and not perishing, hauing greene leaues all the Winter long, and thereupon tooke his name.
4. Anchusa. Sea Buglosse or Alkanet. The Sea Buglosse or Alkanet hath many long, rough, narrow, and dark greene leaues, spread vpon the ground (yet some that growe by the Sea side are rather hoarie and whitish) among these leaues riseth vp a stalke, spread at the toppe into many bran∣ches, whereon stand the flowers in tufts, like vnto the Garden Buglosse, or rather Comfrey, but lesser; in some plants of a reddish blew colour, and in others more red or purplish, and in others of a yellowish colour: after which come the seedes, very like vnto Buglosse, but somewhat longer and paler: the roote of most of them be∣ing transplanted, are somewhat blackish on the outside, vntill the later end of Sum∣mer, and then become more red: for those that grow wilde, will be then so red, that they will giue a very deepe red colour to those that handle them, which being dryed keepe that red colour, which is vsed to many purposes; the roote within being white, and hauing no red colour at all. 5. Limonium Rauwolfij. Marsh Buglosse. This Limonium (which I referre here to the kindes of Buglosse, as presuming it is the fittest place where to insert it) hath many long, narrow, and somewhat rough leaues lying vpon the ground, waued or cut in on both sides, like an Indenture, somewhat like the leaues of Ceterach or Miltwast, among which rise vp two or three stalkes, some∣what rough also, and with thin skinnes like wings, indented on both sides thereof also, like the leaues, hauing three small, long, rough, and three square leaues at euery ioynt where it brancheth forth; at the toppe whereof stand many flowers vpon their foote stalkes, in such a manner, as is not seene in any other plant, that I know: for although that some of the small winged foot stalkes are shorter, and some longer, standing as it were flatwise, or all on one side, and not round like an vmbell, yet are they euen at the toppe, and not one higher than another; each of which small foote stalkes doe beare foure or fiue greenish heads or huskes, ioyned together, out of each of which doe a∣rise other pale or bleake blew stiffe huskes, as if they were flowers, made as it were of parchment, which hold their colour after they are dry a long time; and out of these huskes likewise, doe come (at seuerall times one after another, and not all at one time or together) white flowers, consisting of fiue small round leaues, with some white threds in the middle: after these flowers are past, there come in their places small long seede, inclosed in many huskes, many of those heads being idle, not yeelding any good seede, but chaffe, especially in our Countrey, for the want of sufficient heate of the Sunne, as I take it: the roote is small, long, and blackish on the outside, and perish∣eth at the first approach of Winter. The Place. Borage and Buglosse grow onely in Gardens with vs, and so doth the Semper virens, his originall being vnknowne vnto vs. Alkanet or Sea Bug∣losse groweth neare the Sea, in many places of France, and Spaine, and some of the kindes also in England. But the Limonium or Marshe Buglosse groweth in Cales, and Malacca in Spaine, and is found also in Syria, as Rauwolfius relateth: and in other places also no doubt; for it hath beene sent vs out of Italie, many yeares before eyther Guillaume Boel found it in Cales, or Clusius in Malacca. The Time.
Borage and Buglosse doe flower in Iune, and Iuly, and sometimes sooner, and so doth the euer-liuing or neuer dying Borage, but not as Gerrard saith, flowring Winter and Summer, whereupon it should take his name, but lea∣ueth flowring in Autumne, and abideth greene with his leaues all the Win∣ter, 1 Pulmonaria latifolia maculosa. Cowslips of Ierusalem. 2 Pulmonaria angustifolia. Narrow leafed Cowslips of Ierusalem. 3 Borrago. Borage. 4 Borrago semper virens. Euerliuing Borage. 5 Anchusa. Sea Buglosse or Alkanet. 6 Limonium Rauwolfij. Marsh Buglosse. depiction of flowers
flowring the next Spring following. The other flower not vntill Iuly, and so continue, especially the Marshe Buglosse vntill September bee well spent, and then giueth seede, if early frosts ouertake it not; for it seldome commeth to be ripe. The Names. Our ordinary Borage by the consent of all the best moderne Writers, is the true Buglossum of Dioscorides, and that our Buglosse was vnknowne to the ancients. The Borago semper virens, Lobel calleth Buglossum semper vi∣rens, that is, Euer-liuing, or greene Buglosse: but it more resembleth Bo∣rage then Buglosse; yet because Buglosse abideth greene, to auoyde that there should not be two Buglossa semper virentia, I had rather call it Borage then Buglosse. Anchusa hath diuers names, as Dioscorides setteth downe. And some doe call it Fucus herba, from the Greeke word, because the roote giuing so deepe a colour, was vsed to dye or paint the skinne. Others call it Buglossum Hispanicum, in English Alkanet, and of some Orchanet, after the French. Limonium was found by Leonhartus Rauwolfius, neere vnto Iop∣pa, which he setteth downe in the second Chapter of the third booke of his trauayles, and from him first knowne to these parts: I haue, as you see, referred it to the kindes of Buglosse, for that the flowers haue some resem∣blance vnto them, although I know that Limonium genuinum is referred to the Beetes. Let it therefore here finde a place of residence, vntill you or I can finde a fitter; and call it as you thinke best, eyther Limonium as Rau∣wolfius doth, or Marshe Buglosse as I doe, or if you can adde a more pro∣per name, I shall not be offended. The Vertues. Borage and Buglosse are held to bee both temperate herbes, beeing vsed both in the pot and in drinkes that are cordiall, especially the flowers, which of Gentlewomen are candid for comfitts. The Alkanet is drying, and held to be good for wounds, and if a peece of the roote be put into a little oyle of Peter or Petroleum, it giueth as deepe a colour to the oyle, as the Hype∣ricon doth or can to his oyle, and accounted to be singular good for a cut or greene wound. The Limonium hath no vse that wee know, more then for a Garden; yet as Rauwolfius saith, the Syrians vse the leaues as sallats at the Table. CHAP. XXXVIII. Lychnis. Campions. THere bee diuers sorts of Campions, as well tame as wilde, and although some of them that I shall here entreate of, may peraduenture be found wilde in our owne Countrey, yet in regard of their beautifull flowers, they are to bee re∣spected, and noursed vp with the rest, to furnish a garden of pleasure; as for the wilde kindes, I will leaue them for another discourse. 1. Lychnis Coronaria rubra simplex. The single red Rose Campion. The single red Rose Campion hath diuers thicke, hoary, or woolly long greene leaues, abiding greene all the winter, and in the end of the spring or beginning of sum∣mer, shooteth forth two or three hard round woolly stalkes, with some ioynts thereon, and at euery ioynt two such like hoary greene leaues as those below, but smaller, diuersly branched at the toppe, hauing one flower vpon each seuerall long foot stalke,
consisting of fiue leaues, somewhat broade and round pointed, of a perfect red crim∣son colour, standing out of a hard long round huske, ridged or crested in foure or fiue places; after the flowers are fallen there come vp round hard heads, wherein is contai∣ned small blackish seed: the roote is small, long and wooddy, with many fibres an∣nexed vnto it, and shooteth forth anew oftentimes, yet perisheth often also. 2. Lychnis Coronaria alba simplex. The white Rose Campion. The white Rose Campion is in all things like the red, but in the colour of the flower, which in this is of a pure white colour. 3. Lichnis Coronaria albescens siue incarnata maculata & non maculata. The blush Rose Campion spotted and not spotted. Like vnto the former also are these other sorts, hauing no other difference to distin∣guish them, but the flowers, which are of a pale or bleake whitish blush colour, especi∣ally about the brims, as if a very little red were mixed with a great deale of white, the middle of the flower being more white; the one being spotted all ouer the flower, with small spots and streakes, the other not hauing any spot at all. 4. Lychnis Coronaria rubra multiplex. The double red Rose Campion. The double red Rose Campion is in all respects like vnto the single red kinde, but that this beareth double flowers, consisting of two or three rowes of leaues at the most, which are not so large as the single, and the whole plant is more tender, that is, more apt to perish, then any of the single kindes. 5. Lychnis Chalcedonica flore simplici miniato. Single Nonesuch, or Flower of Bristow, or Constantinople. This Campion of Constantinople hath many broad and long greene leaues, among which rise vp sundry stiffe round hairy ioynted stalks three foot high, with two leaues euery ioynt: the flowers stand at the toppes of them, very many together, in a large tuft or vmbell, consisting of fiue small long leaues, broade pointed, and notched-in in the middle, of a bright red orenge colour, which being past, there come in their places small hard whitish heads or seede vessels, containing blacke seede, like vnto the seede of sweet Williams, and hauing but a small sent; the roote is very stringie, faste∣ning it selfe very strongly in the ground, whereby it is much encreased. Of the single kinde there is also two or three other sorts,Flore albo. differing chiefly in the co∣lour of the flowers. The one is pure white. Another is of a blush colour wholly,Et carneo. without variation. And a third is very variable; for at the first it is of a pale red,Versicolor. and after a while groweth paler, vntill in the end it become almost fully white; and all these diuersities of the flowers are sometimes to bee seene on one stalke at one and the same time. 6. Lychnis Chalcedonica flore miniato pleno. Double Flower of Bristow, or Nonesuch. This glorious flower being as rare as it is beautifull, is for rootes beeing stringie, for leaues and stalkes being hairy and high, and for the flowers growing in tufts, al∣together like the first single kinde: but herein consisteth the chiefest difference, that this beareth a larger vmbell or tuft of flowers at the toppe of the stalke, euery flower consisting of three or foure rowes of leaues, of a deeper orenge colour then it, which addeth the more grace vnto it, but passeth away without bearing seede, as most other double flowers doe, yet recompenceth that defect with encrease from the roote. 7. Lychnis plumaria siluestris simplex & multiplex. The featherd wilde Campion single and double.
The leaues of this wilde Campion are somewhat like the ordinary white wilde  Campion, but not so large, or rather resembling the leaues of sweete Williams, but that they grow not so close, nor so many together: the stalkes haue smaller leaues at the ioynts then those belowe, and branched at the toppe, with many pale, but bright red flowers, iagged or cut in on the edges, like the feathered Pinke, whereof some haue taken it to be a kinde, and some for a kinde of wilde William, but yet is but a wilde Campion, as may be obserued, both by his huske that beareth the flowers, and by the grayish roundish seede, being not of the Family of Pinkes and Gillowers, but (as I said) of the Campions: the roote is full of strings or fibres. Flore pleno.The double kinde is very like vnto the single kinde, but that it is lower and smaller, and the flowers very double. 8. Lychnis siluestris flore pleno rubro. Red Batchelours buttons. The double wilde Campion (which of our Countrey Gentlewomen is called Bat∣chelours buttons) is very like both in rootes, leaues, stalkes, and flowers vnto the or∣dinary wilde red Campion, but somewhat lesser, his flowers are not iagged, but smooth, and very thicke and double, so that most commonly it breaketh his short huske, wherein the flower standeth on the one side, seldome hauing a whole huske, and are of a reddish colour. 9. Lychnis siluestris flore albo pleno. White Batchelours buttons. As the leaues of the former double Campion was like vnto the single kinde that had red flowers, so this hath his leaues like vnto the single white kinde, differing in no o∣ther thing from it, but in the doublenesse of the flowers, which by reason of the multi∣plicity of leaues in them thrusting forth together, breaketh his huskes wherein the flowers doe stand, as the other doth, and hath scarce one flower in many that is whole. 10. Ocymoides arborea semper virens. Strange Bassil Campion. This Strange Campion (for thereunto it must bee referred) shooteth forth many round, whitish, wooddy, but brittle stalkes, whereon stand diuers long, and somewhat thicke leaues, set by couples, narrow at the bottome, and broader toward the point, of a very faire greene and shining colour, so that there is more beauty in the greene leaues, which doe so alwaies abide, then in the flowers, which are of a pale red or blush colour, consisting of fiue small long broad pointed leaues, notched in the mid∣dle, which doe not lye close, but loosly as it were hanging ouer the huskes: after the flowers are past, there come heads that containe blackish seede: the roote is small, hard, white, and threadie. 11. Muscipula Lobelij siue Ben rubrum Monspeliensium. Lobels Catch Flie. I must needes insert this small plant, to finish this part of the Campions, whereunto it belongeth, being a pretty toye to furnish and decke out a Garden. It springeth vp (if it haue beene once sowne and suffered to shed) in the later end of the yeare most com∣monly, or else in the Spring with fiue or six small leaues, very like vnto the leaues of Pinkes, and of the same grayish colour, but a little broader and shorter, and when it beginneth to shoote vp for flower, it beareth smaller leaues on the clammy or viscous stalkes (fit to hold any small thing that lighteth on it) being broad at the bottome compassing them, and standing two at a ioynt one against another: the toppes of the stalkes are diuersly branched into seuerall parts, euery branch hauing diuers small red flowers, not notched, but smooth, standing out of small, long, round, stript huskes, which after the flowers are past, containe small grayish seede: the roote is small, and perisheth after it hath giuen seede; but riseth (as is before said) of its owne seede, if it be suffered to shed. The Place.
The Rose Campions, Flowers of Bristow, or None such, the Bassil Cam∣pion, 1 Lychnis Coranoria simplex. Single Rose Campion. 2 Lychnis Coronaria rubra multiplex. The double red Rose Campion. 3 Lychnis Chalcedonica simplex. Single None such, or flower of Bristow. 4 Lychnis Chalcedonica flore pleno Double None such, or flower of Bristow. 5 Lychnis plumaria mul∣tiplex. Pleasant in sight. 6 Lychnis siluestris flore pleno rubro. Red Batchelours Buttons. 7 Lychnis siluestris flore pleno albo. White Batchelours Buttons. 8 Muscipula Lobelij. Lobels Catch Flie. depiction of flowers
and the Catch Flie, haue been sent vs from beyond the Seas, and are onely noursed vp in Gardens with vs; the other Campions that are double, haue been naturally so found double wilde (for no art or industry of man, that euer I could be assured of to be true, be it by neuer so many repetitions of transplantations, and planeticall obseruations (as I haue said in he be∣ginning of this worke) could bring any flower, single by nature, to become double, notwithstanding many affirmations to that purpose, but whatsoe∣uer hath been found wilde to be double, nature her selfe, and not art hath so produced it) and being brought into Gardens, are there encreased by slip∣ping, and parting the roote, because they giue no seede. The Time. All of them doe flower in the Summer, yet none before May. The Names. The first kindes are called Lychnides satiuae, and coronariae, in English ge∣nerally Rose Campions. The next is called Lychnis Chalcedonica, and By∣zantina; in English, of some Nonesuch, and of others Flower of Bristow, and after the Latine, Flower of Constantinople, because it is thought the seede was first brought from thence; but from whence the double of this kinde came, we cannot tell. The names of the others of this kinde, both single and double, are set downe with their descriptions. The feathered Campions are called Armoraria pratensis, and Flos Cuculi, and of Clusius and others thought to be Odontitis Plinij. Some call them in English Crow∣flowers, and Cuckowe-Flowers; and some call the double hereof, The faire Maide of France. The Bassil Campions were sent ouer among many other seedes out of Italy, by the name of Ocimoides arborea semper virens. Arborea, because the stalke is more wooddy and durable then other Cam∣pions: And semper virens, because the leaues abide greene Winter and Summer. Clusius calleth it Lychnis semper virens, because it is certainly a Campion. The last is diuersly called of Authors; Lobel calleth it Musci∣pula: Others Armoraria altera: Dodonaeus Armerius flos quartus. Clusius Lychnis siluestris altera, in his Spanish obseruations, and prima in his History of plants, and saith, the learned of Salmantica in Spaine called it, Ben ru∣brum, as Lobel saith, they of Mompelier doe also: and by that name I re∣ceiued it first out of Italy. It hath the name of Catch Flie, of Muscipula the Latine word, because the stalkes in the hot Summer dayes haue a certaine viscous or clammy humour vpon them, whereby it easily holdeth (as I said before) whatsoeuer small thing, as Flies, &c. lighteth vpon it. The Vertues. We know none in these dayes, that putteth any of these to any Physicall vse, although some haue in former times. CHAP. XXXIX. Keiri siue Leucoium luteum. Wall-flowers, or Wall Gilloflowers. THere are two sorts of Wall-flowers, the one single, the other double, and of each of them there is likewise some differences, as shall be shewed in their de∣scriptions.
1. Keiri siue Leucoium luteum simplex vulgare. Common single Wall-flowers. The common single Wall-flower which groweth wilde abroad, and yet is brought into Gardens, hath sundry small, narrow, long, and darke greene leaues, set with∣out order vpon small round whitish wooddy stalkes, which beare at the tops diuers single yellow flowers one aboue another, euery one hauing foure leaues a peece, and of a very sweete sent: after which come long pods, containing reddish seede: the roote is white, hard and thready. 2. Keiri siue Leucoium luteum simplex maius. The great single Wall-flower. There is another sort of single Wall-flower, whose leaues as well as flowers are much larger then the former: the leaues being of a darker and shining greene colour, and the flowers of a very deepe gold yellow colour, and vsually broader then a twen∣tie shilling peece of gold can couer: the spike or toppe of flowers also much longer, and abiding longer in flower, and much sweeter likewise in sent: the pods for seede are thicker and shorter, with a small point at the end: this is slower to encrease into branches, as also to be encreased by the branches, and more tender to be preserued; for the hard frosts doe cause it to perish, if it be not defended from them 3. Keiri simplex flore albo. White Wall-flower. This Wall-flower hath his leaues as greene as the great kinde, but nothing so large: the flowers stand at the toppe, but not in so long a spike, and consisteth of foure leaues, of a very white colour, not much larger then the common kinde, and of a faint or weaker sent: the pods are nothing so great as the former great one: this is more easie to be propagated and encreased also, but yet will require some care in defending it from the colds of the Winter. 4. Keiri siue Leucoium luteum vulgare flore pleno. Common double Wall-flowers. This ordinary double Wall-flower is in leaues and stalke very like vnto the first sin∣gle kinde, but that the leaues hereof are not of so deepe a greene colour: the flowers stand at the top of the stalkes one aboue another, as it were a long spike, which flower by degrees, the lowest first, and so vpwards, by which it is a long time in flowring, and is very double, of a gold yellow colour, and very sweete. 5. Keiri siue Leucoium luteum alterum flore pleno. Pale double Wall-flowers. Wee haue another sort of this kinde of double Wall-flower, whose double flow∣ers stand not spike-fashion as the former, but more open spread, and doe all of them blowe open at one time almost, and not by degrees as the other doth, and is of a paler yellow colour, not differing in any thing else, except that the greene leaues hereof are of a little paler greene then it. 6. Keiri siue Leucoium luteum maius flore pleno ferrugineo. Double red Wall-flowers. We haue also another sort of double Wall-flower, whose leaues are as greene, and almost as large as the great single yellow kinde, or full as bigge as the leaues of the white Wall-flower: the flowers hereof are not much larger then the ordinary, but are of a darker yellow colour then the great single kinde, and of a more brownish or red colour on the vnderside of the leaues, and is as it were striped. 7. Keiri siue Leucoium maximum luteum flore pleno. The greatest double yellow Wall-flower.
This great double Wall-flower is as yet a stranger in England, and therefore what I  here write is more vpon relation (which yet I beleeue to be most true) then vpon sight and speculation. The leaues of this Wall-flower are as greene and as large, if not lar∣ger then the great single kinde: the flowers also are of the same deepe gold yellow colour with it, but much larger then any of the former double kindes, and of as sweet a sent as any, which addeth delight vnto beauty. The Place. The first single kind is often found growing vpon old wals of Churches, and other houses in many places of England, and also among rubbish and stones. The single white and great yellow, as well as all the other double kindes, are noursed vp in Gardens onely with vs. The Time. All the single kindes doe flower many times in the end of Autumne, and if the Winter be milde all the Winter long, but especially in the moneths of February, March, and Aprill, and vntill the heate of the Spring doe spend them: but the other double kindes doe not continue flowring in that manner the yeare throughout, although very early sometimes, and very late also in some places. The Names. They are called by diuers names, as Viola lutea, Leucoium luteum, and Keiri, or Cheiri, by which name it is chiefly knowne in our Apothecaries shops, because there is an oyle made thereof called Cheirinum: In English they are vsually called in these parts, Wall-flowers: Others doe call them Bee-flowers; others Wall-Gilloflowers, Winter-Gilloflowers, and yel∣low Srocke-Gilloflowers; but we haue a kinde of Stocke-Gilloflower that more fitly deserueth that name, as shall be shewed in the Chapter following The Vertues. The sweetnesse of the flowers causeth them to be generally vsed in Nose∣gayes, and to decke vp houses; but physically they are vsed in diuers man∣ners: As a Conserue made of the flowers, is vsed for a remedy both for the Appoplexie and Palsie. The distilled water helpeth well in the like manner. The oyle made of the flowers is heating and resoluing, good to ease paines of strained and pained sinewes. CHAP. XL. Leucoium. Stocke-Gilloflower. THere are very many sorts of Stocke-Gilloflowers both single and double, some of the fields and mountaines, others of the Sea marshes and medowes; and some noursed vp in Gardens, and there preserued by seede or slippe, as each kinde is aptest to bee ordered. But because some of these are fitter for a generall His∣tory then for this our Garden of Pleasure, both for that diuers haue no good sent, others little or no beauty, and to be entreated of onely for the variety, I shall spare so many of them as are not fit for this worke, and onely set downe the rest. 1. Leucoium simplex sativum diuersorum colorum. Garden Stocke-Gilloflowers single of diuers colours.
These single Stocke-Gilloflowers, although they differ in the colour of their flow∣ers, 1 Keiri siue Leucoium luteum vulgare. Common Wall-flowers. 2 Keiri siue Leucoium luteum maius simplex. The great single Wall-flower. 3 Keiri siue Leucoium luteum flore pleno vulgare. Ordinary double Wall-flowers. 4 Keiri maius flore pleno fer∣rugino The great double red Wall-flower. 5 Leucoium sativum simplex. Single Stocke-Gilloflowers. 6 Leucoium sati∣vum simplex flore striato. Single stript Stocke-Gilloflowers. depiction of flowers
yet are in leafe and manner of growing, one so like vnto another, that vntill they come to flower, the one cannot be well knowne that beareth red flowers, from another that beareth purple; and therfore one description of the plant shall serue, with a de∣claration of the sundry colours of the flowers. It riseth vp with round whitish woody stalkes, two, three, or foure foot high, whereon are set many long, and not very broad, sost, and whitish or grayish greene leaues, somewhat round pointed, and parted into diuers branches, at the toppes whereof grow many flowers, one aboue another, smel∣ling very sweet, consisting of foure small, long, and round pointed leaues, standing in small long huskes, which turne into long and flat pods, sometimes halfe a foote long, wherein is contained flat, round, reddish seedes, with grayish ringes or circles about them, lying flat all along the middle rib of the pod on both sides: the roote is long, white, and woody, spreading diuers wayes. There is great variety in the colours of the flowers: for some are wholly of a pure white colour, others of a most excellent crim∣son red colour, others againe of a faire red colour, but not so bright or liuely as the other, some also of a purplish or violet colour, without any spot, marke, or line in them at all. There are againe of all these colours, mixed very variably, as white mixed with small or great spottes, strakes or lines of pure or bright red, or darke red, and white with purple spots and lines; and of eyther of them whose flowers are almost halfe white, and halfe red, or halfe white, and halfe purple. The red of both sorts, and the purple also, in the like manner spotted, striped, and marked with white, differing neyther in forme, nor substance, in any other point. 2. Leucoium satiuum albido luteum simplex. The single pale yellow Stocke-Gilloflower. There is very little difference in this kind from the former, for the manner of grow∣ing, or forme of leaues or flower. Only this hath greener leaues, and pale yellow almost white flowers, in all other things alike: this is of no great regard, but only for rarity, and diuersity from the rest. 3. Leucoium Melancholicum. The Melancholick Gentleman. This wilde kinde of stocke gilloflower hath larger, longer and greener leaues then any of the former kindes, vneuenly gashed or sinuated on both edges lying on the ground, and a little rough or hairy withall: from among which rise vp the stalks, a yard high or more, and hairy likewise, bearing theron here and there some such like leaues as are below, but smaller, and at the top a great number of flowers, as large or larger then any of the former single kindes, made of 4. large leaues a peece also, standing in such like long huskes, but of a darke or sullen yellowish colour: after which come long roundish pods, wherein lye somewhat long but rounder and greater seede then any stocke gilloflower, and nearer both in pod and seede vnto the Hesperis or Dames Vio∣let: this perisheth not vsually after seede bearing, although sometimes it doth. 4. Leucoium marinum Syriacum. Leuant stocke gilloflowers. This kind of stocke gilloflower riseth vp at the first with diuers long and somewhat broad leaues, a little vneuenly dented or waued on the edges, which so continue the first yeare after the sowing: the stalke riseth vp the next yeare to bee two foot high or more, bearing all those leaues on it that it first had, which then do grow lesse sinuated or waued then before: at the top whereof stand many flowers, made of foure leaues a peece, of a delayed purple colour, but of a small sent which turne into very long and narrow flat pods, wherein are contained flat seed like the ordinary stocke gilloflowers, but much larger and of a darke or blackish browne colour: the root is white, and groweth deepe, spreading in the ground, but growing woody when it is in seede, and perisheth afterwards.
5. Leucoij alterum genus, flore tam multiplici quam simplici ex seminio oriundum. Another sort of Stocke gilloflowers bearing as well double as single flowers from seede. This kinde of Stocke gilloflower differeth neyther in forme of leaues, stalkes, nor flowers from the former, but that it oftentimes groweth much larger and taller; so that whosoeuer shall see both these growing together, shall scarce discerne the difference, onely it beareth flowers, eyther white, red or purple, wholly or entire, that is, of one colour, without mixture of other colour in them (for so much as euer I haue obserued, or could vnderstand by others) which are eyther single, like vnto the former, or very thicke and double, like vnto the next that followeth; but larger, and growing with more store of flowers on the long stalke. But this you must vnderstand withall, that those plants that beare double flowers, doe beare no seede at all, and is very seldome encreased by slipping or cutting, as the next kinde of double is: but the onely way to haue double flowers any yeare, (for this kinde dyeth euery winter, for the most part, after it hath borne flowers, and seldome is preserued) is to saue the seedes of those plants of this kinde that beare single flowers, for from that seede will rise, some that will beare single, and some double flowers, which cannot bee distinguished one from another, I meane which will be single and which double, vntill you see them in flower, or budde at the least. And this is the only way to preserue this kinde: but of the seed of the former kinde was neuer known any double flowers to arise, and therefore you must be carefull to marke this kinde from the former. 6. Leucoium flore pleno diuersorum colorum. Double Stocke Gillowflowers of diuers colours. This other kinde of Stock gilloflower that beareth onely double flowers, groweth not so great, nor spreadeth his branches so farre, nor are his leaues so large, but is in all things smaller, and lower, and yet is woody, or shrubby, like the former, bea∣ring his flowers in the like manner, many vpon a long stalke, one aboue another, and very double, but not so large as the former double, although it grow in fertile soyle, which are eyther white, or red, or purple wholly, without any mixture, or else mixed with spots and stripes, as the single flowers of the first kinde, but more variably, and not in all places alike, neuer bearing seede, but must be encreased, only by the cutting of the young sproutes or branches, taken in a fit season: this kinde perisheth not, as the former double kinde doth, so as it bee defended in the winter from the extreame frosts, but especially from the snow falling, or at the least remaining vpon it. 7. Leucoium satiuum luteum flore pleno. The double yellow Stocke Gilloflower. This double yellow Stock gilloflower is a stranger in England, as far as I can learne, neyther haue I any further familiaritie with him, then by relation from Germany, where it is affirmed to grow only in some of their gardens, that are curious louers of these delights, bearing long leaues somewhat hoary or white, (and not greene like vnto the Wallflower, whereunto else it might be thought to be referred) like vnto the Stock gilloflowers, as the stalkes and branches also are, and bearing faire double flowers, of a faire, but pale yellow colour. The whole plant is tender, as the double Stock gilloflowers are, and must be carefully preserued in the winter from the coldes, or rather more then the last double, lest it perish. The Place. The single kindes, especially some of them, grow in Italie, and some in Greece, Candy, and the Isles adiacent, as may be gathered out of the verses in Plutarches Booke De Amore fraterno:
Inter Echinopodas velut, asperam & inter Ononim, Interdum crescunt mollia Leucoia. Which sheweth, that the soft or gentle stocke gilloflowers doe sometimes grow among rough or prickely Furse and Cammocke. The other sorts are only to be found in gardens. The Time. They flower in a manner all the yeare throughout in some places, espe∣cially some of the single kindes, if they stand warme, and defended from the windes and cold: the double kindes flower sometimes in Aprill, and more plentifully in May, and Iune; but the double of seed, flowreth vsually late, and keepeth flowring vnto the winter, that the frostes and colde mistes doe pull it downe. The Names. It is called Leucoium, & Viola alba: but the name Leucoium (which is in English the white Violet) is referred to diuers plants; we call it in English generally, Stocke gilloflower, (or as others doe, Stocke gillouer) to put a difference betweene them, and the Gilloflowers and Carnations, which are quite of another kindred, as shall be shewne in place conuenient. The Vertues. These haue no great vse in Physick that I know: only some haue vsed the leaues of the single white flowred kinde with salt, to be laid to the wrests of them that haue agues, but with what good successe I cannot say, if it hap∣pen well I thinke in one (as many such things else will) it will fayle in a number. CHAP. XLI. 1. Hesperis, siue Viola Matronalis. Dames Violets, or Queenes Gilloflowers. THe ordinary Dames Violets, or Queene Gilloflowers, hath his leaues broader, greener, and sharper pointed, then the Stock gilloflowers, and a little endented about the edges: the stalkes grow two foot high, bearing many greene leaues vpon them, smaller then those at the bottome, and branched at the toppe, bearing ma∣ny flowers, in fashion much like the flowers of stocke gilloflowers, consisting of foure leaues in like manner, but not so large, of a faint purplish colour in some, and in others white, and of a pretty sweet sent, especially towards night, but in the day time little or none at all: after the flowers are past, there doe come small long and round pods, wherein is contained, in two rowes, small and long blacke seede: the roote is wholly composed of stringes or fibres, which abide many yeares, and springeth fresh stalks euery yeare, the leaues abiding all the Winter. 2. Hesperis Pannonica. Dames Violets of Hungary. The leaues of this Violet are very like the former, but smoother and thicker, and not at all indented, or cut in on the edges: the flowers are like the former, but of a sullen pale colour, turning themselues, and seldome lying plaine open, hauing many purple veines, and streakes running through the leaues of the flowers, of little or no sent in the day time, but of a very sweete sent in the euening and morning; the seedes are alike also, but a little browner.
1 Leucoium Melancholicum. Sullen Stocke-Gilloflowers. 2 Leucoium sativum flore pleno. Double Stocke-Gilloflowers. 3 Leu∣coium sativum flore pleno vario. Party coloured Stocke-Gilloflowers. 4 Leucoium marinum Syriacum. Leuant Stocke-Gillo∣flowers. 5 Hesperis vulgaris. Dames Violets or Winter Gilloflowers. 6 Lysimachia lutea siliquosa Virginiana. The tree Prim∣rose of Virginia. 7 Viola Lunaris siue Bolbonach. The white Sattin flower. depiction of flowers
3. Lysimachia lutea siliquosa Virgiana. The tree Primrose of Virginia. Vnto what tribe or kindred I might referre this plant, I haue stood long in suspence, in regard I make no mention of any other Lysimachia in this work: lest therfore it should lose all place, let me ranke it here next vnto the Dames Violets, although I confesse it hath little affinity with them. The first yeare of the sowing the seede it abideth without any stalke or flowers lying vpon the ground, with diuers long and narrow pale greene leaues, spread oftentimes round almost like a Rose, the largest leaues being outermost, and very small in the middle: about May the next yeare the stalke riseth, which will be in Summer of the height of a man, and of a strong bigge size almost to a mans thumbe, round from the bottome to the middle, where it groweth crested vp to the toppe, into as many parts as there are branches of flowers, euery one hauing a small leafe at the foote thereof: the flowers stand in order one aboue another, round about the tops of the stalks, euery one vpon a short foot-stalke, consisting of foure pale yellow leaues, smelling somewhat like vnto a Primrose, as the colour is also (which hath cau∣sed the name) and standing in a greene huske, which parteth it selfe at the toppe into foure parts or leaues, and turne themselues downewards, lying close to the stalke: the flower hath some chiues in the middle, which being past, there come in their places long and cornered pods, sharpe pointed at the vpper end, and round belowe, opening at the toppe when it is ripe into fiue parts, wherein is contained small brownish seed: the roote is somewhat great at the head, and wooddy, and branched forth diuersly, which perisheth after it hath borne seede. The Place. The two first grow for the most part on Hils and in Woods, but with vs in Gardens onely. The last, as may be well vnderstood by the title, came out of Virginia. The Time. They flower in May, Iune, and Iuly. The Names. The name of Hesperis is imposed by most Herbarists vpon the two first plants, although it is not certainly knowne to be the same that Theophra∣stus doth make mention of, in his sixth Booke and twenty fiue Chapter de causis plantarum: but because this hath the like effects to smell best in the euening, it is (as I said) imposed vpon it. It is also called Viola Marina Ma∣tronalis, Hyemalis, Damascena and Muschatella: In English, Dames Violets, Queens Gilloflowers, and Winter Gilloflowers. The last hath his Latine name in the title as is best agreeing with it, and for the English, although it be too foolish I confesse, yet it may passe for this time till a fitter be giuen, vnlesse you please to follow the Latine, and call it Virginia Loose-strife. The Vertues. I neuer knew any among vs to vse these kindes of Violets in Physicke, al∣though by reason of the sharpe biting taste, Dodonaeus accounteth the ordi∣nary sort to be a kinde of Rocket, and saith it prouoketh sweating, and v∣rine: and others affirme it to cut, digest, and cleanse tough flegme. The Virginian hath not beene vsed by any that I know, either inwardly or out∣wardly.
CHAP. XLII. Viola Lunaris siue Bolbonach. The Sattin flower. VNto the kindes of Stocke-Gilloflowers I thinke fittest to adioyne these kindes of Sattin-flowers, whereof there are two sorts, one frequent enough in all our Countrie, the other is not so common. 1. Viola Lunaris vulgaris. The common white Sattin flower. The first of those Sattin flowers, which is the most common, hath his leaues broad belowe, and pointed at the end, snipt about the edges, and of a darke greene colour: the stalkes are round and hard, two foot high, or higher, diuided into many branches, set with the like leaues, but smaller: the tops of the branches are beset with many pur∣plish flowers, like vnto Dames Violets, or Stocke-Gilloflowers, but larger, be∣ing of little sent: after the flowers are past, there come in their places round flat thin cods, of a darke colour on the outside, but hauing a thinne middle skinne, that is white and cleare shining, like vnto very pure white Sattin it selfe, whereon lye flat and round brownish seede, somewhat thicke and great: the rootes perish when they haue giuen their seede, and are somewhat round, long, and thicke, resembling the rootes of Lilium non bulbosum, or Day Lilly, which are eaten (as diuers other rootes are) for Sal∣lets, both in our owne Country, and in many places beside. 2. Viola Lunaris altera seu peregrina. Long liuing Sattin flower. This second kinde hath broader and longer leaues then the former, the stalkes also are greener and higher, branching into flowers, of a paler purple colour, almost white, consisting of foure leaues in like manner, and smelling pretty sweete, bearing such like pods, but longer and slenderer then they: the rootes are composed of many long strings, which dye not as the former, but abide, and shoot out new stalkes euery yeare. The Place. The first is (as is said) frequent enough in Gardens, and is found wilde in some places of our owne Country, as Master Gerard reporteth, whereof I neuer could be certainly assured, but I haue had it often sent mee among o∣ther seedes from Italy, and other places. The other is not so common in Gardens, but found about Watford, as he saith also. The Time. They flower in Aprill or May, and sometimes more early. The Names. It hath diuers names, as well in English as in Latine; for it is called most vsually Bolbonach, and Viola Lunaris: Of some Viola latifolia, and of others Viola Peregrina, and Lunaria Graeca, Lunaria maior, and Lunaria odorata, and is thought to be Thlaspi Crateuae: In English, White Satten, or Satten flower: Of some it is called Honesty, and Penny-flower. The Vertues. Some doe vse to eate the young rootes hereof, before they runne vp to flower, as Rampions are eaten with Vinegar and Oyle; but wee know no Physicall vse they haue.
CHAP. XLIII. Linum siluestre & Linaria. Wilde Flaxe and Tode Flaxe. ALthough neither the manured Line or Flaxe is a plant fit for our Garden, nor many of the wilde sorts, yet there are some, whose pleasant and delightfull aspect doth entertaine the beholders eyes with good content, and those I will set downe here for varietie, and adioyne vnto them some of the Linarias, or Tode Flaxe, for the neare affinity with them. 1. Linum siluestre flore albo. Wilde Flaxe with a white flower. This kinde of wilde Flaxe riseth vp with diuers slender branches, a foote high or better, full of leaues, standing without order, being broader and longer then the ma∣nured Flaxe: the tops of the branches haue diuers faire white flowers on them, com∣posed of fiue large leaues a peece, with many purple lines or strikes in them: the seede vessell as well as the seede, is like vnto the heads and seede of the manured Flaxe: the rootes are white strings, and abide diuers yeares, springing fresh branches and leaues euery yeare, but not vntill the Spring of the yeare. 2. Linum siluestre luteum. Wilde Flaxe with a yellow flower. This wilde Flaxe doth so well resemble a kinde of St. Iohns wort, that it will soone deceiue one that doth not aduisedly regard it: For it hath many reddish stalkes, and small leaues on them, broader then the former wilde Flaxe, but not so long, which are well stored with yellow flowers, as large as the former, made of fiue leaues a peece, which being past, there come small flattish heads, containing blackish seede, but not shining like the former: the rootes hereof dye not euery yeare, as many other of the wilde kindes doe, but abide and shoote out euery yeare. 3. Linaria purpurea. Purple Tode Flaxe. This purple Tode Flaxe hath diuers thicke, small, long, and somewhat narrowish leaues, snipt about the edges, of a whitish greene colour, from among which rise vp diuers stalkes, replenished at the tops with many small flowers, standing together one aboue another spike-fashion, which are small and somewhat sweete, while they are fresh, fashioned somewhat like the common Tode flaxe that groweth wilde abroad al∣most euery where, but much smaller, with a gaping mouth, but without any crooked spurre behinde, like vnto them, sometimes of a sad purple neare vnto a Violet, and sometimes of a paler blew colour, hauing a yellow spot in the middle or gaping place: after the flowers are past, there come small, hard, round heads, wherein are contained small, flat, and grayish seede: the roote is small, and perisheth for the most part euery yeare, and will spring againe of it owne sowing, if it be suffered to shed it selfe, yet some hard Winters haue killed the seede it should seeme, in that sometimes it faileth to spring againe, and therefore had neede to be sowne anew in the Spring. 4. Linaria purpurea odorata. Sweete purple Tode Flaxe.
The lower leaues of this purple Tode Flaxe are nothing like any of the rest, but are long and broad, endented about the edges, somewhat resembling the leaues of the greater wilde white Daisie: the stalke is set at the bottome with such like leaues, but a little more diuided and cut in, and still smaller and smaller vpward, so that the vp∣permost leaues are very like the common Tode Flaxe, the toppe whereof is branched, hauing diuers small flowers growing along vpon them, in fashion and colour almost like the last described Tode Flaxe, but not altogether so deepe a purple: the heads and seedes are very like the former, but that the seede of this is reddish: the flowers 1 Linum siluestre flore albo. Wilde Flaxe with a white flower. 2 Linaria purpurea siue caerulea. Purple Tode Flaxe. 3 Linaria pupurea odorata. Sweete purple Tode Flaxe. 4 Scoparia siue Beluidere Italorum Broome Tode Flaxe. 5 Antirrhinum maius. The greater Snapdragon. 6 Chamaenerium flore delphinij. The willowe flower. depiction of flowers
in their naturall hot Countries haue a fine sent, but in these colder, little or none at all: the rootes are small and threadie, and perish after they haue flowred and seeded. 5. Linaria Valentina. Tode Flaxe of Valentia. This Spanish Tode Flaxe hath three or foure thicker and bigger stalkes then the former, bearing small broad leaues, like vnto the small Centory, two or three together at a ioynt, round about the lower end of the stalkes, but without any order vpwards, at the toppes whereof stand many flowers, in fashion like vnto the common kinde, and almost as large, of a faire yellow colour, but the gaping mouth is downie, and the spurre behinde of a purplish colour. 6. Scoparia siue Beluidere Italorum. Broome Tode Flaxe. Although this plant haue no beautifull flowers, yet because the greene plant full of leaues is so delightfull to behold, being in Italy and other places planted not onely in their Gardens, but set likewise in pots to furnish their Windowes, and euen with vs also hath growne to be so dainty a greene bush, that I haue thought it worthy to be a∣mong the delights of my Garden; the description whereof is as followeth: This plea∣sant Broome Flaxe riseth vp most vsually with one straight vpright square stalke, three foote and a halfe high or better in our Gardens, branching it selfe out diuers waies, bearing thereon many long narrow leaues, like the Garden Line or Flaxe, very thicke set together, like vnto a bush, or rather like vnto a faire greene Cypresse tree, growing broad belowe, and spire-fashion vpwards, of a very faire greene colour: at the seue∣rall ioynts of the branches, towards the tops, and among the leaues, there come forth small reddish flowers, not easily seene nor much regarded, being of no beauty, which turne into small round blackish gray seede: the rootes are a number of blackish strings set together, and the whole plant perisheth euery yeare at the first approach of any cold ayre, as if it neuer had beene so faire a greene bush. The Place. These kindes of wilde Flaxe doe growe naturally in diuers places, some in Germany, some in Spaine, and some in Italy. Those that delight in the beauty of natures variety, doe preserue them, to furnish vp the number of pleasant aspects. The Time. They all flower in the Summer moneths, and soone after perfect their seede. The Names. Their names are sufficiently expressed in their titles, yet I must giue you to vnderstand, that the last is called of some Linaria magna, and of others Osyris. The Vertues. The wilde Flaxe hath no medecinable vertue appropriate vnto it that is knowne. The Tode Flaxe is accounted to be good, to cause one to make water.
CHAP. XLIIII. Antirrhinum. Snapdragon. THere is some diuersity in the Snapdragons, some being of a larger, and others of a lesser stature and bignesse; and of the larger, some of one, and some of an∣other colour, but because the small kindes are of no beautie, I shall at this time onely entreate of the greater sorts. 1. Antirrhinum album. White Snapdragon. The leaues of these Snapdragons (for I doe vnder one description comprehend the rest) are broader, longer, and greener then the leaues of the Garden Flaxe, or of the wilde Flaxe set confusedly vpon the tender greene branches, which are spread on all sides, from the very bottome, bearing at the toppes many flowers, somewhat resem∣bling the former Tode Flaxe, but much larger, and without any heele or spurre, of a faire white colour, with a yellow spot in the mouth or gaping place: after the flowers are past, there come vp in their places hard round seede vessels, fashioned somewhat like vnto a Calues head, the snout being cut off, wherein is contained small blacke seede: the rootes are many white strings, which perish in most places after they haue giuen seede, notwithstanding any care or paines taken with them to preserue them a∣liue, and yet they will abide in some places where they are defended in the Winter. 2. Antirrhinum purpureum siue roseum. Purple Snapdragon. The purple Snapdragon is in stalkes, leaues, and flowers altogether like the former, and as large and great in euery part, or greater; the only difference is, that this beareth pale Stammell or Rose coloured flowers, with a yellow spot in the mouth, and some∣times of a paler colour, almost blush. 3. Antirrhinum variegatum. Variable Snapdragon. This variable kinde is somewhat lesse, and tenderer then the last described, hauing also a reddish or blush coloured flower, lesser then the former, but much bigger then the middle kinde of Snapdragon (which is not set downe in this worke) the yellow spot in the mouth of it hath some white about it, and extending to both sides of the spot: the heads and seede are like the former: the rootes are smaller, but neuer will abide after they haue giuen flowers and seede. 4. Antirrhinum luteum. Yellow Snapdragon. There is likewise another of these kindes, that beareth leaues as large as any of the former, & very faire yellow flowers, as large likewise as they, not differing in any thing else from the first; let not any therefore imagine this to be a Linaria or Tode Flaxe: for all parts are answerable vnto the Snapdragons. The Place. All these are nourished with vs in our Gardens, although in Spaine and Italy they are found growing wilde. The Time. They flower for the most part the second yeare after the sowing, from A∣prill vntill Iuly, and the seede is quickly ripe after.
The Names. The name Antirrhinum is vsually giuen to this plant, although it fully agreeth not eyther with the description of Dioscorides, or Theophrastus: It hath also diuers other names in Latine, as Orontium, Canis cerebrum Os Leonis, Leo herba, &c. In English Calues snout, from the forme of the seede vessels, and Snapdragon, or Lyons mouth, from the forme of the flowers. The Vertues. They are seldome or neuer vsed in Physicke by any in our dayes. CHAP. XLV. Chamaenerium flore delphinij. The Willowe flower. THis plant riseth vp with many strong, woddy, round, brownish great stalkes, three or foure foote high, beset here and there without order, with one broad and long whitish greene leafe at a ioynt, somewhat like vnto a Lysimachia, or Willow herbe, as also vnto a Peach leafe, but larger and longer: at the toppe of the branches stand many flowers one aboue another, of a pale reddish purple colour, consisting of fiue leaues, spread open with an heele or spurre behinde them, with many yellow threads in the middle, much larger then any flower of the Larkes spurres, and smelling somewhat sweete withall; it beareth a shew of long pods with seede, but I could neuer obserue the seede: the rootes are like the rootes of Lysimachia, or the ordi∣nary yellow Loose-strife, or Willowe herbe, but greater: running and spreading vn∣der ground, and shooting vp in many places, whereby it filleth a ground that it likes quickly: the stalkes dye downe euery yeare, and spring againe in many places farre asunder. The Place. Wee haue not knowne where this Willowe flower groweth naturally, but we haue it standing in an out corner of our Gardens, to fill vp the num∣ber of delightfull flowers. The Time. It flowreth not vntill May, and abideth a long while flowring. The Names. It may seeme to diuers, that this is that plant that Dodonaeus called Pseu∣dolysimachium purpureum minus, and Lobel seemeth by the name of Delphi∣nium buccinum to aime at this plant, but withall calleth it Chamaenerium Gsneri, and giueth the same figure that Dodonaeus hath for his Pseudolysi∣machium: But that is one kinde of plant (which hath smaller and shorter stalkes, and very narrow long leaues, whose flowers stand vpon long slen∣der cods, full of downe, with reddish seede, like vnto the Lysimachia sili∣quosa siluestris, and rootes that abide many yeares, but creepe not) and this is another, much greater, whose true figure is not extant in any Author that I know. It is vsually called Chamaenerium flore delphinij; but the name of Delphinium buccinum in my minde may not so conueniently be applyed vn∣to it. It is called in English, The Willowe flower, for the likenesse of the leaues, and the beauty and respect of the flowers.
The Vertues. There is no vse hereof in Physicke that euer I could learne, but is onely cherished among other sorts of flowers, that serue to decke and set forth a Garden of varieties. CHAP. XLVI. Aquilegia. Colombines. THere are many sorts of Colombines, as well differing in forme as colour of the flowers, and of them both single and double carefully noursed vp in our Gar∣dens, for the delight both of their forme and colours. 1. Aquilegia vulgaris flore simplici. Single Colombines. Because the whole difference of these Colombines standeth in the varieties of the forme, and colour of the flowers, and little in the leaues, I shall not neede to make a∣nie repetitions of the description of them, seeing one onely shall suffice for each pecu∣liar kinde. The Colombine hath diuers large spread leaues, standing on long stalkes: euery one diuided in seuerall partitions, and roundly endented about the edges, in colour somewhat like the leaues of Celondine, that is, of a darke blewish greene co∣lour: the stalkes rise vp sometimes two or three foote high, diuided vsually into many branches, bearing one long diuided leafe at the lower ioynt, aboue which the flowers growe, euery one standing on a long stalke, consisting of fiue hollow leaues, crooked or horned at the ends, turning backward, the open flower shewing almost like vnto a Cinquefoile, but more hollow: after the flowers are past, there arise small long cods, foure or fiue together, wherein are contained blacke shining seede: the rootes are thicke and round, for a little space within the ground, and then diuided into branches, ending in many small fibres, abiding many yeares, and shooting a fresh euery Spring from the round heads, that abide all the Winter. The variety of the colours of these flowers are very much, for some are wholly white, some of a blew or violet colour, o∣thers of a blush or flesh colour, or deepe or pale red, or of a dead purple, or dead mur∣rey colour, as nature listeth to shew it selfe. 2. Aquilegia vulgaris flore pleno. Double Colombines. The double Colombines differ not in leafe or manner of growing from the single, so that vntill they come to flower, they cannot bee discerned one from another; the onely difference is, it beareth very thicke and double flowers, that is, many horned or crooked hollow leaues set together, and are not so large as the leaues of the single flowers. The variety of colours in this double kinde is as plentifull, or rather more then in the single; for of these there is party coloured, blew and white, and spotted very variably, which are not in the single kinde, and also a very deepe red, very thicke and double, but a smaller flower, and lesse plentifull in bearing then many of the other double sorts. These double kindes doe giue as good seede as the single kindes doe, which is not obserued in many other plants. 3. Aquilegia inuersis corniculis. Double inuerted Colombines.
These Colombines are not to be distinguished eyther in roote, leaues, or seed from the former, the flowers onely make the difference, which are as double as the former, but that the heeles or hornes of these are turned inward, and stand out in the middle of the flowers together: there is not that plentifull variety of colours in this kinde, as there is in the former: for I neuer saw aboue three or foure seuerall colours in this  kinde, that is, white, purplish, reddish, and a dun or darke ouerworne purplish colour. These double flowers doe likewise turne into pods, bearing seede, continuing his kind, and not varying into the former. 4. Aquilegia Rosea. Rose Colombines. The leaues and other parts of this kinde of Colombine, differ little or nothing from the former, the diuersitie consisteth likewise in the flowers, which although they stand in the same manner seuerally vpon their small stalkes, somewhat more sparingly then the former doe, yet they haue no heeles or hornes, eyther inward or outward, or very seldome, but stand sometimes but with eight or tenne smooth small plaine leaues, set in order one by one in a compasse, in a double rowe, and sometimes with foure or fiue rowes of them, euery one directly before the other, like vnto a small thick double Rose layd open, or a spread Marigold: yet sometimes it happeneth, that some of these flowers will haue two or three of the first rowes of leaues without any heele, and the rest that are inward with each of them a peece of a small horne at them, as the former haue: the colours of these flowers are almost as variable, and as variably mixed as the former double kindes. This likewise giueth seede, preseruing his owne kinde for the most part. 5. Aquilegia degener. Degenerate Colombines. This kinde of Colombine might seeme to some, to bee but a casuall degeneration, and no true naturall kinde, happening by some cause of transplanting, or otherwise by the art of man: but I haue not so found it, in that it keepeth, and holdeth his own proper forme, which is like vnto the double Rose Colombine, but that the outermost row of leaues are larger then any of the rest inwardes, and is of a greenish, or else of a purplish greene colour, and is not altogether so apt to giue good seed like the former. The Place. The single kindes haue beene often found in some of the wooddy moun∣taines of Germany, as Clusius saith, but the double kindes are chiefly che∣rished in gardens. The Time. They flower not vntill May, and abide not for the most part when Iune is past, and in the meane time perfecteth their seede. The Names. Costaeus doth call this plant Pothos of Theophrastus, which Gaza tran∣slateth Desiderium. Dalechampius vpon Athenaeus, calleth it Diosanthos, or Iouis flos of Theophrastus, who in his sixth Booke and seuenth Chapter rec∣koneth them both, that is, Diosanthos and Pathos, to be Summer flowers, but seuerally. Dodonaeus Leoherba, and Gesner Leontostomium. Fabius Columna in his Phytobasanos, vnto whom Clusius giueth the greatest approbation, referreth it to the Isopyrum of Dioscorides. All later Writers doe generally call it, eyther Aquileia, Aquilina, or Aquilegia; and we in English, generally (I thinke) through the whole Countrey, Colombines. Some doe call the Aquilegia rosea, Aquilegia stellata, The starre Colombine; because the leaues of the flowers doe stand so directly one by another, besides the doublenesse, that they somewhat represent eyther a Rose or a Starre, and thereupon they giue it the name eyther of a Starre or Rose. The Vertues.
Some in Spaine, as Camerarius saith, vse to eate a peece of the roote here∣of 1 Aquilegia simplex. The single Colombine. 2 Aquilegia flore multiplici. The double Colombine. 3 A∣quilegia versicolor. The party coloured Colombine. 4 Aquilegia inuersis corniculis. The double inuerted Colombine. 5 Aquilegia Rosea siue Stellata. The Rose or the Starre Colombine. 6 Thalictrum Hispa∣nicum album. White Spanish tufts. depiction of flowers
fasting, many dayes together, to helpe them that are troubled with the stone in the kidneyes. Others vse the decoction, of both herbe and roote in wine, with a little Ambargrise, against those kinds of swounings, which the Greekes call . The seede is vsed for the iaundise, and other obctructi∣ons of the liuer. Clusius writeth from the experience of Franciscus Rapard, a chiefe Physician of Bruges in Flanders, that the seede beaten and drunke is effectuall to women in trauell of childe, to procure a speedy deliuerie, and aduiseth a second draught thereof should be taken if the first succeede not sufficiently. CHAP. XLVII. Thalictrum Hispanicum. Spanish Tufts, or Tufted Colombines. FRom among the diuersities of this plant, I haue selected out two sorts for this my garden, as hauing more beautie then all the rest; leauing the other to be entreated of, where all in generall may be included. I haue in this place inserted them, for the likenesse of the leaues only, being in no other part correspondent, and in a Chap∣ter by themselues, as it is most fit. Thalictrum Hispanicum album. White Spanish tufted Colombines. These plants haue both one forme, in roote, leafe and flower, and therefore neede but one description. The leaues are both for colour and forme so like vnto Colom∣bines leaues (although lesser and darker, yet more spread, and on larger stalkes) that they may easily deceiue one, that doth not marke them aduisedly; for the leaues are much more diuided, and in smaller parts, and not so round at the ends: the stalkes are round, strong, and three foote high at the least, branching out into two or three parts, with leaues at the seuerall ioynts of them, at the toppes whereof stand many flowers, which are nothing but a number of threads, made like vnto a small round tuft, break∣ing out of a white skinne, or leafe, which incloseth them, and being vnblowne, shew like vnto little buttons: the colour of these threds or tufts in this are whitish with yel∣low tips on them, and somewhat purplish at the bottome, hauing a strong but no good sent, and abiding in their beautie (especially if they grow in the shade, and not too hot in the sun) a great while, and then fall away, like short downe or threds: the seed vessels are three square, containing small, long, and round seede; the rootes are ma∣ny long yellow stringes, which endure and encrease much. Thalictrum Montanum purpureum. Purple tufted Colombines. This purple tufted Colombine differeth onely from the former, in that it is not so high nor so large, and that the colour of the flower or tuft is of a blewish purple co∣lour with yellow tips, and is much more rare then the other. The Place. These grow both in Spaine and Italie. The Time. They flower in the end of May, or in Iune, and sometime later. The Names. Some doe call them Thalietrum, and some Thalictrum. Others Ruta pau∣stris, and Ruta pratensis, and some Rhabarbarum Monachorum, or Pseudo-rhabarbarum,
by reason that the rootes being yellow, haue an opening qua∣litie, and drying as Rubarbe. In English what other fit Names to giue these then I haue expressed in the titles, I know not. The Vertues. The are a little hot and drying withall, good for old Vlcers, as Dioscori∣des saith, to bring them to cicatrising: in Italy they are vsed against the Plague, and in Saxonye against the Iaundise, as Camerarius saith. CHAP. XLVIII. Radix caua. Hollow roote. THe likenesse of the leaues likewise of this plant with Colombines, hath caused mee to insert it next the other, and although some of this kinde bee of small respect, being accounted but foolish, yet let it fill vp a waste corner, that so no place be vnfurnished. 1. Radix Caua maior flore albo. The white Hollow roote. The leaues of this hollow roote breake not out of the ground, vntill the end of March, or seldome before, and are both for proportion and colour somewhat like vn∣to the leaues of Colombines, diuided into fiue parts, indented about the edges, stan∣ding on small long footestalkes of a whitish greene colour, among which rise vp the stalkes, without any leaues from the bottome to the middle, where the flowers shoote forth one aboue another, with euery one a small short leafe at the foote thereof, which are long and hollow, with a spurre behinde it, somewhat like vnto the flowers of Larckes spurres, but hauing their bellies somwhat bigger, and the mouth not so open, being all of a pure white colour: after the flowers are past, arise small long and round cods, wherein are contained round blackish seede: the roote is round and great, of a yellowish browne colour on the outside, and more yellow within, and hollow vnder∣neath, so that it seemeth but a shell: yet being broken, euery part will grow: it abideth greene aboue ground but a small time. 2. Radix Caua maior flore carneo. Blush colourd Hollow roote. The blush Hollow roote is in all things like vnto the former, but onely that the flowers hereof are of a delayed red or purple colour, which we call blush: and some∣times of a very deepe red or purple colour; but very rare to meete with. 3. Radix Caua minor, seu Capuos fabacea radice. Small hollow roote. This small kinde hath his leaues of a blewish greene colour, yet greener and smal∣ler then the former, growing more thicke together: the flowers are like in proportion vnto the former in all respects, but lesser, hauing purplish backes, and white bellyes: standing closer and thicker together vpon the short stalkes: the roote is solid or firme, round and a little long withall, two being vsually ioyned together, yellowish both within and without: but I haue seene the dry roots that came from beyond Sea hither, that haue beene as small as hasell nuts, and somewhat flat with the roundnesse, diffe∣ring from those that growe with vs, whether the nature thereof is to alter by manuring, I know not. The Place.
The greater kindes Clusius reporteth he found in many places of Hunga∣rie,  and the other parts neere thereunto: the lesser in the lower Germany, or Low Countries, as we call them. The Time. These are most truely to bee reckoned Vernall plants, for that they rise not out of the ground vntill the Spring bee come in, and are gone likewise before it be past, remaining vnder ground all the rest of the yeare, yet the lesser abideth longer aboue ground then the greater. The Names. Concerning the former of these, there is a controuersie among diuers, whether it should be Thesium of Theophrastus, or Eriphium of Galen, but here is no fit place to trauerse those opinions. Some would haue it to bee Corydalis, and some referre it to Plinie his Capuos Cheledonia, for the likenesse it hath both with Fumeterie and Celandine. It is generally called of all moderne Writers, Radix Caua, and we in English thereafter, Hollow roote. The lesser for the firmenesse of his round roote, is vsually called, Capuos fa∣bacea radice, and the Dutch men thereafter, Boonkens Hollwortell: we of the likenesse with the former, doe call it the lesse Hollow roote. The Vertues. Some by the bitternesse doe coniecture (for little proofe hath beene had thereof, but in outward cases) that it clenseth, purgeth, and dryeth withall. CHAP. XLIX. Delphinium. Larkes heeles. OF Larkes heeles there are two principall kindes, the wilde kinde, and the tame or garden; the wilde kinde is of two sorts, one which is with vs noursed vp chiefly in gardens, and is the greatest; the other which is smaller and lower, often found in our plowed landes, and elsewhere: of the former of these wilde sorts, there are double as well as single: and of the tame or more vpright, double also and single: and of each of diuers colours, as shall be set downe. 1. Delphinium maius siue vulgare. The ordinary Larkes heeles. The common Larkes heele spreadeth with many branches much more ground then the other, rather leaning or bending downe to the ground, then standing vpright, whereon are set many small long greene leaues, finely cut, almost like Fennell leaues: the branches end in a long spike of hollow flowers, with a long spurre be∣hinde them, very like vnto the flowers of the Hollow roote last described, and are of diuers seuerall colours, as of a blewish purple colour, or white, or ash colour or red, pa∣ler or deeper,Varietas. as also party coloured of two colours in a flower: after the flowers are past, (which in this kinde abide longer then in the other) there come long round cods, containing very blacke seede: the root is hard after it groweth vp to seede, spreading both abroad and deepe, and perisheth euery yeare, vsually raising it selfe from it own sowing, as well as from the seede sowen in the spring time. 2. Delphinium vulgare flore pleno. Double common Larkes heeles.
Of this vulgar kinde there is some difference in the flower, although in nothing else: the flowers stand many vpon a stalke like the former, but euery one of them are as if  three or foure small flowers were ioyned together, with euery one his spurre behinde, the greatest flower being outermost, and as it were containing the rest, which are of a pale red, or deepe blush colour: Another of this kinde will beare his flowers with three or foure rowes of leaues in the middle, making a double flower with one spurre behinde onely: and of this kinde there is both with purple, blew, blush, and white flowers, and party coloured also; these doe all beare seed like the single, wherby it is encreased euery yeare. 3. Delphinium aruense. Wilde Larkes spurres. This wilde Larkes spurre hath smaller and shorter leaues, smaller and lower bran∣ches, and more thinly or sparsedly growing vpon them, then any of the former: the flowers likewise are neyther so large as any of the former, nor so many growing toge∣ther, the cods likewise haue smaller seede, and is harder to grow in gardens then any of the former; the most vsuall colour hereof is a pale reddish or blush colour, yet some∣times they are found both white and blew, and sometimes mixt of blew and blush, va∣riably disposed, as nature can when she listeth; but are much more rare. 4. Diphinium elatius flore simplici diuersorum colorum. Single vpright bearing Larkes heeles of many colours. The difference betweene this and the last is, that the leaues of this are not fully so greene, nor so large; the stalkes grow vpright, to the height of a man, and sometimes higher, hauing some branches thereon, but fewer then the former, and standing like∣wise vpright, and not leaning downe as the former: the toppes of the stalkes are bet∣ter stored with flowers then the other, being sometimes two foote long and aboue, of the same fashion, but not altogether so large, but of more diuers and seueral colours, as white, pale, blush, redde deeper or paler, ashcoloured, purple or violet, and of an ouerworne blewish purple, or iron colour: for of all these we haue simple, without any mixture or spot: but we haue other sorts, among the simple colours, that rise from the same seede, and will haue flowers that wil be halfe white, and halfe blush or purple, or one leafe white, and another blush or purple, or else variably mixed and spotted: the seede and seede vessels are like the former but larger and harder. 5. Delphinium elatius flore pleno diuersorum colorum. Double vpright Larkes heeles of many colours. These double Larkes heeles cannot bee knowne from the single of the same kinde, vntill they come towards flowring; for there appeare many flowers vpon the stalkes, in the same manner, and of as many colours almost as of the single, except the party co∣loured, which stand like little double Roses, layd or spread broade open, as the Rose Colombine without any heeles behinde them, very delightfull to behold; consisting of many small leaues growing together, and after they are fallen there come vp in their places three or foure small cods set together, wherein is contained here and there (for all are not full of seede, as the single kindes) blacke seede, like vnto all the rest, but smaller, which being sowen will bring plants that will beare both single and double flowers againe, and it often happeneth, that it variably altereth in colours from it owne sowing: for none of them hold constantly his owne colour, (so farre as euer I could obserue) but fall into others as nature pleaseth. 6. Delphinium Hispanicum paruum. Spanish wilde Larkes spurres. This small Larkes spurre of Spaine, hath diuers long and broad leaues next the ground, cut-in on both sides, somewhat like vnto the leafe of a Scabious, or rather that kinde of Stoebe, which Lobel calleth Crupina, for it doth somewhat neerly resemble the same, but that this is smooth on the edges, and not indented besides the cuts, as the
Crupina is, being of a whitish greene colour, and somewhat smooth and soft in handling: among the leaues riseth vp a whitish greene stalke, hauing many smaller  leaues vpon it that grow belowe, but not diuided, branching out into many small stalkes, bearing flowers like vnto the wilde Larkes heeles, but smaller, and of a blke blewish colour, which being past, there come vp two or three small cods ioyned toge∣ther, wherein is blacke seede, smaller and rounder then any of the former: the roote is small and thready, quickly perishing with the first cold that ouertaketh the plant. The Place. The greatest or first wilde kindes growe among corne in many countries beyond the Seas, and where corne hath beene sowne, and for his beauty brought and nourished in our Gardens: the lesser wilde kinde in some fields of our owne Country. The Spanish kinde likewise in the like places, which I had among many seedes that Guillaume Boel brought mee out of Spaine. The first double and single haue been common for many yeares in all coun∣tries of this Land, but the tall or vpright single kindes haue been entertained but of late yeares. The double kindes are more rare. The Time. These flower in the Summer onely, but the Spanish wilde kinde flowreth very late, so that oftentimes in our Country, the Winter taketh it before it can giue ripe seede: the double kindes, as well the vpright as the ordinary or wilde, are very choise and dainty many times, not yeelding good seede. The Names. They are called diuersly by diuers Writers, as Consolida regulis, Clcaris flos; Flos regius, Buccinum Romanorum, and of Matthiolus, Cuminum siluestre alterum Dioscoridis: but the most vsuall name with vs is Delphinium: but whether it be the true Delphinium of Dioscorides, or the Poets Hyacinth, or the flower of Aiax, another place is fitter to discusse then this. Wee call them in English Larkes heeles, Larkes spurres, Larkes toes or clawes, and Monkes hoods. The last or Spanish kinde came to mee vnder the name of Delphinium latifolium trigonum, so stiled eyther from the diuision of the leaues, or from the pods, which come vsually three together. Bauhinus vp∣on Matthiolus calleth it, Consolida regalis peregrina paruo flore. The Vertues. There is no vse of any of these in Physicke in these dayes that I know, but are wholly spent for their flowers sake. CHAP. L. Balsamina foemina. The Female Balsam Apple.
I Haue set this plant in this place, for some likenesse of the flower, rather then for any other comparison, euen as I must also with the next that followeth. This plant riseth vp with a thicke round reddish stalke, with great and bunched ioynts, being tender and full of iuice, much like to the stalke of Purslane, but much greater, which brancheth it selfe forth from the very ground, into many stalkes, bearing thereon ma∣nie long greene leaues, snipt about the edges, very like vnto the Almond or Peach tree leaues; among which from the middle of the stalkes vpwards round about them, come forth vpon seuerall small short foot-stalkes many faire purplish flowers, of two or three colours in them, fashioned somewhat like the former Larkes heeles, or Monks hoods, but that they are larger open at the mouth, and the spurres behinde crooke or bend downewards: after the flowers are past, there come in their places round rough 1 Radix Caua maior flore albo. The white flowred Hollow roote. 2 Capns fabacearadice. The small Hollow roote. 3 Delphinium flore simplici. Single Larkes spurs. 4 Delphinium vulgare flore medio duplici. Larkes spurs double in the middle. 5 Delphinium vulgare flore pleno. Common Larks spurs double. 6 Delphinium elatius flore pleno. Double vpright Larkes spurs. 7 Delphinium Hispanicum parvu. Small Spanish Larkes spurs. 8 Balsamina fmina. The Female Balsam apple. 9 Nasttium Indicum. Indian Cresses, or yellow Larkes spurs. depiction of flowers
heads, pointed at the end, greene at the first, and a little yellower when they bee ripe, containing within them small round blackish seede, which will soone skippe out of the heads, if they be but a little hardly pressed betweene the fingers: the rootes spread themselues vnder ground very much from the toppe, with a number of small fibres an∣nexed thereunto: this is a very tender plant, dying euery yeare, and must bee sowne carefully in a pot of earth, and tended and watered in the heate of Summer, and all little enough to bring it to perfection. The Place. Wee haue alwaies had the seede of this plant sent vs out of Italy, not knowing his originall place. The Time. It flowreth from the middle of Iuly, to the end of August: the seed doth seldome ripen with vs, especially if the Summer be backward, so that wee are oftentimes to seeke for new and good seede from our friends againe. The Names. Some vse to call it Charantia foemina, Balsamina foemina, Balsamella, and Anguillara, Herba Sanctae Katharinae. We haue no other English name to call it by, then the Female Balsame Apple, or Balsamina. The Vertues. Some by reason of the name, would attribute the property of Balme vn∣to this plant, but it is not sufficiently knowne to haue any such; yet I am well perswaded, there may bee some extradinary quality in so beautifull a plant, which yet lyeth hid from vs. CHAP. LI. Nasturtium Indicum. Indian Cresses, or yellow Larkes heeles. THe likenesse (as I said before) of this flower likewise, hauing spurres or heeles maketh me ioyne it with the rest, which is of so great beauty and sweetnesse withall, that my Garden of delight cannot bee vnfurnished of it. This faire plant spreadeth it selfe into very many long trayling branches, enterlaced one within another very confusedly (yet doth it not winde it selfe with any claspers about either pole or any other thing, but if you will haue it abide close thereunto, you must tye it, or else it will lye vpon the ground) foure or fiue foot in length at the least, wherby it ta∣keth vp a great deale of ground: the leaues are smooth, greene, and as round as the Penniwort that groweth on the ground, without any cut or incisure therein at all in any part, the stalkes whereof stand in the middle of each leafe, and stand at e∣uery ioynt of the stalke, where they are a little reddish, and knobbed or bunched out: the flowers are of an excellent gold yellow colour, and grow all along these stalkes, almost at euery ioynt with the leaues, vpon pretty long foote-stalkes, which are com∣posed of fiue leaues, not hollow or gaping, but standing open each leafe apart by it selfe, two of them, that be larger and longer then the other, stand aboue, and the other two that are lesser belowe, which are a little iagged or bearded on both sides, and the fift lowest: in the middle of each of the three lower leaues (yet sometimes it is but in two of them) there is a little long spot or streake, of an excellent crimson colour, with a long heele or spurre behinde hanging downe: the whole flower hath a fine small sent, very pleasing, which being placed in the middle of some Carnations or Gillo∣flowers
(for they are in flower at the same time) make a delicate Tussimussie, as they call it, or Nosegay, both for sight and sent: After the flower is past, come the seede, which are rough or vneuen, round, greenish yellow heads, sometimes but one, and sometimes two or three standing together vpon one stalke, bare or naked of them∣selues, without any huske, containing a white pulpy kernell: the rootes are small, and spreading vnder ground, which perish with the first frosts, and must be sowne a new euery yeare; yet there needeth no bed of horse-dung for the matter: the naturall ground will be sufficient, so as you defend it a little from those frosts, that may spoile it when it is newly sprung vp, or being yet tender. The Place. This goodly plant was first found in the West Indies, and from thence sent into Spine vnto Monardus and others, from whence all other parts haue receiued it. It is now very familiar in most Gardens of any curiosity, where it yearly giueth ripe seed, except the yeare be very vnkindly. The Time. It flowreth sometimes in Iune, but vsually in Iuly (if it be well defended and in any good ground) and so continueth flowring, vntill the cold frosts and mistes in the middle or end of October, doe checke the luxurious na∣ture thereof, and in the meane time the seede is ripe, which will quickly fall downe on the ground, where for the most part the best is gathered. The Names. Some doe reckon this plant among the Clematides or Convolvuli, the Clamberers or Bind weedes; but (as I said) it hath no claspers, neither doth it winde it selfe: but by reason of the number of his branches, that run one within another, it may seeme to climbe vp by a pole or sticke, which yet doth but onely close it, as hauing something whereon to leane or rest his branches. Monardus and others call it Flos sanguineus, of the red spots in the flowers, as also Mastnerzo de las Indias, which is Nasturtium Indicum, by which name it is now generally knowne and called, and wee thereafter in English, Indian Cresses, yet it may bee called from the forme of the flow∣ers onely, Yellow Larkes heeles. The Vertues. The Spaniards and others vse the leaues hereof in stead of ordinary Cres∣ses, because the taste is somewhat sharpe agreeing thereunto, but other Phy∣sicall properties I haue heard of none attributed to it. CHAP. LII. Viola. Violets. THe Garden Violets (for the Wilde I leaue to their owne place) are so well knowne vnto all, that either keepe a Garden, or hath but once come into it, that I shall (I thinke) but lose labour and time to describe that which is so com∣mon. Yet because it is not onely a choise flower of delight, notwithstanding the po∣pularity, and that I let not passe any thing without his particular description, I must also doe so by this. And hereunto I must adde that kinde of Violet, which, although it want that smell of the other, goeth beyond it in variety of dainty colours, called Viola tricolor & flammea, or Harts eases.
1. Viola simplex Martia. Single March Violets. The single Garden Violet hath many round greene leaues, finely snipt or dented a∣bout the edges, standing vpon seuerall small stalkes, set at diuers places of the many creeping branches, which as they runne, doe here and there take roote in the ground, bearing thereon many flowers seuerally at the ioynts of the leaues, which consist of fiue small leaues, with a short round tayle or spurre behinde, of a perfect blew purple colour, and of a very sweete sent, it bringeth forth round seede vessels, standing like∣wise vpon their seuerall small stalkes, wherein is contained round white seede: but these heads rise not from where the flowers grew, as in all other plants that I know, but apart by themselues, and being sowne, will produce others like vnto it selfe, whereby there may be made a more speedy encrease to plant a Garden (as I haue done) or any other place, then by slipping, as is the vsuall manner: the rootes spread both deepe and wide, taking strong hold in the ground. Flore albo.Of this kinde there is another that beareth white flowers, not differing in smell or any thing else from the former. Flore obsoleto.And also another, that beareth flowers of a dead or sad reddish colour, in all other things alike, sauing that this hath not altogether so good a sent as the other. 2. Viola Martia flore multiplici. Double March Violets. There is no difference betweene this Violet and the former, in any other thing then in the doublenesse of the flowers, which haue so many leaues set and thrust together, that they are like vnto hard buttons. There is of this double kinde both white and purple, as in the single; but the white sort is seldome so thicke and double as the pur∣ple: but of the red colour to be double I neuer heard. 3. Viola flammea siue tricolor. Harts eases or Pansies. The Harts ease hath his leaues longer, and more endented or cut in on the edges then the Violet hath, and somewhat round withall: the stalkes are vpright, yet weake, and ready to fall downe, and lye vpon the ground, set here and there with the like leaues, from whence come forth the flowers, of little or no sent at all, made like vnto a Violet, yet more open, and with larger leaues; but so variably mixed with blew or purple, white and yellow, that it is hard to set downe all the varieties: For some flow∣ers will be more white, and but some spots of purple or blew in the two vpper leaues, and the lower leaues with some stripes of yellow in the middle: others will haue more purple in them then any other colour, both in the vpper and lower leaues, the side leaues blew, and the middle yellow, and others white and blew with yellow stripes, as nature listeth to distribute their colours: the seede is small, whitish, and round, con∣tained in small round heads: the roote perisheth euery yeare, and raiseth it selfe vp plentifully by it owne sowing, if it be suffered. 4. Viola tricolor flore duplici. Double Harts ease. We haue in our Gardens another sort, that beareth flowers with more leaues then the former, making it seeme to be twice double, and that onely in Autumne; for the first flowers are single that come in Summer: This is of that sort that beareth purple flowers: And it is to be obserued, that the seed of this kinde will not all bring double flowers, but only some, if the ground be fit and liking, so that if you haue once had of this double kinde, you shall seldome misse to haue double flowers againe euery yeare of it owne growing or sowing. 5. Viola flammea luteae maxima. The great yellow Pansie.
There is one other kinde of Harts ease, that decketh vp our Gardens not to be for∣gotten, whose leaues and flowers are like the former, but more plentifull in stalkes and branches, and better abideth our Winters: the flowers are larger then any of the  former, of a faire pale yellow colour, with some yellower stripes now and then about the middle; for it is sometimes without any stripes, and also of a little deeper yellow colour: this is to bee encreased by slips, which will soone comprehend in a moist or moistened ground, for that I neuer could obserue that it bore seede. The Place. These plants were first wilde, and by manuring brought to be both fai∣rer in colour, and peraduenture of a better sent then when they grew wilde. The Time. The Violets flower in March, and sometimes earlier, and if the yeare be temperate and milde, in Autumne againe. The double Violets, as they are later before they flower then the single, so they hold their flowers longer. The Harts ease flowreth seldome vntill May; but then some will abide to flower vntill the end of Autumne almost, especially if the frosts be not early. The Names. The Violet is called Viola nigra, purpurea, and Martia: In English, Vi∣olets, March Violets, and purple Violets. The Harts ease is called Viola flammea, Viola tricolor, Viola multicolor, and of some, Iacea, Flos trinitatis, and Herba clauellata: In English, Harts ease, and Pansies, of the French name Pensees. Some giue it foolish names, as Loue in idlenesse, Cull mee to you, and Three faces in a hood. The great yellow Harts ease is so called, be∣cause it is like in forme, and is the greatest of all other, although it haue not that diuersity of colours in it that the other haue. The Vertues. The properties of Violets are sufficiently knowne to all, to coole and moisten: I shall forbeare to recite the many vertues that may be set downe, and onely let you know, that they haue in them an opening or purging qua∣lity, being taken either fresh and greene, or dryed, and made into powder, especially the flowers; the dryed leaues will doe the like, but in greater quantity. Costaeus in his booke of the nature of all plants saith, that the di∣stilled water of Harts ease, is commended in the French disease, to be pro∣fitable, being taken for nine dayes or more, and sweating vpon it, which how true it is, I know not, and wish some better experience were made of it, before we put any great confidence in that assertion. CHAP. LIII. Epimedium. Barrenwort.
THis pretty plant riseth vp out of the ground with vpright, hard, round, small stalkes, a foote and a halfe high, or not two foote high at the highest, diuided into three branches for the most part, each branch whereof is againe diuided for the most part into three other branches, and each of them beare three leaues (sel∣dome either more or lesse) set together, yet each vpon his owne foote-stalke, each leafe being broad, round, and pointed at the end, somewhat hard or dry in feeling, hayrie, or as it were prickly about the edges, but very tenderly, without harme, of a light greene colour on the vpperside, and a little whiter vnderneath: from the middle of the stemme or stalke of leaues doth likewise come forth another long stalke, not much higher then those with the leaues on them, diuided into other branches, each  whereof hath likewise three flowers, each vpon his owne footestalke, consisting of eight small leaues a peece, yet seeming to be but of foure leaus spread or layd open flat, for that the foure vppermost, which are the smaller and being yellow, doe lye so close on the foure vndermost, wch are a little broader and red, that they shew as if they were yellow flowers with red edges, hauing yellow thredstipt with greene, standing in the middle of the flowers: the vnderside of the lower leaues are of a pale yellowish red, striped with white lines: after the flowers are past, there come small long pods, wher∣in are contained flat reddish seede: the rootes are small, reddish and hard, spreading, branching and enterlacing themselues very much, and is fit to be placed on some sha∣dy side of a garden: the whole plant is rather of a strong then any good sent, yet is cherished for the pleasant varietie of the flowers. The Place. Caesalpinus saith it groweth on the mountaines of Liguria, that is nigh vnto Ligorne, in the Florentine Dominion. Cametarius saith, nigh vnto Vicenzo in Italie. Bauhinus on the Euganian hils, nigh vnto Padoa, and in Romania in shadowie wet grounds. The Time. It flowreth from Iune vntill the end of Iuly, and to the middle of August, if it stand, as I said it is fittest, in a shadowie place. The Names. It is of most Writers accepted for the true Epimedium of Dioscorides, though he saith it is without flower or seede, being therein eyther mistaken, or mis-informed, as he was also in Dictamnus of Candy, and diuers other plants. From the triple triplicitie of the standing of the stalkes and leaues, and quadriplicitie of the flowers, it might receiue another name in English then is already imposed vpon it: but lest I might be thought to be singular or full of noueltie, let it passe with the name Barrenwort, as it is in the title. The Vertues. It is thought of diuers to agree in the propertie of causing barrennesse, as the ancients doe record of Epimedium. CHAP. LIIII. Papauer satiuum. Garden Poppies. OF Poppies there are a great many sorts, both wilde and tame, but because our Garden doth entertaine none, but those of beautie and respect, I wil onely giue you here a few double ones, and leaue the rest to a general suruey. 1. Papauer multiplex album. Double white Poppies.
The double white Poppy hath diuers broade, and long whitish greene leaues, giuing milke (as all the rest of the plant aboue ground doth, wheresoeuer it is broken) very much rent or torne in on the sides, and notched or indented besides, compassing at the bottome of them a hard round brittle whitish greene stalke, branched towards the toppe, bearing one faire large great flower on the head of euery branch, which before it breaketh out, is contained within a thin skinne, and being blowne open is very thick of leaues, and double, somewhat iagged at the ends, and of a white colour; in the 1 Viola Martia simplex. Single March Violets. 2 Viola Martia multiplex. Double March Violets. 3 Viola flammea siue tricolor. Ordinary garden Pansies or Harts ease. 4 Viola flammea lutea magna. Great yellow Pansies. 5 Viola triolor dple Double Panies or Harts eases. 6 Epimedium. Barrenwort. 7 Papauer sativum flore plno. Double garden Poppies. 8 Papauer sativum flore ple laciv feathere Poppie. 9 Ni∣gella Hispanica flore amplo. Spanish Nigella or Fenell flower. 10 Nigella multiplex caerulea Double blew Nigella or Fenell flower. 11 Nigella duplex flore albo. Double white Nigella. 12 Ptarmica flore pleno. Double wilde Pelletory. depiction of flowers
middle whereof standeth a round head or bowle, with a striped crowne on the heade of it, very like a starre, compassed about with some threds, wherein when it is ripe, is contained small, round, white seede. disposed into seuerall cels: the roote is hard, wooddy, and long, perishing euery yeare, and must bee new sowne euery Spring, if they doe not spring of their own sowing, which if it doe, the flowers are seldome so faire and double as they that are sowne in the Spring: the whole plant is of a strong heady smell. 2. Papauer multiplex rubescens. Double red or blush Poppies. This other kind of double Poppy differeth not in any other thing from the former, but only in the colour of the flowers, which are of a bright red, tending to a blush co∣lour, parted, paned or striped in many places with white, and exceedingly more iagged then the former, almost like a feather at the ends, the bottomes of all the leaues being white: the seede hereof is white as the former, which is not so in any other Poppie, that beareth not a full white flower. 3. Papauer multiplex nigrum siue purpureum. Double purple or murry Poppies. This kinde varyeth both in flowers and seede, although neyther in leaues or any o∣ther thing from the first: the flowers are thicke and double, and somewhat iagged at the ends, in some more, in some lesse, eyther red or blush, or purplish red, more or lesse, or of a sad murrey or tawney, with browne, or blacke, or tawny bottomes: the seede is eyther of a grayish blew colour, or in others more blackish. 4. Papauer Rhaas flore multiplici. The double red field Poppie. This double Poppie is like the wilde or fielde Poppie, which is well knowne to all to haue longer, narrower, and more iagged greene leaues then the former, the stalkes more hairy, and the flower of a deepe yellowish red colour, knowne to all. Now this differeth in nothing from it, but in the doublenesse of the flower, which is very thicke and double, but not so large as the former. This riseth of seede in the like manner as they doe, and so to bee preserued. The Place. From what place they haue beene first gathered naturally I cannot assure you, but we haue had them often and long time in our gardens, being sent from Italie and other places. The double wilde kindes came from Con∣stantinople, which whether it groweth neere vnto it or further off, we can∣not tell as yet. The Time. They flower in the beginning or middle of Iune at the furthest, the seede is ripe within a small while after. The Names. The generall knowne name to all, is Papauer, Poppie: the seuerall distin∣ctions are according to their colours. Yet our English Gentlewomen in some places, call it by a by-name, Ione siluer pinne: subauditur, Faire with∣out and fowle within. The Vertues.
It is not vnknowne, I suppose to any, that Poppie procureth sleepe, for which cause it is wholly and onely vsed, as I thinke: but the water of the  wilde Poppies, besides that it is of great vse in Pleuresies, and Rheumatick-or thinner Distillations, is found by daily experience, to bee a soueraigne re∣medy against surfeits; yet some doe attribute this propertie to the water of the wilde Poppies. CHAP. LV. Nigella. The Fenell flower, or Nigella. AMong the many sorts of Nigella, both wilde and tame, both single and double, I will onely set downe three sorts, to be noursed vp in this garden, referring the rest to a Physicke garden, or a generall Historie, which may comprehend all. 1. Nigella Hispanica flore simplici. The great Spanish Nigella. Spanish Nigella riseth vp with diuers greene leaues, so finely cut, and into so many parts, that they are finer then Fenell, and diuided somewhat like the leaues of Larkes heeles, among which rise vp stalkes, with many such like leaues vpon them, branched into three or foure parts, at the toppe of each whereof standeth one faire large flower, like vnto other single Nigella's, consisting of fiue or six leaues sometimes, of a bleake blew, or of a purplish blew colour, with a greene head in the middle, compassed about with seuen or eight small blewish greene flowers, or peeces of flowers rather, made like gaping hoodes, with euery of them a yellowish line thwart or crosse the middle of them, with some threds also standing by them: after the flower is past the head groweth greater, hauing sixe, seuen or eight hornes as it were at the toppe, greater and longer, and standing closer together then any other Nigella, spreading very like a starre, or the crowne of the Poppy head, but larger and longer, each whereof being folded together, openeth a little when the head is ripe, which is greater aboue, and smaller below, and not so round as the others are, containing within them small yel∣lowish greene seede, or not so blacke as the other sorts: the rootes are small and yel∣low, perishing euery yeare as the others likewise doe. 2. Nigella Damascena flore multiplici. Double blew Nigella, or The Fenell flower. The double Nigella is in leaues, stalkes and rootes, very like vnto the former Ni∣gella, so that the one can very hardly bee discerned from the other before this rise vp to flower, except it be that the leaues hereof are not fully so large as they: the flower consisteth of three or foure rowes of leaues, layde one vpon another, of a pale blew colour, with a greene round head compassed with diuers short threads in the middle, and hauing fiue or sixe such small greene Fenell-like leaues vnder the flower, to beare it vp (as it were) below, which adde a greater grace to the flowers, which at the first sheweth sometimes white, but changeth quickely after: the horned heads hereof are like vnto the heads of the other wilde kinde, which are somewhat rounder and grea∣ter, hauing within them blacke vneuen seedes, but without any sent. 3. Nigella Catrina flore albo multiplici. Double white Nigella. This double white Nigella hath such like leaues as the last hath, but somewhat lar∣ger, of a yellower greene colour, and not so finely cut and iagged: the flowers are somewhat lesse, and lesser double then the former, and in colour white, hauing no greene leaues vnder the flower, as the former hath, the head whereof in the middle is very like the head of the last double kinde, but not so great, wherein is contained black seede for the most part, and sweete like the Romane Nigella, which only is sweet be∣sides this: yet sometimes it is not so blacke, but rather a little more white or yellow∣ish: the roote is yellow, and perisheth as the others euery yeare.
The Place. All these, and the rest be found wilde in diuers Countreyes, as France, Spaine, Italie, &c. but wee onely cherish them in our Gardens for our de∣light. The Time. They flower in the end of Iune, and in Iuly, or thereabouts. The Names. They are called Melanthium, Gith, and Nigella, and of some Flos Diuae Catherinae. We may either call them Nigella according to the Latine name, or the Fenell flower, as some doe, because the double blew Nigella hath small Fenell-like leaues bearing vp the flower, as I shewed before in the de∣scription. The Vertues. These Nigella's are nothing so hot in qualitie as the single Romane kind is, as may well be knowne by the smell of the seede thereof, and therefore are not fit to be vsed in the steed of it, as many ignorant persons vse to doe: for the single Romane seede is vsed to helpe paines, and cold distillations in the head, and to dry vp the rheume. Pena saith, that the pressed oyle of the seede as well taken inwardly as vsed outwardly is an excellent remedy for the hardnesse and swelling of the spleene. CHAP. LVI. Ptarmica siluestris flore pleno. Double wilde Pelletory. THe double wilde Pelletorie hath straight and slender stalkes, beset with long and narrow leaues, snipt round about the edges, in all points like vnto the sin∣gle wilde kinde, that groweth common with vs almost euery where: on the toppes of the stalkes stand foure or fiue, or more white flowers, one aboue another, with a greene leafe at the bottome of the footestalke of euery one of them, beeing small, thicke, and very double, with a little yellowishnesse in the middle of euery flower, like both for forme and colour vnto the flower of the double Featherfew, but smaller: the rootes are many long strings, running here and there in the ground: this hath no smell at all, but is delightsome only for the double white flowers. The Place. It is only cherished in some few Gardens, for it is very rare. The Time. It flowreth in the end of Iune or thereabouts. The Names. It is called of most Ptarmica, or Sternutamenteria, of his qualitie to pro∣uoke neesing; and of some Pyrethrum, of the hot biting taste. We vsually call it Double wilde Pelletorie, and some Sneesewort, but Elleborus albus is vsually so called, and I would not two things should be called by one name, for the mistaking and mis-using of them.
The Vertues. The properties hereof, no doubt, may well bee referred to the single kinde, beeing of the same qualitie, yet as I take it, a little more milde and temperate. CHAP. LVII. Parthenium flore pleno. Double Featherfew. FEatherfew that beareth double flowers is so like vnto the single kinde, that the one cannot be discerned from the other, vntill it come to flower, bearing broad, pale or fresh greene leaues, much cut in on the sides: the stalkes haue such like leaues on them as grow below, from the toppes whereof come forth many double white flowers, like vnto the flowers of the former wilde Pelletory, but larger, and like also vnto the flowers of the double Camomill: the sent whereof is as strong as of the single. The Place. We haue this kinde only in Gardens, and as it is thought by others, is pe∣culiar only to our owne Countrey. The Time. It flowreth in the end of May, and in Iune and Iuly. The Names. It is called diuersly by diuers: Some thinke it to be Parthenium of Dio∣scorides, but not of Galen; for his Parthenium is a sweet herbe, and is thought to bee Amaracus, that is Marierome: others call it Matricaria; and some Amarella. Gaza translateth it Muraleum, Theoph. lib. 7. cap. 7. It is generally in these parts of our Country called Double Feaverfew, or Featherfew. The Vertues. It is answerable to all the properties of the single kinde which is vsed for womens diseases, to procure their monthly courses chiefly. It is held to bee a speciall remedy to helpe those that haue taken Opium too liberally. In Italy some vse to eate the single kinde among other greene herbes, as Camerarius saith, but especially fryed with egges, and so it wholly loseth his strong and bitter taste. CHAP. LVIII. Chamaemaelum. Camomill. OVr ordinary Camomill is well knowne to all, to haue many smal trayling branches, set with very fine smal leaues, bushing and spreading thicke o∣uer the ground, taking roote still as it spreadeth: the toppes of the branches haue white flowers, with yellow thrummes in the middle, very like vnto the Feather∣few, before described, but somewhat greater, not so hard, but more soft and gentle in handling, and the whole herbe to be of a very sweet sent.
1. Chamaemaelum nudum. Naked Camomill. We haue another sort of Camomill in some Gardens, but very rare, like vnto the former, but that it is whiter, finer, and smaller, and raiseth, it selfe vp a little higher, and beareth naked flowers; that is, without that border of white leaues that is in the former, and consisteth onely of a yellow round thrummie head, smelling almost as sweete as the former. 2. Chamaemaelum flore pleno. Double flowred Camomill. The double Camomill groweth with his leaues vpon the ground, as the other sin∣gle kinde doth, but of a little fresher greene colour, and larger withall: the stalkes with the flowers on them, doe raise themselues vp a little higher then the ordinary, and bearing one or two flowers vpon a stalk, which are composed of many white leaues set together in diuers rowes, which make a fine double flower, with a little yellow spot in the middle for the most part of euery one, and are much larger then any single kinde, smelling better, and more pleasing then the ordinary: this doth creepe vpon the ground as the other, but is more tender to be kept in the Winter. Yet if you saue the flowers hereof (and so will the double Featherfew also) when they haue stood long, and ready to fade, and keepe them dry vntill the Spring, and then breaking them or pulling them to peeces, sowe them, there will spring vp from them Camomill, and also Featherfew, that will againe beare double flowers. The Place. Our ordinary Camomill groweth wilde in many places of our Country, and as well neare London as in other places. The others are onely found in our Gardens, where they are cherished. Bauhinus saith, that the double flowred Camomill is found wilde about Orleance in France. The Time. The double kinde is vsually in flower in Iune, before the ordinary kinde, and most commonly past before it flowreth, which is not vntill Iuly or Au∣gust. The naked Camomill flowreth betweene them both, or later. The Names. Camomill is called Anthemis, Leucanthemis, and Leucanthemum, of the whitenesse of the flowers; and Chamaemaelum of the corrupted Italian name Camomilla. Some call the naked Camomill, Chrysanthemum odoratum. The double Camomill is called by some Chamaemaelum Romanum flore multiplici. The Vertues. Camomill is put to diuers and sundry vses, both for pleasure and profit, both for inward and outward diseases, both for the sicke and the sound, in bathings to comfort and strengthen the sound, and to ease paines in the dis∣eased, as also in many other formes applyed outwardly. The flowers boy∣led in Posset drinke prouoketh sweat, and helpeth to expell colds, aches, and other griefes. A Syrupe made of the iuice of the double Camomill, with the flowers and white wine, as Bauhinus saith, is vsed by some against the Iaundise and Dropsie, caused by the euill disposition of the splene.
1 Parthenium flore pleno. Double Featherfew. 2. Chamaemaelum nudum. Naked Camomill. 3 Chamaemaelum flore pleno. Double Ca∣momill. 4 Pyrethrum officinarum Pelletory of Spaine. 5 Flos Adonis flore rubro & flore luteo. Adonis flower both red & yellow. 6 Hlleorus niger feruaceus siue Buphthalmum. The great Oxe eye or the great yellow Anemone. 7 Buphthalmum vulgare. The common yellow Oxe eye. depiction of flowers
CHAP. LIX. Pyrethrum officinarum. Pelletory of Spaine. I Must needes adioyne vnto the Camomils this fine and tender plant, for some neare resemblance it hath with them in face, though not in quality. It is a small and lowe plant, bearing many fine greene leaues vpon his slender branches, which leane or lye down vpon the ground, diuided into many parts, yet somewhat larger and broader then Camomill, the stalkes whereof are bigger, and more iuicie then it: the flowers that stand at the toppes of the stalkes are single, but much larger then any Camomill flower, hauing a pale or border of many leaues, white on the vpperside, and reddish vnderneath, set about the yellow middle thrumme; but not standing so close together ioyning at the bottome, as the Camomill flowers doe, but more seuered one from an∣other: it beareth small whitish seede, which is hardly found and discerned from the chaffe: the roote is long, and growing downe right, of the bignesse of a mans finger or thumbe in our Countrey, but not halfe so great where it groweth naturally, with some fibres and branches from the sides thereof, of a very hot, sharpe, and biting taste, drawing much water into the mouth, after it hath been chewed a while: the plant with vs is very tender, and will hardly or not at all endure the hardnesse and extremi∣ties of our Winters, vnlesse it be very carefully preserued. The Place. It groweth in Spaine wilde in many places, and in other hot Countries, where it may feele no frosts to cause it perish. The Time. It flowreth so late with vs, that it is not vntill August, that oftentimes we cannot gather ripe seedes from it, before it perish. The Names. The name Pyrethrum (taken from , that is, ignis, fire) is giuen to this plant, because of the heate thereof, and that the roote is somewhat like in shew, but specially in property vnto the true Pyrethrum of Dioscorides, which is an vmbelliferous plant, whose rootes are greater, and more feruent a great deale, and haue a hayrie bush or toppe as Meum, and many other vmbelliferous plants haue. It is also called in Latine, Saliuaris, of the effect in drawing much moisture into the mouth, to be spit out. We doe vsually call it Pelletory of Spaine. The Vertues. It is in a manner wholly spent to draw rheume from the teeth, by chewing it in the mouth, thereby to ease the tooth-ach, and likewise from the head, in the paines thereof.
CHAP. LX. Flos Adonis flore rubro. Red Adonis flower. ADonis flower may well be accounted a kinde of Camomill, although it hath some especiall differences, hauing many long branches of leaues lying vpon the ground, and some rising vp with the stalke, so finely cut and iagged, that they much resemble the leaues of Mayweed, or of the former Nigella: at the top of the stalkes, which rise a foote high or better, stand small red flowers, consisting of six or eight round leaues, hauing a greene head in the middle, set about with many blackish threads, without any smell at all: after the flowers are past, there grow vp heads with many roundish white seedes at the toppes of them, set close together, very like vnto the heads of seede of the great Oxe eye, set downe in the next Chapter, but smaller: the rootes are small and thready, perishing euery yeare, but rising of his owne seede againe, many times before Winter, which will abide vntill the next yeare. Yellow Adonis flower is like vnto the red, but that the flower is somewhat larger,Flore luteo. and of a faire yellow colour. The Place. The first groweth wilde in the corn fields in many places of our own coun∣try, as well as in others, and is brought into Gardens for the beauties sake of the flower. The yellow is a stranger, but noursed in our Gardens with o∣ther rarities. The Time. They flower in May or Iune, as the yeare falleth out to be early or late: the seed is soone ripe after, and will quickly fall away, if it be not gathered. The Names. Some haue taken the red kinde to be a kinde of Anemone; other to be Eranthemum of Dioscorides: the most vsuall name now with vs is Flos A∣donis, and Flos Adonidis: In English, where it groweth wilde, they call it red Maythes, as they call the Mayweede, white Maythes; and some of our English Gentlewomen call it Rosarubie: we vsually call it Adonis flower. The Vertues. It hath been certainly tryed by experience, that the seed of red Adonis flower drunke in wine, is good to ease the paines of the Collicke and Stone. CHAP. LXI. Buphthalmum. Oxe eye. VNder the name Buphthalmum, or Oxe eye, are comprehended two or three se∣uerall plants, each differing from other, both in face and property, yet because they all beare one generall name, I thinke fittest to comprise them all in one Chapter, and first of that which in leafe & seed commeth nearest to the Adonis flower. 1. Buphthalmum maius siue Helleborus niger ferulacus. Great Oxe eye, or he yellow Anemone.
This great Oxe eye is a beautifull plant, hauing many branches of greene leaues  leaning or lying vpon the ground for the most part, yet some standing vpright, which are as fine, but shorter then Fenell; some of them ending in a small tuft of green leaues, and some hauing at the toppes of them one large flower apeece, somewhat reddish or brownish on the outside, while they are in bud, and a while after, and being open, shew themselues to consist of twelue or fourteene long leaues, of a faire shining yellow co∣lour, set in order round about a greene head, with yellow thrums in the middle, laying themselues open in the sunne, or a faire day, but else remaining close: after the flower is past, the head growing greater, sheweth it selfe compact of many round whitish seede, very like vnto the head of seede of the Adonis flower last described, but much greater: the rootes are many long blackish fibres or strings, set together at the head, very like vnto the rootes of the lesser blacke Hellebor or Bearefoote, but somewhat harder, stiffer, or more brittle, and seeming without moisture in them, which abide and encrease euery yeare. 2. Buphthalmum minus, seu Anthemis flore luteo. Small Oxe eye. This plant might seeme to be referred to the Camomils, but that it is not sweete, or to the Corne-Marigolds, but that the stalkes and leaues are not edible: it is therefore put vnder the Oxe eyes, and so we will describe it; hauing many weake branches lying vpon the ground, beset with winged leaues, very finely cut and iagged, somewhat like vnto Mayweede, but a little larger: the flowers are like vnto the Corne Marigold, and larger then any Camomill, being wholly yellow, as well the pale or border of leaues, as the middle thrummes: the rootes are somewhat tough and long. 3. Buphthalmum vulgare. Common Oxe eye. This Oxe eye riseth vp with hard round stalkes, a foote and a halfe high, hauing many winged leaues vpon them, made of diuers long and something broad leaues, snipt about the edges, set together somewhat like vnto Tansie, but smaller, and not so much winged: the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes, of a full yellow colour, both the outer leaues and the middle thrum, and not altogether so large as the last: the rootes of this kinde perish euery yeare, and require a new sowing againe. The Place. The first groweth in diuers places of Austria, Bohemia, and those parts, it hath beene likewise brought out of Spaine. The second in Prouence, a country in France. The last in diuers places, as well of Austria as Morauia, and about Mentz and Norimberg, as Clusius setteth downe. We haue them in our Gardens, but the first is of the greatest respect and beauty. The Time. The first flowreth betimes, oftentimes in March, or at the furthest in A∣pill; the seede is ripe in May, and must be quickly gathered, lest it bee lost. The other two flower not vntill Iune. The Names. The first is called Buphthalmum of Dodonaeus,
Pseudohelleborus of Mat∣thiolus, Helleborus niger ferulaceus Theophrasti by Lobel, of some others Elleborus niger verus, vsing it for the true blacke Ellebor, but it is much diffe∣ring, as well in face as properties. Of others Sesamoides minus. Some haue thought it to be a yellow Anemone, that haue looked on it without further iudgement, and by that name is most vsually knowne to most of our English Gentlewomen that know it. But it may most fitly be called a Buphthalmum, as Dodonaeus doth, and Hispanicum or Austriacum, for distinctions sake. We doe most vsually call it Helleborus niger ferulaceus, as Lobel doth: Bauhinus  calleth it Helleborus niger tenuifolius Buphthalmi flore. The second is called Buphthalmum Narbonense: In English, The French, or lesser Oxe eye, as the first is called, The Great Oxe eye. The last, The common Oxe eye. The Vertues. The first hath been vsed in diuers places for the true blacke Ellebor, but now is sufficiently knowne to haue been an errour; but what Physicall pro∣perty it hath, other then Matthiolus hath expressed, to be vsed as Setter∣wort for cattell, when they rowell them, to put or draw the rootes hereof through the hole they make in the dewe lappe, or other places, for their coughes or other diseases, I know not, or haue heard or read of any. The others likewise haue little or no vse in Physicke now a dayes that I know. CHAP. LXII. Chrysanthemum. Corne Marigold. ALthough the sorts of Corne Marigolds, which are many, are fitter for another then this worke, and for a Catholicke Garden of Simples, then this of Pleasure and Delight for faire Flowers: yet giue me leaue to bring in a couple: the one for a corner or by-place, the other for your choisest, or vnder a defenced wall, in re∣gard of his statelinesse. 1. Chrysanthemum Creticum. Corne Marigold of Candy. This faire Corne Marigold hath for the most part one vpright stalke, two foote high, whereon are set many winged leaues, at euery ioynt one, diuided and cut into diuers parts, and they againe parted into seuerall peeces or leaues: the flowers growe at the toppes of the stalkes, rising out of a scaly head, composed of ten or twelue large leaues, of a faire, but pale yellow colour, and more pale almost white at the bottome of the leaues, round about the yellow thrumme in the middle, being both larger and sweeter then any of the other Corne Marigolds: the seede is whitish and chaffie: the roote perisheth euery yeare. 2. Chrysanthemum Perüuianum, siue Flos Solis. The golden flower of Peru, or the Flower of the Sunne.
This goodly and stately plant, wherewith euery one is now adayes familiar, being of many sorts, both higher and lower (with one stalke, without branches, or with many branches, with a blacke, or with a white seede, yet differing not in forme of leaues or flowers one from another, but in the greatnesse or smalnesse) riseth vp at the first like vnto a Pompion with two leaues, and after two, or foure more leaues are come forth, it riseth vp into a great stalke, bearing the leaues on it at seuerall distan∣ces on all sides thereof, one aboue another vnto the very toppe, being sometimes, and in some places, seuen, eight, or ten foote high, which leaues standing out from the stemme or stalke vpon their seuerall great ribbed foote-stalkes, are very large, broad belowe, and pointed at the end, round, hard, rough, of a sad greene colour, and bending downewards: at the topped of the stalke standeth one great, large, and broad flower, bowing downe the head vnto the Sunne, and breaking forth from a great head, made of scaly greene leaues, like vnto a great single Marigold, hauing a border of ma∣nie long yellow leaues, set about a great round yellow thrumme, as it were in the mid∣dle, which are very like vnto short heads of flowers, vnder euery one whereof there is a seede, larger then any seede of the Thistles, yet somewhat like, and lesser, and roun∣der then any Gourd seede, set in so close and curious a manner, that when the seede is taken out, the head with the hollow places or cels thereof, seemeth very like vnto an hony combe; which seede is in some plants very blacke, in the hotter countries, or very  white, and great, or large, but with vs is neither so large, blacke, or white; but some∣times blackish or grayish. Some sort riseth not vp halfe the height that others doe, and some againe beare but one stemme or stalke, with a flower at the toppe thereof; and others two or three, or more small branches, with euery one his flower at the end; and some so full of branches from the very ground almost, that I haue accounted threescore branches round about the middle stalke of one plant, the lowest neare two yards long, others aboue them a yard and a halfe, or a yard long, with euery one his flower thereon; but all smaller then those that beare but one or two flowers, and lesser also for the most part then the flower on the middle stalke it selfe. The whole plant, and euery part thereof aboue ground hath a strong resinous sent of Turpentine, and the heads and middle parts of the flowers doe oftentimes (and sometimes the ioynts of the stalke where the leaues stand) sweat out a most fine thin & cleare Rossin or Turpen∣tine, but in small quantity, and as it were in drops, in the heate and dry time of the year, so like both in colour, smell, and taste vnto cleare Venice Turpentine, that it cannot be knowne from it: the roote is strongly fastened in the ground by some greater roots branching out, and a number of small strings, which growe not deepe, but keepe vn∣der the vpper crust of the earth, and desireth much moisture, yet dyeth euery yeare with the first frosts, and must be new sowne in the beginning of the Spring. The Place. Their places are set downe in their titles, the one to come out of Candy, the other out of Peru, a Prouince in the West Indies. The Time. The first flowreth in Iune, the other later, as not vntill August, and some∣times so late, that the early frosts taking it, neuer suffer it to come to ripeness. The Names. The first hath his name in his title. The second, besides the names set downe, is called of some Planta maxima, Flos Maximus, Sol Indianus, but the most vsuall with vs is, Flos Solis: In English, The Sunne Flower, or Flower of the Sunne. The Vertues. There is no vse of either in Physicke with vs, but that sometimes the heads of the Sunne Flower are dressed, and eaten as Hartichokes are, and are accounted of some to be good meate, but they are too strong for my taste. CHAP. LXIII. Calendula. Marigolds. SOme haue reckoned vp many sorts of Marigolds, I had rather make but two, the single and the double; for doubtlesse, those that be most double, rise from the best seede, which are the middlemost of the great double, and some will be lesse double, whose seede is greater then the rest, according to the ground where it grow∣eth; as also those that be of a paler colour, doe come of the seed of the yellower sort. 1. Calendula maxima. The great Garden Marigold.
The Garden Marigold hath round greene stalkes, branching out from the ground into many parts, whereon are set long flat greene leaues, broader and rounder at the 1 Chrysanthemum Creticum. Corne Marigolds of Candy. 2 Flos Solis. The Flower of the Sunne. 3 Calendula. Marigolds. 4 A∣ter Atticus siue Italorum. The purple Marigold. 5 Piloslla maior. Golden Mouse-eare. 6 Scorsonera Hispanica. Spanish Vipers grasse. 7 Tragopogon. Goates beard, or goe to bed at noone. depiction of flowers
point then any where else, and smaller also at the setting to of the stalke, where it com∣passeth it about: the flowers are sometimes very thicke and double (breaking out of a scaly clammy greene head) composed of many rowes of leaues, set so close together one within another, that no middle thrume can bee seene, and sometimes lesse double, hauing a small browne spot of a thrume in the middle: and sometimes but of two or three rowes of leaues, with a large browne thrume in the middle; euery one where∣of is somewhat broader at the point, and nicked into two or three corners, of an ex∣cellent faire deepe gold yellow colour in some, and paler in others, and of a pretty strong and resinous sweete sent: after the flowers are past, there succeede heads of crooked seede, turning inward, the outermost biggest, and the innermost least: the roote is white, and spreadeth in the ground, and in some places will abide after the seeding, but for the most part perisheth, and riseth againe of his owne feede. Some∣times this Marigold doth degenerate, and beareth many small flowers vpon short stalkes, compassing the middle flower: but this happeneth but seldome, and there∣fore accounted but lusus naturae, a play of nature, which she worketh in diuers other plants besides. 2. Calendula simplex. The single Marigold. There is no difference betweene this and the former, but that the flowers are single, consisting of one rowe of leaues, of the same colour; eyther paler or deeper yellow, standing about a great browne thrumme in the middle: the seed likewise is alike, but for the most part greater then in the double kindes. The Place. Our Gardens are the chiefe places for the double flowers to grow in; for we know not of any other naturall place: but the single kinde hath beene found wilde in Spaine, from whence I received seede, gathered by Guil∣laume Boel, in his time a very curious, and cunning searcher of simples. The Time. They flower all the summer long, and sometimes euen in winter, if it be milde, and chiefly at the beginning of those monethes, as it is thought. The Names. They are called Caltha of diuers, and taken to be that Caltha, wherof both Virgil and Columella haue written. Others doe call them Calendula, of the Kalendes, that is the first day of the monthes, wherein they are thought chiefly to flower; and thereupon the Italians call them, Fiori di ogni mese, that is, The Flowers of euery moneth: We cal them in English generally, eyther Golds, or Marigolds. The Vertues. The herbe and flowers are of great vse with vs among other pot-herbes; and the flowers eyther greene or dryed, are often vsed in possets, broths, and drinkes, as a comforter of the heart and spirits, and to expel any malignant or pestilential quality, gathered neere thereunto. The Syrupe and Conserue made of the fresh flowers, are vsed for the same purposes to good effect.
CHAP. LXIIII. Aster. Starre-wort. DIoscorides and other of the ancient Writers, haue set forth but one kinde of Starre-wort, which they call Aster Atticus, of the place no doubt, where the greatest plentie was found, which was the Countrey of Athens: the later Writers haue found out many other plants which they referre to this kinde, calling them by the same name. It is not my purpose to entreate of them all, neyther doth this garden fitly agree with them: I shall therefore select out one or two from the rest, and giue you the knowledge of them, leauing the rest to their proper place. 1. Aster Atticus flore luteo. Yellow Starre-wort. This Starre-wort riseth vp with two or three rough hairy stalkes, a foote and a halfe high, with long, rough or hairie, brownish, darke greene leaues on them, diuided into two or three branches: at the toppe of euery one whereof standeth a flat scaly head, compassed vnderneath with fiue or sixe long, browne, rough greene leaues, standing like a Starre, the flower it selfe standing in the middle thereof, made as a border of narrow, long, pale yellow leaues, set with a brownish yellow thrume: the roote dyeth euery yeare, hauing giuen his flower. 2. Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo. Purple Italian Starre-wort. This Italian Starre-wort hath many wooddy, round brittle stalkes, rising from the roote, somewhat higher then the former, sometimes standing vpright, and other∣whiles leaning downewards, whereon are set many somewhat hard, and rough long leaues, round pointed, without order vp to the toppe, where it is diuided into seue∣rall branches, whereon stand the flowers, made like vnto a single Marigold, with a bor∣der of blewish purple leaues, set about a browne middle thrume, the heads sustaining the flowers, are composed of diuers scaly greene leaues, as is to be seene in the Knap∣weedes or Matfelons, which after the flowers are past yeelde a certaine downe, where∣in lye small blacke and flat seedes, somewhat like vnto Lettice seede, which are carried away with the winde: the roote is composed of many white strings, which perisheth not as the former, but abideth, and springeth afresh euery yeare. The Place. The first is found in Spaine, as Clusius, and in France, as Lobel say. The other hath beene found in many places in Germany, and Austria: in Italie also, and other places; we haue it plentifully in our Gardens. The Time. The first flowreth in Summer. And the other not vntill August or Sep∣tember. The Names. The first is called Aster Atticus flore luteo, Buhonium, & Inguinalis, and of many is taken to be the true Aster Atticus of Dioscorides: yet Matthiolus thinketh not so, for diuers good reasons, which hee setteth downe in the Chapter of Aster Atticus, as any man may vnderstand, if they will but reade the place, which is too long to bee inserted here. The other is thought by Matthiolus, to bee the truer Aster Atticus, (vnto whom I must also consent) and constantly also affirmed to be the Amellus Virgilij, as may be seene in the same place: but it is vsually called at this day, Aster Italorum flore caeruleo or
purpureo. Their English names are sufficiently expressed in their titles, yet some call the last, The purple Marigold, because it is so like vnto one in form. The Vertues. They are held, if they bee the right, to bee good for the biting of a mad dogge, the greene herbe being beaten with old hogs grease, and applyed; as also for swolne throats: It is likewise vsed for botches that happen in the groine, as the name doth import. CHAP. LXV. Pilosella maior. Golden Mouse-eare. SOme resemblance that the flowers of this plant hath with the former Golds, maketh me to insert it in this place, although I know it agreeth not in any other part, yet for the pleasant aspect thereof, it must bee in this my garden, whose de∣scription is as followeth: It hath many broade greene leaues spread vpon the ground, spotted with pale spots, yet more conspicuous at sometimes then at other; somewhat hairy both on the vpper and vnderside, in the middle of these leaues rise vp one, two or more blackish hairy stalkes, two foote high at the least, bare or naked vp to the top, where it beareth an vmbell, or short tuft of flowers, set close together vpon short stalkes, of the forme or fashion of the Haukeweedes, or common Mouse-eare, but somewhat smaller, of a deep gold yellow, or orenge tawney colour, with some yellow threds in the middle, of little or no sent at all: after the flowers are past, the heads carry small, short, blacke seede, with a light downie matter on them, ready to bee carried a∣way with the winde, as many other plants are, when they be ripe: the rootes spread vnder ground, and shoote vp in diuers other places, whereby it much encreaseth, espe∣cially if it be set in any moist or shadowie place. The Place. It groweth in the shadowie woods of France, by Lions, and Mompelier, as Lobell testifieth: we keepe it in our gardens, and rather in a shadowie then sunnie place. The Time. It flowreth in Somer, and sometimes againe in September. The Names. It is called by Lobell, Pulmonaria Gallorum Hieratij facie: and the Herba∣rists of France take it to be the true Pulmonaria of Tragus. Others call it Hie∣ratium flore aureo. Pelleterius Hieratium Indicum. Some Pilosella, or Auricula muris maior flore aureo. And some Chondrilla flore aureo. Dalechamptus would haue it to bee Corchorus, but farre vnfitly. The fittest English name we can giue it, is Golden Mouse-eare, which may endure vntill a fitter bee imposed on it: for the name of Grim the Collier, whereby it is called of many is both idle and foolish. The Vertues. The French according to the name vse it for the defects of the lunges, but with what good successe I know not.
CHAP. LXVI. Scorsonera. Vipers grasse. ALthough there be foure or fiue sorts of Scorsonera, yet I shall here desire you to be cont with the knowledge only of a couple. 1. Scorsonera Hispanica maior. The greater Spanish Vipers grasse. This Spanish Vipers grasse hath diuers long, and somewhat broad leaues, hard and crumpled on the edges, and sometimes vneuenly cut in or indented also, of a blewish greene colour: among which riseth vp one stalke, and no more for the most part, two foote high or thereabouts, hauing here and there some narrower long leaues thereon then those below: the toppe of the stalke brancheth it selfe forth into other parts, euery one bearing a long scaly head, from out of the toppe whereof riseth a faire large double flower, of a pale yellow colour, much like vnto the flower of yellow Goates beard, but a little lesser, which being past, the seede succeedeth, being long, whitish and rough, inclosed with much downe, and among them many other long smooth seedes, which are limber and idle, and are carryed away at the will of the winde: the roote is long, thicke and round, brittle and blacke, with a certaine roughnesse on the outside: but very white within, yeelding a milkie liquor being broken, as euery other part of the plant doth besides, yet the roote more then any other part, and abideth many yeares without perishing. 2. Scorsonera Pannonica purpurea. Purple flowred Vipers grasse. This purple flowred Vipers grasse hath long and narrow leaues, of the same blewish greene colour with the former: the stalke riseth vp a foote and a halfe high, with a few such like leaues, but shorter thereon, breaking at the toppe into two or three parts, bearing on each of them one flower, fashioned like the former, and standing in the like scaly knoppe or head, but of a blewish purple colour, not fully so large, of the sweetest sent of any of this kinde, comming neerest vnto the smell of a delicate perfume. The Place. The first is of Spaine. The other of Hungarie and Austrich: which now furnish our gardens. The Time. They flower in the beginning of May: the seede is soone ripe after, and then perishing downe to the roote for that yeare, springeth afresh before Winter againe. The Names. They are called after the Spanish name Scorsonera, which is in Latine Vi∣peraria, of some Viperina, and Serpentina: Wee call them in English Vipers grasse, or Scorsonera. The Vertues. Manardus as I thinke first wrote hereof, and saith that it hath been found to cure them that are bitten of a Viper, or other such like venemous Crea∣ture. The rootes hereof being preserued with sugar, as I haue done often, doe eate almost as delicate as the Eringus roote, and no doubt is good to comforr and strengthen the heart, and vitall spirits. Some that haue vsed the preserued roote haue found it effectuall to expelling winde out of the sto∣macke, and to helpe swounings and faintnesse of the heart.
CHAP. LXVII. Tragopogon. Goates beard. I Must in this place set downe but two sorts of Goates beards; the one blew or ash-colour, the other red or purple, and leaue the other kindes: some to bee spoken of in the Kitchin Garden, and others in a Physicall Garden. 1. Tragopogon flore caeruleo. Blew Goates beard. All the Goates beards haue long, narrow, and somewhat hollow whitish greene leaues, with a white line downe the middle of euery one on the vpperside: the stalke riseth vp greater and stronger then the Vipers grasse, bearing at the toppe a great long head or huske, composed of nine or ten long narrow leaues, the sharpe points or ends whereof rise vp aboue the flower in the middle, which is thicke and double, some∣what broad and large spread, of a blewish ash-colour, with some whitish threads a∣mong them, shutting or closing it selfe within the greene huske euery day, that it abi∣deth blowing, vntill about noone, and opening not it selfe againe vntill the next mor∣ning: the head or huske, after the flower is past, and the seede neare ripe, openeth it selfe; the long leaues thereof, which closed not before now, falling downe round a∣bout the stalke, and shewing the seede, standing at the first close together, and the doune at the toppe of them: but after they haue stood a while, it spreadeth it selfe round, and is ready to be carried away with the winde, if it be not gathered: the seede it selfe is long, round, and rough, like the seede of the Vipers grasse, but greater and blacker: the roote is long, and not very great, but perisheth as soone as it hath borne seede, and springeth of the fallen seede, that yeare remaining greene all Winter, and flowring the next yeare following: the whole yeeldeth milke as the former, but some∣what more bitter and binding. 2. Tragopogon purpureum. Purple Goates beard. There is little difference in this kind from the former, but that it is a little larger, both in the leafe, and head that beareth the seed: the flowers also are a little larger, and spread more, of a darke reddish purple colour, with some yellow dust as it were cast vpon it, especially about the ends: the roote perisheth in the like manner as the other. The Place. Both these haue been sent vs from the parts beyond the Seas, I haue had them from Italy, where no doubt they grow naturally wilde, as the yellow doth with vs: they are kept in our Gardens for their pleasant flowers. The Time. They flower in May and Iune: the seede is ripe in Iuly. The Names. Their generall name is after the Greeke word Tragopogon, which is in La∣tine, Barbahirti: In English, Goates beard; the head of seede when it is rea∣die to bee carried away with the winde, causing that name for the resem∣blance: and because the flower doth euery day close it selfe at noone (as I said before) and openeth not againe vntill the next Sunne, some haue fitly called it, Goe to bed at noone. The Vertues.
The rootes of these kindes are a little more bitter and more binding also  then the yellow kinde expressed in the Kitchin Garden; and therefore fit∣ter for medicine then for meate, but yet is vsed as the yellow kinde is, which is more fit for meate then medicine. The distilled water is good to wash old sores and wounds. CHAP. LXVIII. Flos Africanus. The French Marigold. OF the French or African Marigolds there are three kindes as principall, and of each of them both with single and double flowers: of these, some diuer∣sity is obserued in the colour of the flowers, as well as in the forme or large∣nesse, so that as you may here see, I haue expressed eight differences, and Fabius Co∣lumna nine or ten, in regard hee maketh a diuersity of the paler and deeper yellow co∣lour: and although the lesser kinde, because of its euill sent, is held dangerous, yet for the beauty of the flower it findeth roome in Gardens. 1. Flos Africanus maior siue maximus multiplex. The great double French Marigold. This goodly double flower, which is the grace and glory of a Garden in the time of his beauty, riseth vp with a straight and hard round greene stalke, hauing some crests or edges all along the stalke, beset with long winged leaues, euery one whereof is like vnto the leafe of an Ash, being composed of many long and narrow leaues, snipt about the edges, standing by couples one against another, with an odde one at the end, of a darke or full greene colour: the stalke riseth to be three or foure foote high, and diui∣deth it selfe from the middle thereof into many branches, set with such like leaues to the toppes of them, euery one bearing one great double flower, of a gold yellow co∣lour aboue, and paler vnderneath, yet some are of a pale yellow, and some betweene both and all these rising from one and the same seede: the flower, before it be blowne open, hath all the leaues hollow; but when it is full blowne open, it spreadeth it selfe larger then any Prouince Rose, or equall vnto it at the least, if it be in good earth, and riseth out of a long greene huske, striped or furrowed, wherein after the flower is past, (which standeth in his full beauty a moneth, and oftentimes more, and being gathe∣red, may be preserued in his full beauty for two moneths after, if it be set in water) standeth the seede, set thicke and close together vpright, which is blacke, some∣what flat and long: the roote is full of small strings, whereby it strongly comprehen∣deth in the ground: the flower of this, as well as the single, is of the very smell of new waxe, or of an honie combe, and not of that poisonfull sent of the smaller kindes. 2. Flos Africanus maior simplex. The great single French Marigold. This single Marigold is in all things so like vnto the former, that it is hard to di∣scerne it from the double, but by the flowers, onely the stalke will be browner then the double; and to my best obseruation, hath and doth euery yeare rise from the seede of the double flower: so that when they are in flower, you may see the difference (or not much before, when they are in bud) this single flower euer appearing with thrums in the middle, and the leaues, which are the border or pale standing about them, shew∣ing hollow or fistulous, which after lay themselues flat and open (and the double flower appearing with all his leaues folded close together, without any thrum at all) and are of a deeper or paler colour, as in the double. 3. Flos Africanus fistuloso flore simplex & multiplex. Single and double French Marigolds with hollow leafed flowers.
As the former two greatest sorts haue risen from the seede of one and the same (I  meane the pod of double flowers) so doe these also, not differing from it in any thing, but that they are lower, and haue smaller greene leaues, and that the flower also being smaller, hath euery leafe abiding hollow, like vnto an hollow pipe, broad open at the mouth, and is of as deepe a yellow colour for the most part as the deepest of the for∣mer, yet sometimes pale also. 4. Flos Africanus minor multiplex. The lesser double French Marigold. The lesser double French Marigold hath his leaues in all things like vnto the for∣mer, but somewhat lesser, which are set vpon round browne stalkes, not so stiffe or vp∣right, but bowing and bending diuers wayes, and sometimes leaning or lying vpon the ground: the stalkes are branched out diuersly, whereon are set very faire double flow∣ers like the former, and in the like greene huskes, but smaller, and in some the outer∣most leaues will be larger then any of the rest, and of a deeper Orenge colour, almost crimson, the innermost being of a deepe gold yellow colour, tending to crimson: the whole flower is smaller, and of a stronger and more vnpleasant sauour, so that but for the beautifull colour, and doublenesse of the flower, pleasant to the eye, and not to any other sense, this kinde would finde roome in few Gardens: the rootes and seedes are like the former, but lesser. 5. Flos Africanus minor simplex. The small single French Marigold. This single kinde doth follow after the last in all manner of proportion, both of stalkes, leaues, seedes, and rootes: the flowers onely of this are single, hauing fiue or six broad leaues, of a deepe yellow crimson colour, with deepe yellow thrummes in the middle, and of as strong a stinking sent, or more then the last. The Place. They growe naturally in Africa, and especially in the parts about Tunis, and where old Carthage stood, from whence long agoe they were brought into Europe, where they are onely kept in Gardens, being sowne for the most part euery yeare, vnlesse in some milde Winters. The last single and double kindes (as being more hardy) haue sometimes endured: but that kinde with hollow leafed flowers, as Fabius Columna setteth it downe, is accounted to come from Mexico in America. The Time. They flower not vntill the end of Summer, especially the greater kindes: but the lesser, if they abide all the Winter, doe flower more early. The Names. They haue been diuersly named by diuers men: Some calling them Ca∣ryophyllus Indicus, that is, Indian Gilloflowers, and Tanacetum Perüvianum, Tansie of Peru, as if it grew in Peru, a Prouince of America; and Flos Indi∣cus, as a flower of the Indies; but it hath not beene knowne to haue beene brought from thence. Others would haue it to be Othonna of Plinie, and o∣thers; some to be Lycopersicum of Galen. It is called, and that more truely, Flos Tunetensis, Flos Africanus, and Caltha Africana, that is, the flower of Tunis, the flower of Africa, the Marigold of Africa, and peraduenture Pedna Paenorum. We in English most vsually call them, French Marigolds, with their seuerall distinctions of greater or smaller, double or single. To that with hollow leafed flowers, Fabius Columna giueth the name of Fi∣stiluso flore, and I so continue it.
1 Flos Africanus maximus multiplex. The greatest double French Marigold. 2 Flos Africanus maior multiplex. The greater double French Marigold 3 Flos Africanus maximus simplex The greatest single French Marigold. 4 Flos Africanus multiplex fistulosus. The doule hollow French Marigold. 5 Flos Africanus simplex fistulosus. The single hollow French Marigold. 6 Flos Africanus minor multiplex. The smaller double French Marigold. 7 Flos Africanus minor multiplex alter. Another sort of the leer double French Marigold. 8 Flos Africanus minor simplex. The lesser single French Marigold▪ depiction of flowers
The Vertues. We know no vse they haue in Physicke, but are cherished in Gardens for their beautifull flowers sake. CHAP. LXIX. Caryophyllus hortensis. Carnations and Gilloflowers. TO auoide confusion, I must diuide Gilloflowers from Pinkes, and intreate of them in seuerall Chapters. Of those that are called Carnations or Gilloflow∣ers, as of the greater kinde, in this Chapter; and of Pinkes, as well double as single, in the next. But the number of them is so great, that to giue seuerall descripti∣ons to them all were endlesse, at the least needlesse: I will therefore set downe onely the descriptions of three (for vnto these three may be referred all the other sorts) for their fashion and manner of growing, and giue you the seuerall names (as they are vsu∣ally called with vs) of the rest, with their variety and mixture of colours in the flow∣ers, wherein consisteth a chiefe difference. I account those that are called Carnations to be the greatest, both for leafe and flower, and Gilloflowers for the most part to bee lesser in both; and therefore will giue you each description apart, and the Orenge tawnie or yellow Gilloflower likewise by it selfe, as differing very notably from all the rest. 1. Caryophyllus maximus Harwicensis siue Anglicus. The great Harwich or old English Carnation. I take this goodly great old English Carnation, as a president for the description of all the rest of the greatest sorts, which for his beauty and statelinesse is worthy of a prime place, hauing beene alwayes very hardly preserued in the Winter; and there∣fore not so frequent as the other Carnations or Gilloflowers. It riseth vp with a great thicke round stalke, diuided into seuerall branches, somewhat thickly set with ioynts, and at euery ioynt two long greene rather then whitish leaues, somewhat broader then Gilloflower leaues, turning or winding two or three times round (in some other sorts of Carnations they are plaine, but bending the points downewards, and in some also of a darke reddish greene colour, and in others not so darke, but rather of a whitish greene colour:) the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes in long, great, and round greene huskes, which are diuided into fiue points, out of which rise many long and broad pointed leaues, deeply iagged at the ends, set in order round and comely, ma∣king a gallant great double flower, of a deepe Carnation colour, almost red, spotted with many blush spots and strakes, some greater and some lesser, of an excellent soft sweete sent, neither too quicke as many others of these kinds are, nor yet too dull, and with two whitish crooked threads like hornes in the middle: this kinde neuer beareth many flowers, but as it is slow in growing, so in bearing, not to be often handled, which sheweth a kinde of statelinesse, fit to preserue the opinion of magnificence: the roote is branched into diuers great, long, wooddy rootes, with many small fibres annexed vnto them. 2. Caryophyllus hortensis flore pleno rubro. The red or Cloue Gilloflower.
The red Cloue Gilloflower, which I take as a president for the second sort, which are Gilloflowers, grow like vnto the Carnations, but not so thicke set with ioynts and leaues: the stalkes are more, the leaues are narrower and whiter for the most part, and in some doe as well a little turne: the flowers are smaller, yet very thicke and double in most, and the greene huskes wherein they stand are smaller likewise then the for∣mer: the ends of the leaues in this flower, as in all the rest, are dented or iagged, yet in some more then in others; some also hauing two small white threads, crooked at the ends like hornes, in the middle of the flower, when as diuers other haue none. These 1 Caryophyllus maximus rubro varius. The great old Carnation or gray Hulo. 2 Caryophyllus maior rubro & albo varius. The white Carnation. 3 Caryo∣phyllus albo rubeus. The Cambersi or the Poole flower. 4 Caryophyllus Ctij striatus. The faire made of Kent. 5 Caryophyllus Sabadicus carn. The blush Sauadge. 6 Caryophyllus Xerapelinus. The Gredeline Carnation. 7 Caryophyllus dictus Grimelo. The Grimelo or Prince. 8 Caryo∣phyllus albus maior. The great white Gilloflower. 6 Elegans Hroina Bradshawij. Master Bradshwes dainty Lady. depiction of flowers
kindes, and especially this that hath a deepe red crimson coloured flower, doe endure the cold of our winters, and with lesse care is preserued: these sorts as well as the former doe very seldome giue any seede, as far as I could euer obserue or learne. 3. Caryophyllus Silesiacus flore pleno miniato. The yellow or Orenge tawny Gilloflower. This Gilloflower hath his stalkes next vnto the ground, thicker set, and with smaller or narrower leaues then the former for the most part: the flowers are like vnto the Cloue Gilloflowers, and about the same bignesse and doublenesse most vsually, yet in some much greater then in others; but of a pale yellowish Carnation colour, ten∣ding to an Orenge, with two small white threds, crooked at the ends in the middle, yet some haue none, of a weaker sent then the Cloue Gilloflower: this kinde is more apt to beare seede then any other, which is small, black, flat, and long, and being sowen, yeelde wonderfull varieties both of single and double flowers: some being of a ligh∣ter or deeper colour then the mother plants: some with stripes in most of the leaues: Others are striped or spotted, like a speckled Carnation or Gilloflower, in diuers sorts, both single and double: Some againe are wholly of the same colour, like the mother plant, and are eyther more or lesse double then it, or else are single with one row of leaues, like vnto a Pinck; and some of these likewise eyther wholly of a crimson red, deeper or lighter, or variably spotted, double or single as a Pinck, or blush eyther single or double, and but very seldome white: yet all of them in their greene leaues little or nothing varying or differing. Cariophylli maximi. CARNATIONS. Caryophyllus maximus dictus Hulo rubro-varius. THe gray Hulo hath as large leaues as the former old Car∣nation, and as deepely iagged on the edges: it hath a great high stalke, whereon stand the flowers, of a deepe red colour, striped and speckled very close together with a darkish white colour. Caryophyllus maximus dictus Hulo ruber non variatus. The red Hulo is also a faire great flower, of a stamell colour, deeply iagged as the former, and groweth very comely without any spot at all in it, so that it seemeth to bee but a stamell Gillo∣flower, saue that it is much greater. Caryophyllus maximus dictus Hulo caeruleo purpureus. The blew Hulo is a goodly faire flower, being of a faire pur∣plish murrey colour, curiously marbled with white, but so smal∣ly to be discerned, that it seemeth only purple, it hath so much the Mastrie in it; it resembleth the Brassill, but that it is much bigger. Caryophyllus maximus dictus Grimelo siue Princeps. The Grimelo or Prince is a faire flower also, as large as any Chrystall or larger, being of a faire crimson colour, equally for the most part striped with white, or rather more white then red, thorough euery leafe from the bottome, and standeth comely. Caryophyllus maximus Incar∣nadinus albus. The white Carnation or Delicate, is a goodly delightfull fair flower in his pride and perfection, that is, when it is both mar∣bled and flaked, or striped and speckled with white vpon an in∣carnate crimson colour, beeing a very comely flower, but abi∣deth not constant, changing oftentimes to haue no flakes or strakes of white, but marbled or speckled wholly. Caryophyllus maximus Incar∣nadinus Gallicus. The French Carnation is very like vnto the white Carnation, but that it hath more specks, and fewer stripes or flakes of white in the red, which hath the mastrie of the white. Caryophyllus maximus Incar∣nadinus grandi. The ground Carnation (if it be not the same with the graund or great old Carnation first set downe, as the alteration but of one letter giueth the coniecture) is a thicke flower, but spreadeth
not his leaues abroade as others doe, hauing the middle standing higher then the outer leaues, and turning vp their brimmes or edges; it is a sad flower, with few stripes or spots in it: it is ve∣ry subiect to breake the pod, that the flower seldome commeth faire and right; the greene leaues are as great as the Hulo or Lombard red. Caryophyllus maximus Chry∣stallinus. The Chrystall or Chrystalline (for they are both one, howso∣euer some would make them differ) is a very delicate flower when it is well marked, but it is inconstant in the markes, being sometimes more striped with white and crimson red, and some∣times lesse or little or nothing at all, and changing also some∣times to be wholly red, or wholly blush. Caryophyllus maximus flore rubro. The red Chrystall, which is the red hereof changed, is the most orient flower of all other red Gilloflowers, because it is both the greatest, as comming from the Chrystall, as also that the red hereof is a most excellent crimson. Caryophyllus maximus dictus Fragrans. The Fragrant is a faire flower, and thought to come from the Chrystall, being as large, but of a blush red colour, spotted with small speckes, no bigger then pinnes points, but not so thicke as in the Pageant. Caryophyllus maximus Sabau∣dicus varius. The stript Sauadge is for forme and bignesse equall with the Chrystall or White Carnation, but as inconstant as eyther of them, changing into red or blush; so that few branches with flowers containe their true mixtures, which are a whitish blush, fairely striped with a crimson red colour, thicke and short, with some spots also among. Caryophyllus maximus Sabau∣dicus carneus. The blush Sauadge is the same with the former, the same root of the stript Sauadge, as I said before, yeelding one side or part whose flowers will be eyther wholly blush, or hauing some small spots, or sometimes few or none in them. Caryophyllus maximus Sabau∣dicus ruber. The red Sauadge is as the blush, when the colour of the flower is wholly red without any stripes or spots in them, and so abi∣deth long; yet it is sometimes seene, that the same side, or part, or roote being separate from the first or mother plant, will giue striped and well marked flowers againe. Caryophyllus maximus Oxoni∣ensis. The Oxeford Carnation is very like vnto the French Carna∣tion, both for forme, largenesse and colour: but that this is of a sadder red colour, so finely marbled with white thereon, that the red hauing the maistry, sheweth a very sad flower, not hauing any flakes or stripes at all in it. Caryophyllus maximus Regius, siue Bristoliensis maior. The Kings Carnation or ordinary Bristow, is a reasonable great flower, deepely iagged, of a sad red, very smally striped and speckled with white: some of the leaues of the flower on the one side will turne vp their brimmes or edges: the greene leafe is very large. Caryophyllus maximus Grana∣tensis. The greatest Granado is a very faire large flower, bigger then the Chrystall, and almost as bigge as the blew Hulo: it is almost equally diuided and stript with purple and white, but the purple is sadder then in the ordinary Granado Gilloflower, else it might bee said it were the same, but greater. Diuers haue taken this flower to bee the Gran Pere, but you shall haue the difference shewed you in the next ensuing flower. Caryophyllus maximus Gran Pere dictus. The Gran Pere is a fair great flower, and comely for the forme, but of no great beautie for colour, because although it be stript red and white like the Queenes Gilloflower, yet the red is so sad that it taketh away all the delight to the flower. Caryophyllus maximus Camber∣sine dictus. The Cambersine is a great flower and a faire, beeing a redde flower, well marked or striped with white, somewhat like vnto a
Sauadge, say some, but that the red is not crimson as the Sauadge; others say the Daintie, but not so comely: the leaues of the flowers are many, and thrust together, without any due forme of spreading. Caryophyllus maximus Longo∣bardicus ruber. The great Lombard red is a great sad red flower, so double and thick of leaues, that it most vsually breaketh the pod, and sel∣dome sheweth one flower among twenty perfect: the blades or greene leaues are as large as the Hulo. Caryophylli majores. GILLOFLOWERS. Caryophyllus maior Westmin∣steriensis. THe lustie Gallant or Westminster (some make them to be one flower, and others to bee two, one bigger then the other) at the first blowing open of the flower sheweth to be of a reasonable size and comelinesse, but after it hath stood blowen some time it sheweth smaller and thinner: it is of a bright red colour, much striped and speckled with white. Caryophyllus maior Bristolien∣sis purpureus. The Bristow blew hath greene leaues, so large, that it would seeme to bring a greater flower then it doth, yet the flower is of a reasonable size, and very like vnto the ordinary Granado Gillo∣flower, striped and flaked in the same manner, but that the white of this is purer then that, and the purple is more light, and ten∣ding to a blew: this doth not abide constant, but changeth into purple or blush. Caryophyllus maior Bristolien∣sis carneus. The Bristow blush is very like the last both in leafe and flower, the colour only sheweth the difference, which seldome varyeth to be spotted, or change colour. Caryophyllus maior Doroborni∣ensis ruber. The red Douer is a reasonable great Gilloflower and constant, being of a faire red thicke poudered with white spots, and see∣meth somewhat like vnto the ground Carnation. Caryophyllus maior Doroborni∣ensis diltus siue albus. The light or white Douer is for forme and all other things more comely then the former, the colour of the flower is blush, thicke spotted with very small spots, that it seemeth all gray, and is very delightfull. Caryophyllus maior Cantii. The faire maide of Kent, or Ruffling Robin is a very beautiful flower, and as large as the white Carnation almost: the flower is white, thicke poudered with purple, wherein the white hath the mastrie by much, which maketh it the more pleasant. Caryophyllus maior Regineus. The Queenes Gilloflower is a reasonable faire Gilloflower al∣though very common, striped red and white, some great and some small with long stripes. Caryophyllus maior elegans. The Daintie is a comely fine flower, although it be not great, and for the smallnesse and thinnesse of the flower being red so finely marked, striped and speckled, that for the liuelinesse of the colours it is much desired, beeing inferiour to very few Gillo∣flowers. Caryophyllus maior Brasiliensis. The Brassill Gilloflower is but of a meane size, being of a sad purple colour, thicke poudered and speckled with white, the purple herein hath the mastrie, which maketh it shew the sadder, it is vnconstant, varying much and often to bee all purple: the greene leaues lye matting on the ground. Caryophyllus maior Gran∣tensis. The Granado Gilloflower is purple and white, flaked and stri∣ped very much: this is also much subiect to change purple. There is a greater and a lesser of this kinde, besides the greatest that is formerly described.
Caryophyllus Turcicus. The Turkie Gilloflower is but a small flower, but of great de∣light, by reason of the well marking of the flower, being most vsually equally striped with red and white. Caryophyllus Cambrensis Poole. The Poole flower, growing naturally vpon the rockes neare Cogshot Castle in the Isle of Wight, is a small flower, but very pleasant to the eye, by reason of the comely proportion thereof; it is of a bright pale red, thicke speckled, and very small with white, that it seemeth to bee but one colour, the leaues of the flower are but smally iagged about: it is constant. Caryophyllus Pegma dilutior. The light or pale Pageant is a flower of a middle size, very pleasant to behold, and is both constant and comely, and but that it is so common, would be of much more respect then it is: the flower is of a pale bright purple, thicke poudered, and very euenly with white, which hath the mastery, and maketh it the more gracefull. Caryophyllus Pegmasaturatior. The sad Pageant is the same with the former in forme and bignesse, the difference in colour is, that the purple hath the ma∣stery, which maketh it so sad, that it doth resemble the Brassill for colour, but is not so bigge by halfe. Caryophyllus Heroina dictus elegans Magistri Bradshawij. Master Bradshawe his dainty Lady may bee well reckoned a∣mong these sorts of Gilloflowers, and compare for neatenesse with most of them: the flower is very neate, though small, with a fine small iagge, and of a fine white colour on the vnderside of all the leaues, as also all the whole iagge for a pretty compasse, and the bottome or middle part of the flower on the vpperside also: but each leafe is of a fine bright pale red colour on the vp∣perside, from the edge to the middle, which mixture is of won∣derfull great delight. Caryophyllus albus optimus maior Londinensis & alius. The best white Gilloflower groweth vpright, and very dou∣ble, the blades growe vpright also, and crawle not on the ground. The London white is greater and whiter then the other ordi∣nary white, being wholly of one colour. Caryophyllus maior rubens & minor. The stamell Gilloflower is well knowne to all, not to differ from the ordinary red or cloue Gilloflower, but only in being of a brighter or light red colour: there is both a greater and a lesser of this kinde. Caryophyllus purpureus maior & minor. The purple Gilloflower a greater and a lesse: the stalke is so slender, and the leaues vpon them so many and thicke, that they lye and traile on the ground: th greatest is almost as bigge as a Chrystall, but not so double: the lesse hath a smaller flower. Caryophyllus Persico violaceus. The Gredeline Gilloflower is a very neate and handsome flower, of the bignesse of the Cloue red Gilloflower, of a fine pale reddish purple or peach colour, enclining to a blew or vio∣let, which is that colour is vsually called a gredeline colour: it hath no affinity with eyther Purple, Granado, or Pageant. Caryophyllus purpuro caeruleus. The blew Gilloflower is neither very double nor great, yet round and handsome, with a deepe iagge at the edge, and is of an exceeding deepe purple colour, tending to a tawnie: this differeth from all other sorts, in that the leafe is as greene as grasse, and the stalkes many times red or purple: by the greene leaues it may be knowne in the Winter, as well as in the Sum∣mer. Caryophyllus carneus. The blush Gilloflower differeth not from the red or stamell, but only in the colour of the flower, which is blush. Caryophyllus Silesiacus maximus Wittie. Iohn Wittie his great tawny Gilloflower is for forme of grow∣ing, in leafe and flower altogether like vnto the ordinary tawny, the flower onely, because it is the fairest and greatest that any o∣ther
hath noursed vp, maketh the difference, as also that it is of a faire deepe scarlet colour. There are also diuers other Tawnies, either lighter or sadder, either lesse or more double, that they cannot be numbered, and all rising (as I said before) from sowing the seede of some of them: besides the diuersities of other colours both simple and mixed, euery yeare and place yeelding some variety was not seen with them before: I shall neede but onely to giue you the names of some of them we haue abiding with vs, I meane such as haue receiued names, and leaue the rest to euery ones particular de∣nomination. Of Blushes there are many sorts, as the deepe blush, the pale blush, the Infanta blush, a blush enclining to a red, a great blush, the fairest and most double of all the other blushes, and many others both single and double. Of Reds likewise there are some varieties, but not so many as of the other colours; for they are most dead or deepe reds, and few of a bright red or stamell colour; and they are single like Pinkes, either striped or speckled, or more double striped and speckled variably, or else There are neither purple nor white that rise from this seede that I haue obserued, except one white in one place. Caryophyllus Silesiacus striatus. The striped Tawny are either greater or lesser, deeper or light∣er flowers twenty sorts and aboue, and all striped with smaller or larger stripes, or equally diuided, of a deeper or lighter colour: and some also for the very shape or forme will bee more neate, close, and round; others more loose, vnequall, and sparsed. Caryophyllus Silesiacus rinor-amulus. The marbled Tawny hath not so many varieties as the striped, but is of as great beauty and delight as it, or more: the flowers are greater or smaller, deeper or lighter coloured one then ano∣ther, and the veines or markes more conspicuous, or more fre∣quent in some then in others: but the most beautifull that euer I did see was with Master Ralph Truggie, which I must needes therefore call Heroina Rodolphi florum Imperatoris. Master Tuggies Princesse, which is the greatest and fairest of all these sorts of variable tawnies, or seed flowers, being as large fully as the Prince or Chrystall, or something greater, standing comely and round, not loose or shaken, or breaking the pod as some other sorts will; the marking of the flower is in this man∣ner: It iyf a stamell colour, striped and marbled with white stripes and veines quite through euery leafe, which are as deeply iagged as the Hulo: sometimes it hath more red then white, and sometimes more white then red, and sometimes so equally mar∣ked, that you cannot discerne which hath the mastery; yet which of these hath the predominance, still the flower is very beauti∣full, and exceeding delightsome. Caryophyllus Silesiacus assulosus The Flaked Tawny is another diuersity of these variable or mixt coloured flowers, being of a pale reddish colour, flaked with white, not alwaies downeright, but often thwart the leaues, some more or lesse then others; the marking of them is much like vnto the Chrystall: these also as well as others will be grea∣ter or smaller, and of greater or lesse beauty then others. Caryophyllus Silesiacus plumatus. The Feathered Tawny is more rare to meete with then many of the other; for most vsually it is a faire large flower and double, equalling the Lumbard red in his perfection: the colour hereof is vsually a scarlet, little deeper or paler, most curiously feathe∣red and streamed with white through the whole leafe. Caryophyllus Silesiacus punctatus.
The Speckled Tawny is of diuers sorts, some bigger, some 1 Heroina Radolphi florum Imperatoris Princessa dictus Master Tuggie his Princesse. 2 Caryophyllus Oxoniensis. The French or Oxford Carnation. 3 Caryo∣phyllus Westmonasterinsis. The Gallant or Westminster Gilloflower. 4 Caryophyllus Bristoliensis. The Bristow. 5 Caryophyllus Chrystallinus. The Chrstall or Chrystalline. 6 Caryophyllus Sabadi striat. The stript Sauadg. 7 Caryophyllus Granatensis maximus. The Granpere or greatest Granado. 8 Caryo∣phyllus paramanus. The Dainty. 9 Caryophyllus Silesacus maximus  Ioan Iohn Witty his great tawny Gilloflower. 10 Caryophyllus Silesiacus striatus. The stript Tawny. 11 Caryophyllus aemulus. The marbled Tawny. 12 Caryophyllus roseus rotundus magistri Tuggie. Master Tuggie his Rose Gilloflower. depiction of flowers
lesse, some more, and some lesse spotted then others: Vsually it is a deepe scarlet, speckled or spotted with white, hauing also some stripes among the leaues. Caryophyllus roseus rotundus Magistri Tuggie. Master Tuggie his Rose Gilloflower is of the kindred of these Tawnies, being raised from the seede of some of them, and onely possessed by him that is the most industrious preseruer of all na∣tures beauties, being a different sort from all other, in that it hath round leaues, without any iagge at all on the edges, of a fine sta∣mell full colour, without any spot or strake therin, very like vnto a small Rose, or rather much like vnto the red Rose Campion, both for forme, colour, and roundnesse, but larger for size. The Place. All these are nourished with vs in Gardens, none of their naturall places being knowne, except one before recited, and the yellow which is Silesia; many of them being hardly preserued and encreased. The Time. They flower not vntill the heate of the yeare, which is in Iuly (vnlesse it be an extraordinary occasion) and continue flowring, vntill the colds of the Autumne checke them, or vntill they haue wholly out spent themselues, and are vsually encreased by the slips. The Names. Most of our later Writers doe call them by one generall name, Caryo∣phyllus sativus, and flos Caryophylleus, adding thereunto maximus, when wee meane Carnations, and maior when we would expresse Gilloflowers, which name is taken from Cloues, in that the sent of the ordinary red Gilloflower especially doth resemble them. Diuers other seuerall names haue beene formerly giuen them, as Vetonica, or Betonica altera, or Vetonica altilis, and coronaria. Herba Tunica, Viola Damascena, Ocellus Damascenus, and Barbari∣cus. Of some Cantabrica Plinij. Some thinke they were vnknowne to the Ancients, and some would haue them to be Iphium of Theophrastus, wher∣of he maketh mention in his sixth and seuenth Chapters of his sixth booke, among Garland and Summer flowers; others to be his Dios anthos, or Io flos, mentioned in the former, and in other places. We call them in English (as I said before) the greatest kindes, Carnations, and the others Gilloflow∣ers (quasi Iuly flowers) as they are seuerally expressed. The Vertues. The red or Cloue Gilloflower is most vsed in Physicke in our Apothe∣caries shops, none of the other being accepted of or vsed (and yet I doubt not, but all of them might serue, and to good purpose, although not to giue so gallant a tincture to a Syrupe as the ordinary red will doe) and is accounted to be very Cordiall. CHAP. LXX. Caryophylli siluestres. Pinkes.
THere remaine diuers sorts of wilde or small Gilloflowers (which wee vsually call Pinkes) to be entreated of, some bearing single, and some double flowers, some smooth, almost without any deepe dents on the edges, and some iagged, or as it were feathered. Some growing vpright like vnto Gilloflowers, others cree∣ping 1 Caryophyllus siluestris simplex. The vsuall single Pinke. 2 Caryophyllus multiplex siluestris. Double Pinkes. 3 Cariophyllus siluestris pluma∣marius. Feathered or iagged Pinkes. 4 Caryophyllus Stellatus. Starre Pinkes. 5 Caryophyllus reens. Matted Pinkes. 6 Caryophyllus me∣diterraneus. The great Thistle or Sea Gilloflower. 7 Caryophyllus mrinus. The ordinary Thistle or Sea Cushion. depiction of flowers
or spreading vnder the toppe or crust of the ground, some of one colour, some of another, and many of diuers colours: As I haue formerly done with the Gilloflowers, so must I doe with these that are entertained in our Gardens, onely giue you the de∣scriptions of some three or foure of them, according to their variety, and the names of the rest, with their distinctions. 1. Caryophyllus minor siluestris multiplex & simplex. Double and single Pinkes. The single and double Pinkes are for forme and manner of growing, in all parts like vnto the Gilloflowers before described, sauing onely that their leaues are smaller and shorter, in some more or lesse then in others, and so are the flowers also: the single kindes consisting of fiue leaues vsually (seldome six) round pointed, and a little snipt for the most part about the edges, with some threads in the middle, either crooked or straight: the double kindes being lesser, and lesse double then the Gilloflowers, hauing their leaues a little snipt or endented about the edges, and of diuers seuerall colours as shall hereafter be set downe, and of as fragrant a sent, especially some of them as they: the rootes are long and spreading, somewhat hard and wooddy. 2. Caryophyllus plumarius. Feathered or iagged Pinkes. The iagged Pinkes haue such like stalkes and lues as the former haue, but some∣what shorter and smaller, or grasse-like, and of a whitish or grayish greene colour like∣wise: the flowers stand in the like manner at the toppes of the stalkes, in long, round, slender, greene huskes, consisting of fiue leaues, very much cut in on the edges, and iagged almost like a feather, of a light red, or bright purple colour, with two white threads standing in the middle, crooked like a horne at the end, and are of a very good sent. Some of these haue not those two crooked threads or hornes in the middle, but haue in their stead many small threads, not crooked at all: the seedes of them all are like vnto the seedes of Gilloflowers, or the other Pinkes, that is, small, blacke, long, and flat: the rootes are small and wooddy likewise. 3. Caryophyllus plumarius albus orbe rubro siue Stellatus. Starre Pinkes. Of this kinde there is another sort, bearing flowers almost as deeply cut or iagged as the former, of a faire white colour, hauing a ring or circle of red about the bottome or lower part of the leaues, and are as sweete as the former: this being sowne of seede doth not giue the starre of so bright a red colour, but becommeth more dunne. 4. Caryophyllus plumarius Austriacus siue Superba Austriaca. The feathered Pinke of Austria. This kinde of Pinke hath his first or lower leaues, somewhat broader and greener then any of the former Pinkes, being both for breadth and greennesse more like vnto the Sweete Iohns, which shall bee described in the next Chapter: the leaues on the stalkes are smaller, standing by couples at euery ioynt, at the toppes whereof stand such like iagged flowers as the last described, and as large, but more deeply cut in or iagged round about, some of them of a purplish colour, but the most ordinary with vs are pure white, and of a most fragrant sent, comforting the spirits and senses a farre off: the seedes and rootes are like vnto the former. Some haue mistaken a kinde of wilde Campion, growing in our Woods, and by the paths sides in Hornsie Parke, and other places, to be this feathered Pinke: but the flowers declare the difference sufficiently. 5. Caryophyllus minor repens simplex & multiplex. Single and double matted Pinkes.
The matted Pinke is the smallest, both for leafe and flower of all other Pinkes that are nourished in Gardens, hauing many short and small grassie greene leaues vpon the  stalkes, which as they grow and lye vpon the ground (and not standing so vpright as the former) doe take roote againe, whereby it quickly spreadeth, and couereth a great deale of ground in a litle space: the flowers are small and round, a little snipt about the edges, whereof some are white, and some red, and some are white spotted with red, and some red Potted with white, all of them being single flowers. But there is another of this kinde, not differing in leafe, but in flower: for that the first flowers are but once double, or of two rowes of leaues, of a fine reddish colour, spotted with siluer spots: but those that follow, are so thicke and double, that they often∣times doe breake the pod or huske; being not altogether of so deepe a red colour, but more pale. 6. Caryophyllus Meditterraneus siue Marinus maior. Great Sea Gilloflower or Great Thrift. Vnto these kindes of Pinkes I must needs adde, not only your ordinary Thrift (which is more frequent in gardens, to empale or border a knot, because it abideth greene Winter and Summer, and that by cutting, it may grow thick, and be kept in what form one list, rather then for any beautie of the flowers) but another greater kinde, which is of as great beautie and delight almost as any of the former Pinkes, as well for that the leaues are like vnto Gilloflowers, being longer and larger then any Pinkes, and of a whitish greene colour like vnto th, not growing long or by couples vpon the stalkes as Pinkes and Gilloflowers do, but tufting close vpon the ground, like vnto the common Thrift: as also that the stalkes, rising from among the leaues (being some∣times two foote high (as I haue obserued in my garden) are yet so slender and weake, that they are scarce able to beare the heads of flowers, naked or bare, both of leaues and ioynts, sauing only in one place, where at the ioynt each stalke hath two small and very short leaues, not rising vpwards as in all other Gilloflowers, Pinkes, and other herbes, but growing downewards) and doe beare each of them a tuft or vmbell of small purplish, or blush coloured flowers, at the toppes them standing somewhat like vnto sweete Williams, but more roundly together, each flower consisting of fiue small, round, stiffe or hardish leaues, as if they were made of paper, the bottome or middle being hollow, not blowing all at once as the ordinary Thrift, but for the most part one after another, not shewing vsually aboue foure or fiue flowers open at one time (so farre as I could obserue in the plants that I kept) so that it was long before the whole tuft of flowers were past; but yet the hoter and dryer the times was, the sooner it would be gone: the seede I haue not perfectly obserued, but as I remember, it was somewhat like vnto the seede of Scabious; I am sure nothing like vnto Gilloflowers or Pinkes: the roote is somewhat great, long and hard, and not so much spreading in the ground as Gilloflowers or Pinkes. Caryophyllus Marinus. Thrift, or Sea Cushion. Our common Thrift is well knowne vnto all, to haue many short and hard greene leaues, smaller then many of the grasses, growing thicke together, and spreading vpon the ground: the stalkes are naked of leaues a spanne high, bearing a small tuft of light purple, or blush coloured flowers, standing round and close thrusting together. Double Pinkes. THe double white Pinke is onely with more leaues in it then the sin∣gle, which maketh the difference. The double red Pinke is in the same manner double, differing from the single of the same colour. The double purple Pinke differeth not
from the single purple for colour, but on∣ly in the doublenesse of the flower. The Granado Pinke differeth not from the Gilloflower of the same name, but in the smalnesse both of leaues and flower. The double Matted Pinke is before de∣scribed. The double blush Pinke is almost as great as the ordinary blush Gilloflower, and some haue taken it for one, but the greene leaues are almost as small as Pinks, and therefore I referre it to them. Single Pinkes. THe single white ordinary Pinke hath a single white flower of fiue leaues, finely iagged about the edges. The single red Pink is like the white, but that the leaues are not so much iagged, and the flower is of a pale purplish red colour.
The single purple Pinke is of a faire purple colour, like almost vnto the purple Gilloflower. The great blush Pinke hath broader and larger leaues in the flower then any other Pinke, and of a faire blush colour. The white Feathered Pinke hath the edges of the flower more finely and deep∣ly cut in then the former. The red or light purple feathered Pinke is like the former feathered Pinke, but only differeth in colour. The Starre Pinke is a faire flower, finely iagged on the edges, with a faire red circle at the lower end of the leaues on the inside. The white featherd Pinke of Austria is described before. The purple featherd Pinke of Austria is so likewise. The single matted Pinke is before described. The speckled Pinke is a small flower hauing small spots of red here and there dispersed ouer the white flower. Those single flowers being like vnto Pinkes that rise from the sowing of the orenge tawney, I bring not into this classis, hauing already spoken of them in the precedent Chapter. The Place. These are all like as the former, nourished in Gardens with vs, although many of them are found wilde in many places of Austria, Hungarie, and Germany, on the mountaines, and in many other places, as Clusius recor∣deth. The ordinary Thrift groweth in the salt Marshes at Chattam by Ro∣chester, and in many other places in England: but the great kinde was ga∣thered in Spaine, by Guillaume Boel that painefull searcher of simples, and the seede thereof imparted to me, from whence I had diuers plants, but one yeare after another they all perished, The Time. Many of these Pinkes both single and double, doe flower before any Gilloflower, and so continue vntill August, and some, most of the Sum∣mer and Autumne. The Names. The seuerall titles that are giuen to these Pinkes, may suffice for their par∣ticular names: and for their generall they haue beene expressed in the for∣mer Chapter, beeing of the same kindred, but that they are smaller, and more frequently found wilde. The two sorts of Thrift are called Caryophyl∣lus Marinus. The greater, Maior & Mediterraneus; In English, The grea∣ter or Leuant Thrift, or Sea Gilloflower. The lesser Minimus, and is ac∣counted of some to be a grasse, and therefore called Gramen Marinum & Polyanthemum; In English, Thrift, Sea grasse, and our Ladies Cushion, or Sea Cushion. The Vertues. It is thought by diuers, that their vertues are answerable to the Gillo∣flowers, yet as they are of little vse with vs, so I thinke of as small effect.
CHAP. LXXI. Armerius. Sweet Iohns, and sweet Williams. THese kindes of flowers as they come neerest vnto Pinkes and Gilloflowers, though manifestly differing, so it is fittest to place them next vnto them in a peculiar Chapter. 1. Armerius angustifolius rubens simplex. Single red sweete Iohns. The sweete Iohn hath his leaues broader, shorter and greener then any of the for∣mer Gilloflowers, but narrower then sweete Williams, set by couples, at the ioynts of the stalkes, which are shorter then most of the former, and not aboue a foote and a halfe high, at the tops whereof stand many small flowers, like vnto small Pinkes, but standing closer together, and in shorter huskes, made of fiue leaues, smal∣ler then most of them, and more deeply iagged then the Williams, of a red colour in the middle, and white at the edges, but of a small or soft sent, and not all flowring at once, but by degrees: the seede is blacke, somewhat like vnto the seede of Pinkes, the roote is dispersed diuersly, with many small fibres annexed vnto it. 2. Armerius angustifolius albus simplex. Single white sweet Iohns. This white Iohn differeth not in any thing from the former, but onely that the leafe doth neuer change brownish, and that the flower is of a faire white colour, without any mixture. 3. Armerius angustifolius duplex. Double sweet Iohns. There is of both those former kindes, some whose flowers are once double, that is, consisting of two or three rowes of leaues, and the edges not so deepely iagged; not differing in any thing else. 4. Armerius latifolius simplex flore rubro. Single red sweet Williams. The sweet Williams doe all of them spread into many very long trayling branches, with leaues lying on the ground, in the very like manner that the sweet Iohns doe: the chiefe differences betweene them are, that these haue broader, and darker greene leaues, somewhat brownish, especially towards the points, and that the flowers stand thicker and closer, and more in number together, in the head or tuft, hauing many small pointed leaues among them, but harmlesse, as all men know; the colour of the flower is of a deep red, without any mixture or spot at all. 5. Armerius latifolius flore rubro multiplici. Double red sweete Williams. The double kinde differeth not from the single kinde of the same colour, but only in the doublenesse of the flowers, which are with two rowes of leaues in euery flower. 6. Armerius latifolius variegatus siue versicolor. Speckled sweete Williams, or London pride. These spotted Williams are very like the first red Williams, in the forme or maner of growing, hauing leaues as broade, and browne sometimes as they, the flowers stand as thicke or thicker, clustring together, but of very variable colours: for some flowers will be of a fine delayed red, with few markes or spots vpon them, and others
will bee full peckled or sprinkled with white or siluer spots, circlewise about the mid∣dle of the flowers, and some will haue many specks or spots vpon them dispersed: all these flowers are not blowne at one time, but some are flowring, when others are decaying, so that abiding long in their pride, they become of the more respect: The seede is blacke, as all the rest, and not to be distinguished one from another: the roots are some long, and some small and threddy, running vnder the vpper crust of the earth. 7. Armerius latifolius flore rubro saturoholoserice. Sweet Williams of a deepe red or murrey colour. The leaues of this kinde seeme to be a little larger, and the ioints a little redder then the former, but in the flower consisteth the chiefest difference, which is of a deepe red, or murrey purple colour, like vnto veluet of that colour, without any spots, but smooth, and as it were soft in handling, hauing an eye or circle in the middle, at the bottome of the leaues. 8. Armerius latifolius simplex flore albo. Single white sweete Williams. The white kinde differeth not in forme, but in colour from the former, the leaues are not browne at all, but of a fresh greene colour, and the flowers are wholly white, or else they are all one. The Place. These for the most part grow wilde in Italie, and other places: we haue them in our Gardens, where they are cherished for their beautifull varietie. The Time. They all generally doe flower before the Gilloflowers or Pinkes, or with the first of them: their seede is ripe in Iune and Iuly, and doe all well abide the extremitie of our coldest winters. The Names. They all generally are called Armerius, or Armeria, as some doe write, and distinguished as they are in their titles: Yet some haue called them Ve∣tonica agrestis, and others Herba Tunica, Scarlatea, & Caryophyllus siluestris: Wee doe in English in most places, call the first or narrower leafed kindes, Sweet Iohns, and all the rest Sweete Williams; yet in some places they call the broader leafed kindes that are not spotted, Tolmeiners, and London tufts: but the speckled kinde is termed by our English Gentlewomen, for the most part, London pride. The Vertues. We haue not knowne any of these vsed in Physicke. CHAP. LXXII. Bellis. Daisie. THere be diuers sorts of Daisies, both great and small, both single and double, both wilde growing abroade in the fieldes, and elsewhere, and manured grow∣ing only in Gardens: of all which I intend not to entreate, but of those that are of most beautie and respect, and leaue the rest to their proper place.
1 Armerius angustifolius simplex. Single sweete Ions▪ 2 Armerius angustifolius multiplex Double sweet Iohns. 3 Armerius latifolius simplex Single sweete Willims. 4 Armerius latifolius versicolo. Sptted sweet Williams or pride of London. 5 Armerius latifolius multiplex Double sweet Willias 6 Bllis hotensis minor mutiplex Double Garden Daisies. 7 Bell minor hotensis flore vario. Double red Daisies 8 Bellis minor hortensis prolifera. Double fruitfull Daisies or lacke an Apes on horsebacke. 9 Bellis caruea siue Globularia. Double blew Daisies or blew Globeflower. 10 Bellis lutea montana siue Globularia lutea monta. Double yellow Dasies or yellow Globeflower. depiction of flowers
1. Bellis maior flore albo pleno. The great double white Daisie. The great Daisie with the double white flower, is in all things so like vnto the great single kinde, that groweth by the high wayes, and in diuers medowes and fields, that there is no difference but in the flower, which is double. It hath many long, and some∣what broad leaues lying vpon the ground, deepely cut in on both sides, somewhat like vnto an oaken leafe; but those that are on the stalkes are shorter, narrower, and not so deeply cut in, but onely notched on the edges: the flowers at the toppe are (as I said) white and double, consisting of diuers rowes of leaues, being greater in com∣passe then any of the double Daisies that follow, but nothing so double of leaues. 2. Bellis minor flore rubro simplici. Single red Daisies. This single Daisie (like as all the rest of the small Daisies) hath many smooth, greene, round pointed leaues lying on the ground, a little snipt about the edges; from among which rise many slender round foote-stalkes, rather then stalkes or stems, about an hand breadth high at the most, and oftentimes not halfe so high, bearing one flow∣er a peece, consisting of many small leaues, as a pale or border set about a middle thrumme: the leaues of this kinde are almost wholly red, whereas in the wilde they are white or whitish, enclining to red on the edges, the middle being yellow in both sorts: the rootes are many small white threads or strings. 3. Bellis minor hortensis flore pleno variorum colorum. Double Garden Daisies of diuers colours. The leaues of all the double Daisies are in forme like vnto the single ones, but that they are smaller, and little or nothing snipt or notched about the edges: the small stalkes likewise are smaller and lower, but bearing as double flowers as any that growe on the ground, being composed of many small leaues, thicke thrust together, of diuers colours; for some are wholly of a pure white, others haue a little red, either dispersed vpon the white leaues, or on the edges, and sometimes on the backes of the leaues: some againe seeme to be of a whitish red, or more red then white, when as indeede they are white leaues dispersed among the red; others of a deepe or darke red colour, and some are speckled or striped with white and red through the whole flower: and some the leaues will bee red on the vpperside, and white vnderneath; and some also (but those are very rare) are of a greenish colour. 4. Bellis minor hortensis prolifera. Double double Daisies or childing Daisies. There is no difference either in leafe or roote in this kinde from the former double Daisies: the chiefest variety consisteth in this, that it beareth many small double flow∣ers, standing vpon very short stalkes round about the middle flower, which is vsually as great and double as any of the other double kindes, and is either wholly of a deepe red colour, or speckled white and red as in some of the former kindes, or else greenish, all the small flowers about it being of the same colour with the middlemost. 5. Bellis caerulea siue Globularia. Blew Daisies. The likenesse and affinity that this plant hath with the former, both in the forme of leafe and flower, as also in the name, hath caused me to insert it, and another rare plant of the same kinde, in this place, although they be very rare to be met with in our English Gardens. This beareth many narrower, shorter, and blacker greene leaues then the former, lying round about vpon the ground; among which rise vp slender, but stiffe and hard stalks, halfe a foot high or more, set here and there with small leaues, and at the top a small round head, composed of many small blew leaues, somewhat like vnto the head of a Scabious: It hath bin found likewise with a white head of flowers: the roote is hard and stringie: the whole plant is of a bitter taste.
6. Globularia lutea montana. Yellow Daisies. This mountaine yellow Daisie or Globe-flower hath many thicke, smooth, round pointed leaues, spread vpon the ground like the former; among which spring diuers small round rushie stalkes, a foote high, bearing about the middle of them two small leaues at the ioynts, and at the toppes round heads of flowers thrust thicke together, standing in purplish huskes, euery of which flowers do blow or spread into fiue leaues, starre-fashion, and of a faire yellow colour, smelling like vnto broome flowers, with many small threads in the middle compassing a flat pointell, horned or bended two wayes: after the flowers are past rise vp the seede vessels, which are round, swelling out in the middle, and diuided into foure parts at the toppes, containing within them round, flat, blacke seede, with a small cut or notch in them: the roote is a finger long, round and hard, with a thicke barke, and a woddy pith in the middle, of a sharpe dry∣ing taste and strong sent: the leaues are also sharpe, but bitter. The Place. The small Daisies are all planted, and found onely in Gardens, and will require to be replanted often, lest they degenerate into single flowers, or at least into lesse double. The blew Daisie is naturall of Mompelier in France, and on the mountaines in many places of Italy, as also the yellow kinde in the Kingdome of Naples. The Time. The Daisies flower betimes in the Spring, and last vntill May, but the last two flower not vntill August or September. The Names. They are vsually called in Latine Bellides, and in English Daisies. Some call them Herba Margarita, and Primula veris, as it is likely after the Italian names, of Marguerite, and Fior di prima vera gentile. The French call them Pasquettes, and Marguerites, and the Fruitfull sort, or those that beare small flowers about the middle one, Margueritons: our English women call them Iacke an Apes on horse-backe, as they doe Marigolds before recited, or childing Daisies: but the Physitians and Apothecaries doe in generall call them, especially the single or Field kindes, Consolida minor. The blew Daisie is called Bellis caerulea, and Globularia, of some Scabiosae pumilum genus. The Italians call it Botanaria, because the heads are found like buttons. The yellow, Globularia montana, is onely described by Fabius Columna, in his last part of Phytobasanos, and by him referred vnto the former Globularia, althougb it differ in some notable points from it. The Vertues. The properties of Daisies are certainly to binde, and the roote especi∣ally being dryed, they are vsed in medicines to that purpose. They are also of speciall account among those herbes, that are vsed for wounds in the head.
CHAP. LXXIII. Scabiosa. Scabious. THe sorts of Scabious being many, yeeld not flowers of beauty or respect, fit to bee cherished in this our Garden of delight; and therefore I leaue them to the Fields and Woods, there to abide. I haue onely two or three strangers to bring to your acquaintance, which are worthy this place. 1. Scabiosa flore albo. White flowred Scabious. This white Scabious hath many long leaues, very much iagged or gasht in on both sides, of a meane bignesse, being neither so large as many of the field, nor so small as any of the small kindes: the stalkes rise about a foote and a halfe high, or somewhat higher, at the tops whereof grow round heads, thicke set with flowers, like in all points vnto the field Scabious, but of a milke white colour. 2. Scabiosa rubra Austriaca. Red Scabious of Austria. This red Scabious hath many leaues lying vpon the ground, very like vnto Deuils bit, but not so large, being shorter and snipt, not gashed about the edges, of a light greene colour; yet (there is another of a darker greene colour, whose flower is of a deeper red) the stalkes haue diuers such leaues on them, set by couples at the ioynts as grow belowe, and at the tops small heads of flowers, each consisting of fiue leaues, the biggest flowers standing round about in the outer compasse, as is vsuall almost in all the kinds of Scabious▪ or a fine light purple or red colour: after the flowers are past, come the seede, which is somewhat long and round, set with certaine haires at the head thereof, like vnto a Starre: the roote is composed of a number of slender strings, fastened at the head. 3. Scabiosa rubra Indica. Red flowred Indian Scabious. This (reputed Indian) Scabious hath many large faire greene leaues lying on the ground, iagged or cut in on both sides to the middle ribbe, euery peece whereof is narrower then that at the end, which is the broadest: among these leaues rise vp sun∣dry slender and weake stalkes, yet standing vpright for the most part, set with smaller and more iagged leaues at certaine distances, two or three at euery ioynt, branching forth at the toppe into other smaller branches, bearing euery one head of flowers, like in forme vnto other Scabiouses, but of an excellent deepe red crimson colour (and sometimes more pale or delayed) of no sent at all: after which doe come small roun∣dish seede, like vnto the field Scabious: the roote is long and round, compassed with a great many small strings, and perisheth vsually as soone as it hath borne out his flow∣ers and seede: otherwise if it doe not flower the first yeare of the sowing, if it be care∣fully defended from the extremity of Winter, it will flower the sooner the next yeare, as I my selfe haue often found by experience. The Place. The first is sometimes found wilde in our owne Countrey, but it is very geason, and hath been sent among other rare seedes from Italy. The second was first found and written of by Clusius, in Pannonia and Austria, where it is very plentifull. The third hath been sent both from Spain & Italy, and is verily thought to grow naturally in both those parts.
1 Scabiosa flore albo. White flowred Scabious. 2 Scabiosa rubra Austriaca. Red Scabious of Austria. 3 Scabiosa rubra Indica. Red flowred Indian Scabious. 4 Cyanus vulgaris minor. Corn-flower of diuers colours. 5 Cyanus ticus, Spanish Corn-flower. 6 Cyanus floridus Turcicus. The braue Sultans flower. 7 Carthamus sativus. Spanish Saffron. depiction of flowers
The Time. The first and second flower earlier then the last, for that it flowreth not vntill September or October, (vnlesse it be not apt to beare the first yeare as I before said) so that many times (if none be more forward) it perisheth without bearing ripe seede, whereby we are oftentimes to seeke new seede from our friends in other parts. The Names. They haue all one generall name of Scabious, distinguished eyther by their flower, or place of growing, as in their titles: yet the last is called of diuers Scabiosa exotica, because they thinke the name Indica, is not truely imposed vpon it. The Vertues. Whether these kindes haue any of the vertues of the other wilde kinds, I know none haue made any experience, and therefore I can say no more of them. CHAP. LXXIIII. Cyanus. Corne flower, or blew Bottles. VNder the name of Cyanus are comprehended, not onely those plants which from the excellent blew colour of their flower (furnishing or rather pestering the Corne fieldes) haue peculiarly obtained that name, and which doth much vary also, in the colour of the flowers, as shall be shewed; but some other plants also for their neere resemblance, but with seuerall distinctions. The Cyanus maior, Ptarmica Austriaca, Ptarmica Imperati, and many others which may be adioyned vnto them, do more fitly belong to the Garden of Simples, whereunto I leaue them, and will here only entreate of those that may most please the delight of our Gentle Florists, in that I labour and striue, to furnish this our garden, with the chiefest choyse of natures beauties and delights. 1. Cyanus vulgaris diuersorum colorum. Corne flower of diuers colours.
All these sorts of Corne flowers are for the most part alike, both in leaues and flowers one vnto another for the forme: the difference betweene them consisteth in the varying colour of the flowers: For the leaues are long, and of a whitish greene colour, deeply cut in on the edges in some places, somewhat like vnto the leaues of a Scabious: the stalkes are two foote high or better, beset with such like leaues but smal∣ler, and little or nothing slit on the edges: the toppes are branched, bearing many smal greene scaly heads, out of which rise flowers, consisting of fiue or sixe, or more long and hollow leaues, small at the bottome, and opening wider and greater at the brims, notched or cut in on the edges, and standing round about many small threds in the middle: the colours of these flowers are diuers, and very variable; for some are wholly blew, or white, or blush, or of a sad, or light purple, or of a light or dead red, or of an ouerworne purple colour, or else mixed of these colours, as some, the edges white, and the rest blew or purple, or the edges blew or purple, and the rest of the flower white, or striped, spotted, or halfed, the one part of one colour, and the other of another, the threds likewise in the middle varying in many of them; for some will haue the middle thrume of a deeper purple then the outer leaues, and some haue white or blush leaues, the middle thrume being reddish, deeper or paler: After the flowers are past, there come small, hard, white and shining seede in those heads, wrap∣ped  or set among a deale of flockie matter, as is most vsuall, in all plants that beare scaly heads: the rootes are long and hard, perishing euery yeare when it hath giuen seede. 2. Cyanus floridus Turcicus. The Sultans flower. As a kinde of these Corne flowers, I must needes adioyne another stranger, of much beautie, and but lately obtained from Constantinople, where, because (as it is said) the great Turke, as we call him, saw it abroade, liked it, and wore it himselfe; all his vassals haue had it in great regard, and hath been obtained from them, by some that haue sent it into these parts. The leaues whereof are greener, and not only gashed, but finely snipt on the edges: the stalkes are three foote high, garnished with the like leaues as are below, and branched as the former, bearing large scaly heads, and such like flowers but larger, hauing eight or nine of those hollow gaping leaues in euery flower, stan∣ding about the middle threds (if it be planted in good and fertile ground and be well watered, for it soone starueth and perisheth with drought) the circling leaues are of a fine delayed purple or blush colour, very beautifull to behold; the seede of this is smaller and blacker, and not enclosed in so much dounie substance, as the former (yet in our Countrey the seede is not so blacke, as it came vnto vs, but more gray) the roote perisheth likewise euery yeere. 3. Cyanus Baeticus supinus. The Spanish Corne-flower. This Spanish kinde hath many square low bending or creeping stalkes, not standing so vpright as the former, but branching out more diuersly; so that one plant will take vp a great deale of ground: the leaues are broader then any of the rest, softer also, of a pale or whitish greene colour, and not much gashed on the edges: the flowers stand in bigger heads, with foure or fiue leaues vnder euery head, and are of a light pale purple or blush colour; after which come seede, but not so plentifully, yet wrapped in a great deale of flockie matter, more then any: the roote groweth downe deepe into the ground, but perisheth euery yeare as they doe. The Place. The first or former kindes, grow many times in the Corne fields of our own Countrey, as well as of others, especially that sort with a blew flower: but the other sorts or colours are not so frequent, but are nourished in gar∣dens, where they will vary wonderfully. The second as is before set downe, groweth in Turkie: and the last in Spaine, found out and first sent to vs by that industrious searcher of simples, Guillaume Boel before remembred. The Time. The first doe flower in the end of Iune, and in Iuly, and somtimes sooner. The other two later, and not vntill August most commonly, and the seede is soone ripe after. The Names. The first is generally called Cyanus, and some following the Ditch name, call it Flos frumenti. The olde Writers gaue it the name of Bapti saecuba, which is almost worne out. We doe call them in English, Blew Bottles, and in some places, Corne flowers, after the Ditch names. The second hath beene sent by the name of Ambreboi, which whether it be a Turkie or Ara∣bian name, I know not. I haue called it from the place, from whence we had it, Turcicus, and for his beauty, Floridus. The Turkes themselues as I vnder∣stand, doe call it The Sultans flower, and I haue done so likewise, that it may bee distinguished from all the other kindes, or else you may call it,
The Turkey blush Corne flower, which you please. The lst was sent by the name of Iacea Baetica, but I had rather to referre it to the Cyanus, or Corne flowers, because the flowers are like vnto the Corne flowers, and not vnto the Iaceas or Knapweedes. The Vertues. These had no vse in Physicke in Galen and Dioscorides time, in that (as it is thought) they haue made no mention of them: We in these dayes doe chiefly vse the first kindes (as also the greater sort) as a cooling Cordiall, and commended by some to be a remedy, not onely against the plague and pestilentiall diseases, but against the poison of Scorpions and Spiders. CHAP. LXXV. Iacea Marina Baetica. Spanish Sea Knapweede. THere are a great many sorts of Knapweedes, yet none of them all fit for this our Garden, but this only stranger, which I haue beene bold to thrust in here, for that it hath such like gaping or open flowers, as the former Corne flowers haue, but notably differing, and therefore deserueth a peculiar Chapter, as partaking both with Cyanus and Iacea. It hath many long and narrow leaues vneuenly dented or waued on both edges (and not notched, gashed or indented, as many other herbes are) being thicke, fleshie and brittle, a little hairy, and of an ouerworne darke greene co∣lour, among which rise lowe weake stalkes, with such like leaues as grow at the bot∣tome, but smaller, bearing but here and there a flower, of a bright reddish purple co∣lour, like in forme vnto the Corne flowers, but much larger, with many threds or thrumes in the middle of the same colour, standing vp higher then any of the former: this flower riseth out of a large scaly head, all set ouer with small sharpe (but harme∣lesse) white prickles: the seedes are blackish, like vnto the Knapweedes, and larger then any of the former Corne flowers: the roote is great and thicke, growing deepe into the ground, fleshie and full of a slimie or clammy iuice, and easie to bee broken, blackish on the outside, and whitish within, enduring many yeares, like as the other Knapweedes, or Matfelons doe, growing in time to be very thicke and great. The Place. It groweth naturally by the Sea side in Spaine, from whence I receiued the seedes of Guillaume Boel, and did abide well in my garden a long time, but is now perished. The Time. It flowreth in the beginning of Iuly, or thereabouts, and continueth not long in flower: but the head abideth a great while, and is of some beauty after the flower is past; yet seldome giueth good seed with vs. The Names. It hath no other name then is set down in the title, being altogether a No∣uelist, and not now to be seene with any sauing my selfe. The Vertues. We haue not yet known any vse hereof in Physick.
CHAP. LXXVI. Cnicus siuc Carthamus sativus. Bastard or Spanish Saffron. THere are two or three sorts of Cnicus or bastard Saffrons which I passe ouer, as not fit for this Garden, and onely set downe this kinde, whose flowers are of a fairer and more liuely colour in our Country, then any hath come ouer from Spaine, where they manure it for the profit they make thereof, seruing for the dying of Silke especially, and transporting great quantities to diuers Countries. It hath large broad leaues, without any prickes at all vpon them in our Country, growing vpon the stalke, which is strong, hard, and round, with shorter leaues thereon vp to the toppe, where they are a little sharpe pointed, and prickly about the edges sometimes, which stalke riseth three or foure foote high, and brancheth it selfe toward the toppe, bearing at the end of euery branch one great open scaly head, out of which thrusteth out many gold yellow threads, of a most orient shining colour, which being gathered in a dry time, and kept dry, will abide in the same delicate colour that it bare when it was fresh, for a very long time after: when the flowers past, the seede when it is come to ma∣turity, which is very seldome with vs, is white and hard, somewhat long, round, and a little cornered: the roote is long, great, and wooddy, and perisheth quickly with the first frosts. The Place. It groweth in Spaine, and other hot Countries, but not wilde, for that it is accounted of the old Writers, Theophrastus and Dioscorides, to be a ma∣nured plant. The Time. It flowreth with vs not vntill August, or September sometimes, so that it hardly giueth ripe seede (as I said) neither is it of that force to purge, which groweth in these colder Countries, as that which commeth from Spaine, and other places. The Names. The name Cnicus is deriued from the Greekes, and Carthamus from the Arabians, yet still sativus is added vnto it, to shew it is no wilde, but a ma∣nured plant, and sowne euery where that wee know. Of some it is called Crocus hortensis, and Sarasenicus, from the Italians which so call it. We call it in English Bastard Saffron, Spanish Saffron, and Catalonia Saffron. The Vertues. The flowers are vsed in colouring meates, where it groweth beyond Sea, and also for the dying of Silkes: the kernels of the seede are onely vsed in Physicke with vs, and serueth well to purge melancholicke humours. CHAP. LXXVII. Carduus. Thistles.
YOu may somewhat maruaile, to see mee curious to plant Thistles in my Gar∣den, when as you might well say, they are rather plagues then pleasures, and more trouble to weede them out, then to cherish them vp, if I made therein no distinction or choise; but when you haue viewed them well which I bring in, I will  then abide your censure, if they be not worthy of some place, although it be but a cor∣ner of the Garden, where something must needes be to fill vp roome. Some of them are smooth, and without prickes at all, some at the heads onely, and some all ouer; but yet not without some especiall note or marke worthy of respect: Out of this discourse I leaue the Artichoke, with all his kindes, and reserue them for our Kitchin Garden, because (as all know) they are for the pleasure of the taste, and not of the smell or sight. 1. Acanthus sativus. Garden Beares breech. The leaues of this kinde of smooth thistle (as it is accounted) are almost as large as the leaues of the Artichoke, but not so sharp pointed, very deeply cut in and gashed on both edges, of a sad green & shining colour on the vpperside, and of a yellowish green vnderneath, with a great thicke rib in the middle, which spread themselues about the root, taking vp a great deale of ground. After this plant hath stood long in one place, and well defended from the iniury of the cold, it sendeth forth from among the leaues one or more great and strong stalkes, three or foure foote high, without any branch at all, bearing from the middle to the top many flowers one aboue another, spike-fashion round about the stalke, with smaller but not diuided greene leaues at euery flower, which is white, and fashioned somewhat like vnto a gaping mouth; after which come broad, flat, thicke, round, brownish yellow seede (as I haue well obserued by them haue beene sent me out of Spaine, and which haue sprung vp, and doe grow with me; for in our Countrey I could neuer obserue any seede to haue growne ripe) the rootes are composed of many great and thicke long strings, which spread farre in and vnder the ground, somewhat darkish on the outside, and whitish within, full of a clammy moisture (whereby it sheweth to haue much life) and doe endure our Winters, if they be not too much exposed to the sharpe violence thereof, which then it will not en∣dure, as I haue often found by experience. 2. Acanthus siluestris. Wilde or prickly Beares breech. This prickly Thistle hath diuers long greenish leaues lying on the ground, much narrower then the former, but cut in on both sides, thicke set with many white prickes and thornes on the edges: the stalke riseth not vp so high, bearing diuers such like thornie leaues on them, with such a like head of flowers on it as the former hath: but the seede hereof (as it hath come to vs from Italy and other places, for I neuer saw it beare seed here in this Country) is blacke and round, of the bignesse of a small pease: the roote abideth reasonable well, if it be defended somewhat from the extremity of our Winters, or else it will perish. 3. Eringium Pannonicum siue Montanum. Hungary Sea Holly. The lower leaues of this Thistle that lye on the ground, are somewhat large, round, and broad, hard in handling, and a little snipt about the edges, euery one standing vp∣on a long foote-stalke: but those that growe vpon the stalke, which is stiffe, two or three foote high, haue no foote-stalke, but encompasse it, two being set at euery ioynt, the toppe whereof is diuided into diuers branches, bearing small round rough heads, with smaller and more prickly leaues vnder them, and more cut in on the sides then those belowe: out of these heads rise many blew flowers, the foote-stalkes of the flowers, together with the toppes of the branches, are likewise blew and transparent, or shining. Flore albo.We haue another of this kinde, the whole toppes of the stalkes, with the heads and branches, are more white then blew: the seede contained in these heads are white, flat, and as it were chaffie: the roote is great and whitish, spreading farre into many branches, and somewhat sweete in taste, like the ordinary Sea Holly rootes. 4. Carduus mollis. The gentle Thistle.
The leaues of this soft and gentle Thistle that are next vnto the ground, are greene 1 canthus sativus. Garden Beares breech. 2 Acanthus siluestris. Wilde Beares breech. 3 Eringium Pannnicum Mountaine Sea Holly. 4 Carlina humilis. The lowe Carline Thistle. 5 Carduus sphaerocephalus maior. The greater Globe-Thistle. 6 Carduus sphaerocephalus minor. The lesser Globe-Thistle. 7 Carduus Eriocaphalus. The Friers crowne. 8 Fraxinella. Bastard Dittanie. depiction of flowers
on the vpperside, and hoary vnderneath, broad at the bottome, somewhat long poin∣ted, and vneuenly notched about the edges, with some soft hairie prickles, not hurting the handler, euery one standing vpon a short foote-stalke; those that growe about the middle stalke are like the former, but smaller and narrower, and those next the toppe smallest, where it diuideth it selfe into small branches, bearing long and scaly heads, out of which breake many reddish purple threads: the seede is whitish and hard, al∣most as great as the seede of the greater Centory: the roote is blackish, spreading vn∣der the ground, with many small fibres fastened vnto it, and abideth a great while. 5. Carlina humilis. The lowe Carline Thistle. This lowe Thistle hath many iagged leaues, of a whitish greene colour, armed with small sharp white prickles round about the edges, lying round about the root vpon the ground, in the middle whereof riseth vp a large head, without any stalke vnder it, com∣passed about with many small and long prickly leaues, from among which the flower sheweth it selfe, composed of many thin, long, whitish, hard shining leaues, standing about the middle, which is flat and yellow, made of many thrums or threads like small flowers, wherein lye small long seede, of a whitish or siluer colour: the roote is some∣what aromaticall, blackish on the outside, small and long, growing downewards into the ground. There is another of this kinde that beareth a higher stalke, and a redder flower, but there is a manifest difference betweene them. 6. Carduus Sphaerocephalus siue Globosus maior. The greater Globe Thistle. The greatest of these beautifull Thistles, hath at the first many large and long leaues lying on the ground, very much cut in and diuided in many places, euen to the middle ribbe, set with small sharpe (but not very strong) thornes or prickles at euery corner of the edges, greene on the vpperside, and whitish vnderneath: from the middle of these leaues riseth vp a round stiffe stalke, three foote and a halfe high, or more, set without order with such like leaues, bearing at the toppe of euery branch a round hard great head, consisting of a number of sharpe bearded huskes, compact or set close together, of a blewish greene colour, out of euery one of which huskes start small whitish blew flowers, with white threads in the middle of them, and rising aboue them, so that the heads when they are in full flower, make a fine shew, much delighting the spectators: after the flowers are past, the seede encreaseth in euery one, or the most part of the bearded huskes, which doe still hold their round forme, vntill that being ripe it ope∣neth it selfe, and the huskes easily fall away one from another, containing within them a long whitish kernell: the roote is great and long, blackish on the outside, and dyeth euery yeare when it hath borne seede. 7. Carduus Globosus minor. The lesser Globe Thistle. The lesser kinde hath long narrow leaues, whiter then the former, but cut in and gashed on the edges very much with some small prickes on them; the stalke is not halfe so long, nor the heads halfe so great, but as round, and with as blew flowers as the greater: this seldome giueth ripe seede, but recompenseth that fault, in that the roote perisheth not as the former, but abideth many yeares. 8. Carduus Eriocephalus siue Tomentosus. The Friers Crowne.
This woolly Thistle hath many large and long leaues lying on the ground, cut in on both sides into many diuisions, which are likewise somewhat vnequally cut in or di∣uided againe, hauing sharpe white prickles at euery corner of the diuisions, of a dead or sad greene colour on the vpperside, and somewhat woolly withall, and grayish vn∣derneath: the stalke is strong and tall, foure or fiue foote high at the least, branching out into diuers parts, euery where beset with such like leaues as growe below; at the toppe of euery branch there breaketh out a great whitish round prickly head, flattish at the toppe, so thicke set with wooll, that the prickles seeme but small spots or haires,  and doth so well resemble the bald crowne of a Frier, not onely before it be in flower, but especially after it hath done flowring, that thereupon it deseruedly receiued the name of the Friers Crowne Thistle: out of these heads riseth forth a purple thrumme, such as is to be seene in many other wilde Thistles, which when they are ripe, are full of a flockie or woolly substance, which breake at the toppe shedding it, and the seede which is blackish, flat, and smooth: the roote is great and thicke, enduring for some yeares, yet sometimes perishing, if it be too much exposed to the violence of the frosts in Winter. The Place. The first groweth naturally in Spaine, Italy, and France, and in many o∣ther hot Countries, and growe onely in Gardens in these colder climates, and there cherished for the beautifull aspect both of the greene plants, and of the stalkes when they are in flower. The Carline Thistle is found both in Germany and Italy in many places, and as it is reported, in some places of the West parts in England. The others are found some in France, some in Hungary, and on the Alpes, and the last in Spaine. The Time. They doe all flower in the Summer moneths, some a little earlier or later then others. The Names. The first is called Acanthus sativus (because the other that is prickly, is called siluestris or spinosus) and Branea vrsina; In English, Branck vrfine, and Beares breech. The third is called Eringium montanum, Alpinum, and Pannonicum latifolium: In English, Mountaine or Hungary Sea Holly. The fourth is called Carduus mollis, The gentle Thistle, because it hath no harm∣full prickles, although it seeme at the first shew to be a Thistle. The fifth is called of diuers Chamaeleo albus, and Carlina, as if they were both but one plant; but Fabius Columna hath in my iudgement very learnedly descided that controuersie, making Carlina to be Ixine of Theophrastus, and Chamae∣leo another differing Thistle, which Gaza translateth Vernilago. We call it in English, The Carline Thistle. The other haue their names in their titles, as much as is conuenient for this discourse. The Vertues. The first hath alwaies been vsed Physically, as a mollifying herbe among others of the like slimie matter in Glisters, to open the body; yet Lobl seemeth to make no difference in the vse of them both (that is, the prickly as well as the smooth.) The Carline Thistle is thought to bee good against poysons and infection. The rest are not vsed by any that I know. CHAP. LXXVIII. Fraxinella. Bastard Dittany. HAuing finished those pleasing Thistles, I come to other plants of more gentle handling, and first bring to your consideration this bastard Dittany, whereof there are found out two especiall kindes, the one with a reddish, the other with a whitish flower, and each of these hath his diuersity, as shall be presently declared. 1. Fraxinella flore rubente. Bastard Dittany with a reddish flower.
This goodly plant riseth vp with diuers round, hard, brownish stalkes, neare two  foote high, the lower parts whereof are furnished with many winged leaues, somewhat like vnto Liquerice, or a small young Ashe tree, consisting of seuen, nine, or eleuen leaues set together, which are somewhat large and long, hard and rough in handling, of a darkish greene colour, and of an vnpleasant strong resinous sent: the vpper parts of the stalkes are furnished with many flowers, growing spike fashion, at certaine di∣stances one aboue another, consisting of fiue long leaues a peece, whereof foure that stand on the two sides, are somewhat bending vpwards, and the fift hanging downe, but turning vp the end of the leafe a little againe, of a faint or pale red colour, striped through euery leafe with a deeper red colour, and hauing in the middle a tassell of fiue or six long purplish threds, that bowe downe with the lower leafe, and turne vp also the ends againe, with a little freese or thrume at the ends of euery one: after the flowers are past, arise hard, stiffe, rough, clammy huskes, horned or pointed at the end, foure or fiue standing together, somewhat like the seede vessels of the Wolfes-banes, or Co∣lombines, but greater, thicker and harder, wherein is contained round shining blacke seede, greater then any Colombine seede by much, and smaller then Peony seede: the roote is white, large, and spreading many wayes vnder ground, if it stand long: the whole plant, as well roots as leaues and flowers, are of a strong sent, not so pleasing for the smell, as the flowers are beautifull to the sight. 2. Fraxinella flore rubro. Bastard Dittaine with a red flower. This differeth not from the former eyther in roote, leafe or flower for the forme, but that the stalkes and leaues are of a darker greene colour, and that the flowers are of a deeper red colour, (and growing in a little longer spike) wherein the difference chief∣ly consisteth, which is sufficient to distinguish them. 3. Fraxinella flore albo. Bastard Dittanie with a white flower. The white flowred Fraxinella hath his leaues and stalkes of a fresher greene colour then any of the former; and the flowers are of a pure white colour, in forme diffe∣ring nothing at all from the other. 4. Fraxinella flore albo caeruleo. Bastard Dittanie with an ash coloured flower. The colour of the flower of this Fraxinella onely putteth the difference betweene this, and the last recited with a white flower: for this beareth very pale, or whitish blew flower, tending to an ash colour. The Place. All these kindes are found growing naturally, in many places both of Germany, and Italie: and that with the white flower, about Franckford, which being sent me, perished by the way by long and euill carriage. The Time. They flower in Iune and Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August. The Names. The name Fraxinella is most generally imposed on those plants, because of the resemblance of them vnto young Ashes, in their winged leaues. Yet some doe call them Dictamus albus, or Dictamnus albus, and Diptamus albus, as a difference from the Dictamnus Creticus, which is a farre differing plant. Some would haue it to be Tragium of Dioscorides, but beside other things wherein this differeth from Tragium, this yeeldeth no milkie iuice, as Dio∣scorides saith Tragium doth: We in English doe eyther call it Fraxinella, or after the other corrupted name of Dictamus, Bastard Dittanie.
The Vertues. It is held to be profitable against the stingings of Serpents, against con∣tagious and pestilent diseases, to bring downe the feminine courses, for the paines of the belly and the stone, and in Epilepticall diseases, and other cold paines of the braines: the roote is the most effectuall for all these, yet the seede is sometimes vsed. CHAP. LXXIX. Legumina. Pulse. IF I should describe vnto you all the kindes of Pulse, I should vnfold a little world of varieties therein, more knowne and found out in these dayes, then at any time before, but that must bee a part of a greater worke, which will abide a longer time before it see the light. I shall only select those that are fit for this garden, and set them downe for your consideration. All sorts of Pulse may be reduced vnder two generall heads, that is, of Beanes and Pease, of each whereof there is both tame and wilde: Of Beanes, besides the tame or vsuall garden Beane, and the French or Kidney Beane, (whereof I meane to entreate in my Kitchen garden, as pertinent thereto) there is the Lupine or flat Beane, whereof I meane to entreate here, and the blacke Beane and others which must bee reserued for the Physicke Garden. And of the kindes of Pease some are fit for this Garden; (whereunto I will adioyne two or three other plants as neerest of affinitie, the flowers of some, and the fruit of others being delightfull to many, and therefore fit for this garden) some for the Kitchen, the rest for the Phy∣sicke garden. And first of Lupines or flat Beanes, accepted as delightfull to many, and therefore fit for this garden. 1. Lupinus sativus albus. The white garden Lupine. The garden Lupine riseth vp with a great round stalke, hollow and somewhat wool∣ly, with diuers branches, whereon grow vpon long footestalkes many broade leaues, diuided into seuen or nine parts, or smaller leaues, equally standing round about, as it were in a circle, of a whitish greene colour on the vpperside, and more wholly vnder∣neath: the flowers stand many together at seuerall ioynts, both of the greater stalke, and the branches, like vnto beanes, and of a white colour in some places, and in others of a very bleake blew tending to white: after the flowers are past, there come in their places, long, broade, and flat rough cods, wherein are contained round and flat seede, yellowish on the inside, and couered with a tough white skin, and very bitter in taste: the rootes are not very great, but full of small fibres, whereby it fasteneth it selfe strongly in the ground, yet perisheth euery yeare, as all the rest of these kindes doe. 2. Lupinus caeruleus maximus. The greater blew Lupine. The Stemme or stalke of this Lupine is greater then the last before recited, as also the leaues more soft and woolly, and the flowers are of a most perfect blew colour, with some white spots in the middle: the long rough greenish cods are very great and large, wherein are contained hard, flat and round seede, not so white on the outside as the former, but somewhat yellower, greater also, and more rough or hard in handling. 3. Lupinus caeruleus minor. The lesser blew Lupine. This kinde of wilde Lupine differeth not in the forme of leafe or flower from the former, but only that it is much smaller, the leaues are greener, and haue fewer diui∣sions in them: the flower is of as deepe a blew colour as the last; the cods likewise are small and long, containing small round seede, not so flat as the former, but more
discoloured or spotted on the outside,Minimus. then the greater kinde is. There is a lesser kind then this, not differing in any thing from this, but that it is lesser. 4. Lupinus flore luteo. The yellow Lupine. The yellow Lupine groweth not vsually so high, but with larger leaues then the small blew Lupine; the flowers grow in two or three rundles or tufts, round about the stalke and the branches at the ioynts, of a delicate fine yellow colour, like in fa∣shion vnto the other kindes, being larger then the last, but nothing so large as the greater kindes, and of a fine small sent: the seede is round, and not flat, but much a∣bout the forme and bignesse of the small blew, or somewhat bigger, of a whitish co∣lour on the outside, spotted with many spots. The Place. The first groweth in many places of Greece, and the Easterne Countries beyond it, where it hath beene anciently cherished for their foode, being often watered to take away the bitternesse. It groweth also in these Western parts, but still where it is planted. The great blew Lupine is thought to come from beyond the parts of Persia, in Caramania. The lesser blew is found very plentifully wilde, in many places both of Spaine and Italy. The last hath beene brought vs likewise out of Spaine, whereas it is thought it groweth naturally. They all grow now in the gardens of those, that are curious louers of these delights. The Time. They flower in Summer, and their seede is ipe quickly after. The Names. They are generally called Lupini. Plautus in his time saith, they were vsed in Comedies in stead of money, when in any Scene thereof there was any shew of payment, and therefore he calleth them Aurum Comicum. And Horace hath this Verse, Nec tamen ignorant, quid distent aera Lupinis, to shew that counterfeit money (such as counters are with vs, or as these Lu∣pines were vsed in those times) was easily knowne from true and currant coine. In English wee vsually call them after the Latine name, Lupines; and some after the Dutch name, Figge-beanes, because they are flat and round as a Figge that is pressed; and some Flat-beanes for the same reason. Some haue called the yellow Lupine, Spanish Violets: but other foolish names haue beene giuen it, as Virginia Roses, and the like, by knauish Gar∣diners and others, to deceiue men, and make them beleeue they were the finders out, or great preseruers of rarities, of no other purpose, but to cheate men of their money: as you would therefore auoyde knaues and deceiuers, beware of these manner of people, whereof the skirts of our towne are too pitifully pestered. The Vertues. The first or ordinary Lupine doth scoure and cleanse the skin from spots, morphew, blew markes, and other discolourings thereof, beeing vsed ey∣ther in a decoction or ponter. Wee seldome vse it in inward medicines, not that it is dangerous, but of neglect, for formerly it hath beene much vsed for the wormes, &c.
1 Lupinus maior. The great Lupine. 2 Lupinus lutus. The yellow Lupine. 3 Lathyrus laetifolius seu Pisum pere. Pease euerlasting 4 Pisu quadratum. The crimson blossomd or square Pease. 5 Medica cochleatae vulgaris Snailes or Barbary buttons. 6 Medica spinosae. Prickly Snailes. 7 Medica spinosa altera. Another sort o prickly Snailes. 8 Medica folliculo lato. Broad buttons o Snailes. 9 Medica Lunata. Halfe Moons. 10 Ho∣ clypeatum. The red Sattin flower, or French Honysuckle. 11 Scorpioides minus. The lesser Caterpiller. 12 Scorpioides maius. The greater Caterpiller. 13 Orobus Venetus. Blew vpright Pease euerlasting. depiction of flowers
1. Lathyrus latifolius, siue Pisum perenne. Pease euerlasting. This kinde of wilde Pease that abideth long, and groweth euery yeare greater then other, springeth vp with many broade trayling branches, winged as it were on both the sides, diuersly diuided into other smaller branches, at the seuerall ioynts whereof stand two hard, not broad, but somewhat long greene leaues, and diuers twining clas∣pers, in sundry places with the leaues, from betweene the branches and the leaues, at the ioynts towards the toppes, come forth diuers purplish pease like blossomes, stan∣ding on a long stemme or stalke, very beautifull to behold, and of a pretty sent or smell: after which come small, long, thin, flat, hard skind cods, containing small round blackish seede: the roote is great and thicke, growing downe deepe into the ground, of the thicknesse sometimes of a mans arme, blackish on the outside, and whitish with∣in, with some branches and a few fibres annexed thereunto. 2. Orobus Venetus. Blew vpright euerlasting Pease. This pretty kinde of Pease blossome beareth diuers slender, but vpright greene branches somewhat cornered, two foote high or thereabouts, hauing at seuerall di∣stances on both sides of them certaine winged leaues, set together vpon long foote∣stalkes one against another, consisting of six or eight leaues, somewhat broade and pointed, and without any odde one at the end: at the ioynts toward the toppes, be∣tween the leaues and the stalkes, come forth many flowers set together at the end of a pretty long footestalke, of the fashion of the former Pease blossome, but somewhat smaller, and of a purplish violet colour: after which come slender and long pointed pods rounder then they, wherein is contained small round grayish pease: the roote is blacke, hard or woody, abiding after seede bearing as the former doth, and shooting afresh euery yeare. 3. Lathyrus annuus siliquis orobi. Partie coloured Cichelings. This small Pulse or wild Pease, hath two or three long slender winged branches, with smaller leaues theron then the former, and without any claspers at all on them: the flowers stand single, euery one by it selfe, or two at the most together, the middle leaues whereof that close together are white, and the vpper leaues of a reddish purple colour: after which come long round flattish cods, bunched out in the seuerall places where the seedes lye, like vnto the cods of Orobus or the bitter Vetch, but greater: the roote is small and dyeth euery yeare. 4. Pisum quadratum. The crimson blossomd or square codded Pease. This pretty kinde of Pulse might very well for the forme of the leaues, be referred to the kindes of Lotus or Trefoiles: but because I haue none of that kindred to en∣treate of in this Worke, I haue thought fittest to place it here before the Medica's, be∣cause both pods and seedes are like also. It hath three or foure small weake stalkes, di∣uided into many branches, hauing two stalkes of leaues at euery ioynt, and three small soft leaues standing on a very small stalke, comming from the ioynts: the flowers stand for the most part two together, of a perfect red or crimson colour, like in forme almost vnto a Pease blossome; after which come long thicke and round cods, with two skinnes or filmes, running all along the cod at the backe or vpperside, and two other such like filmes, all along the belly or vnder side, which make it seeme foure square, wherein there lye round discoloured Pease, somewhat smaller and harder then ordinary Pease: the roote is small and perisheth euery yeare. 5. Medica Cochleata vulgaris. Snailes or Barbary buttons. The plant that beareth these pretty toyes for Gentlewomen, is somewhat like vnto a Three leafed grasse or Trefoile, hauing many long trayling branches lying vpon the ground, whereon at diuers places are three small greene leaues, set together at the end of a little footestalke, each of them a little snipt about the edges: at seuerall distances,
from the middle of these branches to the ends of them, come forth the flowers, two for the most part standing together vpon a little footstalke, which are of a pale yellow colour, very small, and of the forme of a Pease blossome: after which come smooth heads, which are turned or writhen round, almost like a Snaile, hard and greene at the first, somewhat like a greene button (from the formes of both which came their names) but afterwards growing whiter, more soft and open, wherein lyeth yellowish round and flat seede, somewhat like vnto the Kidney beane: the roote is small and stringie, dying downe euery yeare, and must be new sowne in the spring, if you desire to haue it. 6. Medica spinosa maior. Prickly or thorny Snailes, or Buttons. This kinde of Medica is in all things very like vnto the former, both in the long tray∣ling branches, & three leaues alwaies growing together, but a little greater pale yellow flowers, and crooked or winding heads: but herein chiefly consisteth the difference, that this kinde hath his heads or buttons harder, a little greater, more closed together, and set with short and somewhat hard prickles, all the head ouer, which being pulled open, haue those prickles standing on each side of the filme or skinne, whereof the head consisteth, somewhat like vnto a fish bone, and in this kinde goeth all one way; in which are contained such like seedes for the forme, as are in the former, but great and blacke, and shining withall. 7. Medica spinosa altera. Small thorney Buttons, or Snailes. This other kinde is also like vnto the last described in all other things, except in the heads or buttons, which are a little smaller, but set with longer and softer prickes vpon the filmes, and may easily bee discerned to goe both forwards and backewards, one enterlacing within another, wherein are contained such like flat and blacke shining seede, made after the fashion of a kidney, as are in the former, but somewhat smaller: the roote perisheth in like manner euery yeare. 8. Medica lata. Broade Buttons. This kinde differeth not from the first in leafe or flower, the fruite onely hereof is broade and flat, and not so much twined as it. 9. Medica Lunata. Halfe Moones. This is also a kinde of these Medicke fodders, hauing a trefoyle leafe and yellow flowers like the former sorts, but both somewhat larger, the chiefest different con∣sisteth in the head or fruite, which is broade and flat, and not twined like the rest, but abideth halfe closed, resembling a halfe Moone (and thereupon hath assumed both the Latine and English name) wherein is contained flat seede, kidney fashion like the for∣mer. 10. Hedysarum clypeatum. The red Sattin flower. This red flowred Fitchling, hath many stalkes of winged faire greene leaues, that is, of many set on both sides a middle ribbe, whereof that at the end is the greatest of the rest: from the ioynts where the leaues stand, come forth pretty long small stalkes, bearing on them very many flowers, vp to the toppe one aboue another, of an excel∣lent shining red or crimson colour, very like vnto Sattin of that colour, and some∣times of a white colour, (as Master William Coys, a Gentleman of good respect in Essex, a great and ancient louer and cherisher of these delights, and of all other rare plants, in his life time assured me, he had growing in his garden at Stubbers by North Okenden) which are somewhat large, and more closed together, almost flat and not open, as in most of the other sorts: after the flowers are past, there come rough, flat, round huskes, somewhat like vnto the old fashioned round bucklers with∣out pikes, three or foure standing one vpon or aboue another, wherein are contained
small brownish seede: the roote perisheth the same yeare it beareth seede, for often∣times it flowreth not the first yeare it is sowne. 11. Scorpioides maius & minus. Great and small Caterpillers. Vnder one description I comprehend both these sorts of Scorpions grasse, or Cater∣pillers, or Wormes, as they are called by many, whereof the greater hath been known but of late yeares; and ioyne them to these pulses, not hauing a fitter place where to insert them. It is but a small low plant, with branches lying vpon the ground, and somewhat long, broad, and hard leaues theron, among which come forth small stalkes, bearing at the end for the most part, two small pale yellowish flowers, like vnto Tares or Vetches, but smaller, which turne into writhed or crooked tough cods; in the grea∣ter sort they are much thicker, rounder and whiter, and lesser wound or turned toge∣ther then in the smaller, which are slenderer, more winding, yet not closing like vnto the Snailes, and blacker more like vnto a Caterpiller then the other, wherein are contained brownish yellow seede, much like vnto a Medica: the rootes of both are small and fibrous, perishing euery yeare. The Place. These are found seuerally in diuers and seuerall places, but wee sow and plant them vsually to furnish our gardens. The Time. They doe all flower about the moneths of Iune and Iuly, and their seede is ripe soone after: but the second is earlier then the rest. The Names. The first is called Clymenum of Matthiolus, and Lathyris of Lobel and o∣thers: but Lathyris in Greeke is Cataputia in Latine, which is our Spurge, farre differing from this Pulse; and therefore Lathyrus is more proper to distinguish them asunder, that two plants so farre vnlike should not bee called by one name: this is also called Lathyrus latifolius, because there is another called augustifolius, that differeth from it also: It is most vsually called with vs, Pisum perenne, and in English Pease blossome, or Pease euer∣lasting. The second is called by Clusius, Orobus venetus, because it was sent him from Venice, with another of the same kinde that bore white flowers; yet differeth but little or nothing from that kinde he found in Hungary, that I thinke the seuerall places of their growing only cause them to beare seue∣rall names, and to be the same in deede. Although I yeeld vnto Clusius the Latine name which doth not sufficiently content mee; yet I haue thought good to giue it a differing English name, according as it is in the title. The third, because I first receiued it among other seeds from Spaine, I haue giuen it the name, as it is entituled. The fourth is called of some Sandlida Cretica, & Lotus siliquosus flore rubello, Lotus tetragonolobus, Pisum rubrum, & Pisum quadratum: We vsually call it in English, Crimson Pease, or square Pease. The Medica Cochleata is called of Dodonaeus Trifolium Cochleatum, but not iudged to be the true Medica. Wee call it in English, Medick fodder, Snailes Clauer, or as it is in the title, and so the rest of the Medica's accordingly. The Hedysarum clypeatum or Securidaca is called of Dodonaeus Onobrichis altera, and we in English for the likenesse, The red Sattin flower, although some foolishly call it, the red or French Honysuckle. The last is called by Lobel, Scorpioides bupleurifolio, I haue called it minus, because the greatest sort which came to me out of Spaine was not knowne vnto him: in English they are generally called Caterpillers.
The Vertues. The Medica's are generally thought to feede cattell fat much more then the Medow Trefoile, or Clauer grasse, and therefore I haue known diuers Gentlemen that haue plowed vp some of their pasture grounds, and sowen them with the seedes of some Medica's to make the experience. All the o∣ther sorts are pleasures to delight the curious, and not any way profitable in Physicke that I know. CHAP. LXXX. Paeonia. Peonie. THere are two principall kindes of Peonie, that is to say, the Male and the Fe∣male. Of the male kinde, I haue onely known one sort, but of the Female a great many; which are thus to be distinguished. The Male his leafe is whole, without any particular diuision, notch or dent on the edge, & his rootes long & round, diuided into many branches, somewhat like to the rootes of Gentian or Elecampane, and not tuberous at all. The Female of all sorts hath the leaues diuided or cut in on the edges, more or lesse, and hath alwaies tuberous rootes, that is, like clogs or Asphodill rootes, with many great thick round peeces hanging, or growing at the end of smaller strings, and all ioyned to the toppe of the maine roote. 1. Paeonia mas. The Male Peonie. The Male Peonie riseth vp with many brownish stalkes, whereon doe grow winged leaues, that is, many faire greene, and sometimes reddish leaues, one set against another vpon a stalke, without any particular diuision in the leafe at all: the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes, consisting of fiue or six broade leaues, of a faire purplish red colour, with many yellow threds in the middle, standing about the head, which after riseth to be the seede vessels, diuided into two, three or foure rough crooked pods like hornes, which when they are ful ripe, open and turn themselues down one edge to an∣other backeward, shewing within them diuers round black shining seede, which are the true seede, being full and good, and hauing also many red or crimson graines, which are lancke and idle, intermixed among the blacke, as if they are good seede, whereby it maketh a very pretty shew: the roots are great, thick and long, spreading in the ground, and running downe reasonable deepe. 2. Paeonia faemina vulgaris flore simplici. The ordinary single Female Peonie. This ordinary Female Peonie hath many stalkes, with more store of leaues on them then the Male kinde hath, the leaues also are not so large, but diuided or nicked di∣uersly on the edges, some with great and deepe, and others with smaller cuts or diui∣sions, and of a darke or dead greene colour: the flowers are of a strong heady sent, most vsually smaller then the male, and of a more purple tending to a murrey colour, with yellow thrumes about the head in the middle, as the male kinde hath: the heads or hornes with seed are like also but smaller, the seede also is blacke, but lesse shining: the rootes consist, as I said, of many thicke and short tuberous clogs, fastened at the ends of long strings, and all from the head of the roote, which is thicke and short, and tuberous also, of the same or the like sent with the male. 3. Paeonia faemina vulgaris flore pleno rubro. The double red Peonie.
This double Peonie as well as the former single, is so frequent in euerie Garden of note, through euery Countrey, that it is almost labour in vaine  to describe it: but yet because I vse not to passe ouer any plant so slightly, I will set down the description briefly, in regard it is so common. It is very like vnto the former single female Peony, both in stalkes and leaues, but that it groweth somewhat higher, and the leaues are of a fresher greene colour: the flowers at the tops of the stalkes are very large, thicke, and double (no flower that I know so faire, great, and double; but not abiding blowne aboue eight or ten daies) of a more reddish purple colour then the former female kinde, and of a sweeter sent: after these flowers are past, sometimes come good seed, which being sowne, bring forth some single flowers, and some dou∣ble: the rootes are tuberous, like vnto the former female. 4. Paeonia faemina flore carneo simplici. The single blush Peony. The single blush Peony hath his stalkes higher, and his leaues of a paler or whiter greene colour then the double blush, and more white vnderneath (so that it is very pro∣bable it is of another kinde, and not risen from the seede of the double blush, as some might thinke) with many veines, that are somewhat discoloured from the colour of the leafe running through them: the flowers are very large and single, consisting of fiue leaues for the most part, of a pale flesh or blush colour, with an eye of yellow dis∣persed or mixed therewith, hauing many whitish threads, tipt with yellow pendents standing about the middle head: the rootes are like the other female Peonies. 5. Paeonia faemina flore pleno albicante. The double blush Peony. The double blush Peony hath not his stalkes so high as the double red, but some∣what lower and stiffer, bearing such like winged leaues, cut in or diuided here and there in the edges, as all these female kindes are, but not so large as the last: the flowers are smaller, and lesse double by a good deale then the former double red, of a faint shining crimson colour at the first opening, but decaying or waxing paler euery day: so that after it hath stood long (for this flower sheddeth not his leaues in a great while) it will change somewhat whitish; and therefore diuers haue ignorantly called it, the double white Peony: the seedes, which sometimes it beareth, and rootes, are like vnto the former female kindes, but somewhat longer, and of a brighter colour on the outside. 6. Paeonia faemina Byzantina. The single red Peony of Constantinople. This red Peony of Constantinople is very like in all things vnto the double red Pe∣onie, but that the flowers hereof are single, and as large as the last, and that is larger then either the single female, or the male kinde, consisting of eight leaues, of a deeper red colour then either the single or double Peonies, and not purplish at all, but rather of the colour of an ordinary red Tulipa, standing close and round together: the roots of this kinde haue longer clogs, and not so short as of the ordinary female kinde, and of a paler colour on the outside. The Place. All these Peonies haue beene sent or brought from diuers parts beyond the Seas; they are endenized in our Gardens, where wee cherish them for the beauty and delight of their goodly flowers, as well as for their Physicall vertues. The Time. They all flower in May, but some (as I said) abide a small time, and o∣thers many weekes. The Names.
The name Paeonia is of all the later Writers generally giuen to these plants, although they haue had diuers other names giuen by the elder Wri∣ters, as Rosae fatuina, Idaeus dactylus, Aglaophotis, and others, whereof to set 1 Paeonia ma cum semine. The male Peony & the seed. 2 Paeonia faemina Byzantina. The female red Peony of Constantinople. 3 Pae∣onia faemina flore pleno vulgaris. The ordinary double Peony. 4 Paeonia flore pleno albicante. The double white Peony: 5 Helleborus vernus atrorubente flore. The early ite Ellebor with a darke red flower. 6 Helleborus niger verus. The Christmas flower. 7 Cal∣ceolus Mariae. Our Ladies Slipper. depiction of flowers
downe the causes, reasons, and errours, were to spend more time then I in∣tend for this worke. Wee call them in English, Peonie, and distinguish them according to their titles. The Vertues. The male Peony roote is farre aboue all the rest a most singular appro∣ued remedy for all Epilepticall diseases, in English, The falling sicknesse (and more especially the greene roote then the dry) if the disease be not too inueterate, to be boyled and drunke, as also to hang about the neckes of the younger sort that are troubled herewith, as I haue found it sufficiently expe∣rimented on many by diuers. The seede likewise is of especiall vse for wo∣men, for the rising of the mother. The seede of the female kinde, as well as the rootes, are most vsually sold, and may in want of the other be (and so are generally) vsed. CHAP. LXXXI. Helleborus niger. Beares foote. THere are three sorts of blacke Hellebor or Beares foote, one that is the true and right kinde, whose flowers haue the most beautifull aspect, and the time of his flowring most rare, that is, in the deepe of Winter about Christmas, when no other can bee seene vpon the ground: and two other that are wilde or bastard kindes, brought into many Gardens for their Physicall properties; but I will only ioyne one of them with the true kinde in this worke, and leaue the other for another. 1. Helleborus niger verus. The true blacke Hellebor, or Christmas flower. The true blacke Hellebor (or Beare foote as some would call it, but that name doth more fitly agree with the other two bastard kindes) hath many faire greene leaues ri∣sing from the roote, each of them standing on a thicke round fleshly stiffe green stalke, about an hand breadth high from the ground, diuided into seuen, eight, or nine parts or leaues, and each of them nicked or dented, from the middle of the leafe to the point∣ward on both sides, abiding all the Winter, at which time the flowers rise vp on such short thicke stalkes as the leaues stand on, euery one by it selfe, without any leafe thereon for the most part, or very seldome hauing one small short leafe not much vn∣der the flower, and very little higher then the leaues themselues, consisting of fiue broad white leaues, like vnto a great white single Rose (which sometimes change to be either lesse or more purple about the edges, as the weather or time of continuance doth effect) with many pale yellow thrummes in the middle, standing about a greene head, which after groweth to haue diuers cods set together, pointed at the ends like hornes, somewhat like the seede vessels of the Aconitum hyemale, but greater & thicker, wherein is contained long, round, and blackish seede, like the seede of the bastard kindes: the rootes are a number of brownish strings running downe deepe into the ground, and fastened to a thicke head, of the bignesse of a finger at the toppe manie times, and smaller still downewards. 2. Helleboraster minor. The lesser bastard blacke Hellebor, or Beare foote.
The smaller Beare foote is in most things like vnto the former true blacke Hellebor; for it beareth also many leaues vpon short stalkes, diuided into many leaues also, but each of them are long and narrow, of a blacker greene colour, snipt or dented on both edges, which feele somewhat hard or sharpe like prickes, and perish euery yeare, but rise againe the next Spring: the flowers hereof stand on higher stalkes, with some leaues on them also, although but very few, and are of a pale greene colour, like in  forme vnto the flowers of the former, but smaller, hauing also many greenish yellow threads or thrums in the middle, and such like heads or seede vessels, and blackish seed: the rootes are stringie and blackish like the former. The Place. The first groweth onely in the Gardens of those that are curious, and de∣light in all sorts of beautifull flowers in our Countrey, but wilde in many places of Germany, Italy, Greece, &c. The other groweth wilde in many places of England, as well as the other greater sort, which is not here described; for besides diuers places within eight or ten miles from London, I haue seen it in the Woods of Northamp∣tonshire, and in other places. The Time. The first of these plants doth flower in the end of December, and be∣ginning of Ianuary most vsually, and the other a moneth or two after, and sometime more. The Names. The first is called Helleborus, or Elleborus niger verus, and is the fame that both Theophrastus and Dioscorides haue written of, and which was called Melampodion, of Melampus the Goateheard, that purged and cured the mad or melancholicke daughters of Praetus with the rootes thereof. Dodonaeus calleth it Veratrum nigrum primum, and the other secundum: Wee call it in English, The true blacke Hellebor, or the Christmas flower, because (as I said) it is most commonly in flower at or before Christmas. The second is a bastard or wilde kinde thereof, it so nearely resembleth the true, and is called of most of the later Writers, Pseudoelleborus niger minor, or Hellebora∣ster minor, for a distinction betweene it and the greater, which is not here described: and is called in English, The smaller or lesser Beare foote, and most vsed in Physicke, because it is more plentifull, yet is more churlish and strong in operation then the true or former kinde. The Vertues. The rootes of both these kindes are safe medecines, being rightly prepa∣red, to be vsed for all Melancholicke diseases, whatsoeuer others may feare or write, and may be without danger applied, so as care and skill, and not temerary rashnesse doe order and dispose of them. The powder of the dryed leaues, especially of the bastard kinde, is a sure remedy to kill the wormes in children, moderately taken. CHAP. LXXXII. Elleborus albus. White Ellebor or Neesewort. THere are two sorts of great white Ellebors or Neeseworts, whereas there was but one kinde knowne to the Ancients; the other being found out of later dayes: And although neither of both these haue any beauty in their flowers, yet because their leaues, being faire and large, haue a goodly prospect, I haue inser∣ted them in this place, that this Garden should not be vnfurnished of them, and you not vnacquainted with them.
1. Elleborus albus vulgaris. White Ellebor or Neesing roote. The first great white Ellebor riseth at the first out of the ground, with a whitish greene great round head, which growing vp, openeth it selfe into many goodly faire large greene leaues, plaited or ribbed with eminent ribbes all along the leaues, com∣passing one another at the bottome, in the middle whereof riseth vp a stalke three foot high or better, with diuers such like leaues thereon, but smaller to the middle thereof; from whence to the toppe it is diuided into many branches, hauing many small yel∣lowish, or whitish greene starre-like flowers all along vpon them, which after turne into small, long, three square whitish seede, standing naked, without any huske to con∣taine them, although some haue written otherwise: the roote is thicke and reasonable great at the head, hauing a number of great white strings running downe deepe into the ground, whereby it is strongly fastened. 2. Elleborus albus praecox siue atrorubente flore. The early white Ellebor with reddish flowers. This other Ellebor is very like the former, but that it springeth vp a moneth at the least before it, and that the leaues are not fully so thicke or so much plaited, but as large or larger, and doe sooner perish and fall away from the plant: the stalke hereof is as high as the former, bearing such like starry flowers, but of a darke or blackish red co∣lour: the seede is like the other: the roote hath no such head as the other (so farre as I haue obserued, both by mine own and others plants) but hath many long white strings fastened to the top, which is as it were a long bulbous scaly head, out of which spring the leaues. The Place. The first groweth in many places of Germany, as also in some parts of Russia, in that aboundance, by the relation of that worthy, curious, and di∣ligent searcher and preseruer of all natures rarities and varieties, my very good friend, Iohn Tradescante, often heretofore remembred, that, as hee said, a good ship might be loaden with the rootes hereof, which hee saw in an Island there. The other likewise groweth in the vpland wooddy grounds of Germa∣nie, and other the parts thereabouts. The Time. The first springeth vp in the end or middle of March, and flowreth in Iune. The second springeth in February, but flowreth not vntill Iune. The Names. The first is called Elleborus albus, or Helleborus albus, the letter H, as all Schollers know, being but aspirationis nota: and Veratrum album flore viri∣dante, of some Sanguis Herculis. The other is called Elleborus albus praecox, and flore atrorubente, or atropurpurante. We call the first in English, White Ellebor, Neesewort, or Neesing roote, because the powder of the roote is vsed to procure neesing; and I call it the greater, in regard of those in the next Chapter. The other hath his name according to the Latine title, most proper for it. The Vertues.
The force of purging is farre greater in the roote of this Ellebor, then in the former; and therefore is not carelesly to bee vsed, without extreame danger; yet in contumatious and stubborne diseases it may bee vsed with  good caution and aduice. There is a Syrupe or Oxymel made hereof in the Apothecaries shops, which as it is dangerous for gentle and tender bodies, so it may be very effectuall in stronger constitutions. Pausanias in Phocicis, recordeth a notable stratagem that Solon vsed in besieging the Citie of Cirrheus, viz. That hauing cut off the riuer Plistus from running into the Citie, he caused a great many of these rootes to be put into a quantity there∣of, which after they had steeped long enough therein, and was sufficiently infected therewith, he let passe into the Citie againe: whereof when they had greedily drunke, they grew so weake and feeble by the superpurgation thereof, that they were forced to leaue their wals vnmand, and not guarded, whereby the Amphyctions their enemies became masters of their Citie. The like stratagems are set downe by diuers others Authors, performed by the helpe of other herbes. CHAP. LXXXIII. Elleborine. Small or wilde white Ellebor. THe likenesse of the leaues of these plants, rather then any other faculty with the former white Ellebor, hath caused them to be called Elleborine, as if they were smaller white Ellebors. And I for the same cause haue ioyned them next, whereof there are found many sorts: One which is the greater kinde, is of greatest beauty; the other which are lesser differ not much one from another, more then in the colour of the flowers, whereof I will onely take three, being of the most beautie, and leaue the rest to another worke. 1. Helleborine vel Elleborine maior, siue Calceolus Mariae. Our Ladies Slipper. This most beautifull plant of all these kindes, riseth vp with diuers stalkes, a foote and a halfe high at the most, bearing on each side of them broad greene leaues, some∣what like in forme vnto the leaues of the white Ellebor, but smaller and not so ribbed, compassing the stalke at the lower end; at the tops of the stalkes come forth one, or two, or three flowers at the most, one aboue another, vpon small short foote-stalkes, with a small leafe at the foote of euery stalke: each of these flowers are of a long ouall forme, that is, more long then round, and hollow withall, especially at the vpper part, the lower being round and swelling like a belly: at the hollow part there are two small peeces like eares or flippers, that at the first doe couer the hollow part, and after stand apart one from another, all which are of a fine pale yellow colour, in all that I haue seene (yet it is said there are some found, that are more browne or tending to purple) there are likewise foure long, narrow, darke coloured leaues the setting on of the flower vnto the stalke, wherein as it were the flower at the first standeth: the whole flower is of a pretty small sent: the seede is very small, very like vnto the seede of the Orchides or Satyrions, and contained in such like long pods, but bigger: the roots are composed of a number of strings enterlacing themselues one within another, lying within the vpper crust of the earth, & not spreading deep, of a darke brownish colour. 2. Elleborine minor flore albo. The small or wilde white Ellebor with a white flower.
This smaller wilde white Ellebor riseth vp in the like manner vnto the former, and not much lower, bearing such like leaues, but smaller, and of a whiter greene colour, almost of the colour and fashion of the leaues of Lilly Conually; the top of the stalke hath many more flowers, but lesser, growing together, spike-fashion, with small short leaues at the stalke of euery flower, which consisteth of fiue small white leaues, with a small close hood in the middle, without any sent at all: the seede and seede vessels are  like vnto the former, but smaller: the rootes are many small strings, dispersing them∣selues in the ground. 3. Elleborine minor flore purpurante. The small or wilde white Ellebor with blush flowers. The leaues of this kinde are like vnto the last described, but somewhat narrower: the stalkes and flowers are alike, but smaller also, and of a pale purplish or blush co∣lour, which causeth the difference. The Place. The first groweth in very many places of Germany, and in other Coun∣tries also. It groweth likewise in Lancashire, neare vpon the border of Yorkeshire, in a wood or place called the Helkes, which is three miles from Ingleborough, the highest Hill in England, and not farre from Ingleton, as I am enformed by a courteous Gentlewoman, a great louer of these de∣lights, called Mistris Thomasin Tunstall, who dwelleth at Bull-banke, neare Hornby Castle in those parts, and who hath often sent mee vp the rootes to London, which haue borne faire flowers in my Garden. The se∣cond groweth in many places of England, and with the same Gentlewoman also before remembred, who sent me one plant of this kinde with the other. The last I haue not yet knowne to growe in England; but no doubt many things doe lye hid, and not obserued, which in time may bee discouered, if our Country Gentlemen and women, and others, in their seuerall places where they dwell, would be more carefull and diligent, and be aduertised either by themselues, or by others capable and fit to be imployed, as occa∣sion and time might serue, to finde out such plants as growe in any the cir∣cuits or limits of their habitations, or in their trauels, as their pleasures or affaires leade them. And because ignorance is the chiefe cause of neglect of many rare things, which happen to their view at sometimes, which are not to be seene againe peraduenture, or not in many yeares after, I would heartily aduise all men of meanes, to be stirred vp to bend their mindes, and spend a little more time and trauell in these delights of herbes and flowers, then they haue formerly done, which are not onely harmlesse, but pleasu∣rable in their time, and profitable in their vse. And if any would be better enformed, and certified of such things they know not, I would be willing and ready to my best skill to aduertise them, that shall send any thing vp to me where I dwell in London. Thus farre I haue digressed from the matter in hand, and yet not without some good vse I hope, that others may make of it. The Time. The two first flower earlier then the last, and both the first about one time, that is, in the end of Aprill, or beginning of May. The last in the end of May, or in Iune. The Names. The first is called Elleborine recentiorum maior, and Calceolus Mariae: Of some thought to be Cosmosandalos, because it is Sandali forma. In English▪ we call it our Ladies Slipper, after the Dutch name. The other two lesser kin haue their names in their titles: I haue thought it fit to adde the title of small white Ellebors vnto these, for the forme sake, as is before said. The Vertues. There is no vse of these in Physicke in our dayes that I know.
CHAP. LXXXIIII. Lilium Conuallium. Lilly Conually. THe remembrance of the Conuall Lilly, spoken of in the precedent Chapter, hath caused me to insert these plants among the rest, although differing both in face and properties; but lest it should lose all place, let it keepe this. It is of two sorts, differing chiefly in the colour of the flowers, the one being white, and the other reddish, as shall be shewed in their descriptions following. 1. Lilium Conuallum flore albo. The white Lilly Conually. The white Conuall or May Lilly, hath three or foure leaues rising together from the roote, one enclosed within another, each whereof when it is open is long and broad, of a grayish shining greene colour, somewhat resembling the leaues of the for∣mer wilde Neesewort, at the side whereof, and sometime from the middle of them, riseth vp a small short naked foote-stalke, an hand breadth high or somewhat more, bearing at the toppe one aboue another many small white flowers, like little hollow bottles with open mouths, nicked or cut into fiue or six notches, turning all downe∣wards one way, or on one side of the stalke, of a very strong sweete sent, and comfor∣table for the memory and senses, which turne into small red berries, like vnto Aspara∣gus, wherein is contained hard white seede: the rootes runne vnder ground, creeping euery way, consisting of many small white strings. 2. Lilium Conuallium flore rubente. May Lillies with red flowers. This other May Lilly differeth neither in roote, leafe, nor forme of flower from that before, but onely in the colour of the flower, which is of a fine pale red colour, being in my iudgement not altogether so sweet as the former. The Place. The first groweth aboundantly in many places of England. The other is a stranger, and groweth only in the Gardens of those that are curious louers of rarities. The Time. They both flower in May, and the berries are ripe in August. The Names. The Latines haue no other name for this plant but Lilium Conuallium, al∣though some would haue it to be Lilium vernum of Theophrastus, and o∣thers Oenanthe of the same Author. Gesner thinketh it to be Callionymus. Lonicerus to be Cacalia, and Fuchsius to be Ephemerum non lethale: but they are all for the most part mistaken. We call it in English Lilly Conually, May Lilly, and of some Liriconfancie. The Vertues. The flowers of the white kinde are often vsed with those things that help to strengthen the memory, and to procure ease to Apoplecticke persons. Camerarius setteth downe the manner of making an oyle of the flowers hereof, which he saith is very effectuall to ease the paines of the Goute, and such like diseases, to be vsed outwardly, which is thus: Hauing filled a glasse with the flowers, and being well stopped, set it for a moneths space in an Ants hill, and after being drayned cleare, set it by to vse.
CHAP. LXXXV. Gentiana. Gentian or Fell-wort. THere are diuers sorts of Gentians or Fell-wortes, some greater, others lesser, and some very small; many of them haue very beautifull flowers, but because some are very suddenly past, before one would thinke they were blowne open, and others will abide no culture and manuring, I will onely set forth vnto you two of the greater sorts, and three of the lesser kindes, as fittest, and more familiarly furnishing our gardens, leauing the rest to their wilde habitations, and to bee comprehended in a generall Worke. 1. Gentiana maior flore flauo. The great Gentian. The great Gentian riseth vp at the first, with a long, round and pointed head of leaues, closing one another, which after opening themselues, lye vpon the ground, and are faire, long and broad, somewhat plaited or ribbed like vnto the leaues of white Ellebor or Neeseworte, but not so fairely or eminently plaited, neyther so stiffe, but rather resembling the leaues of a great Plantane: from among which riseth vp a stiffe round stalke, three foote high or better, full of ioynts, hauing two such leaues, but narrower and smaller at euery ioynt, so compassing about the stalke at the lower end of them, that they will almost hold water that falleth into them: from the middle of the stalke to the toppe, it is garnished with many coronets or rundles of flowers, with two such greene leaues likewise at euery ioynt, and wherein the flowers doe stand, which are yellow, layd open like starres, and rising out of small greenish huskes, with some threds in the middle of them, but of no sent at all, yet stately to behold, both for the order, height and proportion of the plant: the seede is browne and flat, con∣tained in round heads, somewhat like vnto the seede of the Fritillaria, or checkerd Daffodill, but browner: the rootes are great, thicke and long, yellow, and exceeding bitter. 2. Gentiana maior folio Asclepiadis. Swallow-wort Gentian. This kinde of Gentian hath many stalkes rising from the roote, neere two foote high, whereon grow many faire pale greene leaues, set by couples, with three ribs in euery one of them, and doe somewhat resemble the leaues of Asclepias or Swallow-wort, that is, broade at the bottome, and sharpe at the point: the flowers grow at the seuerall ioynts of the stalkes, from the middle vpwards, two or three together, which are long and hollow, like vnto a bell flower, ending in fiue corners, or pointed leaues, and folded before they are open, as the flowers of the Bindeweedes are, of a faire blew colour, sometimes deeper, and sometimes paler: the heads or seede vessels haue two points or hornes at the toppes, and containe within them flat grayish seed, like vn∣to the former, but lesse: the rootes hereof are nothing so great as the former, but are yellow, small and long, of the bignesse of a mans thumbe. 3. Gentiana minor Cruciata. Crosse-wort Gentian. This small Gentian hath many branches lying vpon the ground, scarce lifting them∣selues vpright, and full of ioynts, whereat grow vsually foure leaues, one op vnto another, in manner of a Crosse, from whence it tooke his name, in shape v vnto Saponaria or Sopewort, but shorter, and of a darker greene colour: at the tops of the stalkes stand many flowers, thick thrusting together, and likewise at the next ioynt vnderneath, euery one of them standing in a darke blewish greene huske, and con∣sisting of fiue small leaues, the points or ends whereof only appeare aboue the huskes wherein they stand, and are hardly to be seene, but that they are of a fine pale blew co∣lour, and that many grow together: the seed is small and brown, hard, and somewhat
1 Lilium Conuallium. Liriconfancy or Lilly Conually. 2 Gentiana maior. The great Gentian. 3 Gentianlla verna. Small Gentian of the Spring. 4 Gentiana Cruciata. Crossewort Gentian. 5 Pneumonanthe seu Gentiana Autumnalis Autumne Gentian. 6 Sa∣panaria flore duplici. Double flowred Sopewort. 7 Plantago Rosea. Rose Platane. depiction of flowers
like vnto the seed of the Marian Violets, or Couentry bels: the roots are small and whi∣tish, dispersing themselues diuersly in the ground, of as bitter a taste almost as the rest. 4. Gentianella Verna. Small Gentian of the Spring. The small Gentian of the Spring hath diuers small hard greene leaues, lying vpon the ground, as it were in heads or tufts, somewhat broad below, and pointed at the end, with fiue ribs or veines therein, as conspicuous as in the former Gentians, among which riseth vp a small short stalke, with some smaller leaues thereon, at the toppe whereof standeth one faire, large, hollow flower, made bell fashion, with wide open brimmes, ending in fiue corners or diuisions, of the most excellent deepe blew colour that can be seene in any flower, with some what spots in the bottome on the inside: after the flower is past, there appeare long and round pods, wherein are contained small blackish seede: the rootes are small, long, pale yellow strings, which shoot forth here and there diuers heads of leaues, and thereby encrease reasonable well, if it finde a fit place, and ground to grow, or else will not be noursed vp, with all the care and di∣ligence can be vsed: the whole plant is bitter, but not so strong as the former. 5. Gentiana Autumnalis siue Pneumonanthe. Calathian Violet or Autumne Gentian. This Gentian that flowreth in Autumne, hath in some places higher stalkes then in others, with many leaues thereon, set by couples as in other Gentians, but long and narrow, yet shewing the three ribbes or veines that are in each of them: the toppes of the stalkes are furnished euery one with a flower or two, of an excellent urple colour, ending in fiue corners, and standing in long huskes: the rootes are somewhat great at the top, and spreading into many small yellow strings, bitter as the rest are. 6. Saponaria flore duplici. Double flowred Sopeworte. Vnto these kindes of Gentians, I must needes adde these following plants, for that the former is of some neere resemblance in leafe with some of the former. And be∣cause the ordinary Sopeworte or Bruiseworte with single flowers is often planted in Gardens, and the flowers serue to decke both the garden and the house; I may vnder the one describe them both: for this with double flowers is farre more rare, and of greater beautie. It hath many long and slender round stalkes, scarce able to sustaine themselues, and stand vpright, being ful of ioynts and ribbed leaues at them, euery one somewhat like a small Gentian or Plantane leafe: at the toppes of the stalkes stand many flowers, consisting of two or three rowes of leaues, of a whitish or pale purple colour, and of a strong sweet sent, somewhat like the smell of Iasmin flowers, standing in long and thicke pale greene huskes, which fall away without giuing any seede, as most other double flowers doe that encrease by the roote, which spreadeth within the ground, and riseth vp in sundry distant places like the single. 7 Plantago Rosea. Rose Plantane. This other plant is in all things like vnto the ordinary Plantane or Ribworte, that groweth wilde abroade in many places, whose leaues are very large: but in stead of the long slender spike, or eare that the ordinary hath, this hath eyther a thicke long spike of small greene leaues vpon short stalkes, or els a number of such small g leaues layd round-wise like vnto a Rose, and sometime both these may be seen  one and the same roote, at one and the same time, which abide a great while fres the roote, and sometims also giueth seede, especially from the more long and slender spikes. The Place.
Some of these Gentians grow on the toppes of hils, and some on the sides and foote of them in Germany and other Countreyes: some of them also vpon barren heaths in those places, as also in our owne Countrey, especial∣ly  the Autumne Gentian, and as it is reported, the Vernall likewise. The single or ordinary Sopeworte is found wilde in many places with vs, but the double came to vs from beyond the Sea, and s scarce known or heard of in England. The Rose Plantaine hath beene long in England, but whe∣ther naturall thereof or no, I am not assured. The Time. They flower for the most part in Iune and Iuly, but the small Gentian of the Spring flowreth somewhat earlier, and that of the Autumne in Au∣gust and September. The Names. Gentiana is the generall name giuen to the Gentians. We call them in En∣glish Gentian, Fellworte, Bitterwort, and Baldmoney. Saponarta taketh his name from the scouring qualitie it hath: Wee call it in English Sopewort, and in some places Bruisewort. Some haue thought it to bee Struthium of Dioscorides, or at least haue vsed it for the same causes, but therein they are greatly dceiued, as Matthiolus hath very well obserued thereon, and so is Dodonaeus, that thought it to be Alisma. The Rose Plantaine is so cal∣led of the double spikes it carrieth. The Vertues. The wonderfull wholsomnesse of Gentian cannot bee easily knowne to vs, by reason our daintie tastes refuse to take thereof, for the bitternesse sake: but otherwise it would vndoubtedly worke admirable cures, both for the liuer, stomacke and lunges. It is also a speciall counterpoison against any infection, as also against the violence of a mad dogges tooth: wilde Sopewort is vsed in many places, to scoure the countrey womens treen, and pewter vessels, and physically some make great boast to performe admira∣ble cures in Hydropicall diseases, because it is diureticall, and in Lue Vene∣ria, when other Mercuriall medicines haue failed. The Rose Plantaine no doubt hath the same qualities that the ordinary hath. CHAP. LXXXVI. Campanula. Bell-flowers. VNder the title of Bell-flowers are to bee comprehended in this Chapter, not only those that are ordinarily called Campanula, but Viola Mariana, and Trache∣lium also, whereof the one is called Couentry, the other Canterbury Bells. 1. Campanula Persicifolio alba, vel caerulea. Peach-leafed Bell-flowers white or blew.
The Peach-leafed Bell-flower hath many tufts, or branches of leaues lying vpon the gd, which are long and narrow, somewhat like vnto the leafe of an Almond or Pch tree, being finely nicked about the edges, and of a sad greene colour, from a∣mong which rise vp diuers stalkes, two foote high or more, set with leaues to the mid∣dle, and from thence vpwards, with many flowers standing on seuerall small foote∣stalkes, one aboue another, with a small leafe at the foote of euery one: the flowers stand in small greene huskes, being small and round at the bottome, but wider open at the brimme, and ending in fiue corners, with a three forked clapper in the middle, set about with some small threds tipt with yellow, which flowers in some plants are pure  white, and in others of a pale blew or watchet colour, hauing little or no sent at all: the seede is small, and contained in round flat heads, or seede vessels: the roote is very small, white and threddy, creeping vnder the vpper crust of the ground, so that often∣times the heat and drought of the Summer wil goe near to parch and wither it vtterly: it requireth therefore to be planted in some shadowie place. 2. Campanula maior, siue Pyramidalis. Th great or steeple Bell-flower. This great Bell-flower hath diuers stalkes, three foote high or better, whereon grow diuers smooth, darke, greene leaues, broade at the bottome, and small at the point, somewhat vneuenly notched about the edges, and standing vpon longer footestalkes below then those aboue: the flowers are blew, and in some white, not so great or large as the former, but neare of the ame fashion, growing thicker and more plenti∣fully together, with smaller leaues among them, bushing thicke below, and rising smal∣ler and thinner vp to the toppe, in fashion of a Pyramis or speere Steeple: the roote is thicke and whitish, yeelding more store of milke being broken (as the leaues and stalks also doe) then any other of the Bell-flowers, euery one whereof doe yeelde milke, some more and some lesse. 3. Viola Mariana flore albido vel purpureo. Couentry Bels white or purple. The leaues of Couentry Bels are of a pale or fresh greene colour, long, and narrow next vnto the bottome, and broader from the middle to the end, and somewhat round pointed, a little hairy all ouer, and snipt about the edges: the stalkes rise vp the yeare after the sowing, being somewhat hairy also, and branching forth from the roote, into diuers parts, whereon stand diuers leaues, smaller then the former, and of a darker greene colour: at the end of euery branch stand the flowers, in greene huskes, from whence come large, round, hollow Bels, swelling out in the middle, and rising some∣what aboue it, like the necke of a pot, and then ending in fiue corners, which are either of a faire or faint white, or of a pale blew purplish colour, and sometimes of a deeper purple or violet: after the flowers are past, there rise vp great square, or cornered seede vessels, wherein is contained in diuers diuisions, small, hard, shining, browne, flat seeds: the roote is white, and being young as in the first yeares sowing, is tender, and often eaten as other Rampions are; but the next yeare, when it runneth vp to seede, it grow∣eth hard, and perisheth: so that it is to be continued by euery other yeares sowing. 4. Trachelium maius flore albo vel purpureo. Great Canterbury Bels white or purple. The greater Canterbury Bels, or Throateworte, hath many large rough leaues, somewhat like vnto Nettle leaues, being broad and round at the bottome, and pointed at the end, notched or dented on the edges, and euery one standing on a long footstalk: among these leaues rise vp diuers square rough stalkes, diuided at the toppe into diuers branches, whereon grow the like leaues as grow below, but lesser; toward the ends of the branches stand the flowers, mixed with some longer leaues, euery one in his seuerall huske, which are hollow, long and round, like a bell or cup, wide open at the mouth, and cut at the brimme into fiue corners, or diuisions, somewhat lesser then the Co∣uentry Bels, in some of a pure white, and others of a faire deepe purple violet col and sometimes paler: after the flowers are past, come smaller and rounder he then in the former, containing flat seede, but blacker, and not so redde as the la: the roote is hard and white, dispersing it selfe into many branches vnder ground, not perishing euery yeare as the former (although it loseth all the leaues in winter) but abiding many yeares, and encreasing into diuers heades or knobs, from whence spring new leaues and branches.
1 Campanula persicifolia. Peach leafed Bell-flower. 2 Trachelium maius simplex. Canterbury Bels. * Trachelium flore duplici. Double Canterbury Bels. 3 Viola Mariana. Couentry Bels. 4 Trachelium Giganteum. Giants Throatewort. 5 Trachelium minus. The lesser Throatewort. 6 Trachelum Americanum siue Cardinalis planta. The rich crimson Cardinals flower. depiction of flowers
5. Trachelium maius flore duplici albo & caeruleo. Canterbury Bels with double flowers both white and blew. Of this kinde of Throateworte or Canterbury Bels, there is another sort, not dif∣fering in any thing from the former, but in the doublenesse of the flower: For there is of both the kindes, one that beareth double white flowers, and the other blew: Of each whereof I receiued plants from friends beyond the Sea, which grow well with me. 6. Trachelium Giganteum flore purpurante. Pale purple Giants Throateworte. This Bell-flower, although it hath a Gigantine name, yet did I neuer perceiue it in my Garden, to rise vp h gher then the former, the epithite beeing in my perswasion, only giuen for difference sake: the leaues whereof are not so rough, but as large, and dented about the edges, somewhat larger pointed, and of a fresher greene colour: the stalkes beare such like leaues on them, but more thinly or dispersedly set, hauing a flower at the setting on of euery one of the leaues, from the middle vpwards, and are somewhat like the great Throateworte in forme▪ but of a pale or bleake reddish pur∣ple colour, turning the brims or corners a little backwards, with a forked clapper in the middle, sufficient eminent and yellow: the seede hereof is white, and plentifull in the heads, which will abide all the winter vpon the stalkes, vntill all the seede being shed, the heads remaining seeme like torne rags, or like thin peeces of skin, eaten with wormes: the roote is greate, thicke and white, abiding long without perishing. Flore albo.There is another which differeth not any thing but in the flower, which is white. 7. Trachelium minus flore albo & purpureo. Small Throateworte or Canterbury Bells both white and purple. The lesser Throateworte hath smaller leaues, nothing so broade or hard as the for∣mer great kinde, but long, and little or nothing dented about the edges: the stalkes are square and brownish, if it beare purple flowers, and greene if it beare white flowers, which in forme are alike, and grow in a bush or tuft, thicke set together, more then any of the former, and smaller also, being not much bigger then the flowers of the fielde, or garden Rampions: the roote is lasting, and shooteth afresh euery yeare. 8. Trachelium Americarum flore ruberrimo, siue Planta Cardinalis. The rich crimson Cardinals flower. This braue plant, from a white roote spreading diuers wayes vnder ground, sendeth forth many greene leaues, spread round about the head thereof, each whereof is some∣what broade and long, and pointed at the end, finely also snipt about the edges: from the middle whereof ariseth vp a round hollow stalke, two foote high at the least, beset with diuers such leaues as grow below, but longer below then aboue, and branching out at the toppe aboundantly, euery branch bearing diuers greene leaues on them, and one at the foote of euery of them also, the toppes whereof doe end in a great large tuft of flowers, with a small greene leafe at the foote of the stalke of euery flower, each footestalke being about an inch long, bearing a round greene huske, diuided into fiue long leaues or points turned downwards, and in the midst of euery of them a most rich crimson coloured flower, ending in fiue long narrow leaues, standing all of tm foreright, but three of them falling downe, with a long vmbone set as it were at the backe of them, bigger below, and smaller aboue, and at the toppe a small head, being of a little paler colour then the flower, but of no sent or smell at all, commendable on∣ly for the great bush of so orient red crimson flowers: after the flowers are past, the seede commeth in small heads, closed within those greene husks that held the flowers, which is very like vnto the seede vessels of the Viola Mariana, or Couentry Bels, and is small and brownish.
The Place. All these Bell-flowers do grow in our Gardens, where they are cherished for the beautie of their flowers. The Couentry Bels doe not grow wilde in any of the parts about Couentry, as I am credibly informed by a faithfull Apothecary dwelling there, called Master Brian Ball, but are noursed in Gardens with them, as they are in other places. The last groweth neere the riuer of Canada, where the French plantation in America is seated. The Time. They flower from May vntill the end of Iuly or August, and in the mean time the seed is ripe: But the Peache-leafed Bell-flowers, for the most part, flower earlier then the other. The Names. The first is generally called Campanula Persicifolia, in English Peach-leafed Bell-flower. The second is called Campanula maior, Campanula lactescens Py∣ramidalis, and Pyramidalis Lutetiana of Lobel, in English, Great or Steeple Bell-flower. The third is vsually called Viola Mariana, and of some Viola Marina. Lobel putteth a doubt whether it be not Medium of Dioscorides, as Matthiolus and others doe thinke; but in my opinion the thicknesse of the roote, as the text hath it, contradicteth all the rest. We call it generally in English Couentry Bels. Some call it Marian, and some Mercuries Violets. The fourth and fift are called Trachelium or Ceruicaria, of some Vvularia, because many haue vsed it to good purpose, for the paines of the Vvula, or Throate: Yet there is another plant, called also by some Vvularia, which is Hippoglossum, Horse tongue, or Double tongue. The sixt hath his title to descipher it out sufficiently, as is declared. The seuenth is called Trachelium minus, and Ceruiaria minor, of some Saponaria altera; in English, Small Throateworte, or Small Canterbury Bels. The last hath his name in the ti∣tle, as it is called in France, from whence I receiued plants for my Garden with the Latine name: but I haue giuen it in English. The Vertues. The Peach-Bels as well as the others may safely bee vsed in gargles and lotions for the mouth, throate, or other parts, as occasion serueth. The rootes of many of them, while they are young, are often eaten in sallets by diuers beyond the Seas. CHAP. LXXXVII. Campana Caerulea siue Convolvulus Caeruleus. Blew Bell flowers, or blew Bindeweede. THere are two other kindes of Bell-flowers, much differing from the Tribe or Familie of the former, because of their climbing or winding qualitie, which I must needes place next them, for the likenesse of the flowers, al∣though otherwise they might haue beene placed with the other clamberers that follow. Of these there is a greater, and a lesser, and of each likewise some difference, as shall be declared.
1. Convolvulus caeruleus maior rotundifolius. The greater blew Bindweede, or Bell-flower with round leaues. This goodly plant riseth vp with many long and winding branches, whereby it climbeth and windeth vpon any poles, herbes, or trees, that stand neare it within a great compasse, alwaies winding it selfe contrary to the course of the Sunne: on these branches doe growe many faire great round leaues, and pointed at the end, like vnto a Violet leafe in shape, but much greater, of a sad greene colour: at the ioynts of the branches, where the leaues are set, come forth flowers on pretty long stalkes, two or three together at a place, which are long, and pointed almost like a finger, while they are buds, and not blowne open, and of a pale whitish blew colour, but being blowne open, are great and large bels, with broad open mouths or brims ending in fiue cor∣ners, and small at the bottome, standing in small greene huskes of fine leaues: these flowers are of a very deepe azure or blew colour, tending to a purple, very glorious to behold, opening for the most part in the euening, abiding so all the night and the next morning, vntill the Sunne begin to growe somewhat hot vpon them, and then doe close, neuer opening more: the plant carrieth so many flowers, if it stand in a warme place, that it will be replenished plentifully, vntill the cold ayres and euenings stay the luxury thereof: after the flowers are past, the stalkes whereon the flowers did stand, bend downwards, and beare within the huskes three or foure blacke seedes, of the bignesse of a Tare or thereabouts: the rootes are stringy, and perish euery yeare. 2. Convolvulus trifolius siue hederaceus purpureus. The greater purple Bindeweede, or Bell-flower with cornered leaues. The growing and forme of this Bindeweede or Bell-flower, is all one with the for∣mer, the chiefest differences consisting in the forme of the leafe, which in this is three cornered, like vnto an Iuie leafe with corners; and in the flower, which is of a deeper blew, tending more to a deepe purple Violet, and somewhat more reddish in the fiue plaites of each flower, as also in the bottomes of the flowers. 3. Convolvulus tenuifolius Americanus. The red Bell-flower of America. Although this rare plant (because wee seldome haue it, and can as hardly keepe it) be scarce knowne in these cold Countries, yet I could not but make mention of it, to incite those that haue conueniencie to keepe it, to be furnished of it. It springeth vp at the first from the seede with two leaues, with two long forked ends, which abide a long time before they perish, betweene which riseth vp the stalke or stemme, bran∣ching forth diuers waies, being of a brownish colour, which windeth it selfe as the former great Bell-flower doth, whereon are set at seuerall ioynts diuers winged leaues, that is to say, many small narrow and long leaues set on both sides of the middle ribbe, and one at the end: from these ioynts arise long stalkes, at the ends whereof stand two or three small, long, hollow flowers, fashioned very like vnto the flowers of a Binde∣weede, or the flowers of Tabacco, and ending in the like manner in fiue points, but not so much laide open, being of a bright red colour, plaited as the Bindeweedes or Bell-flowers before they be open; with some few threads in the middle, which turne into long pointed cods, wherein is contained long and blacke seede, tasting hot like Pepper: the roote is small and stringy, perishing euery yeare, and with vs will sel∣dome come to flower, because our cold nights and frosts come so soone, before it can∣not haue comfort enough of the Sun to ripen it. 4. Convolvulus caeruleus minor Hispanicus. The Spanish small blew Bindeweede.
This small Bindeweede hath small long leaues, somewhat broader then the next that followeth, and not so broad as the common small Bindeweede (that groweth  euery where wilde on the bankes of fields abroad) set vpon the small trayling bran∣ches, which growe aboue two or three foote high: from the middle of these bran∣ches, and so vnto the toppes of them, come forth the flowers at the ioynts with the leaues, folded together at the first into fiue plaites, which open into so many corners, of a most excellent faire skie coloured blew (so pleasant to behold, that often it ama∣zeth the spectator) with white bottomes, and yellowish in the middle, which turne into small round white heads, wherein are contained small blackish cornered seede, somewhat like the former, but smaller: the roote is small and threddy, perishing as the former euery yeare: this neuer windeth it selfe about any thing, but leaneth by reason of the weaknesse of the branches, and dyeth euery yeare after seede time, and not to be sowne againe vntill the next Spring. 5. Convolvulus purpureus Spicaefolius. Lauander leafed Bindeweede. This small purple Bindeweede, where it naturally groweth, is rather a plague then a pleasure, to whatsoeuer groweth with it in the fields; yet the beauty of the flower hath caused it to be receiued into Gardens, bearing longer and smaller leaues then the last, and such like small Bell-flowers, but of a sad purple colour: the roote is ling, as the common kinds are, and springeth againe where it hath been once sowne, with∣out feare of perishing. The Place. The first two greater kindes haue beene sent vs out of Italy, but whether they had them from the East Indies, or from some of the Easterne Coun∣tries on this side, wee know not: but they thriue reasonable well in our Country, if the yeare be any thing kindly. The next came out of America, as his name testifieth. The lesser blew kinde groweth naturally in many places both of Spaine and Portugall (from whence I first receiued seedes from Guillaume Boel, heretofore remembred.) The last groweth wilde in the fields, about Dunmowe in Essex, and in many other places of our owne Countrey likewise. The Time. The three first greater kindes flower not vntill the end of August, or thereabouts, and the seede ripeneth in September, if the colds and frosts come not on too speedily. The lesser kindes flower in Iune and Iuly. The Names. The first is called of some Campana Lazura, as the Italians doe call it, or Campana caerulea, of others Convolvulus caeruleas maior, siue Indicus, and Flos noctis. Of some Nil Auicennae. The second is called Convolvulus trifolius, or haederaceus, for the distinction of the leaues. In English wee call them ey∣ther Great blew Bell-flowers, or more vsually, Great blew Bindeweedes. That of America is diuersly called by diuers. It is called Quamoclit of the Indians, and by that name it was sent to Ioachinus Camerarius out of Italy, where it is so called still, as Fabius Columna setteth it downe, and as my selfe also can witnesse it, from thence being so sent vnto mee: but Andraeas Caesalpinus calleth it, Iasminum folio Millefolij, supposing it to be a Iasmine. Camerarius saith, it may not vnfitly be called Convolvulus tenuifolius, ac∣counting it a kinde of Bindeweede. Columna entituleth it
Convolvulus pen∣natus exoticus rarior, and saith it cannot bee referred to any other kinde of plant then to the Bindeweedes. Hee that published the Curae posteriores of Clusius, giueth it the name of Iasminum Americanum, which I would doe also, if I thought it might belong to that Family; but seeing the face and forme of the plant better agreeing with the Bindeweedes or Bell-flowers,  I haue (as you see) inserted it among them, and giuen it that name may bee most fit for it, especially because it is but an annuall plant. The lesser kindes haue their names sufficiently expressed in their titles. The Vertues. We know of no vse these haue in Physicke with vs, although if the first be Nil of Auicen, both he and Serapio say it purgeth strongly. CHAP. LXXXVIII. Stramonium. Thorne-Apple. VNto the Bell-flowers, I must adioyne three other plants, in the three seuerall Chapters following, for some affinity of the flowers: and first of the Thorne-Apples, whereof there are two especiall kindes, that is, a greater and a lesser, and of each some diuersity, as shall be set downe. 1. Stramonium maius album. The great white flowred Thorne-Apple. The greater Thorne-Apple hath a great, strong, round greene stalke, as high as any man, if it be planted in good ground, and of the bignesse of a mans wrest almost at the bottome, spreading out at the toppe into many branches, whereon stand many very large and broad darke greene leaues, cut in very deeply on the edges, and hauing ma∣nie points or corners therein: the flowers come forth at the ioynts, betweene two branches towards the toppe of them, being very large, long, and wide open, ending in fiue points or corners, longer and larger then any other Bell-flowers whatsoeuer: after the flowers are past, come the fruit, which are thorny long heads, more prickly and greene then the lesser kindes, which being ripe openeth it selfe into three or foure parts, hauing a number of flat blackish seede within them: the roote is aboundant in fibres, whereby it strongly taketh hold in the ground, but perisheth with the first frosts; yet the seede that is shed when the fruit is ripe, commeth vp the next yeare. 2. Stramonium maius purpureum. The great purple flowred Thorne-Apple. This purple Thorne-Apple is in largenesse of leaues, thicknesse and height of stalke, greatnesse and forme of flowers and fruit, euery way equall and correspondent vnto the former, the chiefe differences be these: the stalke is of a darke purple colour; the leaues are of a darker greene, somewhat purplish, and the flowers are of light purple or pale Doue colour, enclining to white, and whiter at the bottome. 3. Stramonium minus seu Nux Metel flore albo. The smaller Thorne-Apple with a white flower. The smaller Thorne-Apple riseth vp with one round stalke, of the bignesse of a mans finger, and neuer much aboue two foote high with vs, bearing a few large, broad, smooth leaues thereon, without any branches at all, which are vneuenly rent or
about the edges, with many ribs, and smaller veines running through them, yet lesser by much then the greater kinde: at the ioynts where the leaues stand, come forth long and large white flowers, with broad or wide open brims, folded together before their opening, as the other former Bell-flowers or Bindeweedes, but hauing their fiue corners more pointed or horned then either they, or the former Thorne-Apples: af∣ter the flowers are past, succeed small fruit, rounder and harder, set with harder, but blunt prickes then the former, wherein is contained brownish yellow flat seede, 1 Convolvulus maior caeruleus. The greater blew Bindweed or Bell flower. 2 Convolvlus trifolius seu hederaceus. The great purple Bindeweed. 3 Convolvulus minor caerul Hispanicus. The Spanish small blew Bindweed. 4 Stramonium maius seu pomum spinos. The great Thorne Apple. 5 Datura seu Stramo∣nium minus. The small Thorne-Apple. 6 Stramonium flore duplici. The double flowred Thorne-Apple. 7 Stramonium fore gemito. Double Thorne-Apple one out of another 8 Tabacco latifolium. Broad leafed Tabacco. 9 Mirabilia Pena. The Meruae of the world. depiction of flowers
sticking to the inward pulpe: the roote is not very great, but full of strings, and quickly perisheth with the first frosts. 4. Stramonium minus flore geminato purpurante. The small double flowred purple Thorne-Apple. In the flower of this plant, consisteth the chiefest difference from the former, which is as large as the last, pointed into more hornes or corners, and beareth two flowers, standing in one huske, one of them rising out from the middle of the other, like vnto those kindes of Cowslips and Oxelips, called double, or Hose in hose, before descri∣bed, which are of a pale purplish colour on the outside, and almost white within: the fruit is round like the last, and beareth such like seede, so that vntill it bee in flower, their difference can hardly bee discerned: this is more tender then the last, although euen it is so tender, that it seldome beareth ripe seede with vs. Flore duplici.Sometimes (for I think it is not another kind) the flower will haue as it were double rowes of leaues, close set together, and not consisting of two, rising so distinctly one aboue another. The Place. All these kindes haue been brought or sent vs out of Turkie and Egypt; but Garcias, and Christopherus Acosta, with others, affirme that they grow in the East Indies. The lesser kindes are very rare with vs, because they sel∣dome come to maturity; and therefore we are still to seeke of new seede to sowe. The greater kindes are plentifull enough in our Gardens, and will well abide, and giue ripe fruit. The Time. The smaller kindes flower later then the greater; and therefore their fruit are the sooner spoiled with the cold ayres, dewes, and frosts, that come at the latter end of the yeare: but the greater kinds neuer misse lightly to ripen. The Names. Both the greater and smaller kindes are generally called Stramonium, Stramonia, Pomum spinosum, and Datura. Bauhinus vpon Matthiolus his Comentaries on Dioscorides, calleth it Solanum faetidum spinosum. Some learned men haue referred it to Nux Metel, of the Arabian Authors. Wee call them generally in English, Thorne-Apples, and distinguish them by their titles of greater and lesser, single and double. The Vertues. The East Indian lasciuious women performe strange acts with the seed (of the smaller kinde, as I suppose, or it may be of either) giuing it their hus∣bands to drinke. The whole plant, but especially the seed, is of a very cold and soporiferous quality, procuring sleep and distraction of senses. A few of the seeds steeped and giuen in drinke, will cause them that take it to seem starke drunke or dead drunke, which fit will within a few houres we are a∣way, and they recouer their senses againe, as a drunken man raysed after sleep from his wine. It may therefore (in my opinion) be of safe and good vse to one, that is to haue a legge or an arme cut off, or to be cut for the stone, or some other such like cure to be performed, to take away the sense of paine for the time of doing it; otherwise I hold it not fit to be vsed without great caution. But the greene leaues of the greater kindes (as also of the lesser, but that with vs they are not so plentifull) are by tryed experience, found to be excellent good for any scalded or burned part, as also to take away any hot inflammations, being made vp into a salue or ointment with suet, waxe, and rossin, &c. or with Axungia, that is, Hogs larde.
CHAP. LXXXIX. Tabacco. Indian Henbane, or Tabacco. THere hath beene formerly but three kindes of Tabacco knowne vnto vs, two of them called Indian, and the third English Tabacco. In these later yeares, we haue had in our gardens about London (before the suppressing of the planting) three or foure other sorts at the least, and all of the Indian kinde, hauing some especi∣all difference, eyther in leafe, or flower, or both: And in regard the flowers of some of these carry a pretty shew, I shall only entreate of them, and not of the English kind. Tabacco latifolium. Broade leafed Tabacco. The great Indian Tabacco hath many very large, long, thicke, fat and faire greene leaues, standing foreright for the most part, and compassing the stalkes at the bottome of them, being somewhat pointed at the end: the stalke is greene and round, sixe or seuen foote high at sometimes, and in some places, in others not past three or foure foote high, diuided towards the toppe into many branches, with leaues at euery ioynt, and at the toppes of the branches many flowers, the bottomes hereof are long and hollow, and the toppes plaited or folded before they are open, but being open, are diuided sometimes into foure, or more vsually into fiue corners, somewhat like vnto other of the Bell-flowers, but lying a little flatter open, of a light carnation colour. The seede is very small and browne, contained in round heads, that are clammy while they are greene, and pointed at the end: the roote is great, whitish, and woody at the head, dispersing many long branches, and small fibres vnder the ground, whereby it is strongly fastened, but perisheth with our violent frosts in the winter, if it be left abroad in the garden, but if it be housed, or safely prouided for against the frostes, the rootes will liue, and spring afresh the next yeare. There is of this kinde another sort, whose leaues are as large and long as the former, but thicker, and of a more dead greene colour, hanging downe to the ground-ward, and scarce any standing forth-right, as the former, vnlesse they bee very young: the flowers of this kinde are almost whole, without any great shew of corners at the brims or edges, in all other things there is no difference. There is another, whose large and thicke flat leaues doe compasse the stalke at the bottome, and are as it were folded together one side vnto another: the flowers are of a deeper blush, or carnation colour, and with longer points and corners then in any of the former; and in these two things consisteth the difference from the others, and is called Verines Tabacco. Another hath his leaues not so large and long as the first, and these haue short foote∣stalkes, whereon they stand, and doe not compasse the stalke as the other doe: the flower hereof is like the first, but smaller, and of a little paler colour. Tabacco angustifolium. Narrow leafed Tabacco. This kinde of Tabacco hath somewhat lower, and smaller stalkes, then any of the former: the leaues hereof are smaller and narrower, and not altogether so thicke, but more pointed, and euery one standing vpon a footstalke, an inch and a halfe long at the least: the flowers hereof stand thicker together, vpon the small branches, some∣what larger, of a deeper blush colour, and more eminent corners then in any the for∣mer: the seed and roots are alike, and perish in like manner, vnlesse it be brought into a cellar, or other such couert, to defend it from the extremitie of the Winter. The Place.
America or the West Indies is the place where all these kindes doe grow naturally, some in one place, and some in another, as in Peru, Trinidado,  Hispaniola, and almost in euery Iland and Countrey of the continent there∣of: with vs they are cherished in gardens, as well for the medicinable qua∣lities, as for the beauty of the flowers. The Time. It flowreth in August, seldome before, and the seede is ripe quickly after. If it once sowe it selfe in a Garden, it will giue next year after young plants: but for the most part they will spring vp late, and therefore they that would haue them more early, haue sowen the seede vpon a bed of dung, and transplanted them afterwards. The Names. This plant hath gotten many names. The Indians call it in some places Petum, in others Picielt, and Perebecenu, as Ouiedus and others doe relate. The Spaniards in the Indies first called it Tabacco, of an Iland where plenty of it grew. It hath in Christendome receiued diuers other names, as Nico∣tiana, of one Nicot a French man, who seeing it in Portugall, sent it to the French Queene, from whom it receiued the name of Herba Regina. Lobel calleth it Sancta herba, & Sana sancta Indorum. Some haue adiudged it to be an Hioscyamus, and therefore call it Peruvianus. The most vsuall name wher∣by we call it in English, is Tabacco. The Vertues. The herbe is, out of question, an excellent helpe and remedy for diuers diseases, if it were rightly ordered and applyed, but the continuall abuse thereof in so many, doth almost abolish all good vse in any. Notwithstan∣ding if men would apply their wits to the finding out of the vertues, I make no doubt but many strange cures would bee performed by it, both inward and outward. For outward application, a Salue made hereof (as is before re∣cited of the Thorne apple leaues) cureth vlcers, and wounds of hard cura∣tion: And for inward helpes, a Syrupe made of the iuice and sugar, or ho∣ney, procureth a gentle vomit (but the dryed leafe infused in wine much more) and is effectuall in astmaticall diseases, if it bee carefully giuen. And likewise cleanseth cankers and fistulaes admirably, as hath beene found by late experience. The ashes of Tabacco is often vsed, and with good suc∣cesse, for cuts in the hands, or other places, and for other small greene wounds. CHAP. XC. Mirabilia Peruviana. The Meruaile of Peru. THis plant yeeldeth in our Gardens fiue or sixe seuerall varieties of beautifull flowers, as pure white, pure yellow, pure red, white and red spotted, and red and yellow spotted. But besides these, I haue had some other sorts, among which was one, of a pale purple or peach colour: all which, comming vnto mee out of Spaine with many other, seedes in an vnkindly yeare (an early winter following a cold summer) perished with mee; yet I plainely might discerne by their leaues, and manner of growing, to be diuers from them that we now haue and keepe. I shall need therefore (because the chiefest difference consisteth almost in the flowers) to giue only one description of the plant, and therein shew the varieties as is before declared. Admirabilis. The Meruaile of the World.
The stalke of this meruellous plant is great and thick, bigger then any mans thumbe,  bunched out or swelling at euery ioynt, in some the stalkes will bee of a faire greene colour, and those will bring white, or white and red flowers: in others they will bee reddish, and more at the ioynts, and those giue red flowers; and in some of a darker greene colour, which giue yellow flowers; the stalkes and ioynts of those that will giue red and yellow flowers spotted, are somewhat brownish, but not so red as those that giue wholly red flowers: vpon these stalkes that spread into many branches, doe grow at the ioynts vpon seuerall footestalkes, faire greene leaues; broad at the stalke, and pointed at the end: at the ioynts likewise toward the vpper part of the branches, at the foote of the leaues, come forth seuerall flowers vpon short footestalkes, euery one being small, long and hollow from the bottome to the brimme, which is broade spread open, and round, and consist but of one leafe without diuision, like vnto a Bell flower, but not cornered at all: which flowers, as I said, are of diuers colours, and diuersly marked and spotted, some being wholly white, without any spot in them for the most part, through all the flowers of the plant; so likewise some being yellow, and some wholly red; some plants againe being mixed and spotted, so variably either white and red, or purple, (except here and there some may chance to be wholly white, or red or purple among the rest) or red and yellow through the whole plant, (except as before some may chance in this kinde to be eyther wholly red, or wholly yellow) that you shall hardly finde two or three flowers in a hundred, that will bee alike spotted and marked, without some diuersitie, and so likewise euery day, as long as they blow, which is vntill the winters, or rather autumnes cold blastes do stay their willing pronenesse to flower: And I haue often also obserued, that one side of a plant will giue fairer varieties then another, which is most commonly the Easterne, as the more temperate and shadowie side. All these flowers doe open for the most part, in the euening, or in the night time, and so stand blowne open, vntill the next mornings sun beginne to grow warme vpon them, which then close themselues together, all the brims of the flowers shrinking into the middle of the long necke, much like vnto the blew Bindeweede, which in a manner doth so close vp at the sunnes warme heate: or else if the day be temperate and milde, without any sunne shining vpon them, the flowers will not close vp for the most part of that day, or vntill toward night: after the flowers are past, come seuerall seedes, that is, but one at a place as the flowers stood before, of the bignesse (sometimes) of small pease, but not so round, standing within the greene huskes, wherein the flowers stood before, being a little flat at the toppe, like a crowne or head, and round where it is fastened in the cup, of a blacke colour when it is ripe, but else greene all the while it groweth on the stalke, and being ripe is soone shaken downe with the wind, or any other light shaking: the roote is long and round, greater at the head, and smaller downwards to the end, like vnto a Reddish, spreading into two or three, or more branches, blackish on the outside and whitish within. These rootes I haue often preserued by art a winter, two or three (for they will perish if they be left out in the garden, vnlesse it be vnder a house side) because many times, the yeare not falling out kindely, the plants giue not ripe seede, and so we should be to seeke both of seede to sow, and of rootes to set, if this or the like art to keep them, were not vsed; which is in this manner: Within a while after the first frosts haue ta∣ken the plants, that the leaues wither and fall, digge vp the rootes whole, and lay them in a dry place for three or foure dayes, that the superfluous moysture on the outside, may be spent and dryed, which done, wrap them vp seuerally in two or three browne papers, and lay them by in a boxe, chest or tub, in some conuenient place of the house all the winter time, where no winde or moist ayre may come vnto them; and thus you shall haue these rootes to spring a fresh the next yeare, if you plant them in the begin∣ning of March, as I haue sufficiently tryed. But some haue tryed to put them vp into a barrell or firkin of sand, or ashes, which is also good if the sand and ashes be thorough dry, but if it bee any thing moist, or if they giue againe in the winter, as it is vsuall, they haue found the moisture of the rootes, or of the sand, or both, to putrefie the rootes, that they haue beene nothing worth, when they haue taken them forth. Take this note also for the sowing of your seede, that if you would haue variable flowers, and not all of one colour, you must choose out such flowers as be variable while they grow, that you may haue the seede of them: for if the flowers bee of one entire co∣lour, you shall haue for the most part from those seedes, plants that will bring flowers all of that colour, whether it be white, red or yellow.
The Place. These plants grow naturally in the West Indies, where there is a perpe∣tuall summer, or at the least no cold frosty winters, from whence the seede hath been sent into these parts of Europe, and are dispersed into euery garden almost of note. The Time. These plants flower from the end of Iuly sometimes, or August, vntill the frosts, and cold ayres of the euenings in October, pull them down, and in the meane time the seed is ripe. The Names. Wee haue not receiued the seedes of this plant vnder any other name, then Mirabilia Peruviana, or Admirabilis planta. In English wee call them, The meruaile of Peru, or the meruaile of the world: yet some Authors haue called it Gelseminum, or Iasminum rubrum, & Indicum: and Bauhinus Solanum Mexiocanum flore magno. The Vertues. We haue not knowne any vse hereof in Physicke. CHAP. XCI. Malua. Mallowes. OF the kindred of Mallowes there are a great number, some of the gardens, o∣thers wilde, some with single flowers, others with double, some with whole leaues, others with cut or diuided: to entreate of them all is not my purpose, nor the scope of this worke, but onely of such whose flowers, hauing beautie and re∣spect, are fit to furnish this garden, as ornaments thereunto. And first of those single kindes, whose flowers come neerest vnto the fashion of the former Bell-flowers, and after to the double ones, which for their brauery, are entertained euery where into e∣uery Countrey womans garden. 1. Malua Hispanica flore carneo amplo. The Spanish blush Mallow. The Spanish Mallow is in forme and manner of growing, very like vnto our com∣mon fielde Mallow, hauing vpright stalkes two or three foote high, spread into diuers branches, and from the bottome to the toppe, beset with round leaues, like vnto our Mallowes, but somewhat smaller, rounder, and lesse diuided, yet larger below then aboue: the flowers are plentifully growing vpon the small branches, folding or wri∣thing their leaues one about another before they bee blowne, and being open consist of fiue leaues, with a long forked clapper therein, of the same colour with the flower: the chiefest difference from the common consisteth in this, that the leaues of these flowers are longer, and more wide open at the brimmes (almost like a Bell-flower) and of a faire blush or light carnation colour, closing at night, and opening all the day: after the flowers are past, there come such like round heads, with small blacke seede, like vnto the common kinde, but somewhat smaller: the roote is small and long, and perisheth euery yeare. 2. Alcea vulgaris flore carneo. Vervaine Mallow with blush flowers.
There is a Mallow that hath long stalkes, and flowers like vnto the common wilde 1 Malua Hispanica flore carneo amplo. The Spanish Mallow. 2 Alcea Veneta. The Venice Mallow. 3 Alcea Americana. Thorney Mallow. 4 Alcea Aegptiae. The Mallow of Egypt. 5 Althaea rutex. The shrubbe Mal∣low. 6 Malua hortensis simplex. Single Hollihockes. 7 Malua rosea multiplex. Double Hollihockes. depiction of flowers
Mallow, and of the same deepe colour with it, so that you can hardly know it from the ordinary kinde, which is found growing wilde together with it, but onely by the leafe, which is as round and as large as the former, but cut into many fine diui∣sions, euen to the stalke that vpholdeth it, that it seemeth to consist onely of ragges, or peeces of leaues: Of this kinde I take a plante for this garden, growing in all respects like vnto it, but differing onely in the colour of the flowers, which are of the same blush or light carnation colour, or not much differing from the former Spanish kinde, with some veines therein of a deeper colour: the root hereof liueth, as the root of the common wilde kinde doth. 3. Alcea peregrina siue vesicaria. Venice Mallow, or Good night at noone. The Venice Mallow hath long and weake stalkes, most vsually lying or leaning vpon the ground, hauing here and there vpon them long leaues and somewhat broad, cut in or gashed very deepely on both edges, that it seemeth as if they were diuers leaues set together, euery one standing on a long footestalke: at the ioynts of these stalkes, where the leaues are set, come forth seuerall flowers, standing vpon long foot∣stalkes, which are somewhat larger then any of the former flowers, consisting of fiue leaues, small at the bottome, and wide at the brimmes, of a whitish colour tending to a blush, and sometimes all white, with spots at the bottomes of the leaues on the inside, of a very deepe purple or murrey colour, which addeth a great grace to the flower, and hauing also a long pestle or clapper in the middle, as yellow as gold: these flowers are so quickly faded and gone, that you shall hardly see any of them blowne open, vnlesse it bee betimes in the morning before the Sunne doe grow warme vpon them, for as soone as it feeleth the Sunnes warme heate, it closeth vp and neuer openeth a∣gaine, so that you shall very seldome see a flower blowne open in the day time, after nine a clocke in the morning: after these flowers are past, there rise vp in their places thinne, round, shining or transparent bladders, pointed at the toppe, and ribbed down all along, wherein are contained small, round, blackish seede: the roote is long and small, and perisheth euery yeare. 4. Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea. Cinquefoile Mallow. The stalkes of this Mallow are very long, hard or wooddy, more then of any of the other Mallowes: at the lower part whereof, and vp to the middle, stand diuers leaues vpon long footestalkes, parted or diuided into fiue parts or leaues, and dented about the edges; but vpwards from the middle to the toppe, the leaues haue but three diuisions: among these leaues stand large wide open flowers, of the colour of the common Mallow: the seede is smaller then in any other Mallow, but the rootes are great and long, spreading in the ground like vnto the roots of Marsh Mallowes, spring∣ing vp afresh euery yeare from the roote. 5. Sabdarifa seu Alcea Americana. Thorney Mallowe.
This Thorney Mallowe hath greene leaues next vnto the ground, that are almost round, but pointed at the end, and dented very much about the edges; the other leaues that growe vpon the stalke are diuided into three parts, like vnto a trefoile, and some of them into fiue diuisions, all of them dented about the edges: the stalke is reddish, with some harmelesse prickles in sundry places thereon, and riseth vp three or foure foote high in a good ground, a fit place, and a kindly yeare, bearing plenty of flowers vpon the stalkes, one at the foote of euery leafe, the toppe it selfe ending in a long spike, as it were of buddes and leaues together: the flowers are of a very pale yellow, tending to a white colour, spotted in the bottome of each of the fiue leaues, with a deepe purple spot, broad at the lower part, and ending in a point about the middle of the leafe, which are quickly fading, and not abiding aboue one day, with a long pestle in the middle diuided at the toppe: after the flower is past, commeth vp a short prickly podde, set within a small greene huske or cup that bore the flower, wherein is contai∣ned  whitish, or rather brownish yellow seede, flat and somewhat round, like vnto the seedes of Hollyhocke: the roote is stringie, and quickly perisheth; for it will hardly endure in our cold Country to giue flowers, much lesse seede, vnlesse (as I said before) it happen in a kindly yeare, and be well planted and tended. 6. Bamia seu Alcea Aegyptia. The Mallow of Egypt. This Mallow is also as tender to nourse vp as the last, hauing the lower leaues broad like a Marsh Mallow, and of a fresh greene colour; but those that growe vpon the stalke, and vp to the toppe, are diuided into fiue parts or points, but are not cut in to the middle ribbe, like the former Thorney Mallow, yet dented about the edges like vnto them: the flowers growe at the setting to of the leaues, like vnto a Mallow for forme, but of a whitish colour; after which come long fiue square pointed pods, with hard shels, wherein are contained round blackish gray seede, as bigge as a Vetch or bigger: the roote perisheth quickly with vs, euen with the first frosts. 7. Althaea frutex flore albo vel purpureo. Shrubbe Mallow with a white or purple flower. There are diuers sorts of shrubbe Mallowes, whereof some that haue their stemmes or stalkes lesse wooddy, dye downe to the ground euery yeare, and others that abide alwayes, are more wooddy: Of the former sorts I intend not to speake, referring them to a fitter place; and of the other, I will onely giue you the knowledge of one or two in this place, although I doe acknowledge their fittest place had been to be among the shrubbes; but because they are Mallowes, I pray let them passe with the rest of their kindred, and their descriptions in this manner: These wooddy kindes of shrub Mal∣lowes haue somewhat large, long, and diuided leaues, of a whitish greene colour, soft also, and as it were woolly in handling, set dispersedly on the whitish hard or wooddy stalkes: their flowers are large, like vnto a single Rose or Hollyhocke, in the one being white with purple spots in the bottome; in the other either of a deepe red colour, or else of a paler purple, with a deeper bottome, and with veines running in euery leafe: they are somewhat tender, and would not be suffered to be vncouered in the Winter time, or yet abroad in the Garden, but kept in a large pot or tubbe, in the house or in a warme cellar, if you would haue them to thriue. 8. Malua hortensis rosea simplex & multiplex diuersorum colorum. Hollihockes single and double of seuerall colours. I shall not neede to make many descriptions of Hollihockes, in regard the greatest difference consisteth in the flowers, which are in some single, in some double, in some of one colour, and in others of other colours: for the lowest leaues of Hollihockes are all round, and somewhat large, with many corners, but not cut in or diuided, soft in handling; but those that growe vp higher are much more diuided into many corners: the stalkes sometimes growe like a tree, at the least higher then any man, with diuers such diuided leaues on them, and flowers from the middle to the toppe, where they stand as it were a long spike of leaues and buds for flowers together: the flowers are of diuers colours, both single and double, as pure white, and pale blush, almost like a white, and more blush, fresh and liuely, of a Rose colour, Scarlet, and a deeper red like a crimson, and of a darke red like blacke bloud; these are the most especiall colours both of single and double flowers that I haue seene: the single flowers consist of fiue broad and round leaues, standing round like vnto single Roses, with a middle long stile, and some chiues aboue them: the double flowers are like vnto double Roses, very thicke, so that no stile or vmbone is seene in the middle, and the outermost rowe of leaues in the flowers are largest, the innermost being smaller and thicke set together: after the flowers are past, there come vp as well in the double as single, flat round heads, like flat cakes, round about the bottomes whereof growe flat whitish seede: the roote is long and great at the head, white and tough, like the roote of the common Mallowes, but greater, and will reasonably well abide the Winter.
The Place. The first groweth wilde in Spaine. The second in our owne Countrey. The third is thought to growe in Italy and Venice; but Lobel denieth it, saying, that it is there onely in Gardens, and is more plentifull in these parts then with them. The fourth Clusius saith he found in many places of Germany. The fifth is supposed to be first brought out of the West Indies, but an Arabicke name being giuen it, maketh me somewhat doubtfull how to beleeue it. The sixth groweth in Egypt, where it is of great vse, as Pro∣sper Alpinus hath set downe in his Booke of Egyptian plants. The seuenth groweth in some parts both of Spaine and France. The last is not found but in Gardens euery where. The Time. The first, second, third, fourth, and last, doe flower from Iune vntill the end of Iuly and August. The rest flower very late, many times not vn∣till September or October. The Names. The first and second haue their names sufficiently expressed in their titles. The third is diuersly called, as Malua horaria, Alcea vesicaria, Alcea Veneta, Alcea Peregrina, and of Matthiolus, Hypecoum. The most vsuall English name is Venice Mallow. The fourth is called Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea, and Can∣nabinifolio, or Pentaphyllifolio: In English, Cinquefoile Mallow. The fifth hath been sent vnder the name of Sabdarifa, and Sabdariffa, and (as I said) is thought to be brought from America, and therefore it beareth the name of that Country. The sixth is called in Egypt, Bamia, or Bammia, and by that name sent with the addition del Cayro vnto it: In English, Egyptian Mal∣low, or Mallow of Egypt. The seuenth is called Althaea frutex, and of some Althaea arborea: In English, Shrubbe Mallow, because his stemme is wood∣die, and abideth as shrubbes and trees doe. The eight and last is called Malua hortensis, Malua Rosea, and of some Rosa vltra marina: In English, of some Hockes, and vsually Hollihockes. The Vertues. All sorts of Mallowes, by reason of their viscous or slimie quality, doe helpe to make the body soluble, being vsed inwardly, and thereby helpe also to ease the paines of the stone and grauell, causing them to be the more easily voided: being outwardly applyed, they mollifie hard tumors, and helpe to ease paines in diuers parts of the body; yet those that are of most vse, are most common. The rest are but taken vpon credit. CHAP. XCII. Amaranthus. Flower-gentle. WE haue foure or fiue sorts of Flower-gentle to trimme vp this our Garden withall, which doe differ very notably one from another, as shall be de∣clared in their seuerall descriptions; some of which are very tender, and must be carefully regarded, and all little enough to cause them beare seede with vs, or else wee shall bee to seeke euery yeare: others are hardy enough, and will hardly be lost out of the Garden.
1. Amaranthus purpureus minor. The small purple Flower-gentle. This gallant purple Veluet flower, or Flower-gentle, hath a crested stalke two foote high or more, purplish at the bottome, but greene to the toppe, whereout groweth many small branches, the leaues on the stalkes and branches are somewhat broad at the bottome, and sharpe pointed, of a full greene colour, and often somewhat reddish withall, like in forme vnto the leaues of Blites (whereof this and the rest are accounted species, or sorts) or small Beetes: the flowers are long, spikie, soft, and gentle tufts of haires, many as it were growing together, broad at the bottome, and small vp at the toppe, pyramis or steeple-fashion, of so excellent a shining deepe purple colour, ten∣ding to a murrey, that in the most excellent coloured Veluet, cannot be seene a more orient colour, (and I thinke from this respect, the French call it Passe velours, that is to say, passing Veluet in colour) without any smell at all, which being bruised giueth the same excellent purple colour on paper, and being gathered in his full strength and beauty, will abide a great time (if it be kept out of the winde and sunne in a dry place) in the same grace and colour: among these tufts lye the seede scattered, which is small, very blacke, and shining: the rootes are a few threddy strings, which quickly perish, as the whole plant doth, at the first approach of Winter weather. 2. Amaranthus Coccineus. Scarlet Flower-gentle. The leaues of this Flower-gentle are longer, and somewhat narrower then the for∣mer; the stalke groweth somewhat higher, bearing his long tufts at seuerall leaues, as also at the toppe of the stalkes, many being set together, but separate one from ano∣ther, and each bowing or bending downe his head, like vnto a Feather, such as is worn in our Gallants and Gentlewomens heads, of an excellent bloudy Scarlet colour: the seede is blacke, like vnto the former: the roote perisheth quicklier, because it is more tender. 3. Amaranthus tricolor. Spotted or variable Flower-gentle. The chiefest beauty of this plant consisteth in the leaues, and not in the flowers; for they are small tufts growing all along the stalke, which is nothing so high as the for∣mer, especially with vs, and at the ioynts with the leaues: the leaues hereof are of the same fashion that the former are, and pointed also; but euery leafe is to be seene par∣ted into greene, red, and yellow, very orient and fresh (especially if it come to his full perfection, which is in hot and dry weather) diuided not all alike, but in some leaues, where the red or yellow is, there will be greene, and so varying, that it is very pleasant to behold: the seede hereof is blacke and shining, not to bee knowne from the former. 4. Amaranthus Carnea spica. Carnation Flower-gentle. There is another more rare then all the rest, whose leaues are somewhat longer, and narrower then the first, and like vnto the second kinde: the spikes are short, many set together, like branches full of heads or eares of corne, euery one whereof hath some long haires sticking out from them, of a deep blush, tending to a carnation colour. 5. Amaranthus purpureus maior panniculis sparsis. Great Floramour, or purple Flower-gentle.
The great Floramour hath one thicke, tall, crested, browne red stalke, fiue or six foote high, from whence spring many great broad leaues, like vnto the former for the forme, but much larger & redder for the most part, especially the lowest, which bran∣cheth forth into diuers parts, & from between these leaues, & the stalks or branches, as also at the tops of them, stand long, spikie, round, & somewhat flat tufts, of a more red∣dish purple colour then the first, and diuided also into seuerall parts, wherin when they  are full ripe, are to be seen an innumerable company of white seed, standing out among the short thrums, and do then easily fall away with a little touching; euery one of thee white seed hath as it were an hole halfe bored through therin: the root is a great bush of strings, spreading in the ground, whereby it is strongly fastened, yet perisheth euery yeare, after it hath giuen his seede. The Place. All these plants growe in the Easterne Countries, as Persia, Syria, Ara∣bia, &c. except the greatest, which hath been brought out of the West In∣dies, where it is much vsed, especially the seede: they are all, except it, noursed vp with much care in our Gardens, and yet in a backward or cold yeare they will not thriue, for that they desire much heate: but the greatest doth alwayes giue ripe seede euery yeare. The Time. They beare their gallant tufts or spikes for the most part in August, and some not vntill September. The Names. The name Amaranthus is giuen to all these plants, taken from the Greeke word , non marcescens, or non senescens, that is, neuer waxing old, and is often also imposed on other plants, who haue the same property, that is, that their flowers being gathered in a fit season, will retaine their natiue colour a long time, as shall be shewed in the Chapter following. Diuers do thinke the first to be Phlox, or Flamma of Theophrastus. The third is called Gelosia, or Celosia of Tragus. Spigelius in his Isagoges saith, it is generally taken to be Sophonia, whereof Plinie maketh mention; and Lobel, to bee the Persians Theombroton of Plinie. The Italians, from whom I had it (by the meanes of Mr. Doctor Iohn More, as I haue had many other rare sim∣ples) call it, Blito di tre colori, A three coloured Blite. The fifth, which is the greatest, hath been sent from the West Indies by the name of Quinüa, as Clusius reporteth. The name Flower-gentle in English, and Floramour, which is the French, of Flos amoris, and Passe velours, as is before said, or Veluet flower, according to the Italian, Fior veluto, are equally giuen to all these plants, with their seuerall distinctions, as they are expressed in their titles. The Vertues. Diuers suppose the flowers of these plants doe helpe to stay the fluxe of bloud in man or woman, because that other things that are red or pur∣ple doe performe the same. But Galen disproueth that opinion very no∣tably, in lib. 2. & 4. de simpl. medicament. facultatibus. CHAP. XCIII. Helichrysum, siue Amaranthus luteus. Golden Flower-gentle, Goldilockes, or Gold-flower.
THe propinquity of property (as I before said) hath caused the affinity in name, and so in neighbourhood in these plants, wherein there are some diuersity; and although they differ from them before in many notable points, yet they all a∣gree with themselues in the golden, or siluer heads or tufts they beare; and therefore I 1 Amaranthus purpureus maior. The great purple Flower-gentle. 2 Amaranthus purpureus minor. The lesser purple Flower-gentle. 3 Amaranthu tricolor. Variable Flower-gentle. 4 Amaranthus Coccineus. Scarlet Flower gentle. 5 Amaranthus carnea spica. Carnation Flower-gentle. 6 Chry∣scome. Golden Cassidonie. 7 Heliochrysum Creticum. Candy Goldilockes. 8 Gnaphalum Americanum. Liuelong or Life euerlasting. 9 Gna∣phalium motanu. Cats foote. 10 Gnaphalium rosum. The Cotton Rose. depiction of flowers
haue comprised them in one Chapter, and will begin with that which commeth nea∣rest vnto the Helichrysum of Dioscorides, or Aurelia (as Gaza translateth it) of Theo∣phrastus. 1. Heliochrysum. The Golden flower of life. This first Golden tuft riseth vp with many hard, round, white stalkes, a foote and a halfe high, whereon at certaine distances stand many fine cut leaues, or rather one leafe cut into many small fine parts, almost as small as Fenell, but grayish, like vnto the Cud-weedes or Cotton-weedes (whereof certainly these are speciall kindes) at the toppes of the stalkes stand many round flowers, of a pale gold colour, in an vmbell close to∣gether, yet euery flower vpon his owne stalke, and all of an euen height, which will keepe the colour, being gathered, and kept dry for a long time after, and are of a hot and quicke sent: the roote is small and wooddy, spreading vnder the vpper crust of the earth, and liueth long in his owne naturall place, but very hardly endureth the cold of our Winters, vnlesse they be milde, or it be well defended. 2. Helichrysum Creticum. Candy Goldilockes. Candy Goldilockes hath two or three small slender white branches, set here and there very scatteringly, with small, long, and narrow hoary leaues, hauing yellow heads of flowers at the tops made into vmbels or tufts, not so round and euen as the former, but longwise one aboue another, the heads being made as it were of scales, loosly, and not so closely set together, as in the next following, which when they are full ripe, doe passe into doune, and are blowne away with the winde, hauing a small reddish seede at the end; but will abide a long time, as the other in his beauty, being gathered in time, as the rest will doe. 3. Helichrysum Orientale siue Amaranthus luteus. Golden Flower-gentle. This most beautifull plant is very like vnto the former Candy Goldilockes last de∣scribed, but growing vp higher, with many more branches, and more hoary, white, and woolly, hauing also long and narrow white leaues, but somewhat broader, and thicker set on the branches: the tufts of flowers or vmbels likewise doe consist of longer and larger heads, more scaly, and closer compact together, of an excellent pale gold yellow colour, and shining, with some yellow threads or thrummes in the middle: the roote dyeth not euery yeare, but liueth long, especially in the South and East Countries, where no colds or frosts are felt; but will require extraordinary care and keeping, and yet scarce sufficient to preserue it in these cold Countries. 4. Chrysocome siue Staechas Citrina. Golden tufts or Golden Cassidony. This Golden flower is somewhat like the former of these two last described, hauing hoary stalkes and leaues, standing confusedly on them, being long, and narrower then any of the former: the tops of the stalkes are diuided into many parts, each bearing a small long yellow head or flower at the toppe, with some yellow thrummes in them, which heads being many, are diffusedly set together, like a loose or sparsed vmbell, keeping their colour long before they wither, and when they are ripe, haue thinne small reddish seede, like Mariorome seede, but smaller; the roote is small and blacke: the whole plant, as well leaues and flowers, as rootes, are of a strong sharpe sent, yet pleasant. 5. Argyrocome siue Gnaphalium Americanum. Liue long or Life euerlasting. This siluer tuft or Indian Cotton weede, hath many white heads of leafes at their first springing out of the ground, couered with a hoary woollinesse like cotton, which rising into hard, thicke round stalkes, containe still the same hoarinesse vpon them, as also vpon the long and narrow leaues which are set thereon, especially on the vnder
side, for the vpper sides are of a darke shining greene colour: the stalkes are diuided at the toppe into many small branches, each whereof haue many scaly tufted heads set together, couered ouer with cotton before their opening, and then disseuering one from another, abiding very white on the outside, when they are fully growne, but with a small yellow thrume in the midde of euery flower, which in time turne into yellow doune, apt to be blowne away with euery winde: the roots are long and black on the outside, creeping vnder ground very much. 6. Gnaphalium montanum flore albo & flore purpureo. White and purple Catsfoote. This small Cudweede or Cottonweede, hath many small white woolly leaues growing from the roote, which is composed of a few small blackish threds, and lying vpon the ground somewhat like vnto the leaues of a small Mouse eare, but smaller; from among which riseth vp a small stalke of halfe a foote high or thereabouts, beset here and there with some few leaues, at the top whereof commeth forth a tuft of small flowers, set close together, in some of a pure white, in others of a purple or reddish colour, in some of a pale red or blush, and in others of a white and purple mixt toge∣ther which for the beauty is much commended and desired, but will hardly abide to be kept in Gardens, so vnwilling they are to leaue their naturall abiding. 7. Gnaphalium Roseum. The Cotton Rose. This little rose Cotton weede hath many such like woolly leaues, growing as the former from the roote vpon small short branches, not full an hand breadth high, in fa∣shion somewhat like vnto Daysie leaues, but lesser, and round pointed: at the toppe of euery stalke or branch, standeth one flower, composed of two rowes of small white leaues, layd open like a Starre or a Rose, as it beareth the name, hauing a round head in the middle made of many yellow threds or thrumes, which falling away, there ri∣seth vp a small round head, full of small seedes: the root is small, long and threddy. The Place. The foure first plants doe grow naturally in many of the hot Countries of Europe, as Spaine, Italie, and Prouince in France; as also in Candy, Barbary, and other places, and must be carefully kept with vs in the winter time. The Liue long was brought out of the West Indies, and groweth plentifully in our gardens. The two last doe grow as well in the colder Countries of Germany, as in France and other places. The Time. They all flower in the end of September, if they will shew out their beauty at all with vs, for sometimes it is so late, that they haue no faire colour at all, especially the foure first sorts. The Names.
Variable and many are the names that seuerall Writers do call these foure first sorts of plants, as Helichrysum, Heliochrysum, or Elichrylum. Eliochrysum, Chrysocome, Coma aurea, Amaranthus luteus, Stoechas Citrina, and Aurelia, with others, needlesse here to be recited: it is sufficient for this worke, to giue you knowledge that their names are sufficient as they are expressed in their titles: The fift is called Gnaphalium by Carolus Clusius, from the likenesse of the vmbels or tufts of heads, though greater and white: for as I said be∣fore, the Cotton weedes are of kindred with the golden tufts: It hath been called by our English Gentlewomen, Liue long, and Life euerlasting, be∣cause of the durabilitie of the flowers in their beautie. The two last are cal∣led  Gnaphalium, according to their titles; and in English they may passe vn∣der those names are set downe with them. The Vertues. The foure first are accounted to bee hot and dry, and the three last to bee cold and dry: yet all of them may to some good purpose bee applyed to rheumaticke heads. The former foure are likewise vsed to cause vrine, and in baths to comfort and heate cold parts. They are also layd in chests and wardrobes, to keepe garments from moths; and are worne in the heads and armes of Gentiles and others, for their beautifull aspect. CHAP. XCIIII. Canna Indica. The Indian flowring Reede. THere are two kindes or sorts of this beautifull plant, the one with a red flower, the other with a yellow, spotted with reddish spots, both which in some kind¦ly yeares haue borne their braue flowers, but neuer any ripe seede, and doth not abide the extremities of our winters, eyther abroade or vnder couert, vnlesse it meete with a stoue or hot-house, such as are vsed in Germany, or such other like place: For neyther house nor cellar will preserue it, for want of heate. Canna Indica flore rubro. Red flowred Indian Reede. This beautifull plant riseth vp with faire greene, large, broade leaues, euery one ri∣sing out of the middle of the other, and are folded together, or writhed like vnto a paper Coffin (as they call it) such as Comfitmakers and Grocers vse, to put in their Comfits and Spices, and being spread open, another riseth from the bottome thereof, folded in the same manner, which are set at the ioynts of the stalke when it is risen vp, like vnto our water Reede, and growing (if it runne vp for flower) to be three or foure foote high, as I haue obserued in mine owne garden: the flowers grow at the toppe of the stalke one aboue another, which before their opening are long, small, round, and pointed at the end, very like vnto the claw of a Crauise or Sea-Crab, and of the same red or crimson colour, but being open, are very like vnto the flower of Gladiolus or Corne-flagge, but of a more orient colour then at the first, and standing in a rough huske, wherein afterwards standeth a three square head, containing therein round blacke seede, of the bignesse of a pease: the roote is white and tuberous, growing in∣to many knobs, from whence arise such other leaues and stalkes, whereby it encreaseth very much, if it be righrly kept and defended. Canna Indica flore flauo punctato. Yellow spotted Indian Reede. This Reede groweth vp with leaues and flowers, in all points so like vnto the for∣mer, that it cannot bee knowne from it, vntill it come to flower, which is of a yellow colour, spotted with reddish spots, without any other difference. The Place. These plants grow naturally in the West Indies, from whence they were first sent into Spaine, and Portugall, where Clusius saith he saw them plan∣ted by the houses sides, flowring in winter, which might be in those warme Countreyes. We preserue them with great care in our gardens, for the beau∣tifull aspect of their flowers.
The Time. They flower not with vs vntill the end, or middle of August, at the soo∣nest. The Names. They are called of some Canna Indica, and Arundo Indica, of others Canna∣corus, and of some Flos Cancri, because the colour of the flowers, as well as the forme of the buds, are so like vnto a Sea-Crabs cle, or claw. The Vertues. There is not any vse of these in Physicke that I know. CHAP. XCV. Mandragoras. Mandrake. THe Mandrake is distinguished into two kindes, the male and the female; the male hath two sorts, the one differing from the other, as shall be shewed; but of the female I know but one: The male is frequent in many gardens, but the fe∣male, in that it is more tender and rare, is noursed vp but in a few. Manadrgoras mas. The male Mandrake. The male Mandrake thrusteth vp many leaues together out of the ground, which being full growne, are faire, large and greene, lying round about the roote, and are lar∣ger and longer then the greatest leaues of any Lettice, whereunto it is likened by Dio∣scorides and others: from the middle, among these leaues, rise vp many flowers, euery one vpon a long slender stalke, standing in a whitish greene huske, consisting of fiue pretty large round pointed leaues, of a greenish white colour, which turne into small round apples, greene at the first, and of a pale red colour when they are ripe, very smooth and shining on the outside, and of a heady or strong stuffing smell, wherein is contained round whitish flat seede: the roote is long and thicke, blackish on the out∣side, and white within, consisting many times but of one long roote, and sometimes diuided into two branches a little below the head, and sometimes into three or more, as nature listeth to bestow vpon it, as my selfe haue often seene, by the transplanting of many, as also by breaking and cutting off of many parts of the rootes, but neuer found harme by so doing, as many idle tales haue beene set downe in writing, and deliuered also by report, of much danger to happen to such, as should digge them vp or breake them; neyther haue I euer seene any forme of man like or woman like parts, in the rootes of any: but as I said, it hath oftentimes two maine rootes running down-right into the ground, and sometimes three, and sometimes but one, as it likewise often hap∣peneth to Parsneps, Carrots, or the like. But many cunning counterfeit rootes haue bin shaped to such formes, and publickly exposed to the view of all that would see them, and haue been tolerated by the chiefe Magistrates of the Citie, notwithstanding that they haue beene informed that such practices were eer deceit, and vnsufferable; whether this happened through their ouer relitie of the thing, or of the persons, or through an opinion that the information o the truth rose vpon enuy, I know not, I leaue that to the searcher of all hearts. But this you may bee bold to rest vpon, and assure your selues, that such formes as haue bin publickly exposed to e seene, were ne∣uer so formed by nature, but only by the art and cunning of knaues and deceiuers▪ and let this be your Gale against all such vaine, idle and ridiculous toyes of mens in∣uentions.
There is likewise another sort of these male Mandrakes, which I first saw at Canter∣bury, with my very louing and kinde friende Iohn Tradescante, in the garden of the Lord Wotton, whose gardiner he was at that time; the leaues whereof were of a more grayish greene colour, and somewhat folded together, when as the former kind that grew hard by it, was of the same forme that is before described, and ordinary in all others: but whether the apples were differing from the other, I know not, nor did they remember that euer it had borne any. Mandragoras faemina. The female Mandrake. The female Mandrake doth likewise put vp many leaues together, from the head of the roote, but they are nothing so large, and are of a darker greene colour, narrower also and shining, more crumpled, and of a stronger sent: the flowers are many, rising vp in the middle of the leaues, vpon slender stalkes, as in the male kind, but of a blew∣ish purple colour, which turne into small round fruite or apples, and not long like a peare (as Clusius reporteth that saw them naturally growing in Spaine) greene at the first, and of a pale yellowish colour, when they arc full ripe; of a more pleasing, or if you will, of a lesse heady sent then the apples of the male, wherein is contained such like seede, but smaller and blacker: the rootes are like the former, blacke without and white within, and diuided in the same manner as the male is, sometimes with more, and sometimes with fewer parts or branches. The Place. They grow in many places of Italie, as Matthiolus reporteth, but espe∣cially on Mount Garganus in Apulia. Clusius saith hee found the female in many wet grounds of Spaine, as also in the borders of those medowes that lye neere vnto riuers and water courses. The male is cherished in many Gardens, for pleasure as well as for vse: but the female as is said, is both ve∣ry rare, and farre more tender. The Time. The Male flowreth in March, and the fruit is ripe in Iuly. The Female, if it be well preserued, flowreth not vntill August, or September; so that with∣out extraordinary care, we neuer see the fruite thereof in our gardens. The Names. Mandragoras mas is called albus, as the Faemina is called niger, which titles of blacke and white, are referred vnto the colour of the leaues: the fe∣male is called also Thridacias, from the likenesse of Lettice, whereunto they say in forme it doth carry some similitude. Dioscorides saith, that in his time the male was called Mrion, and both of them Antimelum, and Circaea. Wee call them in English, The male, and the female Mandrake. The Vertues. The leaues haue a cooling and drying qualitie, fit for the oyntment Po∣pleo, wherein it is put. But the Apples haue a soporiferous propertie, as Leuinus Lemnius maketh mention in his Herball to the Bible, of an expe∣riment of his owne. Besides, as Dioscorides first, and then Serapio, Auicen, Paulus Aegineta, and others also do declare, they conduce much to the coo∣ling and cleansing of an hot
matrix. And it is probable, that Rachel know∣ing that they might be profitable for her hot and dry body, was the more earnest with Lea for her Sonne Rubens Apples, as it is set downe Genesis 30. verse 14. The strong sent of these apples is remembred also, Cant. 7.13. although some would diuert the signification of the Hebrew word, ,  vnto Violets, or some other sweet flowers, in the former place of Genesis, and the fruit of Musa, or Adams Apples in this place of the Canticles. Hamilcar the Carthaginian Captaine is said to haue infected the wine of the Lybians (his enemies against whom he fought) with the apples of Man∣drake, whereby they being made exceeding drowsie, he obtained a famous victory ouer them. CHAP. XCVI. Pomum Amoris. Loue Apples. ALthough the beautie of this plant consisteth not in the flower, but fruit, yet giue m eaue to insert it here, lest otherwise it haue no place: whereof there are two especiall sorts, which wee comprehend in one Chapter, and distinguish them by maius and minus, greater and smaller: yet of the greater kinde, we haue nour∣sed vp in our Gardens two sorts, that differ only in the colour of the fruite, and in no∣thing else. Pomum Amoris maius fructu rubro. Great Apple of Loue the ordinary red sort. This greater kinde of Loue Apples, which hath beene most frequently cherished with vs, hath diuers long and trayling branches, leaning or spreading vpon the ground, not able to sustaine themselues, whereon doe grow many long winged leaues, that is, many leaues set on both sides, and all along a middle ribbe, some being greater, and others lesse, iagged also and dented about the edges, of a grayish ouer worme greene colour, somewhat rough or hairy in handling, from among the leaues and the branches come forth long stalkes, with diuers flowers set thereon, vpon seuerall short footstalks, consisting of sixe, and sometimes of eight small long yellow leaues, with a middle pricke or vmbone, which after the flowers are fallen, riseth to be the fruite, which are of the bignesse of a small or meane Pippin, vneuenly bunched out in diuers places, and scarce any full round without bunches, of a faire pale reddish colour, or somewhat deeper, like vnto an Orenge, full of a slimie iuice and watery pulpe, wherein the seede lyeth, which is white, flat and somewhat rough: the roote shooteth with many small strings and bigger branches vnderground, but perisheth at the first feeling of our win∣ter weather. The fruite hereof by often sowing it in our Land, is become much smal∣ler then I haue here described it: but was at the first, and so for two or three yeares af∣ter, as bigge as I haue related it. Pomum Amoris maius fructu lute. Yellow Amorous Apples. Of the same kinde is this other sort of Amorous Apples, differing in nothing but the colour of the fruite, which is of a pale yellow colour, hauing bunches or lobes in the same manner, and seede also like the former. Pomum Amoris minus, siue Mala Ethiopica parua. Small Loue Apples. The small Apples of Loue in the very like manner, haue long weake trayling branches, beset with such like leaes as the greater kinde hath, but smaller in euery part: the flowers also stand many together on a long stalke, and yellow as the for∣mer, but much smaller: the fruite are small, round, yellowish red berries, not much bigger then great grapes, wherein are contained white flat seede, like the other, but smaller: the roote perisheth in like manner euery yeare, and therefore must bee new sowen euery spring, if you will haue the pleasure of their sight in the garden; yet some yeares I haue known them rise of their owne sowing in my garden.
The Place. They growe naturally in the hot Countries of Barbary, and Ethiopia; yet some report them to be first brought from Peru, a Prouince of the West Indies. Wee onely haue them for curiosity in our Gardens, and for the amorous aspect or beauty of the fruit. The Time. They flower in Iuly and August, and their fruit is ripe in the middle or end of September for the most part. The Names. The first is named diuersly by diuers Authors; for Lobel, Camerarius, and others, call them Poma amoris. Dodonaeus Aurea Mala. Gesnerus first, and Bauhinus after him, make it to be a kinde of Solanum Pomiferum. An∣guillara taketh it to be Lycopersicum of Galen. Others thinke it to bee Glau∣cium of Dioscorides. The last is called Mala Aethiopica parua, and by that title was first sent vnto vs, as if the former were of the same kinde and country. We call them in English, Apples of Loue, Loue-Apples, Golden Apples, or Amorous Apples, and all as much to one purpose as another, more then for their beautifull aspect. The Vertues. In the hot Countries where they naturally growe, they are much eaten of the people, to coole and quench the heate and thirst of their hot sto∣maches. The Apples also boyled, or infused in oyle in the sunne, is thought to be good to cure the itch, assuredly it will allay the heate thereof. CHAP. XCVII. Digitalis. Foxegloue. THere are three principall sorts of Foxegloues; a greater, a middle or meane sort, and a lesser, and of them, three especiall colours, that is, purple, white, and yellow; the common purple kinde that groweth abroad in the fields, I leaue to his wilde habitation: and of the rest as followeth. 1. Digitalis maxima ferruginea. Dun coloured Foxegloues. The leaues of this Foxegloue are long and large, of a grayish green colour, finely cut or dented about the edges, like the teeth of a fine sawe; among which commeth vp a strong tall stalke, which when it was full growne, and with ripe seede thereon, I haue measured to be seuen foot high at the least, wheron grow an innumerable company (as I may so say, in respect of the aboundance) of flowers, nothing so large as the com∣mon purple kinde, that groweth wilde euery wherein our owne Countrey, and of a kinde of browne or yellowish dunne colour, with a long lippe at euery flower; after them come seede, like the common kinde, but in smaller heads: the rootes are stringie like the ordinary, but doe vsually perish, or seldome abide after it hath giuen seed. 2. Digitalis maior flore caruco. Blush coloured Foxegloues.
This kinde of Foxegloues hath reasonable large leaues, yet not altogether so large 1 Cana Indica. The Indian Red. 2 Mandragoras mas. The male Mandrake. 3 Pomum amoris maius. Great Apples of loue. 4 Digitalis mair flore luteo amplo. The great yellow Foxegloue. 5. Digitalis media flore luteo rubente. Orenge tawny Foxegloues. 6 Digitalis maxima ferrginea. Dun coloured Foxegloues. depiction of flowers
as the common field kinde: the flowers are also smaller then the common sort, but of a blush colour. 3. Digitalis media flore luteo rubente. Orenge tawnie Foxegloue. As this Foxegloue is none of the greatest, so also is it none of the smallest; but a sort betweene both, hauing leaues in some proportion correspondent to the lesser yellow Foxegloue, but not so large as the lesser white: the flowers are long and narrow, al∣most as large as the last white, but nothing so large as the first white, of a faire yellowish browne colour, as if the yellow were ouershadowed with a reddish colour, and is that colour wee vsually call an Orenge tawnie colour: the seede is like the former: the rootes perish euery yeare that they beare seede, which is vsually the second yeare of the springing. 4. Digitalis maior alba. The greater white Foxegloue. This white Foxegloue is in all things so like vnto the purple wilde kinde, that it can hardly be distinguished from it, vnlesse it be in the fresher greennesse and largenesse of the leaues: the flowers are as great in a manner as the purple, but wholly white, with∣out any spot in them: the seed and other things agree in all points. 5. Digitalis alba altera seu minor. The lesser white Foxegloue. We haue in our Gardens another sort of white Foxegloue, whose leaues are like vnto the last described, but not altogether so long or large, and of a darker greene co∣lour: the stalke groweth not so high, as not full three foote: the flowers are pure white, fashioned like vnto the former, but not so great or large, in all other things alike: the rootes hereof did abide sometime in our Gardens, but since perished, and the seede also, since when we neuer could obtaine from any our friends of that kinde againe. 6. Digitalis maior lutea flore amplo. The great yellow Foxegloue. The leaues of this greater yellow Foxegloue, are in forme somewhat like vnto the common purple kinde, but not altogether so large: the stalke groweth to bee three or foure foote high, whereon stand many long hollow pendulous flowers, in shape like the ordinary purple▪ but somewhat shorter, and more large and open at the brimmes, of a faire yellow colour, wherein are long threads, like as in the others: the roote hereof is greater at the head, and more wooddy then any of the rest, with many smaller fibres, spreading themselues in the ground, and abideth almost as well as our common purple kinde. 7. Digitalis minor lutea siue pallida. The small pale yellow Foxegloue. This small pale yellow Foxegloue hath somewhat short, broad, smooth and darke greene leaues, snipt or dented about the edges very finely: the stalke is two foot high, beset with such like leaues, but lesser: the flowers are moe in number then in any of the rest, except the first and greatest, and growe along the vpper part of the stalke, being long and hollow, like the other, but very small, and of a pale yellow colour almost white: the seede vessels are small like the former, wherein are contained seede like the rest, but smaller: the rootes are stringy, but durable, and seldome perish with any iniury of the extreamest frosts. The Place. The great white kinde hath been often, and in many places found wilde in our owne Country, among or hard by the common purple kinde. All the rest are strangers, but cherished in our Gardens.
The Time. They flower in Iune and Iuly, and some in August, their seede becom∣ming ripe quickly after. The Names. Onely the name Digitalis, is of all Writers giuen vnto these plants; for it is not knowne to bee remembred of any of the old Authors. Wee call them generally in English, Foxegloue; but some (as thinking it to bee too foolish a name) doe call them Finger-flowers, because they are like vnto the fingers of a gloue, the ends cut off. The Vertues. Foxegloues are not vsed in Physicke by any iudicious man that I know; yet some Italians of Bononia, as Camerarius saith, in his time vsed it as a wound herbe. CHAP. XCVIII. Verbascum. Mullein. THere be diuers kindes of Mullein, as white Mullein, blacke Mullein, wooddy Mullein, base Mullein, Moth Mullein, and Ethiopian Mullein, all which to distinguish or to describe, is neither my purpose, nor the intent of this worke, which is to store a Garden with flowers of delight, and sequester others not worthy of that honour. Those that are fit to bee brought to your consideration in this place, are first, the Blattarias, or Moth Mulleins, and then the wooddy Mullein, which o∣therwise is called French Sage, and lastly, the Ethiopian Mullein, whose beauty con∣sisteth not in the flower, but in the whole plant; yet if it please you not, take it accor∣ding to his Country for a Moore, an Infidell, a Slaue, and so vse it. 1. Blattaria lutea odorata. Sweete yellow Moth Mullein. The yellow Moth Mullein whose flower is sweete, hath many hard grayish greene leaues lying on the ground, somewhat long and broad, and pointed at the end: the stalks are two or three foot high, with some leaues on them, & branching out from the middle vpwards into many long branches, stored with many small pale yellow flow∣ers, of a pretty sweete sent, somewhat stronger then in the other sorts, which seldome giueth seede, but abideth in the roote, liuing many yeares, which few or none of the others doe. 2. Blattaria lutea maior siue Hispanica. The great yellow Moth Mullein. This Spanish kinde hath larger and greener leaues then the former, and rounder and larger then the next that followeth: the stalke is higher then in any of the Moth Mulleins, being for the most part foure or fiue foote high, whereon toward the toppe growe many goodly yellow flowers, consisting of fiue leaues, as all the rest doe, not so thicke set as the former, but much larger, with some small purplish threads in the middle: the ends whereof are fashioned somewhat like as if a Flie were creeping vp the flower, which turne into round heads, sometimes two or three or more standing together, but vsually one, wherein lye small duskie seed: the roote is not great nor full of threads, and doth perish most vsually hauing giuen seede, except the Winter bee very milde.
3. Blattaria lutea altera vulgatior. The ordinary yellow Moth Mullein. This yellow Moth Mullein (which is the most frequent in our Gardens) hath longer, and narrower leaues then any of the former, and roundly notched or dented on the edges, of a darke greene colour: the stalke is sometimes branched, but most vsually single, whereon stand many gold yellow flowers, not fully so large as the Spa∣nish kinde, but with the like purple threads in the middle: the seede is small, and contained in the like round heads, but alwaies euery one single by it selfe: the roote perisheth euery yeare that it beareth seede. 4. Blattaria flore luteo purpurascente. Cloth of gold Moth Mullein. The greatest point of difference betweene this and the last described, consisteth chiefly in the colour of the flower, which in this is of the colour of cloth of gold, that is, the ground yellow, and ouershadowed with a bright crimson colour, which is a fine colour of much delight: the threads in the middle are not so purple red as in the for∣mer, but much about the colour of the flower: this is not so willing to giue seede, and will as hardly abide in the roote, and hath out of question risen from the seede of the former. 5. Blattaria flore albo. White Moth Mullein. The leaues of the white Moth Mullein are somewhat like vnto the yellow, yet not altogether so much roundly notched about the edges, but rather a little dented, with sharper notches: the stalke riseth as high as the yellow, and hath now and then some branches about it: the flowers hereof are pure white, as large and great as the ordinary yellow, or somewhat larger, with the like purple threads in the middle, as are in the yellow: the seed is like the other; the root perisheth in like maner, and will not endure. 6. Blattaria flore purpureo. Purple Moth Mullein. The Purple Moth Mullein hath his leaues lying on the ground, broader and shor∣ter then any of the other, of a more grayish greene colour, and without any denting for the most part about the edges, sharpe pointed also at the end of the leafe; among the leaues riseth vp the stalke, not so high as either the white or the yellow, and many times branched, bearing many flowers thereon, of the same fashion, and no whit smaller, of a faire deepe blewish colour tending to rednesse, the threads in the middle of the flowers being yellow: the seede vessels hereof are somewhat smaller then any of the former, except the first sweete yellow kinde: the roote hereof is long, thicke, and blackish on the outside, abiding very well from yeare to yeare, and riseth well also from the sowing of the seede. 7. Blattaria flore caeruleo. Blew Moth Mullein. This blew Moth Mullein is in all respects like vnto the former purple kinde, sauing onely in the colour of the flower, which is of a blewish violet colour, and is not much inferiour either in greatnesse of the plant, or in the largenesse of the flower, vnto the former purple kinde, and endureth many yeares in the like manner. And these be all the sorts of this kinde of Moth Mullein, that I haue seene and noursed vp for this my Garden, without interposing any vnknowne, not seene, or vnworthy. 8. Verbascum siluestre siue quartum Matthioli. Wooddy Mullein or French Sage.
Wooddy Mullein or French Sage, hath diuers wooddy branches two or three foot high, very hoary or white, whereon at seuerall ioynts stand diuers thicke leaues, white also and hoary, long, somewhat broad, round pointed, and rough, somewhat resem∣bling the leaues of Sage in the forme and roughnesse, but not in the sent, whereof our  people gaue it the name of Sage, calling it French Sage (when as it is as great a stran∣ger in France as in England, yet they doe with this as with many other things, cal∣ling them French, which come from beyond the Seas; as for example, all or most of our bulbous flowers, they call French flowers, &c.) at the toppes of the stalkes and branches, at certaine distances, are placed round about them many gaping flowers, like vnto the flowers of Sage, but yellow: after which now and then come seede, somewhat bigger then the Moth Mulleins, and lesse then the next Mullein of Ethiopia: the roote is wooddy at the toppe, with diuers blackish strings growing from it, and en∣dureth as well aboue ground with his leaues, as vnder it with his rootes. 9. Aethiopis. Ethiopian Mullein. This Mullein of Ethiopia hath many great, broad, and large leaues lying on the ground, rent or torne in diuers of them very much on the sides, of so hoary a white greene colour, that it farre passeth any of the white Mulleins, that growe wilde abroad in our owne Country; for they are of a yellowish white hoarinesse, nothing so plea∣sant to looke on as this: in the middle of these leaues riseth vp a square strong stalke, foure or fiue foote high, set full of such like leaues as growe belowe, but much lesser, and lesser still vp to the toppe, all hoary and woolly, as the rest, and diuided into ma∣nie branches, spreading farre, and taking vp a great compasse of ground, more then any one roote of Garden Clary, or other such like plant: at each of the stalkes and branches are set two small leaues, and with them, round about the stalkes, stand many small gaping flowers, of a pale bleake blew colour: the seede is almost as large as Gar∣den Clary seede, and of the same forme and colour: the roote is wooddy, and peri∣sheth as soone as it hath borne seede, which is vsually the second yeare after the sow∣ing; for the first yeare it seldome runneth vp to flower. 10. Lamium Pannonicum siue Galeopsis Pannonica. Hungary dead Nettle or the Dragon flower. Let mee thrust this plant into this place, rather then make a peculiar Chapter, be∣cause I haue no other of the same stocke or kindred to be ioyned with it, and is a pretty ornament in a Garden. The leaues whereof are very large, round, and great, rough or full of veines, which make it seeme crumpled, dented or deepely notched about the edges, and of a very darke greene colour, and sometimes brownish, or of a darke reddish colour withall, euery one standing on a long foote-stalke, very like in forme vnto the great white Arch-Angell leaues, but farre larger and blacker: the stalkes are great and foure square, hauing leaues and flowers standing round about them at the ioynts like coronets, which flowers are very great, long, and wide gaping open, of a darke red or purple colour, with some whitenesse or spots in the iawes, and some hai∣rinesse also on the sides, which stand in full flower two or three moneths most vsually, and sometimes longer, after which come brownish seede: the roote is a great tuft or bush of long whitish strings, and encreaseth euery yeare, not fearing the greatest iniuries of our coldest and extreamest Winters. The Place. All these plants are strangers in our Countrey, and onely preserued in Gardens, to furnish them with variety; but (as I said) the cloth of gold Moth Mullein hath been raised from seed in our owne Country. The Time. The last flowreth first, before all the rest, beginning in Aprill. The Moth Mulleins in May and Iune. The French Sage in Iuly. The Names.
All the sorts of Blattaria may bee comprehended vnder the kindes of  Verbascum nigrum, as any one but meanely exercised in the knowledge of plants, may discerne. And although Plinie saith, that Moths doe most fre∣quently haunt where Blattaria either groweth, or is laid, yet it is not ob∣serued sufficiently in our Country so to doe, notwithstanding the name of Moth Mullein is generally giuen them. The last is generally called with vs Lamium Pannonicum, but certainely it is the Galeosis maxima Pannonica of Clusius. The Vertues. Other qualities I haue not found hath been allotted vnto the Blattaria or Moth Mullein, then those of Plinie, to engender Moths. Wee vse none of these plants in Physicke in these daies. CHAP. XCIX. Valeriana. Valerian. THe many sorts of Valerian (or Set-wall as many doe call them) are fitter for a generall worke, or a generall Physicall Garden of Simples, then this of de∣lightfull flowers. I will therefore select out a few, worthy of the place, and offer them to your considerations. 1. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei. Red Valerian. This Valerian hath diuers hard, but brittle whitish greene stalkes, rising from the roote, full of tuberous or swelling ioynts, whereat stand two leaues, on each side one, and now and then some small leaues from betweene them, which are somewhat long and narrow, broadest in the middle, and small at both ends, without either diuision or incisure on the edges, of a pale greene colour: the stalkes are branched at the top into diuers parts, at the ends whereof stand many flowers together, as it were in an vmbell or tuft, somewhat like vnto the flowers of our ordinary Valerian, but with longer neckes, and of a fine red colour, very pleasant to behold, but of no sent of any Valerian: after these flowers haue stood blowne a very great while, they sodainely fall away, and the seede is ripe very quickly after, which is whitish, standing vpon the branches naked, as the Valerians doe, and very like vnto them, with a little white doune at the end of euery one of them, whereby they are soone carried away with the winde: the roote is great, thicke, and white, continuing long, and shooting out new branches euery yeare, and smelling somewhat like a Valerian. 2. Nardus Montana tuberosa. Knobbed Mountaine Valerian. This kinde of Valerian or Spiknard, if you will so call it, hath his first leaues lying on the ground, without any diuision in them at all, being smooth, and of a dark greene colour, which so abide all the winter; but those that spring vp after, and when it run∣neth vp to flower, are cut in on the edges, very like vnto the iagged leaues of the great garden Valerian, and so the elder they grow, the more cut and iagged they are: the stalke and flowers are very like the stalke with flowers of the garden Valerian, but of a darke or deepe red colour, and more store of them thrust together, by double the number almost: the seede is like the seede of the great Valerian: the root is tuberous, or knobbed in many parts, round about, aboue and below also, with some fibres shoo∣ting from them, whereby it is encreased, and smelleth very like the roote of the garden Setwall, or not altogether so strong.
1 Blattaria flore albo. Moth Mullein with a white flower. 2 Blattaria flore purpureo▪ Moth Mullein with a purple flower. 3 Verbascum uertum Matthioli. French Sage. 4 Aethiopis. Ethiopian Mullein. 5 Valeriana rubra Dodonaei. Red Valerian. 6 Valeriana Graeca. Greek Valerian. 7 Lamium Pannonim. Hungary dead Nettle. 8 Cardamine flore pleno. Double Cuckowe flower or Ladies smocks. depiction of flowers
3. Valeriana Graeca. Greeke Valerian. The Greek Valerian hath many winged leaues lying vpon the ground, that is, many small leaues set on both sides of a middle ribbe, very like vnto the wilde Valerian, that groweth by the ditch sides, but much smaller and tenderer, among which rise vp one or two round brittle stalkes, two foote high or thereabouts, whereon are set at the ioynts, such like leaues as grow below, but smaller: the toppes of the stalkes are di∣uided into many small branches, thicke set together, full with flowers, consisting of fiue small round leaues a peece, layd open like vnto the Cinquefoile flower, with some white threds in the middle, tipt with yellow pendents: the colour of these flowers in some plants, is of a faire bleake blew colour, and in others pure white: And I doe heare of one beyond the Seas (if the report bee true, for I haue not seene such a one) which should beare red flowers: after the flowers are past, there come vp in their pla∣ces small hard huskes or heads, containing small blackish seedes: the roote is com∣posed of a number of small long blackish threds, fastened together at the head, with∣out any sent at all of a Valerian, eyther in roote or leafe; and why it should bee called a Valerian I see no great reason, for it agreeth with none of them, in flower or seede, and but onely with the wilde Valerian in leafe, as I said before: but as it is, we so giue it you, and for the flowers sake is receiued into our gardens, to helpe to fill vp the num∣ber of natures rarities and varieties. The Place. All these Valerians are strangers, but endenizond for their beauties sake in our Gardens. The Mountaine Valerian I had of the liberalitie of my louing friend Iohn Tradescante, who in his trauaile, and search of natures varieties, met with it, and imparted thereof vnto me. The Time. They flower in the Summer moneths, and seed quickly after. The Names. The first is generally called of most, Valeriana rubra Dodonaei, who saith also that some would haue it to be Behen rubrum. Some call it Valerianthon, others make it a kinde of Ocimastrum, and some Saponaria altera, with other names, which are to no great purpose to set downe in this place, it beeing fitter for a generall worke to discusse of names, wherein both reading, know∣ledge and iudgement must bee shewen, to correct errours, and set downe the truth, that one may rest thereon. The others haue their names in their titles sufficient to distinguish them. The Vertues. The Mountaine Valerian is of all the the rest here set downe of most vse in Physicke, the rest hauing little or none that I know, although it be much weaker then the great garden kinde, or the Indian Nardus, in whose steed anciently it was vsed, in oyles, oyntments, &c. CHAP. C. Cardamine. Cuckow flowers, or Ladies smockes. OF the common sorts of Cuckow flowers that grow by ditch-sides, or in moist medowes, & wet grounds, it is not my purpose here to write, but of one or two other, the most specious or faire of all the tribe, that doe best befit this garden.
1. Cardamine flore pleno. Double Cuckow flowers. The double Cardamine hath a few winged leaues, weake and tender, lying on the ground, very like vnto the single medow kinde; from among which riseth vp a round greene stalke, set here and there, with the like leaues that grow below, the top wherof hath a few branches, whereon stand diuers flowers, euery one vpon a small footestalk, consisting of many small whitish round leaues, a little dasht ouer with a shew of blush, set round together, which make a double flower: the roote creepeth vnder ground, sending forth small white fibres, and shooteth vp in diuers places. 2. Cardamine trifolia. Trefoile Ladies smockes. This small plant hath diuers hard, darke round greene leaues, somewhat vneuen a∣bout the edges, alwayes three set together on a blackish small footstalke, among which rise vp small round blackish stalkes, halfe a foote high, with three small leaues at the ioynts, where they branch forth; at the toppes whereof stand many flowers, consisting of foure leaues a peece, of a whitish or blush colour very pale: after which come vp small, thicke and long pods, wherein is contained small round seede: the root is com∣posed of many white threds, from the heads whereof runne out small strings, of a dark purple colour, whereby it encreaseth. The Place. The first with the double flower is found in diuers places of our owne Countrey, as neere Micham about eight miles from London; also in Lan∣cashire, from whence I receiued a plant, which perished, but was found by the industrie of a worthy Gentlewoman, dwelling in those parts heretofore remembred, called Mistresse Thomasin Tunstall, a great louer of these de∣lights. The other was sent me by my especial good friend Iohn Tradescante, who brought it among other dainty plants from beyond the Seas, and im∣parted thereof a roote to me. The Time. The last most vsually flowreth before the former, yet not much differing, that is, in the end of Aprill or in May. The Names. The first is a double kinde of that plant, that growing wilde abroade, is vsually called Cardamine altera, and Sisymbrium alterum of Dioscorides, and of some Flos cuculi, but not fitly; for that name is more vsually giuen vnto the wilde featherd Campions, both single and double, as is before expressed: yet for want of a fitter name, wee may call it in English, eyther Cuckowe flower, or Ladyes smockes, which you will. The second hath beene sent vn∣der the name of Sanicula trifolia, but the most frequent name now receiued, is Cardamine trifolia, and in English Trefoile Ladies spockes. The Vertues. The double Ladies smockes are of the same qualitie with the single, and is thought to be as effectuall as Watercresses. The propertie of the other I thinke is not much knowne, although some would make it a wound herbe.
CHAP. CI. Thlaspi Creticum. Candy Tufts. OF the many sorts of Thlaspi it is not the scope of this worke to relate, I will se∣lect but onely two or three, which for their beautie are fit to bee inserted into this garden. Thlaspi Creticum vmbellatum flore albo & purpureo. Candy Tufts white and purple. This small plant riseth seldome aboue a foote and a halfe high, hauing small, narrow, long and whitish greene leaues, notched or dented with three or foure notches on each side, from the middle to the point-wards; from among which rise vp the stalkes, branched from the bottome almost into diuers small branches, at the toppes whereof stand many small flowers, thick thrust together in an vmbell or tuft, making them seeme to be small, round, double flowers of many leaues, when as euery flower is single, and standeth a part by it selfe, of a faire white colour in some plants, without any spot, and in others with a purplish spot in the centre or middle, as if some of the middle leaues were purple, in others againe the whole flower is purplish all ouer, which make a pretty shew in a garden: the seede is contained in many small and flat seed vessels, which stand together in an vmbell, as the flowers did, in which are contained somewhat reddish seede, like vnto some other sorts of Thlaspi, called Treakle Mustards: the roote is small and hard, and perisheth euery yeare hauing giuen seede. Thlaspi Mari∣num Baticum.We haue another sort, whose leaues before it sendeth forth any stalke, are a little toothed, or finely dented about the edges, and brancheth not so much out, but carryeth an vmbell of purplish flowers like vnto the former, and paler yellow seede. The Place. These doe grow in Spaine and Candie, not farre from the Sea side. The Time. These Thlaspi giue not their flowers vntill the end of Iune, or beginning of Iuly, and the seed is ripe soone after. The Names. The first is named by some, Draba, or Arabis, as Dodonaeus, but Draba is another plant differing much from this. Wee call one sort, Thlaspi Creti∣cum, and the other Thlaspi Baticum marinum, because the one came from Spaine, and the other from Candy; we giue it in English, the name of Tufts, because it doth fit the forme of the flowers best, although ordinarily all the Thlaspi are Englished Wilde Mustardes. The Vertues. Candy, or Spanish Tufts, is not so sharpe biting in taste, as some other of the Thlaspies are, and therefore is not to be vsed in medicines, where Thlaspi should be in the stead thereof.
CHAP. CII. Clematis. Clamberers, or Creepers. HAuing shewed you all my store of herbes bearing fine flowers, let mee now bring to your consideration the rest of those plants, be they Shrubs or Trees, that are cherished in our garden, for the beauty of their flowers chiefly, or for some other beautifull respect: and first I will begin with such as creepe on the ground, without climing, and then such as clime vp by poles, or other things, that are set or grow neere them, fit to make Bowers, and Arbours, or else are like them in forme, in name, or some other such qualitie or propertie. 1. Clematis Daphnoides, siue Vinca peruinca simplex minor diuersorum colorum. Single Perwinkle of diuers colours. The smaller Perwinkle which not onely groweth wilde in many places, but is most vsuall in our Gardens, hath diuers creeping branches, trayling or running vpon the ground, shooting out small fibres at the ioynts, as it creepeth, taking thereby hold in the ground, and rooteth in diuers places: at the ioynts of these branches stand two small darke greene shining leaues, somewhat like vnto small Baye leaues, but smaller, and at the ioynts likewise with the leaues, come forth the flowers, one at a ioynt, stan∣ding vpon a tender footestalke, being somewhat long and hollow, parted at the brims, sometimes into foure leaues, and sometimes into fiue, the most ordinary sort is of a pale or bleake blew colour, but some are pure white, and some of a darke reddish pur∣ple colour: the root is in the body of it, little bigger then a rush, bushing in the ground, and creeping with his branches farre about, taking roote in many places, whereby it quickely possesseth a great compasse; and is therefore most vsually, planted vnder hedges, or where it may haue roome to runne. 2. Vinca peruinca flore duplici purpureo. Double purple Perwinkle. The double Perwinkle is like vnto the former single kinde, in all things except in the flower, which is of that darke reddish purple colour that is in one of the single kindes; but this hath another row of leaues within the flower, so that the two rowes of leaues causeth it to be called double, but the leaues of these are lesser then the sin∣gle. I haue heard of one with a double white flower, but I haue not yet seene it. 3. Clematis Daphnoides siue Peruinca maior. The greater Perwinkle. This greater Perwinkle is somewhat like the former, but greater, yet his branches creepe not in that manner, but stand more vpright, or lesse creeping at the least: the leaues also hereof stand by couples at the ioynts, but they are broader and larger by the halfe: the flowers are larger, consisting of fiue leaues that are blew, a little deeper then the former blew: this plant is farre tenderer to keepe then the other, and there∣fore would stand warme, as well as in a moist shadowie place. 4. Clematis altera siue vrens flore albo. Burning Clamberer, or Virgins Bower. This Causticke or burning Climer, hath very long and climing tender branches, yet somewhat woody below, which winde about those things that stand neere it, co∣uered with a brownish greene barke, from the ioynts whereof shoote forth many winged leaues, consisting for the most part of fiue single leaues, that is, two and two together, and one at the end, which are a little cut in or notched on the edges here and
there, but euery part of them is lesser then the leaues of the next following Climer, without any clasping tendrels to winde about any thing at all: towards the vpper part of the branches, with the said leaues, come forth long stalks, wheron stand many white flowers clustering together, opening the brims into sixe or eight small leaues, sprea∣ding like a starre, very sweet of smell, or rather of a strong heady sent, which after turne into flattish and blackish seede, plumed at the head, which plume or feather fly∣eth away with the winde after it hath stood long, and leaueth the seede naked or bare: the roote is white and thicke, fleshie and tender, or easie to be broken, as my selfe can well testifie, in that desiring to take a sucker from the roote, I could not handle it so tenderly, but that it broke notwithstanding all my care. Master Gerard in his Herball maketh mention of one of this kinde with double white flowers, which hee saith he recouered from the seede was sent him from Argentine, that is Strasborough, whereof hee setteth forth the figure with double flowers: but I neuer saw any such with him, neither did I euer heare of any of this kinde with double flowers. Clusius indeed saith, that hee receiued from a friend some seede vnder the name of Clematis flore albo pleno: but he doubteth whether there bee any such: the plants that sprang with him from that seede, were like vnto the vpright kinde called Flammila Matthioli, or Iouis cresta, as he there saith: but assuredly I haue beene informed from some of my especiall friends beyond Sea, that they haue a double white Clematis, and haue promi∣sed to send it; but whether it will be of the climing or vpright sort, I cannot tell vntill I see it: but surely I doe much doubt whether the double will giue any good seede. 5. Clematis altera siue peregrina flore rubro. Red Ladies Bower. This Climer hath many limber and weake climing branches like the former, coue∣red with a browne thin outer barke, and greene vnderneath: the leaues stand at the ioynts, consisting but of three leaues or parts, whereof some are notched on one side, and some on both, without any clasping tendrels also, but winding with his branches about any thing standeth next vnto it: the flowers in like manner come from the same ioynts with the leaues, but not so many together as the former vpon long footstalkes, consisting of foure leaues a peece, standing like a crosse, of a darke red colour; the seed is flat and round, and pointed at the end, three or foure or more standing close to∣gether vpon one stalk, without any doune vpon them at all, as in the former: the roots are a bundell of brownish yellow strong strings, running down deep into the ground, from a bigge head aboue. 6. Clematis peregrina flore purpureo simplici. Single purple Ladies Bower. This Ladies Bower differeth in nothing from the last described, but onely in the colour of the flower, which is of a sad blewish purple colour; so that the one is not possible to be known from the other, vntill they be in flower. 7. Clematis peregrina flore purpureo pleno. Double flowred purple Ladies Bower. This double Clematis hath branches and leaues so neere resembling the single kinds, that there can be knowne no difference, vnlesse it be, that this groweth more goale and great, and yeeldeth both more store of branches from the ground, and more spreading aboue: the chiefest marke to distinguish it is the flower, which in this is very thicke and double, consisting of a number of smaller leaues, set close together in order in the middle, the foure outermost leaues that encompasse them, being much broader and larger then any of the inward, but all of a dull or sad blewish purple colour, the points or ends of the leaues seeming a little darker then the middle of them: this beareth no seede that euer I could see, heare of, or learne by any of credit, that haue noursed it a great while; and therefore the tales of false deceitfull gardiners, and others, that diliuer such for truth, to deceiue persons ignorant thereof, must not bee credulously entertained.
In the great booke of the Garden of the Bishop of Eystot (which place is neere vnto Noremberg) in Germany, I reade of a Clematis of this former kinde,Clematis pere∣grina flore car∣nec caerueo. whose fi∣gure is thereto also annexed, with double flowers of an incarnate, or pale purple ten∣ding to a blush colour, whereof I haue not heard from any other place. 8. Flammula Iouis erecta. Vpright Virgins Bower. This kinde of Clematis hath diuers more vpright stalkes then any of the foure last described, sometimes foure or fiue foote high, or more; yet leaning or bending a lit∣tle, so that it had some neede of sustaining, couered with a brownish barke; from whence come forth on all sides diuers winged leaues, consisting of fiue or seuen leaues, set on both sides of a middle ribbe, whereof one is at the end: the tops of the stalkes are diuided into many branches, bearing many white sweet smelling flowers on them, like in fashion vnto the white Virgins Bower; after which come such like feather topt seede, which remaine and shew themselues, being flat like the other, when the plumes are blowne abroad: the roote spreadeth in the ground from a thicke head, into many long strings, and fasteneth it selfe strongly in the earth; but all the stalkes dye downe euery yeare, and spring afresh in the beginning of the next. 9. Clematis caerulea Pannonica. The Hungarian Climer. The stalks of this plant stand vpright, & are foure square, bearing at euery ioynt two leaues, which at the first are closed together, and after they are open, are somewhat like vnto the leaues of Asclepias, or Swallow-wort: from the tops of the stalks, and some∣times also from the sides by the leaues commeth forth one flower, bending the head downward, consisting of foure leaues, somewhat long & narrow, standing like a crosse, and turning vp their ends a little againe, of a faire blew or skie colour, with a thicke pale yellow short thrumme, made like a head in the middle: after the flower is past, the head turneth into such a like round feather topt ball, as is to be seene in the Tra∣uellers ioy, or Viorna (as it is called) that groweth plentifully in Kent, and in other places by the way sides, and in the hedges, wherein is included such like flat seede. These stalkes (like as the last) dye downe to the ground euery yeare, and rise againe in the Spring following, shooting out new branches, and therby encreaseth in the root. 10. Maracoc siue Clematis Virginiana. The Virginia Climer.
Because this braue and too much desired plant doth in some things resemble the former Climers, so that vnto what other family or kindred I might better conioyne it I know not; let me I pray insert it in the end of their Chapter, with this description. It riseth out of the ground (very late in the yeare, about the beginning of May, if it be a plant hath risen from the seed of our owne sowing, and if it be an old one, such as hath been brought to vs from Virginia, not till the end thereof) with a round stalke, not a∣boue a yard and a halfe high (in any that I haue seene) but in hotter Countries, as some Authors haue set it downe, much higher, bearing one leafe at euery ioynt, which from the ground to the middle thereof hath no claspers, but from thence vpwards hath at the same ioynt with the leafe both a small twining clasper, like vnto a Vine, and a flower also: euery leafe is broad at the stalke thereof, and diuided about the middle on both sides, making it somewhat resemble a Figge leafe, ending in three points, whereof the middlemost is longest: the bud of the flower, before it doe open, is very like vnto the head or seede vessell of the ordinary single Nigella, hauing at the head or top fiue small crooked hornes, which when this bud openeth, are the ends or points of fiue leaues, that are white on the inside, and lay themselues flat, like vnto an Anemone, and are a little hollow like a scoope at the end, with fiue other smaller leaues, and whiter then they lying betweene them, which were hid in the bud before it opened, so that this flower being full blowne open, consisteth of ten white leaues, laide in or∣der round one by another: from the bottome of these leaues on the inside, rise diuers twined threads, which spread and lay themselues all ouer these white leaues, reaching beyond the points of them a little, and are of a reddish peach colour: towards the bot∣tomes  likewise of these white leaues there are two red circles, about the breadth of an Oten strawe, one distant from another (and in some flowers there is but one circle seen) which adde a great grace vnto the flower; for the white leaues shew their colour through the peach coloured threads, and these red circles or rings vpon them being also perspicuous, make a tripartite shew The Iesuites Figure of the Maracoc. GRANADILLVS FRVTEX INDICVS CHRISTI PASSIONIS IMAGO. depiction of flowers of colours most delightfull: the middle part of this flower is hollow, and yellow∣ish; in the bottome whereof riseth vp an vmbone, or round stile, somewhat bigge, of a whitish greene colour, spotted with reddish spots like the stalkes of Dragons, with fiue round threads or chiues, spot∣ted in the like manner, and tipt at the ends with yellow pendents, standing a∣bout the middle part of the said vm∣bone, and from thence rising higher, en∣deth in three long crooked hornes most vsually (but sometimes in foure, as hath beene obserued in Rome by Dr. Aldine, that set forth some principall things of Cardinall Farnesius his Garden) spotted like the rest, hauing three round greene buttons at their ends: these flowers are of a comfortable sweete sent, very ac∣ceptable, which perish without yeelding fruit with vs, because it flowreth so late: but in the naturall place, and in hot Countries, it beareth a small round whi∣tish fruit, with a crowne at the toppe thereof, wherein is contained (while it is fresh, and before it be ouer dried) a sweet liquor, but when it is dry, the seede within it, which is small, flat, somewhat rough and blacke, will make a ratling noise: the rootes are composed of a number of excee∣ding long and round yellowish browne strings, spreading farre abroad vnder the ground (I haue seene some rootes that haue beene brought ouer, that were as long as any rootes of Sarsa parilla, and a great deale bigger, which to be handsomely laid into the ground, were faine to be coyled like a cable) and shooting vp in seuerall places a good distance one from another, whereby it may be well encreased. The Place. The first blew Perwinkle groweth in many Woods and Orchards, by the hedge sides in England, and so doth the white here and there, but the other single and double purple are in our Gardens onely. The great Per∣winkle groweth in Prouence of France, in Spaine, and Italy, and other hot Countries, where also growe all the twining Clamberers, as well single as double: but both the vpright ones doe growe in Hungary and therea∣bouts. The surpassing delight of all flowers came from Virginia. Wee preserue them all in our Gardens. The Time. The Perwinkles doe flower in March and Aprill. The Climers not vn∣till the end of Iune, or in Iuly, and sometimes in August. The Virginian somewhat later in August; yet sometimes I haue knowne the flower to shew it selfe in Iuly. The Names. The first is out of question the first
Clematis of Dioscorides, and called of 1 Thalspi Creticum. Candy tufts. 2 Vinca peruinca flore simplici. Single Perwinkle. 3 Vinca peruinca flore duplici. Double Perwinkle. 4 Flammula Matthioli. Vpright Virgins Bower. 5 Clematis peregrina flore simplici. The single Ladies Bower. 6 Clematis peregrina flore pleno purpureo. Double flowred Ladies Bower. 7 Maracoc siue Clematis Virginiana. The Virginian Climer. depiction of flowers
many Clematis Daphnoides (but not that plant that is simply called Daphnoi∣des, for that is Laureola) and is vsually called Vinca pervinca: but it is not Chamaedaphne, for that is another plant, as shall be shewed in his place; some call it Centunculus: In English wee call it Perwinkle. The other is Clematis altera of Dioscorides, and is called also Clematis peregrina, whose distincti∣ons are set downe in their titles: In English, Ladies Bower, or Virgins Bower, because they are fit to growe by Arbours, to couer them. The first vpright Clamberer is called, and that rightly of some, Clematis erecta, or surrecta. Of others, Flammula frutex, and Flammula Iouis, or surrecta: In English, Vpright Virgins Bower. The next is called by Clusius, Clematis Pannonica caerulea, who thought it to be Climeni species, by the relation of o∣thers, at the first, but after entituled it, Clematis: In English, the Hungarian Climer. The last may be called in Latine, Clematis Virginiana: In English, The Virgin or Virginian Climer; of the Virginians, Maracoc: of the Spa∣niards in the West Indies Granadillo, because the fruit (as is before said) is in some fashion like a small Pomegranate on the outside; yet the seede within is flattish, round, and blackish. Some superstitious Iesu-ite would faine make men beleeue, that in the flower of this plant are to be seene all the markes of our Sauiours Passion; and therefore call it Flos Passionis: and to that end haue caused figures to be drawne, and printed, with all the parts proportio∣ned out, as thornes, nailes, speare, whippe, pillar, &c. in it, and all as true as the Sea burnes, which you may well perceiue by the true figure, taken to the life of the plant, compared with the figures set forth by the Iesuites, which I haue placed here likewise for euery one to see: but these bee their aduantagious lies (which with them are tolerable, or rather pious and meri∣torious) wherewith they vse to instruct their people; but I dare say, God neuer willed his Priests to instruct his people with lyes: for they come from the Diuell, the author of them. But you may say I am beside my Text, and I am in doubt you will thinke, I am in this besides my selfe, and so nothing to be beleeued herein that I say. For, for the most part, it is an inherent er∣rour in all of that side, to beleeue nothing, be it neuer so true, that any of our side shall affirme, that contrarieth the assertions of any of their Fathers, as they call them: but I must referre them to God, and hee knoweth the truth, and will reforme or deforme them in his time. In regard whereof I could not but speake (the occasion being thus offered) against such an er∣roneous opinion (which euen Dr. Aldine at Rome, before remembred, dis∣proued, and contraried both the said figures and name) and seek to disproue it, as doth (I say not almost, but I am affraid altogether) leade many to adore the very picture of such things, as are but the fictions of superstitious brains: for the flower it selfe is farre differing from their figure, as both Aldine in the aforesaid booke, and Robinus at Paris in his Theatrum Florae, doe set forth; the flowers and leaues being drawne to the life, and there exhibited, which I hope may satisfie all men, that will not be perpetually obstinate and contentious. The Vertues. Costaeus saith hee hath often seene, that the leaues of Perwinkle held in the mouth, hath stayed the bleeding at the nose. The French doe vse it to stay the menstruall fluxes. The other are causticke plants, that is, fiery hot, and blistering the skinne; and therefore (as Dioscorides saith) is profitable to take away the scurse, leprye, or such like deformities of the skin. What property that of Virginia hath, is not knowne to any with vs I thinke, more then that the liquor in the greene fruit is pleasant in taste; but assuredly it cannot be without some speciall properties, if they were knowne.
CHAP. CIII. Chamaelaea. Dwarfe Spurge Oliue, or Dwarfe Baye. I Haue three sorts of Chamaelaea to bring to your consideration, euery one differing notably from other; two of them of great beauty in their flowers, as well as in the whole plant: the third abiding with greene leaues, although it haue no beauty in the flower, yet worthy of the place it holds. And vnto these I must adioyne another plant, as comming nearest vnto them in the brauery of the flowers. 1. Chamaelaea Germanica siue Mezereon floribus dilutioris coloris & saturatioris. Dwarfe Baye, or flowring Spurge Oliue. We haue two sorts of this Spurge Oliue or Dwafe Baye, differing onely in the co∣lour of the flowers. They both rise vp with a thicke wooddy stemme, fiue or six foot high sometimes, or more, and of the thicknesse (if they be very old) of a mans wrest at the ground, spreading into many flexible long branches, couered with a tough grayish barke, beset with small long leaues, somewhat like vnto Priuet leaues, but smaller and paler, and in a manner round pointed: the flowers are small, consisting of foure leaues, many growing together sometimes, and breaking out of the branches by themselues: in the one sort of a pale red at the first blowing, and more white afterwards; the other of a deeper red in the blossome, and continuing of a deeper red colour all the time of the flowring, both of them very sweete in smell: after the flowers are past, come the berries, which are greene at the first, and very red afterwards, turning blackish red, if they stand too long vpon the branches: the rootes spread into many tough long bran∣ches, couered with a yellowish barke. 2. Chamaelaea Alpina. Mountaine Spurge Oliue. This Mountaine Laurell riseth vp with a small wooddy stemme, three or foure foot high, or more, branching forth towards the vpper parts into many slender and tough branches, couered with a rough hoary greene barke, beset at the ends thereof with flatter, fuller, and smaller round pointed leaues then the former, of a grayish greene colour on the vpperside, and hoary vnderneath, which abide on the branches in Winter, and fall not away as the former: the flowers are many set together at the ends of the branches, greater then the former, and consisting of foure leaues a peece, of a light blush colour, standing in small grayish huskes, of little or no sent at all: the fruit followeth, which are small long graines or berries, of an excellent red colour, which afterwards turne blacke: the roote is long, and spreadeth about vnder the vpper part of the earth. 3. Chamaelaea tricoccos. Widowe Wayle. This three berried Spurge Oliue hath no great stemme at all, but the whole plant spreadeth from the ground into many flexible tough greene branches, whereon are set diuers narrow, long, darke greene leaues all along the branches, which abide greene all the Winter: the flowers are very small, scarce to be seene, and come forth between the leaues and the stalke, of a pale yellow colour, made of three leaues; after which come small blackish berries, three vsually set together: the roote spreadeth it selfe in the ground not very farre, being hard and wooddy, and often dyeth, if it bee not well defended from the extremity of our sharpe Winters. 4. Cneorum Matthioli. Small Rocke Roses.
I was long in doubt in what place I should dispose of this plant, whether among the Campions, as Bauhinus, or among these, as Clusius doth; but lest my Gorden should want it wholly, let it take vp roome for this time here. This gallant plant hath diuers  long, weake, slender, but yet tough branches lying vpon the ground, diuided vsually into other smaller branches, whereon growe many, small, long, and somewhat thicke leaues, somewhat like vnto the leaues of the former Mezereon, set without any order to the very tops, from whence doe come forth a tuft of many small flowers together, made or consisting of foure leaues a peece, of a bright red or carnation colour, and very sweete withall, which turne into small round whitish berries, wherein is contained small round seede, couered with a grayish coate or skinne: the roote is long and yel∣lowish, spreading diuers wayes vnder the ground, and abideth many yeares shooting forth new branches. Flore albo.It hath beene obserued in some of these plants, to bring forth white flowers, not differing in any thing else. The Place. The first sorts growe plentifully in many places of Germany. The se∣cond in the mountaines by Sauoye. The third in Prouence and Spaine. The last in diuers parts of Germany, Bohemia, and Austria, and about Franckford. The Time. The two first sorts are most vsually in flower about Christmas, or in Ia∣nuary, if the weather be not violent, and sometimes not vntill February. The second flowreth not vntill Aprill. The third in May. The berries of them ripen some in Iune and Iuly; some in August and September, as their flowring is earlier or later. The last flowreth as well in the Spring as in Autumne, so apt and plentifull it is in bearing, and the seede at both times doth ripen soone after. The Names. The first is called of some Chamaelaea, with this addition Germanica, that it may differ from the third, which is the true Chamaelaea of Dioscorides, as all the best Authors doe agree, and is also called Piper montanum of the Italians. It is generally called Mezereon, and is indeede the true Mezereon of the Arabians, and so vsed in our Apothecaries shops, wheresoeuer the Arabians Mezereon is appointed, although the Arabians are so intricate and vncertaine in the descriptions of their plants, confounding Chamaelaea and Thymaelaea together. Matthiolus maketh it to be Daphnoides of Dioscorides; but in my opinion he is therein mistaken: for all our best moderne Wri∣ters doe account our Laureola, which hath blacke berries, to bee the true Daphnoides: the errour of his Countrey might peraduenture drawe him thereunto; but if hee had better considered the text of Dioscorides, that giueth black berries to Daphnoides, and red to Chamaedaphne, he would not so haue written; and truly, I should thinke (as Lobel doth) with better reason, that this Chamaelaea were Dioscorides
Chamaedaphne, then hee to say it were Daphnoides: for the description of Chamaedaphne, may in all parts be very fitly applyed to this Chamaelaea: and euen these words, Semen annexum folijs, wherein may be the greatest doubt in the description, may not vnfitly bee construed, that as is seene in the plant, the berries growe at the foote of the leaues, about the branches: the faculties indeede that Dioscorides giueth to Chamaedaphne, are (if any repugnancie be) the greatest let or hinderance, that this Chamaelaea should not be it: but I leaue the discussing of these and others of the like nature, to our learned Physitians; for I deale not so much with vertues as with descriptions. The second is called of Lobel Chamaelaea Alpina incana, of Clusius Chamaelaea secunda, and saith hee had it out of Italy. Wee may call it in English, Mountaine Spurge Oliue, as it is in the descrip∣tion, or Mountaine Laurell, which you will. The last hath the name of Cneorum, first giuen it by Matthiolus, which since is continued by all others. Bauhinus (as I said) referreth it to the Mountaine Campions, but Clusius 1 Chamaelaea Germanica seu Mezereon. Mezereon or Dwarfe Bay. 2 Chamaelaea Alpina. Mountain Spurge Oliue. 3 Cneorum Matthioli. Small Rocke Roles. 4 Laurus Tinus siue siluestris. The wild Bay tree. 5 Oleander siue Laurus Rosea. The Rose Bay tree. 6 Laurocerasus. The Bay Cherrie tree. depiction of flowers
(as I doe) to the kindes of Chamaelaea or Thymaelaea. For want of an English name I haue (as you see, and that is according to the name the Germane wo∣men, as Clusius saith, doe call it) entituled it the Small Rocke Rose; which may abide vntill a fitter may be conferred vpon it. The Vertues. All these plants except the last, as well leaues as berries, are violent pur∣gers, and therefore great caution is to bee had in the vse of them. The last hath not beene applyed for any disease that I know. CHAP. CIII. Laurus. The Bay Tree. MY meaning is not to make any description of our ordinary Bayes in this place (for as all may very well know, they may be for an Orchard or Courtyard, and not for this Garden) but of two or three other kindes, whose beautifull aspect haue caused them to be worthy of a place therein: the one is called Laurus Tinus, The wilde Baye: the other Laurus Rosea or Oleander, The Rose Bay: and a third is Laurocerasus, The Cherry Bay; which may haue not onely some respect for his long bush of sweet smelling flowers, but especially for the comely statelinesse of his gal∣lant euer fresh greene leaues; and the rather, because with vs in most places, it doth but frutescere, vse to bee Shrub high, not arborescere, Tree high, which is the more fit for this Garden. 1. Laurus Tinus siue siluestris. The wilde Bay tree. This wilde Baye groweth seldome to bee a tree of any height, but abideth for the most part low, shooting forth diuers slender branches, whereon at euery ioynt stand two leaues, long, smooth, and of a darke greene colour, somewhat like vnto the leaues of the Female Cornell tree, or between that and Baye leaues: at the toppes of the branches stand many small white sweete smelling flowers, thrusting together, as it were in an vmbell or tuft, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, the edges whereof haue a shew of a wash purple, or light blush in them, which for the most part fall away with∣out bearing any perfect ripe fruit in our Countrey: Yet sometimes it hath small black berries, as if they were good, but are not. In his naturall place it beareth small, round, hard and pointed berries, of a shining blacke colour, for such haue come often to my hands (yet Clusius writeth they are blew); but I could neuer see any spring that I put into the ground. This that I here describe, seemeth to me to be neither of both those that Clusius saw growing in Spain and Potugall, but that other, that (as he saith) sprang in the low Countreyes of Italian seede. 2. Laurus Rosea siue Oleander. The Rose Bay. Of the Rose Bay there are two sorts, one bearing crimson coloured flowers, which is more frequent, and the other white, which is more rare. They are so like in all other things, that they neede but one description for both. The stemme or trunke is many times with vs as bigge at the bottome as a good mans thumbe, but growing vp smaller, it diuideth it selfe into branches, three for the most part comming from one ioynt or place, and those branches againe doe likewise diuide themselues into three other, and so by degrees from three to three, as long as it groweth: the lowest of these are bare of leaues, hauing shed or lost them by the cold of winters, keeping onely leaues on the vppermost branches, which are long, and somewhat narrow, like in forme vnto Peach leaues, but thicker, harder, and of a darke greene colour on the vpperside, and
yellowish greene vnderneath: at the tops of the young branches come forth the flow∣ers, which in the one sort before they are open, are of an excellent bright crimson co∣lour, and being blowen, consist of foure long and narrow leaues, round pointed, somewhat twining themselues, of a paler red colour, almost tending to blush, and in the other are white, the greene leaues also being of a little fresher colour: after the flowers are past, in the hot countries, but neuer in ours, there come vp long bending or crooked flat pods, whose outward shell is hard, almost woody, and of a browne co∣lour, wherein is contained small flat brownish seede, wrapped in a great deale of a brownish yellow doune, as fine almost as silke, somewhat like vnto the huskes of As∣clepias, or Periploca, but larger, flatter and harder; as my selfe can testifie, who had some of the pods of this Rose bay, brought mee out of Spaine, by Master Doctor Iohn More, the seedes whereof I sowed, and had diuers plants that I raised vp vnto a reasonable height, but they require, as well old as young, to bee defended from the colde of our winters. 3. Laurocerasus. The Bay Cherry. This beautifull Bay in his naturall place of growing, groweth to bee a tree of a rea∣sonable bignesse and height, and oftentimes with vs also if it bee pruined from the lower branches; but more vsually in these colder Countries, it groweth as a shrub or hedge bush, shooting forth many branches, whereof the greater and lower are couered with a darke grayish greene barke, but the young ones are very greene, whereon are set many goodly, faire, large, thicke and long leaues, a little dented about the edges, of a more excellent fresh shining greene colour, and farre larger then any Bay leafe, and compared by many to the leaues of the Pomeritron tree (which because wee haue none in our Countrey, cannot be so well known) both for colour and largenesse, which yeeld a most gracefull aspect: it beareth long stalkes of whitish flowers, at the ioynts of the leaues both along the branches and towards the ends of them also, like vnto the Birds Cherry or Padus Theophrasti, which the French men call Putier & Cerisier blanc, but larger and greater, consisting of fiue leaues with many threds in the middle: after which commeth the fruite or berries, as large or great as Flanders Cherries, ma∣ny growing together one by another on a long stalke, as the flowers did, which are very blacke and shining on the outside, with a little point at the end, and reasonable sweete in taste, wherein is contained a hard round stone, very like vnto a Cherry stone, as I haue obserued as well by those I receiued out of Italie, as by them I had of Master Iames Cole a Merchant of London lately deceased, which grew at his house in High∣gate, where there is a faire tree which hee defended from the bitternesse of the wea∣ther in winter by casting a blanket ouer the toppe thereof euery yeare, thereby the better to preserue it. The Place. The first is not certainly knowne from whence it came, and is communi∣cated by the suckers it yeeldeth. The second groweth in Spaine, Italie, Grece, and many other places: that with white flowers is recorded by Bel∣lonius, to grow in Candy. The last, as Matthiolus, and after him Clusius report, came first from Constantinople: I had a plant hereof by the friend∣ly gift of Master Iames Cole, the Merchant before remembred, a great lo∣uer of all rarities, who had it growing with him at his countrey house in Highgate aforesaid, where it hath flowred diuers times, and borne ripe fruit also. The Time. The first flowreth many times in the end of the yeare before Christmas, and often also in Ianuary, but the most kindly time is in March and Aprill, when the flowers are sweetest. The second flowreth not vntill Iuly. The last in May, and the fruit is ripe in August and September.
The Names. The first is called Laurus siluestris, and Laurus Tinus: in English Wilde Bay, or Sweete flowring Bay. The second is called Laurus Rosea, Oleander, Nerium, and Rhododendros: in English The Rose Bay, and Oleander. The last was sent by the name of Trebezon Curmasi, that is to say, Dactylus Trape∣zuntina, but not hauing any affinitie with any kinde of Date, Bellonius as I thinke first named it Laurocerasus, and Cerasus Trapezuntina. Dalechampius thinketh it to bee Lotus Aphricana, but Clusius refuteth it. Those stones or kernels that were sent me out of Italie, came by the name of Laurus Regia, The Kings Bay. Wee may most properly call it according to the Latine name in the title, The Cherry bay, or Bay Cherry, because his leaues are like vnto Bay-leaues, and both flowers and fruit like vnto the Birdes Cher∣ry or Cluster Cherry, for the manner of the growing; and therfore I might more fitly I confesse haue placed it in my Orchard among the sorts of Cherries: but the beautifulnesse of the plant caused mee rather to insert it here. The Vertues. The wilde Bay hath no propertie allotted vnto it in Physicke, for that it is not to be endured, the berries being chewed declare it to be so violent hot and choking. The Rose Bay is said by Dioscorides, to be death to all foure footed beasts, but contrariwise to man it is a remedie against the poison of Serpents, but especially if Rue bee added vnto it. The Cherry Bay is not knowne with vs to what physicke vse it may be applyed. CHAP. CIIII. Cerasus flore multiplici. The Rose or double blossomd Cherry. Malus flore multiplici. The double blossomd Apple tree. And Malus Persica flore multiplici. The double blossomd Peach tree. THe beautifull shew of these three sorts of flowers, hath made me to insert them into this garden, in that for their worthinesse I am vnwilling to bee without them, although the rest of their kindes I haue transferred into the Orchard, where among other fruit trees, they shall be remembred: for all these here set downe, seldome or neuer beare any fruite, and therefore more fit for a Garden of flowers, then an Orchard of fruite. Cerasus flore pleno vel multiplici. The Rose Cherry, or double blossomd Cherry. The double blossomed Cherry tree is of two sorts for the flower, but not differing in any other part, from the ordinary English or Flanders Cherry tree, growing in the very like manner: the difference consisteth in this, that the one of these two sorts hath white flowers lesse double, that is, of two rowes or more of leaues, and the other more double, or with more rowes of leaues, and besides I haue obserued in this grea∣ter double blossomd Cherry, that some yeares most of the flowers haue had another smaller and double flower, rising vp out of the middle of the other, like as is to bee seene in the double English Crow-foote, and double redde Ranunculus or Crowfoote, before described: this I say doth not happen euery yeare, but sometimes. Sometimes also these trees will giue a few berries, here and there scattered, and that with lesse double flowers more often, which are like vnto our English Cherries both for taste and bignesse. These be very fit to be set by Arbours.
1 Cerasus flore pleno. The double blossomd Cherry tree. 2 Malus flore multiplici The double blossomd Apple tree. 3 Malus Persica flore pleno. The double blossomd Peach tree. 4 Periclymenum perfoliatum. Double Honisuckle. 5 Periclymenum rectum. Vpright Honisuckle. depiction of flowers
Malus flore multiplici. The double blossomd Apple tree. This double blossomd Apple tree is altogether like vnto our ordinary Pippin tree in body, branch and lease, the only difference is in the flower, which is altogether whi∣tish, sauing that the inner leaues towards the middle are more reddish, but as double and thicke as our double Damaske Roses, which fall away without bearing fruit. Malus Persica flore multiplici. The double blossomd Peach tree. This Peach tree for the manner of growing, is so like vnto an ordinary Peach tree, that vntill you see it in blossome you can perceiue no difference: the flower is of the same colour with the blossomes of the Peach, but consisting of three or foure, or more rowes of leaues, which fall often away likewise without bearing any fruite; but after it hath abiden some yeares in a place doth forme into fruite, especially being planted against a wall. The Place. Both the Cherry trees are frequent in many places of England, noursed for their pleasant flowers. The Apple is as yet a stranger. And the Peach hath not been seen or knowne, long before the writing hereof. The Time. They all flower in April & May, which are the times of their other kinds. The Names. Their names are also sufficiently expressed to know them by. The Vertues. Cherries, Peaches and Apples, are recorded in our Orchard, and there you shall finde the properties of their fruit: for in that these beare none or very few, their blossomes are of most vse to grace and decke the persons of those that will weare or beare them. CHAP. CV. Periclymenum. Honysuckles. THe Honisuckle that groweth wilde in euery hedge, although it be very sweete, yet doe I not bring into my garden, but let it rest in his owne place, to serue their senses that trauell by it, or haue no garden. I haue three other that furnish my Garden, one that is called double, whose branches spreade far, and being very fit for an arbour will soone couer it: the other two stand vpright, and spreade not any way far, yet their flowers declaring them to be Honisuckles, but of lesse delight, I con∣sort them with the other. Periclymenum perfoliatum siue Italicum. The double Honisuckle. The truncke or body of the double Honisuckle, is oftentimes of the bignesse of a good staffe, running out into many long spreading branches, couered with a whitish barke, which had neede of some thing to sustaine them, or else they will fall down to the ground (and therefore it is vsually planted at an arbour, that it may run thereon,
or against a house wall, and fastened thereto in diuers places with nailes) from whence spring forth at seuerall distances, and at the ioynts, two leaues, being like in forme vn∣to the wilde Honisuckles, and round pointed for the most part; these branches diui∣ding themselues diuers wayes, haue at the roppes of them many flowers, set at certaine distances one aboue another, with two greene leaues at euery place, where the flowers doe stand, ioyned so close at the bottome, and so round and hollow in the middle, that it seemeth like a hollow cuppe or sawcer of flowers: the flowers stand round about the middle of these cuppes or sawcers, being long, hollow, and of a whitish yellow colour, with open mouthes dasht ouer with a light shew of purple, and some threds within them, very sweet in smell, like both in forme and colour vnto the common Ho∣nisuckles, but that these cuppes with the flowers in them are two or three standing one aboue another (which make a far better shew then the common, which come forth all at the heade of the branches, without any greene leaues or cuppes vnder them) and therefore these were called double Honisuckles. Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro. Red Honisuckles. This vpright Woodbinde hath a straight woody stemme, diuided into seuerall branches, about three or foure foote high, couered with a very thinne whitish barke, whereon stand two leaues together at the ioynts, being lesser then the former, smooth and plaine, and a little pointed: the flowers come forth vpon slender long footstalks at the ioynts where the leaues stand, alwayes two set together, and neuer more, but seldome one alone, which are much smaller then the former, but of the same fashion, with a little button at the foote of the flower; the buds of the flowers before they are open are very reddish, but being open are not so red, but tending to a kinde of yel∣lowish blush colour: after which come in their places two small red berries, the one withered for the most part, or at least smaller then the other, but (as Clusius saith) in their naturall places they are both full and of one bignesse. Periclymenum rectum fructu caeruleo. Blew berried Honisuckles. This other vpright Woodbinde groweth vp as high as the former, or rather some∣what higher, couered with a blackish rugged barke, chapping in diuers places, the younger branches whereof are somewhat reddish, and couered with an hoary doune: the leaues stand two together at the ioints, somewhat larger then the former, and more whitish vnderneath: the flowers are likewise two standing together, at the end of a slender footestalke, of a pale yellowish colour when they are blowne, but more red∣dish in the bud: the berries stand two together as the former, of a darke blewish colour when they are fully ripe, and full of a red liquour or iuice, of a pleasant taste, which doth not only dye the hands of them that gather them, but serueth for a dying colour to the inhabitants where they grow plentifully, wherein are contained many flat seede: The roote is woody as the former is. The Place. The firw groweth in Italie, Spaine, and Prouence of France, but not in the colder countreyes, vnlesse it be there planted, as is most frequent in our countrey. The others grow in Austria, and Stiria, as Clufius saith, and are entertained into their gardens onely that are curious. The Time. The first flowreth vsually in Aprill, the rest in May. The Names.
The first is called Periclymenum, Caprifolium perfoliatum, and Italicum, as a difference from the common kinde: In English Double Woodbinde,  or double Honisuckles. The others, as they are rare, and little knowne, so are their names also: yet according to their Latine, I haue giuen them English names. The Vertues. The double Honisuckle is as effectuall in all things, as the single wilde kinde, and besides, is an especiall good wound herbe for the head or other parts. I haue not knowne the vpright kindes vsed in Physicke. CHAP. CVI. Iasminum siue Gelseminum. Iasmine or Gesmine. WE haue but one sort of true Iasmine ordinarily in our Gardens through∣out the whole Land; but there is another greater sort, which is farre more tender, brought out of Spaine, and will hardly endure any long time with vs, vnlesse it be very carefully preserued. Wee haue a third kinde called a yellow Iasmine, but differeth much from their tribe in many notable points: but be∣cause the flowers haue some likenesse with the flowers of the true Iasmine, it hath been vsually called a Iasmine; and therefore I am content for this Garden to conioyne them in one Chapter. 1. Iasminum album. The white Iasmine. The white Iasmine hath many twiggy flexible greene branches, comming forth of the sundry bigger boughes or stems, that rise from the roote, which are couered with a grayish darke coloured barke, hauing a white pith within it like the Elder, but not so much: the winged leaues stand alwaies two together at the ioynts, being made of ma∣nie small and pointed leaues, set on each side of a middle ribbe, six most vsually on both sides, with one at the end, which is larger, more pointed then any of the rest, and of a darke greene colour: at the toppes of the young branches stand diuers flow∣ers together, as it were in an vmbell or ruft, each whereof standeth on a long greene stalke, comming out of a small huske, being small, long, and hollow belowe, ope∣ning into fiue white small, pointed leaues, of a very strong sweete smell, which fall away without bearing any fruit at all, that euer I could learne in our Country; but in the hot Countries where it is naturall, it is said to beare flat fruit, like Lupines: the rootes spread farre and deepe, and are long and hard to growe, vntill they haue taken strong hold in the ground. 2. Iasminum Catalonicum. The Spanish Iasmine. This Catalonia Iasmine groweth lower then the former, neuer rising halfe so high, and hath slender long greene branches, rising from the toppe of the wooddy stemme, with such like leaues set on them as the former, but somewhat shorter and larger: the flowers also are like vnto the former, and stand in the same manner at the end of the branches, but are much larger, being of a blush colour before they are blowne, and white with blush edges when they are open, exceeding sweete of smell, more strong then the former. 3. Iasminum luteum, siue Trifolium fruticans alijs Polemonium. The yellow Iasmine. This that is called the yellow Iasmine, hath many long slender twiggy branches ri∣sing from the roote, greene at the first, and couered with a darke grayish barke after∣wards, whereon are set at certaine distances, three small darke greene leaues together, the end leafe being alwaies the biggest: at the ioynts where the leaues come forth,
stand long stalkes, bearing long hollow flowers, ending in fiue, and some in six leaues, very like vnto the flowers of the first Iasmine, but yellow, whereupon it is vsually cal∣led the Yellow Iasmine: after the flowers are past, there come in their places round blacke shining berries, of the bignesse of a great Pease, or bigger, full of a purplish iuyce, which will dye ones fingers that bruise them but a little: the roote is tough, and white, creeping farre about vnder the ground, shooting forth plentifully, whereby it greatly encreaseth. The Place. The first is verily thought to haue been first brought to Spaine out of Sy∣ria, or thereabouts, and from Spaine to vs, and is to be seene very often, and in many of our Country Gardens. The second hath his breeding in Spaine also, but whether it be his originall place we know not, and is scarce yet made well acquainted with our English ayre. The third groweth plenti∣fully about Mompelier, and will well abide in our London Gardens, and any where else. The Time. The first flowreth not vntill the end of Iuly. The second somewhat ear∣lier. The third in Iuly also. The Names. The first is generally called Iasminum album, and Gelseminum album: In English, The white Iasmine. The second hath his name in his title, as much as may be said of it. The third hath been taken of some to be a Cytisus, o∣thers iudge it to be Polemonium, but the truest name is Trifolium fruticans, although many call it Iasminum luteum: In English most vsually, The yel∣low Iasmine, for the reasons aforesaid; or else after the Latine name, Shrubbie Trefoile, or Make-bate. The Vertues. The white Iasmines haue beene in all times accepted into outward me∣dicines, eyther for the pleasure of the sweete sent, or profit of the war∣ming properties. And is in these dayes onely vsed as an ornament in Gar∣dens, or for sent of the flowers in the house, &c. The yellow Iasmine, al∣though some haue adiudged it to be the Polemonium of Dioscorides, yet it is not vsed to those purposes by any that I know. CHAP. CVII. Syringa. The Pipe tree. VNder the name of Syringa, is contained two speciall kinds of Shrubs or Trees, differing one from another; namely, the Lilac of Matthiolus, which is called Syringa caerulea, and is of two or three sorts: And the Syringa alba, which also is of two sorts, as shall bee declared. 1. Lilac siue Syringa caerulea. The blew Pipe tree.
The blew Pipe tree riseth sometimes to be a great tree, as high and bigge in the bo∣die as a reasonable Apple tree (as I haue in some places seene and obserued) but most vsually groweth lower, with many twigs or branches rising from the roote, hauing as much pith in the middle of them as the Elder hath, couered with a grayish greene  barke, but darker in the elder branches, with ioynts set at a good distance one from another, and two leaues at euery ioynt, which are large, broad, and pointed at the ends, many of them turning or folding both the sides inward, and standing on long foote-stalkes: at the toppes of the branches come forth many flowers, growing spike-fashion, that is, a long branch of flowers vpon a stalke, each of these flowers are small, long, and hollow belowe, ending aboue in a pale blewish flower, consisting of foure small leaues, of a pretty small sent: after the flowers are past, there come some∣times (but it is not often in our Country, vnlesse the tree haue stood long, and is grown great, the suckers being continually taken away, that it may growe the better) long and flat cods, consisting as it were of two sides, a thin skinne being in the midst, wherein are contained two long flattish red seede: the rootes are strong, and growe deepe in the ground. 2. Syringa flore lacteo siue argenteo. The siluer coloured Pipe tree. This Pipe tree differeth not from the former blew Pipe tree, either in stemme or branches, either in leaues or flowers, or manner of growing, but onely in the colour of the flower, which in this is of a milke, or siluer colour, which is a kinde of white, wherein there is a thinne wash, or light shew of blew shed therein, comming some∣what neare vnto an ash-colour. 3. Lilac lacimatis folijs. The blew Pipe tree with cut leaues. This Pipe tree should not differ from the first in any other thing then in the leaues, which are said to be cut in on the edges into seuerall parts, as the relation is giuen à vi∣ris fide dignis; for as yet I neuer saw any such; but I here am bold to set it downe, to in∣duce and prouoke some louer of plants to obtaine it for his pleasure, and others also. 4. Syringa flore albo simplici. The single white Pipe tree. The single white Pipe tree or bush, neuer commeth to that height of the former, but abideth alwaies like a hedge tree or bush, full of shootes or suckers from the roote, much more then the former: the young shootes hereof are reddish on the outside, and afterward reddish at the ioynts, and grayish all the rest ouer: the young as well as the old branches, haue some pith in the middle of them, like as the Elder hath: the leaues stand two at a ioynt, somewhat like the former, but more rugged or crumpled, as also a little pointed, and dented about the edges: the flowers growe at the toppes of the branches, diuers standing together, consisting of foure white leaues, like vnto small Muske Roses, and of the same creame colour, as I may call it, with many small yel∣lowish threads in the middle, and are of a strong, full, or heady sent, not pleasing to a great many, by reason of the strange quicknesse of the sent: the fruit followeth, be∣ing flat at the head, with many leafie shels or scales compassing it, wherein is enclosed small long seede: the rootes runne not deepe, but spread vnder the ground, with many fibres annexed vnto them. 5. Syringa Arabica flore albo duplici. The double white Pipe tree.
This Pipe tree hath diuers long and slender branches, whereon growe large leaues, somewhat like vnto the leaues of the former single white kinde, but not so rough or hard, and not at all dented about the edges, two alwaies standing one against another at euery ioynt of the stalke, but set or disposed on contrary sides, and not all vpon one side; at the ends whereof come forth diuers flowers, euery one standing on his owne foote-stalke, the hose or huske being long and hollow, like vnto the white Iasmine, and the flowers therin consisting of a double rowe of white and round pointed leaues, fiue or six in a rowe, with some yellownesse in the middle, which is hollow, of a very strong and heady sweet sent, and abiding a long time flowring, especially in the hotter Countries, but is very tender, and not able to abide any the least cold weather with vs; 1 Iminum album vulgare. he ordinary white Iasmin. 2 Iasminum Americanum siue Convolvulus Americanus. The Iasmine or Bindweed of America. 3 Iesminum luto vulgar he yellow Iasmine. 4 Lilac seu Syringa carulea. The blew Pipe tree. 5 Syringa alba vulgaris. The single white Syringa or Pipe tree. 6 Syringa flore albo duplici. The double white Syringa. 7 Sambucus rosea. The Elder or Gelder Role. depiction of flowers
for the cold windes will (as I vnderstand) greatly molest it: and therefore must as charily be kept as Orenge trees with vs, if wee will haue it to abide. The Place. The first groweth in Arabia (as Matthiolus thinketh, that had it from Constantinople.) We haue it plentifully in our Gardens. The second and third are strangers with vs as yet. The fourth is as frequent as the first, or ra∣ther more, but his originall is not knowne. The last hath his originall from Arabia, as his name importeth. The Time. The first, second, and third flower in Aprill, the other two not vntill May. The Names. The first is called of Matthiolus Lilac, and by that name is most vsually called in all parts. It is also called Syringa caerulea, because it commeth nea∣rest vnto those woods, which for their pithy substance, were made hollow into pipes. It is called of all in English, The blew Pipe tree. It seemeth likely, that Petrus Bellonius in his third Booke and fiftieth Chapter of his obseruations (making mention of a shrubbe that the Turkes haue, with Iuie leaues alwaies greene, bearing blew or violet coloured flowers on a long stalke, of the bignesse and fashion of a Foxe taile, and thereupon called in their language a Foxe taile) doth vnderstand this plant here expressed. The certainty whereof might easily be knowne, if any of our Merchants there residing, would but call for such a shrubbe, by the name of a Foxe taile in the Turkish tongue, and take care to send a young roote, in a small tubbe or basket with earth by Sea, vnto vs here at London, which would be perfor∣med with a very little paines and cost. The second and third, as kindes thereof, haue their names in their titles. The fourth is called by Clusius and others, Frutex Coronarius; some doe call it Lilac flore albo, but that name is not proper, in that it doth confound both kindes together. Lobel calleth it Syringa Italica. It is now generally called of all Syringa alba, that is in English, The white Pipe tree. Some would haue it to bee Ostrys of Theo∣phrastus, but Clusius hath sufficiently cleared that doubt. Of others Ligu∣strum Orientale, which it cannot be neither; for the Cyprus of Plinie is Dio∣scorides his Ligustrum, which may be called Orientale, in that it is most pro∣per to the Easterne Countries, and is very sweete, whose seede is like vnto Coriander seede. The last is called by diuers Syringa Arabica flore albo du∣plici, as most fitly agreeing thereunto. Of Basilius Beslerus that set forth the great booke of the Bishop of Eystot in Germany his Garden, Syringa Ita∣lica flore albo pleno, because, as it is likely, hee had it from Italy. It is very likely, that Prosper Alpinus in his booke of Egyptian plants, doth meane this plant, which hee there calleth Sambach, siue Iasminum Arabicum. Mat∣thaeus Caccini of Florence in his letter to Clusius entituleth it Syringa Ara∣bica, siue Iasminum Arabicum, siue Iasminum ex Gine, whereby hee declareth that it may not vnfitly be referred to either of them both. We may call it in English as it is in the title, The double white Pipe tree. The Vertues. We haue no vse of these in Physicke that I know, although Prosper Alpi∣nus saith, the double white Pipe tree is much vsed in Egypt, to help women in their trauailes of childbirth.
CHAP. CVIII. Sambucus Rosea. The Elder or Gelder Rose. ALthough there be diuers kindes of Elders, yet there is but one kinde of Elder Rose, whereof I meane to intreate in this Chapter, being of neare affinity in some things vnto the former Pipe trees, and which for the beauty of it deser∣ueth to be remembred among the delights of a Garden. Sambucus Rosea. The Gelder Rose. The Gelder Rose (as it is called) groweth to a reasonable height, standing like a tree, with a trunke as bigge as any mans arme, couered with a darke grayish barke, somewhat rugged and very knotty: the younger branches are smooth and white, with a pithy substance in the middle, as the Elders haue, to shew that it is a kind there∣of, whereon are set broad leaues, diuided into three parts or diuisions, somewhat like vnto a Vine leafe, but smaller, and more rugged or crumpled, iagged or cut also about the edges: at the toppes of euery one of the young branches, most vsually commeth forth a great tuft, or ball as it were, of many white flowers, set so close together, that there can be no distinction of any seuerall flower seene, nor doth it seeme like the dou∣ble flower of any other plant, that hath many rowes of leaues set together, but is a clu∣ster of white leaued flowers set together vpon the stalke that vpholdeth them, of a small sent, which fall away without bearing any fruit in our Country, that euer I could obserue or learne: The roote spreadeth neither farre nor deepe, but shooteth many small rootes and fibres, whereby it is fastened in the ground, and draweth nourish∣ment to it, and sometimes yeeldeth suckers from it. The Place. It should seeme, that the naturall place of this Elder is wet and moist grounds, because it is so like vnto the Marsh Elder, which is the single kind hereof. It is onely noursed vp in Gardens in all our Country. The Time. It flowreth in May, much about the time of the double Peony flower, both which being set together, make a pleasant variety, to decke vp the windowes of a house. The Names. It is generally called Sambucus Rosea: In English, The Elder Rose, and more commonly after the Dutch name, the Gelder Rose. Dalechampius seemeth to make it Thraupalus of Theophrastus, or rather the single Marsh Elder; for I thinke this double kinde was not knowne in Theophrastus his time. The Vertues. It is not applyed to any Physicall vse that I know.
CHAP. CIX. Rosa. The Rose tree or bush. THe great varietie of Roses is much to be admired, beeing more then is to bee seene in any other shrubby plant that I know, both for colour, forme and smell. I haue to furnish this garden thirty sorts at the least, euery one notably diffe∣ring from the other, and all fit to be here entertained: for there are some other, that being wilde and of no beautie or smell, we forbeare, and leaue to their wilde habita∣tions. To distinguish them by their colours, as white, red, incarnate, and yellow, were a way that many might take, but I hold it not so conuenient for diuers respects: for so I should confound those of diuers sorts one among another, and I should not keepe that methode which to me seemeth most conuenient, which is, to place and ranke e∣uery kinde, whether single or double, one next vnto the other, that so you may the bet∣ter vnderstand their varieties and differences: I will therefore beginne with the most ancient, and knowne Roses to our Countrey, whether naturall or no I know not, but assumed by our precedent Kings of all others, to bee cognisances of their dignitie, the white Rose and the red, whom shall follow the damaske, of the finest sent, and most vse of all the other sorts, and the rest in their order. 1. Rosa Anglica alba. The English white Rose. The white Rose is of two kindes, the one more thicke and double then the other: The one riseth vp in some shadowie places, vnto eight or ten foote high, with a stocke of a great bignesse for a Rose. The other growing seldome higher then a Damaske Rose. Some doe iudge both these to be but one kinde, the diuersitie happening by the ayre, or ground, or both. Both these Roses haue somewhat smaller and whiter greene leaues then in many other Roses, fiue most vsually set on a stalke, and more white vnder∣neath, as also a whiter greene barke, armed with sharpe thornes or prickles, whereby they are soone known from other Roses, although the one not so easily from the other: the flowers in the one are whitish, with an eye or shew of a blush, especially towards the ground or bottome of the flower, very thicke double, and close set together, and for the most part not opening it selfe so largely and fully as eyther the Red or Damaske Rose. The other more white, lesse thicke and double, and opening it selfe more, and some so little double as but of two or three rowes, that they might be held to be single, yet all of little or no smell at all. To describe you all the seuerall parts of the Rose, as the bud, the beards, the threds &c. were needlesse, they are so conuersant in euery ones hand, that I shall not neede but to touch the most speciall parts of the varieties of them, and leaue a more exact relation of all things incident vnto them, vnto a generall worke. 2. Rosa Incarnata. The Carnation Rose. The Carnation Rose is in most things like vnto the lesser white rose, both for the growing of the stocke, and bignesse of the flower, but that it is more spreade abroade when it is blown then the white is, and is of a pale blush colour all the flower thorough∣out, of as small a sent as the white one is almost. Rosa Belgica siue Vitrea.This kinde of Rose is not very great, but very thicke and double, and is very variable in the flowers, in that they will be so different one from another: some being paler then others, and some as it were blasted, which commeth not casually, but naturally to this rose: but the best flowers (whereof there will bee still some) will be of a bright pale murrey colour, neere vnto the Veluet rose, but nothing so darke a colour. 3. Rosa Anglica rubra. The English red Rose.
The red Rose (which I call English, not only for the reason before expressed, but be∣cause  (as I take it) this Rose is more frequent and vsed in England, then in other places) neuer groweth so high as the damaske Rose bush, but most vsually abideth low, and shooteth forth many branches from the roote (and is but seldome suffered to grow vp as the damaske Rose into standards) with a greene barke, thinner set with prickles, and larger and greener leaues on the vpperside then in the white, yet with an eye of white vpon them, fiue likewise most vsually set vpon a stalke, and grayish or whitish vnder∣neath. The Roses or Flowers doe very much vary, according to their site and abiding; for some are of an orient, red or deepe crimson colour, and very double (although ne∣uer so double as the white) which when it is full blowne hath the largest leaues of any other Rose; some of them againe are paler, tending somewhat to a damaske; and some are of so pale a red, as that it is rather of the colour of the canker Rose, yet all for the most part with larger leaues then the damaske, and with many more yellow threds in the middle: the sent hereof is much better then in the white, but not comparable to the excellencie of the damaske Rose, yet this Rose being well dryed and well kept, will hold both colour and sent longer then the damaske, bee it neuer so well kept. 4. Rosa Damascena. The Damaske Rose. The Damaske Rose bush is more vsually noursed vp to a competent height to stand alone, (which we call Standards) then any other Rose: the barke both of the stocke and branches, is not fully so greene as the red or white Rose: the leaues are greene with an eye of white vpon them, so like vnto the red Rose, that there is no great difference be∣tweene them, but that the leaues of the red Rose seeme to bee of a darker greene. The flowers are of a fine deepe blush colour, as all know, with some pale yellow threds in the middle, and are not so thicke and double as the white, nor being blowne, with so large and great leaues as the red, but of the most excellent sweet pleasant sent, far sur∣passing all other Roses or Flowers, being neyther heady nor too strong, nor stuffing or vnpleasant sweet, as many other flowers. 5. Rosa Prouincialis siue Hollandica Damascena. The great double Damaske Prouince or Holland Rose. This Rose (that some call Centifolia Batauica incarnata) hath his barke of a reddish or browne colour, whereby it is soone discerned from other Roses. The leaues are likewise more reddish then in others, and somewhat larger, it vsually groweth very like the Damaske rose, and much to the same height: the flowers or roses are of the same deepe blush colour that the damaske roses are, or rather somewhat deeper, but much thicker, broader, and more double, or fuller of leaues by three parts almost, the outer leaues turning themselues backe, when the flower hath stood long blowne, the middle part it selfe (which in all other roses almost haue some yellow threds in them to be seene) being folded hard with small leaues, without any yellow almost at all to be seene, the sent whereof commeth neerest vnto the damaske rose, but yet is short of it by much, howsoeuer many doe thinke it as good as the damask, and to that end I haue known some Gentlewomen haue caused all their damaske stockes to bee grafted with prouince Roses, hoping to haue as good water, and more store of them then of damask Roses; but in my opinion it is not of halfe so good a sent as the water of damaske Roses: let euery one follow their own fancie. 6. Rosa Prouincialis rubra. The red Prouince Rose. As the former was called incarnata, so this is called Batauica centifolia rubra, the dif∣ference being not very great: the stemme or stocke, and the branches also in this, seeming not to be so great but greener, the barke being not so red; the leaues of the same largenesse with the former damaske Prouince. The flowers are not altogether so large, thicke and double, and of a little deeper damaske or blush colour, turning to a red Rose, but not comming neere the full colour of the best red Rose, of a sent not so sweete as the damaske Prouince, but comming somewhat neere the sent of the or∣dinary
red rose, yet exceeding it. This rose is not so plentifull in bearing as the damaske Prouince. 7. Rosa Prouincialis alba. The white Prouince Rose. It is said of diuers, that there is a white Prouince Rose, whereof I am not ocuiatus testis, and therfore I dare not giue it you for a certaintie, and indeed I haue some doubt, that it is the greater and more double white rose, whereof I gaue you the knowledge in the beginning: when I am my selfe better satisfied, I shall bee ready to satisfie others. 8. Rosa versicolor. The party coloured Rose, of some Yorke and Lancaster. This Rose in the forme and order of the growing, is neerest vnto the ordinary damaske rose, both for stemme, branch, leafe and flower: the difference consisting in this, that the flower (being of the same largenesse and doublenesse as the damask rose) hath the one halfe of it, sometimes of a pale whitish colour, and the other halfe, of a paler damaske colour then the ordinary; this happeneth so many times, and sometimes also the flower hath diuers stripes, and markes in it, as one leafe white, or striped with white, and the other halfe blush, or striped with blush, sometimes also all striped, or spotted ouer, and other times little or no stripes or markes at all, as nature listeth to play with varieties, in this as in other flowers: yet this I haue obserued, that the lon∣ger it abideth blowen open in the sun, the paler and the fewer stripes, markes or spots will be seene in it: the smell whereof is of a weake damaske rose sent. 9. Rosea Chrystallina. The Chrystall Rose. This Rose is very like vnto the last described, both for stocke, branch and leafe: the flower hereof is not much different from it, being no great large or double Rose, but of a meane size, striped and marked with a deeper blush or red, vpon the pale co∣loured leafe, that it seemeth in the marking and beauty thereof, to bee of as much de∣light as the Chrystall Gilloflower: this, euen like the former, soone fadeth and passeth away, not yeelding any great store of flowers any yeare. 10. Rosa rubra humilis siue pumilio. The dwarfe red Rose, or Gilloflower Rose. This Rose groweth alwayes low and small, otherwise in most respects like vnto the ordinary redde Rose, and with few or no thornes vpon it: the Flowers or Roses are double, thicke, small and close, not so much spread open as the ordinary red, but somewhat like vnto the first double white Rose before expressed; yet in some places I haue seene them more layde open then these, as they grew in my garden, being so e∣uen at the toppes of the leaues, as if they had been clipt off with a paire of sheeres, and are not fully of so red a colour as the red Prouince Rose, and of as small or weak sent as the ordinary red Rose, or not so much. 11. Rosa Francafurtensis. The Franckford Rose. The young shootes of this Rose are couered with a pale purplish barke, set with a number of small prickes like haires, and the elder haue but very few thornes: the flower or rose it selfe hath a very great bud or button vnder it, more then in any other rose, and is thicke and double as a red rose, but so strongly swelling in the bud, that ma∣ny of them breake before they can be full blowen, and then they are of a pale red rose colour, that is, betweene a red and a damaske, with a very thicke broade and hard vm∣bone of short yellow threds or thrumes in the middle, the huske of the flower hauing long ends, which are called the beards of the rose, which in all other are iagged in some of them, in this hath no iagge at all: the smell is neerest vnto a red Rose.
Rosa Damascena. The Damaske Rose. 2 Rosa Prouincialis siue Hollandica. The great Prouince Rose. 3 Rose Francafurtensis. The Franckford Rose. 4 Rosa rubra humilis. The dwarfered Rose. 5 Rosa Hungarica. The Hungarian Rose. 6 Rosa lutea multiplex. The great double yellow Rose. depiction of flowers
12. Rosa Hungarica. The Hungarian Rose. The Hungarian Rose hath greene shootes slenderly set with prickes, and seldome groweth higher then ordinarily the red Rose doth; the stemme or stocke being much about that bignesse: the flower or rose is as great, thicke and double, as the ordinary red Rose, and of the same fashion, of a paler red colour, and beeing neerely looked vpon is finely spotted with faint spots, as it were spreade ouer the red; the smell wher∣of is somewhat better then the smell of the ordinary red Rose of the best kinde. 13. Rosa Holoserica simplex & multiplex. The Veluet Rose single and double. The old stemme or stock of the veluet Rose is couered with a dark coloured barke, and the young shootes of a sad greene with very few or no thornes at all vpon them: the leaues are of a sadder greene colour then in most sorts of Roses, and very often seuen on a stalke, many of the rest hauing but fiue: the Rose is eyther single or double: the single is a broade spread flower, consisting of fiue or sixe broade leaues with many yellow threds in the middle: the double hath two rowes of leaues, the one large, which are outermost, the other smaller within, of a very deepe red crimson colour like vnto crimson veluet, with many yellow threds also in the middle; and yet for all the double rowe of leaues, these Roses stand but like single flowers: but there is ano∣ther double kinde that is more double then this last, consisting oftentimes of sixteene leaues or more in a flower, and most of them of an equall bignesse, of the colour of the first single rose of this kinde, or somewhat fresher; but all of them of a smaller sent then the ordinary red Rose. 14. Rosa sine spinis simplex & multiplex. The Rose without thornes single and double. The Rose without thornes hath diuers greene smooth shootes, rising from the root, without any pricke or thorne at all vpon them, eyther young or old: the leaues are not fully so large as of the red rose: the flowers or roses are not much bigger then those of the double Cinamon Rose, thicke set together and short, of a pale red Rose colour, with diuers pale coloured vees through euery leafe of the flower, which hath caused some to call it The marbled Rose, and is of a small sent, not fully equall to the red Rose. The single of this kinde differeth not in any other thing from the former, then in the doublenesse or singlenesse of the flowers, which in this are not halfe so double, nor yet fully single, and are of a paler red colour. Rosa sine spina flore albo.I haue heard likewise of a white Rose of this kinde, but I haue seene none such as yet, and therefore I can say no more thereof. 15. Rosa Cinamomea simplex & multiplex. The Cinamon Rose single and double. The single Cinamon Rose hath his shootes somewhat red, yet not so red as the dou∣ble kinde, armed with great thornes, like almost vnto the Eglantine bush, thereby showing, as well by the multiplicitie of his shootes, as the quicknesse and height of his shooting, his wilde nature: On the stemme and branches stand winged leaues, some∣times seuen or more together, which are small and greene, yet like vnto other Roses. The Roses are single, of fiue leaues a peece, somewhat large, and of a pale red colour, like vnto the double kinde, which is in shootes redder, and in all other things like vn∣to the single, but bearing small, short, thicke and double Roses, somewhat like vnto the Rose without thornes, but a little lesser, of a paler red colour at the end of the leaues, and somewhat redder and brighter toward the middle of them, with many yellow short thrumes; the small sent of Cinamon that is found in the flowers hath caused it to beare the name.
16. Rosalutea simplex. The single yellow Rose. This single yellow Rose is planted rather for variety then any other good vse. It often groweth to a good height, his stemme being great and wooddy, with few or no prickes vpon the old wood, but with a number of small prickes like haires, thicke set, vpon the younger branches, of a darke colour somewhat reddish, the barke of the young shootes being of a sad greene reddish colour: the leaues of this Rose bush are smaller, rounder pointed, of a paler greene colour, yet finely snipt about the edges, and more in number, that is, seuen or nine on a stalke or ribbe, then in any other Gar∣den kinde, except the double of the same kinde that followeth next: the flower is a small single Rose, consisting of fiue leaues, not so large as the single Spanish Muske Rose, but somewhat bigger then the Eglantine or sweete Briar Rose, of a fine pale yel∣low colour, without any great sent at all while it is fresh, but a little more, yet small and weake when it is dryed. 17. Rosa lutea multiplex siue flore pleno. The double yellow Rose. The double yellow Rose is of great account, both for the rarity, and doublenesse of the flower, and had it sent to the rest, would of all other be of highest esteeme. The stemme or stocke, the young shoots or branches, the small hairy prickes, and the small winged leaues, are in all parts like vnto the former single kinde; the chiefest difference consisteth in the doublenesse of the flower or Rose, which is so thicke and double, that very often it breaketh out on one side or another, and but a few of them abiding whole and faire in our Countrey, the cause whereof wee doe imagine to bee the much moisture of our Countrey, and the time of flowring being subiect to much raine and showers; many therefore doe either plant it against a wall, or other wayes defend it by couering: againe, it is so plentifull in young shootes or branches, as also in flowers at the toppe of euery branch, which are small and weake for the most part, that they are not able to bring all the flowers to ripenesse; and therefore most of them fall or wither away without comming to perfection (the remedy that many doe vse for this inconuenience last recited is, that they nippe away most of the buds, leauing but some few vpon it, that so the vigour of the plant may be collected into a few flow∣ers, whereby they may the better come to perfection, and yet euen thus it is hardly effected) which are of a yellowish greene colour in the bud, and before they be blowne open, but then are of a faire yellow colour, very full of leaues, with many short haires rather then leaues in the middle, and hauing short, round, greene, smooth buttons, al∣most flat vnder them: the flower being faire blowne open, doth scarce giue place for largenesse, thicknesse, and doublenesse, vnto the great Prouence or Holland Rose. This Rose bush or plant is very tender with vs here about London, and will require some more care and keeping then the single of this kinde, which is hardy enough; for I haue lost many my selfe, and I know but a few about this towne that can nourse it vp kindly, to beare or scarce to abide without perishing; but abideth well in euery free aire of all or the most parts of this Kingdome: but (as I heare) not so well in the North. 18. Rosa Moschata simplex & multiplex. The Muske Rose single and double. The Muske Rose both single and double, rise vp oftentimes to a very great height, that it ouergroweth any arbour in a Garden, or being set by an house side, to bee ten or twelue foote high, or more, but more especially the single kinde, with many green farre spread branches, armed with a few sharpe great thornes, as the wilder sorts of Roses are, whereof these are accounted to be kindes, hauing small darke greene leaues on them, not much bigger then the leaues of Eglantine: the flowers come forth at the toppes of the branches, many together as it were in an vmbell or tuft, which for the most part doe flower all at a time, or not long one after another, euery one standing on a pretty long stalke, and are of a pale whitish or creame colour, both the single and
the double; the single being small flowers, consisting of fiue leaues, with many yel∣low threads in the middle: and the double bearing more double flowers, as if they were once or twice more double then the single, with yellow thrummes also in the middle, both of them of a very sweete and pleasing smell, resembling Muske: some there be that haue auouched, that the chiefest sent of those Roses consisteth not in the leaues, but in the threads of the flowers. 19. Rosa Moschata multiplex altera: alijs Damascena alba, vel verisimilior Cinamomea flore pleno albo. The double white Damaske Muske Rose. This other kinde of Muske Rose (which with some is called the white Damaske Muske, but more truely the double white Cinamon Rose) hath his stemme and bran∣ches also shorter then the former, but as greene: the leaues are somewhat larger, and of a whiter greene colour; the flowers also are somewhat larger then the former dou∣ble kinde, but standing in vmbels after the same manner, or somewhat thicker, and of the same whitish colour, or a little whiter, and somewhat, although but a little, neare the smell of the other, but nothing so strong. This flowreth at the time of other Ro∣ses, or somewhat later, yet much before the former two sorts of Muske Roses, which flower not vntill the end of Summer, and in Autumne; both which things, that is, the time of the flowring, and the sent being both different, shew plainly it cannot be of the tribe of Muske Roses. 20. Rosa Hispanica Moschata simplex. The Spanish Muske Rose. This Spanish Rose riseth to the height of the Eglantine, and sometimes higher, with diuers great greene branches, the leaues whereof are larger and greener then of the former kindes: the flowers are single Roses, consisting of fiue whiter leaues then in any of the former Muske Roses, and much larger, hauing sometimes an eye of a blush in the white, of a very sweete smell, comming nearest vnto the last recited Muske Rose, as also for the time of the flowring. 21. Rosa Pomifera maior. The great Apple Rose. The stemme or stocke of this Rose is great, couered with a darke grayish barke, but the younger branches are somewhat reddish, armed here and there with great and sharpe thornes, but nothing so great or plentifull as in the Eglantine, although it be a wilde kinde: the leaues are of a whitish greene colour, almost like vnto the first white Rose, and fiue alwaies set together, but seldome seuen: the flowers are small and sin∣gle, consisting of fiue leaues, without any sent, or very little, and little bigger then those of the Eglantine bush, and of the very same deepe blush colour, euery one stan∣ding vpon a rough or prickly button, bearded in the manner of other Roses, which when the flowers are fallen growe great, somewhat long and round, peare-fashion, bearing the beards on the tops of them; and being full ripe are very red, keeping the small prickles still on them, wherein are many white, hard, and roundish seedes, very like vnto the seede of the Heppes or Eglantine berries, lying in a soft pulpe, like vnto the Hawthorne berries or Hawes: the whole beauty of this plant consisteth more in the gracefull aspect of the red apples or fruit hanging vpon the bushes, then in the flowers, or any other thing. It seemeth to be the same that Clusius calleth Rosa Pumila, but that with me it groweth much higher and greater then he saith his doth. 22. Rosa siluestris odora siue Eglenteria simplex. The single Eglantine or sweete Briar bush. The sweete Briar or Eglantine Rose is so well knowne, being not onely planted in Gardens, for the sweetenesse of the leaues, but growing wilde in many woods and hedges, that I thinke it lost time to describe it; for that all know it hath exceeding long greene shootes, armed with the cruellest sharpe and strong thornes, and thicker set
1 osa sine spinis multiplex. The double Rose without thorns. 2 Rosa Cinamomea flore pleno. The double Cinamon Rose. 3 Rosa Ho∣loserica simplex. The single Veluet Rose. 4 Rosa Holoserica duplex. The double Veluet Rose. 5 Rosa Mschata multiplex. The double Muske Rose. 6 Rosa Moschata Hispanica simplex. The single Spanish Muske Rose. 7 Rosa Pomiferae maior. The great Apple Rose. 8 Rosa siluestris siue Eglanteria duplex. The double Eglantine Rose. depiction of flowers
then is in any Rose either wilde or tame: the leaues are smaller then in most of those that are noursed vp in Gardens, seuen or nine most vsually set together on a ibbe or stalke, very greene and sweete in smell, aboue the leaues of any other kinde of Rose: the flowers are small single blush Roses, of little or no sent at all, which turne into reddish berries, stuffed within with a dounie or flocky matter or substance, wherein doth lye white hard seede. 23. Rosa siluestris odora siue Eglenteria flore duplici. The double Eglantine. The double Eglantine is in all the places that I haue seene it a grafted Rose, (but I doubt not, but that his originall was naturall, and that it may be made naturall againe, as diuers other Roses are.) It groweth and spreadeth very well, and with a great head of branches, whereon stand such like leaues as are in the single kinde, but a little larger, not smelling fully so sweete as it: the flowers are somewhat bigger then the single, but not much, hauing but one other rowe of leaues onely more then the former, which are smaller, and the outer leaues larger, but of the same pale reddish purple colour, and smelleth somewhat better then the single. 24. Rosa semper virens. The euer greene Rose bush. This Rose or bush is very like vnto a wilde single Eglantine bush in many respects, hauing many very long greene branches, but more slender and weake, so that many times they bead downe againe, not able to sustaine themselues without some helpe, and armed with hooked thornes as other Roses be; the winged leaues consist of seuen for the most part, whereof those two that are lowest and opposite, are smallest, the next two bigger then they, the third couple bigger then any of the rest belowe, and the end leafe biggest of all: this proportion generally it holdeth in euery winged leafe through the whole plant, which at the first comming forth are somewhat reddish, with the young branch that shooteth out with them, but being full growne, are of a deepe greene colour, and somewhat shining, dented about the edges, and fall not away from the branches as other Roses doe, but abide thereon for the most part all the Winter: the flowers stand foure or fiue together at the tops of the branches, being single Roses, made of fiue leaues a peece, of a pure white colour, much larger then the ordinary Muske Rose, and of a fine sent, comming nearest thereunto, with many yellow chiues or threads in the middle. The Place. Some of these Roses had their originall, as is thought in England, as the first and second; for these dryed red Roses that come ouer to vs from be∣yond the Seas, are not of the kinde of our red Rose, as may well be percei∣ued by them that will compare our English dryed leaues with those. Some in Germany, Spaine, and Italy. Some againe in Turkie, as the double yel∣low Rose, which first was procured to be brought into England, by Master Nicholas Lete, a worthy Merchant of London, and a great louer of flow∣ers, from Constantinople, which (as wee heare) was first brought thither from Syria; but perished quickly both with him, and with all other to whom hee imparted it: yet afterwards it was sent to Master Iohn de Fran∣queuille, a Merchant also of London, and a great louer of all rare plants, as well as flowers, from which is sprung the greatest store, that is now flouri∣shing in this Kingdome. The Time. The Cinamon Rose is the earliest for the most part, which flowreth with vs about the middle of May, and sometimes in the beginning. The ordinary Muske Roses both single and double flower latest, as is said. All the other flower much about one time, in the beginning of Iune, or there abouts, and continue flowring all that moneth, and the next throughout for the most part, and the red vntill August be halfe past.
The Names. The seuerall names, whereby they are most commonly knowne vnto vs in this Countrey, are expressed in their titles; but they are much differing from what they are called in other Countries neare vnto vs, which to com∣pare, conferre, and agree together, were a worke of more paines then vse: But to proportion them vnto the names set downe by Theophrastus, Pliny, and the rest of the ancient Authors, were a worke, wherein I might be sure not to escape without falling into errour, as I verily beleeue many others haue done, that haue vndertaken to doe it: I will therefore for this worke desire that you will rest contented, with so much as hath already been deli∣uered, and expect an exact definition and complete satisfaction by such a methodicall course as a generall History will require, to be performed by them that shall publish it. The Vertues. The Rose is of exceeding great vse with vs; for the Damaske Rose (be∣sides the superexcellent sweete water it yeeldeth being distilled, or the per∣fume of the leaues being dryed, seruing to fill sweete bags) serueth to cause solublenesse of the body, made into a Syrupe, or preserued with Sugar moist or dry candid. The Damaske Prouince Rose, is not onely for sent nearest of all other Roses vnto the Damaske, but in the operation of solubility also. The red Rose hath many Physicall vses much more then any other, seruing for many sorts of compositions, both cordiall and cooling, both binding and loosing. The white Rose is much vsed for the cooling of heate in the eyes: diuers doe make an excellent yellow colour of the iuyce of white Ro∣ses, wherein some Allome is dissolued, to paint or colour flowers or pi∣ctures, or any other such things. There is little vse of any other sort of Ro∣ses; yet some affirme, that the Muske Roses are as strong in operation to open or loosen the belly as the Damaske Rose or Prouince. CHAP. CXI. Cistus. The Holly Rose or Sage Rose. THere are three principall kindes of Cistus, the male, the female, and the gumme or sweete smelling Cistus bearing Ladanum, called Ledon. Of each of these three there are also diuers sorts: Of them all to intreate in this worke is not my minde, I will onely select out of the multitude some few that are fit for this our Gar∣den, and leaue the rest to a greater. 1. Cistus mas. The male Holly Rose or Sage Rose.
The male Cistus that is most familiar vnto our Countrey, I meane that will best a∣bide, is a small shrubby plant, growing seldome aboue three or foure foote high with vs, hauing many slender brittle wooddy branches, couered with a whitish barke, whereon are set many whitish greene leaues, long and somewhat narrow, crumpled or wrinckled as it were with veines, and somewhat hard in handling, especially the old ones; for the young ones are softer, somewhat like vnto Sage leaues for the forme and colour, but much smaller, two alwaies set together at a ioynt: the flowers stand at the toppe of the branches, three or foure together vpon seuerall slender foot∣stalkes, consisting of fiue small round leaues a peece, somewhat like vnto a small single Rose, of a fine reddish purple colour, with many yellow threads in the middle, with∣out  any sent at all, and quickly fading or falling away, abiding seldome one whole day blowne at the most: after the flowers are past, there come vp round hard hairie heads in their places, containing small brownish seede: the roote is wooddy, and will abide some yeares with vs, if there be some care had to keepe it from the extrea∣mity of our Winters frostes, which both this, and many of the other sorts and kinds, will not abide doe what we can. 2. Cistus faemina. The female Holly Rose. The female Holly Rose groweth lower, and smaller then the former male kinde, hauing blackish branches, lesse woody, but not lesse brittle then it: the leaues are some∣what rounder and greener, but a little hard or rough withall, growing in the same man∣ner vpon the branches by couples: the flowers grow at the toppes of the branches, like vnto the former, consisting of fiue leaues, but somewhat lesser, and wholly white, with yellow threds in the middle, as quickly fading, and of as little sent as the former: the heads and seede are somewhat bigger then in the former. 3. Chamaecistus Frisicus. The dwarfe Holly Rose of Friseland. This dwarfe Cistus is a small low plant, hauing diuers shootes from the rootes, full of leaues that are long and narrow, very like vnto the leaues of the French Spikenard or Spica Celtica; from among which leaues shoote forth short stalkes, not aboue a span high, with a few smaller leaues thereon; and at the toppes diuers small flowers one a∣boue another, consisting of six small round leaues, of a yellow colour, hauing two cir∣cles of reddish spots round about the bottome of the leaues, a little distant one from another, which adde much grace to the flower: after the flowers are past, there come in their places small round heads, being two forked at the end, containing within them small brownish chaffie seede: the roote is small and slender, with many fibres thereat creeping vnder ground, and shooting forth in diuers places, whereby it much encrea∣seth: the whole plant, and euery part of it, smelleth strong without any pleasant sent. 4. Cistus annuus. The Holly Rose of a yeare. This small Cistus that endureth but a year (and will require to be sowne euery year, if ye will haue it) riseth vp with straight, but slender hard stalkes, set here and there con∣fusedly with long and narrow greenish leaues, very like vnto the leaues of the Gum Cistus or Ledon, being a little clammy withall: at the toppe of the stalkes, and at the ioynts with the leaues, stand two or three pale yellow flowers, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, with a reddish spot neere the bottome of euery leafe of the flower, as quickely fading as any of the former: after which follow small three square heades, containing small seede, like vnto the first female kinde, but somewhat paler or yellower: the root is small and woody, and perisheth as soone as it hath borne seede. 5. Cistus Ledon. The Gum Cistus, or Sweete Holly Rose.
This sweete Holly Rose or Gum Cistus, riseth higher, and spreadeth larger then the former male kind doth, with many blackish woody branches, whereon are set diuers long and narrow darke greene leaues, but whitish vnderneath, two alwayes standing together at a ioint, both stalks and leaues bedeawed as it were continually with a clam∣my sweete moisture (which in the hot Countries is both more plentifull, and more sweet then in ours) almost transparent, and which being gathered by the inhabitants, with certaine instruments for that purpose (which in some places are leather thongs, drawne ouer the bushes, and after scraped off from the thongs againe, and put toge∣ther) is that kind of blacke sweet gum, which is called Ladanum in the Apothecaries shops: at the tops of the branches stand single white flowers, like vnto single Roses, being larger then in any of the former kindes, consisting of fiue leaues, whereof euery one hath at the bottome a dark purplish spot, broad below, and small pointed vpwards, with some yellow threds in the middle: after which are past, there arise cornered 1 Cistus mas The male Holly Rose. 2 Chamaecistus Frisucus. The dwarfe Holly Rose of Frisia. 3 Cistus Ledon. The sweet Holly Rose or gumme Cistus. 4 Ledum Alpinum. The mountaine Holly Rose. 5 Ledum Silesiacum. The sweet Mary Rose of Silesia. 6 Rosmarinum aureum. Gilded Rosemary. depiction of flowers
heads, containing such small brownish seede as is in the former male kinde: the roote is woody, and spreadeth vnder ground, abiding some yeares, if it be placed vnder a wall, where it may bee defended from the windes that often breake it, and from the extremitie of our winters, and especially the snow, if it lye vpon it, which quickly causeth it to perish. 6. Ledum Alpinum seu Rosa Alpina. The Mountaine sweet Holly Rose. The fragrant smell with properties correspondent of two other plants, causeth me to insert them in this Chapter, and to bring them to your knowledge, as well worthy a fit place in our Garden. The first of them hath diuers flender woody branches, two foote high or thereabouts, couered with a grayish coloured barke, and many times leaning downe to the ground, whereby it taketh roote againe: vpon these branches grow many thicke, short, hard greene leaues, thicke set together, confusedly without order, sometimes whitish vnderneath, and sometimes yellowish: the toppes of the branches are loden with many flowers, which cause them to bend downwards, being long, hollow and reddish, opening into fiue corners, spotted on the outside with many white spots, and of a paler red colour on the inside, of a fine sweet sent: after the flowers are past, there follow small heads, containing small brownish seede: the root is long, hard and woody, abiding better if it comprehend in the ground, then some of the former, because his originall is out of a colder country. 7. Ledum Silesiacum. The sweete Mary Rose, or Rosemary of Silesia. This other sweete plante riseth vp with woody ash-coloured branches two foote high or more, which shoote forth other branches, of a reddish or purplish colour, co∣uered with a brownish yellow hoarinesse, on which are set many narrow long greene leaues, like vnto Rosemary leaues, but couered with the like hoarinesse as the stalks are (especially in the naturall places, but not so much being transplanted) and folding the sides of the leaues so close together, that they seeme nothing but ribbes, or stalkes, of an excellent sweet and pleasant sent; at the ends of the branches there grow certaine brownish scaly heads, made of many small leaues set thicke together, out of which breake forth many flowers, standing in a tuft together, yet seuerally euery one vpon his owne footstalke, consisting of fiue white leaues, with certaine white threds in the middle, smelling very sweete: after which rise small greene heads, spotted with brownish spots, wherein is contained very small, long, yellowish seede: the roote is hard and woodie. The Place. The first, second, fourth and fifth, grow in the hot Countries, as Italie, Spaine, &c. The third, and the two last in the colder Countries, as Frise∣land, Germanie, Bohemia. The Time. They do all flower in the Summer moneths of Iune, Iuly and August, and their seede is ripe quickly after. The Names.
The first, second, fourth and fift, haue their names sufficiently expressed in their descriptions. The third was sent vnto Clusius, vnder the name of Herculus Frisicus, because of the strong sent: but he referreth it to the kinds of Chamaecistus, that is, dwarfe or low Cistus, both for the low growth, and for the flowers and seede sake. The sixt is diuersly called; for Clusius calleth it Ledum Alpinum: others, Nerium Alpinum, making it to bee a Rose Bay.  Gesner according to the Countrey peoples name, Rosa Alpina, and Rosa Montana. Lobel calleth it Balsamum Alpinum, of the fragrant smell it hath, and Chamaerbododendros Chamaelaeae folio. And some haue called it Euonymus, without all manner of iudgement. In English wee may call it, The Moun∣taine Rose, vntill a fitter name be giuen it. The last is called of Matthiolus, Rosmarinum siluestre, but of Clusius Ledum, referring it to their kindred; and Silesiacum, because he found it in that Countrey; or for distinction sake, as he saith, it may bee called, Ledum folijs Rosmarini, or Ledum Bohemicum. Cordus, as it seemeth in his History of Plants, calleth it Chamaepeuce, as though he did account it a kinde of low Pine, or Pitch tree. The Vertues. The first, second, and fift, are very astringent, effectuall for all sorts of fluxes of humours. The sweet Gum called Ladanum, made artificially into oyle, is of singular vse for Alopecia, or falling of the haire. The seed of the fourth is much commended against the stone of the Kidneyes. The sweete Rosemary of Silesia is vsed of the inhabitants, where it naturally groweth, against the shrinking of sinewes, crampes, or other such like diseases, wherof their daily experience makes it familiar, being vsed in bathing or otherwise. CHAP. CXII. Rosmarinum. Rosemary. THere hath beene vsually knowne but one sort of Rosemary, which is frequent through all this Country: but there are some other sorts not so well known; the one is called Gilded Rosemary; the other broadeleafed Rosemary; a third I will adioyne, as more rare then all the other, called Double flowred Rosmary, because few haue heard thereof, much lesse seene it, and my selfe am not well acquainted with it, but am bold to deliuer it vpon credit. 1. Libanotis Coronaria siue Rosmarinum vulgare. Our Common Rosmary. This common Rosemary is so well knowne through all our Land, being in euery womans garden, that it were sufficient but to name it as an ornament among other sweete herbes and flowers in our Garden, seeing euery one can describe it: but that I may say something of it, It is well obserued, as well in this our Land (where it hath been planted in Noblemens, and great mens gardens against bricke wals, and there continued long) as beyond the Seas, in the naturall places where it groweth, that it ri∣seth vp in time vnto a very great height, with a great and woody stemme (of that com∣passe, that (being clouen out into thin boards) it hath serued to make lutes, or such like instruments, and here with vs Carpenters rules, and to diuers other purposes) bran∣ching out into diuers and sundry armes that extend a great way, and from them againe into many other smaller branches, wheron are set at seueral distances, at the ioynts, ma∣ny very narrow long leaues, greene aboue, and whitish vnderneath; among which come forth towards the toppes of the stalkes, diuers sweet gaping flowers, of a pale or bleake blewish colour, many set together, standing in whitish huskes; the seed is small and red, but thereof seldome doth any plants arise that will abide without extraor∣dinary care; for although it will spring of the seede reasonable well, yet it is so small and tender the first yeare, that a sharpe winter killeth it quickly, vnlesse it be very well defended: the whole plant as well leaues as flowers, smelleth exceeding sweete. 2. Rosmarinum striatum, siue aureum. Gilded Rosemary.
This Rosemary differeth not from the former, in forme or manner of growing, nor  in the forme or colour of the flower, but only in the leaues, which are edged, or stri∣ped, or pointed with a faire gold yellow colour, which so continueth all the yeare throughout, yet fresher and fairer in Summer then in Winter; for then it will looke of a deader colour, yet so, that it may be discerned to be of two colours, green & yellow. 3. Rosmarinum latifolium. Broade leafed Rosemary. This broad leafed Rosemary groweth in the same manner that the former doth, but that we haue not seene it in our Countrey since we had it to grow so great, or with such woody stemmes: the leaues stand together vpon the long branches after the same fa∣shion, but larger, broader and greener then the other, and little or nothing whitish vnderneath: the flowers likewise are of the same forme and colour with the ordinary but larger, and herein consisteth the difference. 4. Rosmarinum flore duplici. Double flowred Rosmary. The double flowred Rosmary thus far differeth from the former, that it hath stron∣ger stalkes, not so easie to breake, fairer, bigger and larger leaues, of a faire greene co∣lour, and the flowers are double, as the Larkes heele or spurre: This I haue onely by relation, which I pray you accept, vntill I may by sight better enforme you. The Place. Our ordinary Rosmary groweth in Spaine, and Prouence of France, and in others of those hot Countryes, neere the Sea side. It will not abide (vnlesse kept in stoues) in many places of Germany, Denmarke, and those colder Countries. And in some extreame hard winters, it hath well neere perished here in England with vs, at the least in many places: but by slipping it is vsually, and yearly encreased, to replenish any garden. The Time. It flowreth oftentimes twice in the yeare; in the Spring first, from April vntill the end of May or Iune, and in August and September after, if the yeare before haue been temperate. The Names. Rosmary is called of the ancient Writers, Libanotis, but with this distin∣ction, Stephanomatica, that is, Coronaria, because there were other plants cal∣led Libanotis, that were for other vses, as this for garlands, where flowers and sweete herbes were put together. The Latines call it Rosmarinum. Some would make it to be Cneorum nigrum of Theophrastus, as they would make Lauander to bee his Cneorum album, but Matthiolus hath sufficiently confu∣ted that errour. The Vertues. Rosmary is almost of as great vse as Bayes, or any other herbe both for inward and outward remedies, and as well for ciuill as physicall purposes. Inwardly for the head and heart; outwardly for the sinewes and ioynts: for ciuill vses, as all doe know, at weddings, funerals, &c. to bestow among friends: and the physicall are so many, that you might bee as well tyred in the reading, as I in the writing, if I should set down all that might be said of it. I will therefore onely giue you a taste of some, desiring you will be con∣tent therewith. There is an excellent oyle drawne from the flowers alone by the heate of the Sunne, auaileable for many diseases both inward and outward, and accounted a soueraigne Balsame: it is also good to helpe dim∣nesse
of sight, and to take away spots, markes and scarres from the skin; and is made in this manner. Take a quantitie of the flowers of Rosemary, accor∣ding to your owne will eyther more or lesse, put them into a strong glasse close stopped, set them in hot horse dung to digest for fourteene dayes, which then being taken forth of the dung, and vnstopped, tye a fine linnen cloth ouer the mouth, and turne downe the mouth thereof into the mouth of another strong glasse, which being set in the hot Sun, an oyle will distill downe into the lower glasse; which preserue as precious for the vses before recited, and many more, as experience by practice may enforme diuers. There is another oyle Chymically drawne, auaileable in the like manner for many the same inward and outward diseases, viz. for the heart, rheuma∣ticke braines, and to strengthen the memory, outwardly to warme and com∣fort cold benummed sinewes, whereof many of good iudgement haue had much experience. CHAP. CXIII. Myrtus. The Mirtle tree or bush. IN the hot Countreyes, there haue been many sorts of Mirtles found out, naturally growing there, which will not fructifie in this of ours, nor yet abide without ex∣traordinary care, and conueniencie withall, to preserue them from the sharpenesse of our winters. I shall only bring you to view three sorts in this my Garden, the one with a greater, the other two with lesser leaues, as the remainder of others which wee haue had, and which are preserued from time to time, not without much paine and trouble. 1. Myrtus latifolia. The greater leafed Mirtle. The broader leafed Mirtle riseth vp to the height of foure or fiue foote at the most with vs, full of branches and leaues growing like a small bush, the stemme and elder branches whereof are couered with a dark coloured bark, but the young with a green, and some with a red, especially vpon the first shooting forth, whereon are set many fresh greene leaues, very sweet in smell, and very pleasant to behold, so neer resembling the leaues of the Pomegranate tree that groweth with vs, that they soone deceiue ma∣ny that are not expert therein, being somewhat broade and long, and pointed at the ends, abiding alwaies green: at the ioynts of the branches where the leaues stand, come forth the flowers vpon small footestalkes, euery one by it selfe consisting of fiue small white leaues, with white threds in the middle, smelling also very sweet: after the flow∣ers are past, there doe arise in the hot Countries, where they are naturall, round blacke berries, when they are ripe, wherein are contained many hard white crooked seedes, but neuer in this Countrey, as I said before: the roote disperseth it selfe into many branches, with many fibres annexed thereto. 2. Myrtus minor, seu minore folio. The smaller leafed Mirtle. The smaller leafed Mirtle is a low shrub or bush, like vnto the former, but scarce ri∣sing so high, with branches spreading about the stemme, much thicker set with leaues then the former, smaller also, and pointed at the ends, of a little deeper greene colour, abiding greene also winter and summer, and very sweete likewise: the flowers are white like vnto the former, and as sweete, but shew not themselues so plentifull on the branches: the fruit is blacke in his naturall places, with seedes therein as the former. 3. Myrtus minor rotundiore folio. Boxe Mirtle.
Wee haue another sort of this small kinde of Mirtle, so like vnto the former both for smalnesse, deepe greene colour of the leaues, and thicke growing of the branches,  that it will be thought of most, without good heede, and comparing the one with the o∣ther, to be the very same with the former: but if it bee well viewed, it will shew, by the roundnesse at the ends of the leaues very like vnto the small Boxe leaues, to be another differing kinde, although in nothing else. Wee nourse them with great care, for the beautifull aspect, sweete sent and raritie, as delights and ornaments for a garden of plea∣sure, wherein nothing should be wanting that art, care and cost might produce and pre∣serue: as also to set among other euer greene plants to sort with them. The Place. These, and many other sorts of Mirtles grow in Spaine, Portugall, Italie, and other hot Countries in great aboundance, where they make their hedges of them: wee (as I said) keepe them in this Countrey, with very great care and diligence. The Time. The Mirtles doe flower very late with vs, not vntill August at the soonest, which is the cause of their not fructifying. The Names. They are called in Latine Myrtus, and in English Mirtle tree, without any other diuersitie of names, for the generall title. Yet the seuerall kindes haue had seuerall denominations, in Plinies time, and others, as Romana, Coningala, Terentina, Egyptia, alba, nigra, &c. which haue noted the differences, euen then well obserued. The Vertues. The Mirtle is of an astringent qualitie, and wholly vsed for such purposes. CHAP. CXIIII. Malus Punica siue Granata. The Pomegranet tree. THere are two kindes of Pomegranet trees, The one tame or manured, bearing fruit, which is distinguished of some into two sorts, of others into three, that is, into sower, and sweet, and into sower sweete. The other wilde, which bea∣reth no fruite, because it beareth double flowers, like as the Cherry, Apple, and Peach tree with double blossomes, before described, and is also distinguished into two sorts, the one bearing larger, the other lesser flowers. Of the manured kinde wee haue onely one sort (so farre as we know) for it neuer beareth ripe fruit in this our Countrey) which for the beautifull aspect, both of the greene verdure of the leaues, and faire proportion and colour of the flowers, as also for the raritie, are noursed in some few of their gar∣dens that delight in such rarities: for in regard of the tendernesse, there is neede of di∣ligent care, that is, to plant it against a brick wall, and defend it conueniently from the sharpenesse of our winters, to giue his Master some pleasure in seeing it beare flowers: And of the double kinde we haue as yet obtained but one sort, although I shall giue you the knowledge and description of another. 1. Malus Punica satina. The tame Pomegranet tree. This Pomegranet tree groweth not very high in his naturall places, and with vs som∣times it shooteth forth from the roote many brownish twigges or branches, or if it bee pruned from them, and suffered to grow vp, it riseth to bee seuen or eight foote high,
1 Myrus latifoli maier. The boad leafed Myrtle. 2 Myrtu augustifolia minor. The small leafed Myrtle. 3 Myrtus buifoia minor. The Boxe leafed Myrtle. 4 Malus Granatus simplici flore. The ordinary Pomegranet tree. 5 Balanstium Romamum seu minus. The lesser double flowred Pomegranet tree. 6 Balaustium maius siue Cyprium. The greater double flowred Pomegranet. 7 Pseudocapsicum seu Amonium Plinij. The Winter Cherry tree. 8 Ficus Indica cum suo fractu. The Indian Figgetree and his fruit. depiction of flowers
spreading into many small and slender branches, here and there set with thornes, and with many very faire greene shining leaues, like informe and bignesse vnto the leaues of the larger Myrtle before described, euery one hauing a small reddish foote-stalke vpon these branches: among the leaues come forth here and there, long, hard, and hollow reddish cups, diuided at the brimmes, wherein doe stand large single flowers, euery one consisting of one whole leafe, smaller at the bottome then at the brimme, like bels, diuided as it were at the edges into fiue or six parts, of an orient red or crim∣son colour in the hotter Countries; but in this it is much more delayed, and tendeth neare vnto a blush, with diuers threads in the middle. The fruit is great and round, ha∣uing as it were a crowne on the head of it, with a thicke tough hard skinne or rinde, of a brownish red colour on the outside, and yellow within, stuffed or packt full of small graines, euery one encompast with a thin skin, wherein is contained a cleare red iuyce or liquor, either of a sweet (as I said before) or sower taste, or betweene them both of a winie taste: the roote disperseth it selfe very much vnderground. 2. Balaustium maius siue Malus Punica siluestris maior. The greater wilde or double blossomd Pomegranet tree. The wilde Pomegranet is like vnto the tame in the number of purplish branches, hauing thornes, and shining faire greene leaues, somewhat larger then the for∣mer: from the branches likewise shoote forth flowers, farre more beautifull then those of the tame or manured sort, because they are double, and as large as a double Prouince Rose, or rather more double, of an excellent bright crimson colour, tending to a silken carnation, standing in brownish cups or huskes, diuided at the brims vsually into foure or fiue seuerall points, like vnto the former, but that in this kinde there neuer followeth any fruit, no not in the Country, where it is naturally wilde. 3. Balaustium minus. The smaller wilde Pomegranet tree. This smaller kinde differeth from the former in his leaues, being of a darker greene colour, but not in the height of the stemme, or purplishnesse of his branches, or thorns vpon them; for this doth shew it selfe more like vnto a wilde kind then it: the flowers hereof are much smaller, and not so thicke and double, of a deeper or sadder red O∣renge tawny colour, set also in such like cups or huskes. The Place. The tame or manured kinde groweth plentifully in Spaine, Portugall, and Italy, and other in other warme and hot countries. Wee (as I said be∣fore) preserue it with great care. The wilde I thinke was neuer seene in England, before Iohn Tradescante my very louing good friend brought it from the parts beyond the Seas, and planted it in his Lords Garden at Canterbury. The Time. They flower very late with vs, that is, not vntill the middle or end of August, and the cold euenings or frosts comming so soone vpon it, doth not onely hinder it from bearing, but many times the sharpe winters so pinch it, that it withereth it downe to the ground, so that oftentimes it hardly springeth againe. The Names. The name Malus Punica for the tree, and Malum Punicum for the fruit, or Malus Granata, and Malum Granatum, is the common name giuen vnto this tree, which is called in English the Pomegarnet or Pomegranet tree. The flowers of the tame kinde are called Cytini, as Dioscorides saith, although Plinie seemeth either to make Cytinus to be the flower of the wilde kinde, or
Balaustium to be the flower of both tame and wilde kinde: but properly, as I take it, Cytinus is the cup wherein the flower as well of the came as wilde kinde doth stand; for vnto the similitude of them, both the flowers of Asa∣rum, and the seede vessels of Hyosciamus are compared and resembled, and not vnto the whole flower: the barke or rinde of the fruit is called of diuers Sidion, and in the Apothecaries shops Psidium, and cortex Granatarum. The wilde kinde is called Malus Punica siluestris: In English, The wilde Pome∣granet tree; the flower thereof is properly called Balaustium. The lesser kind is vsually called Balaustium Romanum, as the greater is called Creticum and Cyprinum, because they growe in Candy and Cyprus. The Vertues. The vse of all these Pomegranets is very much in Physicke, to coole and binde all fluxibility both of body and humours: they are also of singular effect in all vlcers of the mouth, and other parts of the body, both of man and woman. There is no part of them but is applyed for some of these re∣spects. The rinde also of the Pomegranet is vsed of diuers in stead of Gaules, to make the best sort of writing Inke, which is durable to the worlds end. CHAP. CXV. Amonum Plinij seu Pseudocapsicum. Tree Night shade or the Winter Cherry tree. I Haue adioyned this plant, for the pleasurable beauty of the greene leaues, and red berries. It groweth vp to be a yard or foure foote high at the most, hauing a small wooddy stemme or stocke, as bigge as ones finger or thumbe, couered with a whi∣tish greene barke, set full of greene branches, and faire greene leaues, somewhat vne∣uen sometimes on the edges, narrower then any Night shade leaues, and very neare resembling the leaues of the Capsicum, or Ginny pepper, but smaller and narrower, fal∣ling away in the Winter, and shooting fresh in the Spring of the yeare: the flowers growe often two or three together, at the ioynts of the branches with the leaues, being white, opening starre-fashion, and sometimes turning themselues backe, with a yel∣low pointell in the middle, very like vnto the flowers of Night shade: after the flow∣ers are past, come forth in their stead small greene buttons, which after turne to be pleasant round red berries, of the bignesse of small Cherries when they are ripe, which with vs vsually ripen not vntill the Winter, or about Christmas, wherein are contained many small whitish seede that are flat: all the whole plant, as well leaues and flowers as seede, are without either smell or taste: the roote hath many yellowish strings and fibres annexed vnto it. The Place. The originall place hereof is not well knowne, but is thought to bee the West Indies. It hath been planted of long time in most of these Countries, where it abideth reasonable well, so that some care bee had thereof in the extreamity of the Winter. The Time. It flowreth sometimes in Iune, but vsually in Iuly and August, and the fruit is not ripe (as is said) vntill the Winter.
The Names. This plant hath diuers names; for it is thought to be that kinde of Amo∣mum that Plinie setteth downe. Dodonaeus calleth it Pseudocapficum, for some likenesse in the leafe and fruit vnto the small Capsicum or Ginnie Pep∣per, although much vnlike in the taste and property. Others doe call it Strichnodendron, that is, Solanum arborescens, and wee in English according thereunto, Tree Night shade. But some Latine asses corrupting the Latine word Amomum, doe call it the Mumme tree. Dalechampius calleth it Sola∣num Americum, seu Indicum, and saith the Spaniards call it in their tongue, Guindas de las Indias, that is, Cerasa Indiana, Indian Cherries, which if any would follow, I would not bee much against it: but many Gentlewomen doe call them Winter Cherries, because the fruit is not throughly ripe vn∣till Winter. The Vertues. I finde no Physicall property allotted vnto it, more then that by reason of the insipidity, it is held to be cooling. CHAP. CXVI. Ficus Indica minor. The smaller Indian Figge tree.
THis Indian Figge tree, if you will call it a tree (because in our Country it is not so, although it groweth in the naturall hot Countries from a wooddy stemme or body into leaues) is a plant consisting only of leaues, one springing out of an∣other, into many branches of leaues, and all of them growing out of one leafe, put in∣to the ground halfe way, which taking roote, all the rest rise out thereof, those belowe for the most part being larger then those aboue; yet all of them somewhat long, flat, and round pointed, of the thicknesse of a finger vsually, and smallest at the lower end, where they are ioyned or spring out of the other leaues, hauing at their first breaking out a shew of small, red, or browne prickes, thicke set ouer all the vpper side of the leaues, but with vs falling away quickly, leauing onely the markes where they stood: but they haue besides this shew of great prickes, a few very fine, and small, hard, white, and sharpe, almost insensible prickes, being not so bigge as haires on the vnderside, which will often sticke in their fingers that handle them vnaduisedly, neither are they to be discerned vnlesse one look precisely for them: the leaues on the vnderside hauing none of those other great pricks or marks at all, being of a faire fresh pale green colour: out of the vppermost leaues breake forth certaine greene heads, very like vnto leaues (so that many are deceiued, thinking them to be leaues, vntill they marke them better, and be better experienced in them) but that they growe round and not flat, and are broad at the toppe; for that out of the tops of euery of them shooteth out a pale yel∣low flower, consisting of two rowes of leaues, each containing fiue leaues a peece, laid open with certaine yellow threads, tipt with red in the middle: this greene head, vntill the flower be past, is not of halfe that bignesse that it attaineth vnto after, yet seldome or neuer commeth vnto perfection with vs, being long and round, like vnto a Figge, small belowe, and greater aboue, bearing vpon the flat or broad head the marke of the flower; some holding still on them the dryed leaues, and others hauing lost them, shew the hollownesse which they haue in the toppe or middle of the head, the sides round about being raised or standing vp higher: this head or figge in our Coun∣try abideth greene on the outside, and little or nothing reddish within (although it a∣bide all the Winter, and the Summer following, as sometimes it doth) for want of that heate and comfort of the Sunne it hath in his naturall place, where it groweth  reddish on the outside, and containing within it a bloudy red clammy iuyce, making the vrine of them that eate of them as red as bloud, which many seeing, were in doubt of themselues, lest their vrine were not very bloud; of what sweetnesse, like a figge, in the naturall places, I am not well assured, yet affirmed: but those that haue beene brought vnto me, whose colour on the outside was greenish, were of a reddish purple within, and contained within them round, small, hard seede, the taste was flat, wate∣rish, or insipide: the roote is neither great, nor disperseth it selfe very deepe or farre, but shooteth many small rootes vnder the vpper crust of the earth. There is a greater kinde hereof, whose leaues are twice or thrice as bigge, which ha∣uing been often brought vs, will seldome abide more then one Summer with vs, our Winters alwaies rotting the leaues, that it could not be longer kept. The Place. This Indian Figge tree groweth dispersedly in many places of Ame∣rica, generally called the West Indies: The greater kinde in the more re∣mote and hot Countries, as Mexico, Florida, &c. and in the Bermudas or Summer Islands, from whence wee haue often had it. The lesser in Virgi∣nia, and those other Countries that are nearer vnto vs, which better endu∣reth with vs. The Time. It flowreth with vs sometimes in May, or Iune; but (as I said) the fruit ne∣uer commeth to perfection in this Country. The Names. Diuers doe take it to bee Opuntia Plinij, whereof hee speaketh in the 21. Booke and 17. Chapter of his Naturall History: but he there saith, Opun∣tia is an herbe, sweete and pleasant to be eaten, and that it is a wonder that the roote should come from the leafe, and so to growe; which words al∣though they descipher out the manner of the growing of this plant, yet be∣cause this is a kinde of tree, and not an herbe, nor to be eaten, it cannot bee the same: but especially because there is an herbe which groweth in the same manner, or very neare vnto it, one leafe standing on the toppe or side of another, being a Sea plant, fit to be eaten with vinegar and oyle (as many other herbes are that growe in the salt marshes, or neare the Sea, whereof Sea Purslane is one) which Clusius calleth Lychen Marinus, and (as Clusius saith) Cortusus very fitly called Opuntia marina, and out of doubt is the ve∣rie same Opuntia that Theophrastus maketh mention of, and Plinie out of him. Our English people in Virginia, and the Bermuda Island, where it groweth plentifully, because of the form of the fruit, which is somewhat like to a Peare, & not being so familiarly acquainted with the growing of Figs, sent it vnto vs by the name of the prickly Peare, from which name many haue supposed it to be a Peare indeede, but were therein deceiued. The Vertues. There is no other especiall property giuen hereunto, by any that haue written of the West Indies, then of the colouring of the vrine, as is be∣fore said.
CHAP. CXVII. Yuca siue Iucca. The supposed Indian Iucca. THis rare Indian plant hath a great thicke tuberous roote (spreading in time in∣to many tuberous heads) from the head whereof shooteth forth many long, hard, and guttured leaues, very sharpe pointed, compassing as it were one an∣other at the bottome, of a grayish greene colour, which doe not fall away, but abide euer greene on the plant; from the middle whereof springeth forth (now and then, but not euery yeare) a strong round stalke, diuided into diuers branches, whereon stand diuers white, and somewhat large flowers, hanging downe their heads, consi∣sting of six leaues, with diuers veines, of a weake reddish or blush colour, spread on the backe of the three outer leaues, especially from the middle of the leaues to the bot∣tome, and not rising to the edge of the leafe of any flower, which fall away without bearing any seede in our Country, as farre as euer could be obserued either in the plant that Master Gerard kept a long time by him, or by Robinus at Paris his plant, which Master Gerard sent vnto him, or yet by that plant, that Vespasian Robin the sonne of old Robin sent vnto Master Iohn de Franqueuille, and now abideth and flourisheth in my Garden. The Place. It was first brought into England (as Master Gerard saith) from the West Indies, by a seruant of Master Thomas Edwards, an Apothecary of Exeter, and imparted to him, who kept it vnto his death: but perished with him that got it from his widow, intending to send it to his Country house. The Time. It flowreth not vntill Iuly, and the flowers fall away sodainely, after they haue beene blowne open a while. The Names. Master Gerard first as I thinke called it Iucca, supposing it to bee the true Yuca of Theuet, wherewith the Indians make bread, called Cassaua: but the true Iucca is described to haue a leafe diuided into seuen or nine parts, which this hath not: Yet not knowing by what better name to call it, let it hold still his first imposition, vntill a fitter may be giuen it. The Vertues. Wee haue not heard of any, that hath either read, heard, or experimen∣ted the faculties hereof, nor yet whether it hath good or euill taste; for be∣ing rare, and possessed but by a few, they that haue it are loth to cut any thereof, for feare of spoiling and losing the whole roote. Some haue affirmed, that in some parts of Turkie, where as they say this plant groweth, they make a kinde of cloth from the threads are found run∣ning through the leaues; but I finde the threads are so strong and hard, that this cannot be that plant the relators meane is vsed in that manner.
1 Yuca siue Iucca. The Indian Iucca. 2 Arbor vita. The tree of life. 3 Arbor Iuda. Iudas tree. 4 Laburnum. Beane Trefoile. 5 Cytisus. Tree Trefoile. depiction of flowers
CHAP. CXVIII. Arbor vitae. The tree of life. THe tree of life riseth vp in some places where it hath stood long, to be a tree of a reasonable great bignesse and height, couered with a redder barke then any other tree in our Country that I know, the wood whereof is firme and hard, and spreadeth abroad many armes and branches, which againe send forth many smal∣ler twigges, bending downewards; from which twiggy or slender branches, being flat themselues like the leaues, come forth on both sides many flat winged leaues, some∣what like vnto Sauine, being short and small, but not pricking, seeming as if they were brayded or folded like vnto a lace or point, of a darke yellowish greene colour, abiding greene on the branches Winter and Summer, of a strong resinous taste, not pleasing to most, but in some ready to procure casting, yet very cordiall and pectorall also to them that can endure it: at the toppes of the branches stand small yellowish dounie flowers, set in small scaly heads, wherein lye small, long, brownish seede, which ripen well in many places, and being sowne, doe spring and bring forth plants, which with some small care will abide the extreamest Winters we haue. The Place. The first or originall place where it naturally groweth, as farre as I can learne or vnderstand, is that part of America which the French doe in ha∣bite, about the riuer of Canada, which is at the backe of Virginia North∣ward, and as it seemeth, first brought by them from thence into Europe, in the time of Francis the first French King, where it hath so plentifully en∣creased, and so largely beene distributed, that now few Gardens of respect, either in France, Germany, the Lowe-Countries, or England, are without it. The Time. It flowreth in the end of May, and in Iune; the fruit is ripe in the end of August and Sptember. The Names. All the Writers that haue written of it, since it was first knowne, haue made it to be Thuyae genus, a kinde of Thuya, which Theophrastus compa∣reth vnto a Cypresse tree, in his fifth Book and fifth Chapter: but Omne si∣mile non est idem, and although it haue some likenesse, yet I verily beleeue it is proprium sui genus, a proper kinde of it owne, not to bee paralleld with any other. For wee finde but very few trees, herbes, or plants in America, like vnto those that growe in Europe, the hither part of Africa, or in the lesser Asia, as experience testifieth. Some would make it to be Cedrus Lycia, but so it cannot be. The French that first brought it, called it Arbor vitae, with what reason or vpon what ground I know not: but euer since it hath continued vnder the title of the Tree of life. The Vertues.
It hath beene found by often experience, that the leaues hereof chewed in the morning fasting, for some few dayes together, haue done much good to diuers, that haue beene troubled with shortnesse of breath, and to helpe to expectorate thinne purulentous matter stuffing the lungs. Other proper∣ties I haue not heard that it hath; but doubtlesse, the hot resinous smell and  taste it hath, both while it is fresh, and after it hath beene long kept dry, doth euidently declare his tenuity of parts, a digesting and cleansing qua∣lity it is possessed with, which if any industrious would make tryall, hee should finde the effects. CHAP. CXIX. Arbor Iudae. Iudas tree. IVdas tree riseth vp in some places, where it standeth open from a wall, and alone free from other trees (as in a Garden at Batthersey, which sometimes agoe belon∣ged to Master Morgan, Apothecary to the late Queene Elizabeth of famous me∣mory) to be a very great and tall tree, exceeding any Apple tree in height, and equall in bignesse of body thereunto (as my selfe can testifie, being an eye witnesse thereof) when as it had many stalkes of flowers, being in the bud, breaking out of the body of the tree through the barke in diuers places, when as there was no bough or branch near them by a yard at the least, or yet any leafe vpon the tree, which they gathered to put among other flowers, for Nosegayes) and in other places it groweth to bee but an hedge bush, or plant, with many suckers and shootes from belowe, couered with a darke reddish barke, the young branches being more red or purplish: the flowers on the branches come forth before any shew or budding of leaues, three or foure stan∣ding together vpon a small foote-stalke, which are in fashion like vnto Pease blos∣somes, but of an excellent deepe purplish crimson colour: after which come in their places so many long, flat, large, and thinne cods, of a brownish colour, wherein are contained small, blackish browne, flat, and hard seede: the roote is great, and run∣neth both deepe, and farre spreading in the earth: the leaues come forth by them∣selues, euery one standing on a long stalke, being hard & very round, like vnto the leafe of the largest Asarum, but not so thick, of a whitish green on the vpper side, and grayish vnderneath, which fall away euery yeare, and spring a fresh after the Spring is well come in, and the buds of flowers are sprung. There is another of this kinde, growing in some places very high,Flore albe. somewhat like the former, and in other places also full of twiggy branches, which are greener then the former, as the leaues are likewise: the flowers of this kinde are wholly white, and the cods nothing so red or browne, in all other things agreeing together. The Place. The former groweth plentifully in many places of Spaine, Italy, Pro∣uence in France, and in many other places. The other hath beene sent vs out of Italy many times, and the seede hath sprung very well with vs, but it is somewhat tender to keepe in the Winter. The Time. The flowers (as I said) appeare before the leaues, and come forth in A∣prill and May, and often sooner also, the leaues following shortly after; but neither of them beareth perfect seede in our Country, that euer I could learne, or know by mine owne or others experience. The Names.
Some would referre this to Cercis, whereof Theophrastus maketh men∣tion in his first Booke and eighteenth Chapter, among those trees that beare their fruit in cods, like as Pulse doe: and hee remembreth it againe in the fourteenth Chapter of his third Booke, and maketh it not vnlike the white  Poplar tree, both in greatnesse and whitenesse of the branches, with the leafe of an Iuie, without corners on the one part, cornered on the other, and sharpe pointed, greene on both sides almost alike, hauing so slender long footestalkes that the leaues cannot stand forthright, but bend downwards, with a more rugged barke then the white Poplar tree. Clusius thinketh this large description is but an ample description of the third kinde of Poplar, called Lybica, the Aspen tree, which Gaza translateth Alpina: but who so will well consider it, shall finde it neyther answerable to any Poplar tree, in that it beareth not cods as Cercis doth; nor vnto this Arbor Iudae, because it beareth not white branches. Clusius saith also, that the learned of Mom∣pelier in his time, referred it to Colytea of Theophrastus in his third booke and seuenteenth chapter, where he doth liken it to the leaues of the broadest leafed Bay tree, but larger and rounder, green on the vpperside, and whitish vnderneath, and whereunto (as he saith) Theophrastus giueth cods in the fourteenth chapter of the same third booke: and by the contracting of their descriptions both together, saith, they agree vnto this Iudas tree. But I find some doubts and differences in these places: for the Colutaea that Dioscori∣des mentioneth in the said fourteenth chapter of his third booke, hath (as he saith there) a leafe like vnto the Willow, and therefore cannot bee the same Colutaea mentioned in the seuenteenth chapter of the same third book, which hath a broade Bay leafe: indeede hee giueth seede in cods: but that with broade Bay leaues is (as he saith) without eyther flower or fruite; and besides all this, he saith the rootes are very yellow, which is not to bee found in this Arbor Iudae, or Iudas tree: let others now iudge if these things can bee well reconciled together. Some haue for the likenesse of the cods vnto Beane cods, called it Fabago. And Clusius called it Siliqua siluestris. It is generally in these dayes called Arbor Iudae, and in English after the La∣tine name, vntill a fitter may be had, Iudas tree. The Vertues. There is nothing extant in any Author of any Physicall vse it hath, ney∣ther hath any later experience found out any. CHAP. CXX. Laburnum. Beane Trefoile. THere be three sorts of these codded trees or plants, one neere resembling ano∣ther, whereof Anagyris of Dioscorides is one. The other two are called La∣burnum; the larger whereof Matthiolus calleth Anagyris altera, and so doe some others also: the third is of the same kinde with the second, but smaller. I shall not for this our Garden trouble you or my selfe with any more of them then one, which is the lesser of the two Liburnum, in that it is more frequent, and that it will far better abide then the Anagyris, which is so tender, that it will hardly endure the winters of our Countrey: and the greater Laburnum is not so easily to be had. Laburnum. Beane Trefoile.
This codded tree riseth vp with vs like vnto a tall tree, with a reasonable great body, if it abide any long time in a place, couered with a smooth greene barke; the branches are very long, greene, pliant, and bending any way, whereon are set here and there di∣uers leaues, three alwaies standing together vpon a long stalk, being somwhat long, and not very narrow, pointed at the ends, greene on the vpperside, and of a siluer shining colour vnderneath, without any smell at all: at the ioynts of these branches, where the leaues stand, come forth many flowers, much like vnto broome flowers, but not so  large or open, growing about a very long branch or stalke, sometimes a good span or more in length, and of a faire yellow colour, but not very deepe; after which come flatthin cods, not very long or broade, but as tough and hard as the cods of Broome; wherein are contained blackish seede, like, but much lesse then the seede of Anagyris vera (which are as big as a kidney beane, purplish and spotted): the roote thrusteth down deepe into the ground, spreading also farre, and is of a yellowish colour. The Place. This tree groweth naturally in many of the woods of Italie, and vpon the Alpes also, and is therefore still accounted to be that Laburnum that Pli∣nie calleth Arbor Alpina. It groweth in many gardens with vs. The Time. It flowreth in May, the fruit or cods, and the seedes therein are ripe in the end of August, or in September. The Names. This tree (as I said before) is called of Matthiolus Anagyris altera, siue se∣cunda, of Cordus, Gesner and others, especially of most now adayes, La∣burnum. It is probable in my opinion, that this should bee that Colutaea of Theophrastus, mentioned in the fourteenth Chapter of his third book with the leafe of a Willow; for if you take any one leafe by it selfe, it may well resemble a Willow leafe both for forme and colour, and beareth small seed in cods like vnto pulse as that doth. Of some it hath beene taken for a kinde of Cytisus, but not truely. We call it in English, Beane Trefoile, in regard of his cods and seede therein, somewhat like vnto Kidney Beanes, and of the leaues, three alwayes standing together, vntill a more proper name may bee giuen it. The Vertues. There is no vse hereof in Physicke with vs, nor in the naturall place of the growing, saue only to prouoke a vomit, which it will doe very strongly. CHAP. CXXI. Cytisus. Tree Trefoile. THere are so many sorts of Cytisus or Tree trefoiles, that if I should relate them all, I should weary the Reader to ouerlooke them, whereof the most part per∣taine rather to a generall worke then to this abstract. I shall not therefore trou∣ble you with any superfluous, but only with two, which we haue noursed vp to furnish waste places in a garden. Cytisus Maranthae. Horned Tree Trefoile.
This Tree Trefoile which is held of most Herbarists to bee the true Cytisus of Dio∣scorides, riseth vp to the height of a man at the most, with a body of the bignesse of a mans thumbe, couered with a whitish bark, breaking forth into many whitish branches spreading farre, beset in many places with small leaues, three alwayes set together vp∣on a small short footestalke, which are rounder, and whiter then the leaues of Beane Trefoile: at the ends of the branches for the most part, come forth the flowers three or foure togethers, of a fine gold colour, and of the fashion of Broome flowers, but  not so large: after the flowers are past, there come in their places crooked flat thinne cods, of the fashion of a halfe moone, or crooked horne, whitish when they are ripe, wherein are contained blackish seede: the roote is hard and woody, spreading diuers wayes vnder the ground: the whole plant hath a pretty small hot sent. Cytisus vulgatior. The common Tree Trefoile. This Cytisus is the most common in this Land, of any the other sorts of tree trefoiles, hauing a blackish colourd barke, the stemme or body whereof is larger then the for∣mer, both for height and spreading, bearing also three leaues together, but smaller and greener then the former: the flowers are smaller, but of the same fashion and colour: the cods blackish and thin, and not very long, or great, but lesser then Broome cods, wherein there lyeth small blackish hard seede: the roote is diuersly dispersed in the ground. The Place. The first groweth in the kingdome of Naples, and no doubt in many other places of Italie, as Matthiolus saith. The other groweth in diuers places of France. The Time. They flower for the most part in May or Iune: the seede is ripe in Au∣gust or September. The Names. The first (as I said) is thought of most to be the true Cytisus of Dioscori∣des, and as is thought, was in these later dayes first found by Bartholomaeus Maranta of Naples, who sent it first to Matthiolus, and thereupon hath euer since beene called after his name, Cytisus Maranthae. Some doe call it Cytisus Lunatus, because the cods are made somewhat like vnto an halfe Moone. We call it in English, Horned Tree Trefoile. The other is called Cytisus vul∣garis or vulgatior; in English, The common Tree Trefoile, because we haue not any other so common. The Vertues. The chiefest vertues that are appropriate to these plants, are to procure milke in womens breasts, to fatten pullen, sheep &c. and to be good for bees. CHAP. CXXII. Colutaea. The Bastard Sena Tree. WEe haue in our Gardens two or three sorts of the Bastard Sena tree; a greater as I may so call it, and two lesser: the one with round thin tran∣sparent skins like bladders, wherein are the seede: the others with long round cods, the one bunched out or swelling in diuers places, like vnto a Scorpions tale, wherein is the seede, and the other very like vnto it, but smaller. 1. Colutaea Vesicaria. The greater Bastard Sena with bladders. This shrub or tree, or shrubby tree, which you please to call it, riseth vp to the height of a pretty tree, the stemme or stock being sometimes of the bignesse of a mans arme, couered with a blackish greene rugged barke, the wood whereof is harder then of an
Elder, but with an hollownesse like a pith in the heart or middle of the branches, which are diuided many wayes, and whereon are set at seuerall distances, diuers win∣ged leaues, composed of many small round pointed, or rather flat pointed leaues, one set against another, like vnto Licoris, or the Hatcher Fitch; among these leaues come forth the flowers, in fashion like vnto Broome flowers, and as large, of a very yellow colour: after which appeare cleare thinne swelling cods like vnto thinne transparent bladders, wherein are contained blacke seede, set vpon a middle ribbe or sinew in the middle of the bladder, which if it be a little crushed betweene the fingers, will giue a cracke, like as a bladder full of winde. The roote groweth branched and woody. 2. Colutaea Scorpioides maior. The greater Scorpion podded Bastard Sena. This Bastard Sena groweth nothing so great or tall, but shooteth out diuersly, like vnto a shrub, with many shoots springing from the root: the branches are greener, but more rugged, hauing a white barke on the best part of the elder growne branches; for the young are greene, and haue such like winged leaues set on them as are to be seen in the former, but smaller, greener, and more pointed: the flowers are yellow, but much smaller, fashioned somewhat like vnto the former, with a reddish stripe downe the backe of the vppermost leafe: the long cods that follow are small, long and round, distinguished into many diuisions or dents, like vnto a Scorpions tayle, from whence hath risen the name: in these seuerall diuisions lye seuerall blacke seede, like vnto the seede of Fenigrecke: the roote is white and long, but not so woody as the former. 3. Colutaea Scorpioides minor. The lesser Scorpion Bastard Sena. This lesser Bastard Sena is in all things like the former, but somewhat lower, and smaller both in leafe, flower, and cods of seede, which haue not such eminent bunches on the cods to be seene as the former. The Place. They grow as Matthiolus saith about Trent in Italie, and in other places: the former is frequent enough through all our Countrey, but the others are more rare. The Time. They flower about the middle or end of May, and their seede is ripe in August. The bladders of the first will abide a great while on the tree, if they be suffered, and vntill the winde cause them to rattle, and afterwards the skins opening, the seed will fall away. The Names. The name Colutaea is imposed on them, and by the iudgement of most writers, the first is taken to bee that Colutaea of Lipara that Theophrastus ma∣keth mention of, in the seuenteenth chapter of his third booke. But I should rather thinke that the Scorpioides were the truer Colutaea of Theophrastus, because the long pods thereof are more properly to bee accounted siliquae, then the former which are vesicae tumentes, windy bladders, and not siliquae: and no doubt but Theophrastus would haue giuen some peculiar note of difference if he had meant those bladders, and not these cods. Let others of iudgement be vmpeeres in this case; although I know the currant of writers since Matthiolus, doe all hold the former Colutaea veficaria to be the true Co∣lutaea Liparae of Theophrastus. Wee call it in English, Bastard Sena, from Ruellius, who as I thinke first called it Sena, from the forme of the leaues. The second and third (as I said before) from the forme of the cods receiued their names, as it is in the titles and descriptions; yet they may as properly be called Siliquosae, for that their fruite are long cods.
The Vertues. Theophrastus saith it doth wonderfully helpe to fatten sheepe: But sure it is found by experience, that if it be giuen to man it causeth strong castings both vpwards and downwards; and therefore let euery one beware that they vse not this in steede of good Sena, lest they feele to their cost the force thereof. CHAP. CXII. Spartum Hispanicum frutex. Spanish Broome. ALthough Clusius and others haue found diuers sorts of this shrubby Spartum or Spanish Broome, yet because our Climate will nourse vp none of them, and euen this very hardly, I shall leaue all others, and describe vnto you this one only in this manner: Spanish Broome groweth to bee fiue or sixe foote high, with a woody stemme below, couered with a darke gray, or ash-coloured barke, and hauing aboue many pliant, long and slender greene twigs, whereon in the beginning of the yeare are set many small long greene leaues, which fall away quickly, not abiding long on; towards the tops of these branches grow the flowers, fashioned like vnto Broom flowers, but larger, as yellow as they, and smelling very well; after which come small long cods, crested at the backe, wherein is contained blackish flat seede, fashioned very like vnto the Kidney beanes: the roote is woody, dispersing it selfe diuers waies. The Place. This groweth naturally in many places of France, Spaine and Italie, wee haue it as an ornament in our Gardens, among other delightfull plaats, to please the senses of sight and smelling. The Time. It flowreth in the end of May, or beginning of Iune, and beareth seede, which ripeneth not with vs vntill it be late. The Names. It is called Spartium Graecorum, and Spartum frutex, to distinguish it from the sedge or rush, that is so called also. Of some it is called Genista, and thought not to differ from the other Genista, but they are much deceiued; for euen in Spaine and Italie, the ordinary Ganista or Broome groweth with it, which is not pliant, and fit to binde Vines, or such like things withall as this is. The Vertues. There is little vse hereof in Physicke, by reason of the dangerous quali∣tie of vomiting, which it doth procure to them that take it inwardly: but being applyed outwardly, it is found to helpe the Sciatica, or paine of the hippes.
1 Coutaea vulgaris. Ordinary bastard Sene. 2 Periploca recta Virginiana. Virginian Silke. 3 Colutae Scorpicides. Scorpion bastard Sene. 4 Spartum Hispanicum. Spanish Broome. 5 Ligustrum. Priuet. 6 Saluia variegata. Party coloured Sage. 7 Maiorana auroa. Gded Matierome. depiction of flowers
CHAP. CXXIIII. Periploca recta Virginiana. Virginian Silke. LEst this stranger should finde no hospitality with vs, being so beautifull a plant, or not finde place in this Garden, let him be here receiued, although with the last, rather then not at all. It riseth vp with one or more strong and round stalkes, three or foure foote high, whereon are set at the seuerall ioynts thereof two faire, long, and broad leaues, round pointed, with many veines therein, growing close to the stemme, without any foote-stalke: at the tops of the stalkes, and some∣times at the ioynts of the leaues, groweth forth a great bush of flowers out of a thinne skinne, to the number of twenty, and sometimes thirty or forty, euery one with a long foote-stalke, hanging downe their heads for the most part, especially those that are outermost, euery one standing within a small huske of greene leaues, turned to the stalkeward, like vnto the Lysimachia flower of Virginia before de∣scribed, and each of them consisting of fiue small leaues a peece, of a pale pur∣plish colour on the vpperside, and of a pale yellowish purple vnderneath, both sides of each leafe being as it were folded together, making them seeme hollow and pointed, with a few short chiues in the middle: after which come long and crooked pointed cods standing vpright, wherein are contained flat brownish seede, disper∣sedly lying within a great deale of fine, soft, and whitish browne silke, very like vnto the cods, seede, and silke of Asclepias, or Swallow-wort, but that the cods are greater and more crooked, and harder also in the outer shell: the roote is long and white, of the bignesse of a mans thumbe, running vnder ground very far, and shooting vp in di∣uers places, the heads being set full of small white grumes or knots, yeelding forth many branches, if it stand any time in a place: the whole plant, as well leaues as stalkes, being broken, yeeld a pale milke. The Place. It came to me from Virginia, where it groweth aboundantly, being rai∣sed vp from the seede I receiued. The Time. It flowreth in Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August. The Names. It may seeme very probable to many, that this plant is the same that Pro∣sper Alpinus in the twenty fift Chapter of his Booke of Egyptian plants, nameth Beidelsar; and Honorius Bellus in his third and fourth Epistles vn∣to Clusius (which are at the end of his History of plants) calleth Ossar fru∣tex: And Clusius himselfe in the same Booke calleth Apocynum Syriacum, Palastinum, and Aegyptiacum, because this agreeth with theirs in very many and notable parts; yet verily I thinke this plant is not the same, but rather another kinde of it selfe: First, because it is not frutex, a shrub or wooddy plant, nor keepeth his leaues all the yeare, but loseth both leaues and stalks, dying down to the ground euery yeare: Secondly, the milke is not causticke or violent, as Alpinus and Bellus say
Ossar is: Thirdly, the cods are more crooked then those of Clusius, or of Alpinus, which Honorius Bellus ac∣knowledgeth to be right, although greater then those he had out of Egypt: And lastly, the rootes of these doe runne, whereof none of them make any mention. Gerard in his Herball giueth a rude figure of the plant, but a very true figure of the cods with seede, and saith the Virginians call it Wisanck, and referreth it to the Asclepias, for the likenesse of the cods stuffed with  silken doune. But what reason Caspar Bauhinus in his Pinax Theatri Bota∣nici had, to call it (for it is Clusius his Apocynum Syriacum) by the name of Lapathum Aegyptiacum lactescens siliqua Asclepiadis, I know none in the world: for but that he would shew an extreame singularity in giuing names to plants, contrary to all others (which is very frequent with him) how could he thinke, that this plant could haue any likenesse or corresponden∣cie, with any of the kindes of Dockes, that euer he had seene, read, or heard of, in face, or shew of leaues, flowers, or seede; but especially in giuing milke. I haue you see (and that not without iust and euident cause) giuen it a differing Latine name from Gerard, because the Asclepias giueth no milke, but the Periploca or Apocymum doth; and therefore fitter to be referred to this then to that. And because it should not want an English name answera∣ble to some peculiar property thereof, I haue from the silken doune called it Virginian Silke: but I know there is another plant growing in Virginia▪ called Silke Grasse, which is much differing from this. The Vertues. I know not of any in our Land hath made any tryall of the properties hereof. Captaine Iohn Smith in his booke of the discouery and descrip∣tion of Virginia, saith, that the Virginians vse the rootes hereof (if his be the same with this) being bruised and applyed to cure their hurts & diseases. CHAP. CXXV. Ligustrum. Primme or Priuet. BEcause the vse of this plant is so much, and so frequent throughout all this Land, although for no other purpose but to make hedges or arbours in Gardens, &c. whereunto it is so apt, that no other can be like vnto it, to bee cut, lead, and drawne into what forme one will, either of beasts, birds, or men armed, or otherwise: I could not forget it, although it be so well knowne vnto all, to be an hedge bush grow∣ing from a wooddy white roote, spreading much within the ground, and bearing ma∣nie long, tough, and plyant sprigs and branches, whereon are set long, narrow, and pointed sad greene leaues by couples at euery ioynt: at the tops whereof breake forth great tufts of sweete smelling white flowers, which when they are fallen, turne into small blacke berries, hauing a purple iuyce within them, and small seede, flat on the one side, with an hole or dent therein: this is seene in those branches that are not cut, but suffered to beare out their flowers and fruit. The Place. This bush groweth as plentifully in the Woods of our owne Countrey, as in any other beyond the Seas. The Time. It flowreth sometimes in Iune, and in Iuly; the fruit is ripe in August and a September. The Names. There is great controuersie among the moderne Writers concerning this plant, some taking it to be  of Dioscorides, other to be Phillyrea of Di∣oscorides, which followeth next after Cyprus. Plinie maketh mention of Cyprus in two places; in the one he saith, Cyprus hath the leafe of
Ziziphus,  or the Iuiube tree: in the other he saith, that certain do affirme, that the Cyprus of the East Country, and the Ligustrum of Italy is one and the same plant: whereby you may plainly see, that our Priuet which is Ligustrum, cannot be that Cyprus of Plinie with Iuiube leaues: Besides, both Dioscorides & Plinie say, that Cyprus is a tree; but all know that Ligustrum, Priuet, is but an hedge bush: Againe, Dioscorides saith, that the leaues of Cyprus giue a red colour, but Priuet giueth none. Bellonius and Prosper Alpinus haue both recor∣ded, that the true Cyprus of Dioscorides groweth plentifully in Egypt, Sy∣ria, and those Easterne Countries, and noursed vp also in Constantinople, and other parts of Greece, being a merchandise of much worth, in that they transport the leaues, and young branches dryed, which laid in water giue a yellow colour, wherewith the Turkish women colour the nailes of their hands, and some other parts of their bodies likewise, delighting much therein: and that it is not our Ligustrum, or Priuet, because Cyprus beareth round white seede, like Coriander seede, and the leaues abide greene al∣waies vpon the tree, which groweth (if it bee not cut or pruined) to the height of the Pomegranet tree. I haue (I confesse) beyond the limits I set for this worke spoken concerning our Priuet, because I haue had the seede of the true Cyprus of Dioscorides sent mee, which was much differing from our Priuet, and although it sprang vp, yet would not abide any time, whereas if it had beene our Priuet, it would haue beene familiar enough to our Countrey. The Vertues. It is of small vse in physicke, yet some doe vse the leaues in Lotions, that serue to coole and dry fluxes or sores in diuers parts. CHAP. CXXVI. Saluia variegata. Party coloured Sage. And Maiorana versicolor siue aurea. Yellow or golden Marierome. VNto all these flowers of beauty and rarity, I must adioyne two other plants, whose beauty consisteth in their leaues, and not in their flowers: as also to se∣parate them from the others of their tribe, to place them here in one Chapter, before the sweete herbes that shall follow, as is fittest to furnish this our Garden of pleasure. This kinde of Sage groweth with branches and leaues, very like the ordi∣nary Sage, but somewhat smaller, the chiefest difference consisteth in the colour of the leaues, being diuersly marked and spotted with white and red among the greene: for vpon one branch you shall haue the leaues seuerally marked one from another, as the one halfe of the leafe white, and the other halfe greene, with red shadowed ouer them both, or more white then greene, with some red in it, either parted or shadowed, or dasht here and there, or more greene then white, and red therein, eyther in the mid∣dle or end of the leafe, or more or lesse parted or striped with white and red in the greene, or else sometimes wholly greene the whole branch together, as nature listeth to play with such varieties: which manner of growing rising from one and the same plant, because it is the more variable, is the more delightfull and much respected. There is another speckled Sage parted with white and greene, but it is nothing of that beauty to this, because this hath three colours euidently to bee discerned in euery leafe almost, the red adding a superaboundant grace to the rest. Maiorana aurea siue versicolor. Yellow or golden Marierome.
This kinde of Marierome belongeth to that sort is called in Latine Maiorana latifo∣lia,  which Lobel setteth forth for Hyssopus Graecorum genuina: In English Winter Mar∣ierome, or pot Marierome: for it hath broader and greater leaues then the sweete Marierome, and a different vmbell or tuft of flowers. The difference of this from that set forth in the Kitchin Garden, consisteth chiefly in the leaues, which are in Summer wholly yellow in some, or but a little greene, or parted with yellow and greene more or lesse, as nature listeth to play: but in Winter they are of a darke or dead greene co∣lour, yet recouering it selfe againe: the sent hereof is all one with the pot Marierome. Wee haue another parted with white and greene, much after the manner with the former. The Place, Time, Names, and Vertues of both these plants, shall be de∣clared where the others of their kindes are specified hereafter, and in the Kitchen Garden; for they differ not in properties. CHAP. CXXVII. Lauendula. Lauender Spike. AFter all these faire and sweete flowers before specified, I must needes adde a few sweete herbes, both to accomplish this Garden, and to please your senses, by placing them in your Nosegayes, or else where, as you list. And although I bring them in the end or last place, yet are they not of the least account. 1. Lauendula maior. Garden Lauender. Our ordinary Garden Lauender riseth vp with a hard wooddy stemme aboue the ground, parted into many small branches, whereon are set whitish, long, and narrow leaues, by couples one against another; from among which riseth vp naked square stalkes, with two leaues at a ioynt, and at the toppe diuers small huskes standing round about them, formed in long and round heads or spikes, with purple gaping flowers springing out of each of them: the roote is wooddy, and spreadeth in the ground: The whole plant is of a strong sweete sent, but the heads of flowers much more, and more piercing the senses, which are much vsed to bee put among linnen and ap∣parrell. There is a kinde hereof that beareth white flowers, and somewhat broader leaues,Flore albo. but it is very rare, and seene but in few places with vs, because it is more tender, and will not so well endure our cold Winters. 2. Lauendula minor sen Spica. Small Lauender or Spike. The Spike or small Lauender is very like vnto the former, but groweth not so high, neither is the head or spike so great and long, but shorter and smaller, and of a more purplish colour in the flower: the leaues also are a little harder, whiter, and shorter then the former; the sent also is somewhat sharper and stronger. This is not so fre∣quent as the first, and is nourished but in some places that are warme, and where they delight in rare herbes and plants. The Place. Lauender groweth in Spaine aboundantly, in many places so wilde, and little regarded, that many haue gone, and abiden there to distill the oyle thereof whereof great quantity now commeth ouer from thence vnto vs: and also in Lanquedocke, and Prouence in France. The Time. It flowreth early in those hot Countries, but with vs not vntill Iune and Iuly.
The Names. It is called of some Nardus Italica, and Lauendula, the greater is called Faemina, and the lesser Mas. We doe call them generally Lauender, or La∣uender Spike, and the lesser Spike, without any other addition. The Vertues. Lauender is little vsed in inward physicke, but outwardly; the oyle for cold and benummed parts, and is almost wholly spent with vs, for to per∣fume linnen, apparrell, gloues, leather, &c. and the dryed flowers to com∣fort and dry vp the moisture of a cold braine. CHAP. CXXVIII. Staechas. Sticadoue, Cassidony, or French Lauender. CAssidony that groweth in the Gardens of our Countrey, may peraduenture somewhat differ in colour, as well as in strength, from that which groweth in hotter Countries; but as it is with vs, it is more tender a great deale then La∣uender, and groweth rather like an herbe then a bush or shrub, not aboue a foote and a halfe high, or thereabouts, hauing many narrow long greene leaues like Lauender, but softer and smaller, set at seuerall distances together about the stalkes, which spread abroad into branches: at the tops whereof stand long and round, and sometimes foure square heads, of a darke greenish purple colour, compact of many scales set together; from among which come forth the flowers, of a blewish purple colour, after which follow seede vessels, which are somewhat whitish when they are ripe, containing blackish browne seede within them: the roote is somewhat wooddy, and will hardly abide the iniuries of our cold Winters, except in some places onely, or before it haue flowred: The whole plant is somewhat sweete, but nothing so much as Lauender. The Place. Cassidony groweth in the Islands Staechades, which are ouer against Mar∣selles, and in Arabia also: we keep it with great care in our Gardens. The Time. It flowreth the next yeare after it is sowne, in the end of May, which is a moneth before any Lauender. The Names. It is called of some Lauendula siluestris, but most vsually Staechas: in English, of some Stickadoue, or French Lauender; and in many parts of England, Cassidony. The Vertues. It is of much more vse in physicke then Lauender, and is much vsed for old paines in the head. It is also held to be good for to open obstructions, to expell melancholy, to cleanse and strengthen the liuer, and other inward parts, and to be a Pectorall also.
CHAP. CXXIX. Abrotanum faemina siue Santolina. Lauender Cotton. THis Lauender Cotton hath many wooddy, but brittle branches, hoary or of a whitish colour, whereon are set many leaues, which are little, long, and foure square, dented or notched on all edges, and whitish also: at the tops of these branches stand naked stalkes, bearing on euery one of them a larger yellow head or flower, then eyther Tansie or Maudeline, whereunto they are somewhat like, wherein is contained small darke coloured seede: the roote is hard, and spreadeth abroad with many fibres: the whole plant is of a strong sweete sent, but not vnpleasant, and is in many places planted in Gardens, to border knots with, for which it will abide to be cut into what forme you thinke best; for it groweth thicke and bushy, very fit for such workes, besides the comely shew the plant it selfe thus wrought doth yeeld, being alwayes greene, and of a sweet sent; but because it quickly groweth great, and will soon runne out of forme, it must be euery second or third yeare taken vp, and new planted. The Place. It is onely planted in Gardens with vs, for the vses aforesaid especially. The Time. It flowreth in Iuly, and standeth long in the hot time of the yeare in his colour, and so will doe, if it be gathered before it haue stood ouer long. The Names. Diuers doe call it as Matthiolus doth, Abrotanum faemina, and Santolina; and some call it Chamaecyparissus, because the leaues thereof, are somewhat like the leaues of the Cypresse tree: Wee call it in English generally Lauen∣der Cotton. The Vertues. This is vsually put among other hot herbes, eyther into bathes, oint∣ments, or other things, that are vsed for cold causes. The seede also is much vsed for the wormes. CHAP. CXXX. Ocimum. Bassill. BAssill is of two sorts (besides other kindes) for this our Garden, the one whereof is greater, the other lesse in euery part thereof, as shall be shewed. 1. Ocimum Citratum. Common Bassill.
Our ordinary Garden Bassill hath one stalke rising from the root, diuersly branched out, whereon are set two leaues alwayes at a ioynt, which are broad, somewhat round, and pointed, of a pale greene colour, but fresh, a little snipt or dented about the edges, and of a strong or heady sent, somewhat like a Pomecitron, as many haue compared it, and thereof call it Citratum: the flowers are small and white, standing at the tops of the branches, with two smal leaues at euery ioynt vnder them, in some plants green, in o∣thers  browne vnder them: after which commeth blackish seede: the roote perisheth at the first approach of winter weather, and is to be new sowen euery yeare. 2. Ocimum minimum siue Gariophyllatum. Bush Basill. The bush Basill groweth not altogether so high, but is thicker spreade out into branches, whereon grow smaller leaues, and thicker set then the former, but of a more excellent and pleasant smell by much: the flowers are white like the former, and the seede blacke also like it, and perisheth as suddenly, or rather sooner then it, so that it requireth more paines to get it, and more care to nourse it, because we seldome or ne∣uer haue any seede of it. Ocimum Indicum. Indian Basill. The Indian Basill hath a square reddish greene stalke, a foote high or better, from the ioynts whereof spreade out many branches, with broade fat leaues set thereon, two alwayes together at the ioynt, one against another, as other Basils haue, but some∣what deepely cut in on the edges, and oftentimes a little crumpled, standing vpon long reddish footestalkes, of a darke purple colour, spotted with deeper purple spots, in some greater, in others lesser: the flowers stand at the tops of the stalkes spike-fashion, which are of a white colour, with reddish stripes and veines running through them, set or placed in darke purple coloured huskes: the seede is greater and rounder then the former, and somewhat long withall: the roote perisheth in like manner as the other former doe. The whole plant smelleth strong, like vnto the other Basils. The Place. The two last sorts of Basils are greater strangers in our Country then the first which is frequent, and only sowen and planted in curious gardens. The last came first out of the West Indies. The Time. They all flower in August, or Iuly at the soonest, and that but by degrees, and not all at once. The Names. The first is vsually called Ocimum vulgare, or vulgatius, and Ocimum Citra∣tum. In English, Common or Garden Basill. The other is called Ocimum minimum, or Gariophyllatum, Cloue Basill, or Bush Basill. The last eyther of his place, or forme of his leaues, being spotted and curled, or all, is called Ocimum Indicum maculatum, latifolium & crispum. In English according to the Latine, Indian Basill, broade leafed Basill, spotted or curled Basill, which you please. The Vertues. The ordinary Basill is in a manner wholly spent to make sweet, or washing waters, among other sweet herbes, yet sometimes it is put into nosegayes. The Physicall properties are, to procure a cheerefull and merry heart, wher∣vnto the seede is chiefly vsed in pouder, &c. and is most vsed to that, and to no other purpose.
1 Santolina. Lauender Cotton. 2 Lauendula. Lauender Spike. 3 Stoechas. Cassidony. 4 Chamaedys. Germander. 5 Ocimum minus. F Bassill. 6 Marum. Herbe Masticke. 7 Maioana. Sweete Marietome. depiction of flowers
CHAP. CXXXI. Maiorana. Sweete Marierome. WEe haue many sorts of Marierome; some that are sweete, and but Sum∣mer plants; others that are greater and not so sweet; and some also that are wilde. Of all these I will onely select some of the choisest that are fit for this place, and leaue the other for the next garden, and the garden of simples, or a generall worke: yet hereunto I will adioyne another sweete plant called Masticke, as participating neerer with them then with Time, whereunto many doe referre it. 1. Maiorana maior aestina. Common sweet Marierome. The sweet Marierome that is most ftequently sowen in our Country, is a low herbe little aboue a foote high when it is at the highest, full of branches, and small whitish soft roundish leaues, smelling very sweet: at the toppes of the branches stand diuers small scaly heads, like vnto knots, (and therefore of some called knotted Marierome) of a whitish greene colour, out of which come here and there small white flowers, and afterwards small reddish seede: the roote is composed of many small threds or strings, which perish with the whole plant euery yeare. 2. Maiorana tenuifolia. Marierome gentle. This Marierome hath likewise diuers small branches, growing low, and not higher then the former, but hauing finer and smaller leaues, hoary and soft, but much sweeter: the heads are like vnto the former, and so are the flowers and seede, and the whole plant abiding but a Summer in the like manner. 3. Marum. Herbe Masticke. The neerer resemblance that this herbe hath with Marierome then with Tyme (as I said before) hath made me place it next vnto the small sweet Marierome. It riseth vp with a greater, and a more woody stalke then Marierome, two foote high or better in some places, where it liketh the ground and ayre, branching out on all sides towards the vpper part, leauing the stemme bare below, if it bee old, otherwise being young, thinly furnishing the branches from the bottome with small greene leaues, bigger then the leaues of any Tyme, and comming neere vnto the bignesse and forme of the last recited finer Marierome, but of a greener colour: at the toppes of the branches stand small white flowers on a head, which afterwards turne into a loose tuft of a long white hoary matter, like vnto soft doune, with some leaues vnderneath and about it, which abide not long on the stalkes, but are blowne away with the winde: the seede is so small if it haue any, that I haue not obserued it: the roote is threddy: the whole plant is of a sweete resinous sent, stronger then the Marierome, and abideth our winters, if it be carefully planted and regarded. The Place. The sweete Marieromes grow naturally in hot Countreyes: the first in Spaine &c. the second is thought to come out of Syria, or Persia first into Italie, where they much esteeme it, and plant it curiously and carefully in pots, and set them in their windowes, beeing much delighted therewith for the sweet sent it hath. The first is vsually sowen euery yeare in most gardens with vs: but the second is very rare and daintie, and must as daintely be pre∣serued, being more tender then the former. The herbe Masticke is thought to be first brought out of Candie, Clusius saith he found it in Spaine: It is planted by slippes, (and not sowen) in many gardens, and is much replanted
for increase, but prospereth onely, or more frequently, in loamie or clay grounds then in any other soyle. The Time. The sweete Marieromes beare their knots or scaly heads in the end of Iu∣ly, or in August. Herbe Masticke in Iune many times, or in the beginning of Iuly. The Names. The first of the two sweet Marieromes called Maiorana in Latine à maiore cura, is taken of most writers to be the Amaracus or Sampsuchum of Diosco∣rides, Theophrastus and Plinie, although Galen doth seem a little to dissent therefrom. The other sweet Marierome hath his name in his title as much as can be said of it. The next is thought by the best of the moderne Writers to be the true Marum that Galen preferreth for the excellent sweetnesse, be∣fore the former Marierome in making the Oleum, or vnguentum Amaricinum, and seemeth to incline to their opinion that thought Amaracus was deriued from Marum. It is the same also that Galen and others of the ancient Wri∣ters make mention of, to go into the composition of the Trochisci Hedychroi, as well as Amaracus among the ingredients of the Theriaca Andromachi. In English we call it Masticke simply, or Herbe Mastick, both to distinguish it from that Tyme that is called Masticke Tyme, and from the Masticke Tree, or Gum, so called. Some of later times, and Clusius with them, haue thought this to be Dioscorides his Tragoriganum, which doth somewhat re∣semble it: but there is another plant that Matthiolus setteth forth for Ma∣rum, that in Lobels opinion and mine is the truest Tragoriganum, and this the truest Marum. The Vertues. The sweete Marieromes are not onely much vsed to please the outward senses in nosegayes, and in the windowes of houses, as also in sweete pou∣ders, sweete bags, and sweete washing waters, but are also of much vse in Physicke, both to comfort the outward members, or parts of the body, and the inward also: to prouoke vrine being stopped, and to ease the paines thereof, and to cause the feminine courses. Herbe Masticke is of greater force to helpe the stopping of vrine, then the Marierome, and is put into Antidotes, as a remedie against the poyson of venemous Beasts. CHAP. CXXXI. Thymum. Tyme. THere are many kindes of Tyme, as they are vsually called with vs, some are called of the garden, and others wilde, which yet for their sweetnesse are brought into gardens, as Muske Tyme, and Lemon Tyme; and some for their beauty, as embroidered or gold yellow Tyme, and white Tyme. But the true Tyme of the ancient Writers, called Capitatum, as a speciall note of distinction from all o∣ther kindes of Tyme, is very rare to be seene with vs here in England, by reason of the tendernesse, that it will not abide our Winters. And all the other sorts that with vs are called garden Tymes, are indeede but kindes of wilde Tyme, although in the de∣fect or want of the true Tyme, they are vsed in the stead of it. With the Tymes I must doe as I did with the Marieromes in the Chapter before, that is, reserue the most com∣mon in vse, for the common vse of the Kitchen, and shew you only those here, that are not put to that vse: and first with the true Tyme, because it is knowne but to a few.
1. Thymum legitimum capitatum. The true Tyme. The true Tyme is a very tender plant, hauing hard and hoary brittle branches, spreading from a small wooddy stemme, about a foote and a halfe high, whereon are set at seuerall ioynts, and by spaces, many small, long, whitish, or hoary greene leaues, of a quicke sent and taste: at the tops of the branches stand small long whitish greene heads, somewhat like vnto the heads of Stoechas, made as it were of many leaues or scales, out of which start forth small purplish flowers (and in some white, as Bellonius saith) after which commeth small seede, that soone falleth out, and if it be not care∣fully gathered, is soone lost, which made (I thinke) Theophrastus to write, that this Tyme was to be sowne of the flowers, as not hauing any other seede: the root is small and wooddy. This holdeth not his leaues in Winter, no not about Seuill in Spaine, where it groweth aboundantly, as Clusius recordeth, finding it there naked or spoiled of leaues. And will not abide our Winters, but perisheth wholly, roote and all. 2. Serpillum hortense siue maius. Garden wilde Tyme. The wilde Tyme that is cherished in gardens groweth vpright, but yet is lowe, with diuers slender branches, and small round greene leaues, somewhat like vnto small fine Marierome, and smelling somewhat like vnto it: the flowers growe in roundels at the toppes of the branches, of a purplish colour: And in another of this kinde they are of a pure white colour. There is another also like hereunto, that smelleth somewhat like vnto Muske; and therefore called Muske Tyme, whose greene leaues are not so small as the former, but larger and longer. 3. Serpillum Citratum. Lemon Tyme. The wilde Tyme that smelleth like vnto a Pomecitron or Lemon, hath many weake branches trayling on the ground, like vnto the first described wilde Tyme, with small darke greene leaues, thinly or sparsedly set on them, and smelling like vnto a Lemon, with whitish flowers at the toppes in roundels or spikes. 4. Serpillum aureum siue verficolor. Guilded or embroidered Tyme. This kinde of wilde Tyme hath small hard branches lying or leaning to the ground, with small party coloured leaues vpon them, diuided into stripes or edges, of a gold yellow colour, the rest of the leafe abiding greene, which for the variable mixture or placing of the yellow, hath caused it to be called embroidered or guilded Tyme. The Place. The first groweth as is said before, about Seuill in Spaine, in very great aboundance as Clusius saith; and as Bellonius saith, very plentifully on the mountaines through all Greece. The others growe some in this Country, and some in others: but wee preserue them with all the care wee can in our gardens, for the sweete and pleasant sents and varieties they yeeld. The Time. The first flowreth not vntill August; the rest in Iune and Iuly. The Names. Their names are seuerally set downe in their titles, as is sufficient to distinguish them; and therefore I shall not neede to trouble you any fur∣ther with them.
The Vertues. The true Tyme is a speciall helpe to melancholicke and spleneticke dis∣eases, as also to flatulent humours, either in the vpper or lower parts of the body. The oyle that is Chimically drawne out of ordinary Tyme, is vsed (as the whole herbe is, in the stead of the true) in pils for the head and sto∣mach. It is also much vsed for the toothach, as many other such like hot oyles are. CHAP. CXXXII. Hyssopus. Hyssope. THere are many varieties of Hyssope, beside the common or ordinary, which I reserue for the Kitchen garden, and intend onely in this place to giue you the knowledge of some more rare: viz. of such as are noursed vp by those that are curious, and fit for this garden: for there are some other, that must be remem∣bred in the Physicke garden, or garden of Simples, or else in a generall worke. 1. Hyssopus folijs niueis. White Hyssope. This white Hyssope is of the same kinde and smell with the common Hyssope; but differeth, in that this many times hath diuers leaues, that are wholly of a white co∣lour, with part of the stalke also: others are parted, the one halfe white, the other halfe greene, and some are wholly greene, or with some spots or stripes of white within the greene, which makes it delightfull to most Gentlewomen. 2. Hyssopus folijs cinereis. Russet Hyssope. As the last hath party coloured leaues, white and greene, so this hath his leaues of an ash-colour, which of some is called russet; and hath no other difference either in forme or smell. 3. Hyssopus aureus. Yellow or golden Hyssope. All the leaues of this Hyssope are wholly yellow, or but a little greene in them, and are of so pleasant a colour, especially in Summer, that they prouoke many Gentlewo∣men to weare them in their heads, and on their armes, with as much delight as many fine flowers can giue: but in Winter their beautifull colour is much decayed, being of a whitish greene, yet recouer themselues againe the next Summer. 4. Hyssopus surculis densis. Double Hyssope. As this kinde of Hyssope groweth lower then the former or ordinary kinde, so it hath more branches, slenderer, and not so wooddy, leaning somewhat downe toward the ground, so wonderfully thicke set with leaues, that are like vnto the other, but of a darker greene colour, and somewhat thicker withall, that it is the onely fine sweete herbe, that I know fittest (if any be minded to plant herbes) to set or border a knot of herbes or flowers, because it will well abide, and not growe too wooddy or great, nor be thinne of leaues in one part, when it is thicke in another, so that it may be kept with cutting as smooth and plaine as a table. If it be suffered to growe vp of it selfe alone, it riseth with leaues as before is specified, and flowreth as the common doth, and of the: same sent also, not differing in any thing, but in the thicknesse of the leaues on the stalkes and branches, and the aptnesse to be ordered as the keeper pleaseth.
Chamaedrys. Germander. Lest Germander should be vtterly forgotten, as not worthy of our Garden, seeing many (as I said in my treatise or introduction to this Garden) doe border knots there∣with: let me at the leaft giue it a place, although the last, being more vsed as a strewing herbe for the house, then for any other vse. It is (I thinke) sufficiently knowne to haue many branches, with small and somewhat round endented leaues on them, and purplish gaping flowers: the rootes spreading far abroad, and rising vp againe in many places. The Place. These Hyssopes haue beene most of them noursed vp of long time in our English Gardens, but from whence their first originall should be, is not well knowne. The Germander also is onely in Gardens, and not wilde. The Time. They flower in Iune and Iuly. The Names. The seuerall names whereby they are knowne to vs, are set forth in their titles; and therefore I neede not here say more of them then onely this, that neyther they here set downe, nor the common or ordinary sort, nor any of the rest not here expressed, are any of them the true Hyssope of the ancient Greeke Writers, but supposititiae, vsed in the stead thereof. The Germander, from the forme of the leaues like vnto small oaken leaues, had the name Cha∣maedrys giuen it, which signifieth a dwarfe Oake. The Vertues. The common Hyssope is much vsed in all pectorall medicines, to cut fleagme, and to cause it easily to be auoided. It is vsed of many people in the Country, to be laid vnto cuts or fresh wounds, being bruised, and ap∣plyed eyther alone, or with a little Sugar. It is much vsed as a sweet herbe, to be in the windowes of an house. I finde it much commended against the Falling Sicknesse, especially being made into Pils after this manner: Of Hyssope, Horhound, and Castor, of each halfe a dramme, of Peony rootes (the male kinde is onely fit to be vsed for this purpose) two drams, of Assa faetida one scruple: Let them be beaten, and made into pils with the iuyce of Hyssope; which being taken for seuen dayes together at night going to bed, is held to be effectual to giue much ease, if not thoroughly to cure those that are troubled with that disease. The vse of Germander ordinarily is as Tyme, Hyssope, and other such herbes, to border a knot, whereunto it is often appropriate, and the rather, that it might be cut to serue (as I said) for a strewing herbe for the house among others. For the physicall vse it ser∣ueth in diseases of the splene, and the stopping of vrine, and to procure wo∣mens courses. Thus haue I led you through all my Garden of Pleasure, and shewed you all the va∣rieties of nature noursed therein, pointing vnto them, and describing them one after another. And now lastly (according to the vse of our old ancient Fathers) I bring you to rest on the Grasse, which yet shall not be without some delight, and that not the least of all the rest.
1 Thymum legitimum. The true Tyme. 2 Serpillum maius bortense. Garcen walde Tyme. 3 Serpillum Citratum. Lemon Tyme. 4 Hyssopus verfiolo siue aureus. Golden Hyssope. 5 Chamaedrys. Germander. 6 Spartum Austriacum siue Gramen plumarium minus. The lesser fea∣ther Grasse. 7 Gramen striatum vel sulcatum Painted Grasse or Ladies Laces. depiction of flowers
CHAP. CXXXIII. Gramina. Grasses. THere are among an infinite number (as I may so say) of Grasses, a few onely which I thinke fit to be planted in this Garden, both for the rarity of them, and also for your delight, and the excellent beauty that is in them aboue ma∣ny other plants. One of them hath long agoe bin respected, and cherished in the coun∣try gardens of many Gentlewomen, and others. The others are knowne but vnto a few. 1. Gramen striatum. Painted Grasse or Ladies laces. This kinde of Grasse hath many stiffe, hard, round stalkes, full of ioynts, whereon are set at euery ioynt one long leafe, somewhat broad at the bottome, where it com∣passeth the stalke, and smaller to the end, where it is sharpe pointed, hard or rough in handling, and striped all the length of the leafe with white streakes or lines, that they seeme party coloured laces of white and greene: the tops of the stalkes are furnished with long spikie tufts, like vnto the tufts of Couch Grasse: the rootes are small, white, and threddy, like the rootes of other Grasses. 2. Gramen Plumarium minus. The lesser Feather-Grasse. This lesser Feather-Grasse hath many small, round, and very long leaues or blades, growing in tufts, much finer and smaller then any other Grasse that I know, being al∣most like vnto haires, and of a fresh greene colour in Summer, but changing into gray, like old hay in Winter, being indeede all dead, and neuer reuiuing; yet hardly to be plucked away vntill the Spring, and then other greene leaues or rushes rise vp by them, and in their stead, and are aboue a foote in length: from the middle of these tufts come forth rounder and bigger rushes, which are the stalkes, and which haue a chaffie round eare about the middle thereof, which when it is full growne, is somewhat higher then the toppes of the leaues or rushes, opening it selfe (being before close) at the top, and shewing forth three or foure long ayles or beards, one aboue another, which bend themselues a little downewards (if they stand ouer long before they are gathered, and will fall off, and be blowne away with the winde) being so finely feathered on both sides, all the length of the beard, and of a pale or grayish colour, that no feather in the taile of the Bird of Paradise can be finer, or to be compared with them, hauing sticking at the end of euery one of them, within the eare, a small, long, whitish, round, hard, and very sharpe pointed graine, like vnto an oaten graine, that part of the stalke of the feather that is next vnder it, and aboue the seede for some two or three inches, being stiffe and hard, and twining or curling it selfe, if it be suffered to stand too long, or to fall away, otherwise being straight as the feather it selfe: the roote is composed of many long, hard, small threddy strings, which runne deepe and far, and will not wil∣lingly be remoued, in that it gaineth strength euery yeare by standing. 3. Gramen Plumarium maius. The greater Feather-Grasse. The greater Feather-Grasse is like vnto the lesser, but that both the leaues and the feathers are greater, and nothing so fine, grosser also, and of lesse beauty and respect, though whiter then it; and therefore is not so much regarded: for I haue knowne, that many Gentlewomen haue vsed the former lesser kinde, being tyed in tufts, to set them in stead of feathers about their beds, where they haue lyen after childe-bearing, and at other times also, when as they haue been much admited of the Ladies and Gentles that haue come to visit them. The Place.
The first of these Grasses, as Lobel saith, groweth naturally in the woods and hils of Sauoy. It hath long agoe beene receiued into our English gar∣dens.  The second, as Clusius saith, in Austria, from whence also (as I take it) the greater came, and are both in the gardens of those, that are curious obseruers of these delights. The Time. The first is in its pride for the leaues all the Spring and Summer, yeel∣ding his bush in Iune. The other giue their feather-like sprigs in Iuly and August, and quickly (as I said) are shed, if they be not carefully gathered. The Names. The first is called by Lobel Gramen sulcatum, or strutum album; of others Gramen pictum. The French call it Aiguellettes d'armes, of the fashion that their Ensignes, Pennons, or Streamers vsed in wars were of, that is, like vnto a party coloured curtaine. In English vsually Ladies laces, and Pain∣ted Grasse. The first of the other two is called Gramen plumarium or plumo∣sum, and minus is added for the distinction of it. Clusius calleth it Spartum Austriacum, of the likenesse and place where he found it. The last is called Gramen plumarium, or plumosum mains, The greater Feather-Grasse. The Vertues. These kindes of Grasses are not in any time or place that I doe heare of applyed to any Physicall vse; and therefore of them I will say no more: but here I will end the prime part of this worke.
THE ORDERING OF THE KITCHEN GARDEN. CHAP. I. The situation of a Kitchen Garden, or Garden of Herbes, and what sort of manure is fittest to helpe the decaying of the soyle thereof.
HAuing giuen you the best rules and instructions that I can for your flower Garden, and all the flowers that are fit to furnish it, I now proceede to your herbe garden, which is not of the least respect belonging to any mans house, nor vtterly to bee neglected for the many vtilities are to be had from it, both for the Masters profit and pleasure, and the meynies content and nourishment: all which if I should here set down, I had a large field to wander in, and matter sufficient to entreat of, but this worke permitteth not that libertie: and I thinke there are but few but eyther know it already, or conceiue it sufficiently in their minds. Passing therefore no further in such discourses, I come to the matter in hand, which is to shew you where the fittest place is for an herbe garden. As before I shewed you that the beautie of any worthy house is much the more commended for the pleasant situation of the garden of flowers, or of pleasure, to be in the sight and full prospect of all the chiefe and choisest roomes of the house; so contrariwise, your herbe garden should bee on the one or other side of the house, and those best and choyse roomes: for the many different sents that arise from the herbes, as Cabbages, Onions, &c. are scarce well pleasing to perfume the lodgings of any house; and the many ouer∣tures and breaches as it were of many of the beds thereof, which must necessarily bee, are also as little pleasant to the sight. But for priuate mens houses, who must like their habitations as they fall vnto them, and cannot haue time or meanes to alter them, they must make a vertue of necessity, and conuert their places to their best aduantage, by making their profit their chiefest pleasure, and making one place serue for all vses. The choyce of ground for this Garden, is (as I said before) where it is fat, fertill and good, there needeth the lesse labour and cost: and contrariwise, where it is cold, wet, dry or barren, there must bee the more helpes still added to keepe it in heart. For this Garden by reason of the much and continuall stirring therein, the herbes and rootes drawing out the substance of the fertilitie thereof more aboundantly then in the former, must be continually holpen with soyle, or else few things of goodnesse or worth will come forward therein. The stable soyle of horses is best and more proper for any colde grounds, for being the hottest, it will cause any the seedes for this Garden to prosper well, and be more forward then in any other ground that is not so holpen. The stable soyle of Cattell is of a colder and moister nature, and is therefore more proper for  the hot sandy or grauelly grounds, and although it bee longer before it bee brought to mould then that of horses, yet it will outlast it more then twice so long. Let euery one therefore take according to the nature of the ground such helpes as are most fit and conuenient, as I haue here and before shewed. But I doe here ingenuously confesse my opinion of these forcings and helpings of ground, that howsoeuer it doth much good to some particular things, which because they delight in heate, and cannot be brought to perfection without it in this our Countrey, which is colder then their naturall from whence they are brought, must therfore haue artificiall helpes to forward them; yet for many other things the compost doth much alter and abate the naturall vigour, and quickenesse of taste, that is perceiued in them that grow in a naturall fat or sandy soile that is not so holpen. CHAP. II. The forme of a Garden of herbes for necessary vses, with the ordering thereof. AS our former Garden of pleasure is wholly formable in euery part with squares, trayles, and knots, and to bee still maintained in their due forme and beautie: so on the contrary side this Garden cannot long conserue any forme, for that euery part thereof is subiect to mutation and alteration. For although it is conuenient that many herbes doe grow by themselues on beds, cast out into some pro∣portion fit for them, as Tyme, Hissope, Sage, &c. yet many others may bee sowen to∣gether on a plot of ground of that largenesse that may serue euery mans particular vse as he shall haue occasion to employ it, as Reddish, Lettice and Onions, which after they are growne vp together may be drawne vp and taken away, as there is occasion to spend them: but Carrots or Parsneps being sowen with others must bee suffered to grow last, because they require a longer time before they be fit to be taken vp. Other herbes require some large compasse of ground whereon they may grow of themselues without any other herbes growing among them, as Artichokes, Cowcumbers, Melons, Pompions. And some will doe so with their Cabbages also, but the best and most fru∣gall way now vsed, is to plant them round about the border of your plot or ground whereon you plant Cowcumbers, Pompions, or other things, in that by this meanes so much ground will be well saued, and the other things be no whit hindered thereby, which else a great deale of ground must be employed for them apart. So that by this that I haue here said, you may perceiue the forme of this Garden is for the most part, to bee still out of forme and order, in that the continuall taking vp of the herbes and rootes that are sowen and planted, causeth the beds or parts of this Garden to lye broken, dismembered, and out of the order that at the first it was put into. Remem∣ber herewithall that (as I said before) this Garden requireth the continuall helpe of soyle to be brought into it, in that the plenty of these manner of herbes and rootes doe so much waste the fertilitie and fatnesse of the ground, that without continuall refreshing it would quickly become so poore and barren, that it would not yeelde the worth of the seede. The ordinary time to soyle a Garden, is to bring in manure or dung before Christmas, and eyther bury it some small depth, not too deepe, or else to lay it vpon the ground that the winter frostes may pierce it, and then turne it shallow into the ground to sow your seeds in the Spring.
CHAP. III. How to order diuers Garden herbes, both for their sowing, spending, and gathering of the seede.
OVr chiefest and greatest Gardiners now adaies, doe so prouide for themselues euery yeare, that from their owne grounds they gather the seede of many herbes that they sowe againe: for hauing gained the best kind of diuers herbes, they will be still furnished with the same, and be not to seeke euery yeare for new that oftentimes will not yeelde them halfe the profit that their choyce seede will: I say of many herbes, but not of all; for the best of them all hath not ground sufficient for all sorts, nor will our climate bring some to that perfection that other forraine doth, and therefore the seede of some things are continually brought from beyond Sea vnto vs. And againe although our chiefe Gardiners doe still prouide their owne seede of diuers things from their owne ground, because as I said it is of the best kinde, yet you must vn∣derstand also, that good store of the same sortes of seeds are brought from beyond the Seas, for that which is gathered in this Land is not sufficient to serue euery mans vse in the whole Kingdome by many parts; yet still it is true, that our English seede of many things is better then any that commeth from beyond the Seas: as for example, Red∣dish, Lettice, Carrots, Parsneps, Turneps, Cabbages, and Leekes, of all which I in∣tend to write in this place; for these are by them so husbanded, that they doe not sow their owne grounds with any other seede of these sorts but their owne: which that you may know the manner how to doe, I will here set it downe, that euery one may haue the best directions if they will follow them. Of Reddish there are two sorts, one more early then the other: they vse therfore to sow their early Reddish first, that they may haue the earliest profit of them, which is more worth in one fortnight, then in a moneth after. And to effect this they haue some artificiall helps also; which are these: They vse to digge vp a large plot of ground where they intend to sow their seede a lit∣tle before or after Christmas, casting it into high balkes or ridges fiue or sixe foote a∣sunder, which they suffer to lye and take all the extreame frosts in Ianuary to mellow the earth, and when the frostes are past, they then beginne to bring into it good store of fresh stable dung, which they laye neyther too deepe nor too thicke, and couer it with the mould a hand breadth thicknesse aboue the dung, which doth giue such a warmth and comfort to whatsoeuer is sowen thereon, that it forceth it forward much sooner then any other way can doe: And to preuent both the frostes, and the cold bitter windes which often spoyle their seede new sprung vp, they vse to set great high and large mattes made of reedes, tyed together, and fastened vnto strong stakes, thrust into the ground to keepe them vp from falling, or being blowne down with the winde; which mattes they place on the North and East side to breake the force of these winds, and are so sure and safe a defence, that a bricke wall cannot better defend any thing vnder it, then this fence will. In this manner they doe euery yeare to bring forward their seede to gaine the more by them, and they that will haue Reddish early, must take the same course. The other sort of Reddish for the most part is sowen in Februa∣rie, a fortnight after the other at the least, and likewise euery moneth after vnto Sep∣tember, that they may haue young continually. For the blacke Reddish, although ma∣ny in many places doe sowe it in the same time, and in the same manner that the ordi∣nary is sowen, yet the nature thereof is to runne vp to seede more speedily then the other, if it haue so rich ground to grow vpon, and therefore the best time to sow it is in August, that so it may abide all winter, wherein is the chiefest time for the spending thereof, and to keepe it vntill the beginning of the next yeare from running vp to seede the gathering whereof, as also of the other sort, is all after one manner, that is, to be pulled vp when the pods change whitish, and then hanged vpon bushes, pales, or such other thing, vntill they bee thorough dry, and then beaten or thrashed out vpon a smooth plancher, or vpon clothes, as euery ones store is, and their conueniencie. Let∣tice is sowen oftentimes with the early Reddish, in the same manner before said, that they may haue Lettice likewise as early as the time of the year will permit them, which  they pull vp where they grow too thicke, spending them first, and so taking, vp from time to time, vntill they stand two foote in sunder one from another, and beginne to spindle and shoote vp for seede. In this is vsed some arte to make the plants strong to giue the better seede without danger of rotting or spoyling with the wet, which of∣ten happeneth to those about whom this caution is not obserued: Before your Lettice is shot vp, marke out the choysest and strongest plantes which are fittest to grow for seede, and from those when they are a foote high, strippe away with your hand the leaues that grow lowest vpon the stalke next the ground, which might rot, spoyle or hinder them from bearing so good seede; which when it is neere to be ripe, the stalkes must be cut off about the middle, and layde vpon mats or clothes in the Sunne, that it may there fully ripen and be gathered; for it would be blowne away with the winde if it should be suffered to abide on the stalkes long. Parsneps must be sowen on a deep trenched mellow ground, otherwise they may run to seede the first yeare, which then are nothing worth: or else the rootes will be small staruelings and short, and runne in∣to many spires or branches, whereby they will not bee of halfe the worth. Some vse to sow them in August and September, that so they may bee well growne to serue to spend in Lent following, but their best time is in February, that the Summers growth may make them the fairer and greater. When they runne vp to seede, you shall take the principall or middle heades, for those carry the Master seede, which is the best, and will produce the fairest rootes againe. You shall hardly haue all the seede ripe at one instant, for vsually the chiefest heads will be fallen before the other are ripe: you must therefore still looke them ouer, and cut them as they ripen. Carrots are vsually sowen in March and Aprill, and if it chance that some of them doe runne vp for seede the same year, they are to be weeded out, for neyther the seed nor roots of them are good: You must likewise pull them vp when they are too thicke, if you will haue them grow fair, or for seed, that they may grow at the least three or foure foot in sunder: the stalkes of Carrots are limber, and fall downe to the ground; they must therefore be sustained by poles layde acrosse on stalkes thrust into the ground, and tyed to the poles and stalkes to keepe them vp from rotting or spoyling vpon the ground: the seed hereof is not all ripe at once, but must be tended and gathered as it ripeneth, and layd to dry in some dry chamber or floore, and then beaten out with a stick, and winnowed from the refuse. Turneps are sowne by themselues vpon a good ground in the end of Iuly, and beginning of August, to haue their rootes best to spend in winter; for it often happe∣neth that those seedes of Turneps that are sowen in the Spring, runne vp to seede the same yeare, and then it is not accounted good. Many doe vse to sow Turneps on those grounds from whence the same yeare they haue taken off Reddish and Lettice, to make the greater profit of the ground, by hauing two crops of increase in one yeare. The stalkes of Turneps will bend downe to the ground, as Carrots doe, but yet must not be bound or ordered in that manner, but suffered to grow without staking or binding, so as they grow of some good distance in sunder: when the seede beginneth to grow ripe, be very carefull to preserue it from the birds, which will be most busie to deuour them. You shall vnderstand likewise that many doe account the best way to haue the fairest and most principall seede from all these fore-recited herbes, that after they are sowen, and risen to a reasonable growth, they be transplanted into fresh ground. Cab∣bages also are not only sowen for the vse of their heads to spend for meat, but to ga∣ther their seede likewise, which howsoeuer some haue endeauoured to doe, yet few haue gained good seede, because our sharpe hard frostes in winter haue spoyled and rotted their stockes they preserued for the purpose; but others haue found out a bet∣ter and a more sure way, which is, to take vp your stocks that are fittest to be preserued, and bring them into the house, and there wrap them eyther in clothes, or other things to defend them from the cold, and hang them vp in a dry place, vntill the beginning of March following, then planting them in the ground, and a little defend them at the first with straw cast ouer them from the cold nights, thereby you may be sure to haue perfect good seede, if your kinde be of the best: Sowe your seed in the moneths of February or March, and transplant them in May where they may stand to grow for your vse, but be carefull to kill the wormes or Caterpillers that else will deuoure all your leaues, and be carefull also that none of the leaues bee broken in the planting, or otherwise rubbed, for that oftentimes hindereth the well closing of them. Leekes are
for the most part wholly noursed vp from the seede that is here gathered; and because there is not so much store of them either sowne or spent, as there is of Onions by the twentieth part, we are still the more carefull to be prouided from our owne labours; yet there be diuers Gardiners in this Kingdome, that doe gather some small quantity of Onion seede also for their owne or their priuate friends spending. The sowing of them both is much about one time and manner, yet most vsually Leeks are sowne later then Onions, and both before the end of March at the furthest; yet some sowe Onions from the end of Iuly to the beginning of September, for their Winter prouision. Those that are sowne in the Spring, are to be taken vp and transplanted on a fresh bed prepa∣red for the purpose, or else they will hardly abide a Winter; but hauing taken roote before Winter, they will beare good seede in the Summer following: You must stake both your Leekes and your Onion beds, and with poles laid a crosse, binde your lop∣ple headed stalkes vnto them, on high as well as belowe, or else the winde and their owne weight will beare them downe to the ground, and spoile your seede. You must thinne them, that is, pull vp continually after they are first sprung vp those that growe too thicke, as you doe with all the other herbes before spoken of, that they may haue the more roome to thriue. Of all these herbes and rootes before spoken of, you must take the likeliest and fairest to keepe for your seede; for if you should not take the best, what hope of good seede can you expect? The time for the spending of these herbes and rootes, not particularly mentioned, is vntill they begin to runne vp for seede, or vntill they are to be transplanted for seede, or else vntill Winter, while they are good, as euery one shall see cause. CHAP. IIII. How to order Artichokes, Melons, Cowcumbers, and Pompions.
THere are certaine other herbes to be spoken of, which are wholly noursed vp for their fruit sake, of whom I shall not need to say much, being they are so frequent in euery place. Artichokes being planted of faire and large slips, ta∣ken from the roote in September and October (yet not too late) will most of them beare fruit the next yeare, so that they be planted in well dunged ground, and the earth raised vp like vnto an Anthill round about each roote, to defend them the better from the extreame frosts in Winter. Others plant slips in March and Aprill, or sooner, but although some of them will beare fruit the same yeare, yet all will not. And indeede many doe rather choose to plant in the spring then in the fall, for that oftentimes an extreame hard Winter following the new setting of slips, when they haue not taken sufficient heart and roote in the ground, doth vtterly pierce and perish them, when as they that are set in the Spring haue the whole Summers growth, to make them strong before they feele any sharpe frosts, which by that time they are the better able to beare. Muske Melons haue beene begun to bee noursed vp but of late dayes in this Land, wherein although many haue tryed and endeauoured to bring them to perfecti∣on, yet few haue attained vnto it: but those rules and orders which the best and skil∣fullest haue vsed, I will here set downe, that who so will, may haue as good and ripe Melons as any other in this Land. The first thing you are to looke vnto, is to pro∣uide you a peece of ground fit for the purpose, which is either a sloping or sheluing banke, lying open and opposite to the South Sunne, or some other fit place not shel∣uing, and this ground also you must so prepare, that all the art you can vse about it to make it rich is little enough; and therefore you must raise it with meere stable soyle, thorough rotten & well turned vp, that it may be at the least three foote deepe thereof, which you must cast also into high beds or balkes, with deepe trenches or furrowes be∣tweene, so as the ridges may be at the least a foot and a halfe higher then the furrowes; for otherwise it is not possible to haue good Melons growe ripe. The choise of your seede also is another thing of especiall regard, and the best is held to be Spanish, and not French, which hauing once gained, be sure to haue still of the same while they last  good, that you may haue the seede of your owne ripe Melons from them that haue eaten them, or saue some of the best your selfe for the purpose. I say while they last good; for many are of opinion, that no seede of Muske Melons gathered in England, will endure good to sowe againe here aboue the third yeare, but still they must be re∣newed from whence you had your choisest before. Then hauing prepared a hot bed of dung in Aprill, set your seedes therein to raise them vp, and couer them, and order them with as great care or greater then Cowcumbers, &c. are vsed, that when they are ready, they may be transplanted vpon the beds or balkes of that ground you had be∣fore prepared for them, and set them at the least two yards in sunder, euery one as it were in a hole, with a circle of dung about them, which vpon the setting being wate∣red with water that hath stood in the Sunne a day or two, and so as often as neede is to water, couer them with strawe (some vse great hollow glasses like vnto bell heads) or some such other things, to defend them both from the cold euenings or dayes, and the heate of the Sunne, while they are young and new planted. There are some that take vpon them great skill, that mislike of the raising vp of Melons, as they doe also of Cowcumbers, on a hot bed of horse dung, but will put two or three seedes in a place in the very ground where they shall stand and growe, and thinke without that former manner of forcing them forwards, that this their manner of planting will bring them on fast and sure enough, in that they will plucke away some of the worst and weakest, if too many rise vp together in a place; but let them know for certaine, that howsoeuer for Cowcumbers their purpose and order may doe reasonable well, where the ground is rich and good, and where they striue not to haue them so early, as they that vse the other way, for Muske Melons, which are a more tender fruit, requiring greater care and trouble in the noursing, and greater and stronger heate for the ripening, they must in our cold climate haue all the art vsed vnto them that may be, to bring them on the more early, and haue the more comfort of the Sunne to ripen them kindly, or else they will not bee worth the labour and ground. After you haue planted them as aforesaid, some of good skill doe aduise, that you be carefull in any dry season, to giue them wa∣ter twice or thrice euery weeke while they are young, but more afterward when they are more growne, and that in the morning especially, yea and when the fruit is growne somewhat great, to water the fruit it selfe with a watering pot in the heate of the day, is of so good effect, that it ripeneth them much faster, and will giue them the better taste and smell, as they say. To take likewise the fruit, and gather it at the full time of his ripenesse is no small art; for if it be gathered before his due time to be presently eaten, it will be hard and greene, and not eate kindly; and likewise if it be suffered too long, the whole goodnesse will be lost: You shall therefore know, that it is full time to ga∣ther them to spend presently, when they begin to looke a little yellowish on the out∣side, and doe smell full and strong; but if you be to send them farre off, or keepe them long vpon any occasion, you shall then gather them so much the earlier, that accor∣ding to the time of the carriage and spending, they may ripen in the lying, being kept dry, and couered with woollen clothes: When you cut one to eate, you shall know it to be ripe and good, if the seede and pulpe about them in the middle be very wate∣rish, and will easily be separated from the meate, and likewise if the meate looke yel∣low, and be mellow, and not hard or greene, and taste full and pleasant, and not wate∣rish: The vsuall manner to eate them is with pepper and salt, being pared and sliced, and to drowne them in wine, for feare of doing more harme. Cowcumbers and Pom∣pions, after they are noursed vp in the bed of hot dung, are to be seuerally transplanted, each of them on a large plot of ground, a good distance in sunder: but the Pompions more, because their branches take vp a great deale more ground, & besides, will require a great deale more watering, because the fruit is greater. And thus haue you the orde∣ring of those fruits which are of much esteeme, especially the two former, with all the better sort of persons; and the third kinde is not wholly refused of any, although it serueth most vually for the meaner and poorer sort of people, after the first early ripe are spent.
CHAP. V. The ordering of diuers sorts of herbes for the pot, for meate, and for the table. TYme, Sauory, and Hyssope, are vsually sowne in the Spring on beds by them∣selues, euerie one a part; but they that make a gaine by selling to others the young rootes, to set the knots or borders of Gardens, doe for the most part sowe them in Iuly and August, that so being sprung vp before Winter, they will be the fitter to be taken vp in the Spring following, to serue any mans vse that would haue them. Sage, Lauender, and Rosemary, are altogether set in the Spring, by slipping the old stalkes, and taking the youngest and likeliest of them, thrusting them either twined or otherwise halfe a foote deepe into the ground, and well watered vpon the setting; if any seasonable weather doe follow, there is no doubt of their well thri∣uing: the hot Sunne and piercing drying Windes are the greatest hinderances to them; and therefore I doe aduise none to set too soone in the Spring, nor yet in Autumne, as many doe practise: for I could neuer see such come to good, for the extremity of the Winter comming vpon them so soone after their setting, will not suffer their young shootes to abide, not hauing taken sufficient strength in the ground, to maintain them∣selues against such violence, which doth often pierce the strongest plants. Marierome and Bassill are sowne in the Spring, yet not too early; for they are tender plants, and doe not spring vntill the weather bee somewhat warme: but Bassill would bee sowne dry, and not haue any water of two or three daies after the sowing, else the seede will turne to a gelly in the ground. Some vse to sowe the seed of Rosemary, but it seldome abideth the first Winter, because the young plants being small, and not of sufficient strength, cannot abide the sharpnese of some Winters, notwithstanding the couering of them, which killeth many old plants; but the vsuall way is to slippe and set, and so they thriue well. Many doe vse to sowe all or the most sorts of Pot-herbes together on one plot of ground, that they neede not to goe farre to gather all the sorts they would vse. There are many sorts of them well knowne vnto all, yet few or none doe vse all sorts, but as euery one liketh; some vse those that others refuse, and some esteem those not to bee wholesome and of a good rellish, which others make no scruple of. The names of them are as followeth, and a short relation of their sowing or planting. Rosemary, Tyme, and Sauorie are spoken of before, and Onions and Leekes. Mints are to bee set with their rootes in some by-place, for that their rootes doe creepe so farre vnder ground, that they quickly fill vp the places neare adioyning, if they be not puld vp. Clarie is to be fowne, and seedeth and dyeth the next yeare, the herbe is strong, and therefore a little thereof is sufficient. Nep is sowne, and dyeth often after seeding, few doe vse it, and that but a little at a time: both it and Clarie are more vsed in Tansies then in Broths. Costmarie is to be set of rootes, the leaues are vsed with some in their Broths, but with more in their Ale. Pot Marierome is set of rootes, being separated in sunder. Penniroyall is to be set of the small heads that haue rootes, it creepeth and sprea∣deth quickly. All isanders are to be sowne of seede, the tops of the rootes with the greene leaues are vsed in Lent especially. Parsley is a common herbe, and is sowne of seede, it seedeth the next yeare and dyeth: the rootes are more vsed in broths then the leaues, and the leaues almost with all sorts of meates. Fennell is sowne of seede, and abideth many yeares yeelding seede: the rootes al∣so are vsed in broths, and the leaues more seldome, yet serue to trimme vp many fish meates. Borage is sowne of seede, and dyeth the next yeare after, yet once being suffered to seede in a Garden, will still come of it owne shedding.
Buglosse commeth of seede, but abideth many yeares after it hath giuen seede, if it stand not in the coldest place of the Garden. Marigolds are sowne of seede, and may be after transplanted, they abide two or three yeares, if they be not set in too cold a place: the leaues and flowers are both vsed. Langedebeefe is sowne of seede, which shedding it selfe will hardly be destroyed in a Garden. Arrach is to be sowne of seede, this likewise will rise euery yeare of it owne seed, if it be suffered to shed it selfe. Beetes are sowne of seede, and abideth some yeares after, still giuing seede. Blites are vsed but in some places; for there is a generall opinion held of them, that they are naught for the eyes: they are sowne euery yeare of seede. Bloodwort once sowne abideth many yeares, if the extremity of the frosts kill it not, and seedeth plentifully. Patience is of the same nature, and vsed in the same manner. French Mallowes are to be sowne of seede, and will come of it owne sowing, if it be suffered to shed it selfe. Ciues are planted onely by parting the rootes; for it neuer giueth any seede at all. Garlicke is ordered in the same manner, by parting and planting the rootes euerie yeare. These be all the sorts are vsed with vs for that purpose, whereas I said before, none vseth all, but euery one will vse those they like best: and so much shall suffice for pot∣herbes. CHAP. VI. The manner and ordering of many sorts of herbes and rootes for Sallets. IF I should set downe all the sorts of herbes that are vsually gathered for Sallets, I should not onely speake of Garden herbes, but of many herbes, &c. that growe wilde in the fields, or else be but weedes in a Garden; for the vsuall manner with many, is to take the young buds and leaues of euery thing almost that groweth, as well in the Garden as in the Fields, and put them all together, that the taste of the one may amend the rellish of the other: But I will only shew you those that are sown or planted in gardens for that purpose. Asparagus is a principall & delectable Sallet herbe, whose young shootes when they are a good handfull high aboue the ground, are cut an inch within the ground, which being boyled, are eaten with a little vinegar and butter, as a Sallet of great delight. Their ordering with the best Gardiners is on this wise: When you haue prouided seede of the best kinde, you must sowe it either before Christmas, as most doe, or before the end of February; the later you sowe, the later and the more hardly will they spring: after they are growne vp, they are to be transplanted in Au∣tumne on a bed well trenched in with dung; for else they will not bee worth your la∣bour, and set about a foote distance in sunder, and looke that the more carefull you are in the replanting of them, the better they will thriue, and the sooner great: af∣ter fiue or six yeares standing they vsually doe decay; and therefore they that striue to haue continually faire and great heads, doe from seede raise vp young for their store. You must likewise see that you cut not your heads or young shoote too nigh, or too much, that is, to take away too many heads from a roote, but to leaue a sufficient num∣ber vncut, otherwise it will kill the heart of your rootes the sooner, causing them to dye, or to giue very small heads or shootes; for you may well consider with your selfe, that if the roote haue not head enough left it aboue the ground to shoote greene this yeare, it will not, nor cannot prosper vnder ground to giue encrease the next yeare. The ordering of Lettice I haue spoken of before, and shall not neede here to repeate what hath beene already said, but referre you thereunto for the sowing, planting, &c. onely I will here shew you the manner of ordering them for Sallets. There are some sorts of Lettice that growe very great, and close their heads, which are called Cab∣bage
Lettice, both ordinary and extraordinary, and there are other sorts of great Let∣tice that are open, and close not, or cabbage not at all, which yet are of an excellent kinde, if they be vsed after that especiall manner is fit for them, which is, That when they are planted (for after they are sowne, they must be transplanted) of a reasonable distance in sunder, and growne to be of some bignesse, euery one of them must bee tyed together with bast or thread toward the toppes of the leaues, that by this meanes all the inner leaues may growe whitish, which then are to be cut vp and vsed: for the keeping of the leaues close doth make them taste delicately, and to bee very tender. And these sorts of Lettice for the most part are spent after Summer is past, when o∣ther Lettice are not to be had. Lambes Lettice or Corne Sallet is an herbe, which abi∣ding all Winter, is the first Sallet herbe of the yeare that is vsed before any ordinarie Lettice is ready; it is therefore vsually sowne in August, when the seede thereof is ripe. Purslane is a Summer Sallet herbe, and is to be sowne in the Spring, yet some∣what late, because it is tender, and ioyeth in warmth; and therefore diuers haue sowne it vpon those beddes of dung, whereon they noursed vp their Cowcum∣bers, &c. after they are taken away, which being well and often watered, hath yeel∣ded Sallet vntill the end of the yeare. Spinach is sowne in the Spring, of all for the most part that vse it, but yet if it be sowne in Summer it will abide greene all the Win∣ter, and then seedeth quickly: it is a Sallet that hath little or no taste at all therein, like as Lettice and Purslane; and therefore Cookes know how to make many a good dish of meate with it, by putting Sugar and Spice thereto. Coleworts are of diuers kinds, and although some of them are wholly spent among the poorer sort of people, yet some kindes of them may be dressed and ordered as may delight a curious palate, which is, that being boyled tender, the middle ribs are taken cold, and laid in dishes, and vinegar and oyle poured thereon, and so eaten. Coleflowers are to be had in this Countrey but very seldome, for that it is hard to meete with good seede: it must bee sowne on beds of dung to force it forward, or else it would perish with the frost be∣fore it had giuen his head of flowers, and transplanted into verie good and rich ground, lest you lose the benefit of your labours. Endiue is of two sorts, the ordinary, and an∣other that hath the edges of the leaues curld or crumpled; it is to be whited, to make it the more dainty Sallet, which is vsually done in this manner: After they are grown to some reasonable greatnesse (but in any case before they shoote forth a stalke in the midst for seede) they are to be taken vp, and the rootes being cut away, lay them to dry or wither for three or foure houres, and then bury them in sand, so as none of them lye one vpon another, or if you can, one to touch another, which by this meanes will change whitish, and thereby become verie tender, and is a Sallet both for Au∣tumne and Winter. Succorie is vsed by some in the same manner, but because it is more bitter then Endiue, it is not so generally vsed, or rather vsed but of a verie few: and whereas Endiue will seede the same yeare it is sowne, and then dye, Succorie abi∣deth manie yeares, the bitternesse thereof causing it to be more Physicall to open ob∣structions; and therefore the flowers pickled vp, as diuers other flowers are vsed to be now adaies, make a delicate Sallet at all times when there is occasion to vse them. Of red Beetes, the rootes are onely vsed both boyled and eaten cold with vinegar and oyle, and is also vsed to trimme vp or garnish forth manie sorts of dishes of meate: the seede of the best kinde will not abide good with vs aboue three yeares, but will dege∣nerate and growe worse; and therefore those that delight therein must be curious, to be prouided from beyond Sea, that they may haue such as will giue delight. Sorrell is an herbe so common, and the vse so well knowne, both for sawce, and to season broths and meates for the sound as well as sicke persons, that I shall not neede to say anie more thereof. Cheruill is a Sallet herbe of much vse, both with French and Dutch, who doe much more delight in herbes of stronger taste then the English doe: it is sowne early, and vsed but a while, because it quickly runneth vp to seede. Sweete Cheruill, or as some call it, Sweete Cis, is so like in taste vnto Anise seede, that it much delighteth the taste among other herbes in a Sallet: the seede is long, thicke, blacke, and cornered, and must be sowne in the end of Autumne, that it may lye in the ground all the Winter, and then it will shoote out in the Spring, or else if it be sowne in the Spring, it will not spring vp that yeare vntill the next: the leaues (as I said be∣fore) are vsed among other herbes: the rootes likewise are not onely cordiall, but also held to be preseruatiue against the Plague, either greene, dryed, or preserud  with sugar. Rampion rootes are a kinde of Sallet with a great many, being boyled tender, and eaten cold with vinegar and pepper. Cresses is an herbe of easie and quick growth, and while it is young eaten eyther alone, or with parsley and other herbes: it is of a strong taste to them that are not accustomed thereunto, but it is much vsed of strangers. Rocket is of the same nature and qualitie, but somewhat stronger in taste: they are both sowen in the Spring, and rise, seede and dye the same yeare. Tarragon is an herbe of as strong a taste as eyther Rocket or Cresses, it abideth and dyeth not euery yeare, nor yet giueth ripe seede (as far as euer could bee found with vs) any yeare, but maketh sufficient increase within the ground, spreading his roots all abroad a great way off. Mustard is a common sawce both with fish and flesh, and the seed thereof (and no part of the plant besides) is well knowne how to be vsed being grownded, as euery one I thinke knoweth. The rootes of horse Radish likewise beeing grownd like Mustard, is vsed both of strangers and our owne nation, as sawce for fish. Tansie is of great vse, almost with all manner of persons in the Spring of the yeare: it is more vsu∣ally planted of the rootes then otherwise; for in that the rootes spread far and neere they may be easily taken away, without any hurt to the rest of the rootes. Burnet, al∣though it be more vsed in wine in the Summer time then any way else, yet it is likewise made a sallet herbe with many, to amend the harsh or weak rellish of some other herbs. Skirrets are better to be sowen of the seed then planted from the roots, and will come on more speedily, and be fairer rootes: they are as often eaten cold as a Sallet, being boyled and the pith taken out, as stewed with butter and eaten warme. Let not Parsley and Fenell be forgotten among your other Sallet herbes, wherof I haue spoken before, and therefore need say no more of them. The flowers of Marigolds pickt cleane from the heads, and pickled vp against winter, make an excellent Sallet when no flowers are to be had in a garden. Cloue Gilloflowers likewise preserued or pickled vp in the same manner (which is stratum super stratum, a lay of flowers, and then strawed ouer with fine dry and poudered Sugar, and so lay after lay strawed ouer, vntill the pot bee full you meane to keepe them in, and after filled vp or couered ouer with vinegar) make a Sallet now adayes in the highest esteeme with Gentles and Ladies of the greatest note: the planting and ordering of them both is spoken of seuerally in their proper places. Goates bearbe that groweth in Gardens only, as well as that which groweth wilde in Medowes, &c. bearing a yellow flower, are vsed as a Sallet, the rootes beeing boyled and pared are eaten cold with vinegar, oyle and pepper; or else stewed with butter and eaten warme as Skirrets, Parsneps &c. And thus haue you here set downe all those most vsuall Sallets are vsed in this Kingdome: I say the most vsuall, or that are noursed vp in Gardens; for I know there are some other wilde herbes and rootes, as Dandelion &c. but they are vsed onely of strangers, and of those whose curiositie searcheth out the whole worke of nature to satisfie their desires. CHAP. VII. Of diuers Physicall herbes fit to be planted in Gardens, to serue for the especiall vses of a familie.
HAuing thus shewed you all the herbes that are most vsually planted in Kitchen Gardens for ordinary vses, let mee also adde a few other that are also noursed vp by many in their Gardens, to preserue health, and helpe to cure such small diseases as are often within the compasse of the Gentlewo∣mens skils, who, to helpe their owne family, and their poore neighbours that are farre remote from Physitians and Chirurgions, take much paines both to doe good vnto them, and to plant those herbes that are conducing to their desires. And although I doe recite some that are mentioned in other places, yet I thought it meete to remem∣ber them altogether in one place. Angelica, the garden kinde, is so good an herbe, that there is no part thereof but is of much vse, and all cordiall and preseruatiue from infectious or contagious diseases, whether you will distill the water of the herbe, or preserue or candie the rootes or the greene stalkes, or vse the seede in pouder or in di∣stillations, or decoctions with other things: it is sowen of seede, and will abide vntill  it giue seede, and then dyeth. Rue or Herbe grace is a strong herbe, yet vsed inwardly against the plague as an Antidote with Figs and Wall-nuts, and helpeth much against windy bodies: outwardly it is vsed to bee layde to the wrestes of the hands, to driue away agues: it is more vsually planted of slips then raised from seede, and abideth long if sharpe frostes kill it not. Dragons being distilled are held to be good to expell any euill thing from the heart: they are altogether planted of the rootes. Setwall, Va∣lerian, or Capons tayle, the herbe often, but the roote much better, is vsed to prouoke sweating, thereby to expell euill vapours that might annoy the heart: it is only plan∣ted of the rootes when they are taken vp, and the young replanted. Asarabacca, the leaues are often vsed to procure vomiting being stamped, and the strained iuice to a lit∣tle quantitie, put into a draught of ale and drunke, thereby to ease the stomacke of many euill and grosse humours that there lye and offend it; diuers also take the leaues and rootes a little boyled in wine, with a little spice added thereunto, to expell both tertian and quartan agues: the rootes of our English growing is more auaileable for these purposes then any outlandish: it is planted by the roote; for I could neuer see it spring of seede. Masterwort commeth somewhat neere in propertie vnto Angelica, and besides very effectuall to disperse winde in the bodie, whether of the collicke or otherwise; as also very profitable to comfort in all cold causes: it yeeldeth seede, but yet is more vsually planted from the rootes being parted. Balme is a cordiall herbe both in smell and taste, and is wholly vsed for those purposes, that is, to comfort the heart being distilled into water either simple or compound, or the herbe dryed and vsed: it is set of the rootes being parted, because it giueth no seede that euer I could obserue. Camomill is a common herbe well knowne, and is planted of the rootes in alleyes, in walkes, and on bankes to sit on, for that the more it is troden on, and pres∣sed downe in dry weather, the closer it groweth, and the better it will thriue: the vse thereof is very much, both to warme and comfort, and to ease paines being applyed outwardly after many fashions: the decoction also of the flowers prouoketh sweat, and they are much vsed against agues. Featherfew is an herbe of greater vse for wo∣men then for men, to dissolue flatulent or windy humours, which causeth the paines of the mother: some vse to take the iuice thereof in drinke for agues: it is as well sowen of the seede as planted of the rootes. Costmary is vsed among those herbes that are put in ole to cause it haue a good rellish, and to be somewhat physicall in the moneth of May, and doth helpe to prouoke vrine: it is set of the rootes being parted. Maudlin is held to be a principall good herbe to open and cleanse the liuer, and for that purpose is vsed many wayes, as in ale, in tansies, and in broths &c. the seed also is vsed, and so is the herbe also sometimes, to kill the wormes in children: it is sowen of the seede, and planted also of the separated rootes. Cassidonie is a small kinde of Lauender, but dif∣fering both in forme and qualitie: it is much vsed for the head to ease paines thereof, as also put among other things to purge melancholicke diseases: it is sowen of seede, and abideth not a winter vnlesse it bee well defended, and yet hardly giueth ripe seede againe with vs. Smallage is a great opening herbe, and much more then eyther Parsley or Fenell, and the rootes of them all are often vsed together in medicines: it is sowen of seede, and will not bee wanting in a Garden if once you suffer it to sow it selfe. Cardus Benedictus, or the Blessed Thistle, is much vsed in the time of any infection or plague, as also to expell any euill symptome from the heart at all other times. It is vsed likewise to be boyled in posse drink, & giuen to them that haue an ague, to help to cure it by sweating or otherwise. It is vsually sowen of seed, and dyeth when it hath giuen seed. Winter Cherries are likewise nursed vp in diuers gardens, for that their propertie is to giue helpe to them that are troubled eyther with the stopping or heate of their v∣rine the herbe and berries are often distilled, but the berries alone are more often vsed: after it is once planted in a garden it will runne vnder ground, & abide well enough, Celondine is held to bee good for the iaundise, it is much vsed for to cleere dim eyes, eyther the iuice or the water dropped into them: it is sowen of seede, and being once brought into a garden, will hardly be weeded out; the seede that sheddeth will so sow it selfe, and therefore some corner in a garden is the fittest place for it. Tabacco is of two sorts, and both vsed to be planted in Gardens, yet the English kinde (as it is called) is more to be found in our Countrey Gardens then the Indian sort: the leaues of both sorts indifferently, that is, of eyther of which is next at hand, being stamped and boy∣led  eyther by it selfe, or with other herbes in oyle or hogs suet, doe make an excellent salue for greene wounds, and also to clense old vlcers or sores; the iuice of the greene leaues drunke in ale, or a dryed leafe steeped in wine or ale for a night, and the wine or ale drunke in the morning, prouoketh to cast, but the dryed leafe much stronger then the greene: they are sowen of seede, but the Indian kinde is more tender, and will not abide a winter with vs abroade. Spurge that vsually groweth in Gardens, is a violent purger, and therefore it is needfull to be very carefull how it is vsed: the seede is more ordinarily vsed then any other part of the plant, which purgeth by vomiting in some, and both vpwards and downwards in many; the iuice of the herbe, but especially the milke thereof, is vsed to kill wartes: it is sowen of seede, and when it doth once shed it selfe, it will still continue springing of the fallen seede. Bearefoote is sowen of seed, and will hardly abide transplanting vnlesse it bee while it is young; yet abideth diuers yeares, if it stand not in too cold a place. This I speake of the greater kinde; for the lower small wilde kind (which is the most ordinary in this land) will neuer decay: the leaues are sometimes vsed greene, but most vsually dryed and poudered, and giuen in drinke to them that haue the wormes: it purgeth melancholy, but especially the roots. In many Countries of this Land, and elsewhere, they vse to thrust the stalk of the great kinde through the eare or dewlap of Kine and Cattell, to cure them of many diseases. Salomons Seale, or (as some call it) Ladder to heauen, although it doth grow wilde in many places of this Land, yet is planted in Gardens: it is accounted an excellent wound herbe to consolidate, and binde, insomuch that many vse it with good successe to cure ruptures, and to stay both the white and the red fluxe in women: it is planted altogether of the rootes, for I could neuer finde it spring from the seede, it is so strong. Comfry likewise is found growing wilde in many places by ditch sides, and in moist places, and therefore requireth some moist places of the garden: it is wholly vsed for knitting, binding, and consolidating fluxes and wounds, to be applyed either inwardly or outwardly: The rootes are stronger for those purposes then any other parts of the plant. Licoris is much vsed now adaies to bee planted in great quantitie, euen to fill many acres of ground, whereof riseth a great deale of profit to those that know how to order it, and haue fit grounds for it to thriue in; for euery ground will not be aduan∣tagious: It will require a very rich, deepe and mellow ground, eyther naturall or arti∣ficiall; but for a priuate house where a small quantitie will serue, there needeth not so much curiositie: it is vsually planted of the top heads, when the lower rootes (which are the Licoris that is vsed) and the runners are cut from them. Some vse to make an or∣dinary drinke or beuerage of Licoris, boyled in water as our vsuall ale or beere is with malt, which fermented with barme in the same manner, and tunned vp, serueth in stead thereof, as I am credibly informed: It is otherwise in a manner wholly spent for colds, coughes and rheumes, to expectorate flegme, but vsed in diuers formes, as in iuice, in decoctions, syrrups, roules, trochisces, and the greene or dryed roote of it selfe. And these are the most ordinary Physicall herbes that are vsed to be planted in gar∣dens for the vse of any Country familie, that is (as I said before) farre remote from Physitians or Cbirurgions abidings, that they may vse as occasion serueth for them∣selues or their neighbours, and by a little care and paines in the applying may doe a great deale of good, and sometimes to them that haue not wherewith to spend on themselues, much lesse on Physitians or Chirurgions, or if they haue, may oftentimes receiue lesse good at their hands then at others that are taught by experience in their owne families, to be the more able to giue helpe to others.
THE KITCHEN GARDEN. THE SECOND PART, COntaining as well all sorts of herbes, as rootes and fruits, that are vsually planted in Gardens, to serue for the vse of the Table whether of the poore or rich of our Countrey: but herein I in∣tend not to bring any fruite bearing trees, shrubbes, or bushes; for I reserue them for my Orchard, wherin they shal be set forth. So that in these three parts, I suppose the exquisite ornament of any worthy house is consummate for the exteriour bounds, the benefit of their riches extending also to the furnishing of the most worthy inward parts thereof: but because many take plea∣sure in the sight and knowledge of other herbes that are Physicall, and much more in their properties and vertues, if vnto these three I should adde a Physicke Garden, or Garden of Simples, there would be a quadripartite complement, of whatsoeuer arte or nature, necessitie or delight could affect: which to effect (as many my friends haue intreated it at my hands) will require more paines and time then all this worke toge∣ther: yet to satisfie their desires and all others herein, that would bee enformed in the truth, and reformed of the many errours and slips set forth and published heretofore of plants by diuers, I shall (God assisting and granting life) labour to performe, that it may shew it selfe to the light in due conueniencie, if these bee well and gratefully ac∣cepted. And because I ended with some sweete herbes in the former part, I will in this part beginne with the rest, which I reserued for this place, as fitter for the pot and kitchen then for the hand or bosome, and so descend to other herbes that are for meat or sallets: and after them to those rootes that are to be eaten, as meate or as sallets: and lastly the fruits that grow neere, or vpon the ground, or not much aboue it; as the Artichoke, &c. in which I make a shorter description then I did in the former, rather endeauouring to shew what they are, and whereunto they are vsed, then the whole varietie or any exact declaration: which methode, although in some sort it may bee fitting for this purpose, yet it is not for an history or herball: I shall therefore require their good acceptance for whose sake I doe it, not doubting, but that I, or others, if they write againe of this subiect, may polish and amende what formerly hath beene eyther mis set, or not so thoroughly expressed, besides some additions of new conceits; seeing I treade out a new path, and therefore those that follow may the easilier see the Meanders, and so goe on in a direct line.
CHAP. I. Maiorana latifolia, siue maior Anglica. Winter, or pot Marierome. WInter Marierome is a small bushie herbe like vnto sweete Marierome, be∣ing parted or diuided into many branches, whereon doe grow broader and greener leaues, set by couples, with some small leaues likewise at the seuerall ioynts all along the branches: at the tops whereof grow a number of small purplish white flowers set together in a tuft, which turne into small and round seed, big∣ger then sweet Marierome seede: the whole plant is of a small and fine sent, but much inferiour to the other, and is nothing so bitter as the sweete Marierome, and thereby both the fitter and more willingly vsed for meates: the roote is white and threddy, and perisheth not as the former, but abideth many yeares. The Vse of winter Marierome. The vse of this Marierome is more frequent in our Land then in others, being put among other pot-herbes and farsing (or faseting herbes as they are called) and may to good profit bee applyed in inward as well as outward griefes for to comfort the parts, although weaker in effect then sweete Marieromes. CHAP. II. Thymum vulgatius siue durius. Ordinary Garden Tyme. THe ordinary Garden Tyme is a small low wooddy plant with brittle branches, and small hard greene leaues, as euery one knoweth, hauing small white pur∣plish flowers, standing round about the tops of the stalkes: the seed is small and browne, darker then Marierome seed: the root is woody, and abideth well diuers Winters. Thymum latifolium. Masticke Tyme. This Tyme hath neyther so wooddy branches, nor so hard leaues, but groweth lower, more spreading, and with somewhat broader leaues: the flowers are of a pur∣plish white colour, standing in roundles round about the stalkes, at the ioynts with leaues at them likewise. This Tyme endureth better and longer then the former, and by spreading it selfe more then the former, is the more apt to bee propagated by slip∣ping, because it hath beene seldome seene to giue seede: It is not so quicke in sent or taste as the former, but is fitter to set any border or knot in a garden, and is for the most part wholly employed to such vses. The Vse of Tyme.
To set downe all the particular vses whereunto Tyme is applyed, were to weary both the Writer and Reader; I will but only note out a few: for be∣sides the physicall vses to many purposes, for the head, stomacke, spleene, &c. there is no herbe almost of more vse, in the houses both of high and low, rich and poore, both for inward and outward occasions; outwardly for bathings among other hot herbes, and among other sweete herbes for strewings: inwardly in most sorts of broths, with Rosmary, as also with other faseting (or rather farsing) herbes, and to make sawce for diuers sorts both fish and flesh, as to stuffe the belly of a Goose to bee rosted, and after put into the sawce, and the pouder with breade to strew on meate when it 1 Maorana maior Anglica. Pot Marierome. 2 Thymum vulgatius. Garden Tyme. 3 Satureia. Sauorie. 4 Hysso∣pus. Hyssope. 5 Pulegium. Penniroyall. 6 Saluia maior. Common Sage. 7 Saluia minor prnata. Sage of vertue. depiction of plants
is rosted, and so likewise on rosted or fryed fish. It is held by diuers to bee a speedy remedy against the sting of a Bee, being bruised and layd thereon. CHAP. III. Satureia siue Thymbra. Sauorie. THere are two sorts of of Sauory, the one called Summer, and the other Win∣ter Sauorie: The Summer Sauory is a small tender herbe, growing not aboue a foote and a halfe high, or thereabouts, rising vp with diuers brittle branches, slenderly or sparsedly set with small long leaues, soft in handling, at euery ioynt a cou∣ple, one against another, of a pleasant strong and quicke sent and taste: the flowers are small and purplish, growing at the toppes of the stalkes, with two small long leaues at the ioynts vnder them: the seede is small, and of a darke colour, bigger then Tyme seede by the halfe: the roote is wooddy, and hath many strings, perishing euery yeare wholly, and must bee new sowen againe, if any will haue it. The Winter Sauorie is a small low bushie herbe, very like vnto Hyssope, but not a∣boue a foote high, with diuers small hard branches, and hard darke green leaues there∣on, thicker set together then the former by much, and as thicke as common Hyssope, sometimes with foure leaues or more at a ioynt, of a reasonable strong sent, yet not so strong or quicke as the former: the flowers are of a pale purplish colour, set at seuerall distances at the toppes of the stalkes, with leaues at the ioynts also with them, like the former: the roote is woody, with diuers small strings thereat, and abideth all the winter with his greene leaues: it is more vsually encreased by slipping or diuiding the roote, and new setting it seuerally againe in the Spring, then by sowing the seed. The Vse of Sauorie. The Summer Sauorie is vsed in other Countryes much more then with vs in their ordinary diets, as condiment or sawce to their meates, sometimes of it selfe, and sometimes with other herbes, and sometimes strewed or layde vpon the dishes as we doe Parsley, as also with beanes and pease, rise and wheate; and sometimes the dryed herbe boyled among pease to make pottage. The Winter Sauorie is one of the (farsing) faseting herbes as they call them, and so is the Summer Sauorie also sometimes. This is vsed also in the same manner that the Summer Sauorie is, set downe before, and to the same purposes: as also to put into puddings, sawsages, and such like kindes of meates. Some doe vse the pouder of the herbe dryed (as I sayd before of Tyme) to mixe with grated bread, to breade their meate, be it fish or flesh, to giue it the quicker rellish. They are both effectuall to expell winde. CHAP. IIII. Hyssopus. Hyssope. GArden Hyssope is so well knowne to all that haue beene in a Garden, that I shall but actum agere, to bestow any time thereon, being a small bushie plant, not ri∣sing aboue two foote high, with many branches, woody below, and tender aboue, whereon are set at certaine distances, sundry small, long and narrow greene leaues: at the toppe of euery stalke stand blewish purple gaping flowers, one aboue another in a long spike or eare: after which followeth the seede, which is small and blackish: the rootes are composed of many threddy strings; the whole plant is of a strong sweet sent.
The Vse of Hyssope. Hyssope is much vsed in Ptisans and other drinkes, to help to expectorate flegme. It is many Countrey peoples medicine for a cut or greene wound, being bruised with sugar and applyed. I finde it is also much commended against the falling sickenesse, especially being made into pils after the man∣ner before rehearsed. It is accounted a speciall remedy against the sting or biting of an Adder, if the place be rubbed with Hyssope, bruised and mixed with honey, salt and cummin seede. A decoction thereof with oyle, and annointed, taketh away the itching and tingling of the head, and vermine also breeding therein. An oyle made of the herbe and flowers, being an∣nointed, doth comfort benummed sinewes and ioynts. CHAP. V. Pulegium. Pennyroyall. PEnnyroyall also is an herbe so well knowne, that I shall not neede to spend much time in the description of it: hauing many weake round stalkes, diuided into sundry branches, rather leaning or lying vpon the ground then standing vpright, whereon are set at seuerall ioynts, small roundish darke greene leaues: the flowers are purplish that grow in gardens, yet some that grow wilde are white, or more white then purple, set in roundles about the tops of the branches; the stalkes shoote forth small fibres or rootes at the ioynts, as it lyeth vpon the ground, thereby fastening it selfe therein, and quickly increaseth, and ouer-runneth any ground, especially in the shade or any moist place, and is replanted by breaking the sprouted stalkes, and so quickely groweth. Other sorts of Pennyroyall are fit for the Physicke Garden, or Garden of Simples. The Vse of Pennyroyall. It is very good and wholesome for the lunges, to expell cold thin flegme, and afterwards to warme and dry it vp: and is also of the like propertie as Mintes, to comfort the stomacke, and stay vomiting. It is also vsed in wo∣mens baths and washings: and in mens also to comfort the sinewes. It is yet to this day, as it hath beene in former times, vsed to bee put into puddings, and such like meates of all sorts, and therefore in diuers places they know it by no other name then Pudding-grasse. The former age of our great Grandfathers, had all these hot herbes in much and familiar vse, both for their meates and medicines, and therewith preserued themselues in long life and much health: but this delicate age of ours, which is not pleased with any thing almost, be it meat or medicine, that is not pleasant to the palate, doth wholly refuse these almost, and therefore cannot be partaker of the benefit of them. CHAP. VI. Salvia. Sage.
THere are two especiall kindes of Sage noursed vp in our Gardens, for our or∣dinary vse, whereof I intend to write in this place, leauing the rest to his fit∣ter place. Our ordinary Sage is reckoned to bee of two sorts, white and red,  both of them bearing many foure square wooddy stalkes, in some whiter, in others redder, as the leaues are also, standing by couples at the ioynts, being long, rough, and wrinkled, of a strong sweete sent: at the tops of the stalkes come forth the flowers, set at certaine spaces one aboue another, which are long and gaping, like vnto the flowers of Clary, or dead Nettles, but of a blewish purple colour; after which come small round seede in the huske that bore the flower: the roote is wooddy, with diuers strings at it: It is more vsually planted of the slips, pricked in the Spring time into the ground, then of the seed. Saluia minor siue pinnata. Small Sage or Sage of vertue. The lesser Sage is in all things like vnto the former white Sage, but that his bran∣ches are long and slender, and the leaues much smaller, hauing for the most part at the bottome of each side of the leafe a peece of a leafe, which maketh it shew like finns or eares: the flowers also are of a blewish purple colour, but lesser. Of this kinde there is one that beareth white flowers. The Vse of Sage. Sage is much vsed of many in the moneth of May fasting, with butter and Parsley, and is held of most much to conduce to the health of mans body. It is also much vsed among other good herbes to bee tund vp with Ale, which thereupon is termed Sage Ale, whereof many barrels full are made, and drunke in the said moneth chiefly for the purpose afore recited: and also for teeming women, to helpe them the better forward in their childe bea∣ring, if there be feare of abortion or miscarrying. It is also vsed to be boyled among other herbes, to make Gargles or wa∣ters to wash sore mouths and throates: As also among other herbes, that serue as bathings, to wash mens legs or bodies in the Summer time, to com∣fort nature, and warme and strengthen aged cold sinewes, and lengthen the strength of the younger. The Kitchen vse is either to boyle it with a Calues head, and being min∣ced, to be put with the braines, vinegar and pepper, to serue as an ordinary sawce thereunto: Or being beaten and iuyced (rather then minced as ma∣nie doe) is put to a rosted Pigges braines, with Currans for sawce there∣unto. It is in small quantity (in regard of the strong taste thereof) put a∣mong other fasting herbes, to serue as sawce for peeces of Veale, when they are farsed or stuffed therewith, and rosted, which they call Olliues. For all the purposes aforesaid, the small Sage is accounted to be of the more force and vertue. CHAP. VII. Horminum sativum. Garden Clary. THere is but one sort of Garden Clary, though many wilde, which hath foure squares stalks, with broad rough wrinkled whitish leaues, somewhat vneuenly cut in on the edges, and of a strong sweete sent, growing some next the ground, & some by couples vpon the stalkes: the flowers growe at certaine distances, with two small leaues at the ioynts vnder them, somewhat like vnto the flowers of Sage, but lesser, and of a very whitish or bleake blew colour: the seede is of a blackish browne colour, somewhat flat, and not so round as the wilde: the rootes spread not farre, and perish euery yeare that they beare flowers and seede. It is altogether to bee sowne of seed in the Spring time, yet sometimes it will rise of it owne sowing.
The Vse of Clary. The most frequent and common vse of Clary, is for men or women that haue weake backes, to helpe to comfort and strengthen the raines, being made into Tansies and eaten, or otherwise. The seede is vsed of some to be put into the corner of the eye, if any mote or other thing haue happened into it: but assuredly although this may peraduenture doe some good, yet the seede of the wilde will doe much more. The leaues taken dry, and dipped into a batter made of the yolkes of egges, flower, and a little milke, and then fryed with butter vntill they be crispe, serue for a dish of meate accepted with manie, vnpleasant to none. CHAP. VIII. Nepeta. Nep. ALthough those that are Herbarists do know three sorts of Nep, a greater & two lesser, yet because the lesser are not vsuall, but in the Gardens of those that de∣light in natures varieties, I do not here shew you them. That which is vsuall (and called of manie Cat Mint) beareth square stalkes, but not so great as Clarie, hauing two leaues at euery ioynt, somewhat like vnto Balme or Speare Mintes, but whiter, softer, and longer, and nicked about the edges, of a strong sent, but nothing so strong as Clary: the flowers growe at the toppes of the stalkes, as it were in long spikes or heads, somewhat close together, yet compassing the stalkes at certaine ioynts, of a whitish colour, for forme and bignesse like vnto Balme, or somewhat bigger: the rootes are composed of a number of strings, which dye not, but keepe greene leaues vpon them all the Winter, and shoote anew in the Spring. It is propagated both by the seede, and by slipping the rootes. The Vse of Nep. Nep is much vsed of women either in baths or drinkes to procure their feminine courses: as also with Clarie, being fryed into Tansies, to streng∣then their backes. It is much commended of some, if the iuyce thereof be drunke with wine, to helpe those that are bruised by some fall, or other accident. A decoction of Nep is auaileable to cure the scabbe in the head, or other places of the body. CHAP. IX. Melissa. Baulme. THe Garden Baulme which is of common knowne vse, hath diuers square blac∣kish greene stalkes, and round, hard, darke, greene pointed leaues, growing thereon by couples, a little notched about the edges, of a pleasant sweete sent, drawing nearest to the sent of a Lemon or Citron; and therefore of some called Ci∣trago: the flowers growe about the toppes of the stalkes at certaine distances, being small and gaping, of a pale carnation colour, almost white: the rootes fasten them∣selues strongly in the ground, and endure many yeares, and is encreased by diuiding the rootes; for the leaues dye downe to the ground euery yeare, leauing no shew of leafe or stalke in the Winter.
The Vse of Baulme. Baulme is often vsed among other hot and sweete herbes, to make baths and washings for mens bodies or legges, in the Summer time, to warme and comfort the veines and sinewes, to very good purpose and effect, and hath in former ages beene of much more vse then now adaies. It is also vsed by diuers to be stilled, being steeped in Ale, to make a Baulme water, after the manner they haue beene taught, which they keepe by them, to vse in the stead of Aqua vitae, when they haue any occasion for their owne or their neighbours Families, in suddaine qualmes or passions of the heart: but if they had a little better direction (for this is somewhat too rude) it would doe them more good that take it: For the herbe without all question is an excellent helpe to comfort the heart, as the very smell may induce any so to beleeue. It is also good to heale greene wounds, being made into salues: and I verily thinke, that our forefathers hearing of the healing and comfor∣table properties of the true naturall Baulme, and finding this herbe to be so effectuall, gaue it the name of Baulme, in imitation of his properties and vertues. It is also an herbe wherein Bees doe much delight, as hath beene found by experience of those that haue kept great store; if the Hiues bee rubbed on the inside with some thereof, and as they thinke it draweth o∣thers by the smell thereof to resort thither. Plinie saith, it is a present re∣medy against the stinging of Bees. CHAP. X. Mentha. Mintes. THere are diuers sorts of Mints, both of the garden, and wilde, of the woods, mountaines, and standing pooles or waters: but I will onely in this place bring to your remembrance two or three sorts of the most vsuall that are kept in gar∣dens, for the vses whereunto they are proper. Red Mint or browne Mint hath square brownish stalkes, with somewhat long and round pointed leaues, nicked about the edges, of a darke greene colour, set by couples at euery ioynt, and of a reasonable good sent: the flowers of this kinde are reddish, standing about the toppes of the stalkes at distances: the rootes runne creeping in the ground, and as the rest, will hardly be cleared out of a garden, being once therein, in that the smallest peece thereof will growe and encrease apace. Speare Mint hath a square greene stalke, with longer and greener leaues then the former, set by couples, of a better and more comfortable sent, and therefore of much more vse then any other: the flowers hereof growe in long eares or spikes, of a pale red or blush colour: the rootes creepe in the ground like the other. Party coloured or white Mint hath square greene stalkes and leaues, somewhat lar∣ger then Speare Mint, and more nicked in the edges, whereof many are parted, halfe white and halfe greene, and some more white then greene, or more green then white, as nature listeth: the flowers stand in long heads close set together, of a blush colour: the rootes creepe as the rest doe. The Vse of Mintes. Mintes are oftentimes vsed in baths, with Baulme and other herbes, as a helpe to comfort and strengthen the nerues and sinewes.
It is much vsed either outwardly applyed, or inwardly drunke, to streng∣then and comfort weake stomackes, that are much giuen to casting: as also for feminine fluxes. It is boyled in milke for those whose stomackes are 1 Horminum sativum. Garden Clary. 2 Nepeta. Nep. 3 Melissa. Baulme. 4 Mentha satiua. Garden Mintes. 5 Balsamita mas, seu Cestus hortorum. Costmary. 6 Ageratum. Maudeline. depiction of plants
apt to cause it to curdle. And applyed with salt, is a good helpe for the bi∣ting of a mad dogge. It is vsed to be boyled with Mackarell, and other fish. Being dryed, is often and much vsed with Penniroyall, to bee put into puddings: as also among pease that are boyled for pottage. Where Dockes are not ready at hand, they vse to bruise Mintes, and lay them vpon any place that is stung with Bees, Waspes, or such like, and that to good purpose. CHAP. XI. Balsamita mas & faemina, seu Costus hortorum maior & minor. Costmary and Maudeline. COstmary or Alecoast is a sweet herbe, bearing many broad and long pale green leaues, snipped about the edges, euery one vpon a long foote-stalke; among which rise vp many round greene stalkes, with such like leaues on them, but lesser vp to the toppe, where it spreadeth it selfe into three or foure branches, euery one bearing an vmbell or tuft of gold yellow flowers, somewhat like vnto Tansie flowers, but lesser, which turne into small heads, containing small flat long seede: the roote is somewhat hard and stringy, and being diuided, is replanted in the Spring of the yeare for increase. Maudeline hath somewhat long and narrow leaues, snipt about the edges: the stalks are two foot high, bearing many yellow flowers on the tops of the branches, in an vm∣bell or tuft like vnto Tansie: the whole herbe is sweete, and somewhat bitter, and is replanted by flipping. The Vse of Costmary and Maudeline. Costmary is of especiall vse in the Spring of the yeare, among other such like herbes, to make Sage Ale, and thereupon I thinke it tooke the name of Alecoast. It is also vsed to be put among other sweete herbes, to make sweete wa∣shing water, whereof there is great store spent. The leaues haue an especiall vertue to comfort both the stomack and heart, and to warme and dry a moist braine. The seede is much vsed in the Country, to be giuen to children for the wormes, in the stead of wormseed, and so is the seede of Maudeline also. Maudeline is much vsed with Costmary and other sweet herbes, to make sweete washing water: the flowers also are tyed vp with small bundels of Lauender toppes, these being put in the middle of them, to lye vpon the toppes of beds, presses, &c. for the sweete sent and sauour it casteth. It is generally accounted of our Apothecaries to be the true Eupatorium of Aui∣cen, and the true Ageratum of Dioscorides; but Dodonaeus seemeth to con∣tradict both. CHAP. XII. Tanacetum vulgare & crispum. Tansie.
OVr Garden Tansie hath many hard greene leaues, or rather wings of leaues; for they are many small ones, set one against another all along a middle ribbe or stalke, and snipt about the edges: in some the leaues stand closer and thic∣ker, and somewhat crumpled, which hath caused it to be called double or curld Tan∣sie,  in others thinner and more sparsedly: It riseth vp with many hard stalks, whereon growe at the tops vpon the seuerall small branches gold yellow flowers like buttons, which being gathered in their prime, will hold the colour fresh a long time: the seede is small, and as it were chaffie: the roote creepeth vnder ground, and shooteth vp a∣gaine in diuers places: the whole herbe, both leaues and flowers, are of a sharpe, strong, bitter smell and taste, but yet pleasant, and well to be endured. The Vse of Tansie. The leaues of Tansie are vsed while they are young, either shred small with other herbes, or else the iuyce of it and other herbes fit for the pur∣pose, beaten with egges, and fryed into cakes (in Lent and the Spring of the yeare) which are vsually called Tansies, and are often eaten, being taken to be very good for the stomack, to helpe to digest from thence bad humours that cleaue thereunto: As also for weak raines and kidneyes, when the vrine passeth away by drops: This is thought to be of more vse for men then for women. The seed is much commended against all sorts of wormes in chil∣dren. CHAP. XIII. Pimpinella siue Sanguisorba. Burnet. BVrnet hath many winged leaues lying vpon the ground, made of many small, round, yet pointed greene leaues, finely nicked on the edges, one set against an∣other all along a middle ribbe, and one at the end thereof; from among which rise vp diuers round, and sometimes crested browne stalkes, with some few such like leaues on them as growe belowe, but smaller: at the toppes of the stalkes growe small browne heads or knaps, which shoote forth small purplish flowers, turning into long and brownish, but a little cornered seede: the roote groweth downe deepe, being small and brownish: the whole plant is of a stipticke or binding taste or quality, but of a fine quicke sent, almost like Baulme. The Vse of Burnet. The greatest vse that Burnet is commonly put vnto, is to put a few leaues into a cup with Claret wine, which is presently to be drunke, and giueth a pleasant quicke taste thereunto, very delightfull to the palate, and is ac∣counted a helpe to make the heart merrie. It is sometimes also while it is young, put among other Sallet herbes, to giue a finer rellish thereunto. It is also vsed in vulnerary drinkes, and to stay fluxes and bleedings, for which purposes it is much commended. It hath beene also much commended in contagious and pestilentiall agues. CHAP. XIIII. Hippolapathum sativum, siue Rhabarbarum Monachorum. Monkes Rubarbe or Patience. GArden Patience is a kinde of Docke in all the parts thereof, but that it is larger and taller then many others, with large and long greene leaues, a great, strong, and high stalke, with reddish or purplish flowers, and three square seede, like as all other Dockes haue: the roote is great and yellow, not hauing any shew of flesh coloured veines therein, no more then the other kinde with great round thin leaues,
commonly called Hippolapathum rotundifolium, Bastard Rubarbe, or Monkes Rubarbe, the properties of both which are of very weake effect: but I haue a kinde of round leafed Dock growing in my Garden, which was sent me from beyond Sea by a worthy Gentleman, Mr. Dr. Matth. Lister, one of the Kings Physitians, with this title, Rhaponti∣cum verum, and first grew with me, before it was euer seen or known elsewhere in Eng∣land, wch by proof I haue found to be so like vnto the true Rubarbe, or the Rha of Pon∣tus, both for forme and colour, that I dare say it is the very true Rubarbe, our climate only making it lesse strong in working, lesse heauy, and lesse bitter in taste: For this hath great and thicke rootes, as diuersly discoloured with flesh coloured veines as the true Rubarbe, as I haue to shew to any that are desirous to see and know it; and also other smaller sprayes or branches of rootes, spreading from the maine great roote, which smaller branches may well be compared to the Rhaponticum which the Merchants haue brought vs, which we haue seene to be longer and slenderer then Rubarbe, but of the very same colour: this beareth so goodly large leaues, that it is a great beauty in a gar∣den to behold them: for I haue measured the stalke of the leafe at the bottome next the roote to bee of the bignesse of any mans thumbe; and from the roote to the leafe it selfe, to bee two foote in length, and sometimes more; and likewise the leafe it selfe, from the lower end where it is ioyned to the stalke, to the end or point thereof, to bee also two foote in length, and sometimes more; and also in the broadest part of the leafe, to be two foote or more ouer in breadth: it beareth whitish flowers, contrary to all other Dockes, and three square brownish seede as other Dockes doe, but bigger, and therefore assuredly it is a Docke, and the true Rubarbe of the Arabians, or at the least the true Rhaponticum of the Ancients. The figure of the whole plant I haue cau∣sed to be cut, with a dryed roote as it grew in my garden by it selfe, and haue inserted it here, both because Matthiolus giueth a false figure of the true Rubarbe, and that this hath not been expressed and set forth by any before. The Vse of Patience, and of the Rubarbe. The leaues of Patience are often, and of many vsed for a pot-herbe, and seldome to any other purpose: the roote is often vsed in Diet-beere, or ale, or in other drinkes made by decoction, to helpe to purge the liuer, and clense the blood. The other Rubarbe or Rhaponticum, wherof I make men∣tion, and giue you here the figure, I haue tryed, and found by experience to purge gently, without that astriction that is in the true Rubarbe is brought vs from the East Indies, or China, and is also lesse bitter in taste; whereby I coniecture it may bee vsed in hot and feauerish bodies more effe∣ctually, because it doth not binde after the purging, as the East India Ru∣barbe doth: but this must bee giuen in double quantitie to the other, and then no doubt it will doe as well: The leaues haue a fine acide taste: A syr∣rupe therefore made with the iuice and sugar, cannot but be very effectuall in deiected appetites, and hot fits of agues; as also to helpe to open obstructi∣ons of the liuer, as diuers haue often tryed, and found auaileable by expe∣rience. CHAP. XV. Lapathum sanguineum. Blood-wort. AMong the sorts of pot-herbes Blood-worte hath alwayes beene accounted a principall one, although I doe not see any great reason therein, especially see∣ing there is a greater efficacie of binding in this Docke, then in any of the o∣ther: but as common vse hath receiued it, so I here set it downe. Blood-worte is out of the sorts of Dockes, and hath long leaues like vnto the smaller yellow Docke, but striped with red veines, and ouer-shadowed with red vpon the greene leafe, that it see∣meth almost wholly red sometimes: the stalke is reddish, bearing such leaues, but
1 Tanacetum. Tansie. 2 Pimpinella. Burnet. 3 Rhaponticum verum seu potius Rhabarbarum verum. True Raponticke or rather true Rubarbe. 4 Lapithum sativum seu Patientia. Monkes Rubarbe or Patience. 5 Lapathum sanguineum. Bloudwort. 6 Acetosa. Sorrell. depiction of plants
smaller vp to the toppe, where it is diuided into diuers small branches, whereon grow purplish flowers, and three square darke red seede, like vnto others: the roots are not great, but somewhat long, and very red, abiding many yeares, yet sometimes spoiled with the extremitie of winter. The Vse of Blood-worte. The whole and onely vse of the herbe almost, serueth for the pot, among other herbes, and, as I said before, is accounted a most especiall one for that purpose. The seede therof is much commended for any fluxe in man or wo∣man, to be inwardly taken, and so no doubt is the roote, being of a stipticke qualitie. CHAP. XVI. Oxalis siue Acetosa. Sorrell. SOrrell must needes bee reckoned with the Dockes, for that it is so like vnto them in all things, and is of many called the sower Docke. Of Sorrels there are ma∣ny sorts, but I shall not trouble you with any other in this place, then the com∣mon Garden Sorrell, which is most knowne, and of greatest vse with vs; which hath tender greene long leaues full of iuice, broade, and bicorned as it were, next vnto the stalke, like as Arrach, Spinach, and our English Mercurie haue, of a sharpe sower taste: the stalkes are slender, bearing purplish long heads, wherein lye three square shining browne seede, like, but lesser then the other: the root is smaller then any of the other Dockes, but browne, and full of strings, and abideth without decaying, hauing greene leaues all the winter, except in the very extremitie thereof, which often taketh away all or most of his leaues. The Vse of Sorrell. Sorrell is much vsed in sawces, both for the whole, and the sicke, cooling the hot liuers, and stomackes of the sicke, and procuring vnto them an ap∣petite vnto meate, when their spirits are almost spent with the violence of their furious or fierie fits; and is also of a pleasant rellish for the whole, in quickning vp a dull stomacke that is ouer-loaden with euery daies plenty of dishes. It is diuers waies dressed by Cooks, to please their Masters stomacks. CHAP. XVII. Buglossum luteum, siue Lingua Bouis. Langdebeefe. VNto this place may well bee referred our ordinary Borage and Buglosse, set forth in the former Booke, in regard of the properties whereunto they are much employed, that is, to serue the pot among other herbes, as is sufficiently knowne vnto all. And yet I confesse, that this herbe (although it bee called Buglossum luteum, as if it were a kind of Buglosse) hath no correspondency with Buglosse or Bo∣rage in any part, sauing only a little in the leafe; & our Borage or Buglosse might more fitly, according to the Greeke name, bee called Oxe tongue or Langdebeefe; and this might in my iudgement more aptly be referred to the kinds of Hieratium Hawkeweed, whereunto it neerest approacheth: but as it is commonly receiued, so take it in this place, vntill it come to receiue the place is proper for it. It hath diuers broad and long darke green leaues, lying vpon the ground, very rough in handling, full of small haires or prickes, ready to enter into the hands of any that handle it; among which riseth
1 Lingua bouis siue Buglossum luteum. Langdebeefe. 2 Atriplex siue Olus aureum. Arrach. 3 Blitum. Blites. 4 Beta. Beetes. 5 Hipposelinum siue Olus atrum. Allisanders. 6 Selinum dulce. Sweete Parsley. depiction of plants
vp a round greene hairy or prickly stalk, bearing at the toppe, among a few small green leaues, diuers small yellow flowers in rough heads, which turne into doune, containing within them browne yellowish small long seedes, somewhat like vnto the seede of Hawkeweede: the roote is wooddy, which perisheth quickly after it hath borne seed; but is tender while it is young. The Vse of Langdebeefe. The leaues are onely vsed in all places that I know, or euer could learne, for an herbe for the pot among others, and is thought to bee good to loo∣sen the belly. CHAP. XVIII. Atriplex siue Olus Aureum. Arrach. THere be diuers kindes of Arrach, or Orach, as some doe call them; some of the Garden, whereof I meane to entreate in this place; others wilde of the Fieldes, &c. and others of the Sea, which are not to bee spoken of in this worke, but referred to a generall historie. The white garden Arrach, or Orach, hath diuers leaues, standing vpon their seuerall footestalkes, broade at the bottome, ending in two points like an arrow, with two feathers at the head, and small pointed at the end of the leafe, of a whitish yellow greene colour, and as it were strewed ouer with flower or meale, especially while they are young: the stalke likewise is mealy, bearing many branches with small yellow flowers on them, which turne into small leafie seeds: the rooote groweth somewhat deepe in the ground, with many small threds fastened thereto: it quickly springeth vp of the seede, groweth great, and fadeth away as soon as it hath borne seede. The purple Arrach is in all things like vnto the white, sauing onely in the colour of the leafe, stalke, seede, &c. which are all of a mealy dusty purplish colour. The Vse of Arrach. Arrach is cold and moist, and of a lubricke or slippery qualitie, whereby it quickely passeth through the stomacke and belly, and maketh it soluble, and is of many vsed for that purpose, being boyled and buttered, or put a∣mong other herbes into the pot to make pottage. There are many dishes of meate made with them while they are young, for being almost without sauour of themselues, they are the more conuer∣tible into what rellish any one will make them with Sugar, Spice &c. CHAP. XIX. Blitum. Blites. THere be diuers sorts of Blites, some whereof I haue entreated in the former part of this worke, vnder the title of
Amaranthus, Flower gentle: others that are noursed vp in Gardens, I will set forth in this place, which are onely two, that haue come to my knowledge, that is, the white and the red, and are of a qualitie as neere vnto Arrach as vnto Beetes, participating of both, and therefore I haue pla∣ced them betwixt them. The white Blite hath leaues somewhat like vnto Beetes, but smaller, rounder, and of a whitish greene colour, euery one standing vpon a small long footestalke: the stalke riseth vp two or three foote high, with many such like leaues thereon: the flowers grow at the top in long round tufts or clusters, wherein are con∣tained  small round seede: the roote is very full of threds or strings. The red Blite is in all things like the white, but that his leaues and tufted heades are exceeding red at the first, and after turne more purplish. The Vse of Blites. Blites are vsed as Arrach, eyther boyled of it selfe or stewed, which they call Loblolly, or among other herbes to bee put into the pot; and yet some doe vtterly refuse it, because in diuers it prouoketh castings. It is altogether insipide or without taste, but yet by reason of the moist slipperie qualitie it hath, it helpeth to loosen the belly. The vnsauorinesse whereof hath in many Countries growne into a prouerbe, or by-word, to call dull, slow, or lazie persons by that name: They are accounted more hurtfull to the stomacke, and so to the head and eyes, then other herbes, and therefore they are the lesse vsed. CHAP. XX. Beta. Beetes. THere are many diuersities of Beetes, some growing naturally in our own Coun∣try, others brought from beyond Sea; whereof some are white, some greene, some yellow, some red: the leaues of some are of vse only, and the root not vsed: others the roote is only vsed, and not the leaues: and some againe, both roote and leafe. The ancient Authors, as by their workes appeare, knew but two sorts, the white and the blacke Beete, whereof the white is sufficiently known, and was of them termed Sicula, of the later Physitians Sicla, because it was thought first to be brought from Sicilie: the blacke abideth some controuersie; some thinking that our common greene Beete, because it is of a darke greene colour, was that they called the blacke Beete; others that our small red Beete, which is of a darke red colour, was their black Beete, which in my opinion is the more likely: But to come to the matter in hand, and giue you the descriptions of them which are in vse with vs, and leaue controuersies to such a worke as is fit for them, wherein all such matters may be discussed at large. The common white Beete hath many great leaues next the ground (in some hot Countries growing to be three foote long, and very broade, in our Countrey they are very large, but nothing neere that proportion) of a whitish greene colour; the stalke is great, strong, and ribbed or crested, bearing great store of leaues vpon it vp to the very toppe almost: the flowers grow in very long tufts, small at the ends, and turning down their heads, which are small pale greenish yellow burres, giuing cornered prick∣ly seede: the roote is great, long and hard, when it hath giuen seede, of no vse at all, but abideth a former winter with leaues vpon it, as all other sorts following do▪ The common red Beet differeth not from the white Beete, but only that it is not so great, and both the leaues and rootes are somewhat red: the leaues bee in some more red then in others, which haue but red veines or strakes in them, in some also of a fresh red, in others very darke red: the roote hereof is red, spongy, and not vsed to bee eaten. The common greene Beete is also like vnto the white Beete, but of a darke greene colour. This hath beene found neere the salt Marshes by Rochester, in the foote-way going from the Lady Levesons house thither, by a worthy, diligent and painefull ob∣seruer and preseruer both of plants and all other natures varieties, often remembred before in this worke, called Iohn Tradescante, who there finding it, gaue me the know∣ledge thereof, and I haue vpon his report set it here down in this manner: The Romane red Beete, called Beta raposa, is both for leafe and roote the most excel∣lent Beete of all others: his rootes bee as great as the Carrot, exceeding red both within and without, very sweete and good, fit to bee eaten: this Beete groweth higher then the last red Beete, whose rootes are not vsed to bee eaten: the leaues like∣wise
are better of taste, and of as red a colour as the former red Beete: the roote is sometimes short like a Turnep, whereof it took the name of Rapa or raposa; and some∣times as I said before, like a Carrot and long: the seede is all one with the lesser red Beete. The Italian Beete is of much respect, whose faire greene leaues are very large and great, with great white ribbes and veines therein: the stalke in the Summer time, when it is growen vp to any height, is six square in shew, and yellowish withall, as the heades with seede vpon them seeme likewise. The great red Beete that Master Lete a Merchant of London gaue vnto Master Ger∣rard, as he setteth it downe in his Herball, seemeth to bee the red kinde of the last re∣membred Beete, whose great ribbes as he saith, are as great as the middle ribbe of the Cabbage leafe, and as good to bee eaten, whose stalke rose with him to the height of eight cubits, and bore plenty of seede. The Vse of Beetes. Beetes, both white, greene and red, are put into the pot among other herbes, to make pottage, as is commonly known vnto all, and are also boy∣led whole, both in France vsually with most of their boyled meates, and in our Countrey, with diuers that delight in eating of herbes. The Italian Beete, and so likewise the last red Beete with great ribbes, are boyled, and the ribbes eaten in sallets with oyle, vinegar and pepper, and is accounted a rare kinde of sallet, and very delicate. The roote of the common red Beete with some, but more especially the Romane red Beete, is of much vse among Cookes to trimme or set out their dishes of meate, being cut out into diuers formes and fashions, and is grown of late dayes into a great custome of seruice, both for fish and flesh. The rootes of the Romane red Beete being boyled, are eaten of diuers while they are hot with a little oyle and vinegar, and is accounted a delicate sallet for the winter; and being cold they are so vsed and eaten likewise. The leaues are much vsed to mollifie and open the belly, being vsed in the decoction of Glisters. The roote of the white kinde scraped, and made vp with a little honey and salt, rubbed on and layd on the belly, prouoketh to the stoole. The vse of eating Beetes is likewise held to bee helpefull to spleneticke persons. CHAP. XXI. Hipposelinum, siue Olus atrum. Alisanders. ALisanders hath beene in former times thought to be the true Macedonian Par∣sley, and in that errour many doe yet continue: but this place giueth not leaue to discusse that doubt: but I must here only shew you, what it is, and to what vse it is put ordinarily for the Kitchen. The leaues of Alisanders are winged or cut into many parts, somewhat resembling Smallage, but greater, broader, and more cut in about the edges: the stalkes are round and great, two foote high or bet∣ter, bearing diuers leaues on them, and at the toppe spokie roundles of white flowers on seuerall small branches, which turne into blacke seede, somewhat cornered or crested, of an aromaticall bitter taste: the roote is blacke without, and white with∣in, and abideth well the first year of the sowing, perishing after it hath borne seed. The Vse of Alisanders.
The tops of the rootes, with the lower part of the stalkes of Alisanders, are vsed in Lent especially, and Spring of the yeare, to make broth, which although it be a little bitter, yet it is both wholsome, and pleasing to a great  many, by reason of the aromaticall or spicie taste, warming and comfor∣ting the stomack, and helping it digest the many waterish and flegmaticke meates are in those times much eaten. The rootes also either rawe or boyled are often eaten with oyle and vinegar. The seede is more vsed physically then the roote, or any other part, and is effectuall to prouoke plenty of v∣rine in them that pisse by drops, or haue the Strangury: It helpeth wo∣mens courses, and warmeth their benummed bodies or members, that haue endured fierce cold daies and nights, being boyled and drunke. CHAP. XXII. Selinum dulce. Sweete Parsley or sweete Smallage. THis kinde of sweete Parsley or Smallage, which soeuer you please to call it; for it resembleth Smallage as well in the largenesse of the leaues, as in the taste, yet sweeter and pleasanter, is (as I take it) in this like vnto sweete Fennell (that hath his sweetnesse from his naturall soyle and clymate; for how∣soeuer it bee reasonable sweet the first yeare it is sowne with vs, yet it quickly doth degenerate, and becommeth no better then our ordinarie Fennell afterwards). The first yeare it is sowne and planted with vs (and the first that euer I saw, was in a Venetian Ambassadours Garden in the Spittle yard, neare Bishops gate streete) is so sweete and pleasant, especially while it is young, as if Sugar had beene mingled with it: but after it is growne vp high and large, it hath a stronger taste of Smal∣ladge, and so likewise much more the next yeare; that it groweth from the seed was gathered here: the leaues are many, spreading farre about the roote, broader and of a fresher greene colour then our ordinary Smalladge, and vpon longer stalkes: the seed is as plentifull as Parsley, being small and very like vnto it, but darker of colour. The Vse of sweete Parsley. The Venetians vse to prepare it for meate many waies, both the herbe and the roote eaten rawe, as many other herbes and rootes are, or boyled or fryed to be eaten with meate, or the dryed herbe poudered and strewed vpon meate; but most vsually either whited, and so eaten rawe with pepper and oyle, as a dainty Sallet of it selfe, or a little boyled or stewed: the taste of the herbe being a little warming, but the seede much more, helpeth cold windy stomackes to digest their meate, and to expell winde. CHAP. XXIII. Petrosolinum & Apium. Parsley and Smalledge. WE haue three sorts of Parsley in our Gardens, and but one of Smalladge: Our common Parsley, Curld Parsley, and Virginia Parsley; which last, although it be but of late knowne, yet it is now almost growne common, and of as good vse as the other with diuers. Our common Parsley is so well knowne, that it is almost needlesse to describe it, hauing diuers fresh greene leaues, three alwaies placed together on a stalke, and snipt about the edges, and three stalkes of leaues for the most part growing together: the stalkes growe three or foure foote high or better, bearing spikie heads of white flowers, which turne into small seede, somewhat sharpe and hot in taste: the roote is long and white. Curld Parsley hath his leaues curled or crumpled on the edges, and therein is the onely difference from the former.
Virginia Parsley is in his leafe altogether like vnto common Parsley for the forme, consisting of three leaues set together, but that the leaues are as large as Smallage leaues, but of a pale or whitish greene colour, and of the same taste of our common Parsley: the seede hereof is as the leaues, twice if not thrice as bigge as the ordinary Parsley, and perisheth when it hath giuen seede, abiding vsually the first yeare of the sowing. Smallage is in forme somewhat like vnto Parsley, but greater and greener, and lesse pleasant, or rather more bitter in taste: the seede is smaller, and the root more stringy. The Vse of Parsley. Parsley is much vsed in all sorts of meates, both boyled, roasted, fryed, stewed, &c. and being greene it serueth to lay vpon sundry meates, as also to draw meate withall. It is also shred and stopped into poudered beefe, as also into legges of Mutton, with a little beefe suet among it, &c. The rootes are often vsed to be put into broth, to helpe to open obstru∣ctions of the liuer, reines, and other parts, helping much to procure vrine. The rootes likewise boyled or stewed with a legge of Mutton, stopped with Parsley as aforesaid, is very good meate, and of very good rellish, as I haue proued by the taste; but the rootes must bee young, and of the first yeares growth, and they will haue their operation to cause vrine. The seed also is vsed for the same cause, when any are troubled with the stone, or grauell, to open the passages of vrine. Although Smallage groweth in many places wilde in moist grounds, yet it is also much planted in Gardens, and although his euill taste and sauour doth cause it not to be accepted into meates as Parsley, yet it is not without many speciall good properties, both for outward and inward diseases, to helpe to open obstructions, and prouoke vrine. The iuyce cleanseth vlcers; and the leaues boyled with Hogs grease, healeth felons on the ioynts of the fingers. CHAP. XXIIII. Foeniculum. Fenell. THere are three sorts of Fenell, whereof two are sweete. The one of them is the ordinary sweete Fenell, whose seedes are larger and yellower then the common, and which (as I said before in the Chapter of sweete Parsley) doth soone degenerate in this our Country into the common. The other sweete Fenell is not much knowne, and called Cardus Fenell by those that sent it out of Italy, whose leaues are more thicke and bushie then any of the other. Our common Fenell, whereof there is greene and red, hath many faire and large spread leaues, finely cut and diuided into many small, long, greene, or reddish leaues, yet the thicker tufted the branches be, the shorter are the leaues: the stalkes are round, with diuers ioynts and leaues at them, growing fiue or six foot high, bearing at the top many spoakie rundels of yellow flowers: the Common, I meane, doth turne into a darke grayish flat seede, and the Sweete into larger and yellower: the roote is great, long, and white, and endureth diuers yeares. The Vse of Fenell.
Fenell is of great vse to trimme vp, and strowe vpon fish, as also to boyle or put among fish of diuers sorts, Cowcumbers pickled, and other fruits, &c. The rootes are vsed with Parsley rootes, to be boyled in broths and drinkes to open obstructions. The seed is of much vse with other things to expell winde. The seede also is much vsed to be put into Pippin pies, and diuers 1 Petrosolinum. Parsley. 2 Atium. Smallage. 3 Foeniculum. Fenell. 4 Anethum. Dill. 5 Myrrhis siue Ceefolium magnum. Sweete Cheruill. 6 Cerefolium vulgare. Common Cheruil. depiction of plants
other such baked fruits, as also into bread, to giue it the better rellish. The sweete Cardus Fenell being sent by Sir Henry Wotton to Iohn Tradescante, had likewise a large direction with it how to dresse it; for they vse to white it after it hath been transplanted for their vses, which by reason of the sweetnesse by nature, and the tendernesse by art, causeth it to be the more delightfull to the taste, especially with them that are accustomed to feede on greene herbes. CHAP. XXV. Anethum. Dill. DIll doth much growe wilde, but because in many places it cannot be had, it is therefore sowne in Gardens for the vses whereunto it serueth. It is a smaller herbe then Fenell, but very like, hauing fine cut leaues, not so large, but shor∣ter, smaller, and of a stronger and quicker taste: the stalke is smaller also, and with few ioynts and leaues on them, bearing spoakie tufts of yellow flowers, which turne into thinne, small, and flat seedes: the roote perisheth euery yeare, and riseth againe for the most part of it owne sowing. The Vse of Dill. The leaues of Dill are much vsed in some places with Fish, as they doe Fenell; but because it is so strong many doe refuse it. It is also put among pickled Cowcumbers, wherewith it doth very well agree, giuing vnto the cold fruit a pretty spicie taste or rellish. It being stronger then Fenell, is of the more force to expell winde in the body. Some vse to eate the seed to stay the Hickocke. CHAP. XXVI. Myrrhis siue Cerefolium maius & vulgare. Sweet Cheruill and ordinary Cheruill. THe great or sweete Cheruill (which of some is called Sweete Cicely) hath diuers great and faire spread winged leaues, consisting of many leaues set to∣gether, deeply cut in the edges, and euery one also dented about, very like, and resembling the leaues of Hemlockes, but of so pleasant a taste, that one would verily thinke, he chewed the leaues or seedes of Aniseedes in his mouth: The stalke is reaso∣nable great, and somewhat cornered or crested about three or foure foote high, at the toppe whereof stand many white spoakie tufts of flowers, which change into browne long cornered great seede, two alwaies ioyned together: the roote is great, blackish on the outside, and white within, with diuers fibres annexed vnto it, and perisheth not, but abideth many yeares, and is of a sweete, pleasant, and spicie hot taste, delight∣full vnto many. The common Cheruill is a small herbe, with slender leaues, finely cut into long peeces, at the first of a pale yellowish greene colour, but when the stalke is growne vp to seede, both stalkes and leaues become of a darke red colour: the flowers are white, standing vpon scattered or thin spread tufts, which turne into small, long, round, and sharpe pointed seedes, of a brownish blacke colour: the roote is small, with diuers long slender white strings, and perisheth euery yeare.
The Vses of these Cheruils. The common Cheruill is much vsed of the French and Dutch people, to bee boyled or stewed in a pipkin, eyther by it selfe, or with other herbes, whereof they make a Loblolly, and so eate it. It is vsed as a pot-herbe with vs. Sweete Cheruill, gathered while it is young, and put among other herbes for a sallet, addeth a meruellous good rellish to all the rest. Some commend the greene seedes sliced and put in a sallet of herbes, and eaten with vinegar and oyle, to comfort the cold stomacke of the aged. The roots are vsed by diuers, being boyled, and after eaten with oyle and vinegar, as an excellent sallet for the same purpose. The preserued or candid rootes are of singular good vse to warme and comfort a cold flegmaticke stomack, and is thought to be a good preseruatiue in the time of the plague. CHAP. XXVII. Malua Crispa. French Mallowes. THe curld or French Mallow groweth vp with an vpright greene round stalke, as high vsually as any man, whereon from all sides grow forth round whitish greene leaues, curld or crumpled about the edges, like a ruffe, else very like vn∣to an ordinary great Mallow leafe: the flowers grow both vpon the stalke, and on the other branches that spring from them, being small and white; after which come small cases with blacke seede like the other Mallowes: the roote perisheth when it hath borne seede, but abideth vsually the first yeare, and the second runneth vp to flower and seede. The Vse of French Mallowes. It is much vsed as a pot-herbe, especially when there is cause to moue the belly downward, which by his slippery qualitie it doth helpe forward. It hath beene in times past, and so is to this day in some places, vsed to be boy∣led or stewed, eyther by it selfe with butter, or with other herbes, and so eaten. CHAP. XXVIII. Imtubum. Succorie and Endiue. I Put both Succorie and Endiue into one chapter and description, because they are both of one kindred; and although they differ a little the one from the other, yet they agree both in this, that they are eaten eyther greene or whited, of many. Endiue, the smooth as well as the curld, beareth a longer and a larger leafe then Succorie, and abideth but one yeare, quickely running vp to stalke and seede, and then perisheth: whereas Succorie abideth many years, and hath long and narrower leaues, somewhat more cut in, or torne on the edges: both of them haue blew flowers, and the seede of the smooth or ordinary Endiue is so like vnto the Succorie, that it is very hard to distinguish them asunder by sight; but the curld Endiue giueth blackish and flat seede, very like vnto blacke Lettice feede: the rootes of the Endiue perish, but the Succorie abideth. The Vse of Succory and Endiue.
Although Succorie bee somewhat more bitter in taste then the Endiues,  yet it is oftentimes, and of many eaten greene, but more vsually being bu∣ried a while in sand, that it may grow white, which causeth it to lose both some part of the bitternesse, as also to bee the more tender in the eating; and Horace sheweth it to be vsed in his time, in the 32. Ode of his first Book, where he saith, Me pascunt Oliuae, me Cithorea leues{que} Maluae. Endiue being whited in the same, or any other manner, is much vsed in win∣ter, as a sallet herbe with great delight; but the curld Endiue is both farre the fairer, and the tenderer for that purpose. CHAP. XXIX. Spinachia, siue Olus Hispanicum. Spinach. SPinach or Spinage is of three sorts (yet some doe reckon of foure, accounting that herbe that beareth no seede to be a sort of it selfe, when it is but an accident of nature, as it falleth out in Hempe, Mercury, and diuers other herbes) two that bear prickly seed, the one much greater then the other: the third that beareth a smooth seede, which is more daintie, and noursed vp but in few Gardens: The common Spi∣nach which is the lesser of the two prickly sorts, hath long greene leaues, broad at the stalke, and rent, or torne as it were into foure corners, and sharpe pointed at the ends: it quickly runneth vp to stalke, if it be sowen in the Spring time; but else, if at the end of Summer, it will abide all the winter green, and then suddenly in the very beginning of the Spring, runne vp to stalke, bearing many leaues both below and at the toppe, where there doth appeare many smal greenish flowers in clusters, and after them prick∣ly seede: The other greater sort that hath prickly seede, is in all things like the for∣mer, but larger both in stalke, leafe and seede. The smooth Spinach hath broader, and a little rounder pointed leaues then the first, especially the lower leaues; for those that grow vpwards vpon the stalke, are more pointed, and as it were three square, of as darke a greene colour as the former: at the seuerall ioynts of the stalkes and branches, stand clustering many small greenish flowers, which turne into clusters of round whi∣tish seede, without any prickles at all vpon them: the roote is long, white and small, like vnto the other, with many fibres at it: If it be often cut, it will grow the thicker, or else spindle vp very thinly, and with but few leaues vpon the stalke. The Vse of Spinage. Spinage is an herbe fit for sallets, and for diuers other purposes for the table only; for it is not knowne to bee vsed Physically at all. Many English that haue learned it of the Dutch people, doe stew the herbe in a pot or pipkin, without any other moisture then it owne, and after the moisture is a little pressed from it, they put butter, and a little spice vnto it, and make therewith a dish that many delight to eate of. It is vsed likewise to be made into Tartes, and many other varieties of dishes, as Gentlewomen and their Cookes can better tell then my selfe; vnto whom I leaue the further orde∣ring of these herbes, and all other fruits and rootes of this Garden: For I intend only to giue you the knowledge of them, with some briefe notes for their vse, and no more.
1 Malua crispa. French Mallowes. 2 Endiuia. Endiue. 3 Cichorium. Succory. 4 Spinachia. Spinach. 5 Lactuca crispa. Curld Lettice. 6 Lactuca parula. An open Lettice. 7 Lactuca capitata vulgaris. Ordinary cabbage Lettice. 8 Lactuca capitata Romana. The great Romane cabbage Lettice. 9 Lactuca agina. Corne Sallet or Lambes Lettice. depiction of plants
CHAP. XXX. Lactuca. Lettice. THere are so many sorts, and so great diuersitie of Lettice, that I doubt I shall scarce be beleeued of a great many. For I doe in this Chapter reckon vp vnto you eleauen or twelue differing sorts; some of little vse, others of more, be∣ing more common and vulgar; and some that are of excellent vse and seruice, which are more rare, and require more knowledge and care for the ordering of them, as also for their time of spending, as some in the spring, some in summer, others in au∣tumne, and some being whited for the winter. For all these sorts I shall not neede ma∣ny descriptions, but only shew you which doe cabbage, and which are loose, which of of them are great or small, white, greene or red, and which of them beare white seeds, and which of them blacke. And lastly I haue thought good to adde another Sallet herbe, which because it is called Lambes Lettice of many, or Corne Sallet of others, is put in only to fill vp a number in this Chapter, and that I must speake of it, and not that I thinke it to be any of the kindes of Lettice. All sorts of Lettice, after a while that they haue closed themselues, if they bee of the Cabbage kindes, or otherwise being loose, and neuer closing, send forth from a∣mong the middle of their leaues a round stalke (in some greater, in others lesser, accor∣ding to their kinde) full of leaues like vnto the lower, branching at the toppe into sun∣dry parts, whereon grow diuers small star-like flowers, of a pale yellowish colour; after which come seede, eyther white or blackish, as the plant yeeldeth, whereat hangeth some small peece of a cottony doune, wherewith the whole head is stored, and is car∣ried away with the winde, if it be not gathered in time: the roote is somewhat long and white, with some fibres at it, and perisheth quickely after the seede is ripe. The Romane red Lettice is the best and greatest of all the rest. For Iohn Trades∣cante that first, as I thinke, brought it into England, and sowed it, did write vnto mee, that after one of them had been bound and whited, when the refuse was cut away, the rest weighed seuenteene ounces: this hath blacke seede. The white Romane Lettice is like vnto it, hauing long leaues like a Teasell, it is in goodnesse next vnto the red, but must be whited, that it may eate kindly: the seede hereof is white. The Virginia Lettice hath single and very broade reddish leaues, and is not of any great regard, and therefore is kept but of a few: it beareth blacke seede. The common Lumbard Lettice that is loose, and another kinde thereof that doth somewhat cabbage, haue both white seedes. The Venice Lettice is an excellent Cabbage Lettice, and is best to bee sowen after Midsummer for lateward Lettice; they be sometimes as great as the crowne of a mans hatt: the seede hereof is white, and groweth to be of a meane height. Our common Cabbage Lettice is well known, and beareth blacke seede. The curld Lettice which is open, and differeth but little from Endiue, beareth black seede. Another sort of curld Lettice doth cabbage, and is called Flanders Cropers, or Cropers of Bruges; this groweth lowest, and hath the smallest head, but very hard and round, and white while it groweth: the seed is blacke. A kinde of Romane Lettice is of a darke green colour, growing as low as the Venice Lettice, and is an excellent kinde, bearing blacke seede. And lastly our winter Lettice is wonderfull hardy to endure our cold: It is but sin∣gle, and must be sowen at Michaelmas, but will be very good, before any of the other good sorts sowen in the Spring, will be ready to be vsed, and beareth white seed. To instruct a nouice (for I teach not a Gardiner of knowledge) how to gather his seede that it may be good, is in this manner: Let him marke out those plants that hee meaneth shall run vp for seede, which must be the most likely; & after they haue begun to shoote forth stalkes, strip away the lower leaues, for two or three hands breadth a∣boue the ground, that thereby in taking away the lowest leaues, the stalke doe not rot, nor the seed be hindered in the ripening.
There are two manner of wayes to whiten Lettice to make them eate the more ten∣der: the one is by raysing vp earth like moale hils, round about the plants while they are growing, which will make them grow white: the other is by tying vp all the loose leaues round together while it groweth, that so the close tying may make it grow white, and thereby be the more tender. Lambes Lettice or Corne Sallet is a small plant while it is young, growing close vp∣on the ground, with many whitish greene, long and narrow, round pointed leaues, all the winter, and in the beginning of the spring (if it bee sowen in autumne, as it is vsuall to serue for an early sallet) riseth vp with small round stalkes, with two leaues at euery ioynt, branching forth at the toppe, and bearing tufts of small bleake blew flowers, which turne into small round whitish seede: the roote is small and long, with some small threds hanging thereat: the whole plant is of a waterish taste, almost insipide. The Vse of Lettice. All sorts of Lettice are spent in sallets, with oyle and vinegar, or as euery one please, for the most part, while they are fresh and greene, or whited, as is declared of some of the sorts before, to cause them to eate the more de∣licate and tender. They are also boyled, to serue for many sorts of dishes of meate, as the Cookes know best. They all coole a hot and fainting stomacke. The iuice of Lettice applyed with oyle of Roses to the foreheads of the sicke and weake wanting sleepe, procureth rest, and taketh away paines in the head: bound likewise to the cods, it helpeth those that are troubled with the Colts euill. If a little camphire be added, it restraineth immoderate lust: but it is hurtfull to such as are troubled with the shortnesse of breath. Lambes Lettice is wholly spent for sallets, in the beginning of the yeare, as I said, before any almost of the other sorts of Lettice are to be had. CHAP. XXXI. Portulaca. Purslane. PVrslane hath many thicke round shining red stalkes, full of iuice, lying vpon the ground for the most part; whereon are set diuers long, thicke, pale green leaues, sometimes alone by themselues, and sometimes many small ones together with them; among which grow small yellow flowers, which stand in little greene huskes, containing blacke seede: the roote is small, and perisheth euery yeare, and must be new sowen in Aprill, in the alleyes of the Garden betweene the beds, as some haue hereto∣fore vsed, where it may haue the more moisture, or, as I haue seene in some Gardens, vpon those beds of dung that Gardiners haue vsed to nourse vp their Cowcumbers, Melons, and Pompions, whereon after they haue beene taken away, they haue sowen Purslane, where if it be much watered, the warmth of the dung, and the water giuen it, the Purslane hath grown great and large, and continued vntill winter. The Vse of Purslane. It is vsed as Lettice in sallets, to coole hot and faint stomackes in the hot time of the yeare, but afterwards if only for delight, it is not good to bee too prodigall in the vse thereof. The seede of Purslane doth coole much any inflammation inward or out∣ward, and doth a little binde withall.
CHAP. XXXII. Dracoherba siue Tarchon & Dracunculus hortensis. Tarragon. TArragon hath long and narrow darke greene leaues, growing on slender and brittle round stalkes, two or three foote high, at the tops whereof grow forth long slender spikes of small yellowish flowers, which seldome giue any good seede, but a dustie or chaffie matter, which flieth away with the winde: the roote is white, and creepeth about vnder ground, whereby it much encreaseth: the whole herbe is of a hot and biting taste. The Vse of Tarragon. It is altogether vsed among other cold herbes, to temper their coldnesse, and they to temper its heate, so to giue the better rellish vnto the Sallet; but many doe not like the taste thereof, and so refuse it. There are some Authors that haue held Tarragon not to be an herbe of it owne kinde, but that it was first produced, by putting the seede of Lin or Flaxe into the roote of an Onion, being opened and so set into the ground, which when it hath sprung, hath brought forth this herbe Tarragon, which absurd and idle opinion, Matthiolus by certaine experience saith, hath been found false. CHAP. XXXIII. Nasturtium hortense. Garden Cresses. GArden Cresses growe vp to the height of two foote or thereabouts, hauing many small, whitish, broad, endented, torne leaues, set together vpon a mid∣dle ribbe next the ground, but those that growe higher vpon the stalkes are smaller and longer: the tops of the stalkes are stored with white flowers, which turne into flat pods or pouches, like vnto Shepheard purse, wherein is contained flat reddish seede: the roote perisheth euery yeare: the taste both of leaues and seedes are some∣what strong, hot, and bitter. The Vse of Cresses. The Dutchmen and others vse to eate Cresses familiarly with their but∣ter and bread, as also stewed or boyled, either alone or with other herbes, whereof they make a Hotch potch, and so eate it. Wee doe eate it mixed among Lettice or Purslane, and sometimes with Tarragon or Rocket, with oyle and vinegar and a little salt, and in that manner it is very sauoury to some mens stomackes. The vse of Cresses physically is, it helpeth to expectorate tough flegme, as also for the paines of the breast; and as it is thought taketh away spots, being laid to with vinegar. The seede is giuen of many to children for the wormes.
1 Portulaca. Purslane. 2 Dracho herba seu Tarchon. Tarragon. 3 Eruca satiua. Garden Rocket. 4 Nasturtium sativum. Garden Cresse. 5 Sinapi. Mustard. 6 Asparagus. Asparagus or Sperage. depiction of plants
CHAP. XXXIIII. Eruca satiua. Garden Rocket. OVr Garden Rocket is but a wilde kinde brought into Gardens; for the true Romane Rocket hath larger leaues; this hath many long leaues, much torne or rent on the edges, smaller and narrower then the Romane kinde: the flow∣ers hereof are of a pale yellowish colour, whereas the true is whitish, consisting of foure leaues: the seede of this is reddish, contained in smaller and longer pods then the true, which are shorter and thicker, and the seede of a whitish yellow colour: the rootes of both perish as soone as they haue giuen seede. Some haue taken one sort of the wilde kinde for Mustard, and haue vsed the seede for the same purpose. The Vse of Rocket. It is for the most part eaten with Lettice, Purslane, or such cold herbes, and not alone, because of its heate and strength; but that with the white seede is milder. The seede of Rocket is good to prouoke vrine, and to stirre vp bodily lust. The seede bruised, and mixed with a little vinegar, and of the gall of an Oxe, cleanseth the face of freckles, spots, and blew markes, that come by beatings, fals, or otherwaies. Matthiolus saith, that the leaues boyled, and giuen with some Sugar to little children, cureth them of the cough. The seede is held to be helpfull to spleneticke persons; as also to kill the wormes of the belly. CHAP. XXXV. Sinapi sativum. Garden Mustard. THe Mustard that is most vsuall in this Country, howsoeuer diuers doe for their priuate vses sowe it in their Gardens or Orchards, in some conuenient corner, yet the same is found wilde also abroad in many places. It hath many rough long diuided leaues, of an ouerworne greene colour: the stalke is diuided at the toppe into diuers branches, whereon growe diuers pale yellow flowers, in a great length, which turne into small long pods, wherein is contained blackish seede, inclining to rednesse, of a fiery sharpe taste: the roote is tough and white, running deepe into the ground, with many small fibres at it. The Vse of Mustard. The seede hereof grownd between two stones, fitted for the purpose, and called a Querne, with some good vinegar added vnto it, to make it liquid and running, is that kinde of Mustard that is vsually made of all sorts, to serue as sawce both for fish and flesh. The same liquid Mustard is of good vse, being fresh, for Epilepticke per∣sons, to warme and quicken those dull spirits that are sopite and scarce ap∣peare, if it be applyed both inwardly and outwardly. It is with good successe also giuen to those that haue short breathes, and troubled with a cough in the lungs.
CHAP. XXXVI. Asparagus. Sperage or Asparagus. ASparagus riseth vp at the first with diuers whitish greene scaly heads, very brit∣tle or easie to breake while they are young, which afterwards rise vp into very long and slender greene stalkes, of the bignesse of an ordinary riding wand at the bottome of most, or bigger or lesser, as the rootes are of growth, on which are set diuers branches of greene leaues, shorter and smaller then Fennell vp to the toppe, at the ioynts whereof come forth small mossie yellowish flowers, which turne into round berries, greene at the first, and of an excellent red colour when they are ripe, shewing as if they were beades of Corrall, wherein are contained exceeding hard and blacke seede: the rootes are dispersed from a spongious head into many long, thicke, and round strings, whereby it sucketh much nourishment out of the ground, and encreaseth plentifully thereby. We haue another kinde hereof that is of much greater account, because the shootes are larger, whiter, and being dressed taste more sweete and pleasant, without any other difference. The Vse of Asparagus. The first shootes or heads of Asparagus are a Sallet of as much esteeme with all sorts of persons, as any other whatsoeuer, being boyled tender, and eaten with butter, vinegar, and pepper, or oyle and vinegar, or as euery ones manner doth please; and are almost wholly spent for the pleasure of the pallate. It is specially good to prouoke vrine, and for those that are troubled with the stone or grauell in the reines or kidneyes, because it doth a little open and cleanse those parts. CHAP. XXXVII. Brassica. Cabbages and Coleworts. THere is greater diuersity in the forme and colour of the leaues of this plant, then there is in any other that I know groweth vpon the ground. But this place requireth not the knowledge of all sorts which might be shewen, many of them being of no vse with vs for the table, but for delight, to behold the wonder∣full variety of the workes of God herein. I will here therefore shew you onely those sorts that are ordinary in most Gardens, and some that are rare, receiued into some e∣speciall Gardens: And first of Cabbages, and then of Coleworts.
Our ordinary Cabbage that closeth hard and round, hath at the first great large thicke leaues, of a grayish greene colour, with thicke great ribbes, and lye open most part of the Summer without closing, but toward the end of Summer, being growne to haue many leaues, it then beginneth to growe close and round in the middle, and as it closeth, the leaues growe white inward; yet there be some kindes that will neuer be so close as these, but will remaine halfe open, which wee doe not account to be so good as the other: in the middle of this head, the next yeare after the sowing, in other Countries especially, and sometimes in ours, if the Winter be milde, as may be seene in diuers Gardens (but to preuent the danger of our Winter frosts, our Gardiners now doe vse to take vp diuers Cabbages with their rootes, and tying a cloth or some such thing about the rootes, doe hang them vp in their houses, where they may be defen∣ded from cold, and then set them againe after the frosts are past) and then there shoo∣teth out a great thicke stalke, diuided at the toppe into many branches, bearing thereon diuers small flowers, sometime white, but most commonly yellow, made of foure leaues, which turne into long, round, and pointed pods, containing therein small  round seede, like vnto Turnep seede: the roote spreadeth not farre nor deepe, and dyeth vsually in any great froste; for a small frost maketh the Cabbage eate the ten∣derer. The red Cabbage is like vnto the white, last spoken of, but differing in colour and greatnesse; for it is seldome found so great as the white, and the colour of the leaues is very variable, as being in some stript with red, in others more red, or very deepe red or purple. The sugar loafe Cabbage, so called because it is smaller at the toppe then it is at the bottome, and is of two sorts, the one white, the other greene. The Sauoy Cabbadge, one is of a deepe greene coloured leafe, and curld when it is to be gathered; the other is yellowish: neyther of both these doe close so well as the first, but yet are vsed of some, and accounted good. The Cole flower is a kinde of Coleworte, whose leaues are large, and like the Cab∣bage leaues, but somewhat smaller, and endented about the edges, in the middle wher∣of, sometimes in the beginning of Autumne, and sometimes much sooner, there ap∣peareth a hard head of whitish yellow tufts of flowers, closely thrust together, but ne∣uer open, nor spreading much with vs, which then is fittest to be vsed, the green leaues being cut away close to the head: this hath a much pleasanter taste then eyther the Coleworte, or Cabbage of any kinde, and is therefore of the more regard and respect at good mens tables. The ordinary Coleworte is sufficiently knowne not to close or cabbage, and giueth seede plentifully enough. The other Colewortes that are noursed vp with those that delight in curiosities, be∣sides the aforesaid ordinary greene, which is much vsed of Dutchmen, and other stran∣gers, are these: The Curld Coleworte eyther wholly of a greene colour, or of di∣uers colours in one plant, as white, yellow, red, purple or crimson, so variably mixed, the leaues being curld on the edges, like a ruffe band, that it is very beautifull to behold. There is also another curld Colewort of lesse beauty and respect, being but a little curld on the edges, whose leaues are white, edged with red, or green edged with white. Two other there are, the one of a popingaye greene colour: the other of a fine deepe greene, like vnto the Sauoyes. Then there is the Cole rape, which is also a kinde of Coleworte, that beareth a white heade, or headed stalke aboue the ground, as bigge as a reasonable Turnep, but longer, and from the toppe thereof springeth out diuers great leaues, like vnto Cole∣wortes; among which rise diuers stalkes that beare yellow flowers, and seede in pods, almost as small as Mustard seede: the roote is somewhat long, and very bushie with threds. The Vse of Cabbages and Colewortes. They are most vsually boyled in poudered beefe broth vntil they be ten∣der, and then eaten with much fat put among them. The great ribs of the Popingay, and deepe greene Colewortes, beeing boyled and layde into dishes, are serued to the table with oyle and vinegar in the Lent time for very good sallets. In the cold Countries of Russia and Muscouia, they pouder vp a number of Cabbages, which serue them, especially the poorer sort, for their most ordinary foode in winter; and although they stinke most grieuously, yet to them they are accounted good meate.
It is thought, that the vse of them doth hinder the milke in Nurses breasts, causing it to dry vp quickely: but many women that haue giuen sucke to my knowledge haue denyed that assertion, affirming that they haue often eaten them, and found no such effect. How it might proue in more delicate bodies then theirs that thus said, I cannot tell: but Matthiolus auerreth it to encrease milke in Nurses breastes; so differing are the opinions of many. The seede grossely bruised and boyled a little in flesh broth, is a present re∣medie for the Collicke; the seede and the broth being taken together, ea∣sing them that are troubled therewith of all griping paines: as also for the stone in the kidneyes. A Lohoc or licking Electuary made of the pulpe of 1 Brassica capitata. Close Cabbage. 2 Brassica patula. Open Cabbage. 3 Brassica Sabaudica crisa. Curld Sauoye Colewort. 4 Caulis florida. Cole flower. 5 Caulis crispa. Curld Colewort. 6 Caulis crispa variata. Changeable curld Colewort. 7 Rapocaulis. Cole rape. depiction of plants
the boyled stalkes, and a little honey and Almond milke, is very profitable for shortnesse of breath, and those that are entring into a Consumption of the lunges. It hath beene formerly held to be helpefull in all diseases: for Crisippus, an ancient Physitian, wrote a whole Volume of the vertues, ap∣plying it to all the parts of the body: which thing neede not seeme won∣derfull, in that it is recorded by writers, that the old Romanes hauing ex∣pelled Physitians out of their Common-wealth, did for many hundred of yeares maintaine their health by the vse of Cabbages, taking them for eue∣ry disease. CHAP. XXXVIII. Sisarum. Skirrets. AFter all the herbes before rehearsed, fit for sallets, or otherwise to bee eaten, there must follow such rootes as are vsed to the same purpose: and first, Skir∣rets haue many leaues next the ground, composed of many small smooth green leaues, set each against other vpon a middle ribbe, and euery one snipt about the edges: the stalke riseth vp two or three foote high, set with the like leaues, hauing at the toppe spoakie tufts of white flowers, which turne into small seede, somewhat bigger and darker then Parsley seede: the rootes be many growing together at one head, beeing long, slender, & rugged or vneuen, of a whitish colour on the outside, and more white within, hauing in the middle of the roote a long small hard pith or string: these heads are vsually taken vp in February and March, or sooner if any so please, the greater number of them being broken off to bee vsed, the rest are planted againe after the heads are separated, and hereby they are encreased euery yeare by many; but it is now adayes more sowen of the seed, which come forwards well enough if the ground be fat and good. The Vse of Skirrets. The rootes being boyled, peeled and pithed, are stewed with butter, pep∣per and salt, and so eaten; or as others vse them, to roule them in flower, and fry them with butter, after they haue beene boyled, peeled and pithed: each way, or any way that men please to vse them, they may finde their taste to be very pleasant, far beyond any Parsnep, as all agree that taste them. Some doe vse also to eate them as a sallet, colde with vinegar, oyle, &c. being first boyled and dressed as before said. They doe helpe to prouoke v∣rine, and as is thought, to procure bodily lust, in that they are a little windy. CHAP. XXXIX. Pastinaca satiua latifolia. Parsneps. THe common garden Parsnep hath diuers large winged leaues lying vpon the ground, that is, many leaues set one by another on both sides of a middle stalk, somewhat like as the Skirret hath, but much larger, and closer set: the stalke ri∣seth vp great and tall, fiue or six foot high somtimes, with many such leaues thereon at seuerall ioynts; the top whereof is spread into diuers branches, whereon stand spoa∣kie rundles of yellow flowers, which turne into brownish flat seede: the root is long, great and white, very pleasant to bee eaten, and the more pleasant if it grow in a fat sandy soyle.
There is another sort of garden Parsnep, called the Pine Parsnep, that is not com∣mon in euery Garden, and differeth from the former in three notable parts. The root is not so long, but thicker at the head and smaller below; the stalke is neither so bigge, 1 Sisarum. Skirrits. 2 Pastinaca latifolia. Parsneps. 3 Pastinaca tenuifolia. Carrets. 4 Rapu. Turneps. 5 Napus saetivus. Narewes. 6 Raphanus niger. Blacke Raddish. 7 Raphanus vulgaris. Common. Raddish. depiction of plants
nor so high; and the seede is smaller: yet as Iohn Tradescante saith (who hath giuen me the relation of this, and many other of these garden plants, to whom euery one is a debtor) the roote hereof is not altogether so pleasant as the other. Moreouer the wilde kinde, which groweth in many places of England (and wherof in some places there might be gathered a quarter sacke full of the seede) if it be sowen in Gardens, and there well ordered, will proue as good as the former kinde of Garden Parsneps. The Vse of Parsneps. The Parsnep root is a great nourisher, and is much more vsed in the time of Lent, being boyled and stewed with butter, then in any othertime of the yeare; yet it is very good all the winter long. The seede helpeth to dis∣solue winde, and to prouoke vrine. CHAP. XL. Pastina satiua tenuifolia. Carrots. THe Carrot hath many winged leaues, rising from the head of the roote, which are much cut and diuided into many other leaues, and they also cut and diuided into many parts, of a deepe greene colour, some whereof in Autumne will turne to be of a fine red or purple (the beautie whereof allureth many Gentlewomen oftentimes to gather the leaues, and sticke them in their hats or heads, or pin them on their armes in stead of feathers): the stalke riseth vp among the leaues, bearing many likewise vpon it, but nothing so high as the Parsnep, being about three foote high, bearing many spoakie tufts of white flowers, which turne into small rough seede, as if it were hairy, smelling reasonable well if it bee rubbed: the roote is round and long, thicke aboue and small below, eyther red or yellow, eyther shorter or longer, accor∣ding to his kinde; for there is one kinde, whose roote is wholly red quite thorough∣out; another whose roote is red without for a pretty way inward, but the middle is yellow. Then there is the yellow, which is of two sorts, both long and short: One of the long yellow sorts, which is of a pale yellow, hath the greatest and longest roote, and likewise the greatest head of greene, and is for the most part the worst, being spongy, and not firme. The other is of a deepe gold yellow colour, and is the best, hauing a smaller head, or tuft of greene leaues vpon it. The shorte rootes are likewise distinguished, into pale and deepe yellow colours. The Vse of Carrots. All these sorts being boyled in the broth of beefe, eyther fresh or salt, but more vsually of salted beefe, are eaten with great pleasure, because of the sweetenesse of them: but they nourish lesse then Parsneps or Skirrets. I haue not often knowne the seede of this Garden kinde to bee vsed in Physicke: but the wilde kinde is often and much vsed to expell winde, &c. CHAP. XLI. Rapum hortense. Turneps. THere are diuers sorts of Turneps, as white, yellow, and red: the white are the most common, and they are of two kinds, the one much sweeter then the other. The yellow and the red are more rare, and noursed vp only by those that are curious: as also the Navewe, which is seene but with very few.
The ordinary Garden Turnep hath many large, and long rough greene leaues, with deepe and vneuen gashes on both sides of them: the stalke riseth vp among the leaues about two foote high, spread at the toppe into many branches, bearing theron yellow flowers, which turne into long pods, with blackish round seede in them: the roote is round and white, some greater, some smaller; the best kinde is knowne to be flat, with a small pigges tale-like roote vnderneath it; the worser kinde which is more common in many places of this land, both North and West, is round, and not flat, with a grea∣ter pigges tayle-like roote vnderneath. The yellow kinde doth often grow very great, it is hardly discerned from the ordi∣nary kinde while it groweth, but by the greatnesse and spreading of the leaues beeing boyled, the roote changeth more yellow, somewhat neare the colour of a Carrot. The red Turnep groweth vsually greater then any of the other, especially in a good ground, being of a faire red colour on the outside, but being pared, as white as any o∣ther on the inside. This, as Matthiolus saith, doth grow in the Countrey of Anania, where hee hath seene an infinite number of them that haue waighed fifty pound a peece, and in some places hee saith, a hundred pound a peece, both which we would thinke to be incredible, but that we see the kind is greatly giuen to grow, and in warme Countries they may so thriue, that the bulke or bignesse of the roote may so farre passe the growth of our Countrey, as that it may rise to that quantity aboue specified. The Navew gentle is of two kindes, a smaller and a greater; the smaller is vsually called in France, Navean de Cane, the roote is somewhat long with the roundnesse; this kinde is twice as bigge as a mans thumbe, and many of them lesse: The other is long and great, almost as big as the short Carrot, but for the most part of an vneuen length, and roundnesse vnto the very end, where it spreadeth into diuers small long fibres: neyther of them doth differ much from the Turnep, in leafe, flower or seed. The Vse of Turneps. Being boyled in salt broth, they all of them eate most kindly, and by rea∣son of their sweetnesse are much esteemed, and often seene as a dish at good mens tables: but the greater quantitie of them are spent at poore mens feasts. They nourish much, and engender moist and loose flesh, and are very windy. The seede of the Navew gentle is (as I take it) called of Andro∣machus in the composition of his Treakle, Bunias dulcis: for Dioscorides and Plinie doe both say, that the seede of the tame Bunias or Napus is put into Antidotes, and not the seede of the wilde, which is more sharpe and bitter; neyther the seede of the Turnep, which is called in Greeke  in Latine Rapum, because the seede is not sweete. CHAP. XLII. Raphanus. Raddish. THere are two principall kindes of Garden Raddish, the one is blackish on the outside, and the otherwhite; and of both these there is some diuision againe, as shall be shewed. Dittander and horse Raddish be reckoned kinds thereof. The ordinary Raddish hath long leaues, vneuenly gashed on both sides, the stalke ri∣seth vp to the height of three or foure foote, bearing many purplish flowers at the top, made of foure leaues a peece, which turne into thicke and short pods, wherein are con∣tained round seede, greater then Turnep or Coleworte seede, and of a pale reddish colour: the roote is long, white, and of a reddish purple colour on the outside toward the toppe of it, and of a sharpe biting taste. There is a small kind of Raddish that commeth earlier then the former, that we haue had out of the low Countries, not differing in any thing else.
The blacke Raddish I haue had brought me out of the lowe Countries, where they sell them in some places by the pound, and is accounted with them a rare winter sallet:  the roote of the best kinde is blackish on the outside (and yet the seede gathered from such an one, hath after the sowing againe, giuen rootes, whereof some haue beene blacke, but the most part white on the outside) and white within, great and round at the head, almost like a Turnep, but ending shorter then a Raddish, and longer then a Turnep, almost peare-fashion, of a firmer and harder substance then the ordinary Rad∣dish, but no lesse sharpe and biting, and somewhat strong withall; the leaues are some∣what smaller, and with deeper gashes, the flower and seede are like the former, but smaller. Another sort of blacke Raddish is like in leafe and seede to the former, but the flower is of a lighter purple colour: the roote is longer and smaller, and changeth also to bee white as the former doth, so that I thinke they haue both risen from one kinde. The Horse Raddish is a kinde of wilde Raddish, but brought into Gardens for the vse of it, and hath great large and long greene leaues, which are not so much diuided, but dented about the edges: the roote is long and great, much stronger in taste then the former, and abideth diuers yeares, spreading with branches vnder ground. Dittander is likewise a wilde kinde hereof, hauing long pointed blewish greene leaues, and a roote that creepeth much vnder ground: I confesse this might haue bin placed among the herbes, because the leaues and not the rootes are vsed; but let it passe now with the kindes of Raddish. The Vse of these Raddishes. Raddishes doe serue vsually as a stimulum before meat, giuing an appetite thereunto; the poore eate them alone with bread and salt. Some that are early sowen, are eaten in Aprill, or sooner if the season permit; others come later; and some are sowen late to serue for the end of Summer: but (as of all things else) the earlier are the more accepted. The blacke Raddishes are most vsed in the winter, (yet some in their na∣turall and not forc'd grounds, haue their rootes good most part of the Sum∣mer) and therefore must bee sowen after Midsomer; for if they should bee sowen earlier, they would presently runne vp to stalke and seed, and so lose the benefit of the roote. The Physicall propertie is, it is often vsed in me∣dicines that helpe to breake the stone, and to auoyde grauell. The Horse Raddish is vsed Physically, very much in Melancholicke, Spleneticke and Scorbuticke diseases. And some vse to make a kinde of Mustard with the rootes, and eate it with fish. Dittander or Pepperworte is vsed of some cold churlish stomackes, as a sawce or sallet sometimes to their meate, but it is too hot, bitter and strong for weake and tender stomackes. Our Gardiners about London vse great fences of reede tyed together, which seemeth to bee a mat set vpright, and is as good as a wall to defend the cold from those things that would be defended, and to bring them for∣wards the earlier. CHAP. XLIII. Cepa. Onions. WEe haue diuers sorts of Onions, both white and red, flat, round and long, as shall be presently shewed: but I will doe with these as I doe with the rest, only giue you one description for them all, and afterwards their se∣uerall names and varieties, as they are to be known by. Our common Garden Onion hath diuers long greene hollow leaues, seeming halfe flat; among which riseth vp a great round hollow stalke, bigger in the middle then any where else, at the toppe whereof standeth a close round head, couered at the first with a thin skinne, which breaketh when the head is growne, and sheweth forth a great vm∣bell
1 Raphanus ruacanus. Horse Raddish. 2 Lepidium siue Piperitis. Dittander. 3 Cepae rotunae Round Onions. 4 Cepae longae. Long Oni∣ons. 5 Porrum. Leekes 6 Allium. Garlicke. 7 Rapunulus. Rampions. 8 Tragopogon. Goates bad. depiction of plants
of white flowers, which turne into blackeseede: but then the head is so heauie that the stalke cannot sustaine it, but must be vpheld from falling to the ground, lest it rot and perish: the roote as all know is round, in some greater, in others lesser, or flat, in some red on the outside only, in others quite thorough out, in some white, and very sharpe and strong, in others milder, and more pleasant, and some so pleasant that they may be eaten as an Apple: All these kindes of Onions, contrary to the nature of all other bulbous rootes, haue no off-set, or other roote growing to it, but are euery one alone single by themselues; and therefore it seemeth, the Latines, as Columella re∣cordeth, haue giuen it the name Vnio, and the French it should seeme following the Latine, and the English the French, do call it Oignon and Onion, as an vnite, or as if they were but one and one, and dye euery yeare after seed bearing. The red flat kinde is most vsually with vs the strongest of them all, yet I haue had a great red Onion brought mee from beyond Sea, that was as great almost as two mens fistes, flat and red quite thoroughout, and very pleasant both to smell vnto, and to eate, but did quickly degenerate; so that we plainly see, that the soyle and climate doth giue great alteration to plants of all sorts. The long kinde wee call St. Omers Onions, and corruptly among the vulgar, St. Thomas Onions. The other red kinde we call Strasborough Onions, whose outside onely is red, and are very sharpe and fierce. The white Onions both long and flat, are like vnto Chalke-stones lying vpon the ground, when they are ripe and fit to be gathered. And lastly, there is the Spanish Onion, both long and flat, very sweete, and eaten by many like an apple, but as Iohn Tradescante saith, who hath beene in Spaine, that the Spaniards themselues doe not eate them so familiarly, as they doe those white Onions that come out of our owne Countrey, which they haue there more plentifully then their sweete Onions. The Vse of Onions. Onions are vsed many wayes, as sliced and put into pottage, or boyled and peeled and layde in dishes for sallets at supper, or sliced and put into water, for a sawce for mutton or oysters, or into meate roasted being stuffed with Parsly, and so many waies that I cannot recount them, euery one plea∣sing themselues, according to their order, manner or delight. The iuice of Onions is much vsed to be applyed to any burnings with fire, or with Gun-pouder, or to any scaldings with water or oyle, and is most fa∣miliar for the Country, where vpon such sudden occasions they haue not a more fit or speedy remedie at hand: The strong smell of Onions, and so also of Garlicke and Leekes, is quite taken away from offending the head or eyes, by the eating of Parsley leaues after them. CHAP. XLIIII. Porrum. Leekes. THere be likewise sundry sorts of Leekes, both great and small. Leekes are very like vnto Onions, hauing long green hollow-like leaues, flattish on the one side, and with a ridge or crest on the backe side: if they bee suffered to grow vncut, then in the second or third yeare after the sowing, they will send forth a round and slender stalke, euen quite thoroughout, and not swollen or bigger in the middle like the Onion, bearing at the toppe a head of purplish flowers, and blacke seede after them, very like vnto Onion seede, that it is hard to distinguish them: the root is long and white, with a great bush of fibres hanging at it, which they call the beards. The vnset Leeke hath longer and slenderer roots then the other, which being trans∣planted, groweth thicker and greater.
The French Leeke, which is called the Vine Leeke, is the best of all others. Our common kinde is of two sorts, one greater then another. Another sort encreaseth altogether by the roote, as Garlicke doth. And then Ciues, which are the smallest, and encrease aboundantly only by the root. Some doe account Scalions to be rather a kinde of Onions then Leekes, and call them Cepa Ascalonica, or Ascalonitides, which will quickly spend it selfe, if it be suffered to be vncut; but all Authors affirme, that there is no wilde kinde of Onion, vnlesse they would haue it to be Gethyum, whereof Theophrastus maketh mention, saying, that it hath a long necke (and so these Scalions haue) and was also of some called Ge∣thyllides, which antiquity accounted to be dedicated to Latona, the mother of Apollo, because when she was bigge with childe of Apollo, she longed for these Leekes. The Vse of Leekes. The old World, as wee finde in Scripture, in the time of the children of Israels being in Egypt, and no doubt long before, fed much vpon Leekes, Onions, and Garlicke boyled with flesh; and the antiquity of the Gentiles relate the same manner of feeding on them, to be in all Countries the like, which howsoeuer our dainty age now refuseth wholly, in all sorts except the poorest; yet Muscouia and Russia vse them, and the Turkes to this day, (as Bellonius writeth) obserue to haue them among their dishes at their ta∣bles, yea although they be Bashas, Cades, or Vaiuodas, that is to say, Lords, Iudges, or Gouernours of countries and places. They are vsed with vs also sometimes in Lent to make pottage, and is a great and generall feeding in Wales with the vulgar Gentlemen. Onions boyled or rosted vnder the embers, and mixed with sugar and butter, are good for those that are troubled with coughes, shortnesse of breath, and wheesing. An Onion made hollow at the bottome, and some good Treakle put into it, with a little iuyce of Citrons (or Lemons in the stead thereof) being well baked together vnder the embers, after the hole is stopped againe, and then strained forth, and giuen to one that hath the plague, is very helpefull, so as hee be laid to sweate vpon it. Ciues are vsed as well to be shred among other herbes for the pot, as to be put into a Sallet among other herbs, to giue it a quicker rellish. Leekes are held to free the chest and lungs from much corruption and rotten flegme, that sticketh fast therein, and hard to be auoided, as also for them that through hoarsenesse haue lost their voice, if they be eyther taken rawe, or boyled with broth of barley, or some such other supping, fit and conducing thereunto. And baked vnder hot embers is a remedy against a surfeit of Mushromes. The greene blades of Leekes being boyled and applyed warme to the Hemorrhoides or piles, when they are swolne and painfull, giue a great deale of case. CHAP. XLV. Allium. Garlicke. I Haue spoken of diuers sorts of Garlicke called Moly, in the former booke: I shall neede in this place to shew onely those kindes, that this Garden nourseth vp, and leaue the rest to his fit time and place.
Garlicke hath many long greene leaues, like vnto Onions, but much larger, and not hollow at all as Onions are: the stalke riseth vp to be about three foote high, bearing such a head at the toppe thereof as Onions and Leekes doe, with purplish flowers, and blacke seede like Leekes: the roote is white within, couered ouer with many pur∣plish  skins, and is diuided into many parts or cloues, which serue both to set againe for increase, and also to vse as neede shall require, and is of a very strong smell and taste, as euery one knoweth, passing either Onions or Leekes, but exceeding wholsome withall for them that can take it. Allium Vrsinum. Ramsons. Ramsons are another kinde of Garlicke, and hath two or three faire broad leaues, of a fresh or light greene colour, pointed at the end: the stalke groweth about an hand length high, bearing many small and pure white starre-like flowers at the toppe, and afterwards small, blacke, and smooth round seede: the roote is also diuided into many parts, whereby it is much encreased, and is much milder then the former, both in smell and taste. The Vse of Garlicke. It being well boyled in salt broth, is often eaten of them that haue strong stomackes, but will not brooke in a weake and tender stomacke. It is accounted, and so called in diuers Countries, The poore mans Trea∣kle, that is, a remedy for all diseases. It is neuer eaten rawe of any man that I know, as other of the rootes aforesaid, but sodden alwaies and so taken. Ramsons are oftentimes eaten with bread and butter, and otherwise also, as euery mans affection and course of life leadeth him to vse. CHAP. XLVI. Rapunculus siue Rapuntium. Rampions. GArden Rampions are of two sorts, the one greater, the other lesser: the leaues of Rampions are in the one somewhat broad like a Beete, in the other some∣what long and narrow, and a little broader at the end, of a light greene colour, lying flat vpon the ground all the first winter, or yeare of the springing, and the next Spring shooteth forth stalkes two or three foote high, bearing at the toppe, in the big∣ger sort, a long slender spike of small horned or crooked flowers, which open their brimmes into foure leaues; in the lesser many small purplish bels, standing vpon seue∣rall small foote-stalkes, which turne into heads, bearing small blackish seede: the root is white, branched into two or three rootes, of the bignesse and length of a mans fin∣ger or thumbe. The Vse of Rampions. The rootes of both are vsed for Sallets, being boyled, and then eaten with oyle and vinegar, a little salt and pepper. CHAP. XLVII. Tragopogon. Goates beard.
GOates beard hath many long and narrow leaues, broader at the bottome, and sharper at the end, with a ridge downe the backe of the leafe, and of a pale greene colour; among which riseth vp a stalke of two or three foote high, smooth and hollow, bearing thereon many such like leaues, but smaller and shorter, and at the toppe thereof on euery branch a great double yellow flower, like almost vnto the flower of a Dandelion, which turneth into a head, stored with doune, and long whitish seede therein, hauing on the head of euery one some part of the doune,  and is carried away with the winde if it bee neglected: the roote is long and round, somewhat like vnto a Parsnep, but farre smaller, blackish on the outside, and white within, yeelding a milkie iuyce being broken, as all the rest of the plant doth, and of a very good and pleasant taste. This kinde, as also another with narrower leaues, almost like grasse, growe wilde abroad in many places, but are brought into diuers Gardens. The other two kindes formerly described in the first part, the one with a purple flow∣er, and the otherwith an ash-coloured, haue such rootes as these here described, and may serue also to the same purpose, being of equall goodnesse, if any will vse them in the same manner; that is, while they are young, and of the first yeares sowing, else they all growe hard, in running vp to seede. The Vse of Goates beard. If the rootes of any of these kindes being young, be boyled and dressed as a Parsnep, they make a pleasant dish of meate, farre passing the Parsnep in many mens iudgements, and that with yellow flowers to be the best. They are of excellent vse being in this manner prepared, or after any o∣ther fit and conuenient way, to strengthen those that are macilent, or grow∣ing into any consumption. CHAP. XLVIII. Carum. Carawayes. CArawayes hath many very fine cut and diuided leaues lying on the ground, be∣ing alwaies greene, somewhat resembling the leaues of Carrots, but thinner, and more finely cut, of a quicke, hot, and spicie taste: the stalke riseth not much higher then the Carrot stalke, bearing some leaues at the ioynts along the stalke to the toppe, where it brancheth into three or foure parts, bearing spoakie vmbels of white flowers, which turne into small blackish seede, smaller then Aniseede, and of a hotter and quicker taste: the roote is whitish, like vnto a Parsnep, but much smaller, more spreading vnder ground, and a little quicke in taste, as all the rest of the plant is, and abideth long after it hath giuen seede. The Vse of Carawayes. The rootes of Carawayes being boyled may be eaten as Carrots, and by reason of the spicie taste doth warme and comfort a cold weake stomacke, helping to dissolue winde (whereas Carrots engender it) and to prouoke vrine, and is a very welcome and delightfull dish to a great many, yet they are somewhat stronger in taste then Parsneps. The seede is much vsed to bee put among baked fruit, or into bread, cakes, &c. to giue them a rellish, and to helpe to digest winde in them are subiect thereunto. It is also made into Comfits, and put into Trageas, or as we call them in English, Dredges, that are taken for the cold and winde in the body, as also are serued to the table with fruit.
CHAP. XLIX. Pappas sine Battatas. Potatoes. THree sorts of Potatoes are well knowne vnto vs, but the fourth I rest doubtfull of, and dare not affirme it vpon such termes as are giuen vnto it, vntill I may be better informed by mine owne sight. The Spanish kinde hath (in the Islands where they growe, either naturally, or plan∣ted for increase, profit, and vse of the Spaniards that nourse them) many firme and ve∣rie sweete rootes, like in shape and forme vnto Asphodill rootes, but much greater and longer, of a pale browne on the outside, and white within, set together at one head; from whence rise vp many long branches, which by reason of their weight and weaknesse, cannot stand of themselues, but traile on the ground a yard and a halfe in length at the least (I relate it, as it hath growne with vs, but in what other forme, for flower or fruit, we know not) whereon are set at seuerall distances, broad and in a manner three square leaues, somewhat like triangled Iuie leaues, of a darke greene colour, the two sides whereof are broad and round, and the middle pointed at the end, standing reasonable close together: thus much we haue seene growe with vs, and no more: the roote rather decaying then increasing in our country. The Potatoes of Virginia, which some foolishly call the Apples of youth, is ano∣ther kinde of plant, differing much from the former, sauing in the colour and taste of the roote, hauing many weake and somewhat flexible branches, leaning a little down∣wards, or easily borne downe with the winde or other thing, beset with many winged leaues, of a darke grayish greene colour, whereof diuers are smaller, and some greater then others: the flowers growe many together vpon a long stalke, comming forth from betweene the leaues and the great stalkes, euery one seuerally vpon a short foot∣stalke, somewhat like the flower of Tabacco for the forme, being one whole leafe six cornered at the brimmes, but somewhat larger, and of a pale blewish purple colour, or pale doue colour, and in some almost white, with some red threads in the middle, standing about a thicke gold yellow pointell, tipped with greene at the end: after the flowers are past, there come vp in their places small round fruit, as bigge as a Damson or Bulleis, greene at the first, and somewhat whitish afterwards, with many white seedes therein, like vnto Nightshade: the rootes are rounder and much smaller then the former, and some much greater then others, dispersed vnder ground by many small threads or strings from the rootes, of the same light browne colour on the out∣side, and white within, as they, and neare of the same taste, but not altogether so pleasant. The Potatos of Canada, (which hath diuers names giuen it by diuers men, as Bau∣hinus vpon Matthiolus calleth it, Solanum tuberosum esculentum, Pelleterius of Middle∣borough in his Plantarum Synonimia, Heliotropium Indicum tuberosum, Fabius Columna in the second part of his Phytobasanos, Flos Solis Farnesianus, siue Aster Peruanus tube∣rosus: We in England, from some ignorant and idle head, haue called them Artichokes of Ierusalem, only because the roote, being boyled, is in taste like the bottome of an Artichoke head: but they may most fitly be called, Potatos of Canada, because their rootes are in forme, colour and taste, like vnto the Potatos of Virginia, but greater, and the French brought them first from Canada into these parts) riseth vp with diuers stiffe, round stalkes, eight or tenne foote high in our Country, where they haue scarce shewed their flowers, whereas the very head of flowers in other Countries, as Fabius Columna expresseth it, being of a Pyramis or Sugar loafe fashion, broade spreading below, and smaller pointed vpwards towards the toppe, is neere of the same length, whereon are set large and broade rough greene leaues, very like vnto the leaues of the flower of the Sunne, but smaller, yet growing in the very same manner, round about the stalkes: at the very later end of Summer, or the beginning of Autumne, if the roote bee well planted and defended, it will giue a shew of a few small yellow flowers at the top, like vnto the flowers of Aster or Starre-worte, and much smaller then any flower of the Sunne, which come to no perfection with vs: the roote, while the plant
1 Carum. Carawayes. 2 Battatas Hisoanorum. Spanish Potatoes. 3 Papas seu Battatas Virginianorum. Virginia Potatoes. 4 Battatas de Canada. Potatoes of Canada, or Artichokes of Ierusalem. depiction of plants
is growing aboue ground, encreaseth not to his full growth, but when the Summer is well spent, and the springing of the stalk is past, which is about the end of August, or in September, then the root is perceiued to be encreased in the earth, and will before Au∣tumne be spent, that is, in October, swell like a mound or hillocke, round about the foote of the stalkes, and will not haue his rootes fit to be taken vp, vntill the stalkes be halfe withered at the soonest; but after they be withered, and so all the winter long vntill the Spring againe, they are good, and fit to bee taken vp and vsed, which are a number of tuberous round rootes, growing close together; so that it hath beene ob∣serued, that from one roote, being set in the Spring, there hath been forty or more ta∣ken vp againe, and to haue ouer-filled a pecke measure, and are of a pleasant good taste as many haue tryed. The Vse of all these Potato's. The Spanish Potato's are roasted vnder the embers, and being pared or peeled and sliced, are put into sacke with a little sugar, or without, and is delicate to be eaten. They are vsed to be baked with Marrow, Sugar, Spice, and other things in Pyes, which are a daintie and costly dish for the table. The Comfit-makers preserue them, and candy them as diuers other things, and so ordered, is very delicate, fit to accompany such other ban∣quetting dishes. The Virginia Potato's being dressed after all these waies before specified, maketh almost as delicate meate as the former. The Potato's of Canada are by reason of their great increasing, growne to be so common here with vs at London, that euen the most vulgar begin to despise them, whereas when they were first receiued among vs, they were dainties for a Queene. Being put into seething water they are soone boyled tender, which after they bee peeled, sliced and stewed with butter, and a little wine, was a dish for a Queene, beeing as pleasant as the bottome of an Artichoke: but the too frequent vse, especially being so plentifull and cheape, hath rather bred a loathing then a liking of them. CHAP. L. Cinara. Artichokes. THe fruits that grow vpon or neere the ground, are next to be entreated of, and first of Artichokes, whereof there be diuers kindes, some accounted tame and of the Garden, others wilde and of late planted in Gardens, Orchards or Fieldes, of purpose to be meate for men. The Artichoke hath diuers great, large, and long hollowed leaues, much cut in or torne on both edges, without any great shew of prickles on them, of a kinde of whi∣tish greene, like vnto an ash colour, whereof it tooke the Latine name Cinara: the stalke is strong, thicke and round, with some skins as it were downe all the length of them, bearing at the toppe one scaly head, made at the first like a Pine-apple, but after growing greater, the scales are more separate, yet in the best kindes lying close, and not staring, as some other kindes doe, which are eyther of a reddish browne, whitish, or greenish colour, and in some broade at the ends, in others sharpe or prickly: after the head hath stood a great while, if it bee suffered, and the Summer proue hot and kindly, in some there will breake forth at the toppe thereof, a tuft of blewish purple thrumes or threds, vnder which grow the seede, wrapped in a great deale of dounie substance: but that roote that yeeldeth flowers will hardly abide the next winter; but else being cut off when it is well growne, that dounie matter abideth close in the mid∣dle of the head, hauing the bottome thereof flat and round, which is that matter or substance that is vsed to be eaten: the roote spreadeth it selfe in the ground reasona∣ble
1 Cinarasatiua rubra. The red Artichoke. 2 Cinara satiua alba. The whte Artichoke. 3 Cinara patala. The French Artichoke. 4 Ci∣ara luestis. The Thistle Artichoke. 5 Carduus esculentas. The Chardon. depiction of plants
well, yeelding diuers heads of leaues or suckers, whereby it is increased. The white Artichoke is in all things like the red, but that the head is of a whitish ashe colour, like the leaues, whereas the former is reddish. We haue also another, whose head is greene, and very sharpe vpwards, and is com∣mon in many places. Wee haue had also another kinde in former times that grew as high as any man, and branched into diuers stalkes, euery one bearing a head thereon, almost as bigge as the first. There is another kinde, called the Muske Artichoke, which groweth like the French kinde, but is much better in spending, although it haue a lesser bottome. The French Artichoke hath a white head, the scales whereof stand staring far asun∣der one from another at the ends, which are sharpe: this is well known by this quali∣tie, that while it is hot after it is boyled, it swelleth so strong, that one would verily thinke it had bin boyled in stinking water, which was brought ouer after a great froste that had well nigh consumed our best kindes, and are now almost cleane cast out again, none being willing to haue it take vp the roome of better. There is a lowe kinde that groweth much about Paris, which the French esteeme more then any other, and is lower then the former French kinde, the head whereof as well as the leaues, is of a fresher greene colour, almost yellowish. Then there is the Thistle Artichoke, which is almost a wilde kinde, and groweth smaller, with a more open and prickly head then any of the former. And lastly, the Chardon as they call it, because it is almost of the forme and nature of a Thistle, or wilde Artichoke. This groweth high, and full of sharpe prickles, of a grayish colour. Iohn Tradescante assured mee, hee saw three acres of Land about Brussels planted with this kinde, which the owner whited like Endiue, and then sold them in the winter: Wee cannot yet finde the true manner of dressing them, that our Countrey may take delight therein. All these kindes are encreased by slipping the young shootes from the root, which being replanted in February, March, or Aprill, haue the same yeare many times, but the next at the most, borne good heads. Wee finde by dayly experience, that our English red Artichoke is in our Countrey the most delicate meate of any of the other, and therefore diuers thinking it to bee a seuerall kinde, haue sent them into Italie, France, and the Lowe Countries, where they haue not abode in their goodnesse aboue two yeare, but that they haue degene∣rated; so that it seemeth, that our soyle and climate hath the preheminence to nourish vp this plant to his highest excellencie. The Vse of Artichokes. The manner of preparing them for the Table is well knowne to the youngest Housewife I thinke, to bee boyled in faire water, and a little salt, vntill they bee tender, and afterwardes a little vinegar and pep∣per, put to the butter, poured vpon them for the sawce, and so are ser∣ued to the Table. They vse likewise to take the boyled bottomes to make Pyes, which is a delicate kinde of baked meate. The Chardon is eaten rawe of diuers, with vinegar and oyle, pepper and salt, all of them, or some, as euery one liketh for their delight.
CHAP. LI. Fabae & Phaseoli. Garden and French Beanes. THe Garden Beane is of two colours, red or blacke, and white, yet both rise from one; the small or fielde Beanes I make no mention of in this place; but the French or Kidney Beane is almost of infinite sorts and colours: we doe not for all that intend to trouble you in this place, with the knowledge or relation of any more then is fit for a Garden of that nature, that I haue propounded it in the be∣ginning. Our ordinary Beanes, seruing for foode for the poorer sort for the most part, are planted as well in fieldes as in gardens, because the quantity of them that are spent ta∣keth vp many acres of land to be planted in, and rise vp with one, two or three stalks, according to the fertilitie of the soyle, being smooth and square, higher then any man oftentimes, whereon are set at certaine distances, from the very bottome almost to the toppe, two long smooth fleshy and thicke leaues almost round, one standing by another at the end of a small footestalke: betweene these leaues and the stalke, come forth diuers flowers, all of them looking one way for the most part, which are close a little turned vp at the brimmes, white and spotted with a blackish spot in the middle of them, and somwhat purplish at the foot or bottome, of the forme almost of Broome or Pease flowers, many of which that grow vpward toward the toppe, doe seldome beare fruit, and therefore are gathered to distill, and the toppes of the stalkes cut off, to cause the rest to thriue the better; after which grow vp long great smooth greene pods, greater then in any other kinde of Pulse, which grow blacke when they are ripe, and containe within them two, three or foure Beanes, which are somewhat flat and round, eyther white or reddish, which being full ripe grow blackish: the roote hath diuers fibres annexed vnto the maine roote, which dyeth euery yeare. The French or Kidney Beane riseth vp at the first but with one stalke, which after∣wards diuideth it selfe into many armes or branches, euery one of them being so weak, that without they be sustained with stickes or poles, whereon with their winding and claspers they take hold, they would lye fruitlesse vpon the ground: vpon these bran∣ches grow forth at seuerall places long footestalkes, with euery of them three broade, round and pointed greene leaues at the end of them, towards the tops whereof come forth diuers flowers, made like vnto Pease blossomes, of the same colour for the most part that the fruit will be of, that is to say, eyther white, or yellow, or red, or blackish, or of a deepe purple &c. but white is most vsuall for our Garden; after which come long and slender flat pods, some crooked, and some straight, with a string as it were running downe the backe thereof, wherein are contained flattish round fruit, made to the fashion of a kidney: the roote is long, and spreadeth with many fibres annexed vn∣to it, perishing euery yeare. The Vse of these Beanes. The Garden Beanes serue (as I said before) more for the vse of the poore then of the rich: I shall therefore only shew you the order the poore take with them, and leaue curiosity to them that will bestow time vpon them. They are only boyled in faire water and a little salt, and afterwards stewed with some butter, a little vinegar and pepper being put vnto them, and so eaten: or else eaten alone after they are boyled without any other sawce. The water of the blossomes distilled, is vsed to take away spots, and to cleer the skin. The water of the greene huskes or cods is good for the stone. The Kidney Beanes boyled in water huske and all, onely the ends cut off, and the string taken away, and stewed with butter &c. are esteemed more sauory meate to many mens pallates, then the former, and are a dish more oftentimes at rich mens Tables then at the poore.
CHAP. LII. Pisum. Pease. THere is a very great variety of manured Pease known to vs, and I think more in our Country then in others, whereof some prosper better in one ground and country, and some in others: I shall giue you the description of one alone for all the rest, and recite vnto you the names of the rest. Garden Pease are for the most part the greatest and sweetest kinds, and are sustained with stakes or bushes. The Field Pease are not so vsed, but growe without any such adoe. They spring vp with long, weake, hollow, and brittle (while they are young and greene) whitish greene stalkes, branched into diuers parts, and at euery ioynt where it parteth one broad round leafe compassing the stalke about, so that it com∣meth as it were thorough it: the leaues are winged, made of diuers small leaues set to a middle ribbe, of a whitish greene colour, with claspers at the ends of the leaues, whereby it taketh hold of whatsoeuer standeth next vnto it: betweene the leaues and the stalkes come forth the flowers, standing two or three together, euery one by it selfe on his owne seuerall stalke, which are either wholly white, or purple, or mixed white and purple, or purple and blew: the fruit are long, and somewhat round cods, whereof some are greater, others lesser, some thicke and short, some plaine and smooth, others a little crooked at the ends; wherein also are contained diuers formes of fruit or pease; some being round, others cornered, some small, some great, some white, o∣thers gray, and some spotted: the roote is small, and quickly perisheth. The kindes of Pease are these: The Rounciuall. The greene Hasting. The Sugar Pease. The spotted Pease. The gray Pease. The white Hasting. The Pease without skins. The Scottish or tufted Pease, which some call the Rose Pease, is a good white Pease fit to be eaten. The early or French Pease, which some call Fulham Pease, because those grounds thereabouts doe bring them soonest forward for any quantity, al∣though sometimes they miscarry by their haste and earlinesse. Cicer Arietinum. Rams Ciches. This is a kinde of Pulse, so much vsed in Spaine, that it is vsually one of their dain∣tie dishes at all their feasts: They are of two sorts, white and red; the white is onely vsed for meate, the other for medicine. It beareth many vpright branches with win∣ged leaues, many set together, being small, almost round, and dented about the edges: the flowers are either white or purple, according to the colour of the Pease which fol∣low, and are somewhat round at the head, but cornered and pointed at the end, one or two at the most in a small roundish cod. The Vse of Pease. Pease of all or the most of these sorts, are either vsed when they are greene, and be a dish of meate for the table of the rich as well as the poore, yet euery one obseruing his time, and the kinde: the fairest, sweetest, youn∣gest, and earliest for the better sort, the later and meaner kindes for the meaner, who doe not giue the deerest price: Or
Being dry, they serue to boyle into a kinde of broth or pottage, wherein many doe put Tyme, Mints, Sauory, or some other such hot herbes, to giue it the better rellish, and is much vsed in Towne and Countrey in the Lent 1 Fabasatiua. Garden Beanes. 2 Phaseoli satiui. French Beanes. 3 Pisum vulgae. Garden Pease. 4 Pisum vmbellatum siue Roseum. Rose Pease or Scottish Pease. 5 Pisum Saccharatum. Sugar Pease. 6 Pisum maculatum. Spotted Pease. 7 Cicer Arietinum. Rams Ciches or Cicers. depiction of plants
time, especially of the poorer sort of people. It is much vsed likewise at Sea for them that goe long voyages, and is for change, because it is fresh, a welcome diet to most persons therein. The Rams Ciches the Spaniards call Grauancos, and Garauancillos, and eate them boyled and stewed as the most dainty kinde of Pease that are, they are of a very good rellish, and doe nourish much; but yet are not with∣out that windy quality that all sorts of Pulse are subiect vnto: they increase bodily lust much more then any other sorts, and as it is thought, doth helpe to encrease seede. CHAP. LIII. Cucumer. The Cowcumber. OF Cowcumbers there are diuers sorts, differing chiefly in the forme and co∣lour of the fruit, and not in the forme of the plant; therefore one description shall serue in stead of all the rest. The Cowcumber bringeth forth many trailing rough greene branches lying on the ground, all along whereof growe seuerall leaues, which are rough, broad, vneuen at the edges, and pointed at the ends, with long crooked tendrels comming forth at the same ioynt with the leafe, but on the other side therof: between the stalks & the leaues at the ioynts come forth the flowers seuerally, euery one standing on a short foot-stalke, ope∣ning it selfe into fiue leaues, of a yellowish colour, at the bottome whereof groweth the fruit, long and greene at the first, but when it is thorough ripe, a little yellowish, ha∣uing many furrowes, and vneuen bunches all the length of it, wherein is a white firme substance next vnto the skin, and a cleare pulpe or watery substance, with white flat seede lying dispersed through it: the roote is long and white, with diuers fibres at it. The kindes. The first described is called, The long greene Cowcumber. There is another is called, The short Cowcumber, being short, and of an equall bignesse in the body thereof, and of an vnequall bignesse at both ends. The long Yellow, which is yellowish from the beginning, and more yel∣low when it is ripe, and hath beene measured to be thirteene inches long: but this is not that small long Cowcumber, called of the Latines, Cucumis anguinus. Another kinde is early ripe, called The French kinde. The Dantsicke kinde beareth but small fruit, growing on short branches or runners: the pickled Cowcumbers that are vsually sold are of this kind. The Muscouie kinde is the smallest of all other, yet knowne, and beareth not aboue foure or fiue at the most on a roote, which are no bigger then small Lemons. The Vse of Cowcumbers. Some vse to cast a little salt on their sliced Cowcumbers, and let them stand halfe an houre or more in a dish, and then poure away the water that commeth from them by the salt, and after put vinegar, oyle, &c. thereon, as euery one liketh: this is done, to take away the ouermuch waterishnesse and coldnesse of the Cowcumbers. In many countries they vse to eate Cowcumbers as wee doe Apples or Peares, paring and giuing slices of them, as we would to our friends of some dainty Apple or Peare.
The pickled Cowcumbers that come from beyond Sea, are much vsed  with vs for sawce to meate all the Winter long. Some haue striuen to equall them, by pickling vp our Cowcumbers at the later end of the yeare, when they are cheapest, taking the little ones and scalding them thoroughly well, which after they put in brine, with some Dill or Fenell leaues and stalkes: but these are nothing comparable to the former, wee either missing of the right and orderly pickling of them, or the kinde it selfe differing much from ours (as I said of the Dantsicke kinde) for ours are neither so tender and firme, nor so sauoury as the other. The rawe or greene Cowcumbers are fittest for the hotter time of the yeare, and for hot stomackes, and not to be vsed in colder weather or cold stomackes, by reason of the coldnesse, whereby many haue been ouertaken. The seede is vsed physically in many medicines that serue to coole, and a little to make the passages of vrine slippery, and to giue ease to hot diseases. CHAP. LIIII. Melo. Milions or Muske Melons. THere bee diuers sorts of Melons found out at this day, differing much in the goodnesse of taste one from another. This Countrey hath not had vntill of late yeares the skill to nourse them vp kindly, but now there are many that are so well experienced therein, and haue their ground so well prepared, as that they will not misse any yeare, if it be not too extreme vnkindly, to haue many ripe ones in a rea∣sonable time: yet some will be later then others alwayes. The Melon is certainly a kinde of Cowcumber, it doth so neare resemble it, both in the manner of his growing, hauing rough trailing branches, rough vneuen leaues, and yellow flowers: after which come the fruit, which is rounder, thicker, bigger, more rugged, and spotted on the outside then the Cowcumber, of a russet colour, and greene vnderneath, which when it groweth full ripe, will change a little yellowish, being as deepe furrowed and ribbed as they, and besides hauing chaps or rifts in di∣uers places of the rinde: the inward hard substance is yellow, which onely is eaten: the seede which is bigger, and a little yellower then the Cowcumber, lying in the mid∣dle onely among the moister pulpe: the smell and changing of his colour, fore-shew their ripenesse to them that are experienced: the roote is long, with many fibres at it. The fruit requireth much watering in the hot time of the day, to cause them to ripen the sooner, as I haue obserued by diuers of the best skill therein. The Vse of the kindes of Melons. The best Melon feede doe come to vs out of Spaine, some haue come out of Turkie, but they haue been nothing so good and kindly. Some are called Sugar Melons, others Peare Melons, and others Muske Melons. They haue beene formerly only eaten by great personages, because the fruit was not only delicate but rare; and therfore diuers were brought from France, and since were noursed vp by the Kings or Noblemens Gardiners onely, to serue for their Masters delight: but now diuers others that haue skill and conueniencie of ground for them, doe plant them and make them more common. They paire away the outer rinde, and cut out the inward pulpe where the seede lyeth, slice the yellow firme inward rinde or substance, & so eate it with salt and pepper (and good store of wine, or else it will hardly disgest) for this is firmer, & hath not that moisture in it that the Cowcumbers haue. It is also more delicate, and of more worth, which recompenseth the paine. The seed of these Melons are vsed as Cowcumbers physically, and to∣gether with them most vsually.
CHAP. LV. Pepo. Pompions. WE haue but one kinde of Pompion (as I take it) in all our Gardens, not∣withstanding the diuersities of bignesse and colour. The Pompion or great Melon (or as some call it Milion) creepeth vp∣on the ground (if nothing bee by it whreeon it may take hold and climbe) with very great, ribbed, rough, and prickly branches, whereon are set very large rough leaues, cut in on the edges with deepe gashes, and dented besides, with many claspers also, which winde about euery thing they meete withall: the flowers are great and large, hollow and yellow, diuided at the brims into fiue parts, at the bottome of which, as it is in the rest, groweth the fruit, which is very great, sometimes of the bignesse of a mans body, and oftentimes lesse, in some ribbed or bunched, in others plaine, and ei∣ther long or round, either green or yellow, or gray, as Nature listeth to shew her selfe; for it is but waste time, to recite all the formes and colours may be obserued in them: the inner rinde next vnto the outer is yellowish and firme: the seede is great, flat, and white, lying in the middle of the watery pulpe: the roote is of the bignesse of a mans thumbe or greater, dispersed vnder ground with many small fibres ioyned thereunto. Gourds are kindes of Melons; but because wee haue no vse of them, wee leaue them vnto their fit place. The Vse of Pompions. They are boyled in faire water and salt, or in powdered beefe broth, or sometimes in milke, and so eaten, or else buttered. They vse likewise to take out the inner watery substance with the seedes, and fill vp the place with Pippins, and hauing laid on the couer which they cut off from the toppe, to take out the pulpe, they bake them together, and the poore of the Citie, as well as the Country people, doe eate thereof, as of a dainty dish. The seede hereof, as well as of Cowcumbers and Melons, are cooling, and serue for emulsions in the like manner for Almond milkes, &c. for those are troubled with the stone. CHAP. LVI. Fragaria. Strawberries. THere be diuers sorts of Strawberries, whereof those that are noursed vp in Gar∣dens or Orchards I intend to giue you the knowledge in this place, and leaue the other to a fitter; yet I must needs shew you of one of the wilde sorts, which for his strangenesse is worthy of this Garden: And I must also enforme you, that the wilde Strawberry that groweth in the Woods is our Garden Strawberry, but bettered by the soyle and transplanting.
The Strawberry hath his leaues closed together at the first springing vp, which af∣terwards spread themselues into three diuided parts or leaues, euery one standing vpon a small long foote-stalke, greene on the vpperside, grayish vnderneath, and snipped or dented about the edges; among which rise vp diuers small stalkes, bearing foure or fiue flowers at the tops, consisting of fiue white round pointed leaues, somewhat yel∣lowish in the bottome, with some yellow threads therein; after which come the fruit, made of many small graines set together, like vnto a small Mulberry or Raspis, red∣dish when it is ripe, and of a pleasant winy taste, wherein is enclosed diuers small blac∣kish seede: the roote is reddish and long, with diuers small threads at it, and sendeth 1 cmis , u vulgaris. The ordinary Cowcumber. 2 Cucumis Hispanicus. The long yellow Spanish Cowcumber. 3 Melo vulgaris. The ordinary Melon. 4 Melo maximus optimus. The greatest Muske Melon. 5 Pepo. The Pompion. 6 Fraga vulgaris. Common Straw∣berries. 7 Fraga Bohemica maxima. The great Bohemia Strawberries. 8 Fraga acuseata. The prickly Strawberry. depiction of plants
forth from the head therof long reddish strings running vpon the ground, which shoot forth leaues in many places, whereby it is much encreased. The white Strawberry differeth not from the red, but in the colour of the fruite, which is whiter then the former when it is thorough ripe, enclining to rednesse. The greene Strawberry likewise differeth not, but that the fruit is green on all sides when it is ripe, saue on that side the Sun lyeth vpon it, and there it is somewhat red. The Virginia Strawberry carryeth the greatest leafe of any other, except the Bohe∣mian, but scarce can one Strawberry be seene ripe among a number of plants; I thinke the reason thereof to be the want of skill, or industry to order it aright. For the Bohe∣mia, and all other Strawberries will not beare kindly, if you suffer them to grow with many strings, and therefore they are still cut away. There is another very like vnto this, that Iohn Tradescante brought with him from Brussels long agoe, and in seuen yeares could neuer see one berry ripe on all sides, but still the better part rotten, although it would euery yeare flower abundantly, and beare very large leaues. The Bohemia Strawberry hath beene with vs but of late dayes, but is the goodliest and greatest, both for leafe next to the Virginian, and for beauty farre surpassing all; for some of the berries haue beene measured to bee neere fiue inches about. Master Quester the Postmaster first brought them ouer into our Country, as I vnderstand, but I know no man so industrious in the carefull planting and bringing them to perfection in that plentifull maner, as Master Vincent Sion who dwelt on the Banck side, neer the old Paris garden staires, who from seuen rootes, as hee affirmed to me, in one yeare and a halfe, planted halfe an acree of ground with the increase from them, besides those he gaue away to his friends, and with him I haue seene such, and of that bignesse be∣fore mentioned. One Strawberry more I promised to shew you, which although it be a wilde kinde, and of no vse for meate, yet I would not let this discourse passe, without giuing you the knowledge of it. It is in leafe much like vnto the ordinary, but differeth in that the flower, if it haue any, is greene, or rather it beareth a small head of greene leaues, many set thicke together like vnto a double ruffe, in the midst whereof standeth the fruit, which when it is ripe, sheweth to be soft and somwhat reddish, like vnto a Straw∣berry, but with many small harmlesse prickles on them, which may be eaten and chew∣ed in the mouth without any maner of offence, and is somewhat pleasant like a Straw∣berry: it is no great bearer, but those it doth beare, are set at the toppes of the stalks close together, pleasant to behold, and fit for a Gentlewoman to weare on her arme, &c. as a raritie in stead of a flower. The Vse of Strawberries. The leaues of Strawberries are alwaies vsed among other herbes in coo∣ling drinkes, as also in lotions, and gargles for the mouth and throate: the rootes are sometimes added to make it the more effectuall, and withall som∣what the more binding. The berries themselues are often brought to the Table as a reare seruice, whereunto claret wine, creame or milke is added with sugar, as euery one li∣keth; as also at other times, both with the better and meaner sort, and are a good cooling and pleasant dish in the hot Summer season. The water distilled of the berries, is good for the passions of the heart, caused by the perturbation of the spirits, being eyther drunke alone, or in wine; and maketh the heart merry. Some doe hold that the water helpeth to clense the face from spots, and to adde some cleerenesse to the skinne.
CHAP. LVII. Angelica. Garden Angelica. HAuing thus furnished you out a Kitchen Garden with all sorts of herbes, roots & fruits fit for it, and for any mans priuate vse, as I did at the first appropriate it; let me a little transcend, and for the profit & vse of Country Gentlewomen and others, furnish them with some few other herbes, of the most especiall vse for those shall need them, to be planted at hand in their Gardens, to spend as occasion shall serue, and first of Angelica. Angelica hath great and long winged leaues, made of many broade greene ones, diuided one from another vpon the stalk, which is three foot long or better somtimes, among which rise vp great thicke and hollow stalkes with some few ioynts, whereat doth alwayes stand two long leaues compassing the stalke at the bottome, in some pla∣ces at the ioynts spring out other stalkes or branches, bearing such like leaues but smal∣ler, and at the tops very large vmbels of white flowers, that turne into whitish seede somewhat thicke: the roote groweth great with many branches at it, but quickly pe∣risheth after it hath borne seede: to preserue the roote therefore the better, they vse to cut it often in the yeare, thereby to hinder the running vp to seede: the whole plant, both leafe, roote and seede, is of an excellent comfortable sent, sauour and taste. The Vse of Angelica. The distilled water of Angelica, eyther simple or compound, is of espe∣ciall vse in deliquium animi, vel cordis tremores & passiones, that is, swounings, when the spirits are ouercome and faint, or tremblings and passions of the heart, to expell any windy or noysome vapours from it. The green stalkes or the young rootes being preserued or candied, are very effectuall to comfort and warme a colde and weake stomacke: and in the time of infection is of excellent good vse to preserue the spirits and heart from infection. The dryed roote made into pouder, and taken in wine or other drinke, will abate the rage of lust in young persons, as I haue it related vnto me vpon credit: A Syrupe made thereof in this manner, is very profitable to expectorate flegme out of the chest and lunges, and to procure a sweete breath. Into the greene stalke of Angelica as it standeth growing, make a great gashe or in∣cision, wherein put a quantitie of fine white Sugar, letting it there abide for three dayes, and after take it forth by cutting a hole at the next ioynt vnder the cut, where the Syrupe resteth, or cut off the stalke, and turne it downe, that the Syrupe may drayne forth; which keepe for a most delicate me∣dicine. CHAP. LVIII. Dracunculus hortensis siue Serpentaria. Dragons. DRagons riseth out of the ground with a bare or naked round whitish stalke, spotted very much with purplish spots and strakes, bearing at the toppe therof a few greene leaues very much diuided on all sides, standing vpon long foote∣stalkes, in the middle whereof (if the roote be old enough) commeth forth a great long huske or hose, green on the outside, and of a darke purplish colour on the inside, with a slender long reddish pestell or clapper in the middle: the roote is great, round, flat and whitish on the outside, and whiter within, very like vnto the rootes of Arum, or Wakerobin, and tasting somewhat sharpe like it.
The Vse of Dragons. The chiefe vse whereunto Dragons are applyed, is, that according to an old receiued custome and tradition (and not the iudgement of any learned Author) the distilled water is giuen with Mithridatum or Treakle to expell noysome and pestilentiall vapours from the heart. CHAP. LIX. Ruta. Garden Rue, or Herbe Grace. GArden Rue or Herbe Grace groweth vp with hard whitish wooddy stalkes, whereon are set diuers branches of leaues, being diuided into many small ones, which are somewhat thicke and round pointed, of a blewish greene colour: the flowers stand at the tops of the stalkes consisting of foure small yellow leaues, with a greene button in the middle, and diuers small yellow threds about it, which growing ripe, containe within them small blacke seede: the roote is white and wooddy, sprea∣ding farre in the ground. The Vse of Rue. The many good properties whereunto Rue serueth, hath I thinke in for∣mer times caused the English name of Herbe Grace to be giuen vnto it. For without doubt it is a most wholesome herbe, although bitter and strong, and could our dainty stomackes brooke the vse thereof, it would worke admi∣rable effects being carefully and skilfully applyed, as time and occasion did require: but not vndiscreetly or hand ouer head, as many vse to doe that haue no skill. Some doe rippe vp a beade rowle of the vertues of Rue, as Macer the Poet and others, in whom you shall finde them set downe, to bee good for the head, eyes, breast, liuer, heart, spleene, &c. In some places they vse to boyle the leaues of Rue, and keep them in pickle, to eate them as Sam∣pire for the helpe of weake eyes. It is very auaileable in glisters or drinkes against the winde or the collicke, and to procure vrine that is stayed by the paines therof. The distilled water is often vsed for the same purposes afore∣said: but beware of the too frequent or ouermuch vse thereof, because it heateth exceedingly, and wasteth nature mightily. CHAP. LX. Carduus Benedictus. The Blessed Thistle. CArduus benedictus or the blessed Thistle, hath many weake tender branches ly∣ing for the most part on the ground, whereon are set long and narrow leaues, much cut in or waued about the edges, hairy or rough in handling, yet without any hard or sharpe thornes or prickles at all, that the tenderest hand may touch them without harme: but those that grow toward the toppes of the stalkes are somewhat more prickly, and the heads which grow on the tops of the seuerall branches are some∣what sharpe, set with prickles like a Thistle: the flower is yellow, and the seede lying within the woolly or flocky doune like to all other thistles, are blackish, long and round, with a few haires on the head of them: the roote is white, and perisheth euery yeare after it hath giuen seede. The Vse of the blessed Thistle.
The distilled water hereof is much vsed to be drunke against agues of all sortes, eyther pestilentiall or humorall, of long continuance or of lesse: 1 Angellica. Angellica. 2 Dracuncuus bortensis. Dragons. 3 uta bortensis. Garden Re, or Herbegrace. 4 Carduits benedict. bessed Thistle. 5 Alkakengi sue Solanum Haliccabum & Vesicatium, Winter Che. 6 Asarum Asarabacca. 7 Liqueritia. depiction of plants
but the decoction of the herbe giuen in due time, hath the more forcible operation: it helpeth to expell wormes, because of the bitternesse, and is thereby also a friend to the stomack ouercharged with chollar, and to clense the liuer: it prouoketh sweate and vrine, is helpefull to them are troubled with the stone, and to ease paines in the sides. CHAP. LXI. Solanum veficarium, siue Alkakengi. Winter Cherries. THe Winter Cherry hath a running or creeping roote in the ground, of the big∣nesse wany times of ones little finger, shooting forth at seuerall ioynts in seue∣rall places, whereby it quickly spreadeth a great compasse of ground: the stalke riseth not aboue a yard high, whereon are set many broade and long greene leaues, somewhat like vnto the leaues of Nightshade, but larger: at the ioynts where∣of come forth whitish flowers made of fiue leaues a peece, which after turne into green berries, inclosed with thin skins or bladders, which change to bee reddish when they grow ripe, the berry likewise being reddish, and as large as a Cherry, wherein are contained many flat and yellowish seed lying within the pulpe: which being gathered and strung vp, are kept all the yeare to be vsed vpon occasion. The Vse of Winter Cherries. The distilled water of the herbe and fruit together, is often taken of them that are troubled with the sharpnesse or difficultie of vrine, and with the stone in the kidneyes, or grauel in the bladder: but the berries themselues ei∣ther greene or dryed boyled eyther in broth, in wine, or in water, is much more effectuall: It is likewise conducing to open obstructions of the liuer, &c. and thereby to helpe the yellow Iaundise. CHAP. LXII. Asarum. Asarabacca. A Sarabacca, from a small creeping roote set with many fibres, shooteth forth di∣uers heads, and from euery of them sundry leaues, euery one standing vpon a long greene stalke, which are round, thicke, and of a very sad or darke greene colour, and shining withall: from the rootes likewise spring vp short stalkes, not fully foure fingers high, at the toppe of euery one of which standeth the flower, in fa∣shion very like the seede vessell of Henbane seede, of a greenish purple colour, which changeth not his forme, but groweth in time to containe therein small cornered seed: the greene leaues abide all the winter many times, but vsually sheddeth them in winter, and recouereth fresh in the spring. The Vse of Asarabacca. The leaues are much and often vsed to procure vomits, fiue or seuen of them bruised, and the iuice of them drunke in ale or wine. An extract made of the leaues with wine artificially performed, might bee kept all the yeare thorough, to bee vsed vpon any present occasion, the quantitie to bee pro∣portioned according to the constitution of the patient. The roote worketh not so strongly by vomit, as the leaues, yet is often vsed for the same pur∣pose, and besides is held auaileable to prouoke vrine, to open obstructions in the liuer and spleene, and is put among diners other simples, both into Mithridatum and Andromachus Treakle, which is vsually called Venice Treakle. A dram of the dryed roots in pouder giuen in white wine a little before the fit of an ague, taketh away the shaking fit, & therby cause the hot fit to be the more remisse, and in twice taking expell it quite.
CHAP. LXIII. Glycyrrhiza siue Liqueritia. Licorice. ALthough there are two sorts of Licorice set downe by diuers Authors, yet be∣cause this Land familiarly is acquainted but with one sort, I shall not neede for this Garden, to make any further relation of that is vnknowne, but onely of that sort which is sufficiently frequent with vs. It riseth vp with diuers wooddy stalks, whereon are set at seuerall distances many winged leaues, that is to say, many narrow long greene leaues set together on both sides of the stalke, and an odde one at the end, very well resembling a young Ashe tree sprung vp from the seede: this by many yeares continuance in a place without remouing, and not else, will bring forth flowers many standing together spike-fashion one aboue another vpon the stalkes, of the forme of Pease blossomes, but of a very pale or bleake blew colour, which turne into long somewhat flat and smooth cods, wherein is contained small round hard seede: the roote runneth downe exceeding deep into the ground, with diuers other smaller roots and fibres growing with them, and shoote out suckers from the maine rootes all about, whereby it is much encreased, of a brownish colour on the outside, and yellow within, of a farre more weake sweete taste, yet far more pleasing to vs then that Licorice that is brought vs from beyond Sea; because that, being of a stronger sweet taste hath a bitternesse ioyned with it, which maketh it the lesse pleasing and acceptable to most. The Vse of Licorice. Our English Licorice is now adaies of more familiar vse (as I said before) then the outlandish, and is wholly spent and vsed to helpe to digest and ex∣pectorate flegme out of the chest and lunges, and doth allay the sharpenesse or saltnesse thereof. It is good also for those are troubled with shortnesse of breath, and for all sorts of coughes. The iuice of Licorice artificially made with Hyssope water, serueth very well for all the purposes aforesaid. It be∣ing dissolued with Gum Tragacanth in Rose water, is an excellent Lohoc or licking medicine to breake flegme, and to expectorate it, as also to avoyde thin frothy matter, or thin salt flegme, which often fretteth the lunges. It doth also lenifie exulcerated kidneyes, or the bladder, and helpeth to heale them. It is held also good for those that cannot make their water but by drops, or a small deale at a time. The dryed root finely minced, is a speciall ingredient into all Trageas or Dredges, seruing for the purposes aforesaid, but the vse of them is almost wholly left now adaies with all sorts. Thus haue I shewed you not only the herbes, rootes and fruites, noursed vp in this Garden, but such herbes as are of most necessary vses for the Country Gentlewomens houses: And now I will shew you the Orchard also.
THE ORDERING OF THE ORCHARD. The third part, or ORCHARD. CHAP. I. The situation of an Orchard for fruit-bearing trees, and how to amend the defects of many grounds.
AS I haue done in the two former parts of this Treatise, so I meane to proceede in this; first to set downe the situation of an Orchard, and then other things in order: And first, I hold that an Orchard which is, or should bee of some reasonable large extent, should be so placed, that the house should haue the Garden of flowers iust before it open vpon the South, and the Kitchen Garden on the one side thereof, should also haue the Orchard on the other side of the Garden of Pleasure, for many good reasons: First, for that the fruit trees being grown great and tall, will be a great shelter from the North and East windes, which may of∣fend your chiefest Garden, and although that your Orchard stand a little bleake vpon the windes, yet trees rather endure these strong bitter blasts, then other smaller and more tender shrubs and herbes can doe. Secondly, if your Orchard should stand be∣hinde your Garden of flowers more Southward, it would shadow too much of the Garden, and besides, would so binde in the North and East, and North and West windes vpon the Garden, that it would spoile many tender things therein, and so much abate the edge of your pleasure thereof, that you would willingly wish to haue no Orchard, rather then that it should so much annoy you by the so ill standing thereof. Thirdly, the falling leaues being still blowne with the winde so aboundantly into the Garden, would either spoile many things, or haue one daily and continuall at∣tending thereon, to cleanse and sweepe them away. Or else to auoide these great in∣conueniences, appoint out an Orchard the farther off, and set a greater distance of ground betweene. For the ground or soile of the Orchard, what I haue spoken con∣cerning the former Garden for the bettering of the seuerall grounds, may very well serue and be applyed to this purpose. But obserue this, that whereas your Gardens be∣fore spoken of may be turned vp, manured, and bettered with soile if they growe out of heart, your Orchard is not so easily done, but must abide many yeares without alte∣ring; and therefore if the ground be barren, or not good, it had the more neede to bee amended, or wholly made good, before you make an Orchard of it; yet some there be  that doe appoint, that where euery tree should bee set, you onely digge that place to make it good: but you must know, that the rootes of trees runne further after a little times standing, then the first compasse they are set in; and therefore a little compasse of ground can maintaine them but a little while, and that when the rootes are runne beyond that small compasse wherein they were first set, and that they are come to the barren or bad ground, they can thriue no better then if they had beene set in that ground at the first, and if you should afterwards digge beyond that compasse, intending to make the ground better further off, you should much hurt the spreading rootes, and put your trees in danger: the situation of hils in many places is grauelly or chalky, which is not good for trees, because they are both too stonie, and lacke mellow earth, wherein a tree doth most ioy and prosper, and want moisture also (which is the life of all trees) because of the quicke descent of raine to the lower grounds: and besides all these inconueniences there is one more; your trees planted either on hils or hill sides, are more subiect to the fury and force of windes to be ouer∣turned, then those that growe in the lower grounds; for the strongest and most forci∣ble windes come not vsually out of the North East parts, where you prouide best de∣fence, but from the South and West, whence you looke for the best comfort of the Sunne. To helpe therefore manie of the inconueniences of the hils sides, it were fit to cause manie leauels to bee made thereon, by raising the lower grounds with good earth, and sustaining them with bricke or stone wals, which although chargeable, will counteruaile your cost, beside the pleasure of the walkes, and prospect of so worthy a worke. The plaine or leuell grounds as they are the most frequent, so they are the most commendable for an Orchard, because the moulds or earths are more rich, or may better and sooner be made so; and therefore the profits are the more may be rai∣sed from them. A stiffe clay doth nourish trees well, by reason it containeth moi∣sture; but in regard of the coldnesse thereof, it killeth for the most part all tender and early things therein: sea-cole ashes therefore, bucke ashes, streete soyle, chaulke after it hath lyen abroad and been broken with many yeares frosts and raine, and sheepes dung, are the most proper and fittest manure to helpe this kinde of soyle. The dry sandy soile, and grauelly ground are on the contrary side as bad, by reason of too much heate and lacke of moisture: the dung of kine or cattell in good quantity bestowed thereon, will much helpe them. The amending or bettering of other sorts of grounds is set down toward the end of the first Chapter of the first part of this worke, where∣vnto I will referre you, not willing to repeate againe the same things there set downe. The best way to auoide and amend the inconueniences of high, boisterous, and cold windes, is to plant Walnut trees, Elmes, Oakes or Ashes, a good distance without the compasse of your Orchard, which after they are growne great, will bee a great safe∣guard thereunto, by breaking the violence of the windes from it. And if the soyle of your Orchard want moisture, the conueying of the sinke of the house, as also any o∣ther draine of water thereinto, if it may be, will much helpe it. CHAP. II. The forme of an Orchard, both ordinary, and of more grace and rarity.
ACcording to the situation of mens grounds, so must the plantation of them of necessitie be also; and if the ground be in forme, you shall haue a formall Or∣chard: if otherwise, it can haue little grace or forme. And indeed in the elder ages there was small care or heede taken for the formality; for euery tree for the most part was planted without order, euen where the master or keeper found a vacant place to plant them in, so that oftentimes the ill placing of trees without sufficient space be∣tweene them, and negligence in not looking to vphold them, procured more waste and spoile of fruit, then any accident of winde or weather could doe. Orchards in most places haue not bricke or stone wals to secure them, because the extent thereof being  larger then of a Garden, would require more cost, which euery one cannot vndergoe; and therefore mud wals, or at the best a quicke set hedge, is the ordinary and most vsu∣all defence it findeth almost in all places: but with those that are of ability to com∣passe it with bricke or stone wals, the gaining of ground, and profit of the fruit trees planted there against, will in short time recompense that charge. If you make a doubt how to be sure that your Orchard wall shall haue sufficient comfort of the Sunne to ripen the fruits, in regard the trees in the Orchard being so nigh thereunto, and so high withall, will so much shadow the wall, that nothing will ripen well, because it will want the comfort of the Sunne: you may follow this rule and aduice, to remedy those inconueniences. Hauing an Orchard containing one acre of ground, two, three, or more, or lesse, walled about, you may so order it, by leauing a broad and large walke betweene the wall and it, containing twenty or twenty foure foote (or yards if you will) that the wall shall not be hindered of the Sun, but haue sufficient comfort for your trees, notwithstanding the height of them, the distance betweene them and the wall being a sufficient space for their shadow to fall into: and by compassing your Or∣chard on the inside with a hedge diagram of planting scheme (wherein may bee planted all sorts of low shrubs or bushes, as Roses, Cornellian Cherry trees plashed lowe, Gooseberries, Curran trees, or the like) you may enclose your walke, and keepe both it and your Orchard in better forme and man∣ner, then if it lay open. For the placing of your trees in this Or∣chard, first for the wals: Those sides that lye open to the South & Southwest Sunne, are fittest to bee planted with your tenderest and earliest fruits, as Apricockes, Pea∣ches, Nectarius, and May or early Cherries: the East, North and West, for Plums and Quinces, as you shall like best to place them. And for the Orchard it selfe, the ordinary manner is to place them without regard of measure or dif∣ference, as Peares among Ap∣ples, and Plums among Cherries promiscuously; but some keepe both a distance and a diuision for euery sort, without intermingling: yet the most gracefull Orchard containeth them all, with some others, so as they be placed that one doe not hinder or spoile another; and therefore to describe you the modell of an Orchard, both rare for comelinesse in the proportion, and pleasing for the profitablenesse in the vse, and also durable for continuance, regard this figure is here placed for your direction, where you must ob∣serue, that your trees are here set in such an equall distance one from another euery way, & as is fittest for them, that when they are grown great, the greater branches shall not gall or rubbe one against another; for which purpose twenty or sixteene foot is the least to be allowed for the distance euery way of your trees, & being set in rowes euery one in the middle distance, will be the most gracefull for the plantation, and besides, giue you way sufficient to passe through them, to pruine, loppe, or dresse them, as need shall require, and may also bee brought (if you please) to that gracefull delight, that euery alley or distance may be formed like an arch, the branches of either side meeting to be enterlaced together. Now for the seuerall sorts of fruit trees that you shall place in this modell, your best direction is to set Damsons, Bulleis, and your taler growing Plums on the outside, and your lower Plums, Cherries, and Apples on the inside, ha∣uing regard, that you place no Peare tree to the Sunward, of any other tree, lest it ouer∣shadow
them: Let your Peare trees therefore be placed behinde, or on the one side of your lower trees, that they may be as it were a shelter or defence on the North & East side. Thus may you also plant Apples among Plums and Cherries, so as you suffer not one to ouer-growe or ouer-toppe another; for by pruning, lopping, and shred∣ding those that growe too fast for their fellowes, you may still keepe your trees in such a conformity, as may be both most comely for the sight, and most profitable for the yeelding of greater and better store of fruit. Other sorts of fruit trees you may mixe among these, if you please, as Filberds, Cornellian Cherries in standerds, and Med∣lers: but Seruice trees, Baye trees, and others of that high sort, must be set to guard the rest. Thus haue I giuen you the fairest forme could as yet be deuised; and from this patterne, if you doe not follow it precisely, yet by it you may proportion your Or∣chard, be it large or little, be it walled or hedged. CHAP. III. Of a noursery for trees, both from sowing the kernels, and planting fit stockes to graft vpon.
ALthough I know the greater sort (I meane the Nobility and better part of the Gentrie of this Land) doe not intend to keepe a Nursery, to raise vp those trees that they meane to plant their wals or Orchards withall, but to buy them al∣ready grafted to their hands of them that make their liuing of it: yet because many Gentlemen and others are much delighted to bestowe their paines in grafting them∣selues, and esteeme their owne labours and handie worke farre aboue other mens: for their incouragement and satisfaction, I will here set downe some conuenient directi∣ons, to enable them to raise an Orchard of all sorts of fruits quickly, both by sowing the kernels or stones of fruit, and by making choise of the best sorts of stockes to graft on: First therefore to begin with Cherries; If you will make a Nursery, wherein you may bee stored with plenty of stockes in a little space, take what quantitie you thinke good of ordinarie wilde blacke Cherrie stones, cleansed from the berries, and sowe them, or pricke them in one by one on a peece of ground well turned vp, and large enough for the quantitie of stones you will bestowe thereon, from the midst of August vnto the end of September, which when they are two or three yeares old, ac∣cording to their growth, you may remoue them, and set them anew in some orderly rowes, hauing pruned their tops and their rootes, which at the next yeares growth af∣ter the new planting in any good ground, or at the second, will be of sufficient big∣nesse to graft vpon in the bud what sorts of Cherries you thinke best: and it is fittest to graft them thus young, that pruning your stockes to raise them high, you may graft them at fiue or six foote high, or higher, or lower, as you shall see good, and being thus grafted in the bud, will both more speedily and safely bring forward your grafts, and with lesse danger of losing your stockes, then by grafting them in the stocke: for if the bud take not by inoculating the first yeare, yet your tree is not lost, nor put in any hazzard of losse; but may be grafted anew the yeare following, if you will, in an∣other place thereof, whereas if you graft in the stocke, and it doe not take, it is a great chance if the stocke dye not wholly, or at least be not so weakened both in strength and height, that it will not bee fit to bee grafted a yeare or two after. In the same man∣ner as you doe with the blacke, you may deale with the ordinary English red Cherrie stones, or kernels, but they are not so apt to growe so straight and high, nor in so short a time as the blacke Cherrie stones are, and besides are subiect in time to bring out suc∣kers from the rootes, to the hinderance of the stockes and grafts, or at the least to the deformitie of your Orchard, and more trouble to the Gardiner, to pull or digge them away. Plumme stones may bee ordered in this manner likewise, but you must make choise of your Plums; for although euery Plumme is not so fit for this purpose, as the white Peare Plumme, because it groweth the goalest and freest, the barke being smooth and aptest to be raised, that they may be grafted vpon; yet diuers other Plummes may be taken, if they be not at hand, or to be had, as the blacke and red Peare Plumme, the  white and red Wheate Plumme, because they are nearest in goodnesse vnto it. Peach stones will be soone raised vp to graft other sorts of Peaches or Nectorins vpon, but the nature of the Peach roote being spongie, is not to abide long. As for Almonds, they will be raised from their stones to be trees of themselues; but they will hardly a∣bide the remouing, and lesse to bee grafted vpon. Apricocke stones are the worst to deale withall of any sort of stone fruit; for although the Apricocke branches are the fittest stockes to graft Nectorins of the best sorts vpon, yet those that are raised from the kernels or stones will neuer thriue to be brought on for this purpose; but will starue and dye, or hardly grow in a long time to be a straight and fit stocke to be grafted, if it be once remoued. Your Cornellian Cherrie trees are wholly, or for the most part rai∣sed from the stones or kernels; yet I know diuers doe increase them, by laying in their lowest branches to take roote: and thus much for stone fruits. Now for Apples and Peares, to be dealt withall in the same manner as aforesaid. They vse to take the pres∣sing of Crabs whereas Veriuyce is made, as also of Cidar and Perry where they are made, and sowing them, doe raise vp great store of stockes; for although the beating of the fruit doth spoile many kernels, yet there will bee enough left that were neuer toucht, and that will spring: the Crabbe stockes some preferre for the fittest, but I am sure, that the better Apple and Peare kernels will growe fairer, straighter, quicklier, and better to be grafted on. You must remember, that after two or three yeares you take vp these stockes, and when you haue pruned both toppe and roote, to set them a∣gaine in a thinner and fitter order, to be afterwards grafted in the bud while they are young, as I shall shew you by and by, or in the stocke if you will suffer them to growe greater. Now likewise to know which are the fittest stockes of all sorts to choose, thereon to graft euery of these sorts of fruits, is a point of some skill indeede; and therefore obserue them as I doe here set them downe: for bee you assured, that they are certaine rules, and knowne experiences, whereunto you may trust without being deceiued. Your blacke Cherrie stockes (as I said before) are the fittest and best for all sorts of Cherries long to abide and prosper, and euen May or early Cherry will a∣bide or liue longer, being grafted thereon, either in the budde or in the stocke, then on the ordinary red Cherry stocke; but the red Cherry stocke is in a manner the onely tree that most Nursery men doe take to graft May Cherries on in the stocke (for it is but a late experience of many, to graft May Cherries in the bud) many also doe graft May Cherries on Gascoigne Cherry stockes, which doe not onely thrine well, but en∣dure longer then vpon any ordinay Cherry stocke: For indeede the May Cherries that are grafted vpon ordinary red Cherrie stockes, will hardly hold aboue a dozen yeares bearing well, although they come forwarder at the first, that is, doe beare soo∣ner then those that are grafted on Gascoigne or blacke Cherry stockes; but as they are earlier in bearing, so they are sooner spent, and the Gascoigne and blacke Cherry stockes that are longer in comming forward, will last twice or thrice their time; but many more grafts will misse in grafting of these, then of those red Cherry stockes, and besides, the natures of the Gascoigne and blacke Cherry stockes are to rise higher, and make a goodlier tree then the ordinary red stocke will, which for the most part sprea∣deth wide, but riseth not very high. The English red Cherry stocke will serue very well to graft any other sort of Cherry vpon, and is vsed in most places of this Land, and I know no other greater inconuenience in it, then that it shooteth out many suckers from the roote, which yet by looking vnto may soone bee remoued from doing any harme, and that it will not last so long as the Gascoigne or blacke Cherry stocke will. May Cherries thus grafted lowe, doe most vsually serue to be planted against a wall, to bring on the fruit the earlier; yet some graft them high vpon standards, although not many, and it is, I thinke, rather curiosity (if they that doe it haue any wals) then anie o∣ther matter that causeth them thus to doe: for the fruit is naturally small, though early, and the standard Cherries are alwaies later then the wall Cherries, so that if they can spare any roome for them at their wals, they will not plant many in standards. Now concerning Plummes (as I said before) for the sowing or setting of the stones, so I say here for their choise in grafting of them, either in the budde or stocke. The white Peare Plumme stocke, and the other there mentioned, but especially the white Peare Plumme is the goodliest, freest, and fittest of all the rest, as well to graft all sort of Plummes vpon, as also to graft Apricockes, which can be handsomely, and to any  good purpose grafted vpon no other Plum stocke, to rise to bee worth the labour and paine. All sorts of Plums may be grafted in the stocke, and so may they also in the bud; for I know none of them that will refuse to be grafted in the bud, if a cunning hand performe it well; that is, to take off your bud cleanely and well, when you haue made choice of a fit cyon: for, as I shal shew you anon, it is no small peece of cunning to chuse your cyon that it may yeeld fit buds to graft withall, for euery plum is not of a like apt∣nes to yeeld them: But Apricocks cannot be grafted in the stock for any thing that euer I could heare or learne, but only in the bud, and therefore let your Plum stocke bee of a reasonable size for Apricockes especially, and not too small, that the graft ouer∣grow not the stocke, and that the stocke bee large enough to nourish the graft. As your Plum stockes serue to graft both Apricockes and Plummes, so doe they serue also very well to graft Peaches of all sorts; and although Peach stockes will serue to be grafted with Peaches againe, yet the Peach stocke (as I said before) will not endure so long as the Plumme stocke, and therefore serueth but for necessity if Plum stocks be not ready, or at hand, or for the present time, or that they afterwards may graft that sort of Peach on a Plumme stocke: for many might lose a good fruit, if when they meete with it, and haue not Plumme stockes ready to graft it on, they could not be as∣sured that it would take vpon another Peach stocke or branch, or on the branch of an Apricocke eyther. Plumme stockes will serue likewise very well for some sorts of Nectorins; I say, for some sorts, and not for all: the greene and the yellow Necto∣rin will best thriue to be grafted immediately on a Plumme stocke; but the other two sorts of red Nectorins must not be immediately grafted on the Plumme stocke, but vp∣on a branch of an Apricocke that hath beene formerly grafted on a Plumme stocke, the nature of these Nectorins being found by experience to be so contrary to the Plum stocke, that it will sterue it, and both dye within a yeare, two or three at the most: Di∣uers haue tryed to graft these red Nectorins vpon Peach stockes, and they haue endu∣red well a while; but seeing the Peach stocke will not last long it selfe, being ouer∣weake, how can it hold so strong a nature as these red Nectorins, which will (as I said before) sterue a Plum stocke that is sufficient durable for any other Plumme?
Apricocke stockes from the stones are hardly nursed vp, and worse to be remoued, and if a red Nectorin should be grafted on an Apricock raysed from the stone, and not remoued, I doubt it might happen with it as it doth with many other trees raised from stones or kernels, and not remoued, that they would hardly beare fruit: for the nature of most trees raised from stones or kernels, and not remoued, is to send great downe∣right rootes, and not to spread many forwards; so that if they be not cut away that o∣thers may spreade abroad, I haue seldome seene or known any of them to beare in any reasonable time; and therefore in remouing, these great downe-right rootes are al∣wayes shred away, and thereby made fit to shoote others forwards. Hereby you may perceiue, that these red Nectorins will not abide to bee grafted vpon any other stocke well, then vpon an Apricocke branch, although the green and the yellow (as I said be∣fore) will well endure and thriue vpon Plums. The suckers or shootes both of Plums and Cherries that rise from their rootes, eyther neare their stockes, or farther off, so that they bee taken with some small rootes to them, will serue to bee stockes, and will come forward quickly; but if the suckers haue no small roots whereby they may com∣prehend in the ground, it is almost impossible it should hold or abide. There is another way to rayse vp eyther stockes to graft on, or trees without grafting, which is, by cir∣cumcising a faire and fit branch in this manner: About Midsomer, when the sappe is thoroughly risen (or before if the yeare be forward) they vse to binde a good quantity of clay round about a faire and straight branch, of a reasonable good size or bignesse, with some conuenient bands, whether it be ropes of hey, or of any other thing, about an handfull aboue the ioynt, where the branch spreadeth from the tree, and cutting the barke thereof round about vnder the place where the clay is bound, the sap is hereby hindered from rising, or descending further then that place so circumcised, whereby it will shoote out small knubs and rootes into the clay, which they suffer so to abide vn∣till the beginning of winter, whenas with a fine Sawe they cut off that branch where it was circumcised, and afterwardes place it in the ground where they would haue it to grow, and stake it, and binde it fast, which will shoote forth rootes, and will become eyther a faire tree to beare fruite without grafting, or else a fit stocke to graft on accor∣ding  to the kinde: but oftentimes this kinde of propagation misseth, in that it sendeth not forth rootes sufficient to cause it to abide any long time. Let me yet before I leaue this narration of Plummes, giue you one admonition more, that vpon whatsoeuer Plumme stocke you doe graft, yet vpon a Damson stocke that you neuer striue to graft, for it (aboue all other sorts of Plumme stockes) will neuer giue you a tree worth your labour. It remaineth only of stone fruit, that I speake of Cornelles, which as yet I ne∣uer saw grafted vpon any stocke, being as it should seeme vtterly repugnant to the na∣ture thereof, to abide grafting, but is wholly raysed vp (as I said before) eyther from the stones, or from the suckers or layers. For Peares and Apples your vsuall stockes to graft on are (as I said before, speaking of the nursing vp of trees from the kernels) your Crabbe stockes, and they bee accepted in euery Countrey of this Land as they may conueniently be had, yet many doe take the stockes of better fruit, whether they bee suckers, or stockes raysed from the kernels (and the most common and knowne way of grafting, is in the stocke for all sorts of them, although some doe vse whipping, packing on, or incising, as euery one list to call it: but now we doe in many places be∣gin to deale with Peares and Apples as with other stone fruit, that is, graft them all in the bud, which is found the most compendious and safest way both to preserue your stocke from perishing, and to bring them the sooner to couer the stock, as also to make the goodlier and straighter tree, being grafted at what height you please:) for those stockes that are raysed from the kernels of good fruit (which are for the most part ea∣sily knowne from others, in that they want those thornes or prickles the wilde kindes are armed withall:) I say for the most part; for I know that the kernels of some good fruite hath giuen stockes with prickles on them (which, as I thinke, was because that good fruite was taken from a wilde stocke that had not beene long enough grafted to alter his wilde nature; for the longer a tree is grafted, the more strength the fruite ta∣keth from the graft, and the lesse still from the stocke) being smoother and fairer then the wilde kinds, must needes make a goodlier tree, and will not alter any whit the taste of your fruit that is grafted thereon, but rather adde some better rellish thereunto; for the Crabbe stockes yeelding harsh fruite, must giue part of their nature to the grafts are set thereon, and therefore the taste or rellish, as well as some other naturall properties of most fruits, are somewhat altered by the stocke. Another thing I would willingly giue you to vnderstand concerning your fruits and stockes, that whereas diuers for cu∣riosity and to try experiments haue grafted Cherries vpon Plumme stockes, or Plums on Cherry stockes, Apples vpon Peare stockes, and Peares vpon Apple stockes, some of these haue held the graft a yeare, two or three peraduenture, but I neuer knew that euer they held long, or to beare fruite, much lesse to abide or doe well: bestow not therefore your paines and time on such contrary natures, vnlesse it be for curiositie, as others haue done: Yet I know that they that graft peares on a white thorne stocke haue had their grafts seeme to thriue well, and continue long, but I haue seldome seene the fruite thereof answerable to the naturall wilde Peare stocke; yet the Medlar is knowne to thriue best on a white thorne. And lastly, whereas diuers doe affirme that they may haue not only good stockes to graft vpon, but also faire trees to bear store of fruit from the kernels of Peares or Apples being prickt into the ground, and suffered to grow without remouing, and then eyther grafted or suffered to grow into great trees vngrafted; and for their bearing of fruite, assigne a dozen or twenty yeares from the first setting of the kernels, and abiding vngrafted, I haue not seene or heard that expe∣rience to hold certaine, or if it should be so, yet it is too long time lost, and too much fruit also, to waite twenty yeares for that profit may be gained in a great deale of lesse time, and with more certainty. Vnto these instructions let mee adde also one more, which is not much known and vsed, and that is, to haue fruit within foure or fiue years from the first sowing of your stones or kernels in this manner: After your stones or kernels are two or three yeares old, take the fairest toppe or branch, and graft it as you would doe any other cyon taken from a bearing tree, and looke what rare fruite, eyther Peare or Apple, the kernell was of that you sowed, or Peach or Plum &c. the stone was set, such fruite shall you haue within two or three yeares at the most after the grafting, if it take, and the stocke be good. And thus may you see fruit in farre lesse time then to stay vntill the tree from a kernell or stone beareth fruit of it selfe.
CHAP. IIII. The diuers manners of grafting all sorts of fruits vsed in our Land. THe most vsuall manner of grafting in the stocke is so common and well known in this Land to euery one that hath any thing to doe with trees or an Orchard, that I think I shall take vpon mee a needlesse worke to set downe that is so well knowne to most; yet how common soeuer it is, some directions may profit euery one, without which it is not easily learned. And I doe not so much spend my time and paines herein for their sakes that haue knowledge, but for such as not knowing would faine be taught priuately, I meane, to reade the rules of the arte set downe in priuate, when they would refuse to learne of a Gardiner, or other by sight: and yet I discom∣mend not that way vnto them to learne by sight; for one may see more in an instant by sight, then he shall learn by his own practice in a great while, especially if he be a little practised before he see a cunning hand to doe it. There are many other kindes of graf∣ting, which shall be spoken of hereafter, and peraduenture euen they that know it well, may learne something they knew not before.
1. The grafting in the stocke, is, to set the sprigge of a good fruit into the body or stocke of another tree, bee it wilde or other, bee it young or old, to cause that tree to bring forth such fruit as the tree bore from whence you took the sprigge, and not such as the stocke or tree would haue borne, if it had not beene grafted, and is performed in this manner: Looke what tree or stocke you will chuse to graft on, you must with a small fine sawe and very sharpe, whip off, or cut off the head or toppe thereof at what height you eyther thinke best for your purpose, or conuenit for the tree: for if you graft a great tree, you cannot without endangering the whole, cut it downe so low to the ground, as you may without danger doe a small tree, or one that is of a reasonable size; and yet the lower or neerer the ground you graft a young tree, the safer it is both for your stocke and graft, because the sappe shall not ascend high, but soone giue vi∣gour to the graft to take and shoote quickly: After you haue cut off the toppe of your stocke, cut or smooth the head thereof with a sharpe knife, that it may be as plaine and smooth as you can, and then cleaue it with a hammer or mallet, and with a strong knife, cleauer or chessell, either in the middle of it if it be small, or of a reasonable size, or on the sides an inch or more within the barke, if it be great: into both sides of the cleft put your grafts, or into one if the stocke bee smaller; which grafts must bee made fit for the purpose on this fashion: Hauing made choise of your grafts from the toppe branches especially, or from the sides of that tree wherof you would haue the fruit, and that they be of a reasonable good size, not too small or too great for your stockes, and of one or the same yeares shoote; (and yet many doe cut an inch or more of the olde wood with the sprigge of the last yeares growth, and so graft the old and young toge∣ther (but both are good, and the old wood no better then the young) cut your graft not too long, but with two, three or foure eyes or buds at the most, which at the lower or bigger end for an inch long or more (for the greater stockes, and an inch or lesse for the lesser sort) must be so cut, that it be very thin on the one side from the shoulders down∣ward, and thicker on the other, and thin also at the end, that it may goe downe close in∣to the cleft, and rest at the shoulders on the head of the stocke: but take heede that in cutting your grafts your knife bee very sharpe that you doe not rayse any of the barke, eyther at the sides or the end, for feare of losing both your paines and graft, and stocke too peraduenture; and let not your grafts bee made long before you set them, or else put the ends of them in water to keepe them fresh and cleane: when you set them you must open the cleft of your stocke with a wedge or chessell as most doe, that the graft may goe easily into it, and that the barke of both graft and stocke may ioyne close the one to the other, which without stirring or displacing must bee so left in the cleft, and the wedge or chessell gently pulled forth; but because in the doing hereof consisteth in a manner the whole losse or gaine of your paines, graft and stocke, to preuent which inconuenience I doe vse an iron Instrument, the forme whereof is showne in the fol∣lowing  page, marked with the letter A, crooked at both ends, and broade like vnto a chessell, the one bigger, and the other lesser, to fit all sorts of stockes, and the iron han∣dle somewhat long betweene them both, that being thrust or knocked downe into the cleft, you may with your left hand open it as wide as is fit to let in your graft, without strayning, which being placed, this iron may bee pulled or knocked vp againe without any mouing of your graft: when you haue thus done, you must lay a good hand∣full or more (according to the bignesse of your stocke) of soft and well moistned clay or loame, well tempered together with short cut hey or horse dung, vpon the head of your stocke, as lowe or somewhat lower then the cleft, to keepe out all winde, raine or ayre from your graft vntill Midsomer at the least, that the graft be shot forth somewhat strongly, which then if you please may be remoued, and the cleft at the head only filled with a little clay to keepe out earewigs, or other things that may hurt your graft. A. The Iron Instrument with chessels at each end, the one bigger and the other lesser, to keepe the cleft of the Tree open vntill the graft bee pla∣ced in the stocke, which with a knock vpwards will be easily taken away. B. The small Penne-knife with a broad and thinne ended hafte, to raise the sides both of the bud and the down-right slit in the body or arme of a Tree to be grafted in the bud. C. A pen or quil cut halfe round to take off a bud from the branch. D. An Iuory Instrument made to the same fashion. E. A shielde of brasse made hol∣low before to be put into the slit, to keepe it open vntill the bud be put into its place. F. The manner of grafting cal∣led incising or splicing. G. A Ladder made with a stoole at the toppe, to serue both to graft higher or lower, and also to gather fruit without spoy∣ling or hurting any buddes or branches of Trees. 1. The first slit in the body or arme of a Tree to be grafted in the bud with the crosse cut at the head. 2. The same slit opened on both sides, ready to receiue the budde should be put there∣in: these small peeces serue as well as trees to shew the manner and order of the graf∣ting. 3. The branch of a Tree with one budde cut ready to be taken off, and another not yet touched. 4. The bud cleane taken off from the branch, both the foreside and backside. 5. The graft or bud now put into the stocke or tree you intend to be grafted: but the binding thereof is omitted. diagram of grafting tools and techniques 2. Inarching is another manner of grafting in the stocke, and is more troublesome, and more casuall also then the former, and is rather a curiosity then any way of good speede, certainety or profit, and therefore vsed but of a few. Yet to shew you, the
manner thereof, it is thus: Hauing a tree well growne, bee it high or low, yet the lower the better, with young branches well spread, they vse to set stockes round about it, or on the one side as you please; into which stockes they ingraft the young branches of the well growne tree as they are growing (before they cut them from the tree) by bow∣ing downe the branch they intend to graft, and putting it into the stocke, hauing first cut off the head thereof, and cut a notch in the middle of the head a little slope on both sides, wherein the branch must be fitted: let the branch be cut thinne on the vn∣derside, only of that length as may suffice to fit the notch in the stocke, leauing about halfe a yarde length of the branch, to rise aboue or beyond the stocke, which beeing bound on, and clayed ouer or couered with red or greene soft waxe, they let so abide, that if it take in the stocke they cut off the branch a little below the grafting place in Nouember following, and remouing the stocke, they haue thus gained a grafted and growne tree the first yeare: but it is vsually seene, that where one branch taketh, three doe misse: yet this manner of grafting was much in vse for May Cherries, when they were first known to vs, and the way thought to be a rare manner of grafting to encrease them, vntill a better way was found out, which now is so common and good also, that this is not now scarce thought vpon. 3. Another kinde of grafting in the stocke is called of some whipping, of some splicing, of others incising, and of others packing on (and as I heare, is much vsed in the West parts especially, and also in the North parts of this Land) and is performed in this manner: Take and slice the branch of a tree (so as the branch be not too bigge) or else a young tree of two, or three, or foure yeares growth at the most, quite off slope wise, about an inch and a halfe long or more, and cut a deep notch in the middle there∣of, then fit into it a graft iust of that size or bignesse, cut on both sides with shoulders, and thin at the end, that it may ioyne close in the notch, and neyther bigger or lesser, but that the barke of the one may bee fitted iust to the barke of the other, the figure wherof is expressed at the letters E.F. which shew the one to be with a shoulder & the other without; binde them gently together with bast, and put clay or waxe ouer the place, vntill it be taken: this is much vsed of late dayes for such young trees as are ri∣sen of stones or kernels after the second or third yeares growth, and thriue very well in that it not only saueth much time, but diuers checks by remouing and grafting.
4. Inoculating or grafting in the budde is another manner of grafting, which is the taking of a budde from one tree, and putting it into the barke of another tree, to the end, that thereby you may haue of the same kinde of fruit the tree bare from whence the budde was taken; and although it bee sufficiently knowne in many places of this Land, yet as I vnderstand, good Gardiners in the North parts, and likewise in some o∣ther places, can scarce tell what it meaneth, or at the least how to doe it well. It is per∣formed after a different fashion from the former, although they all tend vnto one end, which is the propagating of trees. You must for this purpose obserue, that for those trees you would graft, either with, or vpon, you choose a fit time in Summer, when the sappe is well risen, and your graft well shot, that the barke will rise easily and cleanly, both of stocke and graft, which time I cannot appoint, because both the years doe differ in earlinesse, and the seuerall parts or countries of this Land likewise one from another, but most vsually in these Southerne parts, from the beginning of Iune vnto the end of it, or to the middle of Iuly, or either somewhat before or after. First (as I said) hauing taken the fittest time of the yeare, you must take especiall care, that your grafts be well growne, and of the same yeares shoote, and also that the buds or eyes haue but single leaues at them, as neare as you can: for I would vtterly refuse those buds that haue aboue two leaues as vnprofitable, either in Peaches or any other fruit; and therefore see that your grafts or cyons bee taken from the chiefest place of the tree, that is, either from the toppe, or from a sunnie side thereof, and not from the contrarie side if you may otherwise, nor from any vnder-boughes; for seeing your graft is so small a thing, you had neede take the more care that it be the best and fairest. You must to take off this eye or budde from the sprigge, haue a small sharpe pen-knife, the end of the haft being made flat and thinne, like a chessell or wedge, the figure whereof is set forth at the letter B, and a pen or goose quill cut, to be lesse then halfe round, and to be broad at the end, but not sharpe pointed like a penne, or else such a peece of bone or Iuorie made in that fashion as the quill is, to bee thinne, hollow, or  halfe round, the figures of both which are marked with the letters C, D. with your knife cut the barke of the bud (hauing first cut off the leafe, leauing onely the short foote-stalke thereof at the bud) about a strawes breadth aboue the eye thereof halfe round, and then from that round or ouerthwart cut, with your knife cut it downe on both sides of the eye, close to the bud slopewise about an inch long or thereabouts, that it bee broad at the head aboue the eye, and pointing at the end like a sheild or scutcheon; and then cutting away the rest of the barke from about it, with the thinne flat end of the haft of your knife raise vp both sides of your bud a little, and with your quill or bone put vnder the barke, raise your budde, and thrust it quite off, beginning at the toppe or head of your eye; but see that you thrust it off close to the wood of the branch or sprigge, and that you doe not leaue the eye of the budde behinde sticking vpon the branch; for if that eye be left or lost, your bud is worth nothing; you must cast it away, and cut another that may haue that eye abiding within the budde on the inside: you may perceiue if that eye be wanting, if you see an emptie hole in the place where the eye should be, to fill it vp on the inside thereof; thus hauing taken off your bud well and cleanly, which is set forth vnto you at the figures 3 and 4. presently set it on the tree you would graft (for your small bud can abide no delay, lest by taking the ayre too long it become dry, and nothing worth) in this manner: Cut the barke of your tree you would graft in a smooth place, at what height you please, first aboue or ouerthwart, and then downe right in the middle thereof, more then an inch long, the figure whereof you shall haue at the figure 1. and then raise vp both sides of the barke, first one, and then another, with the flat and thinne haft end of your knife, a prettie way inwards (for if the barke will not rise easily, the stocke is not then fit to graft vp∣on) put in your budde into the cleft with the point downewards, holding the stalke of the leafe that is with the budde betweene your fingers of the one hand, and opening the cleft with the flat end of your knife with the other hand, that the head of your bud may be put close vnder the ouerthwart cut in the stocke or tree (which must not be raised or stirred as the sides are) & the eye of the bud stand iust in the middle of the slit that is downeright, and then closing the barke of the stocke or tree softly vnto the bud thus put in with your fingers, let it be bound gently with a small long peece of baste, or other such like soft thing, first aboue the eye, & then compassing it belowe as close as you can, but not too hard in any case, vntil you haue bound it all ouer the slit you made, especially the lower end, lest any winde get in to dry and spoile it; and hauing tyed both ends thereof fast, leaue it so for a fornight or somewhat more, in which space it will take and hold, if it be well done, which you shall perceiue, if the bud abide green, and turne not blacke, when you haue vnloosed the tying; for if it hold fast to the tree, and be fresh and good, tye it vp gently againe, and so leaue it for a fortnight longer, or a moneth if you will, and then you may take away your binding cleane: this budde will (if no other mischance happen vnto it) spring and shoote forth the next yeare, (and sometimes the same yeare, but that is seldome) and therefore in the beginning of the yeare, cut off the head of the grafted tree about an handfull aboue the grafted place, vntill the graft be growne strong, and then cut it off close, that the head may be couered with the graft, and doe not suffer any buds to sprout besides the graft, either aboue or belowe it. If you graft diuers buds vpon one stocke (which is the best way) let that onely remaine and abide that shooteth best forth, and rubbe off, or take away the other: the seuerall parts of this grafting I haue caused to be expressed for your fur∣ther information.
5. Grafting in the scutcheon is accounted another kinde of grafting, and differeth verie little from grafting in the budde: the difference chiefly consisteth in this, that in stead of the downe right slit, and that aboue ouerthwart, they take away iust so much barke of the great tree, as your bud is in bignesse, which vsually is a little larger then the former, and placing it therein, they binde it as formerly is said: some vse for this purpose a paire of compasses, to giue the true measure both of bud and stocke; this manner of grafting is most vsed vpon greater trees, whose young branches are too high to graft vpon in the former maner, and whose tops they cut off (for the most part) at the latter end of the next yeare after the bud is taken: both these waies were inuen∣ted to saue the losse of trees, which are more endangered by grafting in the stocke,  then any of these waies; and besides, by these waies you may graft at a farre grea height without losse. CHAP. V. Of the manner of grafting and propagating all sorts of Roses. HAuing now spoken of the grafting of trees, let mee adioyne the properties of Roses, which although they better fit a Garden then an Orchard, yet I could not in a fitter place expresse them then here, both for the name and affinity of grafting, & because I do not expresse it in the first part. All sorts of Roses may be graf∣ted (although all sorts are not, some seruing rather for stockes for others to be grafted on) as easily as any other tree, & is only performed, by inoculating in the same maner I haue set downe in the former Chapter of grafting trees in the bud; for both stocke and budde must bee dealt with after the same fashion. And although some haue boasted of grafting Roses by slicing or whipping, as they call it, or in the stocke, after the first manner, set downe in the former Chapter, yet I thinke it rather a bragge, not hauing seene or heard any true effect proceede from that relation. The sweete Briar or Eglan∣tine, the white and the Damaske Roses, are the chiefest stockes to graft vpon. And if you graft lowe or neare the ground, you may by laying downe that graft within the ground, after it hath bin shot out well, and of a years growth, by pinning it fast downe with short stickes, a thwart or acrosse, cause that grafted branch, by taking roote, to become a naturall Rose, such as the graft was, which being separated and transplanted after it hath taken root wel, will prosper as well as any naturall sucker. And in this ma∣ner, by laying downe branchese at length into the ground, if they be full of spreading small branches, you may increase all sorts of Roses quickly and plentifully; for they will shoote forth rootes at the ioynt of euery branch: But as for the manner of grafting white Roses or Damaske vpon Broome stalkes or Barbary bushes, to cause them to bring forth double yellow Roses, or vpon a Willowe, to beare greene Roses, they are all idle conceits, as impossible to be effected, as other things, whereof I haue spo∣ken in the ninth Chapter of my first part, concerning a Garden of flowers, vnto which I referre you to be satisfied with the reasons there alledged. And it is the more need∣lesse, because we haue a naturall double yellow Rose of it owne growing. The sowing of the seedes of Roses (which are sometimes found vpon most sorts of Roses, although not euery yeare, and in euerie place) hath bin formerly much vsed; but now the laying downe of the young shootes is a way for increase so much vsed, being safe and verie speedie to take, especially for those Roses that are not so apt to giue suckers, that it hath almost taken quite away the vse of sowing of the seedes of Roses, which yet if anie one bee disposed to make the triall, they must gather the seede out of the round heads, from amongst the doune, wherein they lye verie like vnto the berries of the Eglantine or sweete Briar bush, and especially of those Roses that bee of the more sin∣gle kindes, which are more apt to giue berries for seed then the more double, although sometimes the double Roses yeeld the like heads or berries. Their time of sowing is in the end of September (yet some reserue them vntill February) and their manner of noursing is to bee transplanted, after the first or second yeares growth, and ten∣ded carefully, that while they are young they be not lost for want of moisture in the dry time of Summer.
CHAP. VI. Certaine rules and obseruations in and after grafting, not remembred in the former Chapter.
THe time of some manners of grafting being not mentioned before, must here be spoken of. For the grafting of all sorts of trees in the stocke, the most vsuall time is from the middle of February vntill the middle of March, as the yeare and the countrie is more forward or backward, with vs about London wee neuer passe midde March: but because the May Cherrie is first ripe, and therefore of a very for∣ward nature, it doth require to be grafted somewhat sooner then others. The time of gathering likewise, or cutting your grafts for grafting in the stocke, is to be obserued, that they bee not long gathered before they bee grafted, for feare of being too dry, which I commend, howsoeuer diuers say, if they be long kept they are not the worse; and therefore if you be forced to haue your grafts from farre, or by some other chance to keepe them long, be carefull to keepe them moist, by keeping their ends stucke in moist clay; but if neare hand, neglect no time I say after the cutting of them for their grafting, but either the same, or the next day, or verie speedily after, in the meane time being put into the ground to keepe them fresh. The grafts taken from old trees, be∣cause they are stronger, and shoote forth sooner, are to bee sooner grafted then those that are taken from younger trees: of a good branch may bee made two, and some∣times three grafts sufficient for anie reasonable stocke. For whipping, the time is somewhat later then grafting in the stocke, because it is performed on younger trees, which (as I said before) doe not so early bud or shoote forth as the elder. Inarching likewise is performed much about the later end of the grafting time in the stocke; for being both kindes thereof they require the same time of the yeare. The times of the other manners of graftings are before expressed, to bee when they haue shot forth young branches, from whence your buds must be taken; and therefore need not here againe to be repeated. If a graft in the stocke doth happen not to shoote forth when o∣thers do (so as it holdeth green) it may perchance shoot out a moneth or two after, & do well, or else after Midsummer, when a second time of shooting, or the after Spring ap∣peareth: but haue an especiall care, that you take not such a graft that shal haue nothing but buds for flowers vpon it, and not an eye or bud for leaues (which you must be care∣full to distinguish) for such a graft after it hath shot out the flowers must of necessitie dye, not hauing wherewith to maintaine it selfe. Also if your good graft doe misse, and not take, it doth hazzard your stocke at the first time, yet manie stockes doe recouer to be grafted the second time; but twice to faile is deadly, which is not so in the inocu∣lating of buds in the greene tree: for if you faile therein three, or three times three, yet euerie wound being small, and the tree still growing greene, will quickly recouer it, and not be afterwards seen. Some vse to graft in the stocke the same yeare they remoue the stocke, to saue time, & a second checke by grafting; but I like better both in grafting in the stocke, and in the bud also, that your trees might be planted in the places where you would haue them growe, for a yeare or two at the least before you graft them, that after grafting there should be no remouall, I neede not be tedious, not yet I hope ve∣rie sollicitous to remember many other triuiall, or at the least common knowne things in this matter. First, for the time to remoue trees, young or old, grafted or vngrafted, to be from a fortnight after Michaelmas vntill Candlemas, or if neede be, somewhat after, yet the sooner your remoue is, the better your trees will thriue, except it be in a very moist ground. For the manner or way to set them: viz. in the high and dry grounds set them deeper, both to haue the more moisture, and to be the better defen∣ded from windes; and in the lower and moister grounds shallower, and that the earth be mellow, well turned vp, and that the finer earth bee put among the small rootes, wherein they may spread, and afterwards gently troden downe, that no hollownesse remaine among the rootes: as also that after setting (if the time be not ouermoist) there may be some water powred to the rootes, to moisten and fasten them the better; and in the dry time of Summer, after the setting, let them not want moisture, if you will  haue them thriue and prosper; for the want thereof at that time, hath often Killed ma∣nie a likely tree. To stake and fence them also if neede bee after they are new set, and so to continue for two or three yeares after, is verie expedient, lest windes or other casualties spoile your paines, and ouerthrow your hopes. And likewise to defend your grafts from birds lighting on them, to breake or displace them, to sticke some prickes or sharpe pointed stickes longer then your graft into your clay, that so they may be a sure defence of it: As also to tye some woollen cloathes about the lower end of your stockes, or thrust in some thornes into the ground about the rootes, to defend them from hauing their barkes eaten by nies, er hurt by some other noisome ver∣mine. CHAP. VII. Obseruations for the dressing and well keeping of Trees and an Orchard in good order.
THere are two manner of waies to dresse and keepe trees in good order, that they may bee both gracefull and fruitfull; the one is for wall-trees, the o∣ther is for standards: for as their formes are different, so is their keeping or ordering. Wall trees, because they are grafted lowe, and that their branches must be plasht or tackt vnto the wall to fasten them, are to be so kept, that all their branches may be suffered to growe, that shoote forth on eithet side of the bodie, and led either along the wall, or vpright, and one to lappe ouer or vnder another as is convenient, and still with peeces of lists, parings of felt, peeces of soft leather, or other such like soft thing compassing the armes or branches, fastened with small or great nailes, as neede requireth, to the wals, onely those buds or branches are to be nipped or cut off, that shoot forward, and will not so handsomely be brought into conformity, as is fit∣ting; yet if the branches growe too thicke, to hinder the good of the rest, or too high for the wall, they may, nay they must be cut away or lopped off: and if anie dead branches also happen to be on the trees, they must be cut away, that the rest may haue the more libertie to thriue. Diuers also by carefully nipping away the waste and su∣perfluous buds, doe keepe their trees in conformity, without much cutting. The time to pruine or plash, or tye vp wall trees, is vsually from the fall of the leafe, to the be∣ginning of the yeare, when they begin to blossome, and most especially a little before or after Christmas: but in any case not too late, for feare of rubbing off their buds. Some I know doe plash and tye vp their wall trees after bearing time, while the leaues are greene, and their reason is, the buds are not so easie or apt to bee rubbed from the branches at that time, as at Christmas, when they are more growne: but the leaues must needes be very cumbersome, to hinder much both the orderly placing, and close fastening of them to the wall. This labour you must performe euery yeare in its due time; for if you shall neglect and ouerslip it, you shall haue much more trouble, to bring them into a fit order againe, then at the first. The standard trees in an Orchard must be kept in another order; for whereas the former are suffered to spread at large, these must be pruined both from superfluous branches that ouerload the trees, & make them lesse fruitfull, as well as lesse sightly, and the vnder or water boughes likewise, that drawe much nourishment from the trees, and yet themselues little the better for it, I meane to giue fruit. If therefore your Orchard consist of young trees, with a lit∣tle care and paines it may bee kept in that comely order and proportion it was first de∣stined vnto; but if it consist of old growne trees, they will not without a great deale of care and paines be brought into such conformitie, as is befitting good and comely trees: for the marke of those boughes or branches that are cut off from young trees, will quickly be healed againe, the barke growing quickly ouer them, whereby they are not worse for their cutting; but an old tree if you cut off a bough, you must cut it close and cleanly, and lay a searcloth of tallow, waxe, and a little pitch melted toge∣ther vpon the place, to keepe off both the winde, sunne, and raine, vntill the barke haue couered it ouer againe: and in this manner you must deale withall such short stumps of branches, as are either broken short off with the winde, or by carelesnesse of  want of skill, or else such armes or branches as are broken off close, or sliued from the body of the tree: for the raine beating and falling into such a place, will in short time rotte your tree, or put it in danger, besides the deformity. Some vse to fill vp such an hole with well tempered clay, and tacke a cloth or a peece of leather ouer it vntill it be recouered, and this is also not amisse. Your young trees, if they stand in anie good ground, will bee plentifull enough in shooting forth branches; bee carefull therefore if they growe too thicke, that you pruine away such as growe too close (and will, if they be suffered, spoile one another) as they may be best spared, that so the sunne, ayre, and raine may haue free accesse to all your branches, which will make them beare the more plentifully, and ripen them the sooner and the more kindly. If anie boughes growe at the toppe too high, cut them also away, that your trees may rather spread then growe too high. And so likewise for the vnder boughes, or anie other that by the weight of fruit fall or hang downe, cut them off at the halfe, and they will after∣wards rise and shoote vpwards. You shall obserue, that at all those places where anie branches haue been cut away, the sappe will euer bee readie to put forth: if therefore you would haue no more branches rise from that place, rubbe off or nippe off such buddes as are not to your minde, when they are new shot: and thus you may keep your trees in good order with a little paines, after you haue thus pruined and dressed them. One other thing I would aduertise you of, and that is how to preserue a fainting or de∣caying tree which is readie to perish, if it be not gone too farre or past cure, take a good quantitie of oxe or horse bloud, mixe therewith a reasonable quantitie of sheepe or pi∣geons dung, which being laid to the roote, will by the often raines and much watering recouer it selfe, if there bee anie possibilitie; but this must bee done in Ianuarie or Fe∣bruarie at the furthest. CHAP. VIII. Diuers other obseruations to be remembred in the well keeping of an Orchard.
THere be diuers other things to be mentioned, whereof care must be had, either to doe or auoide, which I thinke fit in this Chapter promiscuously to set down, that there may be nothing wanting to furnish you with sufficient knowledge of the care, paines, and casualties that befall an Orchard: for it hath many enemies, and euery one laboureth as much as in them lye, to spoile you of your pleasure, or profit, or both, which must bee both speedily and carefully preuented and helped; and they are these: Mosse, Caterpillars, Ants, Earwigs, Snailes, Moales, and Birds. If Mosse begin to ouergrowe your trees, looke to it betimes, lest it make your trees barren: Some vse to hacke, and crossehacke, or cut the barke of the bodies of their trees, to cause it fall away; but I feare it may endanger your trees. Others do either rubbe it off with a haire cloth, or with a long peece of wood formed like a knife, at the end of a long sticke or pole, which if it bee vsed cautelously without hurting the buds, I like better. Caterpillars, some smoake them with burning wet strawe or hay, or such like stuffe vnder the trees; but I doe not greatly like of that way: others cut off the boughes whereon they breed, and tread them vnder their feete, but that will spoile too manie branches; and some kill them with their hands: but some doe vse a new deuised way, that is, a pompe made of lattin or tin, spout-fashion, which being set in a tubbe of water vnder or neare your trees, they will cause the water to rise through it with such a force, and through the branches, that it will wash them off quickly. To destroy Ants, that eate your fruit be∣fore and when it is ripe, some vse to annoint the bodies of their trees with tarre, that they may not creepe vp on the branches; but if that doe not helpe, or you will not vse it, you must be carefull to finde out their hill, and turne it vp, pouring in scalding wa∣ter, either in Summer, but especially if you can in Winter, and that will surely destroy them. I haue spoken of Earwigs in the first part of this worke, entreating of the annoy∣ances of Gilloflowers, and therefore I referre you thereunto: yet one way more I  will here relate which some doe vse, and that is with hollow canes of halfe a yard long or more, open at both ends for them to creepe in, and stucke or laid among the branches of your trees, will soone drawe into them many Earwigs, which you may soone kill, by knocking the cane a little vpon the ground, and treading on them with your foote. Snailes must be taken with your hands, and that euerie day, especially in the morning when they will be creeping abroad. Moales by running vnder your trees make them lesse fruitfull, and also put them in danger to be blowne downe, by leauing the ground hollow, that thereby the rootes haue not that strength in the ground, both to shoote and to hold, that otherwise they might haue. Some haue vsed to put Gar∣licke, and other such like things into their holes, thinking thereby to driue them away, but to no purpose: others haue tryed manie other waies; but no way doth auaile anie thing, but killing them either with a Moale spade, or a trappe made for the purpose as manie doe know: and they must bee watched at their principall hill, and trenched round, and so to be caught. Birds are another enemie both to your trees and fruit; for the Bullfinch will destroy all your stone fruit in the budde, before they flower, if you suffer them, and Crowes, &c. when your Cherries are ripe: for the smaller birds, Lime twigs set either neare your trees, or at the next water where they drinke, will helpe to catch them and destroy them. And for the greater birds, a stone bowe, a birding or fowling peece will helpe to lessen their number, and make the rest more quiet: or a mill with a clacke to scarre them away, vntill your fruit be gathered. Some other annoyances there are, as suckers that rise from the rootes of your trees, which must be taken away euerie yeare, and not suffered to growe anie thing great, for feare of robbing your trees of their liuelihood. Barke bound, is when a tree doth not shoote and encrease, by reason the barke is as it were drie, and will not suffer the sappe to passe vnto the branches: take a knife therefore, and slit the barke downe almost all the length of the tree in two or three places, and it will remedy that euill, and the tree will thriue and come forward the better after. Barke pilled is another euill that happeneth to some trees, as well young as old, either by reason of casuall hurts, or by the gnawing of beasts, howsoeuer it bee, if it bee anie great hurt, lay a plai∣ster thereon made of tallow, tarre, and a little pitch, and binde it thereto, letting it so abide vntill the wound bee healed: yet some doe only apply a little clay or loame bound on with ropes of hay. The Canker is a shrewd disease when it happeneth to a tree; for it will eate the barke round, and so kill the very heart in a little space. It must be looked vnto in time before it hath runne too farre; most men doe wholly cut away as much as is fretted with the Canker, and then dresse it, or wet it with vinegar or Cowes pisse, or Cowes dung and vrine, &c. vntill it be destroyed, and after healed againe with your salue before appointed. There are yet some other enemies to an Or∣chard: for if your fence be not of bricke or stone, but either a mudde wall, or a quicke set or dead hedge, then looke to it the more carefully, and preuent the comming in of either horse, or kine, sheepe, goates, or deere, hare, or conie; for some of them will breake through or ouer to barke your trees, and the least hole almost in the hedge will giue admittance to hares and conies to doe the like. To preuent all which, your care must be continuall to watch them or auoide them, and to stoppe vp their entrance. A dogge is a good seruant for many such purposes, and so is a stone bowe, and a peece to make vse of as occasion shall serue. But if you will take that medicine for a Canker spoken of before, which is Cowes dung and vrine mixed together, and with a brush wash your trees often to a reasonable height, will keepe hares and conies from eating or barking your trees. Great and cold windes doe often make a great spoile in an Or∣chard, but great trees planted without the compasse thereof, as Wall-nuts, Oakes, Elmes, Ashes, and the like, will stand it in great stead, to defend it both early and late. Thus haue I shewed you most of the euils that may happen to an Orchard, and the meanes to helpe them, and because the number is great and daily growing, the care and paines must be continuall, the more earnest and diligent, lest you lose that in a moment that hath been growing many yeares, or at the least the profit or beauty of some yeares fruit.
CHAP. IX. The manner and way how to plant, order, and keepe other trees that beare greene leaues continually. THe way to order those trees that beare their leaues greene continually, is dif∣fering from all others that doe not so: for neyther are they to bee planted or remoued at the time that all other trees are set, nor doe they require that man∣ner of dressing, pruining and keeping, that others doe. And although many ignorant persons and Gardiners doe remoue Bay trees, and are so likewise perswaded that all other trees of that nature, that is, that carry their greene leaues continually, may bee remoued in Autumne or Winter, as well as all other trees may bee; yet it is certaine it is a great chance if they doe thriue and prosper that are set at that time, or rather it is found by experience, that scarce one of ten prospereth well that are so ordered. Now in regard that there be diuers trees and shrubs mentioned here in this booke that beare euer greene leaues, wherein there is very great beauty, and many take pleasure in them; as the ordinary Bay, the Rose Bay, and the Cherry Bay trees, the Indian Figge, the Cypresse, the Pine tree, the Mirtle and dwarfe Boxe, and many others; I will here shew you how to plant and order them, as is fittest for them. For in that they doe not shed their greene leaues in winter as other trees doe, you may in reason be perswaded that they are of another nature; and so they are indeede: for see∣ing they all grow naturally in warme Countries, and are from thence brought vnto vs, we must both plant them in a warmer place, and transplant them in a warmer time then other trees be, or else it is a great hazzard if they doe not perish and dye, the cold and frosts in the winter being able to pierce them through, if they should bee transplanted in winter, before they haue taken roote. You must obserue and take this therefore for a certaine rule, that you alwaies remoue such trees or shrubbes as are euer greene in the spring of the yeare, and at no time else if you will doe well, that is, from the end of March, or beginning of Aprill, vnto the middle or end of May, especially your more dainty and tender plants, shadowing them also for a while from the heate of the Sun, and giuing them a little water vpon their planting or transplanting; but such water as hath not presently been drawn from a Well or Pumpe, for that will go neer to kill any plant, but such water as hath stood in the open ayre for a day at the least, if not two or three. Yet for dwarfe Boxe I confesse it may endure one moneth to be earlier planted then the rest, because it is both a more hardy and lowe plant, and thereby not so much subiect to the extremitie of the colde: but if you should plant it before winter, the frosts would raise it out of the ground, because it cannot so soone at that time of the yeare take roote, and thereby put it in danger to be lost. Moreouer all of them will not abide the extremitie of our winter frosts, and therefore you must of necessity house some of them, as the Rose Bay, Mirtle, and some others, but the other sorts being set where they may bee somewhat defended from the cold windes, frostes, and snow in winter, with some couering or shelter for the time, will reasonably well endure and beare their fruit, or the most of them. If any be desirous to be furnished with store of these kinds of trees that will be noursed vp in our Country, he may by sowing the seed of them in square or long woodden boxes or chests made for that purpose, gaine plenty of them: but hee must be carefull to couer them in winter with some straw or fearne, or beane hame, or such like thing layd vpon crosse sticks to beare it vp from the plants, and after two or three yeares that they are growne somewhat great and strong, they may bee transplanted into such places you meane they shall abide: yet it is not amisse to defend them the first yeare after they are transplanted, for their more securitie: the seedes that are most vsually sowen with vs, are, the Cypresse tree, the Pine tree, the Baye, the Pyracantha or prickly Corall tree, and the Mirtle: the Rose Bay I haue had also risen from the seede that was fresh, and brought me from Spaine. But as for Orenge trees, because they are so hardly preserued in this our cold climate (vnlesse it bee with some that doe bestow the housing of them, besides a great deale more of care and re∣spect vnto them) from the bitternesse of our cold long winter weather (although their
kernels being put into the ground in the Spring or Summer, and if care bee had of them and conuenient keeping, will abide, and by grafting the good fruite on the crab stocke they may bee in time nursed vp) I doe not make any other especiall account of them, nor giue you any further relation of their ordering. Now for the ordering of these trees after they are eyther planted of young sets, or transplanted from the seede, it is thus: First for Bay trees, the most vsuall way is to let them grow vp high to bee trees, and many plant them on the North or East side of their houses that they may not bee scorched with the Sunne; but the bitter winters which we often haue, doe pinch them shrewdly, insomuch that it killeth euen well growne trees sometimes downe to the roote: but some doe make a hedge of them being planted in order, and keep them low by lopping of them continually, which will make them bush and spread. The Cy∣presse tree is neuer lopped, but suffered to grow with all the branches from a foote a∣boue the ground, if it may be, straight vpright; for that is his natiue grace and greatest beautie, and therefore the more branches doe dye that they must bee cut away, the more you deforme his propertie. The Pine tree may be vsed in the same manner, but yet it wil better endure to sustaine pruining then the Cypresse, without any such defor∣mitie. The Laurocerasus or Cherry Bay may be diuersly formed, that is, it may be ei∣ther made to grow into a tall tree by shredding still away the vnder branches, or else by suffering all the branches to grow to be a low or hedge bush, & both by the suckers and by laying downe the lower branches into the earth, you may soone haue much increase; but this way will cause it to bee the longer before it beare anie fruit. The Rose Baye will verie hardlie bee encreased either by suckers or by layers, but must bee suffered to grow without lopping, topping or cutting. The Pyracantha or Prickly Corall tree may bee made to grow into a reasonable tall tree by shredding away the lower branches, or it may be suffered to grow lowe into an hedge bush, by suffering all the branches to grow continually, you may also propagate it by the suckers, or by lay∣ing downe the lower branches. The Myrtle of all sorts abideth a low bush spreading his branches full of sweete leaues and flowers, without anie great encrease of it selfe, yet sometimes it giueth suckers or shootes from the rootes: but for the more speedie propagating of them, some doe put the cuttings of them into the earth, and thereby in∣crease them. There are some other trees that are not of any great respect, as the Yew tree, and the Savine bush, both which may be encreased by the cuttings, and therefore I need not make any further relation or amplification of them, and to say thus much of them all, is (I thinke) sufficient for this Worke. CHAP. X. The ordering, curing, and propagating Vines of all sorts. IN most places of this countrie there is small care or paines taken about the orde∣ring of Vines: it sufficeth for the most part with them that haue anie, to make a frame for it to spread vpon aboue a mans height, or to tacke it to a wall or win∣dow, &c. and so to let it hang downe with the branches and fruit, vntill the weight thereof, and the force of windes doe teare it downe oftentimes, and spoile the grapes: and this way doth somewhat resemble that course that the Vineyard keepers obserue in the hot countries of Syria, Spaine, and Italy, and in the furthest parts of France as I hear likewise: for in most of these hot countries they vse to plant an Oliue betweene two Vines, and let them runne thereupon. But manie of the other parts of France, &c. doe not suffer anie trees to growe among their Vines; and therefore they plant them thicke, and pruine them much and often, and keepe them lowe in comparison of the other way, fastening them to pearches or poles to hold them vp. And according to that fashion many haue aduentured to make Vineyards in England, not onely in these later daies, but in ancient times, as may wel witnesse the sundrie places in this Land, en∣tituled by the name of Vineyards; and I haue read, that manie Monasteries in this King∣dome hauing Vineyards, had as much wine made therefrom, as sufficed their couents yeare by yeare: but long since they haue been destroyed, and the knowledge how to order a Vineyard is also vtterly perished with them. For although diuers, both No∣bles
and Gentlemen, haue in these later times endeauoured to plant and make Vine∣yards, and to that purpose haue caused French men, being skilfull in keeping and dres∣sing of Vines, to be brought ouer to performe it, yet either their skill failed them, or their Vines were not good, or (the most likely) the soile was not fitting; for they could neuer make anie wine that was worth the drinking, being so small and heartlesse, that they soone gaue ouer their practice. And indeede the soile is a maine matter to bee chiefly considered to seate a Vineyard vpon: for euen in France and other hot coun∣tries, according to the nature of the soile, so is the rellish, strength, and durabilitie of the wine. Now although I think it a fruitlesse labour for any man to striue in these daies to make a good Vineyard in England, in regard not only of the want of knowledge, to make choise of the fittest ground for such Vines as you would plant therupon, but also of the true maner of ordering them in our country; but most chiefly & aboue all others, that our years in these times do not fal out to be so kindly and hot, to ripen the grapes, to make anie good wine as formerly they haue done; yet I thinke it not amisse, to giue you instructions how to order such Vines as you may nourse vp for the pleasure of the fruit, to eate the grapes being ripe, or to preserue and keepe them to bee eaten almost all the winter following: And this may be done without any great or extraordinarie paines. Some doe make a lowe wall, and plant their Vines against it, and keepe them much about the height thereof, not suffering them to rise much higher: but if the high bricke or stone wals of your Garden or Orchard haue buttresses thereat, or if you cause such to bee made, that they bee somewhat broade forwards, you may the more conueniently plant Vines of diuers sorts at them, and by sticking down a couple of good stakes at euery buttresse, of eight or ten foot high aboue ground, tacking a few lathes acrosse vpon those stakes, you may therunto tye your Vines, & carry them ther∣on at your pleasure: but you must be carefull to cut them euery year, but not too late, and so keepe them downe, and from farre spreading, that they neuer runne much be∣yond the frame which you set at the buttresses: as also in your cutting you neuer leaue too many ioynts, nor yet too few, but at the third or fourth ioint at the most cut them off. I doe aduise you to these frames made with stakes and lathes, for the better ripe∣ning of your grapes: for in the blooming time, if the branches of your vines bee too neare the wall, the reflection of the Sunne in the day time, and the colde in the night, doe oftentimes spoile a great deale of fruit, by piercing and withering the tender foot-stalkes of the grapes, before they are formed, whereas when the blossomes are past, and the fruit growing of some bignesse, then all the heate and reflection you can giue them is fit, and therefore cut away some of the branches with the leaues, to admit the more Sunne to ripen the fruit. For the diuers sorts of grapes I haue set them downe in the Booke following, with briefe notes vpon euerie of them, whether white or blacke, small or great, early or late ripe; so that I neede not here make the same relation again. There doth happen some diseases to Vines sometimes, which that you may helpe, I thinke it conuenient to informe you what they are, and how to remedy them when you shall be troubled with any such. The first is a luxurious spreading of branches and but little or no fruit: for remedie whereof, cut the branches somewhat more neere then vsuall, and bare the roote, but take heed of wounding or hurting it, and in the hole put either some good old rotten stable dung of Horses, of else some Oxe blood new taken from the beasts, and that in the middle of Ianuarie or beginning of Febru∣arie, which being well tempered and turned in with the earth, let it so abide, which no doubt, when the comfort of the blood or dung is well soaked to the bottome by the raines that fall thereon, will cause your Vine to fructifie againe. Another fault is, when a Vine doth not bring the fruit to ripenesse, but either it withereth before it be growne of any bignesse, or presently after the blooming: the place or the earth where such a Vine standeth, assuredly is too cold, and therefore if the fault bee not in the place, which cannot bee helped without remouing to a better, digge out a good quantity of that earth, and put into the place thereof some good fresh ground well heartned with dung, and some sand mixed therewith (but not salt or salt water, as some doe aduise, nor yet vrine, as others would haue) and this will hearten and strengthen your Vine to beare out the frut vnto maturitie. When the leaues of a Vine in the end of Summer or in Autumne, vntimely doe turne either yellow or red, it is a great signe the earth is  too hot and drie; you must therefore in stead of dung and sand, as in the former de∣fect is said, put in some fresh loame or short clay, well mixed together with some of the earth, and so let them abide, that the frosts may mellow them. And lastly, a Vine sometimes beareth some store of grapes, but they are too many for it to bring to ripe∣nesse; you shall therefore helpe such a Vine (which no doubt is of some excellent kinde, for they are most vsually subiect to this fault) by nipping away the blossomes from the branches, and leauing but one or two bunches at the most vpon a branch, vn∣till the Vine be growne older, and thereby stronger, and by this meane inured to beare out all the grapes to ripenesse. These be all the diseases I know doe happen to Vines: for the bleeding of a Vine it seldome happeneth of it selfe, but commeth either by cutting it vntimely, that is, too late in the yeare, (for after Ianuarie, if you will be well aduised, cut not any Vine) or by some casuall or wilfull breaking of an arme or a branch. This bleeding in some is vnto death, in others it stayeth after a certaine space of it selfe: To helpe this inconuenience, some haue seared the place where it bleedeth with an hot iron, which in many haue done but a little good; others haue bound the barke close with packe-thred to stay it; and some haue tied ouer the place, being first dried as well as may bee, a plaister made with waxe rossen and turpentine while it is warme. Now for the propagating of them: You must take the fairest and goalest shot branches of one yeares growth, and cut them off with a peece of the old wood vnto it, and these being put into the ground before the end of Ianuarie at the furthest, will shoote forth, and take roote, and so become Vines of the same kinde from whence you tooke them. This is the most speedy way to haue increase: for the laying downe of branches to take roote, doth not yeelde such store so plentifully, nor doe suckers rise from the rootes so aboundantly; yet both these waies doe yeelde Vines, that be∣ing taken from the old stockes will become young plants, fit to bee disposed of as any shall thinke meete. CHAP. XI. The way to order and preserue grapes, fit to be eaten almost all the Winter long, and sometimes vnto the Spring. ALthough it bee common and vsuall in the parts beyond the Sea to dry their grapes in the Sunne, thereby to preserue them all the year, as the Raisins of the Sunne are, which cannot bee done in our Countrie for the want of sufficient heate thereof at that time: or otherwise to scald them in hot water (as I heare) and afterwards to dry them, and so keepe them all the yeare, as our Malaga Raisins are pre∣pared that are packed vp into Frayles: yet I doe intend to shew you some other waies to preserue the grapes of our Countrie fresh, that they may be eaten in the winter both before and after Christmas with as much delight and pleasure almost, as when they were new gathered. One way is, when you haue gathered your grapes you intend to keepe, which must be in a dry time, and that all the shrunke, dried, or euill grapes in e∣uery bunch be picked away, and hauing prouided a vessell to hold them, be it of wood or stone which you will, and a sufficient quantitie of faire and cleane drie sand; make stratum super stratum of your grapes and the sand, that is, a lay of sand in the bottome first, and a lay of grapes vpon them, and a lay or strowing againe of sand vpon those grapes, so that the sand may couer euery lay of grapes a fingers breadth in thicknesse, which being done one vpon another vntill the vessell be full, and a lay of sand vpper∣most, let the vessell be stopped close, and set by vntill you please to spend them, being kept in some drie place and in no sellar: let them bee washed cleane in faire water to take away the sand from so many you will spend at a time. Another way is (which Ca∣merarius setteth downe he was informed the Turkes vse to keepe grapes all the winter vnto the next summer) to take so much meale of Mustard seede, as will serue to strow vpon grapes, vntill they haue filled their vessels, whereon afterwards they poure new wine before it hath boiled, to fill vp their vessels therwith, and being stopped vp close, they keepe them a certaine time, and selling them with their liquour to them that will
vse them, they doe wash the seedes or meale from them when they vse them. Another way is, that hauing gathered the fairest ripe grapes, they are to be cast vpon threds or strings that are fastened at both ends to the side walks of a chamber, neere vnto the see∣ling thereof, that no one bunch touch another, which will bee so kept a great while, yet the chamber must be well defended from the frosts, and cold windes that pierce in at the windowes, lest they perish the sooner: and some will dippe the ends of the branches they hang vp first in molten pitch, thinking by searing vp the ends to keepe the bunches the better; but I doe not see any great likelihood therein. Your chamber or closet you appoint out for this purpose must also bee kept somewhat warme, but e∣specially in the more cold and frostie time of the yeare, lest it spoile all your cost and paines, and frustrate you of all your hopes: but although the frosts should pierce and spoile some of the grapes on a bunch, yet if you be carefull to keepe the place warme, the fewer will be spoiled. And thus haue I shewed you the best directions to order this Orchard rightly, and all the waies I know are vsed in our Countrie to keep grapes good anie long time after the gathering, in regard wee haue not that comfort of a hotter Sun to preserue them by its heate. The fruits themselues shall follow euerie one in their order; the lower shrubbes or bushes first, and the greater afterwards.
THE THIRD PART CALLED THE ORCHARD, COntaining all sorts of trees bearing fruit for mans vse to eate, pro∣per and fit for to plant an Orchard in our climate and countrie: I bound it with this limitation, because both Dates, Oliues, and o∣other fruits, are planted in the Orchards of Spaine, Italy, and o∣ther hot countries, which will not abide in ours. Yet herein I will declare whatsoeuer Art, striuing with Nature, can cause to prosper with vs, that whosoeuer will, may see what can bee effected in our countrie. And first to begin with the lower shrubbes or bushes, and after ascend to the higher trees. CHAP. I. Rubus Idaeus. Raspis. THe Raspis berrie is of two sorts, white and red, not differing in the forme ei∣ther of bush, leafe, or berry, but onely in the colour and taste of the fruit. The Raspis bush hath tender whitish stemmes, with reddish small prickes like haires set round about them, especially at the first when they are young; but when they grow old they become more wooddy and firme, without any shew of thornes or prickles vpon them, and hath onely a little hairinesse that couereth them: the leaues are some∣what rough or rugged, and wrinkled, standing three or fiue vpon a stalke, somewhat like vnto Roses, but greater, and of a grayer greene colour: the flowers are small, made of fine whitish round leaues, with a dash as it were of blush cast ouer them, many standing together, yet euery one vpon his owne stalke, at the tops of the branches; af∣ter which come vp small berries, somewhat bigger then Strawberries, and longer, ei∣ther red or white, made of many graines, more eminent then in the Strawberry, with a kinde of douninesse cast ouer them, of a pleasant taste, yet somewhat sowre, and no∣thing so pleasant as the Strawberrie. The white Raspis is a little more pleasant then the red, wherein there is small seede inclosed: the rootes creepe vnder ground verie farre, and shoote vp againe in many places, much encreasing thereby. There is another whose stemme and branches are wholly without prickles: the fruit is red, and somewhat longer, and a little more sharpe. The Vse of Raspis. The leaues of Raspis may be vsed for want of Bramble leaues in gargles, and other decoctions that are cooling and drying, although not fully to that effect.
The Conserue or Syrupe made of the berries, is effectuall to coole an hot stomacke, helping to refresh and quicken vp those that are ouercome with faintnesse. The berries are eaten in the Summer time, as an afternoones dish, to please the taste of the sicke as well as the sound. The iuyce and the distilled water of the berries are verie comfortable and cordiall. It is generally held of many, but how true I know not, that the red wine that is vsually sold at the Vintners, is made of the berries of Raspis that grow in colder countries, which giueth it a kinde of harshnesse: And also that of the same berries growing in hotter climates, which giueth vnto the wine a more pleasant sweetnesse, is made that wine which the Vintners call Alligant: but we haue a Vine or Grape come to vs vnder the name of the Alligant Grape, as you shall finde it set downe hereafter among the Grapes; and therefore it is likely to be but an opinion, and no truth in this, as it may be also in the other. CHAP. II. Ribes rubra, alba, nigra. Currans red, white, and blacke. THe bushes that beare those berries, which are vsually called red Currans, are not those Currans either blew or red, that are sold at the Grocers, nor any kind thereof; for that they are the grapes of a certaine Vine, as shall be shewed by and by: but a farre differing kinde of berry, whereof there are three sorts, red, white, and blacke. The red Curran bush is of two sorts, and groweth to the height of a man, hauing sometimes a stemme of two inches thicknesse, and diuers armes and branches, couered with a smooth, darke, brownish barke, without anie pricke or thorne at all vpon anie part thereof, whereon doe growe large cornered blackish greene leaues, cut in on the edges, seeming to be made of fiue parts, almost like a Vine leafe, the ends a little poin∣ting out, and standing one aboue another on both sides of the branches: the flowers are little and hollow, comming forth at the ioynts of the leaues, growing many toge∣ther on a long stalke, hanging downe aboue a fingers length, and of an herbie colour: after which come small round fruit or berries, greene at the first, and red as a Cherry when they are ripe, of a pleasant and tart taste: the other differeth not in anie other thing then in the berries, being twice as bigge as the former: the roote is wooddy, and spreadeth diuersly. The white Curran bush riseth vsually both higher then the red, and straighter or more vpright, bigger also in the stemme, and couered with a whiter barke: the leaues are cornered, somewhat like the former, but not so large: the flowers are small and hollow like the other, hanging downe in the same manner on long stalkes, being of a whiter colour: the berries likewise growe on the long stalkes, somewhat thicker set to∣gether, and of a cleare white colour, with a little blacke head, so transparent that the seedes may be easily seene thorough them, and of a more pleasant winie taste then the red by much. The blacke Curran bush riseth higher then the white, with more plentifull bran∣ches, and more pliant and twiggie: the stemme and the elder branches being couered with a brownish barke, and the younger with a paler: the flowers are also like vnto lit∣tle bottles as the others be, of a greenish purple colour, which turne into blacke ber∣ries, of the bignesse of the smaller red Currans: the leaues are somewhat like vnto the leaues of the red Currans, but not so large: both branches, leaues, and fruit haue a kind of stinking sent with them, yet they are not vnwholsome, but the berries are eaten of many, without offending either taste or smell. The Vse of Currans.
The red Currans are vsually eaten when they are ripe, as a refreshing to an 1 Rubus Idaeus. The Raspis. 2 Ribes fructu rubro vel albo. White or red Currans. 3 Grossularia vulgaris. The ordinary Gooseberry 4 Grossularia fructu rubro. The great red Gooseberry. 5 Grossularia aculeata. The prickly Gooseberry. 6 Oxyaecantha seu Berberis. The Barbary bush. 7 Auellana Byzantina. The Filberd of Constantinople. 8 Auellana rubra nostras. The best red Filberd. depiction of plants
hot stomacke in the heate of the yeare, which by the tartnesse is much de∣lighted. Some preserue them, and conserue them also as other fruits, and spend them at neede. The white Currans, by reason of the more pleasant winie taste, are more accepted and desired, as also because they are more daintie, and lesse com∣mon. Some vse both the leaues and berries of the blacke Currans in sawces, and other meates, and are well pleased both with the sauour and taste thereof, although many mislike it. CHAP. III. Vva Crispa siue Grossularia. Gooseberries or Feaberries. WEe haue diuers sorts of Gooseberries, besides the common kinde, which is of three sorts, small, great, and long. For wee haue three red Goose∣berries, a blew and a greene. The common Gooseberrie, or Feaberrie bush, as it is called in diuers Countries of England, hath oftentimes a great stemme, couered with a smooth darke coloured bark, without anie thorne thereon, but the elder branches haue here and there some on them, and the younger are whitish, armed with verie sharpe and cruell crooked thorns, which no mans hand can well auoide that doth handle them, whereon are set verie greene and small cornered leaues cut in, of the fashion almost of Smallage, or Haw∣thorne leaues, but broad at the stalke: the flowers come forth single, at euerie ioynt of the leafe one or two, of a purplish greene colour, hollow and turning vp the brims a little: the berries follow, bearing the flowers on the heads of them, which are of a pale greene at the first, and of a greenish yellow colour when they are ripe, striped in diuers places, and cleare, almost transparent, in which the seede lyeth. In some these berries are small and round; in others much greater; a third is great, but longer then the o∣ther: all of them haue a pleasant winie taste, acceptable to the stomacke of anie (but the long kinde hath both the thicker skin, and the worser taste of the other) and none haue been distempered by the eating of them, that euer I could heare of. The first of the red Gooseberries is better knowne I thinke then the rest, and by reason of the small bearing not much regarded; the stemme is somewhat bigge, and couered with a smooth darke coloured barke, the younger branches are whiter, and without anie thorne or pricke at all, so long, weake, small, and slender, that they lye vpon the ground, and will there roote againe: the leaues are like vnto the former Gooseberries, but larger: the flowers and berries stand single, and not manie to bee found anie yeare vpon them, but are somewhat long, and are as great as the ordinarie Gooseberry, of a darke brownish red colour, almost blackish when they are ripe, and of a sweetish taste, but without any great delight. The second red Gooseberry riseth vp with a more straight stemme, couered with a brownish barke; the young branches are straight likewise, and whitish, and grow not so thicke vpon it as the former red kinde, and without any thorne also vpon them: the leaues are like vnto the former red, but smaller: the berries stand singly at the leaues as Gooseberries doe, and are of a fine red colour when they are ripe, but change with standing to be of a darker red colour, of the bignesse of the small ordinary Goose∣berry, of a pretty tart taste, and somewhat sweete withall. The third red Gooseberry which is the greatest, and knowne but vnto few, is so like vnto the common great Gooseberry, that it is hardly distinguished: the fruit or berries grow as plentifully on the branches as the ordinary, and are as great & round as the great ordinary kinde, but reddish, and some of them paler, with red stripes. The blew Gooseberry riseth vp to bee a bush like vnto the red Curran, and of the same bignesse and height, with broader and redder leaues at the first shooting out, then the second red Gooseberry: the berries are more sparingly set on the branches, then on the small red, and much about the same bignesse, or rather lesser, of the colour of a Damson, with an ouershadowing of a blewish colour vpon them, as the Damson hath, before it be handled or wiped away.
The greene prickly Gooseberry is very like vnto the ordinary Gooseberry in stemme and branches, but that they are not stored with so many sharpe prickles; but the young shootes are more plentifull in small prickles about, and the greene leafe is a little smaller: the flowers are alike, and so are the berries, being of a middle size, and not very great, greene when they are thorough ripe as well as before, but mellower, and hauing a few small short prickles, like small short haires vpon them, which are harmlesse, and without danger to anie the most dainty and tender palate that is, and of a verie good pleasant taste. The seede hereof hath produced bushes bearing ber∣ries, hauing few or no prickles vpon them. The Vse of Gooseberries. The berries of the ordinary Gooseberries, while they are small, greene, and hard, are much vsed to bee boyled or scalded to make sawce, both for fish and flesh of diuers sorts, for the sicke sometimes as well as the sound, as also before they be neere ripe, to bake into tarts, or otherwise, after manie fashions, as the cunning of the Cooke, or the pleasure of his commanders will appoint. They are a fit dish for women with childe to stay their long∣ings, and to procure an appetite vnto meate. The other sorts are not vsed in Cookery that I know, but serue to bee eaten at pleasure; but in regard they are not so tart before maturity as the former, they are not put to those vses they be. CHAP. IIII. Oxyacantha, sed potius Berberis. Barberries. THe Barberry bush groweth oftentimes with very high stemmes, almost two mens height, but vsually somewhat lower, with manie shootes from the roote, couered with a whitish rinde or barke, and yellow vnderneath, the wood be∣ing white and pithy in the middle: the leaues are small, long, and very greene, nicked or finely dented about the edges, with three small white sharpe thornes, for the most part set together at the setting on of the leaues: the flowers doe growe vpon long clu∣stering stalkes, small, round, and yellow, sweete in smell white they are fresh, which turne into small, long, and round berries, white at the first, and very red when they are ripe, of a sharpe sowre taste, fit to set their teeth on edge that eate them: the roote is yellow, spreading far vnder the vpper part of the ground, but not very deepe. There is (as it is thought) another kinde, whose berries are thrice as bigge as the former, which I confesse I haue not seene, and know not whether it be true or no: for it may peraduenture be but the same, the goodnesse of the ground and ayre where they growe, and the youngnesse of the bushes causing that largenesse, as I haue obserued in the same kinde, to yeeld greater berries. There is said to be also another kinde, whose berries should be without stones or seede within them, not differing else in anie thing from the former: but because I haue long heard of it, and cannot vnderstand by all the inquirie I haue made, that any hath seene such a fruit, I rest doubtfull of it. The Vse of Barberries. Some doe vse the leaues of Barberries in the stead of Sorrell, to make sawce for meate, and by reason of their sowrenesse are of the same quality. The berries are vsed to be pickled, to serue to trimme or set out dishes of fish and flesh in broth, or otherwise, as also sometime to bee boyled in the broth, to giue it a sharpe rellish, and many other wayes, as a Master Cooke can better tell then my selfe.
The berries are preserued and conserued to giue to sicke bodies, to helpe to coole any heate in the stomacke or mouth, and quicken the appetite. The depurate iuyce is a fine menstrue to dissolue many things, and to ve∣rie good purpose, if it be cunningly handled by an Artist. The yellow inner barke of the branches, or of the rootes, are vsed to be boyled in Ale, or other drinkes, to be giuen to those that haue the yellow iaundise: As also for them that haue anie fluxes of choller, to helpe to stay and binde. Clusius setteth downe a secret that hee had of a friend, of a cleane diffe∣ring propertie, which was, that if the yellow barke were laid in steepe in white wine for the space of three houres, and afterwards drunke, it would purge one very wonderfully. CHAP. V. Nux Auellana. The Filberd. THe Filberd tree that is planted in Orchards, is very like vnto the Hasell nut tree that groweth wilde in the woods, growing vpright, parted into many boughes and tough plyable twigges, without knots, couered with a brownish, speckled, smooth, thinne rinde, and greene vnderneath: the leaues are broad, large, wrinkled, and full of veines, cut in on the edges into deepe dents, but not into any gashes, of a darke greene colour on the vpperside, and of a grayish ash colour vnderneath: it hath small and long catkins in stead of flowers, that come forth in the Winter, when as they are firme and close, and in the Spring open themselues somewhat more, growing longer, and of a brownish yellow colour: the nuts come not vpon those stalkes that bore those catkins, but by themselues, and are wholly inclosed in long, thicke, rough huskes, bearded as it were at the vpper ends, or cut into diuers long iagges, much more then the wood nut: the nut hath a thinne and somewhat hard shell, but not so thicke and hard as the wood nut, in some longer then in other, and in the long kinde, one hath the skinne white that couereth the kernels, and another red. There is another sort of the round kinde that came from Constantinople, whose huske is more cut, torne, or iagged, both aboue and belowe, then any of our country; the barke also is whiter, and more rugged then ours, and the leaues somewhat larger. We haue had from Virginia Hasell nuts, that haue beene smaller, rounder, browner, thinner sheld, and more pointed at the end then ours: I know not if any hath planted of them, or if they differ in leafe or any thing else. The Vse of Filberds. Filberds are eaten as the best kinde of Hasell nuts, at bankets among o∣ther dainty fruits, according to the season of the yeare, or otherwise, as euery one please: But Macer hath a Verse, expressing prettily the nature of these nuts, which is, Ex minimis nucibus nulli datur esca salubris. that is, There is no wholsome food or nourishment had from these small kinde of nuts. Yet they are vsed sometime physically to be rested, and made into a Lo∣hoc or Electuary, that is vsed for the cough or cold. And it is thought of some, that Mithridates meant the kernels of these nuts, to be vsed with Figs and Rue for his Antidote, and not of Walnuts.
CHAP. VI. Vitis. The Vine. THere is so great diuersities of Grapes, and so consequently of Vines that bear them, that I cannot giue you names to all that here grow with vs: for Iohn Tradescante my verie good friend, so often before remembred, hath assured me, that he hath twentie sorts growing with him, that hee neuer knew how or by what name to call them. One description therefore shall serue (as I vse to doe in such varie∣ties) for all the rest, with the names afterwards, of as many as we can giue, and the se∣uerall formes, colours and proportions of the grapes. The manured Vine, in the places where it hath abiden long time, groweth to haue a great bodie, stemme or trunke, sometimes of the bignesse of a mans arme, sleeue and all, spreading branches if it bee suffered without end or measure, but vsually stored with many armes or branches, both old and new, but weake, and therefore must bee sustained; whereof the old are couered with a thin scaly rinde, which will often chap and peele off of it selfe; the youngest being of a reddish colour, smooth and firme, with a hollownesse or pith in the middle: from the ioints of the young branches, and sometimes from the bodie of the elder, breake out on euerie side broade greene leaues, cut on the edges into fiue diuisions for the most part, and besides notched or den∣ted about: right against the leafe, and likewise at other ioynts of the branches, come forth long twining or clasping tendrels, winding themselues about any thing standeth next vnto them: at the bottome of these leaues come forth clusters of small greenish yellow bloomes or flowers, and after them the berries, growing in the same manner in clusters, but of diuers formes, colours, tastes and greatnesse. For some grapes are great, others lesse, some very small (as the Currans that the Grocers sell) some white, some red, blew, blacke, or partie-coloured, some are are as it were square, others round: some the clusters are close, others open, some are sweete, others sower or harsh, or of some other mixed taste; euerie one differing from others, verie notably either in taste, colour or forme; within euerie one of which grapes, (and yet there is a grape with∣out stones) are contained one, two, or more kernels or stones, some of them being smal, others greater: the rootes spread far and deepe. They that keepe their Vines in the best order, doe cut them low, not suffering them to grow high, or with too many bran∣ches, whereby they grow the better, take vp the lesser roome, and bring their grapes fairer and sweeter. The kinds of Vines and Grapes. Our ordinarie Grape both white and red, which excelleth Crabs for ver∣iuice, and is not fit for wine with vs. The white Muscadine Grape is a verie great Grape, sweete and firme, some of the bunches haue weighed sixe pound, and some of the grapes halfe an ounce. The redde Muscadine is as great as the white, and chiefly differeth in co∣lour. The Burlet is a very great white Grape, but fitter for veriuice then wine for the most part; yet when a hot yeare happeneth fit for it, the Grape is pleasant. The little blacke Grape that is ripe very early. The Raisin of the Sunne Grape is a very great Grape, and very great clu∣sters, of a reddish colour when it is ripe with vs, yet in an extraordinarie hot yeare, it hath got a little blewnesse cast ouer it by the heat: but naturally verie blew.
The Curran Grape (or the Grape of Corinth) is the least Grape of all, and beareth both few, and verie seldome with vs, but in reasonable great clusters, and of a blackish blew colour, when they are ripe with vs, and very  sweete. There is another sort of them that are red or browne, and of a sow∣er taste, nothing so sweete. The Greeke wine Grape is a blackish Grape, and very sweete. The Frontignack is a white Grape, of a verie sweete and delicate taste, as the wine declareth, that smelleth as it were of Muske. The square Grape is reported to bear a Grape not fully round, but sided, or as it were square, whereby it became so called. The Damasco Grape is a great white grape, very sweete, and is the true Vva Zibeba, that the Apothecaries should vse in the Trochisci Ciphi: and such wee haue had in former times come ouer vnto vs in great, long and round white boxes, containing halfe an hundred weight a peece. The Russet Grape is a reasonable faire grape, exceeding sweet and whi∣tish, with a thicke skinne, crusted ouer with a shew of ash colour. The white long Grape is like vnto a Pigeons egge, or as it were pointed pendent like a Pearle. The partie-coloured Grape is a reasonable great Grape, and discoloured when it is ripe, sometimes the whole bunches, and sometimes but some of the grapes being parted whitish, and blacke halfe through, verie variably. The Rhenish wine Grape is a white Grape, and endureth the cold of win∣ter when it commeth earely, more then the Muscadine before set downe, and is nothing so sweete. The White wine Grape is verie like vnto the Rhine Grape, the soile only and climate adding more sweetnesse vnto the one then to the other. The Claret wine Grape is altogether like the white Grape, but that it is not white, but of a reddish colour, which lying bruised vpon the skins be∣fore they are pressed, giue that Claret tincture to the wine. The Teint is a Grape of a deeper or darker colour, whose iuice is of so deepe a colour, that it serueth to colour other wine. The Bursarobe is a faire sweete white Grape of much esteeme about Paris. The Alligant is a verie sweete Grape, giuing so deep and liuely a coloured red wine, that no other whatsoeuer is comparable to it, and therfore vsually called Spaniards blood. The blew or blacke Grape of Orleans is another blacke Grape, giuing a darke coloured sweete wine much commended in those parts. The Grape without stones is also a kinde by it selfe, and groweth natural∣ly neere Ascalon, as Brochard affirmeth, the wine whereof is redde, and of a good taste. The Virginia Vine, whereof I must needes make mention among other Vines, beareth small Grapes without any great store of iuice therein, and the stone within it bigger then in any other Grape: naturally it runneth on the ground, and beareth little. The Vse of Vines, Grapes, and other parts that come of them. The greene leaues of the Vine are cooling and binding, and therefore good to put among other herbes that make gargles and lotions for sore mouthes. And also to put into the broths and drinke of those that haue hot burning feauers, or any other inflammation. They stay (as it is held for true) womens longings, if they be either taken inwardly, or applyed outwardly. Wine is vsually taken both for drinke and medicine, and is often put into sawces, broths, cawdles, and gellies that are giuen to the sicke. As al∣so into diuers Physicall drinkes, to be as a vehiculum for the properties of the ingredients. It is distilled likewise after diners manners, with diuers things, for diuers & sundry waters to drinke, & for diuers purposes both inward and outward.
1 Vuae nigrae minores. The small blacke Grape. 2 Vuae caeruleae maiores. The great blew Grape. 3 Vuae Moschatellinae. The Musca∣dine Grape. 4 Vuae Suratenses. The Burlet Grape. 5 Vuae insold. The Raysins of the tunne Grape. 6 Ficus. The Figge tree. depiction of plants
Also distilled of it selfe, is called Spirit of wine, which serueth to dissolue, and to draw out the tincture of diuers things, and for many other purposes. The iuice or veriuice that is made of greene hard grapes, before they be ripe, is vsed of the Apothecaries to be made into a Syrupe, that is very good to coole and refresh a faint stomacke. And being made of the riper grapes is the best veriuice, farre exceeding that which is made of crabs, to be kept all the yeare, to be put both into meates and medicines. The grapes of the best sorts of Vines are pressed into wine by some in these dayes with vs, and much more as I verily beleeue in times past, as by the name of Vineyard giuen to many places in this Kingdome, especially where Abbies and Monasteries stood, may bee coniectured: but the wine of late made hath beene but small, and not durable, like that which com∣meth from beyond Sea, whether our vnkindly yeares, or the want of skill, or a conuenient place for a Vineyard be the cause, I cannot well tell you. Grapes of all sorts are familiarly eaten when they are ripe, of the sicke sometimes as well as the sound. The dryed grapes which we call great Raysins, and the Currans which we call small Raysins, are much vsed both for meates, broths, and sawces, in diuers manners, as this Countrey in generall aboue any other, wherein many thousands of Frailesfull, Pipes, Hogs-heads, and Buts full are spent yearly, that it breedeth a wonder in them of those parts where they growe and prouide them, how we could spend so many. The Raysins of the Sunne are the best dryed grapes, next vnto the Da∣masco, and are very wholsome to eate fasting, both to nourish, and to helpe to loosen the belly. The dryed Lees of wine called Argoll or Tartar, is put to the vse of the Goldsmith, Dyer, and Apothecary, who doe all vse it in seuerall manners, uery one in his art. Of it the Apothecaries make Cremer Tartari, a fine medicine to bee vsed, as the Physitian can best appoint, and doth helpe to purge humours by the stoole. Thereof likewise they make a kinde of water or oyle, fit to bee vsed, to take away freckles, spots, or any such deformities of the face or skinne, and to make it smooth. It causeth likewise haire to growe more aboundantly in those places where it naturally should growe. The liquor of the Vine that runneth forth when it is cut, is commended to be good against the stone wheresoeuer it be; but that liquor that is taken from the end of the branches when they are burnt, is most effectuall to take away spots and markes, ring-wormes and tetters in any place. CHAP. VII. Ficus. The Figge tree. THe Figge trees that are noursed vp in our country are of three sorts, whereof two are high; the one bearing against a wall goodly sweete and delicate Figs, called Figs of Algarua, and is blewish when it is ripe: the other tall kinde is nothing so good, neither doth beare ripe Figges so kindly and well, and peraduenture may be the white ordinary kinde that commeth from Spaine. The third is a dwarfe kinde of Figge tree, not growing much higher then to a mans body or shoulders, bea∣ring excellent good Figges and blew, but not so large as the first kinde.
The Figge trees of all these three kindes are in leaues and growing one like vnto an∣other, sauing for their height, colour, and sweetnesse of the fruit, hauing many armes or branches, hollow or pithy in the middle, bearing very large leaues, and somewhat thicke, diuided sometimes into three, but vsually into fiue sections, of a darke greene colour on the vpperside, and whitish vnderneath, yeelding a milkie iuyce when it is  broken, as the branches also or the figges when they are greene: the fruit breaketh out from the branches without anie blossome, contrary to all other trees of our Orchard, being round and long, fashioned very like vnto a small Peare, full of small white grains or kernels within it, of a very sweete taste when it is ripe, and very mellow or soft, that it can hardly be carried farre without bruising. The other two sorts you may easily know and vnderstand, by so much as hath been said of them. Take only this more of the Figge tree, That if you plant it not against a bricke wall, or the wa∣l of an house, &c. it will not ripen so kindly. The dwarfe Figge tree is more tender, and is therefore planted in great square tubs, to be remoued into the sunne in the Summer time, and into the house in Winter. The Vse of Figges. Figges are serued to the table with Raysins of the Sunne, and blanched Almonds, for a Lenten dish. The Figs that growe with vs when they are ripe, and fresh gathered, are eaten of diuers with a little salt and pepper, as a dainty banquet to entertaine a freind, which seldome passeth without a cup of wine to wash them downe. In Italy (as I haue beene enformed by diuers Gentlemen that haue liued there to study physicke) they eate them in the same manner, but dare not eate many for feare of a feuer to follow, they doe account them to be such breeders of bloud, and heaters of it likewise. The Figges that are brought vs from Spaine, are vsed to make Ptisan drinkes, and diuers other things, that are giuen them that haue coughes or colds. It is one of the ingredients also with Nuts and Rice, into Mithridates counterpoison. The small Figges that growe with vs, and will not ripen, are preserued by the Comfitmakers, and candid also, to serue as other moist or candid ban∣quetting stuffe. CHAP. VIII. Sorbus. The Seruice tree. THere are two kindes of Seruice trees that are planted in Orchards with vs, and there is also a wilde kinde like vnto the later of them, with Ashen leaues, found in the woods growing of it selfe, whose fruit is not gathered, nor vsed to bee eaten of any but birds. And there is another kinde also growing wilde abroad in many places, taken by the Country people where it groweth, to be a Seruice tree, and is cal∣led in Latine, Aria Theophrasti, whole leaues are large, somewhat like Nut tree leaues, but greene aboue, and grayish vnderneath: some doe vse the fruit as Seruices, and for the same purposes to good effect, yet both of these wilde kindes wee leaue for another worke, and here declare vnto you onely those two sorts are noursed vp in our Or∣chards. The more common or ordinary Seruice tree with vs, is a reasonable great tree, co∣uered with a smooth barke, spread into many great armes, whereon are set large leaues, very much cut in on the edges, almost like vnto a Vine leafe, or rather like vnto that kind of Maple, that is vsually called the Sycomore tree with vs: the flowers are white, and growe many clustering together, which after bring forth small browne berries when they are ripe, of the bignesse almost of Hasell nuts, with a small tuft, as if it were a crowne on the head, wherein are small blacke kernels. The other kinde, which is more rare with vs, and brought into this Land by Iohn Tradescante, heretofore often remembred, hath diuers winged leaues, many set toge∣ther like vnto an Ashen leafe, but smaller, and euery one endented about the edges: the flowers growe in long clusters, but nothing so many, or so close set as the wilde kinde: the fruit of this tree is in some round like an Apple, and in others a little longer
like a Peare, but of a more pleasant taste then the ordinarie kinde, when they are ripe and mellowed, as they vse to doe with both these kindes, and with Medlars. The Vse of Seruices. They are gathered when they growe to be neare ripe (and that is neuer before they haue felt some frosts) and being tyed together, are either hung vp in some warme roome, to ripen them thoroughly, that they may bee eaten, or (as some vse to doe) lay them in strawe, chaffe, or branne, to ripen them. They are binding, fit to be taken of them that haue any scouring or laske, to helpe to stay the fluxe; but take heed, lest if you binde too much, more paine and danger may come thereof then of the scouring. CHAP. IX. Mespilus. The Medlar tree. THere are three sorts of Medlers: The greater and the lesser English, and the Neapolitan. The great and the small English Medlar differ not one from the other in any thing, but in the size of the fruit, except that the small kinde hath some prickes or thornes vpon it, which the great one hath not, bearing diuers boughes or armes, from whence breake forth diuers branches, whereon are set long and somewhat narrow leaues, many standing together; in the middle whereof, at the end of the branch, com∣meth the flower, which is great and white, made of fiue leaues, broad at the ends, with a nicke in the middle of euery one; after which commeth the fruit, being round, and of a pale brownish colour, bearing a crowne of those small leaues at the toppe, which were the huske of the flower before, the middle thereof being somewhat hollow, and is harsh, able to choake any that shall eate it before it be made mellow, wherein there are certaine flat and hard kernels. The Medlar of Naples groweth likewise to bee a reasonable great tree, spreading forth armes and branches, whereon are set many gashed leaues, somewhat like vnto Hawthorne leaues, but greater, and likewise diuers thornes in many places: the flow∣ers are of an herbie greene colour, and small, which turne into smaller fruit then the former, and rounder also, but with a small head or crowne at the toppe like vnto it, and is of a more sweete and pleasant taste then the other, with three seeds only therein ordinarily. The Vse of Medlars. Medlars are vsed in the same manner that Seruices are, that is, to be eaten when they are mellowed, and are for the same purposes to binde the body when there is a cause: yet they as well as the Seruices, are often eaten by them that haue no neede of binding, and but onely for the pleasant sweet∣nesse of them when they are made mellow, and sometimes come as a dish of ripe fruit at their fit season, to be serued with other sorts to the table. CHAP. X. Lotus. The Lote or Nettle tree.
THe first kinde of Lote tree, whereof Dioscorides maketh mention, is but of one kinde; but there are some other trees spoken of by Theophrastus, that may be referred thereunto, which may bee accounted as bastard kindes thereof, of which I meane to entreate in this Chapter, hauing giuen you before the description 1 Sorbus legitima. The true Seruice tree. 2 Sorbus vulgaris siue Torminalis. The ordinary Seruice tree. 3 Mespilus vulgaris. The common Melar tree 4 Me∣spilus Aronia. The Medlar of Naples. 5 Lotus arbor. The Nettle tree. 6 Lotus Ʋirginiana. The Pishamin or Virginia Plumme. 7 Cornus mas. The Cornell Cherry tree. depiction of plants
of another kinde hereof (by the opinion of good Authors) vnder the name of Lauro∣cerasus. The first or true Lote tree groweth to be a tree of a great height, whose bodie and elder branches are couered with a smooth darke greene barke, the leaues are somewhat rough in handling, of a darke greene colour, long pointed, and somewhat deepe den∣ted about the edges, somewhat like vnto a Nettle leafe, and oftentimes growe yellow toward Autumne: the flowers stand here and there scattered vpon the branches; after which come round berries like vnto Cherries, hanging downewards vpon long foot-stalkes, greene at the first, and whitish afterwards; but when they are ripe they become reddish, and if they be suffered to hang too long on the branches, they grow blackish, of a pleasant austere taste, not to be misliked, wherein is a hard round stone. The second, which is a bastard kinde, and called Guatacum Pataninum, groweth to bee a faire tree, with a smooth darke greene barke, shooting out many faire great boughes, and also slender greene branches, beset with faire broad greene leaues, al∣most like vnto the leaues of the Cornell tree, but larger: the flowers growe along the branches close vnto them, without any or with a very short foote-stalke consisting of foure greene leaues, which are as the huske, containing within it a purplish flower, made of foure leaues somewhat reddish: the fruit standeth in the middle of the green huske, greene at the first, and very harsh, but red and round when it is ripe, and some∣what like a Plumme, with a small point or pricke at the head thereof, and of a reasona∣ble pleasant taste or rellish, wherein are contained flat and thicke browne seeds or ker∣nels, like vnto the kernels of Cassia Fistula, somewhat hard, and not so stonie, but that it may somewhat easily be cut with a knife. The third is called in Virginia Pishamin, The Virginia Plumme (if it be not all one with the former Guaiacana, whereof I am more then halfe perswaded) hath growne with vs of the kernels that were sent out of Virginia, into great trees, whose wood is very hard and brittle, and somewhat white withall: the branches are many, and grow slender to the end, couered with a very thinne greenish bark, whereon doe grow many faire broad greene leaues, without dent or notch on the edges, and so like vnto the for∣mer Guaiacum, that I verily thinke it (as I before said) to bee the same. It hath not yet borne flower or fruit in our Countrey that I can vnderstand: but the fruit, as it was sent to vs, is in forme and bignesse like vnto a Date, couered with a blackish skinne, set in a huske of foure hard leaues, very firme like vnto a Date, and almost as sweete, with great flat and thicke kernels within them, very like vnto the former, but larger. The Vse of these Lote trees. The first sort is eaten as an helper to coole and binde the body: the last, as Captaine Smith relateth in the discouery of Virginia, if the fruit be eaten while it is greene, and not ripe, is able by the harsh and binding taste and quality to draw ones mouth awry (euen as it is said of the former Guaiaca∣na) but when it is thorough ripe it is pleasant, as I said before. CHAP. XI. Cornus mas. The Cornell tree. THe Cornell tree that is planted in Orchards, being the male (for the female is an hedge bush) is of two sorts, the one bearing red, the other whiter berries, which is very rare yet in our country, and not differing else.
It groweth to a reasonable bignesse and height, yet neuer to any great tree, the wood whereof is very hard, like vnto horne, and thereof it obtained the name: the body and branches are couered with a rugged barke, and spreadeth reasonable well, hauing somewhat smooth leaues, full of veines, plaine, and not dented on the edges: the flow∣ers are many small yellow tufts, as it were of short haires or threads set together, which come forth before any leafe, and fall away likewise before any leafe bee much open: the fruit are long and round berries, of the bignesse of small Oliues, with an  hard round stone within them, like vnto an Oliue stone, and are of a yellowish red when they are ripe, of a reasonable pleasant taste, yet somewhat austere withall. The white (as I said) is like vnto the red, but onely that his fruit is more white when it is ripe. The Vse of the Cornelles. They helpe to binde the body, and to stay laskes, and by reason of the pleasantnesse in them when they are ripe, they are much desired. They are also preserued and eaten, both for rarity and delight, and for the purpose aforesaid. CHAP. XII. Cerasus. The Cherry tree. THere are so many varieties and differences of Cherries, that I know not well how to expresse them vnto you, without a large relation of their seuerall formes. I will therefore endeauour after one generall description (as my cu∣stome is in many other the like variable fruits) to giue as briefe and short notes vpon all the rest, as I can both for leafe and fruit, that so you may the better know what the fruit is, when you haue the name. The English Cherrie tree groweth in time to be of a reasonable bignesse and height, spreading great armes, and also small twiggy branches plentifully; the leaues whereof are not varie large or long, but nicked or dented about the edges: the flowers come forth two or three or foure at the most together, at a knot or ioynt, euerie one by it selfe, vpon his owne small and long footestalke, consisting of fiue white leaues, with some threds in the middle; after which come round berries, greene at the first, and red when they are through ripe, of a meane bignesse, and of a pleasant sweete taste, somew hat tart withall, with a hard white stone within it, whose kernell is somewhat bitter, but not vnpleasant. The Flanders Cherrie differeth not from the English, but that it is somewhat larger, and the Cherry somewhat greater and sweeter, and not so sower. The early Flanders Cherry is more rathe or early ripe, almost as soone as the May Cherry, especially planted against a wall, and of many false knaues or Gardiners are sold for May Cherrie trees. The May Cherrie in a standard beareth ripe fruite later then planted against a wall, where the berries will be red in the verie beginning of May sometimes. The Arch-Dukes Cherrie is one of the fairest and best cherries wee haue, being of a very red colour when it is ripe, and a little long more then round, and somewhat poin∣ted at the end, of the best rellish of any Cherrie whatsoeuer, and of a firme substance; scarce one of twentie of our Nurserie men doe sell the right, but giue one for another: for it is an inherent qualitie almost hereditarie with most of them, to sell any man an ordinary fruit for whatsoeuer rare fruit he shall aske for: so little they are to be trusted. The ounce Cherrie hath the greatest and broadest leafe of any other cherrie, but beareth the smallest store of cherries euerie yeare that any doth, and yet blossometh well: the fruit also is nothing answerable to the name being not verie great, of a pale yellowish red, neere the colour of Amber, and therefore some haue called it, the Am∣ber Cherrie. The great leafed Cherrie is thought of diuers to bee the Ounce Cherrie, because it hath almost as great a leafe as the former: but the fruit of this also doth not answer the expectation of so great a leafe, being but of a meane bignesse, and a small bearer, yet of a pale reddish colour. The true Gascoign Cherry is known but to a few; for our Nursery men do so change the names of most fruits they sell, that they deliuer but very few true names to any: In former times before our wilde blacke Cherrie was found to grow plentifully in our owne woods in many places of this Land, the French continually stored vs with wilde stockes to graft vpon, which then were called Gascoigne stocks, but since they haue so
termed another red Cherrie, and obtruded it vpon their customers: but the true is one of our late ripe white Cherries, euen as Gerard saith, it is a great cherrie and spotted: and this is that Cherrie I so commend to be a fit stocke to graft May cherries vpon. The Morello Cherrie is of a reasonable bignesse, of a darke red colour when they are full ripe, and hang long on, of a sweetish sower taste, the pulpe or substance is red, and somewhat firme: if they be dryed they will haue a fine sharpe or sower taste very delectable. The Hartlippe Cherrie is so called of the place where the best of this kinde is nour∣sed vp, being betweene Sitting bourne and Chattam in Kent, and is the biggest of our English kindes. The smaller Lacure or Hart Cherrie is a reasonable faire Cherrie, full aboue, and a little pointing downward, after the fashion of an heart, as it is vsually painted, blackish when it is full ripe, and lesser then the next. The great Lacure or Hart Cherrie differeth not in forme, but in greatnesse, being v∣sually twice as great as the former, and of a reddish blacke colour also: both of them are of a firme substance, and reasonable sweete. Some doe call the white cherrie, the White hart cherrie. The Luke Wardes Cherrie hath a reasonable large leafe, and a larger flower then many other: the cherries grow with long stalkes, and a stone of a meane size within them, of a darke reddish colour when they are full ripe, of a reasonable good rellish, and beareth well. The Corone Cherrie hath a leafe little differing from the Luke Wardes cherrie; the fruit when it is ripe, is of a faire deepe red colour, of a good bignesse, and of a verie good taste, neither verie sweete or sower: the pulpe or iuice will staine the hands. The Vrinall Cherrie in a most fruitfull yeare is a small bearer, hauing many yeares none, and the best but a few; yet doth blossome plentifully euery yeare for the most part: the cherrie is long and round, like vnto an Vrinall, from whence it tooke his name; reddish when it is full ripe, and of an indifferent sweete rellish. The Agriot Cherrie is but a small Cherrie, of a deepe redde colour when it is ripe, which is late; of a fine sharpe taste, most pleasant and wholsome to the stomacke of all other cherries, as well while they are fresh as being dryed, which manner they much vse in France, and keepe them for the vse both of the sicke and sound at all times. The Biguarre Cherrie is a fair cherrie, much spotted with white spots vpon the pale red berry, and sometimes discoloured halfe white and halfe reddish, of a reasonable good rellish. The Morocco Cherrie hath a large white blossome, and an indifferent big berrie, long and round, with a long stalke of a darke reddish purple colour, a little tending to a blew when it is full ripe, of a firme substance: the iuice is of a blackish red, disco∣louring the hands or lips, and of a pleasant taste: Some doe thinke that this and the Morello be both one. The Naples Cherrie is also thought to bee all one with the Morello or Morocco. The white Spanish Cherrie is an indifferent good bearer, the leafe and blossome somewhat large, and like the Luke Wardes cherrie: the cherries are reasonable faire berries, with long stalkes and great stones, white on the outside, with some rednesse, on the one side of a firme substance, and reasonable sweet, but with a little aciditie, and is one of the late ripe ones: But there is another late ripe white Cherry, which some call the Gascoigne, before remembred. The Flanders cluster Cherrie is of two sorts, one greater then another: the greater kinde hath an indifferent large leafe; the blossomes haue many threds within them, shewing as it were many parts, which after turne into clusters of berries, foure, fiue or sixe together, and but with one stalke vnder them, as if they grew one out of another, and sometimes they will beare but two or three, and most of them but one cherry on a stalke, which are red when they are ripe, very tender, and waterish sweete in eating. The lesser is in all things like the greater, but smaller, which maketh the difference. The wilde cluster or birds cluster Cherry beareth many blossomes set all along the stalkes, and cherries after them in the same maner, like long thinne bunch of grapes, and therefore called of some the Grape cherry: there are of them both red and blacke.
1 Cerasus pracox. The May Cherry. 2 Cerasus Batanica. The Flanders Cherry. 3 Cerasus hispanica fiue alba. The white Cherry. 4 Cerasus plat∣phyllos. The great leafed Cherry. 5 Cerasus Luca Wards. Luke Wards Cherry. 6 Cerasus Neapolita. The Naples Cherry. 7 Cerasus Corata. The Heart Cherry. 8 Cerasus maculata. The bignarre or spotted Cherry. 9 Cerasus aium recemosa. The wilde cluster Cherry. 10 Cerasus Corymbifera. The Flanders cluster Cherry. 11 Cerasus Archiducu. The Archdukes Cherry. 12 Chamacerasus. The dwarfe Cheryy. depiction of fruit
The soft sheld Cherrie is a small red cherrie when it is ripe, hauing the stone within it so soft and tender, that it may easily be broken in the eating of the cherrie. Iohn Tradescantes Cherrie is most vsually sold by our Nursery Gardiners, for the Archdukes cherrie, because they haue more plenty thereof, and will better be increa∣sed, and because it is so faire and good a cherrie that it may be obtruded without much discontent: it is a reasonable good bearer, a faire great berrie, deepe coloured, and a little pointed. The Baccalaos or New-found-land Cherrie hath a shining long leafe, most like vnto a Peach lease, the blossomes come very many together as it werein an vmbell, which is such a cluster as is neither like the Flanders cluster, nor the wilde cluster cherrie blos∣some: it bringeth forth berries standing in the same manner euerie one vpon his own footestalke, being no bigger then the largest berrie of the red Curran tree or bush, of a pale or waterish red colour when it is ripe. The strange long cluster Cherrie, or Padus Theophrasti Dalechampio is reckoned by the Author of that great Herball that goeth vnder his name, among the sorts of cher∣ries; and so must I vntill a fitter place be found for it. It groweth in time to be a great tree, with a sad coloured barke both on the bodie and branches, whereon doe grow many leaues, somewhat broade, shorter, harder, and a little more crumpled then any cherrie leafe: the blossomes are very small, and of a pale or whitish colour, smelling very sweete and strong, or rather heady, like Orenge flowers, growing on small long branches, very like the toppe of flowers vpon the Laburnum or Beane trefoile trees: after which come small blacke berries, growing together all along the long stalke, like vnto the wilde cluster or birds cherrie mentioned before, but not much bigger then tares, with small stones within them, and little or no sustance vpon them: the French call the tree Putier, because the wood thereof stinketh, and make it to be wonderfull that the blossomes of the tree should be so sweete, and the wood so stinking. The Cullen Cherrie is a darke red cherrie like the Agriot, which they of those parts neere Cullen and Vtrecht &c. vse to put into their drinke, to giue it the deeper colour. The great Hungarian Cherrie of Zwerts is like both in leafe and fruite vnto the Morello cherrie, but much greater and fairer, and a far better bearer: for from a small branch hath beene gathered a pound of cherries, and this is vsuall continually, and not accidentally, most of them foure inches in compasse about, and very many of them more of a faire deepe red colour, and very sweete, excelling the Arch-Dukes cherry, or any other whatsoeuer. The Cameleon or strange changeable Cherry deseruedly hath this name, although of mine owne imposition, not only because it beareth vsually both blossomes, greene and ripe fruit at one time thereupon, but that the fruit will be of many formes; some round, some as it were square, and some bunched forth on one side or another, abiding constant in no fashion, but for the most part shewing forth all these diuersities euerie yeare growing vpon it: the fruit is of a very red colour, and good taste. The great Rose Cherry, or double blossomd Cherry differeth not in anything from the English Cherrie, but only in the blossomes, which are very thicke of white leaues, as great and double as the double white Crowfoote, before remembred, and somtimes out of the middle of them will spring another smaller flower, but double also; this sel∣dome beareth fruit, but when it doth I suppose it commeth from those blossomes are the least double, and is red, no bigger then our ordinary English cherrie. The lesser Rose or double blossomd Cherrie beareth double flowers also, but not so thicke and double as the former; but beareth fruit more plentifully, of the same colour and bignesse with the former. The Dwarfe Cherrie is of two sorts; one whose branches fall downe low, round a∣bout the body of it, with small greene leaues, and fruit as small, of a deep red colour. The other, whose branches, although small, grow more vpright, hauing greener shi∣ning leaues: the fruit is little bigger then the former, red also when it is ripe, with a lit∣tle point at the end: both of them of a sweetith rellish, but more sower. The great bearing Cherry of Master Millen is a reasonable great red cherry, bearing very plentifully, although it bee planted against a North wall, yet it will bee late ripe, but of an indifferent sweet and good rellish. The long finger Cherry is another small long red one, being long & round like a fin∣ger, wherof it took the name: this is not the Vrinall cherry before, but differing from it.
The Vse of Cherries. All these sorts of Cherries serue wholly to please the palate, and are eaten at all times, both before and after meales. All Cherries are cold, yet the sower more then the sweete; and although the sweete doe most please, yet the sower are more wholsome, if there bee regard taken in the vsing. The Agriot or sower Cherries are in France much vsed to bee dryed (as is said before) as Pruines are, and so serue to ministred to be the sick in all hot diseases, as feuers &c. being both boyled in their drinkes, and taken now and then of themselues, which by reason of their tartnesse, doe please the stomacke passing well. The Gum of the Cherrie tree is commended to bee good for those are troubled with the grauell or stone. It is also good for the cough being dis∣solued in liquour, and stirreth vp an appetite. The distilled water of the blacke Cherries, the stones being broken among them, is vsed for the same purpose, for the grauell, stone, and winde. CHAP. XIII. Prunus. The Plumme tree. THere are many more varieties of Plummes then of Cherries, so that I must follow the same order with these that I did with them, euen giue you their names apart, with briefe notes vpon them, and one description to serue for all the rest. And in this recitall I shall leaue out the Apricockes which are certainly a kind of Plum, of an especiall difference, and not of a Peach, as Galen and some others haue thought, and set them in a chapter by themselues, and only in this see down those fruits are vsually called Plums. The Plum tree (especially diuers of them) riseth in time to bee a reasonable tall and great tree, whose bodie and greater armes are couered with a more rugged barke, yet in some more or lesse, the younger branches being smooth in all, the leaues are some∣what rounder then those of the Cherrie tree, and much differing among themselues, some being longer, or larger, or rounder then others, and many that are exercised here∣in, can tell by the leafe what Plum the tree beareth (I speake this of many, not of all) as in many Cherries they can doe the like: the flowers are white, consisting of fiue leaues: the fruit is as variable in forme, as in taste or colour, some being ovall or Peare fashion or Almond like, or sphericall or round, some firme, some soft and waterish, some sweete, some sower or harsh, or differing from all these tastes: and some white, others blacke, some red, others yellow, some purple, others blew, as they shall bee briefly set downe vnto you in the following lines, where I meane not to insert any the wilde or hedge fruit, but those only are fit for an Orchard, to be stored with good fruit: and of all which sorts, the choysest for goodnesse, and rarest for knowledge, are to be had of my very good friend Master Iohn Tradescante, who hath wonderfully la∣boured to obtaine all the rarest fruits hee can heare off in any place of Christendome, Turky, yea or the whole world; as also with Master Iohn Millen, dwelling in Olde streete, who from Iohn Tradescante and all others that haue had good fruit, hath stored himselfe with the best only, and he can sufficiently furnish any. The Amber Primordian Plumme is an indifferent faire Plumme, early ripe, of a pale yellowish colour, and of a waterish taste, not pleasing. The red Primordian Plumme is of a reasonable size, long and round, reddish on the outside, of a more dry taste, and ripe with the first sorts in the beginning of Au∣gust. The blew Primordian is a small plumme, almost like the Damascene, and is subiect to drop off from the tree before it be ripe. The white Date Plum is no very good plum.
The red Date plumme is a great long red pointed plumme, and late ripe, little bet∣ter then the white. The blacke Mussell plumme is a good plumme, reasonable drye, and tasteth well. The red Mussell Plumme is somewhat flat as well as round, of a very good taste, and is ripe about the middle of August. The white Mussell plumme is like the redde, but somewhat smaller, and of a whitish greene colour, but not so well tasted. The Imperiall plum is a great long reddish plum, very waterish, and ripeneth some∣what late. The Gaunt plum is a great round reddish plum, ripe somewhat late, and eateth wa∣terish. The red Pescod plum is a reasonable good plum. The white Pescod plum is a reasonable good rellished plumme, but somewhat wa∣terish. The greene Pescod plum is a reasonable big and long pointed plum, and ripe in the beginning of September. The Orenge plum is a yellowish plum, moist, and somewhat sweetish. The Morocco plumme is blacke like a Damson, well tasted, and somewhat drye in eating. The Dine plum is a late ripe plum, great and whitish, speckled all ouer. The Turkie plum is a large long blackish plum, and somewhat flat like the Mussell plum, a well rellished dry plum. The Nutmeg plumme is no bigger then a Damson, and is of a greenish yellow co∣lour when it is ripe, which is with vs about Bartholmew tide, and is a good plum. The Perdigon plumme is a dainty good plumme, early blackish, and well rellished. The Verdoch plum is a great fine greene shining plum fit to preserue. The Ienua plum is the white Date plum, before remembred. The Barberry plum is a great early blacke plum, and well tasted. The Pruneola plum is a small white plum, of a fine tart taste: it was wont to bee v∣sually brought ouer in small round boxes, and sold most commonly at the Comfit∣makers, (cut in twaine, the stone cast away) at a very deere rate: the tree groweth and beareth well with vs. The Shepway Bulleis is of a darke blewish brown colour, of a larger size then the ordinary, and of a sharpe taste, but not so good as the common. The white and the blacke Bulleis are common in most Countries, being small round plums, lesser then Damsons, sharper in taste, and later ripe. The Flushing Bulleis groweth with his fruite thicke clustring together like grapes. The Winter Creke is the latest ripe plum of all sorts, it groweth plentifully about Bishops Hatfield. The white Peare plum early ripe, is of a pale yellowish greene colour. The late ripe white Peare plum is a greater and longer plum, greenish white, and is not ripe vntill it be neere the end of September, both waterish plums. The blacke Peare plum is like vnto the white Peare plumme, but that the colour is blackish when it is ripe, and is of a very good rellish, more firme and drye then the o∣ther. The red Peare plumme is of the same fashion and goodnesse, but is the worst of the three. The white Wheate plum is a waterish fulsome plum. The red Wheate plum is like the other for taste. The Bowle plum is flat and round, yet flatter on the one side then on the other, which caused the name, and is a very good rellished blacke plum. The Friars plumme is a very good plum, well tasted, and comming cleane from the stone, being blacke when it is ripe, and some whitish spots vpon it. The Catalonia plum is a very good plum. The don Alteza is also a very good plum. The Muscadine plum, some call the Queene mother plumme, and some the Cherry plum, is a faire red plum, of a reasonable bignesse, and ripe about Bartholmew tide.
The Christian plum, called also the Nutmeg plum; the tree groweth very shrubby, 1 Prunum Imperiale. The Imperiall Plum. 2 Prunum Tureicum. The Turkey Plum. 3 Prunum pracox rubrum. The red Primordian Plum. 4 Prunum Mytellinum. The Mussell Plum. 5 Prunum Ambarinum. The Amber Plum. 6 Prunum Regineum. The Queen mother Plum. 7 Prunum viride. The green Oysterly Plum. 8 Prunum Arantiacum. The Orenge Plum. 9 Prunum Myristicum. The Nutmeg Plum. 10 Prunum Siliquosum. The Pescod Plum. 11 Prunum Gandanense. The Ganat Plum. 12 Prunum Dactylites. The Date Plum. 13 Prunum Pyrinum praecox. The early Peare Plum. depiction of fruit
and will abide good for six weekes at the least after it is gathered, and after all other plums are spent. The Cherry plum remembred before, speaking of the Muscadine plum, is a very good plum, but small. The Amber plum is a round plum, as yellow on the outside almost as yellow waxe, of a sowre vnpleasant taste that which I tasted, but I thinke it was not the right; for I haue seene and tasted another of the same bignesse, of a paler colour, farre better relli∣shed, and a firmer substance, comming cleane from the stone like an Apricocke. The Apricocke plum is a good plum when it is in its perfection, but that is seldome; for it doth most vsually cracke, thereby diminishing much of its goodnesse, and be∣sides yeeldeth gumme at the crackes. The Eason plum is a little red plum, but very good in taste. The Violet plum is a small and long blackish blew plum, ripe about Bartholomew tide, a very good dry eating fruit. The Grape plum is the Flushing Bulleis before remembred The Dennie plum is called also the Cheston, or the Friars plum before remembred. The Damaske Violet plum, or Queen mother plum spoken of before. The blacke Damascene plum is a very good dry plum, and of a darkeblew colour when it is ripe. The white Damson is nothing so well rellished as the other. The great Damson or Damaske plum is greater then the ordinary Damson, and sweeter in taste. The blew Damson well knowne, a good fruit. The Coferers plum is flat, like vnto a Peare plum, it is early ripe and blacke, of a very good rellish. The Margate plum the worst of an hundred. The green Oysterly plum is a reasonable great plum, of a whitish green colour when it is ripe, of a moist and sweete taste, reasonable good. The red Mirobalane plum groweth to be a great tree quickly, spreading very thicke and farre, very like the blacke Thorne or Sloe bush: the fruit is red, earlier ripe, and of a better taste then the white. The white Mirobalane plum is in most things like the former red, but the fruit is of a whitish yellow colour, and very pleasant, especially if it be not ouer ripe: both these had need to be plashed against a wall, or else they will hardly beare ripe fruit. The Oliue plum is very like a greene Oliue, both for colour and bignesse, and grow∣eth lowe on a small bushing tree, and ripeneth late, but is the best of all the sorts of greene plums. The white diapred plum of Malta, scarce knowne to any in our Land but Iohn Tra∣descante, is a very good plum, and striped all ouer like diaper, and thereby so called. The blacke diapred plum is like the Damascene plum, being blacke with spots, as small as pins points vpon it, of a very good rellish. The Peake plum is a long whitish plum, and very good. The Pishamin or Virginia plum is called a plum, but vtterly differeth from all sorts of plums, the description whereof may truely enforme you, as it is set downe in the tenth Chapter going before, whereunto I referre you. The Vse of Plums. The great Damaske or Damson Plummes are dryed in France in great quantities, and brought ouer vnto vs in Hogs-heads, and other great ves∣sels, and are those Prunes that are vsually sold at the Grocers, vnder the name of Damaske Prunes: the blacke Bulleis also are those (being dryed in the same manner) that they call French Prunes, and by their tartnesse are thought to binde, as the other, being sweet, to loosen the body. The Bruneola Plumme, by reason of his pleasant tartnesse, is much ac∣counted of, and being dryed, the stones taken from them, are brought ouer to vs in small boxes, and sold deere at the Comfitmakers, where they very often accompany all other sorts of banquetting stuffes.
Some of these Plums, because of their firmnesse, are vndoubtedly more wholsome then others that are sweete and waterish, and causelesse offence in their stomackes that eate them; and therefore are preserued with Sugar, to be kept all the yeare. None of them all is vsed in medicines so much as the great Damson or Damaske Prune, although all of them for the most part doe coole, lenifie, and draw forth choller, and thereby are fitted to be vsed of such as haue chollericke Agues. CHAP. XIIII. Mala Armeniaca siue Praecocia. Apricockes. THe Apricocke (as I said) is without question a kinde of Plumme, rather then a Peach, both the flower being white, and the stone of the fruit smooth also, like a Plumme, and yet because of the excellencie of the fruit, and the difference therein from all other Plummes, I haue thought it meete to entreate thereof by it selfe, and shew you the varieties haue been obserued in these times. The Apricocke tree riseth vp to a very great height, either standing by it selfe (where it beareth not so kindly, and very little in our country) or planted against a wall, as it is most vsuall, hauing a great stemme or body, and likewise many great armes or branches, couered with a smooth barke: the leaues are large, broad, and almost round, but pointed at the ends, and finely dented about the edges: the flowers are white, as the Plumme tree blossomes, but somewhat larger, and rounder set: the fruit is round, with a cleft on the one side, somewhat like vnto a Peach, being of a yellowish colour as well on the inside as outside, of a firme or fast substance, and dry, not ouer∣moist in the eating, and very pleasant in taste, containing within it a broad and flat stone, somewhat round and smooth, not rugged as the Peach stone, with a pleasant sweete kernell (yet some haue reported, that there is such as haue their kernels bitter, which I did neuer see or know) and is ripe almost with our first or earliest Plummes, and thereof it tooke the name of Pracox; and it may bee was the earliest of all others was then knowne, when that name was giuen. The great Apricocke, which some call the long Apricocke, is the greatest and fairest of all the rest. The smaller Apricocke, which some call the small round Apricocke, is thought to be small, because it first sprang from a stone: but that is not so; for the kinde it selfe being inoculated, will bee alwaies small, and neuer halfe so faire and great as the former. The white Apricocke hath his leaues more folded together, as if it were halfe dou∣ble: it beareth but seldome, and very few, which differ not from the ordinary, but in being more white, without any red when it is ripe. The Mascoline Apricocke hath a finer greene leafe, and thinner then the former, and beareth very seldome any store of fruit, which differeth in nothing from the first, but that it is a little more delicate. The long Mascoline Apricocke hath his fruit growing a little longer then the for∣mer, and differeth in nothing else. The Argier Apricocke is a smaller fruit then any of the other, and yellow, but as sweete and delicate as any of them, hauing a blackish stone within it, little bigger then a Lacure Cherry stone: this with many other sorts Iohn Tradescante brought with him returning from the Argier voyage, whither hee went voluntary with the Fleete, that went against the Pyrates in the yeare 1620. The Vse of Apricockes. Apricockes are eaten oftentimes in the same manner that other dainty Plummes are, betweene meales of themselues, or among other fruit at banquets.
They are also preserued and candid, as it pleaseth Gentlewomen to be∣stowe their time and charge, or the Comfitmaker to sort among other can∣did fruits. Some likewise dry them, like vnto Peares, Apples, Damsons, and other Plummes. Matthiolus doth wonderfully commend the oyle drawne from the ker∣nels of the stones, to annoint the inflamed haemorrhoides or piles, the swel∣lings of vlcers, the roughnesse of the tongue and throate, and likewise the paines of the eares. CHAP. XV. Mala Persica. Peaches. AS Iordered the Cherries and Plummes, so I intend to deale with Peaches, be∣cause their varieties are many, and more knowne in these dayes then in former times: but because the Nectorin is a differing kinde of Peach, I must deale with it as I did with the Apricocke among the Plummes, that is, place it in a Chapter by it selfe. The Peach tree of it selfe groweth not vsually altogether so great, or high as the A∣pricocke, because it is lesse durable, but yet spreadeth with faire great branches, from whence spring smaller and slenderer reddish twigges, whereon are set long narrow greene leaues, dented about the edges: the blossomes are greater then of any Plumme, of a deepe blush or light purple colour: after which commeth the fruit, which is round, and sometimes as great as a reasonable Apple or Pippin (I speake of some sorts; for there be some kindes that are much smaller) with a furrow or cleft on the one side, and couered with a freese or cotton on the outside, of colour either russet, or red, or yel∣low, or of a blackish red colour; of differing substances and tastes also, some being firme, others waterish, some cleauing fast to the stone on the inside, others parting from it more or lesse easily, one excelling another very farre, wherein is contained a rugged stone, with many chinkes or clefts in it, the kernell whereof is bitter: the roots growe neither deepe nor farre; and therefore are subiect to the winds, standing alone, and not against a wall. It sooner waxeth old and decayeth, being sprung of a stone, then being inoculated on a Plumme stocke, whereby it is more durable. The great white Peach is white on the outside as the meate is also, and is a good well rellished fruit. The small white Peach is all one with the greater, but differeth in size. The Carnation Peach is of three sorts, two are round, and the third long; they are all of a whitish colour, shadowed ouer with red, and more red on the side is next the sunne: the lesser round is the more common, and the later ripe. The grand Carnation Peach is like the former round Peach, but greater, and is as late ripe, that is, in the beginning of September. The red Peach is an exceeding well rellished fruit. The russet Peach is one of the most ordinary Peaches in the Kingdome, being of a russet colour on the outside, and but of a reasonable rellish, farre meaner then many other. The Island Peach is a faire Peach, and of a very good rellish. The Newington Peach is a very good Peach, and of an excellent good rellish, being of a whitish greene colour on the outside, yet halfe reddish, and is ripe about Barthol∣mew tide. The yellow Peach is of a deepe yellow colour; there be hereof diuers sorts, some good and some bad. The St. Iames Peach is the same with the Queenes Peach, here belowe set downe, although some would make them differing. The Melocotone Peach is a yellow faire Peach, but differing from the former yel∣low both in forme and taste, in that this hath a small crooked end or point for the most part, it is ripe before them, and better rellished then any of them.
1 Malus Armeniea fiue Pracociae. The Apricoeke. 2 Malus Persica Melocotonea. The Melocotone Peach. 3 Persica Moschatellina. The Nutmeg Peach 4 Perfleanigra. The blacke Peach. 5 Perfica Caemea longa. The long Carnation Peach. 6 Perfica Reginea. The Queenes Peach. 7 Amygalalus. The Al∣mond. 8 Perficadu Treas. The Peach du Troas. 9 Nuciperfica rubra optima. The best Romane red Nectorin. 10. Nuciperfica rubra altera. The bastard red Nectoria with a pincking blstome. depiction of fruit
The Peach du Troas is a long and great withish yellow Peach, red on the outside; early ripe, and is another kinde of Nutmeg Peach. The Queenes Peach is a faire great yellowish browne Peach, shadowed as it were ouer with deepe red, and is ripe at Bartholmew tide, of a very pleasant good taste. The Romane Peach is a very good Peach, and well pullished. The Durasme or Spanish Peach is of a darke yellowish red colour on the outside, and white within. The blacke Peach is a great large Perch, of a very darke browne colour on the out∣side, it is of a waterish taste, and late ripe. The Alberza Peach is late ripe, and of a reasonable good taste. The Almond Peach, so called, because the kernell of the stone is sweete, like the Al∣mond, and the fruit also somewhat pointed like the Almond in the huske; it is early ripe, and like the Newington Peach, but lesser. The Man Peach is of two sorts, the one longer then the other, both of them are good Peaches, but the shorter is the better rellished. The Cherry Peach is a small Peach, but well tasted. The Nutmeg Peach is of two sorts, one that will be hard when it is ripe, and eateth not so pleasantly as the other, which will bee soft and mellow; they are both small Peaches, hauing very little or no resemblance at all to a Nutmeg, except in being a little longer then round, and are early ripe. Many other sorts of Peaches there are, whereunto wee can giue no especiall name; and therefore I passe them ouer in silence. The Vse of Peaches. Those Peaches that are very moist and waterish (as many of them are) and not firme, doe soone putrefie in the stomacke, causing surfeits often∣times; and therefore euery one had neede bee carefull, what and in what manner they eate them: yet they are much and often well accepted with all the Gentry of the Kingdome. The leaues, because of their bitternesse, serue well being boyled in Ale or Milke, to be giuen vnto children that haue wormes, to help to kill them, and doe gently open the belly, if there be a sufficient quantity vsed. The flowers haue the like operation, that is, to purge the body somewhat more forceably then Damaske Roses; a Syrupe therefore made of the flow∣ers is very good. The kernels of the Peach stones are oftentimes vsed to be giuen to them that cannot well make water, or are trouble d with the stone; for it openeth the stoppings of the vritory passages, whereby much ease ensueth. CHAP. XVI. Nucipersica. Nectorins. I Presume that the name Nucipersica, doth most rightly belong vnto that kinde of Peach, which we call Nectorins, and although they haue beene with vs not many yeares, yet haue they beene knowne both in Italy to Matthiolus, and others before him, who it seemeth knew no other then the yellow Nectorin, as Dalechampius also: But we at this day doe know fiue seuerall sorts of Nectorins, as they shall be presently set downe; and as in the former fruits, so in this, I will giue you the description of one, and briefe notes of the rest. The Nectorin is a tree of no great bignesse, most vsually lesser then the Peach tree, his body and elder boughes being whitish, the younger branches very red, whereon grow narrow long greene leaues, so like vnto Peach leaues, that none can well distin∣guish them, vnlesse it be in this, that they are somewhat lesser: the blossomes are all reddish, as the Peach, but one of a differing fashion from all the other, as I shall shew you by and by: the fruit that followeth is smaller, rounder, and smoother then Pea∣ches, without any cleft on the side, and without any douny cotton or freeze at all; and
herein is like vnto the outer greene rinde of the Wallnut, whereof as I am perswaded it tooke the name, of a fast and firme meate, and very delicate in taste, especially the best kindes, with a rugged stone within it, and a bitter kernell. The Muske Nectorin, so called, be cause it being a kinde of the best red Nectorins, both smelleth and eateth as if the fruit were steeped in Muske: some thinke that this and the next Romane Nectorin are all one. The Romane red Nectorin, or cluster Nectorin, hath a large or great purplish blos∣some, like vnto a Peach, reddish at the bottome on the outside, and greenish within: the fruit is of a fine red colour on the outside, and groweth in clusters, two or three at a ioynt together, of an excellent good taste. The bastard red Nectorin hath a smaller or pincking blossome, more like threads then leaues, neither so large nor open as the former, and yellowish within at the bot∣tome: the fruit is red on the outside, and groweth neuer but one at a ioynt; it is a good fruit, but eateth a little more rawish then the other, euen when it is full ripe. The yellow Nectorin is of two sorts, the one an excellent fruit, mellow, and of a very good rellish; the other hard, and no way comparable to it. The greene Nectorin, great and small; for such I haue seene abiding constant, al∣though both planted in one ground: they are both of one goodnesse, and accounted with most to be the bestrellished Nectorin of all others. The white Nectorin is said to bee differing from the other, in that it will bee more white on the outside when it is ripe, then either the yellow or greene: but I haue not yet seene it. The Vse of Nectorins. The fruit is more firme then the Peach, and more delectable in taste; and is therefore of more esteeme, and that worthily. CHAP. XVII. Amygdala. Almonds. THe Almond also may be reckoned vnto the stock or kindred of the Peaches, it is so like both in leafe and blossome, and somewhat also in the fruit, for the out∣ward forme, although it hath onely a dry skinne, and no pulpe or meate to bee eaten: but the kernell of the stone or shell, which is called the Almond, maketh re∣compense of that defect, whereof some are sweete, some bitter, some great, some small, some long, and some short. The Almond tree groweth vpright, higher and greater then any Peach; and is therefore vsually planted by it selfe, and not against a wall, whose body sometime ex∣ceedeth any mans fadome, whereby it sheweth to be of longer continuance, bearing large armes, and smaller branches also, but brittle, whereon are set long and narrow leaues, like vnto the Peach tree: the blossomes are purplish, like vnto Peach blosoms, but paler: the fruit is somewhat like a Peach for the forme of the skinne or outside, which is rough, but not with any such cleft therein, or with any pulpe or meate fit to bee eaten, but is a thicke dry skinne when it is ripe, couering the stone or shell, which is smooth and not rugged, and is either long and great, or small, or thicke and short, according as the nut or kernell within it is, which is sweete both in the greater and smaller, and onely one smaller kinde which is bitter: yet this I haue obserued, that all the Almond trees that I haue seene growe in England, both of the sweete and bit∣ter kindes, beare Almonds thicke and short, and not long, as that sort which is called the Iorden Almond. The Vse of Almonds. They are vsed many wayes, and for many purposes, either eaten alone with Figges, or Raysins of the Sunne, or made into paste with Sugar and Rosewater for Marchpanes, or put among Floure, Egges, and Sugar, to
make Mackerons, or crusted ouer with Sugar, to make Comfits, or mixed with Rosewater and Sugar, to make Butter, or with Barley water, to make Milke, and many other waies, as euery one list, that hath skill in such things. The oyle also Almonds is vsed many waies, both inwardly and out∣wardly, for many purposes; as the oyle of sweete Almonds mixt with poudered white Sugar Candy, for coughes and hoarsenesse, and to be drunk alone, or with some other thing (as the Syrupe of Marsh Mallowes) for the stone to open and lenifie the passages, and make them slipperie, that the stone may passet the easier. And also for women in Child bed after their sore trauell. And outwardly either by it selfe, or with oyle of Tartar to make a creame, to lenifie the skin, parched with the winde or otherwise, or to an∣noint the stomacke either alone, or with other things to helpe a cold. The oyle of bitter Almonds is much vsed to be dropped into their eares that are hard of hearing, to helpe to open them. And as it is thought, doth more scoure and cleanse the skin then the sweet oyle doth, and is therefore more vsed of many for that purpose, as the Almonds themselues are. CHAP. XVIII. Mala Arantia. Orenges. I Bring here to your consideration, as you see, the Orenge tree alone, without menti∣oning the Citron or Lemmon trees, in regard of the experience we haue seen made of them in diuers places: For the Orenge tree hath abiden with some extraordi∣nary looking and tending of it, when as neither of the other would by any meanes be preserued any longtime. If therefore any be desirous to keepe this tree, he must so prouide for it, that it be preserued from any cold, either in the winter or spring, and exposed to the comfort of the sunne in summer. And for that purpose some keepe them in great square boxes, and lift them to and fro by iron hooks on the sides, or cause them to be rowled by trundels, or small wheeles vnder them, to place them in an house, or close gallerie for the winter time: others plant them against a bricke wall in the ground, and defend them by a shed of boardes, couered ouer with seare-cloth in the winter, and by the warmth of a stoue, or other such thing, giue them some comfort in the colder times: but no tent or meane prouision will preserue them. The Orenge tree in the warme Countries groweth very high, but with vs (or else it is a dwarfe kinde there of) riseth not very high: the barke of the elder stemmes being of a darke colour, and the young branches very greene, whereon grow here and there some few thornes: the leaues are faire, large, and very greene, in forme almost like a Bay leafe, but that it hath a small eare, or peece of a leafe, fashioned like vnto an heart vnder euery one of them, with many small holes to be seene in them, if you hold them vp betweene you and the light, of a sweet but strong smell, naturally not falling away, but alwaies abiding on, or vntill new be come vp, bearing greene leaues continually: the flowers are whitish, of a very strong and heady sent; after which come small round fruit, greene at the first, while they are small, and not neere maturitie, but being grown and ripe, are (as all men know) red on the out side, some more pale then others, and some kindes of a deeper yellowish red, according to the climate, and as it receiueth the heate of the sunne, wherein is contained sower or sweete iuice, and thicke white ker∣nels among it: it beareth in the warme Countries both blossomes and greene fruit continually vpon it, and ripe fruit also with them for the best part of the yeare, but e∣specially in Autumne and Winter. The Vse of Orenges. Orenges are vsed as sawce for many sorts of meates, in respect of their sweete sowernesse, giuing a rellish of delight, whereinsoeuer they are vsed. The inner pulpe or iuice doth serue in agues and hot diseases, and in Sum∣mer to coole the heate of deiected stomackes, or fainting spirits.
1 Malus Arantia. The Orenge tree, 2 Malus. The Apple tree. 3 Malum Carbonarium. The Pomewater. 4 Malum Curtipendulum. The golden 5 Melapium. The Pearemaine. 6 Malum Reginei. The Queene Apple. 7 Malum Primo matuum. The Genneting. 8 Malum Regule. The pound Ro∣all. 9 Malum Kentij ad feruescondum. The Kentish Codlin. 10 Malum Regineum spurium. The Bardfield Quining. depiction of fruit
The dryed rinde, by reason of the sweete and strong sent, serueth to bee put among other things to make sweet pouthers. The outer rindes, when they are clensed from all the inner pulpe and skins, are preserued in Sugar, after the bitternesse by often steepings hath been taken away, & do serue either as Succots, and banquetting stuffes, or as ornaments to set out dishes for the table, or to giue a rellish vnto meats, whether baked or boyled: Physically they helpe to warme a cold stomack, and to digest or breake winde therein: or they are candid with Sugar, and serue with other dryed Iunquets. The water of Orange flowers is oftentimes vsed as a great persume for glones, to washe them, or in stead of Rose-water to mixe with other things. It is vsed to bee drunke by some, to preuent or to helpe any pestilentiall feuer. The oyntment that is made of the flowers, is very comfortable both for the stomache, against the could or cough, or for the head, for paines and disinesse. The kernels or seede beeing cast into the ground in the spring time, will quickely grow vp, (but will not abide the winter with vs, to bee kept for growing trees) and when they are of a finger length high, being pluckt vp, and put among sallats, will giue them a maruellous fine aromaticke or spicy taste, very acceptable. The seed or kernels are a little cordiall, although nothing so much as the kernels of the Pomecitron. CHAP. XIX. Poma. Apples. THe sorts of Apples are so many, and infinite almost as I may say, that I cannot giue you the names of all, though I haue endeauoured to giue a great many, and I thinke it almost impossible for any one, to attaine to the full perfection of knowledge herein, not onely in regard of the multiplicitie of fashions, colours and tastes, but in that some are more familiar to one Countrey then to another, being of a better or worse taste in one place then in another, and therefore diuersly called: I will therefore as I haue done before, giue you the description of the Tree in generall, as also of the Paradise or dwarfe Apple, because of some especiall difference, and afterwards the names of as many, with their fashions, as haue come to my knowledge, either by sight or relation: for I doe confesse I haue not seene all that I here set downe, but vse the helpe of some friends, and therefore if it happen that the seuerall names doe not answer vnto seuerall sorts, but that the same fruit may bee called by one name in one Country, that is called by another elsewhere, excuse it I pray you; for in such a num∣ber, such a fault may escape vnknowne.
The Apple tree for the most part is neyther very high, great or straight, but rather vsually boweth and spreadeth (although in some places it groweth fairer and straighter then in others) hauing long and great armes or boughes, and from them smaller bran∣ches, whereon doe grow somewhat broade, and long greene leaues, nicked about the edges: the flowers are large and white, with blush coloured sides, consisting of fiue leaues: the fruit (as I said) is of diuers formes, colours and tastes, and likewise of a very variable durabilitie; for some must be eaten presently after they are gathered, and they are for the most part the earliest ripe; others will abide longer vpon the trees, before they bee fit to be gathered; some also will be so hard when others are gathered, that they will not be fit to be eaten, for one, two or three months after they bee gathered; and some will abide good but one, two or three moneths, and no more; and some will be best, after a quarter or halfe a yeares lying, vnto the end of that yeare or the next. The Paradise or dwarfe Apple tree groweth nothing so high as the former, and many times not much higher then a man may reach, hauing leaues and flowers altogether like the other, the fruit is a faire yellow Apple, and reasonable great, but very light and spongy or loose, and of a bitterish sweet taste, nothing pleasant. And these faults al∣so  are incident vnto this tree, that both bodie and branches are much subiect vnto cancker, which will quickely eate it round, and kill it; besides it will haue many bun∣ches, or tuberous swellings in many places, which grow as it were scabby or tough, and will soone cause it to perish: the roote sendeth forth many shootes and suckrs, whereby it may be much increased. But this benefit may be had of it, to recompence the former faults, That being a dwarfe Tree, whatsoeuer fruit shall bee grafted on it, will keepe the graft low like vnto it selfe, and yet beare fruit reasonable well. And this is a pretty way to haue Pippins, Pomewaters, or any other sort of Apples (as I haue had my selfe, and also seene with others) growing low, that if any will, they may make a hedge rowe of these low fruits, planted in an Orchard all along by a walke side: but take this Caueat, if you will auoide the danger of the cancker and knots, which spoile the tree, to graft it hard vnto the ground, that therby you may giue as little of the nature of the stock thereunto as possibly you can, which wil vndoubtedly help it very much. The kindes or sorts of Apples. The Summer pippin is a very good apple first ripe, and therefore to bee first spent, because it will not abide so long as the other. The French pippin is also a good fruit and yellow. The Golding pippin is the greatest and best of all sorts of pippins. The Russet pippin is as good an apple as most of the other sorts of pippins. The spotted pippin is the most durable pippin of all the other sorts. The ordinary yellow pippin is like the other, and as good; for indeed I know no sort of pippins but are excellent good well rellished fruites. The great pearemaine differeth little either in taste or durabilitie from the pippin, and therefore next vnto it is accounted the best of all apples. The summer pearemaine is of equall goodnesse with the former, or rather a little more pleasing, especially for the time of its eating, which will not bee so long lasting, but is spent and gone when the other beginneth to be good to eate. The Russetting is also a firme and a very good apple, not so waterish as the pippin or pearemaine, and will last the best part of the year, but will be very mellow at the last, or rather halfe dryed. The Broading is a very good apple. The Pomewater is an excellent good and great whitish apple, full of sap or moisture, somewhat pleasant sharpe, but a little bitter withall: it will not last long, the winter frosts soone causing it to rot, and perish. The Flower of Kent is a faire yellowish greene apple both good and great. The Gilloflower apple is a fine apple, and finely spotted. The Marligo is the same, that is called the Marigold apple, it is a middle sized apple, very yellow on the outside, shadowed ouer as it were with red, and more red on one side, a reasonable well rellished fruit. The Blandrill is a good apple. The Dauie Gentle is a very good apple The Gruntlin is somewhat a long apple, smaller at the crowne then at the stalke, and is a reasonable good apple. The gray Costerd is a good great apple, somewhat whitish on the outside, and abi∣deth the winter. The greene Costerd is like the other, but greener on the outside continually. The Haruy apple is a faire great goodly apple, and very well rellished. The Dowse apple is a sweetish apple not much accounted of. The Pome-paris is a very good apple. The Belle boon of two sorts winter and summer, both of them good apples, and fair fruit to look on, being yellow and of a meane bignesse. The pound Royall is a very great apple, of a very good and sharpe taste. The Doues Bill a small apple. The Deusan or apple Iohn is a delicate fine fruit, well rellished when it beginneth to be fit to be eaten, and endureth good longer then any other apple. The Master William is greater then a pippin, but of no very good rellish. The Master Iohn is a better tasted apple then the other by much.
The Spicing is a well tasted fruite. Pome de Rambures all faire and good apples brought from France. Pome de Capanda all faire and good apples brought from France. Pome de Calual all faire and good apples brought from France. The Queene apple is of two sorts, both of them great faire red apples, and well rel∣lished, but the greater is the best. The Bastard Queene apple is like the other for forme and colour, but not so good in taste: some call this the bardfield Queening. The Boughton or greening is a very good and well tasted apple. The Leathercoate apple is a good winter apple, of no great bignesse, but of a very good and sharpe taste. The Pot apple is a plaine Country apple. The Cowsnout is no very good fruit. The Gildiling apple is a yellow one, not much accounted. The Cats head apple tooke the name of the likenesse, and is a reasonable good apple and great. The Kentish Codlin is a faire great greenish apple, very good to eate when it is ripe; but the best to coddle of all other apples. The Stoken apple is a reasonable good apple. The Geneting apple is a very pleasant and good apple. The Worcester apple is a very good apple, as bigge as a Pomewater. Donime Couadis is a French apple, and of a good rellish. The French Goodwin is a very good apple. The old wife is a very good, and well rellished apple. The towne Crab is an hard apple, not so good to be eaten rawe as roasted, but ex∣cellent to make Cider. The Virgilling apple is a reasonable good apple. The Crowes egge is no good rellished fruit, but noursed vp in some places of the common people. The Sugar apple is so called of the sweetnesse. Sops in wine is so named both of the pleasantnesse of the fruit, and beautie of the apple. The womans breast apple is a great apple. The blacke apple or pippin is a very good eating apple, and very like a Pearemaine, both for forme and bignesse, but of a blacke sooty colour. Tweenty sorts of Sweetings and none good. The Peare apple is a small fruit, but well rellished being ripe, and is for shape very like vnto a small short Peare, and greene. The Paradise apple is a faire goodly yellow apple, but light and spongy, and of a bit∣terish sweet taste, not to be commended. The apple without blossome, so called because although it haue a small shew of a blossome, yet they are but small threds rather than leaues, neuer shewing to bee like a flower, and therefore termed without blossome: the apple is neyther good eating nor baking fruit. Wildings and Crabs are without number or vse in our Orchard, being to be had out of the woods, fields and hedges rather then any where else. The Vse of Apples. The best sorts of Apples serue at the last course for the table, in most mens houses of account, where, if there grow any rare or excellent fruit, it is then set forth to be seene and tasted. Diuers other sorts serue to bake, either for the Masters Table, or the meynes sustenance, either in pyes or pans, or else stewed in dishes with Rose∣water and Sugar, and Cinamon or Ginger cast vpon. Some kinds are fittest to roast in the winter time, to warme a cup of wine, ale or beere; or to be eaten alone, for the nature of some fruit is neuer so good, or worth the eating, as when they are roasted.
Some sorts are fittest to scald for Codlins, and are taken to coole the sto∣macke, as well as to please the taste, hauing Rosewater and Sugar put to them. Some sorts are best to make Cider of, as in the West Countrey of Eng∣land great quantities, yea many Hogsheads and Tunnes full are made, espe∣cially to bee carried to the Sea in long voyages, and is found by experience to bee of excellent vse, to mixe with water for beuerage. It is vsually seene that those fruits that are neither fit to eate raw, roasted, nor baked, are fittest for Cider, and make the best. The iuice of Apples likewise, as of pippins, and pearemaines, is of very good vse in Melancholicke diseases, helping to procure mirth, and to expell heauinesse. The distilled water of the same Apples is of the like effect. There is a fine sweet oyntment made of Apples called Pomatum, which is much vsed to helpe chapt lips, or hands, or for the face, or any other part of the skinne that is rough with winde, or any other accident, to supple them, and make them smooth. CHAP. XX. Cydonia. Quinces. WEe haue some diuersities of Quinces, although not many, yet more then our elder times were acquainted with, which shall be here expressed. The Quince tree groweth oftentimes to the height and bignesse of a good Apple tree, but more vsually lower, with crooked and spreading armes and branches farre abroad, the leaues are somewhat round, and like the leaues of the Ap∣ple tree, but thicker, harder, fuller of veines, and white on the vnderside: the blos∣somes or flowers are white, now and then dasht ouer with blush, being large and open, like vnto a single Rose: the fruit followeth, which when it is ripe is yellow, and co∣uered with a white cotton or freeze, which in the younger is thicker and more plenti∣full, but waxeth lesse and lesse, as the fruit ripeneth, being bunched out many times in seuerall places, and round, especially about the head, some greater, others smaller, some round like an Apple, others long like a Peare, of a strong heady sent, accounted not wholsome or long to be endured, and of no durabilitie to keepe, in the middle whereof is a core, with many blackish seedes or kernels therein, lying close together in cels, and compassed with a kinde of clearegelly, which is easier seene in the scalded fruit, then in the raw. The English Quince is the ordinarie Apple Quince, set downe before, and is of so harsh a taste being greene, that no man can endure to eate it rawe, but eyther boyled, stewed, roasted or baked; all which waies it is very good. The Portingall Apple Quince is a great yellow Quince, seldome comming to bee whole and faire without chapping; this is so pleasant being fresh gathered, that it may be eaten like vnto an Apple without offence. The Portingall Peare Quince is not fit to be eaten rawe like the former, but must be vsed after some of the waies the English Quince is appointed, and so it will make more dainty dishes then the English, because it is lesse harsh, will bee more tender, and take lesse sugar for the ordering then the English kinde. The Barbary Quince is like in goodnesse vnto the Portingall Quince last spoken of, but lesser in bignesse. The Lyons Quince. The Brunswicke Quince. The Vse of Quinces.
There is no fruit growing in this Land that is of so many excellent vses as this, seruing as well to make many dishes of meate for the table, as for  banquets, and much more for the Physicall vertues, whereof to write at large is neither conuenient for mee, nor for this worke: I will onely briefly recite some, as it were to giue you a taste of that plenty remaineth therein, to bee conuerted into sundry formes: as first for the table, while they are fresh (and all the yeare long after being pickled vp) to be baked, as a dainty dish, being well and orderly cookt. And being preserued whole in Sugar, either white or red, serue likewise, not onely as an after dish to close vp the stomacke, but is placed among other Preserues by Ladies and Gentlewo∣men, and bestowed on their friends to entertaine them, and among other sorts of Preserues at Banquets. Codiniacke also and Marmilade, Ielly and Paste, are all made of Quinces, chiefly for delight and pleasure, although they haue also with them some physicall properties. We haue for the vse of physicke, both Iuyce and Syrupe, both Conserue and Condite, both binding and loosening medicines, both inward and out∣ward, and all made of Quinces. The Ielly or Muccilage of the seedes, is often vsed to be laid vpon wo∣mens breasts, to heale them being sore or rawe, by their childrens default giuing them sucke. Athenaeus reciteth in his third booke, that one Philarchus found, that the smell of Quinces tooke away the strength of a certaine poison, called Phariacum. And the Spaniards haue also found, that the strength of the iuyce of white Ellebor (which the Hunters vse as a poyson to dippe their arrow heads in, that they shoote at wilde beasts to kill them) is quite taken away, if it stand within the compasse of the smell of Quinces. And also that Grapes, being hung vp to bee kept, and spent in Win∣ter, doe quickly rot with the smell of a Quince. CHAP. XXI. Pyra. Peares. THe variety of peares is as much or more then of apples, and I thinke it is as hard in this, as before in apples, for any to be so exquisite, as that hee could number vp all the sorts that are to be had: for wee haue in our country so ma∣nie, as I shall giue you the names of by and by, and are hitherto come to our know∣ledge: but I verily beleeue that there be many, both in our country, and in others, that we haue not yet knowne or heard of; for euery yeare almost wee attaine to the know∣ledge of some, we knew not of before. Take therefore, according to the manner be∣fore held, the description of one, with the seuerall names of the rest, vntill a more ex∣act discourse be had of them, euery one apart. The Peare tree groweth more slowly, but higher, and more vpright then the apple tree, and not lesse in the bulke of the body: his branches spread not so farre or wide, but growe vprighter and closer: the leaues are somewhat broader and rounder, greene aboue, and whiter vnderneath then those of the apple tree: the flowers are whiter and greater: the fruit is longer then round for the most part, smaller at the stalke, and grea∣ter at the head, of so many differing formes, colours, and tastes, that hardly can one distinguish rightly between them, the times also being as variable in the gathering and spending of them, as in apples: the roote groweth deeper then the apple tree, and therefore abideth longer, and giueth a faster, closer, & smoother gentle wood, easie to be wrought vpon. The kindes of Peares. The Summer bon Chretien is somewhat a long peare, with a greene and yellow russetish coate, and will haue sometimes red sides; it is ripe at Michaelmas: some vse to dry them as they doe Prunes, and keepe them all the yeare after. I haue not seene or heard any more Summer kindes hereof then this one, and needeth no wall to nourse it as the other.
1 Malus Cotouo. The Quince tree. 2 Cydonium Luitanicum. The Portingall Quince. 3 Pyrus. The Peare tree. 4 Pyrum Pompeianum, siue Cucumeinum hyemale. The Winter Bon Chretien. 5 Pyrum pictum vel striatum. The painted or striped Peare of erusalem. 6 Pyrum Palatinal. The Burgomot Peare. 7 Pyrum Cucumerinum siue Pompeianum aestivum. The Summer Bon Chretien. 8 Pyrum Ʋolemam. The best Warden. 9 Pyrum Librale. The ocua Peare. 10 Pyrum Windsorianum. The Windsor Peare. 11 Pyrum Cucumerinum. The Gratiosa Peare. 12 Pyrum Caryophyllatum. The Gilloflower Peare. depiction of fruit
The Winter bon Chretien is of many sorts, some greater, others lesser, and all good; but the greatest and best is that kinde that groweth at Syon: All the kinds of this Win∣ter fruit must be planted against a wall, or else they will both seldome beare, and bring fewer also to ripenesse, comparable to the wall fruit: the kindes also are according to their lasting; for some will endure good much longer then others. The Summer Bergomot is an excellent well rellished peare, flattish, & short, not long like others, of a meane bignesse, and of a darke yellowish greene colour on the outside. The Winter Bergomot is of two or three sorts, being all of them small fruit, some∣what greener on the outside then the Summer kindes; all of them very delicate and good in their due time: for some will not be fit to bee eaten when others are will-nigh spent, euery of them outlasting another by a moneth or more. The Diego peare is but a small peare, but an excellent well rellished fruit, tasting as if Maske had been put among it; many of them growe together, as it were in clusters. The Duetete or double headed peare, so called of the forme, is a very good peare, not very great, of a russettish browne colour on the outside. The Primating peare is a good moist peare, and early ripe. The Geneting peare is a very good early ripe peare. The greene Chesill is a delicate mellow peare, euen melting as it were in the mouth of the eater, although greenish on the outside. The Catherine peare is knowne to all I thinke to be a yellow red sided peare, of a full waterish sweete taste, and ripe with the foremost. The King Catherine is greater then the other, and of the same goodnesse, or rather better. The Russet Catherine is a very good middle sized peare. The Windsor peare is an excellent good peare, well knowne to most persons, and of a reasonable greatnesse: it will beare fruit some times twice in a yeare (and as it is said) three times in some places. The Norwich peare is of two sorts, Summer and Winter, both of them good fruit, each in their season. The Worster peare is blackish, a farre better peare to bake (when as it will be like a Warden, and as good) then to eate rawe; yet so it is not to be misliked. The Muske peare is like vnto a Catherine peare for bignesse, colour, and forme; but farre more excellent in taste, as the very name importeth. The Rosewater peare is a goodly faire peare, and of a delicate taste. The Sugar peare is an early peare, very sweete, but waterish. The Summer Popperin both of them are very good firme dry peares, somewhat spotted, and brownish on the outside. The Winter Popperin both of them are very good firme dry peares, somewhat spotted, and brownish on the outside. The greene Popperin is a winter fruit, of equall goodnesse with the former. The Soueraingne peare, that which I haue seene and tasted, and so termed vnto me, was a small brownish yellow peare, but of a most dainty taste; but some doe take a kind of Bon Chretien, called the Elizabeth peare, to be the Soueraigne peare; how truely let others iudge. The Kings peare is a very good and well tasted peare. The peare Royall is a great peare, and of a good rellish. The Warwicke peare is a reasonable faire and good peare. The Greenfield peare is a very good peare, of a middle size. The Lewes peare is a brownish greene peare, ripe about the end of September, a reasonable well rellished fruit, and very moist. The Bishop peare is a middle sized peare, of a reasonable good taste, not very wa∣terish; but this property is oftentimes seene in it, that before the fruit is gathered, (but more vsually those that fall of themselues, and the rest within a while after they are gathered) it will be rotten at the core, when there wil not be a spot or blemish to be seene on the outside, or in all the peare, vntill you come neare the core. The Wilford peare is a good and a faire peare. The Bell peare a very good greene peare. The Portingall peare is a great peare, but more goodly in shew then good indeed. The Gratiola peare is a kinde of Bon Chretien, called the Cowcumber peare, or Spinola's peare. The Rowling peare is a good peare, but hard, and not good before it bee a little rowled or bruised, to make it eate the more mellow.
The Pimpe peare is as great as the Windsor peare, but rounder, and of a very good rellish. The Turnep peare is a hard winter peare, not so good to eate rawe, as it is to bake. The Arundell peare is most plentifull in Suffolke, and there commended to be a ve∣rie good peare. The Berry peare is a Summer peare, reasonable faire and great, and of so good and wholsome a taste, that few or none take harme by eating neuer so many of them. The Sand peare is a reasonable good peare, but small. The Morley peare is a very good peare, like in forme and colour vnto the Windsor, but somewhat grayer. The peare pricke is very like vnto the Greenfield peare, being both faire, great, and good. The good Rewell is a reasonable great peare, as good to bake as to eate rawe, and both wayes it is a good fruit. The Hawkes bill peare is of a middle size, somewhat like vnto the Rowling peare. The Petworth peare is a winter peare, and is great, somewhat long, faire, and good. The Slipper peare is a reasonable good peare. The Robert peare is a very good peare, plentifull in Suffolke and Norfolke. The pound peare is a reasonable good peare, both to eate rawe, and to bake. The ten pound peare, or the hundred pound peare, the truest and best, is the best Bon Chretien of Syon, so called, because the grafts cost the Master so much the fetching by the messengers expences, when he brought nothing else. The Gilloflower peare is a winter peare, faire in shew, but hard, and not fit to bee eaten rawe, but very good to bake. The peare Couteau is neither good one way nor other. The Binsce peare is a reasonable good winter peare, of a russetish colour, and a small fruit: but will abide good a long while. The Pucell is a greene peare, of an indifferent good taste. The blacke Sorrell is a reasonable great long peare, of a darke red colour on the out∣side. The red Sorrell is of a redder colour, else like the other. The Surrine is no very good peare. The Summer Hasting is a little greene peare, of an indifferent good rellish. Peare Gergonell is an early peare, somewhat long, and of a very pleasant taste. The white Genneting is a reasonable good peare, yet not equall to the other. The Sweater is somewhat like the Windsor for colour and bignesse, but nothing neare of so good a taste. The bloud red peare is of a darke red colour on the outside, but piercing very little into the inner pulpe. The Hony peare is a long greene Summer peare. The Winter peare is of many sorts, but this is onely so called, to bee distinguished from all other Winter peares, which haue seuerall names giuen them, and is a very good peare. The Warden or Luke Wards peare of two sorts, both white and red, both great and small. The Spanish Warden is greater then either of both the former, and better also. The peare of Ierusalem, or the stript peare, whose barke while it is young, is as plainly seene to be stript with greene, red, and yellow, as the fruit it selfe is also, and is of a very good taste: being baked also, it is as red as the best Warden, whereof Ma∣ster William Ward of Essex hath assured mee, who is the chiefe keeper of the Kings Granary at Whitehall. Hereof likewise there is a wilde kinde no bigger then ones thumbe, and striped in the like manner, but much more. The Choke peares, and other wilde peares, both great and small, as they are not to furnish our Orchard, but the Woods, Forrests, Fields, and Hedges, so wee leaue them to their naturall places, and to them that keep them, and make good vse of them. The Vse of Peares.
The most excellent sorts of Peares, serue (is I said before of Apples) to  make an after-course for their masters table, where the goodnesse of his Or∣chard is tryed. They are dryed also, and so are an excellent repaste, if they be of the best kindes, fit for the purpose. They are eaten familiarly of all sorts of people, of some for delight, and of others for nourishment, being baked, stewed, or scalded. The red Warden and the Spanish Warden are reckoned among the most excellent of Peares, either to bake or to roast, for the sicke or for the sound: And indeede, the Quince and the Warden are the two onely fruits are per∣mitted to the sicke, to eate at any time. Perry, which is the iuyce of Peares pressed out, is a drinke much esteemed as well as Cyder, to be both drunke at home, and carried to the Sea, and found to be of good vse in long voyages. The Perry made of Choke Peares, notwithstanding the harshnesse, and euill taste, both of the fruit when it is greene, as also of the iuyce when it is new made, doth yet after a few moneths become as milde and pleasant as wine, and will hardly bee knowne by the sight or taste from it: this hath beene found true by often experience; and therefore wee may admire the goodnesse of God, that hath giuen such facility to so wilde fruits, altoge∣ther thought vselesse, to become vsefull, and apply the benefit thereof both to the comfort of our soules and bodies. For the Physicall properties, if we doe as Galen teacheth vs, in secundo Alimentorum, referre the qualities of Peares to their seuerall tastes, as be∣fore he had done in Apples, we shall not neede to make a new worke; those that are harsh and sowre doe coole and binde, sweet do nourish and warme, and those betweene these, to haue middle vertues, answerable to their tem∣peratures, &c. Much more might be said, both of this and the other kinds of fruits; but let this suffice for this place and worke, vntill a more exact be accomplished. CHAP. XXII. Nux Iuglans. The Wallnut. ALthough the Wallnut tree bee often planted in the middle of great Court∣yards, where by reason of his great spreading armes it taketh vp a great deale of roome, his shadow reaching farre, so that scarce any thing can well grow neare it; yet because it is likewise planted in fit places or corners of Orchards, and that it beareth fruit or nuts, often brought to the table, especially while they are freshest, sweetest, and fittest to be eaten, let not my Orchard want his company, or you the knowledge of it. Some doe thinke that there are many sorts of them, because some are much greater then others, and some longer then others, and some haue a more fran∣gible shell then others; but I am certainly perswaded, that the soyle and climate where they grow, are the whole and onely cause of the varieties and differences. In∣deed Virginia hath sent vnto vs two sorts of Wallnuts, the one blacke, the other white, whereof as yet wee haue no further knowledge. And I know that Clusius reporteth, he tooke vp at a banquet a long Wallnut, differing in forme and tendernesse of shell from others, which being set, grew and bore farre tenderer leaues then the other, and a little snipt about the edges, which (as I said) might alter with the soyle and climate: and besides you may obserue, that many of Clusius differences are very nice, and so I leaue it.
The Wallnut tree groweth very high and great, with a large and thicke body or trunke, couered with a thicke clouen whitish greene barke, tending to an ash-colour; the armes are great, and spread farre, breaking out into smaller branches, whereon doe grow long & large leaues, fiue or seuen set together one against another, with an odde one at the end, somewhat like vnto Ashen leaues, but farre larger, and not so many on a stalke, smooth, and somewhat reddish at the first springing, and tender also, of a reaso∣nable good sent, but more strong and headie when they growe old: the fruit or nut is great and round, growing close to the stalkes of the leaues, either by couples or by  three set together, couered with a double shell, that is to say, with a greene thicke and soft outer rinde, and an inner hard shell, within which the white kernell is contained, couered with a thinne yellow rinde or peeling, which is more easily peeled away while it is greene then afterwards, and is as it were parted into foure quarters, with a thinne wooddy peece parting it at the head, very sweete and pleasant while it is fresh, and for a while after the gathering; but the elder they growe, the harder and more oily: the catkins or blowings are long and yellow, made of many scaly leaues set close together, which come forth early in the Spring, and when they open and fall away, vp∣on their stalkes arise certaine small flowers, which turne into so many nuts. The Vse of Wallnuts. They are often serued to the table with other fruits while they abide fresh and sweete; and therefore many to keepe them fresh a long time haue deuised many wayes, as to put them into great pots, and bury them in the ground, and so take them out as they spend them, which is a very good way, and will keepe them long. The small young nuts while they are tender, being preserued or candid, are vsed among other sorts of candid fruits, that serue at banquets. The iuyce of the outer greene huskes are held to be a soueraigne remedy against either poyson, or plague, or pestilentiall feuer. The distilled water of the huskes drunke with a little vinegar, if the fits growe hot and tedious, is an approued remedy for the same. The water distilled from the leaues, is effectuall to be applyed to fluent or running vlcers, to dry and binde the humours. Some haue vsed the pouder of the catkins in white wine, for the suffoca∣tion or strangling of the mother. The oyle of Wallnuts is vsed to varnish Ioyners workes. As also is ac∣counted farre to excell Linseede oyle, to mixe a white colour withall, that the colour bee not dimmed. It is of excellent vse for the coldnesse, hard∣nesse and contracting of the sinewes and ioynts, to warme, supple, and to extend them. CHAP. XXIII. Castanea Equina. The Horse Chesnut. ALthough the ordinary Chesnut is not a tree planted in Orchards, but left to Woods, Parkes, and other such like places; yet wee haue another sort which wee haue noursed vp from the nuts sent vs from Turky, of a greater and more pleasant aspect for the faire leaues, and of as good vse for the fruit. It groweth in time to be a great tree, spreading with great armes and branches, whereon are set at seuerall distances goodly faire great greene leaues, diuided into six, seuen, or nine parts or leaues, euery one of them nicked about the edges, very like vnto the leaues of Ricnus, or Palma Christi, and almost as great: it beareth at the ends of the branches many flow∣ers set together vpon a long stalke, consisting of foure white leaues a peece, with many threads in the middle, which afterwards turne into nuts, like vnto the ordinary Ches∣nuts, but set in rougher and more prickly huskes: the nuts themselues being rounder and blacker, with a white spot at the head of each, formed somewhat like an heart, and of a little sweeter taste. The Vse of this Chesnut. It serueth to binde and stop any maner of fluxe, be it of bloud or humours, either of the belly or stomacke; as also the much spitting of bloud. They are roasted and eaten as the ordinary sort, to make them taste the better. They are vsually in Turkie giuen to horses in their prouender, to cure them of coughes, and helpe them being broken winded.
CHAP. XXIIII. Morus. The Mulberrie. THere are two sorts of Mulberries sufficiently known to most, the blackish and the white: but wee haue had brought vs from Virginia another sort, which is of greater respect then eyther of the other two, not onely in regard of the ra∣titie, but of the vse, as you shall presently vnderstand. 1. Morus nigra. The blacke Mulberrie. The blacke Mulberrie tree groweth oftentimes tall and great, and oftentimes also crooked, and spreading abroade, rather then high; for it is subiect to abide what forme you will conforme it vnto: if by suffering it to grow, it will mount vp, and if you will binde it, or plash the boughes, they will so abide, and be carried ouer arbours, or other things as you will haue it. The bodie groweth in time to bee very great, couered with a rugged or thicke barke, the armes or branches being smoother, whereon doe grow round thicke leaues pointed at the ends, and nicked about the edges, and in some there are to be seene deep gashes, making it seeme somewhat like the Vine leafe: the flowers are certaine short dounie catkings, which turne into greene berries at the first, after∣wards red, and when they are full ripe blacke, made of many graines set together, like vnto the blacke berrie, but longer and greater: before they are ripe, they haue an au∣stere and harsh taste, but when they are full ripe, they are more sweete and pleasant; the iuice whereof is so red, that it will staine the hands of them that handle and eate them. 2. Morus alba. The white Mulberrie. The white Mulberrie tree groweth not with vs to that greatnesse or bulke of bodie that the blacke doth, but runneth vp higher, slenderer, more knotty, hard and brittle, with thinner spreade armes and branches: the leaues are like the former, but not so thicke set on the branches, nor so hard in handling, a little paler also, hauing somewhat longer stalkes: the fruit is smaller and closer set together, greene, and somewhat harsh before they be ripe, but of a wonderfull sweetnesse, almost ready to procure loathing when they are thorough ripe, and white, with such like seede in them as in the former, but smaller. 3. Morus Virginiana. The Virginia Mulberrie. The Virginia Mulberry tree groweth quickely with vs to be a very great tree, sprea∣ding many armes and branches, whereon grow faire great leaues, very like vnto the leaues of the white Mulberrie tree: the berry or fruit is longer and redder then either of the other, and of a very pleasant taste. The Vse of Mulberries.
The greatest and most especiall vse of the planting of white Mulber∣ries, is for the feeding of Silke wormes, for which purpose all the Ea∣sterne Countries, as Persia, Syria, Armenia, Arabia &c. and also the hither part of Turkie, Spaine also and Italie, and many other hot Countries doe nourish them, because it is best for that purpose, the wormes feeding there∣on, giuing the finest and best silke; yet some are confident that the leaues of the blacke will doe as much good as the white: but that respect must be had to change your seede, because therein lyeth the greatest mysterie. But there is a Booke or Tractate printed, declaring the whole vse of whatsoeuer can belong vnto them: I will therefore referre them thereunto, that 1 Nux Iuglans. The Wallnut. 2 Castanea equina. The horse Chesnut. 3 Morus nigra-vel alba. The Mulberry. 4 Morus Viginiana The Virginia Mulberry. 5 Laurus vulgaris. The ordinary Bay tree, 6 Laurea Cerasus Virginiana, The Virginia Cherry Bay. depiction of plants
would further vnderstand of that matter. Mulberries are not much desired to be eaten, although they be somewhat pleasant, both for that they staine their fingers and lips that eate them, and doe quickly putrefie in the stomacke, if they bee not taken before meate. They haue yet a Physicall vse, which is by reason of the astringent qua∣lity while they are red, and before they bee ripe, for sore mouthes and throats, or the like, whereunto also the Syrup, called Diamoron, is effectuall. Corollarium. A COROLEARIE To this Orchard. THere are certaine other trees that beare no fruit fit to bee eaten, which yet are often seene planted in Orchards, and other fit and conuenient places bout an house, whereof some are of especiall vse, as the Bay tree &c. others for their beauty and shadow are fit for walkes or arbours; some being euer green are most fit for hedge-rowes; and some others more for their raritie then for any other great vse, wherof I thought good to entreat apart by themselues, and bring them after the fruit trees of this Orchard, as an ornament to accomplish the same. 1. Laurus. The Bay tree. THere are to bee reckoned vp fiue kindes of Bay trees, three whereof haue been entreated of in the first part, a fourth wee will only bring hereto your consi∣deration, which is that kinde that is vsually planted in euery mans yard or orchard, for their vse throughout the whole land, the other we will leaue to bee con∣sidered of in that place is fit for it. The Bay tree riseth vp oftentimes to carry the face of a tree of a meane bignesse in our Countrey (although much greater in the hoter) and oftentimes shooteth vp with many suckers from the roote, shewing it selfe more like to a tall shrubbe or hedge∣bush, then a tree, hauing many branches, the young ones whereof are sometimes red∣dish, but most vsually of a light or fresh greene colour, when the stemme and elder boughes are couered with a darke greene barke: the leaues are somewhat broad, and long pointed as it were at both the ends, hard and sometimes crumpled on the edges, of a darke greene colour aboue, and of a yellowish greene vnderneath, in smell sweet, in taste bitter, and abiding euer greene: the flowers are yellow and mossie, which turne into berries that are a little long as well as round, whose shell or outermost peele is greene at the first, and blacke when it is ripe; wherein is contained an hard bitter ker∣nell, which cleaueth in two parts. The Vse of Bayes.
The Bay leaues are of as necessary vse as any other in Garden or Orchard; for they serue both for pleasure and profit, both for ornament and for vse, both for honest Ciuill vses, and for Physicke, yea both for the sicke and for the sound, both for the liuing and for the dead: And so much might be said of this one tree, that if it were all told, would as well weary the Reader, as the Relater: but to explaine my selfe; It serueth to adorne the house of God as well as of man: to procure warmth, comfort and strength to the limmes of men and women, by bathings and annoyntings outward, and by drinkes &c. inward to the stomacke, and other parts: to season vessels &c. wherein are preserued our meates, as well as our drinkes: to crowne or en∣circle  as with a garland, the heads of the liuing, and to sticke and decke forth the bodies of the dead: so that from the cradle to the graue we haue still vse of it, we haue still neede of it. The berries likewise serue for stitches inward, and for paines outward, that come of cold eyther in the ioynts, sinewes, or other places. 2. Laurea Cerasus, siue Laurus Virginiana. The Virginian Bay, or Cherry Baye. THis Virginian (whether you will call it a Baye, or a Cherrie, or a Cherrie Bay, I leaue it to euery ones free will and iudgement, but yet I thinke I may as well call it a Bay as others a Cherrie, neither of them being answerable to the tree, which neyther beareth such berries as are like Cherries, neither beareth euer greene leaues like the Bay: if it may therefore bee called the Virginia Cherry Bay, for a di∣stinction from the former Bay Cherry that beareth faire blacke Cherries, it will more fitly agree thereunto, vntill a more proper may be imposed) riseth vp to be a tree of a reasonable height, the stemme or bodie thereof being almost as great as a mans legge, spreading forth into diuers armes or boughes, and they againe into diuers small bran∣ches, whereon are set without order diuers faire broade greene leaues, somewhat like vnto the former Bay leaues, but more limber and gentle, and not so hard in handling, broader also, and for the most part ending in a point, but in many somewhat round pointed, very finely notched or toothed about the edges, of a bitter taste, very neere resembling the taste of the Bay leafe, but of little or no sent at all, either greene or dry∣ed, which fall away euery autumne, and spring a fresh euery yeare: the blossomes are small and white, many growing together vpon a long stalke, somewhat like the Bird Cherry blossomes, but smaller, and come forth at the ends of the young branches, which after turne into small berries, euery one set in a small cup or huske, greene at the first, and blacke when they are ripe, of the bignesse of a small pease, of a strong bitter taste, and somewhat aromaticall withall, but without any fleshy substance like a Cherry at all vpon it; for it is altogether like a berry. The Vse of this Virginia Cherry Bay. Being a stranger in our Land, and possessed but of a very few, I doe not heare that there hath beene any triall made thereof what properties are in it: let this therefore suffice for this present, to haue shewed you the descrip∣tion and forme thereof, vntill we can learne further of his vses. 3. Pinus. The Pine tree. MY purpose in this place is not to shew you all the diuersities of Pine trees, or of the rest that follow, but of that one kinde is planted in many places of our Land for ornament and delight, and there doth reasonably well abide: take it therefore into this Orchard, for the raritie and beautie of it, though we haue little o∣ther vse of it. The Pine tree groweth with vs, though slowely, to a very great height in many places, with a great straight bodie, couered with a grayish greene barke, the younger branches are set round about, with very narrow long whitish greene leaues, which fall away from the elder, but abide on the younger, being both winter and summer al∣waies greene. It hath growing in sundry places on the branches, certaine great hard wooddy clogs (called of some apples, of others nuts) composed of many hard wood∣dy scales, or tuberous knobs, which abide for the most part alwaies greene in our Countrey, and hardly become brownish, as in other Countries, where they haue more heat and comfort of the Sun, and where the scales open themselues; wherein are con∣tained white long and round kernels, very sweete while they are fresh, but quickely growing oylely and rancide.
The Vse of the Pine apples and kernels. The Cones or Apples are vsed of diuers Vintners in this City, being painted, to expresse a bunch of grapes, whereunto they are very like, and are hung vp in their bushes, as also to fasten keyes vnto them, as is seene in many places. The kernels within the hard shels, while they are fresh or newly taken out, are vsed many waies, both with Apothecaries, Comfit-makers, and Cookes: for of them are made medicines, good to lenifie the pipes and passages of the lungs and throate, when it is hoarse. Of them are made Comfits, Pastes, Marchpanes, and diuers other such like: And with them a cunning Cooke can make diuers Keck shoses for his Masters table. Matthiolus commendeth the water of the greene apples distilled, to take away the wrinkles in the face, to abate the ouer-swelling breasts of Mai∣dens, by fomenting them after with linnen clothes, wet in the water; and to restore such as are rauisht into better termes. 4. Abies. The Firre tree. THe Firre tree groweth naturally higher then any other tree in these parts of Christendome where no Cedars grow, and euen equalling or ouer-topping the Pine: the stemme or bodie is bare without branches for a great height, if they bee elder trees, and then branching forth at one place of the bodie foure wayes in manner of a crosse, those boughes againe hauing two branches at euery ioynt, on which are set on all sides very thicke together many small narrow long hard whitish greene leaues, and while they are young tending to yellownesse, but nothing so long or hard or sharpe pointed as the Pine tree leaues, growing smaller and shorter to the end of the branches: the bloomings are certaine small long scaly catkins, of a yellowish colour, comming forth at the ioynts of the branches, which fall away: the cones are smaller and longer then of the Pine tree, wherein are small three square seede contained, not halfe so big as the Pine kernels. The Vse of the Firre tree. The vse of this tree is growne with vs of late daies to bee more frequent for the building of houses then euer before: for hereof (namely of Deale timber and Deale boords) are framed many houses, and their floores, without the helpe of any other tim∣ber or boord of any other tree almost; as also for many other workes and purposes. The yellow Rossen that is vsed as well to make salues as for many other common vses, is taken from this tree, as the Pitch is both from the Pitch and Pine trees, and is boyled to make it to bee hard, but was at the first a yellow thin cleere Turpentine, and is that best sort of common Turpentine is altogether in vse with vs, as also another more thicke, whitish, and troubled, both which are vsed in salues, both for man and beast (but not inwardly as the cleere white Venice Turpentine is) and serueth both to draw, cleanse and heale. Dodonaeus seemeth to say, that the cleere white Turpentine, called Venice Turpentine, is drawn from the Firre: but Matthiolus confuteth that opinion, which Fulsius also held before him. 5. Ilex arbor. The euer-greene Oake. THe Ilex or euer-greene Oake riseth in time to be a very great tree, but very long and slow in growing (as is to be seene in the Kings priuy Garden at Whitehall, growing iust against the backe gate that openeth into the way going to West∣minster, and in some other places) spreading many fair large great armes and branches, whereon are set small and hard greene leaues, somewhat endented or cornered, and
1 Piaus The Pine tree. 2 Abies. The Firre tree. 3 Ilex. The euer greene Oake. 4 Cupressus. The Cipresse tree. 5 Arbutus. The Strawberry tree. 6 Alaternus. The euer greene Priuet. depiction of trees
prickly on the edges, especially in the young trees, and sometimes on those branches that are young and newly sprung forth from the elder rootes, but else in a manner all smooth in the elder growne, abiding greene all the winter as well as summer, and are of a grayish greene on the vnderside. It beareth in the spring time certaine slender long branches (like as other Okes doe) with small yellowish mossie flowers on them, which fall away, and are vnprofitable, the acornes not growing from those places, but from others which are like vnto those of our ordinary Oake, but smaller and blacker, and set in a more rugged huske or cuppe. This and no other kinde of Ilex doe I know to grow in all our land in any Garden or Orchard: for that kind with long and narrower leaues, and not prickly, growing so plentifully as Matthiolus saith in Tuscane, I haue not seen: and it is very probable to bee the same that Plinie remembreth to haue the leafe of an Oliue; but not as some would haue it, that Smilax Theophrastus maketh mention of in his third Booke and sixteenth Chapter of his Historie of Plants, which the Arca∣dians so called, and had the leafe of the Ilex, but not prickly: for Theophrastus saith, the timber of Smilax is smooth and soft, and this of the Ilex is harder, and stronger then an Oake. The Vse of the Ilex or euer-greene Oake. Seeing this is to be accounted among the kindes of Oake (and all Oakes by Dioscorides his opinion are binding) it is also of the same qualitie, but a little weaker, and may serue to strengthen weake members. The young tops and leaues are also vsed in gargles for the mouth and throate. 6 Cupressus. The Cypresse tree. THe Cypresse tree that is noursed vp by vs, in our Country, doth grow in those places where it hath beene long planted, to a very great height, whose bodie and boughes are couered with a reddish ash-coloured bark; the branches grow not spreading, but vpright close vnto the bodie, bushing thicke below, and small vp∣wards, spire fashion, those below reaching neere halfe the way to them aboue, where∣on doe grow euer greene leaues, small, long and flat, of a resinous sweete smell, and strong taste, somewhat bitter: the fruit, which are called nuts, grow here and there a∣mong the boughes, sticking close vnto them, which are small, and clouen into diuers parts, but close while they are young, of a russetish browne colour; wherein are con∣tained small browne seede, but not so small as motes in the Sunne, as Matthiolus and others make them to be. The Vse of the Cypresse tree. For the goodly proportion this tree beareth, as also for his euer-greene head, it is and hath beene of great account with all Princes, both beyond, and on this side of the Sea, to plant them in rowes on both sides of some spatious walke, which by reason of their high growing, and little spreading, must be planted the thicker together, and so they giue a goodly, pleasant and sweet shadow: or else alone, if they haue not many, in the middle of some quarter, or as they thinke meete. The wood thereof is firme and durable, or neuer decaying, of a brown yellow colour, and of a strong sweete smell, whereof Chests or Boxes are made to keepe apparell, linnen, furres, and o∣ther things, to preserue them from moths, and to giue them a good smell. Many Physicall properties, both wood, leaues and nuts haue, which here is not my purpose to vnfold, but only to tell you, that the leaues being boy∣led in wine, and drunke, helpe the difficultie of making vrine, and that the nuts are binding, fit to bee vsed to stay fluxes or laskes, and good also for ruptures.
7. Arbutus. The Strawberry tree. THe Strawberry tree groweth but slowly, and riseth not to the height of any great tree, no not in France, Italy, or Spaine: and with vs the coldnesse of our country doth the more abate his vigour, so that it seldome riseth to the height of a man: the barke of the body is rough, and smooth in the younger branches: the leaues are faire and greene, very like vnto Baye leaues, finely dented or snipped about the edges, abiding alwayes greene thereon both Winter and Summer: the flowers come forth at the end of the branches vpon long stalkes, not clustering thicke toge∣ther, but in long bunches, and are small, white, and hollow, like a little bottle, or the flower of Lilly Conually, which after turne into rough or rugged berries, most like vnto Strawberries (which hath giuen the name to the tree) somewhat reddish when they are ripe, of a harsh taste, nothing pleasant, wherein are contained many small seedes: It hardly bringeth his fruit to ripenesse in our countrey; for in their naturall places they ripen not vntill Winter, which there is much milder then with vs. The Vse of the Strawberry tree. Amatus Lusitanus I thinke is the first that euer recorded, that the water distilled from the leaues and flowers hereof, should bee very powerfull a∣gainst the plague and poysons: for all the ancient Writers doe report, that the fruit hereof being eaten, is an enemy to the stomacke and head. And Clusius likewise setteth downe, that at Lishbone, and other places in Por∣tingall where they are frequent, they are chiefly eaten, but of the poorer sort, women and boyes. They are somewhat astringent or binding, and therefore may well serue for fluxes. It is chiefly noursed with vs for the beauty and rarenesse of the tree; for that it beareth his leaues alwayes green. 8. Alaternus. The euer greene Priuet. THe tree which we haue growing in our country called Alaternus, groweth not to be a tree of any height; but abiding lowe, spreadeth forth many branches, whereon are set diuers small and hard greene leaues, somewhat round for the forme, and endented a little by the edges: it beareth many small whitish greene flow∣ers at the ioynts of the stalkes, and setting on of the lower leaues clustering thicke toge∣ther, which after turne into small blacke berries, wherein are contained many small graines or seedes: the beauty and verdure of these leaues abiding so fresh all the yeare, doth cause it to be of the greater respect; and therefore findeth place in their Gardens onely, that are curious conseruers of all natures beauties. The Vse of the euer greene Priuet. It is seldome vsed for any Physicall property, neither with vs, nor in the places where it is naturall and plentifull: but as Clusius reporteth, hee lear∣ned that the Portingall Fishermen do dye their nets red with the decoction of the barke hereof, and that the Dyers in those parts doe vse the small pee∣ces of the wood to strike a blackish blew colour. 9. Celastrus Theophrasti Clusio. Clusius his Celastrus. ALthough the Collectour (who is thought to be Ioannes Molineus of the great Herball or History of plants, and generally bearing Daleschampius name, be∣cause the finding and relation of diuers herbes therein expressed, is appropiate to him, and printed at Lyons) of all our moderne Writers doth first of all others ap∣point the Celastrus, whereof Theophrastus onely among all the ancient Writers of
plants maketh mention, to be the first Alaternus that Clusius hath set forth in his Hi∣story of rarer plants: yet I finde, that Clusius himselfe before his death doth appro∣piate that Celastrus of Theophrastus to another plant, growing in the Garden at Ley∣den, which formerly of diuers had beene taken to be a kinde of Laurus Tinus, or the wilde Baye; but he impugning that opinion for diuers respects, decyphreth out that Leyden tree in the same manner that I doe: and because it is not onely faire, in bearing his leaues alwayes greene, but rare also, being noursed vp in our Land in very few pla∣ces, but principally with a good old Lady, the widow of Sir Iohn Leuson, dwelling neere Rochester in Kent; I thought it fit to commend it for an ornament, to adorne this our Garden and Orchard. It groweth vp to the height of a reasonable tree, the body whereof is couered with a darke coloured barke, as the elder branches are in like manner; the younger branches being greene, whereon are set diuers leaues thicke to∣gether, two alwayes at a ioynt, one against another, of a sad but faire greene colour on the vpperside, and paler vnderneath, which are little or nothing at all snipped about the edges, as large as the leaues of the Laurus Tinus, or wilde Baye tree: at the end of the young branches breake forth between the leaues diuers small stalkes, with foure or fiue flowers on each of them, of a yellowish greene colour, which turne into small ber∣ries, of the bignesse of blacke Cherries, greene at the first, and red when they begin to be ripe, but growing blacke if they hang too long vpon the branches, wherein is con∣tained a hard shell, and a white hard kernell within it, couered with a yellowish skin. This abideth (as I said before) with greene leaues as well Winter as Summer; and therefore fittest to be planted among other of the same nature, to make an euer greene hedge. The Vse of Clusius his Celastrus. Being so great a stranger in this part of the Christian world, I know none hath made tryall of what property it is, but that the taste of the leaues is somewhat bitter. 10. Pyracantha. The euer greene Hawthorne, or prickly Corall tree. THis euer greene shrubbe is so fine an ornament to a Garden or Orchard, either to be noursed vp into a small tree by it selfe, by pruining and taking away the suckers and vnder branches, or by suffering it to grow with suckers, thicke and plashing the branches into a hedge, for that it is plyable to be ordered either way; that I could not but giue you the knowledge thereof, with the description in this manner. The younger branches are couered with a smooth darke blewish greene barke, and the elder with a more ash coloured, thicke set with leaues without order, some greater and others smaller, somewhat like both in forme and bignesse vnto the leaues of the Barberry tree, but somewhat larger, and more snipt about the edges, of a deeper green colour also, and with small long thornes scattered here & there vpon the branches: the flowers come forth as well at the ends of the branches, as at diuers places at the ioynts of the leaues, standing thicke together, of a pale whitish colour, a little dasht ouer with a shew of blush, consisting of fiue leaues a peece, with some small threads in the mid∣dle, which turne into berries, very like vnto Hawthorne berries, but much redder and dryer, almost like polished Corall, wherein are contained foure or fiue small yellowish white three square seede, somewhat shining. It is thought to be the Oxyacantha of Di∣oscorides; but seeing Dioscorides doth explaine the forme of the leafe in his Chapter of Medlars, which he concealed in the Chapter of Oxyacantha, it cannot be the same: for Mespilus Anthedon of Theophrastus, or Aronia of Dioscorides, hath the leafe of Oxyacantha, as Dioscorides saith, or of Smalladge, as Theophrastus, which cannot agree to this Thorne; but doth most liuely delineate out our white Thorne or Haw∣thorne, that now there is no doubt, but that Oxyacantha of Dioscorides is the Haw∣thorne tree or bush. The Vse of this Corall tree.
Although Lobel maketh mention of this tree to grow both in Italy, and 1 Celastrus Theophrasti Clufio. Clusius his Celastrus. 2 Pyracantha. The euer green prickly Corall tree, 3 Taxus. The Yewe tree. 4 Buxus arbor. The Boxe tree 5 Buxus humilis. The lowe or dwarfe Boxe. 6 Sabina. The Sauine tree. 7 Paliurus. Christs thorne. 8 Larix. The Larch tree. depiction of trees
Prouence in France, in some of their hedges, yet he saith it is neglected in the naturall places, and to be of no vse with them: neither doe I heare, that it is applyed to any Physicall vse with vs, but (as I before said) it is preser∣ued with diuers as an ornament to a Garden or Orchard, by reason of his euer greene leaues, and red berries among them, being a pleasant spectacle, and fit to be brought into the forme of an hedge, as one please to lead it. 11. Taxus. The Yewe tree. THe Yewe tree groweth with vs in many places to bee a reasonable great tree, but in hoter countries much bigger, couered with a reddish gray scaly barke; the younger branches are reddish likewise, whereon grow many winged leaues, that is, many narrow long darke greene leaues, set on both sides of a long stalke or branch, neuer dying or falling away, but abiding on perpetually, except it be on the elder boughes: the flowers are small, growing by the leaues, which turne into round red berries, like vnto red Asparagus berries, in taste sweetish, with a little bitternesse, and causing no harme to them for any thing hath been knowne in our country, The Vse of the Yewe tree. It is found planted both in the corners of Orchards, and against the win∣dowes of Houses, to be both a shadow and an ornament, in being alwayes greene, and to decke vp Houses in Winter: but ancient Writers haue euer reckoned it to be dangerous at the least, if not deadly. 12. Buxus. The Boxe tree. THe Boxe tree in some places is a reasonable tall tree, yet growing slowly; the trunke or body whereof is of the bignesse of a mans thigh, which is the biggest that euer I saw: but sometimes, and in other places it groweth much lower, vsually not aboue a yard, or a yard and a halfe high, on the backe sides of many Hou∣ses, and in the Orchards likewise: the leaues are small, thicke and hard, and still the greater or lesser the tree is, the greater or lesser are the leaues, round pointed, and of a fresh shining greene colour: the flowers are small and greenish, which turne into heads or berries, with foure hornes, whittish on the outside, and with reddish seede within them. Buxus aureus. Gilded Boxe.There is another kinde hereof but lately come to our knowledge, which differeth not in any thing from the former, but onely that all the leaues haue a yellow list or gard about the edge of them on the vpperside, and none on the lower, which maketh it seeme very beautifull; and is therefore called gilded Boxe. Buxus humilis. Dwarfe Boxe.We haue yet another kinde of Boxe, growing small and lowe, not aboue halfe a foote, or a foote high at the most, vnlesse it be neglected, which then doth grow a lit∣tle more shrubby, bearing the like leaues, but smaller, according to the growth, and of a deeper greene colour: I could neuer know that this kinde euer bore flower or seede, but is propagated by slipping the roote, which encreaseth very much. The Vse of Boxe. The wood of the Boxe tree is vsed in many kindes of small works among Turners, because it is hard, close, and firme, and as some haue said, the roots much more, in regard of the diuers waues and crooked veines running through it. It hath no Physicall vse among the most and best Physitians, al∣though some haue reported it to stay fluxes, and to be as good as the wood of Guaiacum, or Lignum vitae for the French disease. The leaues and bran∣ches serue both Summer and Winter to decke vp houses; and are many times giuen to horses for the bots.
The lowe or dwarfe Boxe is of excellent vse to border vp a knot, or the  long beds in a Garden, being a maruailous fine ornament thereunto, in re∣gard it both groweth lowe, is euer greene, and by cutting may bee kept in what maner euery one please, as I haue before spoken more largely. 13. Sabina. The Sauine tree or bush. THe Sauine tree or bush that is most vsuall in our country, is a small lowe bush, not so high as a man in any place, nor so bigge in the stemme or trunke as a mans arme, with many crooked bending boughes and branches, whereon are set many small, short, hard, and prickly leaues, of a darke green colour, fresh and green both Winter and Summer: it is reported, that in the naturall places it beareth small blacke berries, like vnto Iuniper, but with vs it was neuer knowne to beare any. The Vse of Sauine. It is planted in out-yards, backsides, or voide places of Orchards, as well to cast clothes thereon to dry, as for medicines both for men and horses: being made into an oyle, it is good to annoint childrens bellies for to kill the Wormes: and the powder thereof mixed with Hogs grease, to annoint the running sores or scabs in their heads; but beware how you giue it in∣wardly to men, women, or children. It is often put into horses drenches, to helpe to cure them of the bots, and other diseases. 14. Paliurus. Christs thorne. THis thorny shrubbe (wherewith as it is thought, our Sauiour Christ was crow∣ned, because as those that haue trauelled through Palestina and Iudaea, doe re∣port no other thorne doth grow therein so frequent, or so apt to be writhed) riseth in some places to a reasonable height, but in our country seldome exceedeth the height of a man, bearing many slender branches, full of leaues, set on either side thereof one by one, which are somewhat broad and round, yet pointed, and full of veines, thicke set also with small thornes, euen at the foote of euery branch, and at the foote of euery leafe one or two, some standing vpright, others a little bending downe: the flowers are small and yellow, standing for the most part at the end of the bran∣ches, many growing vpon a long stalke, which after turne into round, flat, and hard shelly fruit, yet couered with a soft fleshy skinne, within which are included two or three hard, small, and browne flat seeds, lying in seuerall partitions. The leaues hereof fall away euery yeare, and spring forth a fresh againe the next May following. The ra∣rity and beauty of this shrubbe, but chiefly (as I thinke) the name hath caused this to be much accounted of with all louers of plants. The Vse of Christs thorne. Wee haue so few of these shrubbes growing in our country, and those that are, doe, for any thing I can vnderstand, neuer beare fruit with vs; that there is no other vse made hereof then to delight the owners: but this is cer∣tainly receiued for the Paliurus of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, and thought also by Matthiolus to be the very true Rhamnus tertius of Diosco∣rides. Matthiolus also seemeth to contradict the opinion is held by the Physitians of Mompelier, and others, that it cannot be the Paliurus of The∣ophrastus. It is held to be effectuall to helpe to breake the stone, both in the bladder, reines, and kidneyes: the leaues and young branches haue an astrin∣gent quality, and good against poysons and the bitings of serpents.
15. Larix. The Larch tree. THe Larch tree, where it naturally groweth, riseth vp to be as tall as the Pine or Firre tree, but in our Land being rare, and noursed vp but with a few, and those onely louers of rarities, it groweth both slowly, and becommeth not high: the barke hereof is very rugged and thicke, the boughes and branches grow one aboue another in a very comely order, hauing diuers small yellowish knobs or bun∣ches set thereon at seuerall distances; from whence doe yearely shoote forth many small, long, and narrow smooth leaues together, both shorter and smaller, and not so hard or sharpe pointed as either the Pine or Firre tree leaues, which doe not abide the Winter as they doe, but fall away euery yeare, as other trees which shed their leaues, and gaine fresh euery Spring: the blossomes are very beautifull and delectable, being of an excellent fine crimson colour, which standing among the greene leaues, allure the eyes of the beholders to regard it with the more desire: it also beareth in the naturall places (but not in our Land that I could heare) small soft cones or fruit, some∣what like vnto Cypresse nuts, when they are greene and close. The Vse of the Larch tree. The coles of the wood hereof (because it is so hard and durable as none more) is held to be of most force being fired, to cause the Iron oare to melt, which none other would doe so well. Matthiolus contesteth against Fuch∣sius, for deeming the Venice Turpentine to be the liquid Rossen of the Firre tree, which he assureth vpon his owne experience and certaine knowledge, to be drawne from this Larch tree, and none other; which cleere Turpin∣tine is altogether vsed inwardly, and no other, except that of the true Tur∣pintine tree, and is very effectuall to cleanse the reines, kidneyes, and blad∣der, both of grauell and the stone, and to prouoke vrine: it is also of espe∣ciall property for the gonorrhaea, or running of the reines, as it is called, with some powder of white Amber mixed therewith, taken for certaine dayes together. Taken also in an Electuary, it is singular good for to expectorate rotten flegme, and to helpe the consumption of the lungs. It is vsed in plai∣sters and salues, as the best sort of Turpintine. The Agaricke that is vsed in physicke, is taken from the bodies and armes of this tree. And Matthiolus doth much insist against Brasauolus, that thought other trees had produced Agaricke, affirming them to be hard Fungi, or Mushroms (such as wee call Touch-wood) wherwith many vse to take fire, strooke thereinto from steele. 16. Tilia. The Line or Linden tree. THere are two sorts of Line trees, the male and the female; but because the male is rare to be seene, and the female is more familiar, I will onely giue you the description of the female, and leaue the other. The female Line tree groweth exceeding high and great, like vnto an Elme, with many large spreading boughes, couered with a smooth barke, the innermost being very plyant and bending from whence come smaller branches, all of them so plya∣ble, that they may bee led or carried into any forme you please: the leaues thereon are very faire, broad, and round, somewhat like vnto Elme leaues, but fairer, smoother, and of a fresher greene colour, dented finely about the edges, and ending in a sharpe point: the flowers are white, and of a good smell, many standing together at the top of a stalke, which runneth all along the middle ribbe of a small long whitish leafe; af∣ter which come small round berries, wherein is contained small blackish seede: this tree is wholly neglected by those that haue them, or dwell neere them, because they suppose it to be fruitlesse, in regard it beareth chaffie huskes, which in many places fall away, without giuing ripe seede.
1 Tilia faemina. The Line or Linden tree. 2 Tamariscus. The Tamariske tree. 3 Acer maius latifolium. The Sycomore tree. 4 ahy∣lodendron. The bladder nut. 5 Rhus Myrtifolia. The Mirtle leafed-Sumach. 6 Rhus Virginiana. The Bucks horne tree. 7 Vitis seu Potius Hedera Virginensis. The Virginia Vine or rather Iuie. depiction of trees
The Vse of the Line tree. It is planted both to make goodly Arbours, and Summer banquetting houses, either belowe vpon the ground, the boughes seruing very hand∣somely to plash round about it, or vp higher, for a second aboue it, and a third also: for the more it is depressed, the better it will grow. And I haue seene at Cobham in Kent, a tall or great bodied Line tree, bare without boughes for eight foote high, and then the branches were spread round a∣bout so orderly, as if it were done by art, and brought to compasse that middle Arbour: And from those boughes the body was bare againe for eight or nine foote (wherein might bee placed halfe an hundred men at the least, as there might be likewise in that vnderneath this) & then another rowe of branches to encompasse a third Arbour, with stayres made for the pur∣pose to this and that vnderneath it: vpon the boughes were laid boards to tread vpon, which was the goodliest spectacle mine eyes euer beheld for one tree to carry. The coles of the wood are the best to make Gunpowder. And being kindled, and quenched in vinegar, are good to dissolue clotted bloud in those that are bruised with a fall. The inner barke being steeped in water yeeldeth a slimie iuyce, which is found by experience, to be very profitable for them that haue been burnt with fire. 17. Tamarix. Tamariske tree. THe Tamariske tree that is common in our country, although in some places it doth not grow great, yet I haue seene it in some other, to be as great as a great apple tree in the body, bearing great arms; from whose smaller branches spring forth young slender red shootes, set with many very fine, small, and short leaues, a lit∣tle crisped, like vnto the leaues of Sauine, not hard or rough, but soft and greene: the flowers be white mossie threads, which turne into dounie seede, that is carried away with the winde. Tamariscus fo∣lijs ablidis. White Tama∣riske.There is another kinde hereof very beautifull and rare, not to be seene in this Land I thinke, but with Mr. William Ward, the Kings seruant in his Granary, before remem∣bred, who brought me a small twigge to see from his house at Boram in Essex, whose branches are all red while they are young, and all the leaues white, abiding so all the Summer long, without changing into any shew of greene like the other, and so abideth constant yeare after yeare, yet shedding the leaues in Winter like the other. The Vse of Tamariske. The greatest vse of Tamariske is for spleneticke diseases, either the leaues or the barke made into drinkes; or the wood made into small Cans or Cups to drinke in. 18. Acer maius latifolium. The great Maple or Sycomore tree. THe Sycomore tree, as we vsually call it (and is the greatest kind of Maple, che∣rished in our Land onely in Orchards, or elsewhere for shade and walkes, both here in England, and in some other countries also) groweth quickly to bee a faire spreading great tree, with many boughes and branches, whose barke is somewhat smooth: the leaues are very great, large, and smooth, cut into foure or fiue diuisions, and ending into so many corners, euery one standing on a long reddish stalke: the bloo∣mings are of a yellowish greene colour, growing many together on each side of a long stalke, which afrer turne into long and broad winged seede, two alwaies standing toge∣ther on a stalke, and bunched out in the middle, where the seed or kernell lyeth, very like vnto the common Maple growing wilde abroad, but many more together, and larger.
The Vse of the Sycomore tree. It is altogether planted for shady walkes, and hath no other vse with vs that I know. 19. Nux Vesicaria. The bladder Nut. THis tree groweth not very high, but is of a meane stature, when it is preserued and pruined to grow vpright, or else it shooteth forth many twigges from the rootes, and so is fit to plant in a hedge rowe, as it is vsed in some places: the body and armes are couered with a whitish greene barke: the branches and leaues on them are like vnto the Elder, hauing three or fiue leaues set one against another, with one of them at the end, each whereof is nicked or dented about the edges: the flowers are sweete and white, many growing together on a long stalke, hanging downeward, in forme resembling a small Daffodill, hauing a small round cup in the middle, and leaues about it: after which come the fruit, inclosed in russetish greene bladders, con∣taining one or two brownish nuts, lesser then Hasell nuts, whose outer shell is not hard and woody, like the shell of a nut, but tough, and hard withall, not easie to breake, within which is a greene kernell, sweetish at the first, but lothsome afterwards, ready to procure casting, and yet liked of some people, who can well endure to eate them. The Vse of the Bladder Nut. The greatest vse that I know the tree or his fruit is put vnto, is, that it is receiued into an Orchard, either for the rarity of the kinde, being suffered to grow into a tree, or (as I said before) to make an hedge, being let grow into suckers. Some Quacksaluers haue vsed these nuts as a medicine of rare vertue for the stone, but what good they haue done, I neuer yet could learne. 20. Rhus Myrtifolia. The Mirtle leafed Sumach. THis lowe shrubbe groweth seldome to the height of a man, hauing many slen∣der branches, and long winged leaues set thereon, euery one whereof is of the bignesse of the broad or large Mirtle leafe, and set by couples all the length of the ribbe, running through the middle of them. It beareth diuers flowers at the tops of the branches, made of many purple threads, which turne into small blacke berries, wherein are contained small, white, and rough seed, somewhat like vnto Grape kernels or stones. This vseth to dye down to the ground in my Garden euery Winter, and rise vp again euery Spring, whether the nature thereof were so, or the coldnesse of our cli∣mate the cause therof, I am not well assured. It is also rare, and to be seen but with a few. The Vse of this Sumach. It is vsed to thicken or tanne leather or hides, in the same manner that the ordinary Sumach doth; as also to stay fluxes both in men and women. 21. Rhus Virginiana. The Virginia Sumach, or Buckes horne tree of Virginia.
THis strange tree becommeth in some places to bee of a reasonable height and bignesse, the wood whereof is white, soft, and pithy in the middle, like vnto an Elder, couered with a darke coloured barke, somewhat smooth: the young branches that are of the last yeares growth are somewhat reddish or browne, very soft  and smooth in handling, and so like vnto the Veluet head of a Deere, that if one were cut off from the tree, and shewed by it selfe, it might soone deceiue a right good Woodman, and as they grow seeme most like thereunto, yeelding a yellowish milke when it is broken, which in a small time becommeth thicke like a gumme: the leaues grow without order on the branches, but are themselues set in a seemly order on each side of a middle ribbe, seuen, nine, ten, or more on a side, and one at the end, each whereof are somewhat broad and long, of a darke greene colour on the vpperside, and paler greene vnderneath, finely snipped or toothed round about the edges: at the ends of the branches come forth long and thicke browne tufts, very soft, and as it were woolly in handling, made all of short threads or thrums; from among which appeare many small flowers, much more red or crimson then the tufts, which turne into a very small seede: the roote shooteth forth young suckers farre away, and round about, whereby it is mightily encreased. The Vse of this Sumach. It is onely kept as a rarity and ornament to a Garden or Orchard, no bo∣die, that I can heare of, hauing made any tryall of the Physicall properties. 22. Vitis, seu potius Hedera Virginensis. The Virginia Vine, or rather Iuie. THis slender, but tall climing Virginia Vine (as it was first called; but Iuie, as it doth better resemble) riseth out of the ground with diuers stems, none much bigger then a mans thumbe, many lesse; from whence shoote forth many long weake branches, not able to stand vpright, vnlesse they be sustained: yet planted neere vnto a wall or pale, the branches at seuerall distances of the leaues will shoote forth small short tendrels, not twining themselues about any thing, but ending into foure, fiue, or six, or more small short and somewhat broad clawes, which will fasten like a hand with fingers so close thereunto, that it will bring part of the wall, morter, or board away with it, if it be pulled from it, and thereby stay it selfe, to climbe vp to the toppe of the highest chimney of a house, being planted thereat: the leaues are crum∣pled, or rather folded together at the first comming forth, and very red, which after growing forth, are very faire, large, and greene, diuided into foure, fiue, six, or seuen leaues, standing together vpon a small foote-stalke, set without order on the branches, at the ends whereof, as also at other places sometime, come forth diuers short tufts of buds for flowers; but we could neuer see them open themselues, to shew what manner of flower it would be, or what fruit would follow in our country: the roote spreadeth here and there, and not very deepe. The Vse of this Virginian. We know of no other vse, but to furnish a Garden, and to encrease the number of rarities. And thus haue I finished this worke, and furnished it with whatsoeuer Art and Na∣ture concurring, could effect to bring delight to those that liue in our Climate, and take pleasure in such things; which how well or ill done, I must abide euery ones censure: the iudicious and courteous I onely respect, let Momus bite his lips, and eate his heart; and so Farewell. FINIS.
Index omnium stirpium quae in hoc opere continentur. A ABies page 600 Abrotanum foeminum, siue Santolina 449 Acanthus Aclets 330 Acanthus sativus bid. Acer manis siue Sycomorus 610 Acetosa 486 Aconitum bacciferum, i. e. Christophoriana Aconitum flore albido 214 Aconitum hyemale ibid. Aconitum luteum Ponticum ibid. Aconitum salutiferum 216 Admirabilis pervana 364 Aethiopis 385 Agluophotis, i.e. Paeonia Alaternus 603 Albucum 148 Alcea Aegyptia siue Bamia 369 Alcea Americana 368 Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea ib. Alcea peregrina siue veficaria ib. Alisma Dodonaei, i.e. Saponaria Alisma Dioscoridis Fab. Columna, i. e. Auricula Vrsi Alisma syluarum, i.e. Paralysis Allium 613 Althaea frutex 369 Amaracus, i.e. Maiorana. Amarella, i.e. Matricaria Amaranthus panniculis sparsis 371 Amaranthus purpureus ib. Amaranthus tricolor ib. Amaranthus luteus, i.e. Heliocrysum Ambreboi, i.e. Cyanus Orientalis Amellus Virgilij, i.e. Aster Atticus Italorum Amomum Plinij, i.e. Pseudocapsicum Dodonaei Amygdalus 583 Anagyris altera, i.e. Laburnum. Anchusa 251 Anemone eiusque species 199 ad 214 Anthum 494. Angelica 529 Anthemis flore luteo 294 Anthemis Leucanthemis, i.e. Chamemaelum Anthericos 148 Anthora 494 Antimclum, i.c. Mandragoras Antirrhinum 269 Apium 491 Apocynum Syriacum 444 Apocynum Virginianum 445 Aquilegia 271 Arbor Alpina Plinij, i.e. Laburnum Arbor Iudae 437 Arbor Vitae 438 Arbuus 603 Argyrocome, i.e. Gnaphalium Americanum Armerius 319 Armoraria pratensis 256 Armoraria altera, i.e. Muscipula Lobelij Arthanita, i e. Cyclamen Arthritica, i.e. Paralysis Arundo Indica, siue Canna Indica 376 Asarum 532 Asparagus 503 Asphodelus bulbosus albus 138 Asphodelus bulbosus Galeni ibid. Asphodelus hyacinthinus, i.e. bulbosus Asphodelus maior albus 146 Asphodelus minor luteus, i.e. Hastula regia Aster Atticus Italorum 299 Aster Pervanus Columnae, i.e. Battatas de Canada Attamusco, i.e. Narcissus Virginianus Atriplex, i.e. Olus aureum Avellana, & Byzantina Aurelia, i.e. Chrysocome Auricula muris maior, i.e. Pulmonaria Gallorum Auricula Vrsi eiusque species 235 B BAlaustium 430 Balsamina faemina & Balsamella 278 Balsamita mas & faemina 482 Balsamum alpinum, i.e. Ledum alpinum 424 Bamia, i.e. Alcea Aegyptia Baptisecula, i.e. Cyanus Barba hirci, i.e. Tragopogon Battatas Hispanorum, Virginianum, & Canadense 518 Behen rubrum, i. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei
Bellis caerulea siue Glebularia 321 Bellis maior flore pleno 322 Bellis minor flore pleno eiusque species ibid. Belvidere Italorum, i. Scoparia, siue Linaria mag∣na 268 Ben rubrum Monspeliense, i. Muscipula Lobelij Berberis 561 Beta 488 Binizade & Binizante, i. Anemone tenuifolia Blattaria 383 Blito di tre colori 372 Blitum 488 Bolbonach, i. Viola lunaris & latifolia 26 Borrago, Borrago semper virens 249 Botanaria, i. Globularia Branca vrsina, i. Acanthus sativus Brassica eiusque species 503 Bubonium siue Inguinalis, i. Aster Atticus Italo∣rum Bulbus agrestis, i. Colchicum Buccinum Romanorum, i. Delphinium Bulbus Eriophorus 124 Bulbus esculentus Lacunae, i. Ornithogalum luteum 140 Bulbus Leucanthemos i. Ornithogalum album Bulbus vnifolius 140 Bulbus vomitorius Matthioli, i. Muscari Buglossum 249 Buglossum Hispanicum, i. Anchusa Buglossum luteum 486 Bunias dulcis, i. Napus 509 Buphthalmum 293 Buphthalmum maius i. Helleborus niger ferula∣ceus Buxus arbor. Buxus humilis, & Buxus verficori∣bus folijs 606 C CAcalia Loniceri. i. Lilium Conuallium Calcaris flos, i. Delphinium Calceolus Mariae 367 Calendula maxima & simplex 296. 298 Callionymus Gesneri, i. Lilium conuallium Caltha, i. Calendula Caltha Africana, i. Flos Africanus Caltha palustris flore pleno 224 Camomilla vulgaris, & flore pleno 290 Campanula maior pyramidalis 354 Campana lazura, i. Convolvulus caeruleus maior 359 Campanula perficifolia alba & caerulea 353 Canicida, i. Aconitum luteum Ponticum Canis cerebrum, i. Antirrhinum Cannacorus, i. Canna Indica Canna Indicaflore luteo punctato 376 Canna Indica flore rubro ibid. Cantabrica Plinij, i. Caryophyllus Capnos fabacea radice, i. Radix caua minor 275 Caprifolium perfoliatum siue Italicum 405 Cardamine flore pleno, & trifolia 389 Carduus benedictus 530 Carduus Eriocephalus, i. tomentosus 332 Carduus mollis 330 Carlina humilis 332 Carthamus siue Cnicus sativus 329 Carum 515 Caryophylli maiores & maximi 316 Caryophylli syluestres 314 Caryophyllus marinus & mediterraneus 317 Caryophyllus Indicus. i. Flos Africanus Cassaua, i. Iucca 434 Cavala lale, i. Tulipae praecoces Caffalale, i. Tulipae mediae Caucafon, i. Moly Indicum Caulis vulgaris, Crispa, Subaudica 504 Caulis florida ibid Caulo rapum ibid. Cedrus Lycia 436 Celastrus 603 Cepa alba, rubra &c. 510 Cerasa Indiana 432 Cerasus flore pleno 402 Cerasorum diuersitas 571 Cerasus Trapezuntina, i. Laurocerasus Cercis 437 Cerefolium maius & vulgare 494 Cervicaria, i. Trachelium Chamaecistus Frisicus 424 Chamaecyparissus, i. Santolina Chamaedaphne 498 Chamaedrys 456 Chamaeiris angustifolia 187 Chamaeiris latifolia 186 Chamaelaea Alpina 397 Chamaelaea Germanica, i. Mesereon 397 Chamaelea tricoccos ibid Chamaeleo, vide Carlina Chamaemalus, i. Malus Paradiseus Chamaemelum, i. Camomilla Chamaenerium flore Delphinij 270 Chamaepauce Cordi, i. Ledum Silefiacum Chamaerhododendros Chamaelaaefolio Lobelij, i. Le∣dum Alpidum Charantia foemina, i. Balsamina foemina Cheiri siue Keiri, i. Leucoium luteum 256 Chondrilla aurea, i. Pilosella maior 300 Chrysanthemum odoratum, i. Chamaemelum nudum Chrysanthemum Peruvianum, i. Flos Solis Chrysanthemum Creticum 295 Chrysocome siue Stoechas citrina 374 Cichorium 495 Cinara alba, rubra, moschata &c. 58 Circaea. i. Mandragoras Cistus annuus 422 Cistus mas 421 Cistus faemina 422 Cistus Ledon ibid Claues sancti Petri, i. Paralysis Clematis Daphnoides, i. Vinca peruinca 391 Clematis altera siue vrens flore albo ibid Clematis peregrina flore rubro 392 Clematis peregrina flore purpureo ibid Clematis peregrina flore purpureo pleno ibid Clematis peregrina flore carneo pleno 393 Clematis caerulea Pannonica ibid Clematis surrecta siue Flammula louis ibid Clematis flore albo pleno, vel surrecta flore duplici 392 Clematis Virginiana, i. Maracos 393 Clymenum Matthioli, i. Lathyrus latifolius siue Pi∣sum perenne Cneorum Matthioli 397
Cneorum nigrum & album Theophraesti 426 Cnicus siue Carthamus sativus 329 Colchicum Anglicum Byzantinum &c. 154 &c. Colchicum vernum 158 Colytea Theophrasti 438 Colutea vulgaris, & Scorpioides 440 Coma aurea siue Heliochrysum Condrilla aurea, i. Pilosella maior Consolina minor, i. Bellis minor vulgaris Consolida regalis, i. Delphinium Convolvulus Americanus 358 Convolvulus caeruleus maior 357 Convolvulus caeruleus minor 358 Convolvulus purpureus maior ibid Convolvulus purpureus minor spicaefolijs 359 Corchorus Dalechampij, i. Pilosella maior Cornus mas fructu albo, rubro 570 Corona Imperialis 28 Cortusa Matthioli 240 Corydalis 276 Cosmosandalos, i. Calceolus Mariae Costus hortorum maior & minor 482 Cotonea malus 589 Cotyledon altera minor, & flore rubro 232 Crocus vernus albus, purpureus &c. 160 ad 170 Crocus Hispanicus, i. Carthami flores Cucumis hortensis 524 Cuminum syluestre alterum Dioscoridis Matthiolo, i. Delphinium Cupressus 601 Cyanus Baetitus supinus 327 Cyanus floridus Turcicus ibid. Cyanus minor variorum colorum 326 Cyanus Orientalis, i. floridus Turcicus Cyclamen Antiochenum 196 Cyclamen autumnale hederaefolio ibid Cyclamen vernum. Veronense &c. 195 Cyclaminus idem Cydonia malus 589 Cyprus Plinij, i. Ligustrum Orientale 414. 445 Cytisus vulgaris. Maranthae &c 440 D DActylus Trapezuntinus, i. Laurocerasus Daphnoides, i. Laureola 398 Datura Turcarum, i. Stramonium Delphinium 276 Delphinium buccinum, i. Chamaenerium Delphinium Hispanicum parvum 277 Dens caninus 193 Dentali, i. Dens caninus Devebohini, i. Narcissus medio purpureus Dictamus albus & Diptamus albus, i. Fraxinella Digitalis 380 Diosanthos Theophrasti Dalechampio, i. Aquilegia Diosanthos, siue Iouis flos, i. Caryophyllus Dipcadi, i. Muscari Dracoherba, seu Tarchon 500 Draba siue Arabis Dodonaei, i. Thlaspi Creticum Dracunculus maior 529 E. ELleborine flore albo &c. 347 Elleborus albus vulgaris & praecox 346 Elleborus niger, vel Helleborus niger 344 Endiuia 495 Ephemerum lethale, i Colchicum Ephemerum non lethale, i. Lilium conuallium Ephemerum Virginianum 152 Epimedium 283 Eranthemum, i. Flos Adonidis Eriphium Galeni, i. Radix caua Eruca satiua 502 Eryngium Montanum siue Pannonicum 330 F FAba vulgaris 521 Fabago, i. Arbor Iudae Ficus Arbor & humilis 566 Ficus Indica 432 Flamma Theophrasti i. Amaranthus minor purpureus Flammula Iouis, i. Clematis surrecta Flos Adonis 293 Flos Africanus 303 Flos Amoris, i. Amaranthus Flos Cancri, i. Canna Indica Flos Cardinalis, i. Trachelium Americanum 356 Flos Caryophylleus, siue Caryophyllus 314 Flos Constantinopolitanus siue Lychnis Chalcedonica Flos maximus, i. Flos Solis Flos Cuculi, i. Cardamine Flos Cuculi, i. Lychnis syluestris plumaria Flos frumenti, i. Cyanus minor Flos noctis, i. Convolvulus maior purpureus Flos Diuae Katharinae, i. Nigella Flos Meleagridis, i. Fritillaria Flos Regius, i. Delphinium Flos Indicus vel Tunetensis, i. Africanus Flos Solis Farnesianus Columnae, i. Battatas de Canada Flos Solis 295 Faeniculum 492 Fragaria 526 Fraxinella 333 Fritillaria 44 Frutex Coronarius Clusij, i. Syringa alba 414 Fucus herba, i. Anchusa G. GAllipo lale, i. Anemone tenuifolia Galeopsis Pannonica siue Lamium Pannonicum 385 Gelosia Tragi, i. Amaranthus tricolor Gelseminum, i. Iasminum Genista Hispanica siue Spartum Hispanicum 442 Gentiana maior 350 Gentiana Asclepiadis folio ibid Gentiana cruciata ibid Gentianella verna 352 Gentianella autumnalis siue Pneumonanthe ibid Geranium tuberosum vel bulbosum 228 Geum Alpinum Lobelij, i. Sanicula guttata Geranium batrachoides, fuscum &c. 229 Gith, i. Nigella Giul catamer lale, i. Anemone latifolia multiplex Gladiolus Byzantinus, Italicus &c. 189 Globularia caerulea 322 Globularia lutea montana 323 Glycyrrhiza siue Liqueritia 533
Gnaphalium Americanum 374 Gnaphalium Montanum, siue Pes Cati vel Pilosella minor Montana 375 Gnaphalium Roseum ibid. Gramen stratum vel pictum 458 Gramen marinum, i. Caryophyllus marinus minor Gramen plu narium vel plumosum 458 Grossularia siue Vva crispa valgaris, baccis rubris, caeruleis, aculeatis &c. 560 Guaiacana siue Guaiacum Patauinum idem est cum Pishamin Virginianorum, Loti species H. HAstula regia, i. Asphodelus luteus minor Hedera Virginiana 612 Hedysarum clypeatum 339 Heliotropium Indicum Pelleterij, i Battatas de Ca∣nada Heliocrysum 374 Helleboraster siue Pseudohelleborus 345 Helleborus albus & vernus praecox 346 Helleborus niger verus 344 Helleborus niger ferulaceus, i. Buphthalmum maius 293 Helleborine 347 Hemerocallis, i. Martagon Hemerocallis Valentina Clusij, i. Pseudonarcissus marinus, vel Pancratium vulgo Hepatica nobilis siue trifolia 225 Herba clauellata, i. Viola tricolor Herba sancti Petri, i. Paralysis Herba Sanctae Catharinae, i. Balsamina faemina Herba Margarita, i. Bellis minor Herba Regina, i. Tabacco Herba Tunica, i. Caryophyllus & Armerius Herba Trinitatis, i. Hepatica trifolia Hermodactylus Matthioli 188 Gesneri 194 Hermodactylum Colchicum 160 Hesperis 262 Hippolapathum, i. Patientia siue Lapathum sativum, & Rhabarbarum Monachorum 483 Hippolapathum rotundifolium 484 Hipposelinum siue Olus atrum 490 Hirculus Frisicus, i. Chamaecistus Friciscus Horminum sativum 478 Hyacinthus & eius genera 111 ad 133 Hyacynthus Poetarum, i. Iris bulbosa Anglicana Hyssopus folijs aureis 455 Hyssopus vulgaris 476 Hypecoum Matthioli, i. Alcea vesicaria I. IAcea Baetica 328 Iacea marina Baetica ib. Iasminum Americanum 359 Iasminum Arabicum 410 Iasminum album 406 Iasminum Catalonicum ibid Idaeus dactylus, i. Poeonia Ilex arbor 600 Intubum, i. Endiuia & Cichorium 495 Iouis flos, i. Caryophyllus Iphium Theophrasti, i. Caryophyllus Iris bulbosa & eius varietas 171 ad 179 Iris Chalcedonica 179 Iris Dalmatica Damascena &c. 180 &c. Iris Persica 172 Iris Tripolitana 182 Iris tuberosa 188 Iucca 434 Ixine Theophrasti, i. Carlina K KEiri, siue Leucoium luteum 256 Keiri albo flore 257 L LAburnum 438 Lactuca agnina. Capitata &c. 498 Lamium Pannonicum, i. Galeopsis Pannonica 385 Lapathum sanguineum 484 Larix 608 Lathyrus latifolius, i. Pisum perenne 338 Lathyrus siliquis orobi ib. Lauendula mas & faemina 447 Lauendula syluestris, i. Staechas Laurus 598 Laurus regia, i Laurocerasus 401 Laurus Rosea, i. Oleander Laurus Tinus 400 Laurea Cerasus 599 Lauro cerasus 401 Ledum Alpinum. Silesiacum 424 Ledum id est Cistus Ledon Leimonia Theophrasti Clusio, i. Anemone syluestris Leontostomium, i, Aquilegia Leucoium bulbosum 109 Leucoium hortense simplex & multiplex 258 Leucoium luteum multiplex 257 Leucoium marinum Syriacum 260 Leucoium melancholicum ibid Leuconacissolirion, i Leucoium bulbosum Libanotis Coronaria, i. Rosmarinus Ligustrum 445 Ligustrum Orientale, i. Cyprus Plinij 410 Lilac, i. Syringa caerulea 407 Lilac flore argenteo 408 Liliago, i. Phalangium: vel alijs Lilium non bulbo∣sum siue Liliasphodelus Liliasphodelus 148 Lilionarcissus, i. Tulipa Lilium Alexandrinum, i Ornithogalum Arabicum 135 Lilium album 40 Lilium aureum, rubrum &c 39 Lilium conuallium 340 Lilium Macedonicum 36 Lilium Montanum 33 Lilium non bulbosum. i. Liliasphodelus Lilium Perficum vel Susianum 28 Lilium syluestre, i Montanum Lilium variegatum, i. Fritillaria Limonium peregrinum Rauwolfij 250 Linaria magna siue Belvidere Italorum 268 Liqueritia 583 Linaria caerulea purpurea odorata 66 Lingua Bouis vel Buglosum luteum 486 Linum syluestre album, luteum 266
Lotus Africana Dalechampij, i. Laurocerasus Lotus Arbor 568 Lotus tetragonolobus siue siliquosus flore rubello, i. Pi∣sum quaaratum Lunaria Arthritica, i. Paralysis, etiamque & Au∣riculae Vrsi Lunaria Graeca maior odorata i. Bolbonach, seu Viola latifolia 265 Lunaria caerulea, i. Soldanella Alpina, siue Monta∣na 234 Lupinus 335 Lychnis Chalcedonica flore simplici, & flore pleno 253 Lychnis Coronaria 252 Lychnis plumaria syluestris multiplex 253 Lychnis syluestris flore albo pleno, & flore rubro pleno 254 Lycopersicum Galeni, i. Flos Africanus, pomum A∣moris Anguillarae M. MAiorana aurea 446 Maiorana tenuifolia 452 Maiorana vulgaris ibid Maiorana latifolia vulgaris 474 Mala Aethyopica 379 Mala Arantia 584 Mala Armeniaca siue praecocia 579 Malus Cotonea vel Cydonia 589 Malus Granata seu Punica 428 Malorum Persicorum diuersitas 580 Malorum varia genera 586 Malus Punica satiua 428 Malus Punica syluestris, i. Balaustium Maluacrispa 495 Malua Hispanica flore carneo amplo 366 Malua horaria, i. Alcea peregrina 370 Malua hortensis simplex & multiplex 369 Malua Rosea, i. hortensis Mandragoras mas & faemina 377 Maracoc siue Clematis Virginiana 393 Marguerites & Margueritons, i. Bellis minor mul∣tiplex Martagon album, flore carneo 33 Martagon Chymistarum, i. Lilium aureum siue ru∣brum Martagon Byzantinum seu Constantinopolitanū 34 Martagon Pannonicum flore spadiceo 35 Martagon Imperiale 33 Martagon Pomponeum 36 Martagon Phoeniceo flore 34 Martagon rarissimum, i. Narcissus tertius Matthi∣oli Matric aria flore pleno 289 Medica Cochleata. Spinosa 338. &c. Medium Dioscoridis, i. Viola Mariana Melampodium, i. Helleborus niger Melanthium, i. Nigella Melissa 479 Melo Moscatus &c. 525 Mentha 480 Mespilus Aronia. Vulgaris 568 Mezereon, i. Chamaelaea Germanica Mirabilia Peruviana 394 Moly alterum genus Plinij Dodonaeo, i. Phalangium Moly varia genera 141 ad 146 Morion, i. Mandragoras Morus vulgaris, alba, Virginiana 599 Muschoromi, i. Muscari Moschatella, i. Hesperis Muscipula Lobelij, i. Benrubrum Monsp. 254 Myrobalanus prunus 577 Myrrhis, i. Cerefolium maius Myrtus maior & minor 427 N. NApellus 215 Napellus Moisis, i. Anthora 216 Napus maior & minor 509 Narcissus Caperonius, i. Fritillaria Narcissorum varia genera 67 ad 108 Narcissus marinus, i. tertius Matthioli Narcissus Iacobaeus flore rubro 169 Narcissus Matthioli, i. Ornithogalum Neapolitanum Narcissus Trapezunticus 30 Narcissus Virgineus 86 & 91 Nardus Italica, i. Lauendula Nardus montana 386 Nasturtium Indicum 280 Nasturtium hortense 500 Nepeta 479 Nerium, i. Oleander Nerium Alpinum, i. Ledum Alpinum Nicotiana, i. Tabacco Nigella flore albo duplici 287 Nigella flore caeruleo multiplici ibid Nigella Hispanica ibid Nil Auicennae, i. Convolvulus caeruleus maior Nozelha, i. Crocus Clusio. Sysirinchium Boelio 171 Nucipersica & eius varietas 583 Nux Auellana, Byzantina 562 Nux Iuglans 595 Nux Metel, i. Stramonium maius Nux vesicaria seu Staphylodendron 611 O. OCellus Barbaricus, & Damascenus, i. Caryo∣phyllus Ocimastrum Valerianthon, i. Valeriana rubra Dodo∣naei Ocimoides semper virens 254 Ocimum citratum, Indicum 450 Odontitis, i. Lychnis plumaria Oenanthe Myconi, i. Ranunculus thalictri folio minor 218 Olus album, i. Lactuca agnina Olus atrum, i. Hipposelinum Olus aureum, i. Atriplex Olus hispanicum, i. Spinachia Opuntia, i. Lychen marinum 433 Opuntia seu Ficus Indica ibid Orchis Melitias seu Apifera 192 Orchis hermaphroditica &c. ibid. Ornithogalum Aethiopicum 138 Ornithogalum Arabicum 134 Ornithogalum luteum 140 Ornithogalum Neapolitanum 138 Ornithogalum Pannonicum 136 & 138 Orobus Venetus 338
Orontium, i. Antirrhinum Os Leonis, i. Antirrhinum Ostrys Theophrasti 410 Osyris, i. Scoparia vel Linaria magna Oxalis siue Acetosa 487 Oxyacantha siue Berberis & sine acinis 561 P. PAdus Theophrasti, i. Cerisier blanc Gallorum siue Cerasus racemosus Paeonia mas & faemina simplex & multiplex 341 &c. Paliurus 607 Palma Christi, i. Ricinus Palma Christi, i. Orchis siue Satyrium Basilicum Pancratium, i. Scilla rubra, & non Pseudonarcissus marinus, vide pag. 108 & 153 Panis porcinus, i. Cyclamen. Papaver sativum flore pleno 286 Papaver syluestre flore pleno ibid. Pappas siue Battatas Hispanorum Canadense Virgi∣nianum 516 Paralysis diuersarum specierum 242 &c. Paralytica alpina maior & minor, i. Auricula Vrsi & Paralysis minor Parthenium, i. Matricaria Parthenium Galeni, i. Amaracus Pastinaca latifolia 506 Pastinaca tenuifolia 508 Pedua Penorum, i. Flos Africanus Pennachio Persiano, i. Lilium Persicum Pepo 526 Peruinca siue Vinca peruinca 391 Periclymenum perfoliatum 404 Periclymenum rectum 415 Periploca Virginiana 444 Pes cati, i. Gnaphalium Montanum Petroselinum 491 Petum & Picielt, i. Tabacco. Perebecenuc, i. Tabacco Phalangium Allobrogicum 150 Phalangium ephemerum Virginianum 152 Phalangium Italicum maius 150 Phalangium ramosum & non ramosum ibid. Phaseolus vulgaris 521 Phillyrea 445 Phlomitis, i. Aethiopis Phlox siue flamma Theophrasti, i. Viola flammea siue tricolor Pilosella maior siue Chondrilla aurea 300 Pilosella minor montana, i. Gnophalium montanum 375 Pimpinella siue Sanguisorba 483 Pinus 599 Piper montanum, i. Chamaelaeae frutex vel semen Pishamin Virginianorum, i. Guaiacum Patauinum Pisum pe enne, Lathyrus latifolius 340 Pisum quadratum rubrum 338 Pisum vulgare, roseum, maculatum &c. 522 Planta Cardinalis, i. Trachelium Americanum 356 Planta maxima, i, Flos Solis Plantago rosea 352 Pneumonanthe, i. Gentiana autumnalis 352 Poma amoris maiora & minora 379 Pomoum varietas 586 Pomum spinosum, i. Stramonium 362 Porrum 512 Portulaca 499 Pothos Theophrasti, i. Aquilegia Primula veris simplex & multiplex 242. &c. Prunorum magna varietas 575 Pseudocapsicum, i. Amomum Plinij 431 Pseudohelleborus Matthioli, i. Helleborus niger feru∣laceus Pseudohermodactylus Matthioli, i. Dens Caninus Pseudonarcissus Anglicus, Germanicus, Hispanicus, &c. 99. &c. Pseudolotus Matthioli, i. Laurocerasus, est & Gua∣tacum Patavinum & Pishamin Virginianorum Pseudorhabarbarum est Rhabarbarum Monacho∣rum 274 Psidium, i. Cortex Granatorum Ptarmica flore pleno 288 Pulegium 477 Pulmonaria Tragi & Gallorum, i, Pilosella maior 300 Pulmonaria maculosa & non maculosa 248 Pulsatilla 200 Pyracantha 604 Pyramidalis Lutetiana, i. Campanula maior siue la∣ctescens 354 Pyretrum officinarum 292 Pyretrum syluestre 288 Pyrus & eius varietas 590 Q. QVamoclit Indorum, i. Convolvulus America∣nus 358 Quinúa Indorum, i. Amaranthus maior siue panus∣culis sparsis R. RAdix Caua maior, & minor 275 Ranunculus Anglicus, Asiaticus, Creticus &c. 276 ad 223 Ranunculus monophyllos, i. Aconitum hyemale Ranunculus nemorum & syluarum, i. Anemones syl∣uestres Raphanus vulgaris & nigra radice 509 Rapum hortense, luteum, rubrum ibid. Rapunculus hortensis 514 Rhabarbarum Monachorum & Pseudorhabarbarum 274 Rhabarbarum & Rhaponticum verum 483 Rhododendron, i. Oleander Rhus Virginiana 611 Rhus Myrtifolia ibid. Ribes fructu albo, nigro, rubro 558 Rosa Alpina, i. Ledum alpidum 424 Rosa Iunonis, i. Lilium album Rosa satuina, i. Paeonia Rosa montana, i. Alpina Rosa vltramarina, i. Malua rosea Rosa Anglica, Cinamomea, Damascena, &c. 412 ad 425 Rosmarinum vulgare 425 Rosmarinum aureum ibid Rosmarinum latifolium 426 Rosmarinum syluestre Matthioli, i. Ledum Alpi∣num Rubus Idaeus 557 Rubus Idaeus non spinosus ibid
Ruta hortensis 530 Ruta palustris vel pratensis, i. Thalictrum S SAbdaifa i. Alcea Americana Sabina 607 Saliuaris, i Pyretrum Saluta maior & minor 478 Saluta variegata 446 Sambach Araum, i. Syringa Arabica flore duplica Sambacus Rosea 411 Sampsuchum, i. Mr Sana sa cta & Saiabrba, i Tabacco Sandalida Cretic, i. P quaratum Saniu dp vel montana, i. Cortusa Matthioli Sanicula trifolia, i. Caramine trifolia Sanicula guttata 231 Sanguisorba vel Pmpinella 483 Sanguis H rculis, i. Elleborus albus Santolina, i. Abretanum aemina 449 Saponaria flore duplici 352 Saponaria altera i. Trachelium minus, & Valeriana rubra Dodon. Sarahug, i. Hacinthus Lillifolius Satucia vel hymbra 476 Sa yrium Eythronium & Triphyllum Dioscoridis i. Tulipa 66 Satyrium Orchidis species 192 Scabiosa rubra Austriaca 324 Scabiosa rubra Indica ibid Scarlatea, i. Amerius Scoparia, i. Lanaria magna 268 Scorpioides maius & minus 340 Scorsonera 301 Scylla alba, rubra 133 Sedum serratum 232 Segetalis, i. Gladiolus Selinum dulce 491 Serincade, i. Narcissus medio purpureus Serincade catamer lale, i. Narcissus flore pleno Serpentaria, i. Dracunculus Serpentina, i. Scorsonera Serpillum aureum, Citratum &c. 454 Sesamoides minus, alquibus est Helleborus niger feru∣rulaceus Sicla & Sicula, i. Beta Sidium idem quod Psidium Siliqua syluestris, i. Arbor Iudae Simboline idem quod Zumbul Indicum, Hyacinthi Orientalis species Sinapi 502 Sisarum 506 Sisyrinchium alterum, i, Cardamine altera Sisyrinchium Mauritanicum &c, 171 Sisyrinchium Cordi, i. Ornithogalum Solanum arborescens, i. Amomum Plinij Solanum faetidum spinosum Bauhini, i. Stramonium Solanum Mexiocanum Bauhni, i. Mirabilia Solanum pomiferum Gesneri & Bauhini, i. Pomum amoris Solanum vesicarium, i. Alkakengi Solanum esculentum Bauhini, i. Battatas de Virgi∣nia Sol Indianus, i. Flos solis Soldanella alpina 234 Sophonia, i. Amaranthus tricolor Sorbus legitima & Torminalis 567 Spartum Austriacum, i. Gramen plumosum Spartum Hispanicum frutex, i. Genista Hispanica 442 Spinachia 496 Staphylodendron, i. Nux vesicaria Sternutamentoria, i. Ptarmica Stoechas 448 Stoechas Citrina, i. Chrysocome Struthium non est Saponaria 353 Stramonium maius & minus 360 Sumach Virginense 612 Susamgiul, i. Lilium Persicum, & Hyacinthus stella∣tus, Byzantinus alter Sycomorus, siue Acer maius latifolium 610 Symphitum maculosum, i. Pulmonaria Syringa alba, caerulea 408 Syringa Arabica flore albo duplici 408 Syringa Italica Lobelij, i. Syringa flore albo simplici Syringa Italica flore albo pleno Boslers 410 T TAbacco 363 Tamarix vel Tamariscus 610 Tanacetum vulgare 482 Tanacetum Pervanum, i. Flos Africanus Tarchon herba 500 Taxus arbor 606 Thalictrum vel Thalietrum Hispanicum 274 Thesium Theophrasti, i. Radix caua Thlaspi Baeticum marinum 390 Thraupalus Theophrasti Dalechampio, i. Sambucus rosea Thridacias, i. Mandragoras Thuya, i. Arbor vitae 436 Thymbra, i Satureia 476 Thymum legitimum capitatum 454 Thymum durius & latifolium 474 Tilia faemina 608 Trachellum maius & minus 354 Trachelium Americanum 356 Tragium Dioscoridis, i. Fraxinella Tragopogon caeruleum, purpureum 302 Tragopogon luteum 514 Tragoriganum Matthioli 453 Trifolium fruticans, i. lasminum luteúm Trifolium aureum i Hepatica Trifolium nobile i Hepatica Trinitas, seu herba trinitatis, i. Hepatica Tulipa Armeniaca Boloniensis, Bombycina, Byzan∣tina, Cretica &c. 52 &c. Tulipae mediae 55 Tulipae pracoces 48 Tulipae serotinae 61 Tusai & Turfana, i. Corona Imperialis V. VAccinium Virgilij 128 Valeriana rubra Dodonaei 386 Valeriana Graeca 388 Valerianthon, i. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei Verbascum odoratum & i. Paralysis Verbasculum odoratum i. Paralysis
Veratrum album & nigrum, i. Helleborus albus & niger Vernilago, i. Chamaelaeo albus Vetonica altera, vel altilis, aut Coronaria, i. Caryo∣phyllus hortensis Vetonica agrestis, i. Armerius Victorialis rotunda, i. Gladiolus Vincaperuinca 391 Viola alba, i. Leucoium Viola alba bulbosa, i. Leucoium bulbosum Viola Damascena, i. Hesperis Viola flammea, i. Tricolor Viola hyemalis, i. Hesperis Viola latifolia & Bolbonach 265 Viola Lunaris Bolbonach 265 Viola lutea, i. Leucoium luteum siue Keiri Viola peregrina, i. Bolbonach Viola mariana 354 Viola martia 281 Viola Matronalis, i. Hesperis Viola tricolor simplex & duplex 282 Viperaria & Viperina, i. Scorsonera Vitis Corinthiaca, Damascena &c. 563 Vitis Virginiana 564 Vitis Virginense seu potius Hedera Virginiana 612 Vmbilicus Veneris, i, Cotiledon 234 Vva crispa, i. Grossularia 560 Vvularia, i. Trachelium, est & Hippoglossum Y. YVcca, siue Iucca 434 Z. ZAmbach Arabi, i. Iasminum Arabicum Zufiniare, i. Martagon Constantinopolitanum Zumbul Arabi, i. Ornithogalum Arabicum Zumbul Indi, i. Orientalis maior praecox
A Table of the English names of such Plants as are contained in this Booke. A. WHite Aconite 214 Yellow Aconite, or winter Wolfes bane, ibid. Adonis flower 293 Alkanet, or Sea Buglosse 250 Anemone, or winde-flower, & the kinds 199 to 214 Yellow Anemone 194 Allisanders 490 Almond, and the kinds 583 Angelica 529 Apricocks 579 Apples and the seueral sorts 586 Double blossomd Apple tree 404 Apples of Loue 379 Thorne Apples 360 Arrach white and purple 488 Asaraacca 532 Asparagus 503 Asphodill and his kindes 146 Asphodill with Lilly flowers 148 B BAldmony or Gentian 350 Balme 479 The Balsame apple 278 Barberies 561 Barbery Buttons, and Thorny Buttons 339 Barrenwort 283 Batchelours Buttons double, white and red 254 Batchelours Buttons yellow 218 & 224 The Bay tree 598 The Cherry Bay tree, or Bay Cherry 401 The dwarfe Bay 397 The Kings Bay, that is, the Cherry Bay The Rose Bay 400 The Virginia Bay Cherry 599 The wilde Bay 400 The Bee-flower 192 & 258 Beares breech 330 Beares eares, and the sorts 235 &c. Beares eare Sanicle 240 Beares foote 344 Beetes, and the kindes 489 Garden Beanes and French Beanes 521 Bell flowers, and the kinds 353 Canterburie Bels 354 & 356 Couentry Bels 354 Blites 488 Bloodwort 484 The great blew Bindeweed 359 The small blew Bindeweed 360 Blew Bottles 326 Borrage, and euerliuing Borage 249 Ladies Bower, and Virgins Bower single and dou∣ble 393 Dwarfe Boxe and guilded Boxe 606 Flower of Bristow, or None such 253 Spanish Broome 442 Double flowred Bruisewort or Sopewort 352 Garden Buglosse 249 Marsh buglosse and Sea buglosse 250 Burnet 483 Butterflie Orchis 192 C CAbbage, and his kindes 503 Calues snout or Snapdragon 269 Double Camomill and naked Camomill 290 Rose Campion 252 Featherd wilde Campion single and double 253 The Crimson Cardinals flower 356 Carawayes 515 Carnations and Gilloflowers 306 Caterpillers great and small 340 Cassidonie 443 Lobels Catch flye 254 Clusius his Celastrus 604 Sweete Cheruill or great Cheruill 494 Garden Cheruill ib. Party coloured Cicheling 338 The Christmas flower 344 The Cherry tree, and the kindes thereof 572 The double blossomd Cherry tree 402 The Cypresse tree 602 The sweet gum Cistus 422 Burning Clamberer or Climer 391 Hungarian Climer 393 Virginian Climer or Maracoc ibid Coleflower, Colewort, Colerape 504 Colombines 271 Tufted Colombines 274 The prickly euer greene Corall tree 604 Corneflower 326 Corne sallet or Lambes Lettice 428 The Cornell tree 570 Costmary 482 Cotton weedes 375
Cowcumbers, diuers 524 Cowslips of diuers sorts 242. &c. French Cowslips or Beares eares 235 Cowslips of Ierusalem 248 Cranes bill, and the kinds 228 Garden Cresses 500 Indian Cresses 280 Crow flower 253 Crow foote of diuers kinds 216 to 223 Crown Imperial 28 The double Cuckow flower 253 and 389 Currans, white, red and blacke 558 The true Curran Vine and Grape 563 D DAffodils, and the diuersities thereof, from 67 to 108 Checkerd Daffodill, and the kinds 44 Dittander 508 Bastard Dittanie 333 Dogs tooth Violet 193 Dragons 529 The Dragon flower 385 Double Dasie, and blew Dasies 321 E. WHite Ellebor of two sorts 346 Wilde white Ellebor 347 The true black Ellebor or Christmas flower 344 Garden Endiue 495 F FEllworte or Gentian 350 Fennell 492 Fennell flower 287 Double Fetherfew 289 The Princes Feather 232 The Fig tree, and the kinds 566 The Indian Figge tree 433 The Finger flower 383 The Firre tree 600 The Corne Flagge 189 The flagge or flowerdeluce 79 &c. The flowerdeluce of Constantinople 79 The flowerdeluce of Persia 172 The bulbous flowerdeluces 172 to 179 The veluet flowerdeluce 188 Wilde flaxe or Tode flaxe 266 Foxe gloues, and the kinds 380 Fillbeards ordinary, and of Constantinople 562 Flower of Bristow, or None such, single and dou∣ble 253 Purple flower gentle, and the kinds 371 Golden flower gentle or golden flower of life 372 The flower of the Passion, or Maracoc 393 The flower of the Sun 295 The Sultans flower 327 The friars Crowne 332 Fritillaria or checkerd Daffodil 44 Double fritillaria ibid. G GArlicke 513 Gentian great and smal 350 Germander 456 Gilloflowers and Carnations 306 Queenes Gilloflowers or Dames Violets 262 Stocke Gilloflowers single and double 258 The Ginny hen-flower, that is, Fritillaria 44 Goats beard blew and purple 302 Goats beard yellow 514 Candy Goldilocks 372 Golds, that is, Marigolds 296 Gooseberries of diuers sorts 560 Herbe Grace or Rue 530 Grape flower 114 Vipers Graesse 301 Feather Grasse 458 Painted Grasse ib. The Guaiacum of Padoa 570 H HAres bels 122 Hearts ease single and double 282 The blew Helmet flower or Monkes hood 215 The wholsome Helmet flower ibid Hollihockes single and double 369 Holewort or Hollow-roote 275 Hyssope common 476 Guilded Hyssope 455 Hungary or mountaine Sea Holly 330 Honisockles double 404 Red Honysockles or vpright Honysockles 405 The euer green Hawthorne tree, or the euer green prickly Coral tree 604 I IAcinths, and the seueral sorts 111 to 133 White Iasmine and yellow Iasmine 406 Double white Iasmine 408 Sweet Iohns single and double 319 Ione siluer Pin, that is, Poppies double 286 Iudas tree 437 The supposed Indian Iucca 434 The Virginia Ivye 612 K SPanish Sea Knapweede 328 L LAdies laces or painted grasse 458 Laedies smockes double 389 Lambes Lettice 498 Langedebeefe 486 The Larch tree 608 Larkes heeles or spurs single and double 276 Yellow Larkes heele, that is, Indian Cresses 280 Lauender spike 447 Lauender cotton 449 French Lauender or Sticadoue 448 Mountaine Laurell 398 Leekes 512 Lettice, and the kinds thereof 498 Licorice 533 The tree of Life 436 The chekerd Lilly, that is, Fritillaria The Conual Lilly, or Lilliconvally 340
The Day Lilly 148 The Persian Lilly 28. 30 The Mountaine Lilly 33 The red or gold Lilly 39 The white Lilly 40 The Line or Linden tree 608 Liue-long, or Life euerlasting 375 Noble Liuerwort or Hepatica 225 Lungwort or Cowslips of Ierusalem 248 Lupines white, blew and yellow 325 M. SWeet Marierome 452 Guilded or yellow Marierome 446 French Mallowes 495 Spanish Mallowe 366 Shrub Mallow 369 Thorny Mallow 368 Venice Mallow ibid. Red Maiths, and white 293 Mandrake male and female 377 The great Maple or Sycomore tree 611 Marigolds 296 Corne Marigolds of Candy 295 French Marigolds 303 Double Marsh Marigolds 224 The Spanish Marigold is the greatest double broade leafed Anemone 207 The blew or purple Marigold 299 Martagons of diuers sorts 33 Masticke the herbe 452 Medlars 568 The Melancholy Gentleman 260 Muske Melons 525 The Meruaile of the world 364 Mirtles 427 Moly or Mountaine Garlicke 144 &c. Monkes hoode, or Larkes spurs 276 Monkes hood or helmet flower 215 Counterpoyson Monkes hood 216 Blew Moone-wort 234 Halfe Moones 339 Golden Mouse-eare 330 Mulberries, and Virginia Mulberry 599 Moth-Mulleine 383 Woody Mulleine or French Sage 384 Ethiopian Mullein 385 The Mumme tree 432 Mustard 502 N. SPotted Nauelwort 232 Navew 509 The Nectorin, and the kinds thereof 582 Neesewort, or Neesing roote 346 Nppe 479 The Nettle tree 568 Hungarian dead Nettle 385 Nigella, or the Fenel-flower 287 Tree Night shade, that is, the Winter Cherry tree 432 None-such, or the flower of Bristow 253 The bladder Nut 611 The Filberd Nut of Constantinople 562 The Spanish or Barberry Nut 171 The Wall Nut 594 O THe euer greene Oake 600 Spurge Oliue 397 Mountaine Spurge Oliue ibid Onions, and the kinds 510 Sea Onion 133 Orchis of Virginia 194 Orenges 584 Oxe eye 293 Oxe lips 245 P PAnsies single and double 282 Parsley, and sweet Parsley 491 Virginia Parsley 492 Parsneps 506 Pasque flower, or Passe flower 200 Patience, or Monkes Rubarbe 483 Peaches, and the kinds 586 Double blossomd Peach tree 404 Peares, and the seueral sorts 590 The prickl Peare, that is, the Indian Figge Pearles of Spaine 115 Garden Pease of diuers sorts 522 Crimson Pease blossome 338 Pease euerlasting ibid Blew vpright euerlasting Pease ibid Pelletory of Spaine 292 Double wilde Pelletory 288 Penny flower, that is, white Sattin Peony single and double 342 Perwinkle single and double 392 Pinkes single and double 314 The Pine tree 599 The blew and the white Pipe tree 408 The double white Pipe tree, or double Iasmine 410 Rose Plantane 352 Plums, and the kindes 575 The Pomegranet tree 428 The double blossomd Pomegranet tree 430 Pompions 526 Double garden Poppies 284 Double wilde Poppy 286 Potato's of Spaine, of Virginia, of Canada 516 Pride of London 310 Primme or Priuet 445 The euer greene Priuet 603 Primroses, and the kinds 242 &c. Tree Primrose of Virginia 264 Purslane 499 Purse tassels 116 & 118 Pushamin or Pishamin, the Virginia Plum 570 Q. QVinces, and the kinds 589 R RAmpions 514 Raspis, white and red 557 Reddish, blacke Reddish, horse Reddish 509 Red and yellow flowred Indian Reede 376
Rosarubie, that is, Adonis flower 293 Rose tree, and the seuerall kinds 412. to 425 Iuno's Rose, that is, the white Lilly The Elder or Guelder Rose 401 The Holly Rose or Sage Rose 421 The Mountaine Rose 424 Rocke Roses 397 Rosemarie common and gilded &c. 425 The Marie Rose or Rosemary of Silesia 424 Rocket 502 Garden Rue or Herbe grace 530 True Rubarbe, Monkes Rubarke, Rubarbe of Pon∣tus 483 S SAge great and small 478 Guilded Sage 446 Sage of Ierusalem 248 French Sage 384 Saffron flowers of diuers sorts of the spring time and of the fall 160 to 170 Medow Saffrons or Colchicum, that is, the Sonne before the Father, and the kindes 154 Spotted Sanicle 231 Beares eare Sanicle 240 Satyrion 192 The Sauine tree 607 Summer Sauorie and winter Sauory 476 White Sattin flower 265 Red Sattin flower 339 Scabious white and red 324 Scorsonera or Vipers grasse 301 Bastard Sena tree 440 The true and the ordinary Seruice 567 Mountaine Setwall 386 Virginia Silke 444 Skirrets 506 Our Ladies Slipper 347 Smallage 491 Ladies Smocks double 388 Snayles 338 Snapdragons 269 Mountaine Soldanella 434 Double flowred Sopewort 352 Sorrell 486 Sowbread, and the kindes 195 to 199 The Kings Speare or yellow Asphodill 148 Sperage or Asparagus 503 Spiderworte, and the kindes 150 &c. Spinach 496 Starre flowers of diuers sorts, or Stars of Beth∣lehem 130. to 140 The greene Starre flower or bulbed Asphodill of Galen 136 Starwort or Sharewort, and Italian Starwort 299 Sticadoue or Cassidonie 448 Stock gilloflowers single and double 258 Storkes bils of diuers sorts 228 Strawberries of many sorts 526 The Strawberry tree 603 Succory 495 The Sultans flower, or Turkie Corne flower 327 The Sun flower or flower of the Sun 295 The Virginia Sumach 611 The Myrtle leafed Sumach ibid The Sycomore tree 610 T INdian Tabacco of diuers sorts 363 The greene and the white Tamariske tree 610 Tansie single and double 482 The blessed Thistle 530 The gentle Thistle. Globe Thistle &c. 332 Christs Thorne 607 Thrift ordinary, and the great Sea Thrift 317 Throatwort, and Giants Throatewort single and double 354 Beane Trefoyle 438 Shrub Trefoile 407 Tree Trefoile 439 Candie Tufts 390 Golden Tufts 375 Spanish Tus 274 & 340 The early flowring Tulipa 46 The meane flowring Tulipa 54 The dwarfe Tulipa 52 The Persian Tulipa ibid The Turkes Cap, that is, the Tulipa The true Time 454 Guilded Time, Moske and Lemmon Time ibid Garden Time, and Masticke Time 474 V REd Valerian of Dodonaeus 386 Greeke Valerian 388 Mountaine Valerian 386 Violets single and double 282 The bulbous Violet 169 The Dogs tooth Violet 193 Dames Violets 262 Mercuries Violets 357 Vines, and the seuerall kinds of grapes 564 Vipers grasse 301 Virginia Vine 564 Virginia Vine, or Virginia Ivie 612 W. THe Walnut tree 594 Single and double Wall-flowers of many sorts 257 Widow Wayle 397 The Willow-flower 270 The Wind-flower or Anemone, single and double of many sorts 199 to 214 Wild Wind-flower single and double 202 Sweet Williams, and the kinds 319 Winter Gilloflowers 258 Winter Wolfes bane, and yellow Wolfes bane 214 Winter Cherries 532 The Winter Cherrie tree 431 Double Wood-bine or Honisuckle 404 Y. THe Yew tree 606
A Table of the Vertues and Properties of the Hearbes contained in this Booke. A. IN feare of Aborsment, or mis-carrying in women 478 Good against Aches 290 Good in hot Agues and to driue away their fits 223. 484. 532. 536. 538. 564 575. 579. 584 595 From whence Agaricke is taken 608 A Syrupe of Angelica 529 Good for deiected appetites, 484. 486. 499. 561. 562. 578. 575. 584. To perfume Apparell, Leather, &c. 421 448. 586 For the Apoplexie 349 Astringent or to binde 428. 431 B FOr weake Backes and reines 479. 483 A Balsame for green wounds 426 To cause Barrennesse 284 Good for Bathing 294. 376. 421. 449 474. 477. 478. 479. 480 Good for Bees 440. 480 Good to take away the sting of Bees and waspes 476. 479. 480. 482 Good to open and mollifie the Belly, and make it soluble 333. 370. 421. 488 489. 490. 495. 566. 578. 582 To clense the Blood 484 To dissolue clotted Blood 610 To encrease Blood 567 To helpe the spitting of Blood 595 To stay Bleeding 230. 396. 483 Hurtfull for a short Breath 499 Good for the shortnesse of Breath 364. 436. 502. 506. 513. 533 For a stinking Breath 529 To make a sweet Breeth ibid For cold and moist Braines 335. 427. 448 481. 482 To abate the ouer-swelling of Maidens Breasts 600 To helpe paines in the Breast 500 To heale womens sore Breasts 590 To draw out broken Bones &c. out of the flesh 190 For Bruises by fals &c. 479. 608. 610 Good for Burnings or scaldings 362. 512 610 C. TO clense Cankers 364 To procure Castings or vomitings 189 434. 442. 489. 532 To stay Casting or vomiting 477. 480 To feede or make Cattell fat 348. 440 442 Causticke or burning plants 396 The best Coales for Gunpowder 610 The best Coales for lasting 608 For the Winde Collicke 216. 293. 453 455. 476. 504. 508. 515. 530 To Clense, purge and dry 276 To set an orient red Colour on the cheeke of a woman 241 To make a deepe blew Colour 179. 603 To make a red Colour ibid To giue a lustre to a white Colour 595 To make a yellow Colour 421 For the Colts euill, or immoderate lust 499 To warme and comfort Cold griefes 214 376. 434 477. 478. 480. 491 Cooling and drying 323. 353. 378. 421 438. 486, 499. 528. 562. 557. 564. 576 562. 568. 576. 578. 590. 594. 598. 602 603. 607 Cooling and moistning 234. 283. 380. 432 579 For a Consumption 519. 608 Cordiall to comfort the heart 170. 216
252. 298. 301. 314. 328. 421. 427. 436 450. 480. 482. 483. 526. 528. 530. 558 586 For the Cough in young children 502 Good for Coughes and colds 134. 295. 513 533. 562. 567. 575. 584. 586 Mithridates Counterpoyson 567 Good for Crampes and shrinking of sinews 425 D. TO procure an easie and speedy Deliuery to women in trauell 40. 199. 274 410 To stay rheumaticke Distillations 288 376. 386. 427 To cure the biting of a mad Dogge 300 353. 482 To helpe the Dropsie 235. 290. 353 To cause Drowsinesse like vnto drunkennes 362 E. FOr paines in the Eares 580. 584 Good for sore and weake Eyes 216 421. 427. 479. 530 Hurtfull to the head and Eyes 489 For the Epilepsie or falling sicknesse 194 335. 344. 456. 477. 502 F. TO cleanse the Face, and other patts of the skinne, and make it fresh 40. 189 247. 336. 396. 500. 502. 521. 528. 566 584. 589. 600 For the Falling sicknesse 194. 335. 344 456. 477. 502 Farsing or faseting herbes 474. 476. 478 To heale Felons on the ioynts of the fin∣gers 492 To procure the Feminine courses 289 335. 453. 456. 477. 479. 491 To stay the Feminine or menstruall cour∣ses 372. 396. 480. 486. 608. 611 To cleanse Fistula's 364 To expell thin Flegme 477 To extenuate & expectorate tough Flegme 134. 264. 436. 448. 456. 477. 500, 529 530. 533. 608 For the bloody Flixe and all other Fluxes 193. 231. 372. 425. 431. 446, 483. 486 568. 595. 602. 605. 608, 611 To take away Freckles, spots, &c. 500 566 For the French disease 283. 353. 606 G TO stay the Gonorrhaea or running of the reynes 608 Good for the Gout 349 H. TO cause the haire to grow 566 For the falling of the Haire 425 Hurtfull to the Head and eyes 489 Good for the Head and Heart 134. 170 298. 426. 455. 474. 530. 586 Good for the Head and stomack 455. 474 530. 586 For paines in the Head 288. 292. 426 448. 499 For the swimming and dissinesse of the Head 241. 247. 586 For the passion of the Heart, and to make it merry 480. 528. 529, 589 To expell venemous vapours from the Heart 170. 301. 529. 530. 586 To procure Health 477. 478 To ease the Hemorrhodes or piles 513 580 For an Hoarsenesse 580. 584. 600 For the bots in Horses 606. 607 For the cough in Horses 595 To stay the Hickock 494 To purge flegmatick and watery Humours 329 I. FOr the yellow Iaundise 132. 134. 150 170. 275. 290. 531. 562 To make excellent Inke 431 To asswage hot Inflammations 362. 378 380 To helpe the Itching of the Head 477 To cure the Itch 380 K. TO heale exulcerated Kidneyes 533 L. TO stay a Laske or loosenesse 132. 323 421. 425. 446. 483. 562. 568. 570. 571 578. 595 For the Lepry and deformity of the skin 306 For chapt Lips and hands &c. 589 To tanne or thicken Leather 611 To clense the Liuer 484. 532 To coole and strengthen the Liuer 226 448. 486 Good for the Lunges and old coughes 134. 249. 300. 353. 364. 436. 448. 456 477. 502. 506. 513. 529. 530. 533. 600 608 To stay immoderate lust 499. 529 M. TO take away blew Markes 427. 500 502. 566 For the Measels and small pocks 170. 216 To straw on Meate 474. 476
For Melancholicke diseases 345. 450. 448 455, 510, 589 To comfort & strengthen cold and weake Members, 170, 290, 407, 427, 448, 449 453, 474, 477, 491, 598 To strengthen the Memory 427, 428 To keep Milke from curdling in the sto∣macke 482 To increase Milke in womens breasts 440 504 For the Morphew and other discolourings of the skin, 336, 396, 427, 566 For the Mother in women 344, 378 To keep garments from Moths 376, 611 To engender Moths 386 Good to wash and clense the Mouth 428 431, 446, 528, 557, 564, 598 To cure Vlcers in the Mouth 431 For a surfet of Mushroms 513 N. TO waste Nature 530 For a cricke in the Necke 66 To procure Neesing 189, 289 To stay bleeding at the Nose 396 O. TO open Obstructions 448, 484, 492, 532 To take away the offence of the smell of Onions, Garlicke, Leekes &c. 512 A remedie for them that haue taken Opium too liberally 289 P. TO ease Paines 290, 370 For the Palsie 241, 247 For the Plague or pestilentiall feuers 160, 170, 216, 275, 298, 328, 333, 335, 353, 483, 495, 513, 529, 530, 586, 595, 603. From whence Pitch is made 600 For the small Pocks 170, 216 An especiall Antidote against Poyson 134, 339, 353 Against the Poyson of the Helmet flower and other venemous herbes, and against all other infectious diseases 216, 333, 335, 353, 483, 529 Against the Poyson of the Spider Phalan∣gium, Scorpions, Serpents, and other venemous beasts 152, 301, 328, 333, 335, 402, 453. 477, 607 To take away the strength of certaine Poy∣sons 590 Poyson to all fourefooted beasts 402 For sweet Pouthers and sweet bags 189 421, 450, 453, 586 To Purge gently 284, 421, 566 To Purge vehemently, and stubborne di∣seases 189, 346, 360, 400, 562 To fatten Pullen 440, 442 R. TO restore Rauishment 600 To hinder young persons from grow∣ing Ripe too soone 132 Fences of Reedes as good as wals 510 To draw Rheume 214, 288, 292 To stay Rheumaticke distillations 287 288, 376, 427, 482 From whence Rossen is made 60 Good for Ruptures 602 S. TO put into Sawsages &c. 476, 477, 478, 480, 482 For Scaldings and burnings 362, 512 To take away Scars and markes 223, 247 336, 521, 568 For the Sciatica or paine in the hippes and ioynts 160, 442 To clense the head of Scurfe 134, 396 477, 479, 607 For the Scurvie 389, 510 To increase Seede 524 To ease paines in the Sides 532, 599 To cleare the Sight 134, 427, 479, 530 To comfort the Sinewes and ioynts 426 427, 477, 478, 480, 595, 599 To procure Sleepe 286, 362, 378, 499 To keep the body Soluble 333, 376, 421 480, 488, 495, 566, 578, 582 To clense the head of running Sores 134 607 For the shrinking of Sinewes 425, 426 599 To breake plague Sores 223, 300 Good for Sores and wounds 303, 446 600 Good for the Spleene 198, 288. 455. 456 474. 490. 502. 510. 530. 610 To draw out Splinters &c. out of the flesh 190 Good for Stitches 599 Good for the Stomacke and Liuer 134, 353 455, 473, 483. 491, 532 Hurtfull to the head and Stomacke 489 607 For cold and windy Stomacks 301, 455 476. 491, 495, 586 To coole an hot Stomacke 380, 486, 499. 525, 526, 528, 558, 560, 562, 566, 575, 584, 589 To warme a cold Stomacke 474, 477, 480 482, 495, 500, 515, 529, 586, 598 For the Stone in the reynes and kidneyes 230, 274, 293, 335, 370, 425, 492, 503. 504, 510, 521, 526, 532, 533, 566. 575. 582, 584. 607. 608. 611 For the Strangury 491 Good against Surfets 287
To cause Surfets 582 To prouoke Sweating. 264. 290. 532 To helpe Swounings 274. 301. 529 T. TO draw out Thornes &c. out of the flesh 190 Good for swollen Throats 300 To wash the mouth and Throate 357. 478 528. 598 For the Tooth-ach 134. 292 The poore mans Treakle 514 For Trageas or dredges 573 Common Turpentine from whence it is ta∣ken 600 Venice Turpentine from whence it is taken 600. 608 V. TO helpe Venery 66. 190. 193, 194. 502. 506. 524 To take away Vermine and Lice in the head &c. 477 To recouer the Voyce being lost 513 To cicatrise old Vlcers 275. 364 To clense Vlcers 492. 580 For running Vlcers 364. 595 To procure Vomiting 189. 439. 442. 532 To stay Vomiting 477. 480 To cure the biting of a Viper or Adder 302 To cause the Vrine to seeme blood 433 For the stopping of Vrine 132. 264. 353 376. 453. 456. 483. 491. 492. 502. 503 506. 508. 515. 525. 530. 532. 533. 582 602. 608 W. TO purge watery humours 329 To make sweete Waters 421, 450. 453 482 To breake Winde 301. 455. 476. 491, 494. 508. 515. 529. 530. 575. 586 To stay the longing of Women with childe 561. 564 For the Wormes 134. 216. 336. 345. 449. 482. 483. 500. 502. 532. 582. 607 Good to cure Wounds 241. 252. 364. 389 445. 446. 456. 480. 483. 492 Good Wound herbes 230. 231. 235. 241. 323. 383. 389. 406. Faults escaped in some Copies. FOlio 8. line 14. for own reade home. f. 12. l. 27. for trouble reade treble. f 42. l. 5. reade, like vnto that of a Lilly f. 66. l. 42. for read . f. 73. l. 37 for top of the flower, ead cup f. 134. l. 36. for composed reade com∣passed. f 150. l. 4. for hath, reade haue, and line 5. for is are. f. 173. l. 12. put out these wordes, the inside, in the begin∣ning of the line. f. 189. l. 38. reade Binuflorum ordinibus. f. 218. l. 19. reade golons, and line 28 pratensis. f. 272. line 36. read Pothos. f. 276 l. 12. Chelidonia. f. 281. l. 37. for hath, haue. and l 28. Mastuerzo. f. 284 l. 15. Vicenza. f. 287. l. 39. Citrina. f. 290. l. 39. reade prouoke, and, helpe. f. 329. l. 37. for Melancholicke, reade Flegmaticke. f. 330. 331. 333. reade Eryngium in all places f. 336. l. 8. reade, and not very flat. f. 356. l. 31. Americanum. f. 357. l. 26. Cervicaria. f. 38. l. 45. reade, before it can haue. f. 372. l. 9. blo out, except it. f. 389. for spockes, reade smockes f. 393 l. 3. in the margent for caeruleo, read pleno. f. 397. l. 10. reade dwarfe. f. 424. l. 45. Hirculus. f. 428. l. 20. Tarentina. f. 31. l. 10. Cyprium. l. 19. Amomum. f. 438. l. 17. for Doscorides, reade Theophrastus. f. 442. l. 3. for castings reade purgings. f. 509. l. 35. reade  f. 513. l. 24. transferre all that clause of Onions vnto the o her side, vnder the vse of Onions. f. 516. l. 37. trans∣ferre these words, [Bauhinus vpon Matthiolus calleth it Solanum tuberosum esculenium] vnto the former Potatoes of Virginia. f. 520. l. 13. for swelleth, read smelleth. f. 541. l. 51. reade, after your stockes raysed from stones. f. 566. l. 20. for as, read and. and l. 29. euery one. f. 567. l. 24. for Rice, read Rue. f. 575. l. 8. reade serue to be ministred to the sicke. f. 588 l. 3. Capandu. f. 594. l. 18. for facility, read faculty. f. 595. l. 39. reade Ricinus. f. 600. l. 4. Fuchsius LONDON, Printed by HVMFREY LOWNES and ROBERT YOVNG at the signe of the Starre on Bread-street hill. 1629.
