22396 99838196 2562
MANS LAST END, THE GLORIOVS VISI∣ON AND FRV∣ITION OF GOD. By Richard Sheldon Doctor in Divinity, one of his Maiesties Chaplines. 1 Ioh. 3. 2. Wee know that when he shall appeare wee shall be like him, for wee shall see him as he is. LONDON. Printed by WILLIAM IONES dwelling in Red-crosse-streete, 1634.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. DREAD SOveraigne, Sacred and divine is Royall MAIESTIE, and it is the glorie thereof to protect sa∣cred things. This my Meditation vpon Heavens Loadstone, the glorious vision & fruition of God, though in respect of the authour and the stile, it may seeme unworthy of your Ma∣iesties iudicious eye; yet in regard it is in it selfe asubiect most sacred, and sacredly handled (agree∣ing to the rule of holy faith) I humbly presume to crave from your Maiesty both prection, and gra∣cious acceptance of it; which my minde presumes, I shall most assuredly haue: Protection, because I humbly craue it, from the Defender of that faith, the happy end and fruite whereof, is the glorious vision and fruition of God: Gracious acceptance, because it cannot but be a subiect most acceptable to your religious and pious mind, which (like that of Moses) is daily looking on this most glorious
reward. For this (to the ioy of your people, and for the example of all greatnesse) Comes testified & confirmed, both by your Maiesties reverent at∣tention to the word Read or Preached; fervent and intentiue devotion to Gods prayses (in pray∣ers) celebrated; but especially by your Maiesties daily often times of prayers. O that the whole Britaine-Orbe, at least the whole Tribe of Levy therein, were composed and ordered, according to this your Maiesties example. Goe on glorious Prince, & let not your Hand cease to protect & enlarge the virgine-faith which yee professe, to raise up despised Discipline, (for the glory of our Church), to mainteyne iustice and iudgement, and with Clemency to establish your Throne. And that glorious God whom yee serue with feare & trembling, shall, and will in the end, bid you en∣ter into that his owne ioye, the glorious vision and fruition of himselfe. Amen. Your most Excellent Majesties loyall subiect and servant, Richard Sheldon.
To the Religious Reader. CHristian Reader whosoever thou art, into whose hands this Treatise may come; I advise thee that howsoever this diamond of thy felicity come thus rudely (yet clearly and truely) presented unto thee, thou make such good use of this and the like, that thou mayest happily in the end enjoy the glory it selfe. Medita∣ting hereon thou wilt easily see how degenerate thou art from thy owne Originall dignity, if by the contagion of unre∣pented sinne, thou deprive thy selfe of that gemme which God hath prepared for thee, and all those that feare him, and love his comming. Had the naturall Sages of the world knowne this end of man, whereas some of them, as the Gre∣cians called him a little world, an Earthly God: Others, as the Egiptians and their Trismegistus, the miracle of the world, they would in respect of the glory expected and to be revealed, have termed him the miracle of heaven, a glorious companion by grace, of majesty it selfe, thus entring into, and diving into, the Lords owne Ioy it selfe. But whence hath man this, but from the free grace of the Father? By whom hath hee this, but by the humble obedience of the Sonne to the Father? By what, all this? but by obedient faith in the Saviour; The first is the fountaine; the second, is the way and meane of this glory: the third is the condition without which, this glory is not obtained. O then having found this most precious diamond, and from whom it is; God the Father: By whom it is; Christ Iesus the Sonne: for whom it is: the faithfull and loving beleevers. Presse thou on to∣wards the marke, for the price of this high calling of God in Christ Iesus, the glorious vision and fruition of God himselfe. AMEN. Thine in CHRIST IESVS, RICHARD SHELDON.
THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOKE. Section 1. Sheweth joyntly wherein the nature and condition of an end and last end may consist. Sect. 2. Wherein is joyntly shewed by sundry argu∣ments and cleare demonstrations, that the ob∣ject of humane felicity or last end of man, can∣not be riches, pleasures, nor honour; taken seve∣rally, or joyntly. pag. 9. Sect. 3. Shewing that God onely is the last end of man, and his finall happinesse. pag. 18. Sect. 4. God being the object of mans happinesse, and his last end, it is shewed by what union, he is knitte, and united to the Soule, and thereby the Soule made happy. pag. 25. Sect. 5. Wherein is more particularly handled, in what action, or actions, the last happinesse of man, doth specially consist. pag. 50. Sect. 6, Conteines certaine observations, touching the glorified bodies of the beatified and their glo∣rious qualities. pag. 63. Sect. 7. Wherein is breefely and in generall laid downe the meanes and way, whereby eternall happines is to be attained. pag. 92.
MANS LAST END, THE GLORIOVS VISION AND FRVITION OF GOD. First Section, shewing Ioyntly wherein the nature and condition of an end and last end may consist. THE nature and essence of an end in generall, is to be that for which another thing is intended, as a meanes to attaine the same end. OrWherein the nature of an end doth . thus, An end, is that which mo∣veth to motion or action: which respect and formality of an end, in the last end requires further, that it be that for which all other things are intended, and it not for any one of them singly taken, no, nor for all of them taken together and unitedly: Whence from by ine∣vitable consequence it followeth, that the last end of man is, that to which all the actions of man, yea man himselfe is to be referred; as being that, by which and in which, his full rest and last per∣fection is intended. Herehence it also followeth most clearely; first, that the last end of man, must needs be farre better than man, and all that is in man; as being that which must give full
perfection and rest to man, and all that is in man. The end finall is ever better than that which is for the end; the house is better than the lime, timber and stone, which are for the house; and man better than the house, for whose use the house is, so the end of man better then man, Secondly, the last end of man must be such as doth fully satiate and quiet all the desires of man; for that is the last end of every thing, which when it is had, giveth perfect rest and re∣pose. Austin, Truly wee say that to be the last end of man, not wherewith he is so consumed as that he ceaseth to be, but that wherewith he is so perfited that he may fully and perfectly be; By which it may ap∣peare, that the inordinate love of mans owne selfe, is farthest off, from being the last end of a mans owne selfe; for an inordinate mind is ever a punishment and affliction to it selfe. In Austins phrase; God hath made us for himselfe, and unquiet is mans heart untill it attaine him. This nature of an end thus breifly laid open, two things will clearely apeare, The first, that man in all his acti∣onsMan hath an end in all his actions. hath some speciall end, againe, that of him∣selfe and all his actions he hath a last and totall end. Concerning the first, that man hath an end in all his actions, what man that hath the least spaeke of humane knowledge in him is not per∣swaded? yea more; who hath arightly thought of man and all other earthly creatures, can other∣wise thinke, but that man, onely man, doth pre∣sent unto himselfe some speciall end in all his
actions; yea a last end, for which and the con∣secutiō of which, he doth and intends all he either doth or intendeth. Senslesse creatures, worke not otherwise too and for their ends, but for that without all sense or knowledge, they by a natu∣rall poyse bend and are inclined to their ends. Sensitiue creatures worke too and for their ends, though not knowne to them under the formality of an end, yet apprehended by them as the thing unto which for their rest and perfection their nature doth encline them, so that they are rather driven and enforced by a naturall propension then moved by apprehension and cogitation. This truth if dayly experience did not make ma∣nifest, yet cleare reason doth evince it; for there is not any creature whether sensitive or senslesse which hath not some inclination and proporti∣on whereby it is wayed to some speciall good; which good being that for the attaining whereof it is inclined, we must and doe call the same an end, either partiall or totall. And although all sensitiue and senslesse crea∣tures have one and the same last remote end, not knowne to themselves, but intended by God, who hath made all things for himselfe, yet theirFro. 16.  speciall and peculiarends, are severall and distin∣guished; being no other than a naturall conser∣vation or enlarging of themselues: A very per∣fect paterne of that inordinate love, (the very stones and mortar wherewith the tower of Babell to the contempt of God is built) which every in∣ordinate man hath of himselfe: for as the sensitive
creature hath no other end than by satisfying his lust to conserve it selfe, so the inordinate man hath no other end, but the selfe content and fruiti∣on of himselfe; he referrs all things, yea God him∣selfe and his religion (asmuch as may lye in his power) to himselfe and for his owne content; which is the greatest iniquity, to use the things which ought to be injoyed, and to injoy those things, which ought onely to be used. And although these brutish sensitiue and Animall men have no other end of themselves but themselves, Lovers of themselues more than of God, yet God ordeines2 Tim. 3. 2. Pro. 16. 4. Ier. 46. 11. them to another end, the evill day, the day of anger and of slaughter. It being thus apparent, that sensitive vnreaso∣nable senslesse and inanimate creatures, have their severall inclinations, either innate or upon apprehension, by which they are urgently and necessarily carried to their severall ends; more apparent it must be, that man in such his actions as are humane, is swayed in and unto them all, upon the apprehension of some good by him intended and prosecuted, wherein the formality and nature of an end doth properly consist. And we must not onely thinke, that man in his severall particular actions, hath some particular good things after which he aimerh as the ends of the same, but we are further to understand, that every man hath some totall compleat last end, both of himselfe, and all his actions, in things which are ordeined one for another, as are the actions of man, every man; there cannot be pro∣cesse
into an infinity; In causes finall, or ends, there cannot be progresse infinite, say the Schooles, and the reason is manifest; for an end, is not an end but as it moveth: now if there were an infinitie in the ends, there could be no mooving nor motion at all; for that is infinite which never can be passed over, nor mooved unto, either in finite time or by a finite cause: And againe, second cau∣ses mooue not unlesse they be mooved; but over an infinite distance there is no mooving; so then if there were an infinite progresse in causes finall, there could be no mooving at all, and therefore of necessity it must be graunted, that man hathHow every man intendeth some end. some last totall compleate end, to which he or∣deineth himselfe and all his actions. Only it is to be observed, that every man doth so ordeine himselfe and his actions to some last full end, ei∣ther vainely, interpretatively, and by vaine ima∣gination, or else, truely, and deliberately by sett resolution. I said vainely and interpretative∣ly, vainely, thereby to designe the impious and ungodly, who upon vaine imaginations, doe pre∣sett unto themselves some vaine fading object, as their end and last happinesse; I said interpreta∣tively, for how soever the wicked and ungodly,Psal. 1. whose thoughts and affections are scattered, as dust before the wind, do in words pretend God, to be their last end, yet seeing they vainely solace them∣selves in the fruition of the creature, contrary to the will of God; and thereby commit wilfull sinne (which is a separation wall betwixt God andIsa. 59▪ themselves) they are interpreted to make the crea∣ture
and not the creator their last end; and ac∣cordingly their God is said to be their belly, theirPhi. 3. 19. Col. 3. 4. Luc. 12. 19. gold their idoll, their store houses and barns the centers of their rest and repose; by which meanes (what soever else they may presume or pretend) they are for all eternity, to be separated from God. Againe I said (vainely) for how vaine is it forBy vaine ima∣gination. any man to make that his last end, which ought not to be any end at all, or that to be last end of man (to weet, delightfull sinne) the end whereof is hell and destruction; for the wages of sinne isRom. 6. death, death eternall. O, how vainely then walke sinners in the vanity of their sense; having theirEples. 4. 18. vnderstandings obscured through the blindnesse of their hearts, which is in them. Excellently saith the Apostle, that the understanding is obscured, through the blindnesse of the heart; for so blind are they that though they love sinne immoderat∣ly, yet they presume that they serue God obse∣quiously, O the lamentable (yet unlamented) blindnesse of willfull sinners! O the fearefull se∣verity of God, thus chastening presumption! Austen fitly to this purpose, If any robbing, shouldIn Psa. 17. thereby in the very act lose his sight, every man would say that Gods judgement was present: but having lost the eyes of our minds, we thinke God to be both sparingIndg. 16. 27. and indulgent. Sampson could not be brought to grind in the mill before his eyes were plucked out; so, so, neither could the Devill draw men to so servile a bondage of sinne, to place happinesse in that which inevitably leadeth to death and de∣struction,
unlesse he had first deprived him of the light of his mind. I said above that the last end in some is truely, directly and deliberatly inten∣ded; to shew the very manner, how the true ser∣vants of God doe preset and prefixe vnto them∣selves God and his glory for the last totall and compleat end of themselves, and all their acti∣ons, that whether they eate or drinke, or what else so∣ever1 Cor. 10. 32. they do in word or worke, they do all to the glory of God, alwayes and in al things giuing thāks to GodCol. 3. 17. and the Father by Iesus Christ. But I must not on to fast, and involue this truth with obscurity; I re∣peate againe these words Truly, directly and deli∣beratly,Sap. 7. 5. Truly for that into feined soules and deceitfull minds, wisdome will not enter, but onely unto such as thinke of God in goodnesse, and in the sincerity of their heart do seeke him. Directly, to shew that the Archer aimeth not more directly at the white in the shooting, than the servant of God doth looke on God in working. To him his soule walketh, on him his soule wayteth, after him his soule thir∣steth,Psal. 3. . ▪ yea to him both soule and flesh is manifest∣ly fastned and fixed. I say deliberately, to shew, that the soule not onely upon a first motion and as it were by an impetuosity of sanctified nature, is bent and inclined to God, but that vpon cleare consideration he doth most fervently pursue and intend after God, only God. That of the Schooles is most true: The causality of the end is the reason of all, because the first that mooveth and the moover of all other causes; So in God, so in all intelligent creatures, the end
prefixed mooves all: which end in God (though without himselfe he ordeined one thing for ano∣ther; Grace for Glory, damnation for sinne, (only sinne) is no other than himselfe, his owne glory; mooving himselfe to doe all things for the same. In like sort, the end is that, which first mooveth in all intelligent creatures; how then can it be, but that the end is truly, directly & deliberatly intended? whenas for the attaining of it all other things are intended, it being the good one that guids and directs all. Againe, say the Schooles and truly, The end is pursued without measure, but those things which are for the end, according as the further and con∣duce unto the end; how then shall not the last end be pursued directly and deliberatly, yea with aMat. 22. 33. sweet kind of impetuossity and violence of Grace, with the whole heart, all the soule, with the whole mind, and with all the strength of him, who arightly appre∣hends the end. This David feelingly professesPsal. 42. 1. whē as he thus breathes out. Even as the Hart pan∣teth after the fountaines of waters, so my soule thirsteth and longeth after thee O my God. Herehence it is, that in so much every thing is the more perfect, in how much it is more efficaciously ordered and directed to the end: and that as in naturall mo∣tions, the neerer the end the swifter the motions are, so in motions of grace and supernall, the nee∣rer to God, the swifter and the more sweetly vio∣lent and efficacious the motions are. So, so the soule which living only desireth God, delightedPsal. 73. 25. on God, dying and parting from the body, longeth
and panteth only after God, nothing but God. Yet againe saith the Schooles, and truly: That all things which (as meanes) are for, and conduce to the end, are not intended nor prosecuted but out of a deliberate and full intention of the end. So then in man there can be no deliberate actions but such as are intended either for the true and happy end of all, God; or else for such imagined and sup∣posed ends which the corruption of man presets vnto himselfe. Austen excellently; That is the end of all our good, for which all other things are loved, and it for it selfe. Thus have wee shewed (though breefely, yet sufficiently) that man, every man hath not only in all his severall and particular actions some spe∣ciall privat ends, but further also, that man, every man hath some compleate and finall end both of himselfe and of all his actions: But what is the last end of man? THE SECOND SECTION. Wherein is ioyntly shewed by sundry arguments and cleare demonstrations, that the obiect of humane felicity or last end of man, cannot be riches, pleasures nor honours; taken severally, or ioyntly. THough common experience excludes from being the object of humane felicity or last
end of man, that three headed monster, concupis∣cence1 Ioh. 2. 16. of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life, (joyntly or severally taken) wherein the Apostle confines, all that is excellent, delightfull, or pro∣fitable in the world; yet by way of prelude to our following discourse, I have thought good to adde a few morall reasons and demonstrations eight in a perfect number, that these three which are (formally or reductively) all that is excellent, pleasant or proffitable in the world, whether ta∣ken vnitedly together, or apart, are not the last end of man or the obiect of his felicity, for which1 Reason. purpose I argue thus first: The object of mans felicity, or last end of man, must, in respect of that which is cheefe in man (to weet, the soule of man) be so perfect that it must give full contentThe last end of man must give full content to man. and rest thereunto; that is, to man as man; But out alasse! who ever, (whose soule hath beene en∣dowed with least sparke of wisdome) hath found full content in riches, honour or pleasures; against which Salomon the wisest amongst all the wise, exclaimes; O the vanity of vanities and all vanity.Ecl. 1. Yea so contrary is the operation of these to the wisdome of the soule, that to surfet with these, is to pie in reason, to languish in piety, andEph. 4. 18. with deepest ignorance to have the soule obscu∣red and darkned. And surely by these Occasionaly the God of this world doth blind the hearts of such as doe perish. And in this respect, is Sahan called God2 Cor. 4. 4. of this world; bcause by these three (as it were the life and marrow of the world) (pride, riches, pleasures, glory, &c.) He hath abusively rule
and reigneth over the children of misbeleefe and disohedience. Secondly: the last end or felicity of man, mustSecond reason be so good, that no man may use the same ill; but these both joyntly and severally taken; are such as by the possessiones of them, may be used so ill, that for the abusing of them, they may with the reprobate glutton perish eternally; yea they are soLuk. 16. 15. fit and apt to be ill used, that they carry with them a crosse barre of difficulty, if (not of impossibility,) of being well used, or that salvation may be obteined by the posessioners of them; for so we are to understand that of the Sonne of God; ItMat. 19. 14. is easier for a Camell, to passe through the eye of a nee∣dle, than for a rich man, to enter into the King∣dome of Heaven. Some of the wiser Ancients, to expresse the difficulty, which pleasures, honour, and riches, do bring against the exercise of ver∣tue, have feigned a Virgin (by name Aclanta) of such admirable beauty, that the Worthies of that time, were all enamoured with the love of her: but as her beauty was surpassing great, so was her swiftnesse in running farre greater, so that in running shee could not be overtaken, by any of the Valiants of those times; though she had often proffered her selfe to be his, who in running could out go her: At last, one Hippomenes, pre∣sents himselfe unto her, who that the better he might obteine his purpose, in out running the faire Aclanta, had secretly provided three balls of gold, the which, one after one, as they were in their course of running, he casts before her; for the
taking up of which the beautifull maid makes such stayes and so many stops, that shee was out∣runne by Hippomenes, and so was obteined of him. Now who is this faire Atlanta, but the soule of man, adorned with sundry heavenly graces? whose power (by grace,) was to have not sinned, but to have stood and continued in grace; had shee not beene overtaken and over prised, in the course of her obedience, by the infernall Hp∣pomenes;First apple of Pleasures; the forbidden fruit: the 2 of pride you shal be like God: the 3 of Covetousnesse, knowing good and evill. Gen: 3▪ 4. 5. who, casting before her, the three blls of riches, pleasures, and honoures, letted her from the attaining of that glory, and happinesse for which shee was made and designed. Thus are riches eagerly desired, and heaped up for the hurt of the possessioner; So are honours, the bel∣lowes of Satan, blowing up the fire of arrogancy; So are pleasures, the snares and gives of Satan, wherewith he leades sensuall minds, captives to that place of torments, where such a measure of torments shall be given according as the guilty shall be found, to have exceeded in the riot of their pleasures. The third reason I frame thus. The happinesseThird reason. of man, must be such that as no man can use it ill, so must it not have any evill unavoydable accom∣panying and adjoyned with it. But what sweet, proffitable or glorious thing is there in the world, which hath not ever, some evill either, of bitter∣nesse, or disproffit, or dishonour, or infirmity of the body, or anxiety of the minde, intermixt therewith? that whosoever shall sett his soule, upon any thing, or all the things that are in this
world, he cannot but be thought to have received his soule in vaine, & resting upon vanity, what hap∣pinesse for such a soule, to have gained the world, ifMat. 16. 26. it perish with the world? and what a felicity to have gained the world, when as all that is in the world is but a puffe of vanity? Seneca very excellently, O how ridiculous is the boundes of mortall men? it is but a point, which with sword and fier, is devided into so many nations; above there are infinite spaces, into the possession whereof the soule may be admitted. Fourthly, I argue thus; The last end of man,Fourth reason. (because the last, and because of man, who in his soule is immortall, and never dieth) must be also immortall, never dye nor fade away; but who seeth not, by dayly experience, that of the belo∣ved Apostle to be most true: The world and the lust1 Ioh. 2. 17. thereof passeth away? If then that be true (as it is most true) that, that cannot be true happines, the eter∣nity whereof is not certeine; then assuredly, that cannot be the matter and object of true happinesse, whose instability, and dayly mutability is most certeine. Salomon having had a full taste (even to sa∣tiety) of all the glorious delicacyes of the world, cries out with a most humble note and loud crie, O the vanity of vanityes; and all things vanity; O the vanity of vanityes! Vanity then, and most vaine, should the last end of man then be, if placed in such vanities of honours, riches, or pleasures. Fifthly, the last end naturall of man, is thatFifth reason. whereunto by God (as Author of nature) he is ordeined; the last end supernaturall, is that where∣unto God (as the Author of Grace) hath designed
and ordeined him: But cleare it is, and it needs no proofe, that all the good terrene things of the world, cannot be the end supernaturall, for which man was made; and as easily it is shewed, that they cannot be the end naturall of man; for as it hath beene already prooved, they let and hinder man, from the atcheiving of his supernaturall ends: But as Grace, hurts not, but perfects nature; so nature, as nature (though as vitiated it hinders) hinders not Grace, but being elevated and renewed by Grace, is by Grace made able to be concurrent with Grace. O with how few things is nature ordinate content! Socrates the wise and temperate, obser∣ving the superfluity of humane cares, cries out, O how many things are there which I do not want! A∣gaine, do we not see, that honours, riches, espe∣cially pleasures, are very frequently attendant up∣on those, in whom nature is rather destroyed and corrupted, than in part impaired or diminished? Of such manner of men the Apostle Iude very fily: That in those things which they naturally know,Iud. epist v. 10 (not as man but as brute beasts) in them they are corrupted. It is true, that as God often favours the famous in giving them wealth, so sinn for most part infatuates where God giveth wealth, so that the wealthy as they often glory inordinately in honour; so they surfet immoderately in Pleasures. And where are the persons that do not so? Let the Iovinianists of latter times be an example for all. And who observes not; that this tendes not to the perfection but to the corruption of nature? Sixtly, the last end of man must bee immediat∣lySixth reason.
attained, possessed, injoyed by the best and cheefest actions, which are in man, to weet, the actions of the cheefest powers, and faculties of the soule; the will, and understanding. But riches, pleasures, honour, fame glory, are immediately apprehended, felt, and injoyed, by the outward senses of man; and do only appertaine to the soule, by the way of approvance or rejectiō; for the good and usefull service of her body, and sensuall parts; for the soule, being spirituall and immateriall, can∣not have, or receive any immediate impressions, from things corporall, and materiall. Which be∣ing so, and most clearely so; how idle were it, in these corporall and materiall things, to place the last end of man, and to make them, the object of his happinesse and felicity? Seventhly, as the cheefest actions of the soule,Seventh reason must be the immediate apprehension, possession, and fruition, of those things, which must be theThe last end of man must bee the cheefest good that man can attaine vn∣to. last end of man; so the cheefest good and best thing which the soule, can attaine unto by know∣ledge; can embrace by love; can injoy by delight; must be his last end and the object of his happi∣nesse & felicity. Now to thinke of any other thing for this purpose besides God, were the greatest do∣tage, that might be imagined: For, not speaking onely of things sublunary, but even the celestiallGen. 1. 17. themselves; what are they all, but either images (as men and Angells) or footings, or shadowes ofPsa. 19. the creator himselfe, as all other creatures are? And what a vanity were it, to thinke, that the I∣mage of the Creator, should have for the object
of her happinesse and last end, those things, which are onely as footings or darke foote impressions of the Creator? Or how vaine to thinke, that those things which are made for the use and ser∣vice of man (as all terrene things were) should be the end of man? Sweetly was this understood by most Intelligent David, who ballancing all things that were in the heavens above, or on the earth belowe; cries out, What is there for me in hea∣ven?Psal 73. And besides thee what would I upon earth, theGen. 2. 9. Psa. 23. 25. 26 God of my heart, and portion for ever? As if he should have said, O thou my God, thou, thou thatA most divine elevation of Davids spirit. art my ever and last end; the very joy and hap∣pinesse of my hart; how glorious thou in the heavens above? and what happinesse is there pro∣vided for me in thee? above? how then may I, or can I, take full content or delight in any thing that is here below? Basill elegantly, compares them, that fixe their hearts upon any earthly good thing whatsoever, (appretiating them before God) to him, who hearing some exquisite and most di∣vine Doctor, preaching, or teaching out of a chaire▪ standing in the Sunne, should (neglecting both the Teacher, his words, and gestures) attend and observe only the shadow of the teacher, and such severall motions, or gestures, as are represented thereby; So he very excellently, accounting all the best, and good creatures of God (being com∣pared to God,) to be no more, nor better (indeed they are not somuch) than the shadow of the tea∣cher, and his gestures, (represented therein) are, be∣ing compared to the Teacher himselfe, and unto
his actions of life. Eightly, and lastly, as the understanding ofEight reason. man, is by nature apt, and hath an apprehensive power to apprehend all that is cognoscible, or mayGod onely can be the full ob∣iect of mans knowledge and love. be knowne or vnderstood, vnder the condition of truth; so the will of man, (whose proper object is good) as by nature it embraceth nothing but what is good, or under the apparance of good; so it hath a propension and inclination, to pursue all good, either to be attained dispersedly in severall creatures; or in some one fountaine and roote of all goodnesse: which inclinations, both of the will and understanding, unlesse they be fully sa∣tisfied and quieted, by that cheefest good, and purest truth (which is, and are the last end, and object of their happinesse) they shall never be found, truly to have attained their last end and finall happinesse. But if we consider, the most glorious, of Gods creatures; in no one; no, in no one million of them, can be found, all that may be understood by the understanding; or be desired and embraced by the will; and consequently, no one of them; nor no infinite multitude of them toge∣ther, can be the full object of mans last end, and happinesse: no; God, God alone is this purest truth, and cheefest good, the full and compleate object, both of the wills and understandings, of all his Intelligent creatures; who being presented to the beautified Soules, enabled with the light of glo∣ry, to see him as he is in himselfe, even face to face; how unenarrable, unspeakeable and incompre∣hensible, is the joy of such Soules, so intuitively
beholding? so joyously possessing of their God, and most sweetly delighting in their God? Of this Ambrose sweetly; What good better then this good, What felicity greater then this, to live to God, in God, and to live of God? Bernard like himselfe divinely:Barnard sem, 31 in Cantia. To whom God appeareth, they will see nothing more desiredly; nor can see nothing more delightfully: when then, will either desire of seeing lothe, or sweetnesse withdraw herselfe, or truth deceive, or aeternity fale, to whom, opportunity of seeing, and a will to see is graunted for ever and ever? how then shall their felicity not be full? for nothing is either wanting to them, that alwayes see, or is tedious to them, who have a desire al∣wayes to see: but this vision is not of this present life, but is reserved for the last end of man. THIRD SECTION. Shewing that God onely is the last end of man, and his finall happinesse. VVHen I thinke of that precept of God, knowne by the lawe of nature, directed by the law of Moyses, renewed in the law of grace; Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,Deut. 6. 5. with all thy soule, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, I cannot but make a speedy resolution,Mat. 22. 37. who, and what is the last end of mans heart, his soule, his strength, and his mind; for if God be to be beloved with the whole heart, soule, minde, and strength of man, it were a vanity and a do∣tage, to ke any other last end for man then God.
Nay love, as saith Austen (very excellently) Is my weight and poyse, with it, and by it I am carried whi∣ther to soever I am carried. A totall and compleat love then of the whole heart, Soule, and minde, of man, and all that is in man, cannot other whither carry him, or leade him, then to that which is the very center of his rest, and happinesse. Thou fast made us O Lord for thee, and unquiet is our heart till it come to thee: and Boetius very fitly: We must of ne∣cessity confesse, that God is the very blessednesse of man. But when we affirme, that God is the last end of man and his finall happinesse, we must for the clearer understanding of the same, distinguish thus: the last end of man and his happinesse, may beA necessary di∣stinction. considered in two sorts; either the last end (which) or the last end (wherewith;) or thus in other termes; the objective beatitude of man, or the formall beatitude of man. I explaine my selfe: The end, (which) is that, which is the very thing, where in the soule of man, doth finally rest, and eternally joy it selfe: the end (wherewith) are the cheifest action or actions; operation or operati∣ons of the soule, wherewith the end attained is in∣joyed, and possessed: In like sort, the objective beatitude, is the very object, whereon these cheife actions are exercised, which the Soule seeing and enjoying, is thereby made happy; Beatitude for∣mall, is the very seeing, enjoying and possessing of this object. We may take some familiar exam∣ples hereof; To the avaritious Person (who should indeed have only God for his lott and por∣tion) his end, which is his Mony, and whatsoever
else, is for Money estimable; his end (wherewith) is his base whoording up, increasing, and posses∣sion of the same: The Intemperate mans end (which is every voluptuous thing,) he takes plea∣sure in his end (wherewith) is his solace, pleasure, and delight which he takes therein even so the last end of man (wherewith) is the adeption and frui∣tion of God; the end (which) is God himselfe, so injoyed and possessed. It is true, that God who is his owne end essen∣tially,God happy by himselfe. both objective and formall; is not happy by any any thing that is without himselfe, or that is dependently of himselfe, but as he is essentially his owne existence and being, so is hee essentially his owne happy being: Austen excellently; what so∣ever is in God, is God, there is no accidentall com∣paction or composition; So then God being hap∣py in himselfe, and by himselfe; himselfe is both the object of his happinesse, and his owne formall happinesse. But creatures intelligent, to weet, men and Angells, having not an infinite and essen∣tiall happinesse, but a happinesse only by parti∣cipation, can have the same by no other meanes, nor wayes, then by some limited operations, and actions of their intellectuall parts, understanding and will; which actions and operations must needs have some happy and singular object, wherein and whereon they are conversant and exercised; which object also must or can, fully satiate, con∣tent, and glad the soule; which that it is God, the one onely, cheefe, and infinite good of the soule, is so cleare and evident, that it were dotage to
stand long in the proofe of the same. And though it be most cleare, that God, onely God, is this last object, which onely must and can give happinesseRom. 1. 11. unto the Soule, yet so obscured are the hearts of some foolish men, that though they cannot say in their hearts there is no God, yet they say that God is not the last end of their soules, nor the object of their happinesse. But O that they would consider, and seriously ponder in their soules, oh, how easily should they finde in God all reasons, that might moove them to take him, and to embrace him on∣ly for their last end; and the totall object of their happinesse? Where there is an infinite pyle of wood kindled, it cannot bee but the fier kindled may burne for an infinite time, and without end; how then shall not the soule infinitely, and for everIn God is all that is to bee beloved. burne with love; and joy it selfe with delight; which hath God (in whom there is an infinite abysse of goodnesse, power, Majesty, beawty) for her present and happy object? O thou soule. Whosoevers thou art, and wheresoever thou art; O that thou wouldest seriously consider, this thy last and best good, the very place and center of thy sefe; consider seriously, whether there can be any perfect happy place of rest for thy selfe be∣sidesGen. 1. 27. God? Art not thou made to the Image and likenesse of God? Then thy essentiall and totall dependency is from God, then thy totall inclina∣tion and propension ought onely to be to God; Inquire into thy soule and aske whose Image it is, whose inscription is ingraved therein? And thou shalt finde that it is only God, it is onely he that
hath marked thee, and signed thee for himselfe yea immediately for himselfe. O the honours of intelligent creatures, by their institution to have God only God, for their last, and immediate end, wherewith they must be eternally conversant; and to have him for the full and compleate object of their happinesse, in the contemplation of whose beauty they must be eternally exercised. O the best of all best parts; for by participation, it is theMat. 25. 27. Luk. 10. 42. Psa. 73 26 very joy of the Lord himselfe; O choose this thou my soule, it shall never be taken from thee; the God of my heart and portion forever. O that my very flesh and soule would exult and rejoyce after this living God for ever; O the sweetest water springs; my soule, thirst thou after them for ever. It is said of those, that love God sincerely and make him the object of their hearts in this life,1 Ioh. 4. 7. that they abide in God, and God in them; holily and graciously; O how joyous, holy, and gra∣cious then in that glorious estate, shall our abi∣ding in God, and his abiding in us bee, to our soules for the dayes of his owne aeternity in himselfe and our Coaeternity with himselfe! But in this last end of man, and object of his happinesse, we are to consider, that which is observable in every object, to weet, in what formality or formall respect, God is found to be the object of mans happinesse, and felicity; whether in the formality of goodnesse,To what for∣mall respect God is the ob∣iect of mans happinesse. as he is infinitely good; or in the formality of power, as he is omnipotent; or of knowledge, as he is omniscious; or of wisdome, as he infinitely wise; or of truth, as he is infinitely cognoscible and in∣telligible;
or justice, as he is infinitely just, faith∣full in his promises, and upright in his judgements mercifull in his rewards; or in the formality of any other of his attributes; vnity, simplicity, veri∣ty, &c. Wherein (the observation and question being novell and new) I had farre rather heare a master, then be a teacher my selfe. Sure I am, that the beautified and happy, see God in his owne very1 Ioh. 3 2. presence face to face, for so the beloved Disciple (who sucked this truth, from the brest of truth) hath himselfe pronounced: wee shall see him (saith hee) as hee is; not obscurely as Timeus and Simoni∣desPlato in dialog. Philosophers: who both, being required to speake what God was, the first answers onely by negation: shewing what God was not, but not what he was: the other the more he considersGod seene by the beatified as he is in him selfe. God, the longer time he requires to answer the King what God was: but wee shall see him with eyes intuitive as he is in himselfe. A most pure and perfect Act: all existence and being: all essence and nature, and essentiall existence, and Act most pure, without all manner of potentiallity, and im∣perfection. And because whatsoever is in God, is God: it cannot bee, but that hee who seeth God must needs see all that is in God: his power, ju∣stice, wisdome, bonity, purity, verity, which seeing, hee seeth them all to be the very deity and God∣head it selfe, wherewith he is unspeakeably de∣lighted. But in what respect, is God formally the object of beautified Soules? That of God toExod. 33. 19. Moyses, I will shew thee all good: may seeme to per∣swade, that God in the formality of the cheefest
good, is the object of mans happinesse: That of Christ, This is aternall life, that they may know theeIoh. 17 3. the onely true God, in the formality of unity and verity: that of St. Iohn, we shall see him as he is, un∣der1 Ioh. 3. 2. the formality of his infinite essence, and na∣ture; that of the Apostle, face to face, under the for∣mality1 Cor. 13. 12. of Majesty and glory; so diversly, seemes this truth to be delivered and distinguished unto us; yet with reverence my imperfect meditation and apprehension telles me, If I misconceave not, according to that of God to Moyses, I will shew thee all good, that God under the formality of infinite∣lyExod. 33. 19. good: good, as in power he is able to protect, wisdom to direct, justice to guide and govern, boun∣tyGod under the formality of good the ob∣iect of mans happinesse. to enrich and satiate, but especially as he is in every respect infinitely good in himselfe, is the formall object of mans Felicity, and last Happi∣nesse. And this is all that I can devoutly meditate or dare religiously affirme, of this unspeakeable mystery: whereinto to dive overcuriously, and to be a rash searcher of majesty, should deserve rather confusion then illustration. Cherubins and Seraphins beholding the divine majesty, out of a trembling re∣verence,Isa. 6. 2. doe cover their faces: what ought wee then do who do dwell in houses of clay? I shutIob. 4. 19. up this poynt with this reverend note; An Alleluja,Rev. 19. 1. 3. a song of admiration beseemes Gods majesty in Hierusalem above, but silence of admiration and devotion beseemes Gods Sanctuary here on earth below, and yet not such silence and admiration, as must be altogether ocious, and idle, as though man were in this life onely to consider God con∣fusedly
in his creatures; for I understand that of Austen of a more cleare and perfect know∣ledge, to be had even in this life; though not so fully as in the next; Man was created, that heAugust. de dili∣gendo Deo cap. 13. might know his cheefest good God; knowing, might love him; loving him, might possesse him; posses∣sing him, might enjoy him. For the further clea∣ring whereof, we observe in our fourth Section. THE FOVRTH SECTION. God being the object of mans happinesse, and his last end, it is shewed by what union, he is knitt, and united to the Soule, and thereby the Soule made happy. THe object of mans happinesse, and his last end, being found to be God, onely God; it resteth further to be considered, by what reall either union, or application, God is united to man, so that he doth enjoy God, as the present object of his happinesse and last end. And here∣inSome glorious union necessary that the beati∣fied may enioy God. first most cleare it is, that some glorious uni∣on is required for the same: for God being in all his creatures, high and lowe; Intelligent and unintelligent, Sensitive and senselesse, in three generall sorts and manners; To weet, by hisThree generall presenion of God in h creatures. existence, presence, and power; by his existence, intimely and immediately coexisting with them or ather inexisting in them: by his presence, to  mely
intimely beholding them, and every circum∣stance of them, with his all-seeing eyes: by his power, working in, with, and by them all; it can∣not bee (I say) but that God, being in the soules of the beatified, as the object of their happi∣nesse and last end; must needes bee in them, in a more peculiar sort and manner, then he is gene∣rally in all his other creatures. And this glori∣ous union, and application, must be by the meanes of some new glorious qualities, giftes or habits imparted to the beatified soules: for God being immutably, vnchangeably and essen∣tiallyNo change in God. in himselfe alwayes one & the same and in the same manner (for with him there is no vicissi∣tudeIacob 1. 17. or course of changing; being alwayes one, he is what he is) all the change that is, must be inExod. 3. 14. the glorified and beatified Soules. Wherein if wee will arightly consider, there is no repug∣nancy nor difficulty at all to be found. For asGod in a more speciall sort in the regenerate then he is in the unregene∣rate Eph. 1. 6. Gala. 6 15. 2 Cor. 6 6. Apoc. 3. 20. God is truely said by the meanes of the super∣naturall gifts of faith, charity, grace and such like, to be in the regenerate in a more peculiar sort then he was in them, before thy were regenerated (for in the regenerate he walkes, Dwells, and feastes as in his houses, temples, and Paradises of pleasure, but on the unregenerate he looketh as yet distant from him;) So likewise God with, and in his glorified creatures in heaven; must needes bee vnited, in a more glorious and speciall manner then he was united with them on earth, when they were onely regenerate, not as yet glorified. For the clearer understanding of
which truth, wee are to make some speciall ob∣servations, and suppositions: * first I suppose, that this formal happinesse, or immediate meanesThe glorious union can bee no extrinsecall thing. thereof (which by a generall name I have called union) cannot be any extrinsecall thing, without the soules of the happy; For this union being required as a meanes for the attaining and con∣secution of God (which is extrinsecall, and out∣existent in respect of an infinite naturall distance to the soule,) if this union, should be any thing that is extrinsecall to the soule; then should there be required somewhat else to make it inherent and intrinsecall in the soule, or else wee must proceed into an infinity, untill wee shall finde somewhat inhaesiue, and intrinsecall in the soule, whereby God may intimely be united unto the same. Againe, this union, and formall happi∣nesse,Formall happy∣nesse requires an inhaerent union. maketh the beatified, happy not onely by imputation; but intrinsecally and most inward∣ly happy, and consequently, the same must needs be inherent and in-existent in their soules. For cleare it is, whatsoever thing is extrinsecall to another, as it maketh no reall impression in it; so it cannot give any formall but onely an ex∣trinsecallAn extrinsecall cannot make a formall deno∣mination a inherent. denomination unto it; by the way of improper denomination and imputation onely; which is no more nor no other, then a meere relation extrinsecall, and it cannot be otherwise. For, for example, how is it possible that for such beauty which is without the face, and not in the face, the face should be formally denomina∣ted beautifull? The denominations then, which
are of this kind extrinsecall, are like to the d∣minations which are attributed to a ,  being situate upon the right hand or left hand of the passenger, that goeth by it. According∣ly; if this formall happinesse, should not be in∣haerently intrinsecally in the beatified soules, then should they, not formally, but only extrin∣secally be denominated happy thereby; how , shall they be found to be happy really, and in verity? Surely they should be onely as really happy, by such a manner of happinesse, as a poore man may be really releeved by such a manner of releefe, as St. Iames describeth 2. 25. 16. in his Epistle. I conclude then this point as most cleare, adding this reason further and a∣bove: to weet, this formall happinesse beeing a union, i is meerely impossible it should bee such, unlesse it be found to be at last inhaerent i on of the extreames, or parts, which are united▪ which manner of inhaerency, cannot be in God, it must theefore of necessity be in the glorified creature.No  sub∣stantiall reall union possible betwixt Gd and his creatu then persona. Secondly, I suppose, that betwixt God, and any of his creatures, there is no other substan∣tiall, reall and intrinsecall union possible, then that which is personall; which manner of union was truely sound in Christ; whereby the WordIoh 1. 14. was made flesh, that is, subsistentially and perso∣nally dwelt amongst us, full of grace and truth, as the 1. 12. onely begotten Sonne of the Father. I say no other substantiall reall union possible, then that which is personall and substantiall: for by the
very principles of Philosophy it is most mani∣fest, that God cannot, neither as a substantiall part, be informed (as matter is) nor substantially informe (as the forme doth:) foreither of them to informe or to bee informed, includeth imper∣fection. Of which kind, in God who is a most pure and perfect essentiall act, there can be no sort, nor degree at all. I am not ignorant, that some excellent witts, have affirmed; that Gods act of intellection and understanding, wherewithApud Captolum in 3. dist. 14. 9. 1. et Greg. Ari∣min. in 1 dist. 7. 9. art. 2. conclu. 3. he beholdeth himselfe, may bee, yea, and is re∣ally united, unto the understandings and intel∣lective parts of the beatified Soules; and that they by the very same act of intellection, where∣with God beholdes himselfe, do see and behold God, as he is in himselfe; So that God and the Beatified, with one and the same iutellection, do behold God as he is in himselfe: God beholding himselfe, and comprehending himselfe with an infinite action; but the beatified with the same infinite action, beholding and seeing him finitely and by participation onely. These men, though they seeme to have many great reasons, whereby they endeavour to shew such an union to be as possible, as the union per∣sonall in Christ; or the union, that is face to face, in the beatified and blessed is; yet doubtlesse they are greatly mistaken, as by sundry reasons may appeare. As first thus; that if the very vision and intellection of God were so united (as they dreame) to the soules of the beatified; yet they should not therewith be able intuitively to
see God, for it implyeth, that the power intel∣lectiveThe beatified cannot see god by the same act of intellection and knowledge wherewith God seeth and beholdeth him∣selfe. of the soule, or the power volitive of the will of the Soule, should know or understand; will or desire, by any other actions, then such as are efficiently from themselves; which with∣out impiety cannot be affirmed of the intellecti∣on of God, as though it could be efficiently from them. To confirme this; An action vitall & of life, doth essentially depend of a power of life; that power vitall which useth, it: and is and must also bee essentially immanent (if as an acti∣on) in the same power, which useth and produ∣ceth it. Againe, it is not possible to declare, how the action of God, as an action, should be united to the understanding power of the bea∣tified. Againe: how is it possible, for them to distinguish and shew, how the Beatified them∣selves do see and behold God, in different de∣grees of vision, if they all see and behold him, with one and the same intellection; and yet most certeine it is that the Saints differ each from other in degrees of glory; as the starres in the fir∣mament1 Cor. 15. 41. 42. do differ from each other in degrees of clarity. Againe, how is it possible that the Beatified, should not comprehend God, by see∣ing asmuch in God as God himselfe doth, if they see and behold God, with the same vision, & intellection, wherewith God seeth and behol∣deth himselfe? Againe, how should the happi∣nesse of the beatified, be onely a partaking and participation of Gods owne happinesse, (as all the Ancients have affirmed, and Councells have
determined,) if one and the same action, should be one and the same formall happinesse of God, and the creatures? May wee not here apply to our purpose, those words which the sixth gene∣rall Synod, used (in like case) against Eutyches? Neither will wee allow in any thing or respect, one and the same naturall operation of God, and the Crature, that neither we may elevate that which is Created into the devine essence: neither depresse downe, that which is excellent in God, to the state and condition of the creature. I conclude this point, affirming this opinion of these Schoole∣menAn erronious opinion of cer∣teine Schoole∣men. to be so greatly against the glory and ma∣jesty of God, wherein they affirme that one and the same vision of God, is the formall beatitude & happinesse both of God and of the creatures; that it is rather to be reputed an error, or here∣sy, then an opinion to be tolerated. Thirdly, I suppose that the last felicity and happinesse of man, must be so full and compleat, that it must beatifie, and make happy, the very nature of the soule, which is estentially life; and all the powers of the soule, which as powers of life are essentially vital, naturally apperteining to life, and essentially depending of, or emaning from the life of the soule: which being so, wee must of necessity find out, how or by what uni∣onThe soules bea∣tified must of necessity bee happy by some formall and vi∣tall actions and of her selfe or guift the very soule in her owne nature, how and by what union or guift the very pow∣ers of the soule, are in themselves, immediately & intimely united to God, & thereby made hap∣py. Touching the second point, no doubt can
be made (for it is confessed by all) that the vi∣tallconversant and exercised about God. Psa. 6. 10. Co. 1. 12.  2. 5. 2 Cr. 13. faculties, and powers of the soule, (to weet the will, understanding, and memory, are not onely united to God by glorious habites; to weet, the understanding by the light of wisdome; the will with and by the light of glorified Cha∣rity (though it be the same essentially with the charity of this life) the memory with a glorious hbitt of fruition for the tention and possession of God in security; but further also that they are united to God, by their proper operations and actions; the understanding by a cleare vi∣sionBy what man∣ner of actions the powers of the soule are converant up∣on God. and sight of God; the will by a burning and ardent affection of the love of God; the me∣mory, by a joyous ruminating and recogita∣ting of the security of her happinesse in God. These things (I say) are cleare, but the greatest difficulty is, whether the soule her selfe, in her owne essence and nature be immediately united to God, or no: If so, then by what manner of gift or quality she is so united. I call this the grea∣test difficulty, not in respect of the thing it selfe, but in respect of the judgements of later Schoole-Divines;A generall con¦ of the Schoolemen. who generally acknowledge, no o∣ther union, betwixt God and the soules beatifi∣ed, thn such, as is by meanes of such glorious habits, and qualities, which are immediately and subjectively in the powers of the soule; and by the meanes of such actions, and operations, which the powers of the soule, enabled by such glorious habits, do produce: I say, the point in it selfe is not difficult; nay rather, it is facill
and apparent. For first, how cleare is it, that God by a glo∣rious illapse, and most in time presence, is to be present to the beatified soules themselves, where∣byThe soule her∣selfe is imme∣diately united to God, and not onely by her power, and the actions of them. the soules, (who of themselves are onely a naturall life) even as in this life by a gracious re∣novation they become regenerate; so by a life glorious in the celestiall kingdome, they become glorious, and immortall: The life naturall, is onely an immortallity; the life gracious is an assecured sanctity; the life glorious, though by participation, yet is a glorious coeternity of du∣rance with immutability. Againe, cleare it is, that God, must be united, and gloriously united to the soule, and her powers; before shee can by her understanding see; by her will, love; by her memory embrace God. Now this uniō, what else can it be, but a very state of happinesse? happinesse and a very felicity in estate; even as happinesse by vision, actuall love, and delight, is happinesse in exercise and operation. Againe, if there were no such glorious insding illapse, and inpresence of God in the soule; but that all for∣mall and glorious presence of God, with the be∣atified soules, should be onely by actions and operaions; then this would follow; to weet, that the last happinesse and felicity of the soules beatified, should be immediatly from themselves (for themselves by their powers immediately do produce such actions) and mediately onely from God, by the means of those glorious ha∣bits, which he onely infuseth, and imparteth to
hem;  very , for thereby  God  her , by the ,  happy. And ;  we consi∣der▪ tha which is ; to  God, of the love of  o  i God; are effectively  by the glorified powers and faculties of  for these being both actions, and  and  or actions of life; and imma∣nent  as actions, they must of necessity, be from the soule, whose actions they are: for it  very terms, that ac∣tions as actions  from any other powers then from these, whose actions they are. And as they are vitall actions, or actions of life, it also implyes contradiction, that as such, they should be from any other powers or  then from such a are  vitall, and of life. Againe as actions immanent, they have essentiall, and , on the powers from which  are effectively. By  is appaet, that the happinesse of  not (whatsoever Pope Benedictu may  have desired and certine Schoole∣mn may have affirmed) onely and intimely, in the actions and operations of the beatified soules: For an estate perfect and cosummate, and a glorious grace of light, (whereby they are conjoyned to God, and enabled to see God, face to face: thereby to love him for himselfe
to delight in him as he is in himselfe;) is so ne∣cessarily the  and absolutely required, that it is the very corner stone, and oundation, whereon all the st is built, and which doth thence from by necessry consequnce follow. Againe, this may be thewd, by an argument, drawne from the , which may be , although the  of this   , which  or would be . Futher to  strongly; The last happinesse  of that which is  happinesse (which is God, onely Gd▪ must ofTh  of  of , and  necessity, be immediately  to that which is  in man; to , to the very nature of the oule ; which is  man, yea formally  but  wise done, then by a glorious  and change, made in the  by the ∣parting to h by grace, a  con∣smmate estate of participated , which is the foundation, and root of all that  glo∣rious , in ,  and loving, of, and in God; which the  in heaven . St. Pter termes this an uncor∣ruptible1 P. 5. 4▪  of Glory. And perhaps, of this,  termes, the ▪ Paul speaketh, where he assumeth, that the2 C. 3. 1
followers of Christ, are changed into the same I∣mage of Christ, from glory to glory. This is the morning Starre which the Son of God hath pro∣mised;Reve. 2. 28. to give unto them that hould fast their faith, that overcome, and keepe his words unto the end. This is the white glorious robe, where∣with those, that stand before the Lambe and theReve. 7. 9. throne, are cloathed and adorned. This is, that very glory of God, and light of the Lambe, where∣withReve. 21. 23. the heavenly Citizens are so illustrated, that they need not, either light of the Sunne, or of the Moone. This is that very estate, place, or msion of participated eternity, which the Sonne of God promised to his disciples, that heoh. 14. 2. 3. went to provide for them; to weet, as it is ex∣pressed in another place, that they should walkeReve. 3. 4. with him in whites, for that they were worthy there∣unto. This is that very Crowne of glory, where∣with the Saints of God in their very soules be crowned and invested, when Christ himselfe shal Cor 4. 17. appeare in glory to beatifie and make happy allCooss. 3. 4. those that expect, and love his comming. And thus it is evidently shewed, that there is a glorious estate, and permanent glorious condition of the beatified in their very soules themselves, where∣by they are intimely and immediately united to God: whereupon I make a fourth supposition. Fourthly, I suppose, that this glorious con∣dition and state of the beatified, is not as a bedd of doune for sleepe and rest onely without any exercise or operation at all; no; it hath insepa∣rably joyned with, and incessantly emaning from
it, a most glorious exercise of the actions and o∣perationsThe estate of happinesse re∣quires that the soules of the beatified should be in a continuall glo∣rified exercise of glorious actions of every power and faculty of the soule: nay, it is impossible to conceive, how there should be a glorious satiety of happinesse, if there be not an incessant and never intermitted exercise of glorious operations, and a very ap∣prehension of that glorious estate and condition of happinesse, wherein the beatified are. This truely is most apparent. The Cherubins and Seraphins with incessant admiration, sing the thrice holy, holy, holy, holy Lord God of Saboth. The sweet singer of Israell, accounts all those blessed, that dwell in the house of the Lord; for that they shall for all eternities blesse and sing praises unto the Lord; Now these divine criesIsa. 6. 3. and elevations of admiration, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabboth, of the Cherubins and Seraphins; these praises and collaudations of the Saints; those Alleluias, praise ye the Lord; praise ye the Lord, recounted by the Prophet in the Revelation; are they ought else? or can they be ought else? then thir severall actions and operations of visi∣on, love, joy, delight, reverence, admiration, which the Angells and Saints seeing God, have with God, in God, and of God: with God, because they are made partakers of the very joy of the Lord; in God because they shall see him as he is of God, because he is the eternall fountaine of light, streaming into the soules and spirits of the bea∣tified; a most glorious light whereby they see God and his glorious Majesty most clearely: and consequently they cannot but love him, but de∣light
in him; admire, reverence, and adore him;  bf him, thereby acknow∣ledging him for the  and  of them∣selves, of their  and o all creatures whe∣thr  the  above, or on the earth  within the  of the arth beneath. Fifthly, I suppose that this glorious exercise,  in  glorious ,  and  and  of the  God. Some there are, who do thinke, that there is in the , an abstrac∣tive knowledge of God by his creatures, and ▪ an answerable love arising from the same, but without all question they are herein mistaken for seeing the knowledges of God by 13.  and  as being obsue, in part, and imperfect, and of God  are to cause, and to be  when as the clare and ituitive vision of him,  given unto the btified; why then shall  know∣ledge of God by and though his creatures when∣as  shall be  is in : whenas, he shall be  whenas we shall kw  even as w , not obseurely in a haow▪  clearely,  face to face. By  vision, the spirits and soules of the , shall be , , and so swallowed up, that the pretended abstractive knowledge of God, by, and in his creatures, shall be altogether needlesse, yea perhaps impossible, if we would stand longer to  the same. And so I come more specially to distinguish the
principall actions and operations, which the be∣atified have in  God. The first and paine action of the beatified, about and on God the fountaine of all the rest) is a cleare and  vision o him, as he is in1 Io. . 2. himselfe. I is , with God before God and  presence of God: thereby not onelyThe first  a on  the beatified. seeing that which is nifest of God, in regard of his creatures, but also that which is manifest of God in himselfe, by his owne  sential light; For God is light, and in him there is no dark∣nesse at all: And by this intuitive vision of God,1 Ioh. . the beatified spirits so see God (their intellective powers being enabled thereunto by the light of glory) that their powers are thereby fully satia∣ted and at rest; most sweetely and joyously in∣joying that, which God promised to Moyses; I will shew thee all good. Out of this presentiall andExod. 33. 19. intuitive vision of good, all good clearly beheld, there followeth necessarily a double love of God: I said necessarily; for it is impossible, that good,Second glori∣ous action. all good, essentially good, having no evill in it; should clearely bee proposed to the understan∣ding, and that the will (whose proper and for∣mall object is good) should not love and em∣brace the same. Now this love, is a double ten∣dency, or embracing of the soule, into, and of that infinite goodnesse which is in God; first of that infinite goodnesse of God as he is good in himselfe, goodnesse it selfe; secondly, of the very same goodnesse of God as by participation it is imparted, and cōmunicated, (as their last end
and finall good) unto the soules and spirits of the Beatified. This with reverence I presume to declare by that which the Apostle delivereth in his Epistleto the Corinthians: to weet, that love never fadeth away; whereby it is most ap∣parent,1 Cor. 13. 8. that the love of the regenerate in this life, & the love of the beatified, in the life of blisse and glory, is one and the same essentially and in nature; the onely diversity is, that by an excesse of perfection, that of the beatified doth excee∣dingly surpasse, that which is of the Pilgrimes in this valley of mortality. If then the love of the Elect, whilst they are in the way, absent from God; and the love of the Elect, when they are in their country, and at their end present with God, be one and the same; then must it needs follow, that as the love of the Elect in the way, tendeth with a double respect to God, to loveA double kind of glorious love. God as he is good in himselfe, and to himselfe, (which is the love of friendship and amity) and to love him, as he is good to his elect, their to∣tall and finall good (which is a love of a holy and sacred concupiscence) so likewise the love of God in the beatified inclineth them to love God as hee is good to himselfe, and in himselfe, and as he is most graciously good unto themselves: And can there be made any doubt of this? what? shall the habit of love & charity moove & incline us most divinely to love God, in both respects, as he is obscurely seene by faith, whilest wee are Pilgrims and travellers in this mortall life? and shall not the same habitt of love and charity; be∣ing
now perfected and glorious, necessarily and ineviably moove us, to love God in both re∣spects, for his goodnesse as it is infinitely in himselfe, and for his goodnesse it as it is; and as he is by participation communicated unto us. Yea, this is so apparent, that the man according to Gods owne heart, professes what his love was in this life of mortality, and what he longed for, and longed after, in that life of glory and im∣mortality, thus; What is there, saith he, for me in hea∣ven,Psal. 73. 25. 26. besides thee; and besides thee, what would I upon earth, the God of my heart and of my salvati∣on, and my portion for ever? Vpon and out of this double love of the infi∣nite goodnesse of God, both as it is in himselfe essentially himselfe, and to his elect by participa∣tion (not now absent from them, but most in∣timely present with them) there ariseth a doubleA double glo∣rious ioy. joy and gladnesse; joy to see God, whom they so dearely love, infinitely good and happy in himselfe; joy to see themselves, in full and se∣cure possession of that infinite good as their last end, and the compleat object of their happinesse. This joy is that wherof Augustine very excel∣lently. There is a joy which is not graunted to theAugust. lib. 9. Confesse. wicked, but to those who worship thee freely, whose joy thou thy selfe art, and that is, the very life of hap∣pinesse, to joy in thee, and for thee, that is the blessed life, and there is no other. Of this we are to understand those joyous words of Christ; Welcome; well done good and faithfull servants, you have beene faith∣fullMatt. 25. 21 24. in a little, I will make you rulers over much: en∣ter into
thy Masters joy. Loe, the Master of this joyous feast, calls his owne joy the joy of his faithfull servants; which is so great, and so surpassing, that holy David dareth thus by a familiar metaphore to expresse the exceeding sweetnesse of the same. They shall be satiated (he speakes of the Beatified) with an over plentifullnessePsal. 36. 8. of thy house, and with a torrent or river of thy plea∣sures, thou shalt inebriate them and make them dronke. O most dviine satiety, O most sacred inebriati∣on of the beatified soules (Seeing, loving, delight∣ing & enjoying God) of love, of adoration, of admira∣tion, of astonishment, of content, of satiety, of rest, of delight, of joy, of enjoying. O blessed Spirits, O Beatified Soules, so satiated, so inebriated, that seeing and admiring they cannot but admire at, and delight in, so infinitely good, so infinitely sweet, so infinitely joyous a good. Holy David considering the same, could not but with an eleva∣ted Spirit cry out, O how amiable are thy dwelingsPsal. 84. 1. 2. thou Lord of hosts! my soule longeth and fainteth after the Courts of the Lord. Bernard most sweetly; The sweet aboundance of that house, and the Torrent of that pleasure, neither eye hath seene, or eare heard,Bernard in de∣dicat. serm: 4. nor the heart of man hath conceived. Doe not thinke therefore O man, to heare that which the eare of man hath not heard; neither seeke thou of man, to know what that is, which the eye of man hath not seene, nor the minde of man hath conceived; Let us rather manfully and couragiously labour in these our taberna∣cles, that in the end, we may be gloriously glorified, in the house of Gods blisse and glory above, and be
made partakers of that joy, which shall never fade, nor fall away; which shall be such as it shall fully sati∣ate, and yet never cloy; ever be had, or enjoyed; and yet ever be desired: not with anxiety after more or other, but with a most assured continuance of the same. Againe thereof Austine very divinely. There shall be what∣soever shall bee worthy of love, neither shall any thingAustine his 12. de itate. be desired, which shall not bee there; all that shall be there, shall be good, and the supreame God, shall be the soveraigne good, and most happy it shall be to knowe, and to be assecured, that that good shall ever be. There shall wee be at rest and see thee; there shall we see and love thee, wee shall love and prayse thee, which shalt bee our end without end. For what other is our end, than to come to a kingdome, which hath no end? thus he. Besides the above expressed actions, and opera∣tions of the beatified soules and spirits, I doe observe another, which I call a retention or holding or pos∣session of God, which whether it be all these ac∣tions together, as they are exercised upon God so intimely, and gloriously present; or whether there be besids them another action of conquiescen∣cy, and resting in, and upon God, as the last and compleat end of the beatified, it is not easie to distinguish. Sure I am, that such a rest and con∣quiescency there is, the which in all humility and modesty I will endeavour to difference and di∣stinguish; and O most happy my Soule, when I shall come, clearely to behould, and know the same. O how with the very heartstrings of my soule, do I not onely desire but long after the same! O the God of my heart, my Soule longeth after thee, to see
thee, 'O love thee, to delight in thee, and to live and rest in thee and by thee, for ever and ever. O fill and replenish my Soule here so to feare thee, that in the end I may attaine thee to enjoy thee; Amen. It cannot have beene uathought of by any, who have arightly thought of their last end, and of that happinesse, which is layed up for all2 Tim. 4. 8. these that love God and his comming; but that they have in their soules conceived a living hope, and fervent desire of attaining unto the same. We glo∣rye, saith St. Paul, in the hope of glory of the sonnesRom. 5. 2. of God. Iob laid up in his breast, as a most pre∣tious jewell, the hope that he had, that he should by himselfe see God his redeemer and Saviour. We areIob. 19. 27. Heb. 10. 23. all encouraged to hould fast the confession of our hope, a hope firme and unmooveable. The Apostle he de∣siredPhi 1. 23. to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And what faithfull soule is there, who longeth not for, and desires not after the comming of the Lord; that he may enjoy that crowne of glory and happi∣nesse,2 Tim. 4. 8. which God hath laid up for all those that love his comming? Now this hope of the last happinesse and longing after the same, if it be arightly con∣sidered, will be found according to the doctrine of all sound Divines, to be specially an action or affection of the will of man (enabled and illustra∣ted by grace) tending to and longing after God absent: which affection of hope and desire, ceaseth not, untill the good that is desired and hoped for, is obteined, and made present; but the good be∣ing had and attained unto, then the affection of hope ceaseth, for what we have and injoy, we hope
not for, nor long after; That which a man seeth (that is, as I interpret him, seeth and by sight in∣joyeth) how can he hope for, saith the Apostle?Rom. 8. 24. 25. Austen excellently, Hope is a child of faith, by whichAugust de spirit. et lit. man hopeth (from him whom he knoweth,) for that which he yet hath not; which hope, being in this state the expectation of an immortall life, I do fit∣ly call it, the very life of this our mortall life; the which (though fortune often failes) will never faile, nor in the end deceave the upright and In∣nocent. Who, because by hope he waiteth on God, and hath his heart reposed upon God, as Su∣sannaDan. 13. 35. had hers, is as confident as a lion. Now when as these affections of hope and desire, by reason that the good which was hoped for, is obteined, doth end and cease, there must needesSome glorious action of the will must needs succeed in roome of the action of hope. in lieu and place of these former, succeede and fol∣low, some other action and affection of the will, which formally and respectively, must answere unto the former; The former was hope to; this must be a tention and possession: the former was desire after, this must be use; the former was lon∣ging after, this must be fruition and injoying; the former was tending to the good, to attaine it; this a tention, rest, and conquiescency in the good at∣tained. The motion of the stone to the center, and the resting of the stone at, or so neere the center as possibly it may, is like the hope or de∣sire; and tention or possession of man to and in its last end. Now as the motion of the stone to, and the rest of the stone in or at the center, ariseth from, and is agreeing to, the naturall inclinati∣on which
the stone hath to its center; so like∣wise the deliberate hope, desire, or inclination whether naturall and rationall, and sapientiall, and supernaturall, of the soule and blessed spirits to their last end: whether naturall or supernatu∣rall, and their rest and conquiescency in the same, is from one, and the same faculty of the soule, to weet, the will: whether naturally (if to her na∣turall end) or supernaturally (if to her supernatu∣rall end) shee bee enabled, strengthened, and illustra∣ted for the same. And although it falleth out often, that the same faculty which inclines to good things, doth not alwayes by it selfe attaine and apprehend the said good things, but they are attained and ap∣prehended, by some other powers; yet the same power and faculty, that desires them, and inclines to them, doth rest in them, and delight in them, being had and attained. For example, the heart of man desires some rich treasure of Iewell (forMatt. 6. 21. where the treasure is there is the heart also, saith our Saviour) and yet the hand, and other powers of man take immediate possession and apprehend the same: nverthelesse the same being attained, the heart or appetite of man, takes content, plea∣sure, and rest in the Iewell, or treasure obtained. So likewise the will of man is that, which enclines whole man, either naturally by her naturall force to some naturall good; or supernaturally, by a∣bundance of Grace supernaturall and sapientiall, to her last end and happinesse; But the attaining and apprehension thereof, is by the cleare vision,
and fervent love of God, as he is in himselfe. And yet neverthelesse, the eternall rest, repose, and conquiescency (which I call fruition) in the same God, so clearely and intuitively sceene, so sweetely beloved; is immediately from, in, and of the glorified will, whose proper action as it is to desire and hope for: so it is eternally to rest and repose herselfe and all other faculties of the soule, yea the soule herselfe in the last end of her happinesse, and her cheefest and onely good: So that it is shee that commands this conquiescency and rest unto hereselfe. Be turned O my soule into thy rest! For thePsa. 116. 7. Lord hath done well for thee: It is shee that ex∣ults; This is my rest, here will I abide for ever This isPsa. 132. 14. my joy which no power shall take from me: This, this is that eternall rest and conquiescency which the Apostle adviseth us so servently to pursue:Heb. 4. 10. 11. This is that happy and most sweet repose which the restlesse Ambitious, Avaricious, Presumptuous, Contentious, Blasphemous, Luxurious, perjurious spi∣rits shall never injoy: For as it is in the Revelati∣on, They shall have no rest neither day nor night, be∣causeRevel. 4. 1. & 14. 11. they serve such Gods in their workes (although they may have tongues and lookes as Angells of light) Gods their owne lusts, which shall giveIerem. 16. 13. them no rest neither day nor night. On that such wretched soules (who imitating Satan, seeke rest in such drye places of Pride, Avarice, periury, Blas∣phemy) returning into themselves, and repenting them of their manifold transgressions (whether by their walking in the counsell of the ungodly, or standing
in the way of sinners, or sitting on the chayres ofPsa. 1. the pernicious scorners) would endeavour forPsa 95. 11. that rest which God hath sworne he would never give to those who haue hardened their hearts against his calls! And will he then give it to those who shall willingly and deliberately either for gaine or envy forsweare themselves, and abjure them∣selves out of his protection, So helpe us God so helpe us God? O the most fearefull and execrable evill of perjury, of Elder and of Latter times! That worthy Cardinall of Cambrey Peter de Ali∣aco, hath a fearefull saying touching the coruption of the Popish church of his times (to weet, at and about the time of the Councell of Constance) That the Church was come to that passe, that shee was worthy to be ruled and governed by reprobates: which his saying may we not interpret in respect of most fearefully Blaspheming the Majestie of heaven, by most execrable false oathes and perjuryes? And surely who may or can be reputed to sinne more fearefully, than those who by false oathes and perjuries do willingly and premeditatly put them∣selves out of Gods protection? If they whoMatt. 10. 33. shall deny God before men shall be denyed of him be∣fore his Angells? what shall or can become of them who shall deliberately abjure him before men? But to returne to our purpose touching the rest and repose of the soule in God and his Graces; Peeter upon the mount no sooner beheld the glo∣riousMatt. 17. 4. transfigured body of Christ, but he cryes out with a most fervent longing desire of, and re∣pose in that object; Let us make here (saith he to
Christ) three tabernacles; one for thee, a second for Elias, a third for Moyses; So naturall it is, for the will, to rest and content herselfe in Good pre∣sent, apprehended by the understanding as Good; that it is impossible, that the will should not, according to the measure of the Good, take content therein; How then is it imaginable or possible, but that God infinitely good, being as such proposed to the will (beloved dearely, and enjoyed happily) but that the will possessed with such a sweet trinity, of sight, love, and joy; should (solacing her owne soule with infinite content) thus crie out to her selfe, This is my rest; herePsal. 132. 14. will I dwell, and abide for ever? The heart of man, is restlesse, till it come to its last end, which being once attayned, her aeternall rest is a verie banket of unspeakeable joy and peace. S. AustenAugust. 1. Con∣fesse. verie worthily; Thou hast made us O Lord for thy selfe, and restlesse are our hearts, till they come unto thee: But when they are come, their rest is a supper of everlasting sweetnes; the which, my meditation could affoord to call, a celestiall and divine satiety, of a never satiated soule, and a supernall inebriation of glory, whereby the soules beatified, and all their powers, and facul∣tyes of them, are filled with so great a iucundi∣ty as it is possible for them to attayne to; and so are therewith most divinely satiated. The Royall Prophet, of this glorious banquet professes andPsal. 17. 15. singeth thus, I shall be filled, and satiated, when thy glory shall appeare. S. Austen hereof mostAugust. tract. 3. in Ioh. sweetely: Such shall bee that delight of beautie; that
it shall be alwayes present with thee, and yet thou ne∣ver satiated; or rather thus; that thou maist be al∣wayes satiated, and yet never satiated: for if I shall say that thou shalt not be satiated; there shall be a hunger and thirst: if I shall say, thou shalt bee satia∣ted, then wilt thou feare a cloying there; where shall bee neyther famine, hunger, nor thirst, nor any tedious cloying, not then shall I say? I know not; God hath that, which he will bestowe. And so concluding this poynte, not having more what to say, of the sweetnesse of this sweetnes; of the unsatiadnes of this satiety, of the iucundity of this eternall rest; I pray, and be∣seech God of his infinite mercy, that he wil be plea∣sed to conduct my Soule, and the Soules of all the devout and faythfull readers hereof, to the ha∣ven of rest, and heaven of Satietie. Amen. FIFTH SECTION. Wherein is more particularly handled, in what action, or actions, the last happinesse of man, doth spe∣cially consist. THe principall actions, of the last happines of man, being thus distinguished: I ob∣serve first, that if a man would imitate the school∣men, the Thomists and Scotists; then were he to distinguish, wherein, and in what action for∣mally and principally, the same happines doth consist: The learned cannot bee ignorant, what fervent disputes there are, betwixt the Scotists
and Thomists on this poynt; the former giving the same unto the act of the will, the other, unto the act of the understanding; which their opi∣nion eyther syde endeavours, by sundry reasons to prove and confirme; but in my opinion, they tosse Sisiphus his stone, they labour in vayne; for what neede they, with the quintessence of their witts, to refine and distinguish farther, than the holy scriptures have done? Who is ignorant, that hath read the scriptures, but that the last happines of man, as it is sometimes called the joy of the Lord, whereby the will (the immedi∣ateMat. 25. 21. 25. subject and Efficient of joy) seemes to have the preeminency; so elsewhere, they pronounce life everlasting, to consist in the knowledge of God: This is life everlasting, that they may know thee, to be the only true God; and whome thou hast sent Christ Iesus. Like observations I might make of other passages of scripture; but the pointe is cleare, that in the Phrase of holy Scripture, the happi∣nesse and felicity of man, doth consist, in all those integrall partes, which hee attributes there∣unto: to weet, cleare and intuitive Vision, Love, Ioy, Delight, Peace, Rest, Eternall Praysing, & Adoringe of God with such like, by which it is cleare that in the sense and intent of holy scrip∣ture, the last happinesse of man (to use Boetius, hisBoetius l. 3. de consolat. phrase,) is a state perfect with a confluence of all that is good; but wherein formally it doth consist, or what is the principall action thereof, it doth not expresse; and therefore herein, I require mo∣desty in the schoolemen; and I would to God that
in like controversies, all men (which would bring great peace to Hierusalem) would imitate and expresse such modesty as is requisite; but there is no hope of amendment. I cannot therefore, but here lament that arrogant and itching rest∣lessenes of some witts, and in none more appa∣rent than in the Pope and Tridentine sages, with the statizing Ignatians; who in not unlike con∣troversies, by teaching and preaching; by de∣creeing and comaunding; what is formall, what is materiall; what is principall, what is Secondary, have formally, if not overturned▪ at least seve∣red and disioynted, many of the churches of God. O yee that are Traditionists; And O wee, that worthily embrace nothing for fayth, but what the holy scriptures have recommended unto us: O doe not yee; nor let not any of us, disioyne and separate those thinges which God hath joyned together; O let us, with a religious reverence, use the verie phrase of holy scriptures; where they attribute to any action or operation a principall concurrence; let not us deny it: where they graunt a necessarie concurrence, let us graunt it; where they require a necessarie concurrence, con∣junction, or society of many actions to salvation; let us teach the same. O let us feare that curse which is threatned against those that shall eytherReve. 22. 19. adde or diminish, to, or from the sacred word of God. But to returne to our purpose which wee have now in hand. If nothing, can truly and solidly bee affirmed of the last happinesse, and gloriouse felicity of
man, besydes that which the word o▪God hath revealed, from the bosome of the Father; and all that which indeed is revealed, doth onely (not speaking of the formality of any action more then other) declare unto us, that the same hap∣pinesse, is a summe of all good things; a Confluence of all Ioy and Peace, and other such exellent things,Isa. 64. 1 Cor. 2 9. as eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, nor the heart of man hath conceaved; then undoubtedly (if we would arightly distinguish) wee should rather confesse our owne ignorance therein; than overboldly and arrogantly to confine the forma∣lity of the same, rather to the actions of the wil, then to those of the understanding, or to these of the understanding rather then to those of the will. S. Austen excellently, That which God hathAugust: lib. 22. de Civi. prepared for those that love him, is not apprehended by fayth, is not attayned by hope, and is not compre∣hended by Charity: It surpasseth those desires and wishes; it may bee gotten and acquired, but it can∣not bee fully esteemed or prized: And so not daring peremptorily to affirme, wherein only (and in no∣thing else) the formality of the same doth consist, I conclude this observation with the sweete saying of venerable Cyprian. The Saynts, shall allCyprian de lau∣de Martyll. rejoyce in glory, they shall see God, and they shall re∣joyce in him; they shall be glad, and delighted; they shall flowe in glory, and be jocound with an aeternall felicity; There they shall not only tast how sweet God is, but they shall be filled and satiated with a wonder∣full sweetnes; nothing shall be wanting to them; yet nothing that is hurtefull, with them; Christ present
shall fill and satiate everye desire of them; they shall not waxe ould, they shall not languish, they shall not rott; A perpetuall sanitye, a happy aeternity, shall con∣firme the sufficiency of that happinesse; there shall be no concupiscence in the members; there shall arise noe rebellion of the flesh; but the whole state of man, shall be chaste and peaceable; last of all, God shall be all in all, his presence shall fill and satiate, all the powers and facultyes, both of body and mind: all needfull service and ministration of Angells shall cease; the whole City, being filled and arightly ordered; the state of this consummate happinesse, shall neyther bee inno∣vated, nor chaunged: Thus hee with many more excellent prayses of that glory, and yet hee ex∣presseth not, the least part of the excellent joyes, which shall be injoyed there: for to con∣cludeAugust. this poynte in Austens phrase, VVee maye more easily shew, what is not there, then what is there; wee may more easily declare, what ill is not there; then expresse, the gloriouse emi∣nency of all good, that is there. Though I dare not distinguish peremptorily, with eyther Sect of the Schoolemen, wherein the formality of mans happinesse doth consist; yet wee may not deny, but that in that most glo∣riouse estate; three gloriouse Actions, are most specially recommended and spoken of by the Scriptures; to witt, Vision, Dilection, and Ioye, or Fruition; which three, certeyne schoolmen callA mistake of the schoolmen. What is the dowrie of the beatified. the dowrie of the Beatified Spirits; but they are undoubtedly mistaken: for as in carnall mar∣riage, the dowrie which eyther the Parents of
the Bride, doe give; that the husband may bet∣ter undergoe the charges and burden of mar∣riage; or which the Bridegroome maye give out of excesse of love to please and honour the Bride; are not actions, nor operations; but gifts of Iewells, Ornaments, Moneyes or such like: so likewise in that gloriouse Marriage above, when the LambeRevel. 19. 7. and his Spousesse are knitt togeather, in the linke or wedding-ring of a gloriouse aeternitye, the dowrie is not operations and actions (for those are the verie exercise, fruition, and consummation (if I may so write) of the gloriouse marriage it selfe. But they are gloriouse Habitts, Orna∣ments and Iewells of the Soules of the Bride; cal∣ledPsal. 36. 10. by holy David, the light wherewith God is to be seene; by the Prophet in his Revelation, TheRevel. 21. 11. and 19 8. brightnes of God and his light: agayne, fine whiteRevel. 6. 11. 2. Timoth. 4. 8. 1. Pet. 6. 4. silke, wherewith the spousesse is to adorne herselfe; agayne, white stoles, wherewith the beatified Soules are to bee adorned and honnoured: and the Scriptures elsewhere, call them crownes of glory, names written in the foreheades, of the bea∣tified, Thrones of glory, with many such like glo∣rious epethites. So then, the gloriouse actions of the beati∣fied, are not the dowrie it selfe, but suppose a dowrie, which to expresse, wants not great dif∣ficulty; yet if I bee not mistaken, as for the act of Vision, there is required a gloriouse habitt of the Light of glory, so likewise for the act of Love, a gloriouse habitt of glorified Charity; for the act of Ioy and fruition, a gloriouse habitt, answering
to the habitt of Hope and Desire: And these, if I be not mistaken, are that splendent silke, those glo∣riouse whites, those new-names, those seates andReve. 3. 4. 12. 21. et 6. 11. et 7. 9. et 19. 14. et 21. 11. thrones of glory, those glorified stoles, that clarity and brightnes of God, whereof the holy Prophet makes so cleare, and expresse mention. And in truth, the dowrie of the beatified Spirits and Soules can be no other, then that glorious trea∣surye of glorious ornaments, graces, and gifts, whereby they are prepared and fitted, for the wedding of God, the marriage of the Lambe: and whereby they are enabled, to all those glorious actions, and operations; in which, as the glo∣rious issue, and offspring of that Marriage, they are for all aeternities, incessantly and joyously, to exercise, and there with to solace themselves, in the present vision and fruition of God. This state being such and so glorious, it were idle, with the schoolemen to inquire, whether inAn idle questi∣on of lome schoole-men. such a state be required a rectitude, and upright∣nesse of the will, or not; For how is it possible but that there should be a rectitude of the will,True happines cannot be with out a rectitude of the will. when as there is such a cleare intuitive vision of all good, so fully injoyed and possessed? Is not the wil of herselfe a blind power, seeing no other∣wise, then by her understanding; how then, can she incline too or prosecute any evill; when as the understanding proposes no evill, nor can propose evill unto her? For in God whom the understanding so clearely and intuitively propo∣ses to the will; what evill or shadow of evill can be found? or what want of good can be ap∣prehended?
And here I cannot but admire,Orig: I. peri∣arch cap. 7. & hom: 33. et 35. in Lucam. how Origen (that flower of witts amongst the Ancients) could find (unlesse his writings be cor∣rupted) that the beatified Soules, and Spirits might sinne and transgresse: which his errour we may observe too too clearely in his writings: a∣gainst it we may thus argue most unanswerably: If the blessed Soules and Spirits, may sinne, then by sinne they may loose their happinesse, which is so contrary to the essentiall condition thereof, that it were dotage so to imagine, that to be the true happinesse of man, which is defectible, amis∣sible, and may be lost: most cleare it is, that that cannot be true happinesse, the aeternity whereof may be doubted of: Or else we must admitt, that the beatified together with the complacence of sinne, may continue happy: the which is impossible, and implies contradiction. For if perfect happi∣nesse, do necessarily, yea essentially exclude all evill, how then can it admitt that evill, whichPro. 14. 34. Mat. 25. 48. is the evill of all evills, the evill that made mankind miserable, the evill that onely makes nations misera∣ble: the evill for the punishing of which, the e∣vill of hell fire was onely provided: and for ever against the reprobates foreknowne and designed. How then, (I say) can the last happinesse of man admitt this evill, which is so contrary to that most happy and holy state, that nothing, which is polluted with him, can ever or shall ever enterReve. 21. 27. August. in psal. 119. thereinto. But so it is not above at the Lambes table; there the pure, truely pure, and onely pure, have admittance. Austen aptly. Blessed
are the pure and unspotted in the way, as if the Pro∣phet should have said, I know what thou wouldest, thou desirest happinesse; if then thou willt be happy, be thou pure, be thou unspotted: So then cleare it is that the beatified cannot sinne: for beatified they cannot be, unlesse they be first purified from all sinne, how then being beatified may they committ sinne? The truth of this point, of the impeccability of the beatified Soules and Spi∣rits, I declare thus. The beatified and happy byHow the bea∣tified be come impeceable. the cleare vision of God, are so determined and inclined, with a glorious necessity to love him, that as they cannot but love him as their last end, and cheefest good: so they cannot but referre all other actions and affections whatsoever else they may there have, to the glory of him, as to their last end: how then is it possible, that they should transgresse or swarve from God, and so sinne? Surely they cannot; and this impecca∣bility they have, not by any extraordinary grace graunted unto them, For that purpose; for their very estate, and condition of seeing God, with so cleare a vision; of loving him, with so unmoove∣able a love, of delighting in him, with so un∣speakeable a joy, requires that they should not have any left a possibility to swarve from him, And in truth, to stand within the principles of the light of nature, the Rules of divinity and Philo∣sophy; it is more possible and probable: that a heavy milstone, should naturally moove and ascend upwards from the Center of the earth (un∣to which or neere unto which it hath a naturall
inclination by the whole force of his nature) then that the beatified Soules and Spirits, should swarve and cease from their love of God and delight in God, whom they so clearely, and presentially, see and behold as their last end, the marke of their desires, the totall object of their happinesse, their onely and cheefest good. And so we may ob∣serve, how idle that reason is, wherewith some endeavour to proove, that the beatified Soules and Spirits are peccable: because forsooth the na∣ture of their wills (which intrinsecally requires that they should be free, and at liberty) is not chaunged nor altered: True: the liberty of their wills is not perverted nor destroyed: but theyThe will of men beatified hath no liberty about her last end. are so perfected in the highest degree of their per∣fection, unto which they can possibly attaine. And here I cannot passe to note, as a point of ignorance, for any one to thinke that the will hath, or can have a liberty of freedome to love,See Aquinas. 1. q. 81. et 1. 2. or not to love: to embrace or not to embrace, her last end, her cheefest and onely good, the ob∣ject of her happinesse: so clearely and presenti∣ally proposed unto her, and as such embraced by her. The jester in the play could tell, what end man desired, yea what end man necessarily de∣sired, yea could not but desire: to weet, to be happy: and yet these can finde, or presume to finde, how the beatified Soules and Spirits, can in their very state of happinesse, have a liber∣ty or indisserency to love or not to love, to em∣brace, or not to embrace the infinite Godnesse of God, and their
last happinesse: which with such unspeakeable joy, peace, and rest, they hould and possesse in their bedds of that celestiall paradise: And ofAugust in psal. 6. the purity and necessity whereof, Austen most divinely thus. What shall be the delights of Saints? they shall be delighted in a multitude of peace: Let the wicked here rejoyce in multitude of gold, store of silver, a∣bundance of servants, excesse of riotous and luxuri∣ous feasts: but thou, O thou Lover of God, what shall thy delights be? Thou shalt be delighted in multitude of peace, and rest: thy gold peace, thy silver peace, thy possession peace: Thy life peace, thy God peace, yea whatsoever thou canst desire shall be to thy peace and peace to thee: here that which is gold to thee can∣not be silver: that which is wine, cannot be bread, that which is light, cannot be to thee as food and drinke; but there thy God shall bee to thee all in all: thou shalt eate him that thou hunger not, thou shalt drinke him least thou thirst, thou shalt be lightened of him that thou be not blinde: thou shalt be held up by him, that thou fall not from him: he whole and entire shall pos∣sesse thee, wholy and intirely; want there with him thou shalt not suffer any, with whom thou shalt possesse all. Thou shalt have all of him, and hee all of thee, because hee and thou, shalt be but one: which one, and all, he shall have, who shall possesse and hold his Saints in rest and peace. Thus that Father most aptly and sweetely, shewing God to be so possessed of the beatified, and the beatified so to possesse God, that they cannot desire ought else, no not have so much as a velleity or weake desire to delight, or rest in
ought else then in God; the God of their heartsPsa. 73. desire, and their portion for ever. Where then is that idle conceipt of those, who affirme, that al∣though the blessed cannot see any thing in God, that may moove them, or incline them to sinne, yet in respect of other I cannot tell what particu∣ler actions (wherein God may imploy them) they may have some either inconsideration or igno∣rance, and so consequently may in the doing of the same, sinne and transgresse: and so to them, e∣ven to them being happy, that of the Poet may be applyed, It is the part of a foole to say I had not thought of it; I did not consider it arightly. O the presumption of witts, to thinke that those blessed Spirits can have any such ignorance or inconsi∣deration, as not to do the will of God clearely proposed unto them: how shall not they know the will of him, whose face they so clearely see andMat. 18. 20. behold? how should not they doe his will who de∣light in nothing more then in the performance of his will? The Church by Christs owne commaund prayes thus to God; Thy will be done in earth, asMat. . 10. it is in heaven. Whereby shee professes, that in the heavens above, there is most perfect obedi∣ence yeelded by the beatified unto God; because nothing can be there done or admitted against his will, either out of intended wilfullnesse, or pre∣tended negligence.Mat. 18. 10. Those blessed Spirits that ever behold the face of God, that is in heaven, cannot have the least veleityBaruch. 3. 39. orinclination, not to doe the will of their God, which is in heaven; Those glorious starres no sooner
heare the call of their God, but they answere, we are ready: doth not David give unto them, as a pe∣culiar of their honnour and happinesse, that theyPsa. 103. 21. ever doe the will of the Lord? Prayse the Lord, all yee his hosts; yee his servants, that doe his pleasure, prayse the Lord. And so I conclude this point; affir∣ming that the beatified Soules and spirits, are un∣peccable, being by contemplation made immuta∣ble, and by an euerlasting love made undefec∣tible. I have sufficiently shewed, that there cannot be a deficiency in the last happinesse, by reason of the commitment of any sine by the beatified; but what? can there be any deficiency, or defectibili∣ty thereof, upon any other head or respect? Sure∣ly no, for then unworthily should it be reputed the last end of those Spirits, which shall have no end, and of those soules, which being immortall, shall never dye nor cease to bee. True happinesse that cannot be, of the aeternity and endlesse du∣rance whereof, doubt may be made. AustenAusten de Ci∣vitat. lib. 2. most excellently: What other is our end, then to come to that kingdome whereof there is no end? Divers do here question, whether the last happinesse in part, to weet, of the glorious love of God, and joyous delight in God, may cease and fade; notwithstanding the cleare vision and sight of God, do still continue: where in to resolve, is smal or no difficulty at al: for if the questiō be, whe∣ther God out of his absolut power can shew him∣selfe as he is in himselfe (infinitely good &c.) to any of the beatified, & yet they not love him, nor
actualy delight in him; I answere, that it is morally impossible, except in such a case onely, that God would not concurre with such his beatified, to the act of love and affection of delight; and then most cleare it is that in such a case, (though they follow naturally one upon another) yet be∣cause they are really distinguished; that one may be effected and not the other, God concur∣ring, with the power intellective, for the action of vision; but not with the power of the will, for the act of love, and affection of delight. But what a vanity of witts, to seeke a knot where none is? Cleare it is, that the state of the last hap∣pinesse of man shal be so perfect and consummate, that well may there be some new addition of ad∣venticious and accidentall glory; but to thinke that there should be any fading in that happinesse in which as Bernard divinely, the Beatified are ever greene and growing in aeternity; were an injurious vanity, and blasphemous dotage, against the glo∣ry and honour of the Citty of God. SIXTH SECTION: Conteines certaine observations, touching the glori∣fied bodyes of the beatified and their glorious qua∣lities. WHat hath beene said touching the glory of the soules of the beatified, comes very short of that which in truth it is; For if an admiring soule cannot: how shall a speaking tongue,
be able to expresse the excellent eminencyes of the same? But it being so, that the beatified Soules want part of their consummation untill their bodies shall be joyntly glorified with them: This place requires that wee should adde somewhat, touch∣ingFirst observa∣tion. the glorious conditions, and states of their glorified bodies. For which purpose, I observe first, that though at the dissolution of man by death, the Soule being separated, from the bo∣dy; shee (if holy and regenerated) be elevated to blisse and glory, her body on earth rotting and falling away into dust and corruption; yet there remaineth in the Soule a naturall and most intime inclination, to have her body (by information and naturall conjunction) reunited to her againe; which inclination St. Austen conceived to beAugust lib. 12 in Gen. cap. 35. so great, that he thought by the meanes thereof, the soules beatified to be so letted and hindred; that they cannot see and behold God before the resurrection, so perfectly as they shall do after the same; In which his opinion though (with reve∣rence be it written) he was mistaken, (for the cleare vision and fruition of God depends no∣thing of the body, or animall affections thereof) yet hereby it is evident, that the Soule hath not her full and compleat happinesse untill her yoke-fel∣low after whom shee so naturally longeth, be to her unted againe: I say longeth, for the desire after the body is not immoderate, nor anxious: for shee knoweth, that at the time and houre ap∣pointed, her body shall be reformed in the likenessePhil. 3. 20. of Christs glorified body, and be renuited to her a∣gaine,
which time, because God hath so ap∣pointed it, she dutifully and obediently tarrieth and expecteth, knowing assuredly, that though it bee long, yet that at length, coming it will come. Secondly I observe, that this inclination of the Soule, arises from this, that the Soules of men are not (as the Spirits of Angells are) compleate and perfect Substances, subsisting by themselves;The Soule and body are as na∣turall parts for the Constitu∣ting of the na∣ture of man. but they are parts onely of humane nature; the Soule one part, the body another; both con∣curring to make a perfect subsisting nature of man; the Soule and body of both of them, parts separable; yet herein differing, that the Soule whether separated or united, is naturallie immor∣tall; the body whether separated or united, by nature mortall: and yet herein agreeing, that as being naturall parts, (if united) they make one compleat whole substance; so if separated) they have an inclination, most intime and natural (for the making up of the whole) to be reunited agayne. But to declare this point more clearely. The inclination of any thing, that is but a part of a whole, to be united to that part, wherewith it maketh the whole, is so naturall, that the same inclination cannot be removed, unlesse the thing it selfe, which is the part, bee first destroyed; for example, the parts of a greene tree, being but halfe cleft and pulled asunder, doe not with a na∣turall force more endevour to reunite them selves together; then the naturall, and essentiall parts of any compleat substance, (upon any separation)
doe incline to bee reunited together agayne: the reason of which inclination I take to be this, that everye thing hath a naturall propension, for the con∣servation of it selfe and his owne being. Now cleare it is, that the esse and being of a part, as a part, is for the making of the whole; so then a part, hath never a more perfect being, then when it is in the whole; for whose being, making, & constitution naturally it is. What marvaile then, that every part naturall and essentiall (if separated from the whole) have an inclination (for the making up of the whole) to be reunited to her fellowe part agayne? and so no merveyle it is, that the Soule being an Essentiall and Natu∣rall part, together with the body, for the making up of the substance of man, if (she being separated from the body) have a naturall inclination, to bee reunited to the body agayne; that by the meanes of such a union, man, who by death was dissolved, and become no man, may by the re∣suscitation of the body, and the reunition of the body to the Soule, bee made man agayne. Though this point be most cleare, both in Divinity and Philosophy, yet is it not conceipted by those, who make the Soule only to bee the whole man; and the body to be no other, then the Soules waggon or chariot; so that the Soule is no otherwise in the body, then as the mariner is in the shipp, or the inhabitant in his dwelling house: Of this opinion Porphirie seemed to bee, who (as Austen writesAusten 12. de Civit. of him) affirmed, that the Soule (if she would bee happie) was of necessity to bee separated and freed
from the body: And likewise of this opinion al those Heritickes of necessity must bee, who make and teach a duality of God; a good one, and a bad one; the good God, author of Spirits and Soules; the bad God, author of the bodies and all such habituall corruptions as are in them; needes I say must theese latter so teach, for if Soules bee not naturall formes of bodies, to quicken them, & give life unto them; and with them as comparts, to make compleat composed substances, of the Persons of men and women; then assuredly, no naturall inclination or propension, can bee in them, being separated from the bodies, to bee reunited to them agayne; no more inclination certeynly, then there can be in him, who ha∣ving once tasted of the tyrannie of the Popish In∣quisition, can desire to returne into it agayne. Thirdly I observe, the just disposition of God, who hath ordeyned a generall resuscitation of bodies at the last day; that man accordingly as hee may have done eyther good or evill, may receave eyther a glorious reward, or an ignomi∣niouse punishment in the bodye. Cleare it is, that not only the Soule, or only the body, but men and women composed both of body and soules, are those who worke and doe; (for acti∣ons and deedes are of the Persons themselves) are those (I say) who doe eyther good or evill, and consequently, whole man and woman perfect and compleat Persons, must appeare to receave according as they have done in their bodie eyther good or evill: Wee must all appeare before the judgement
seate of Christ (sayth the Apostle) that every one may2. Cor. 5. 10. ceceave, according as hee maye have done in his body, eyther good or evill. Not onely bodies then, nor Soules alone; but men and women, Persons compleate and consummate, must appeare; I say consummate, for such is the Phrase of the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, where speaking ofHeb. 11. 13. the Fathers and Ancients of the old testament, who by the testimonie of Fayth were approved, sayth thus, They receaved not the repromission and promise, God providing better for us, that without us they should not be consummated; so hee speaketh. And this cōsummation (which is when the bodie being raysed up and shall be joyned to the Soule agayne) is that whereof holy Iob speaketh thus,Iob. 14. 15. making it the verie worke of the right hand of God himselfe, Thou shalt reach out thy right hand, to the worke of thy handes; or as the Chaldaicke pa∣raphrase hath it, Thou shalt be gracious to the worke of thy hands. How this; but by a powerfull and gracious resuscitation, and raysing up of her body from her bed of dust and corruption, and reuniting the same agayne, unto the Soule, whereby, (it being reunited) becomes quickened,Iob. 9. 25. & 26. with the Spirit of life? The hope of this, was so deare and preciouse to holy and most venera∣ble Iob; that on the dunghill of his miseries, with a triumphant kind of joy, hee layed up in his bosome the joy full expectation hereof: I know, sayth he, that my redeemer liveth, and that at the last day, I shall be compassed about with my skinne, and that in my flesh, I shall see God my Saviour; and
that myne owne eyes shall behould him, and not any other for mee. And in this expectation, hee dayly dwelt, according as he professes in another place: All the dayes of this my warfarre, I expect and looke, untill my chaunge, and immutation be come. WhichIob. 14. 14. chaunge and immutation, is that verie thing, which now wee have in consideration; to weet, the glorious state, and condition of the bodies of those, who in this their pilgrimage, may have walked in true fayth towards their God. It is not doubted of amongst Christians, but that the same individuall Person is to appeare, & is or shall bee glorified both in body and soule; who in this mortall life, hath kept his fayth; faythfullie and obediently seruing God; not taking, or receaving his Soule in vayne; and consequent∣ly,Psal. 24. 4. as the Soule is the same individuallye (for it never perished) so likewise the verie body, must bee the same individuallye, yea, and the substan∣tiall union and conjunction whereby the Soule and body are joyned together, must be the same individuallye, and in unity of number; which though reason conceaves not, yet fayth assecures and warrantes; And so consequently cleare it is, that the immutation and chaunge, whereof the Apostle and holy Iob speake, is not because there is another Soule, or another body, or another union of body and Soule (for all these three are the same individuallye and numerically) but the whole chaunge and immutation is, in respect of some glorious properties and qualities which the bodies resuscitated to glorie shall have, which
they never had whilst they were yet mortall; fro as the Soules and Spirits have their speciall glories, so likewise shall the bodies have theirs. TheseFoure glorious qualities of the glorified bo∣dies. qualities and properties, are commonly distin∣guished to bee fowre; to weet, Impassibilitie, Sub∣tillity, Agility, Clarity: Impassibilitie whereby the body is made uncapable of any contrary passion, or violent impression: Subtillity, whereby the body is made not a Spirit, but like unto a Spirit, to bee able to penetrate, or passe where it could not before: Agility, whereby it is indewed with such a velocity and Swifenes, that the beatified may followe the Lambe whithersoever he goeth: Clarity, whereby al deformitie, or naturall obscure∣nesse being taken away, the body becomes bright, shining and resplendent; but wee must explicate these things more particularlye, and yet with all brevitie possible. I beginne with the first. Impassibilitye. Impassibilitye must needes be graunted, as a partiall dowrie to glorified bodies; for if they should be passible as before, then consequently they should bee corruptible, which as it is a∣gaynst the nature of felicity, that essentially in∣cludes a participated aternity, so is it expressely, a∣gaynst the Apostles doctrine, where he profes∣ses, that our bodies which are sowne in corruption, shall rise up in incorruption. But though it be most appa∣rant, that glorified bodies shall bee impassible; yet is it not so easily to explicate and open, from
whence this impassibility doth immediately a∣rise; or what is, the immediate cause thereof: The Apostle tells us, that what is sowed in weake∣nesse, and infirmity, riseth up in power and vertue; which vertus or power, I take to be the immediate cause of impassibility; or else to be impassibility it selfe. But what is this vertue and power? Is it1. a supernaturall vertue, making the elementary parts and qualities, to be of another nature, then now they are? Not so; for nature must not be chaunged or destroyed, but perfected. Second∣ly,2. shall these elementary qualities, by Gods hand be limited and stayed, in their actions and operations, that they shall not worke one against another, for their mutuall destruction? Not so; for then, this impassibility should not be an in∣ternall vertue, as a dowry immanent in the glo∣rified body; (which is against the Apostles in∣tention) but onely an outward assistance of God. Againe, these elementary parts and qualities,Impassibility is internall. must have their severall mixtions; for the ma∣king of diverse and distinct parts corporall, which cannot be, without a refraction and composi∣tion of the elementary qualities themselves one with another. Or Thirdly, may we thinke, that3. this vertue is a coelestiall kinde of substance, or substanciall quality, which united with the ele∣mentary qualities and substances, doth temper and make thereby the bodies which are to be glorified, fit receptacles for their glorious soules? This though it seeme very probable, yet I will rather resolve with Aquinas, that this vertue andSupplem: q. 2. art 1.
power of Impassibility flowes immediately from the soule herselfe, which informing the body doth so perfectly and fully, subdue all the powers and qualities of the same, unto herselfe; that no contrary agent, can be able to make any vio∣lent impression, or action, upon, or against the bo∣dy, for the corruption & destruction of the same: or may be able to draw it from that quiet and peaceable state, wherein it rests. Austen excel∣lently: God hath made the Soule of so powerfull a na∣ture,August epist. 66. ad Dioso∣rum. that from her glorious happinesse there redounds to the body the vigour of incorruption. Cleare it is, that no agent can worke, with any violent or con∣trary impression, upon, or against any other A∣gent, or subject, to hurt or alter the same, unlesse the same Agent, be more powerfull then the other is; on which, or against which, it worketh: which being clearely true; likewise cleare it is; that no corporall creature, which hath in it contrary ele∣mentary quallities, can be of greater power and force, then a glorified body is, to worke a∣gainst or upon the same. So long therefore, as the glorified Soule shall be subject to God, and the glorified body, be subject to the Soule; so long it shall be impossible, for any corporall a∣gent whatsoever, to have a transeunt action or impression, which may any way alter or hurt the same. And this is that immutation and change whereof the Apostle not onely speakes but glo∣ries,1 Cor. 15. 51. We shall not all sleepe, but wee shall all be chan∣ged. Where he makes this immutation, to be a chaunge, from passibility to impassibility; and to
be peculiar onely to the elect, whereof the repro∣bate, shall have no part, nor portion at all. And yet, though we graunt an impassibility to the bodies glorified, so that they shall not be subject to any violent, or contrary impressions;The Beatified shall have all such sensitive actions which include not Corruption. yet we may not deny, but that there shall be all such sensitive actions, (and consequently answe∣rable passions which include not corruption) of see∣ing, hearing, feeling, smelling, tasting and such like, as may be fitting for that place. Of sight cleareIob. 19. 26. it is; for Iob professes that his eyes shall behold God his Saviour; and most frequent are other testimo∣nies of Scripture for the same. Hearing cannot be denyed, for as the Saints shall incessantly with vocall praise, (the Psalmist professing that the ex∣ultationsPsal. 149. 6. of God, shall be in their throates) magnifie God; so no doubt may be made, but that their vocall Alleluas shall be mutually heard and under∣stood; yea who can doubt, but that the beatifi∣ed, shall speake to Christ, and Christ to them? Goe too; Good and faithfull Servants, saith Christ; all haile Glorious God and Lord, sing they; Benediction, thanksgiving, is their glorious note for ever and e∣ver. Feeling we may not deny, for that in∣cludes not any corruption, and if agreeing to sense, it is a perfection not a defect of nature. And that glorified bodies be palpable and may be felt,Luc. 24. 39. that of Christ makes it most cleare, Feele, and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see mee to have. Neither of the sense of smelling, may any questi∣on be made; because, for the sensation thereof, there is no corruptible or corporall immutation necessarily required.
Touching the sense of taste; some difficulty may be made; and yet though there be no deli∣cious taste by eating or drinking delicious meates or dainties (such as the voluptuous of these times make their God) notwithstanding it is not absurd to thinke, that the glorified bodyes by Gods ordi∣nance, shall have, some delicious and pleasant moysture, resting upon the place of tast, that so by such a meanes, that sensible part may have her full rest and content. The best reasons, for this which I have said, touching the perfection of cor∣porall senses, I take to be these few, first, that as the body shall have her perfection and reward, because shee was so familiar, and individuall a companion of the Soule, in the suffering forReasons why there shall be glorious acti∣ons of Sensati∣on in the glori∣fied. Christ, or her subjection to Christ; So likewise, the sensitive parts, and faculties, which have been instruments of the Soule, in the exercise of righte∣ousnesse, shall also have their appointed reward. Againe, there can be no sufficient reason, broughtRom. 6. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Luk. 10. 27. 2 Cor. 5. 10. against what I have said; why it should not be so. Againe; he that will seriously peruse the 5. and 25. chapters of St. Matthewes Gospell, and the 22. of St. Luke; where Christ promises, and per∣formesMat. 5. and 25. Luk: 22. his glorious rewards, to his faithfull fol∣lowers; and where Lazarus is described, to have tasted his very felicity (a thing which the rich glutton importunely desired) will not easily be induced to thinke this which I have here set downe to be untrue or false. And so I conclude this point with this observation, that if (as I have shewed above) there be in the Soule glorified an
impeccability and indefectibility, so that they cannot sin; & in the body, an impassibility, not to receive any the least impression of cōtrariety and corrup∣tion, that may be: how firme then? how stable then? yea how everlasting then? is that glori∣ous state: which hath this participated aeternity aeter∣nally that it cannot perish nor decay? Who a∣rightly considers this, and longs not, to have a speedy dissolution of this terrestriall house? of this cotage of dirt and clay? that so he may beIob. 4. 19. present with the Lord; and have a house aeternall and2. Cor. 5. 1. everlasting? not made with hands, but such a one, as the spirit of the Lord shall frame and establish? O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of hosts? my SoulePsal. 84. 2. longeth and my heart fainteth after the Courts of the Lord. Subtilitie. THis dowrie gift, which is generallie called Subtilitie, I would rather speaking with the Apostle, call Spiritualty; for in his Epistle to the Corinthians, hee affirmeth thus, It is sowed a na∣turall body, but it riseth a spirituall body; and againe,1 Cor. 15. 44, 47. 48. 49. The first man is of the earth, earthly; The second man, is the Lord from heaven; As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such also are they, that are heavenly: And as wee have borne the Image of the earthy, wee shall also beare the Image of the heavenly. Thus the Apo∣stle; whereout many excellent observations might bee made. But I call it Spiritualty not as
though (which some falsly have affirmed) the body were chaunged into the Soule and Spirit, for so that which is raysed should not bee man, consisting of Soule and Body; but a third distinct thing, different from Man; and consequently the mystery of the resurrection of the flesh should bee quite taken away; for Resurrection re∣quires that the same thing which fell, bee raysed up againe. Neyther doe I call it Spiritualty as though the body after resurrection were made thin, and rare, like the wynd and ayre, as the Eu∣tychians of ould did affirme; denying the bodyes glorified to bee palpable: but I call it Spiritualty by reason of a more powerfull influence, and that do∣minion which the Soule shall have into and over the Body after the resurrection, then it ever had or could have in the time of her mortalitye. This though it bee hard to explicate, yet sure I am that in so affirming & calling of it Spiritualty I speake in the phrase of the Apostle; but as for Subtility1. Cor. 15. 44. which in true and proper signification signifyes a property whereby such things as are spirituall have a penetrative and piercing vertue to passe andAristo. lib. 2. de Generat. tex. 50 pierce into and through, the corpulent parts of any thing that hath a bodye and is corpulent, ha∣ving dmensions and parts; I cannot see how it can bee given to the glorified bodyes, which after resurrection have the same extensive and corpulent parts for quantity and fulnes of matter or bodili∣nesse; as they had before the resurrection: and can no more penetrate, pierce or enter into or thorough any true bodily and corporall sub∣stance
which hath the dimensions of quantity, to weet, thicknes, breadth, length, then they couldAugust. tract 121 in Ioh. Chrysost. hom. 89. in Ioh. Ambros. in 24. luc. Hiar. ub. 3 definit. Hiero-Epist. ad Pammach. Ioh 20, 26. before their resurrection, in the time of their mortality and corruption. And although it may bee probably affirmed with diverse Ancient Fa∣thers, that the body of our saviour (who entered into his disciples the dores beeing shut) did by powerfull penetration passe thorough the doore, yet wee maye not attribute the same as a thing naturall to his glorified body, it having the same dimensions of quantity for bodilines and fulnes of matter which it had before; but wee must with Anti∣quity attribute the same to the power of his God∣head,Luc. 137. August. Eps. 3. ad Volusianum Heb. 4. 18. Iob. 37. 18 to whom no word is impossible; for he that could enter into the wombe the secret of the most pure ver∣gin not violated, as Augustine and Nazianzene ex∣cellently; Hee who could penetrate the heavens which are more solid and strong then brasse, and yet receaue no bruise in his body, nor make any rent in them; wee may not doubt but that by the omnipotenty of his power hee could enter in into his disciples the dores being shut. But to conculde this point wherein the holy Scriptures bee so sparing; though with the Apostle wee give Spiritualty to the glorified bo∣dyes, whereby it may seeme that in truth they are become Spirituall (which is true in the sense I have expressed) yet are they not so Spirituall but that they are palpaple and may bee touchedLuc. 24. 39. and felt▪ Feele & see, sayth Christ, to his Apostles, for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see mee to have. Where I note that a body which is truly spiritual,
may withall bee really palpaple and bee touched and felt also, though it bee against that knowenGregor. hom. 26 in Euangel. saying of Gregory called the great, a Pope of Rome. Of necessity all what so ever may bee felt or handled is subject to Corruption. But perhaps hee meant, that so it was ordinarily according to the course of naturall things, as they are in this state of morta∣lity. The reader may here expect that I should more amply open and explicate what this Spiri∣tualty may bee; I confesse my Ignorance, I had rather heare a master then bee my self a Teacher; only I resolve that it is a spirituall influence into, and a powerfull Dominion of a Soule Glorious over a Glorified Body, whereby the Body may seeme as it were to bee freed and cleared from all such corporall imperfections and defections as are incident to substances that are bodily, and Cor∣porall, I meane such imperfections and defects as doe not essentially follow the nature of quan∣tity and Bodilines it self; that is, all such defects and imperfectious as precede and goe before, accom∣pany, or follow after Generation, Augmentation or such like corporall motions, which serve for the increase or conservation of humane nature. And surely most necessary it is that all such de∣fects and imperfectious should cease; for without the cessation of them it cannot bee well under∣stood, how the Beatified both in body and Soule should bee elevated into that liberty of Glory whichRom. 8. 21. Galat. 4. is promised to the childeren of God, the Citisens of that Hierusalem above, which is both Glorious and freed from all servitude of corruption.
Cleare experience teacheth that to bee most true which the booke of Wisedome complay∣ninglySap. 9. 15: delivereth. That the Corruptible body over∣loadeth and aggravateth the soule. And that the earthly habitation presseth downe the mynde meditating upon many things. Most necessary then it is, that in that state of felicity and full liberty where the Soules Beatified incessantly see God and meditate upon God, that they should bee freed from all grosse and heavy clogs and hinderances, that so with all their forces and endeavours they may bend themselves to the contemplation, loue and fruition of the infinit Goodnes of God so cleare∣ly and presentially proposed unto them. And this is that which wee must call Spiritualty; where∣in, if I may seeme to the Learned to be mistaken, I desire from them some better and more full de∣claration of this dowry of Subtility. Agility. THis dowry gift of Agility is a glorious quality or vertue, whereby the bodyes of the glori∣fied are totally subject to the Soules, as to most powerfull Movers: to be moved by them with∣out all resistance or least reluctancy that may be thought on: which Agility or Facility as I con∣ceive they have, because the soule hath a most ab∣solute dominion over them, and doth by a redun∣dancy and emanation impart unto them a glorious quickning and vivacity or livelines, farre beyond that which any mortall creature in their bodily
heavy parts can have. And this either by the meanes of a greater perfection of glorified Soules, or by the meanes of more perfect instruments for motion, then those which corruptible bodies u∣sually have. This Agility or Facility for motion, al∣though it make the bodies glorified very tractable to the soules for motion, so that we may in a sort say with St. Austen. Whereto soever the will shal in∣tend,August. lib: 22. de Civit. cap. altimo. there presently the body (as it were in a momēt) shall or may be: yet we may not graunt unto the said bodies any instant tanean motion: so that in an imagined instant of time (I say imagined in∣stant, for time hath no true or reall instant either as part or period and end of it selfe) they may make any true reall corporall motion or mooving. Howsoever diverse Schoolemen may to the con∣trary have dreamed. For doth it not imply in termes, and involve contradiction, that that mo∣tion which is a successiue passing over, or in space from place to place (as all corporall motion and moving is) should be, and not in some durance and continuance of time according to the greater or lesse velocity and swiftnesse thereof. And yet notwithstanding, the corporall moti∣on of glorified bodies may be very sodaine and in (as it were) imperceptible moments of time; like as the Sunne beames, the which as it were in a moment (because in an unperceivable moment of time) doe fill this whole hemisphere with their glo∣riousAug. epist. 44. Sap. 3. 7. Lustre. Austen affirmes it, and I dare not deny it: And so I interpret those words of the booke of Wisdome (if they are to be understood
of the glorified). The righteous shall shine, and asIoh. 20. and 21. Luk 24. sparks among the stubble, they shall runne too and fro: Whereby, I take it, their agility and facility for motion is figured. And if we arightly consider what is recorded in sacred Scriptures, touching the sundry soudayne corporall apparitions and disapearings of our Saviour after his resurrection, and how that the bodyes of the beatified shall be made conformable to the Clarity (and so answera∣blyPhil. 3. 20. to other glorious qualities) of his glorified body, there will no just reason be shewed for de∣nying such a glorious agility, either to the body of Christ, or to the glorified bodyes of his Saints. And although we give to the glorified bodyes of Christ and his Saints such a glorious nimble∣nesse and Agility, yet if we observe the phrases of sacred Scriptures, we shall finde that the glorifi∣ed in that glorious state of happinesse, are sel∣dome recorded to have used such extraordina∣ry agility and nimblenesse of motion. We reade that they shall follow the Lambe whithersoever heReve. 14. 4. goeth, which following is interpreted even by the Lambe himselfe to be a walking, which must be so decent and grave as becomes that glorious state. For thus he professeth hereof: They shallReve. 3. 4. walke with me in whites, for they are worthy. Now this walking must be such as beseemes the glori∣ous Majesty of Christ and the honour of his Saints Glorious, Grave, Divine, Magnificent; Aud surely it were no lesse then folly once to dreame that the glorified shall have any games or sports in cour∣sing and running up and downe. No, no, such va∣nities which
earthly minds do over highly prise, do not beseeme their states of glory and Majesty; And yet though we deny them to have any un∣seemely runnings or dancings, we may not affirme them to be so penned up as though they had no glorious restings, perambulations and walkings; They have doubtlesse their sittings on seates of Iudgement; They have their religious and Reveren∣tiall standings up, bowing downe, prostrations andEphe. 2. 5. Revelat. 3. 2. Luk. 22. 30. Mat. 19 28. Revelat. 4. 4. 10. and 7. 9. the casting downe of their Crownes before the state of Majestye. How then can we deny unto them seemely divine motions? And notwithstanding whitherto soever their motions leade them, they have the glorious presence of God with them; for God by the vertue and immensity of his all∣presence being in all his Creatures, the glorifiedMat. 18. 10. weresover they be, they alwayes see his face, not one∣ly above in the heavens, but even in the lowest bowells of the earth, if any occasion of service, should require their presence there. And can wee otherwise dreame but that those glorious Angells who did minister to Christ in theMat. 4. 12. wildernesse, did there (for by definitive presence the substances and natures were in the wildernes not in heaven) did there I say behold the glori∣ous Majesty of the Father? And surely that which Gregory affirmes of the Angells truely; That theyGreg. hom. 34. in Ezekiel. runne as it were within God and in God, whitherto soever they are sent, may also be truely affirmed of the glorified Saints, wheretosoever they roule, and wheresoever they abide; they abide in God and roulle in God. It was truely said by the Poet, and after∣wards
confirmed by the Apostle, that in God we live, we moove, and have our being, as certainlyAct. 17. 28. it may be said of the beatified, that they live, moove are, and have their glorious being in him; live of him, by partaking of his glorious life; move before him, by most prompt and ready obedience, alwayes doing his will; are in him by a glorious inpre∣sence of God in them, and they in God, being en∣teredMat. 25. 23. into his owne glory. Againe in him, with him, and before him; with him never to be separated from him; in him, diving into and swimming in the infinite ocean of his joy; before him alwayes beholding and delighting to behold the glory of his Majesty, and the Majesty of his glory. So likewise God in them with them and before them In them by the glorious bright and light of his countenance illustrating them within; with them ever supporting them with the left hand of his protection, and filling them with the joyes and pleasures of his right hand of consolation; beforePsal. 16. them for all aternityes by their glorious vision and fruition of him; himselfe to satiate them, but ne∣ver to sade or cloy them; ever desirous to see and delighting to see. O how amourously in longing desire after these things cryed out that sweet sin∣gell of Israell: Glorious things are spoken of thee OPsal. 87. 2. City of God! O thou City of God, so glorious are the things which are in thee, that no tongue can with sufficiency, speake the least part of them: and no marvell, for what tongue can speake them whichIsa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9. eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, neither the heart of man hath conceived, neither can conceive in this
state of mortality, what God hath prepared for those that love him. Clarity. THat which the Apostle calls glory, speaking1 Cor. 15. 43. thus, The body is sowen in ignoblenes, it riseth againe in glory, is generally by Divines termed and called Clarity, and this nothing at all from the Apostles sense; for in the place alleaged, he teaching that at the Generall resurrection the Glories of the bodies glorified shalbe different and diverse, one exceeding the other, hee useth this de∣claration1 Cor. 15. 45. for the same, Like as onestarre differeth from another in Clarity (the brightnesse of the starres being more properly, called Clarity then glory) so shall the resurrection of the dead bee. Now what manner of Clarity this shall bee, it is not dif∣ficult to expesse; if wee call to mynd what man∣ner of Clarity and Glory that was wherwith the body of Christ was adorned at the time of hisMat. 17. 2. Transfiguration, when his face did shyne as the sun, and his rayment was white as the light. S. Mark, addes that his rayment became shyning, exceeding whyte as the snow, so as no fuller on the earth can whyten them.Mark. 9. 3. But cleare it is, that our vile and humble bodyes at the daye of the Resurrection shall bee transfor∣med, and by a glorious immutation bee made like to the resplendant and bright shinning body of Christ: so sayth Paule in his Epistle to the Philip∣pians;Phil. 3. 20. And Christ promiseth in the Gospell, That the Righteous shall shyne like the Sun in the kingdome
of their Father. Loe Christs face on earth did shine,Mat. 13. 43. and now in heaven doth shyne like the Sun; and to the Righteous it is promised, that though now they are as the very of scumme of the world, yet their faces shall shyne like the Sun in the kingdome of their Father. But here note that though it bee sayd that Christs body & the Saynts bodies shall shyne like one and the same thing; never the lesse this must not bee taken in full equality of Clarity & bright∣nes.Chrysost: in Mat. Chrysostome excellently: But if the face of the Lord did shyne as the Sun, and the Saynts shall shyne as the Sun; shall then the Lords Clarity and his ser∣vants bee equall? Not so, but because nothing is found to bee more bright then the Sun, therefore to give an example of the future resurrection, both the face of our Lord is sayed to shyne, and the righteous also are sayd to shyne as the Sun; Whereby wee cannot but observe how exceeding bright and resplendant the Clarity of our glorified bodies shall bee; for if they shall shyne as the Sun, and the Sun shallIsa. 30. 26. Chrysost, in Mat. shyne at the day of Iudgement seventimes brigh∣ter then now it doth; then may wee boldly with Chrysostome say, though there shall bee no chaunge in nature, yet there shall be the addition or putting to of an unenarrable Clarity and brightnes. Which brightnes and Clarity we may not only conceave that it shall bee a transeunt Light upon the superficies and out syde of the body, like as the Suns beames, without any immutation inter∣nall, doe spread themselves upon a wall; No, no; there shall bee a true internall immutation by a glorious Clarity and brightnes, which shall make
the glorified bodies not only bright and cleare without, but also fulgent and shyning within, and thoroughout. So that the glory of the Soule may thorough the body is it were by a glasse, in such a manner bee seene and beheld in such sort as a spi∣rituall glory may bee beheld and seene; some∣what in like sort, as the Coulour of the body may be seene in a glasse, or rather as the life of the soule is seene and observed in and by the vivacity and Livelines which it imparts by action and motion to the outward visible parts of the body. And if I misconceane not, in respect of this glorious translucency and transparency, the bright∣nes and Clarity of the celestiall Hierusalem is in the Revelation of S. Iohn thus & in like sort described: And hee caryed mee away in the spirit into an highReve. 21. 10. 11. and great mountayne, and shewed mee the great City holy Hierusalem (which I interpret the Glorious state of the Saints Triumphant) descending out of heaven, from God having the glory of God. And her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a Iasperstone as cleare as Chrystall. And agayne inv. 18. 19. 20. &c. the 18. and other verses following, And the buil∣ding of the wall of it was of Iasper, and the City was pure gould like unto cleare glasse, and the foundations of the wall of the City were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was Iasper, the second Saphire, the third a Chalcedonye, the fourth an Emerauld, the fifth a Sardonix, the sixth a Sar∣dius, the seventh a Chrysolite, the eighth a Berill, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasse, the eleventh a Hiacinth, the twelfth an Amethist. And
the twelve gates, were twelve pearles, every severall gate one pearle. And the streete of the City was pure gould as it were transparent glasse. Thus farre the Prophet, giving almost in every word a touche and description of some one or other Clarity and brightnes of that Triumphant City. O let us ponde∣ring and ballancing these things in the scales of our Soules, say unto them; Arise ye up and be illightened, for the Light of the Lord is comming, and the glory of God shall appeare both over us and in us if we find truely to feare him sincerely, to love him, and faithfully to expect his comming, Amen. I have here set downe more at large the words of the Prophet, that the Godly reader may well observe these things, first what I have sayd to be most true, touching the glorious translucency and splendour of the glorified bodyes described to be like Iasper or Crystal, or Saphire or Chalcedon, or some other precious pearles, or Margarites: the excellen∣cy and surpassing brightnesse whereof, especially of Christ (conformable whereunto the glorifiedPhil. 3. 20. bodyes of the Saints shall be made) I gather out of the 23. verse of this said chapter, wherein the Pro∣phet having described that the glorious City needeth neither light of the Sunne nor of the Moone, andReve. 21. 23. gives a reason thereof, for that the Clarity and bright∣nesse of God shall illighten the same; he adds in the same verse that the Candell thereof was the Lambe.Glorious brightnesse of Christs body distusing it selfe Who hath ever observed a candel, lighted at noon dayes, and bright to have given any light? No, no; the brightnesse of the Sunne obscures the same, be the candell never so great; And yet the Lambs
clarity and brightnesse, that is, the brightnesse of Christ as man, shall through and by his glorified body be so shining & resplendant, that it shall be as a bright shining Sunne in that Triumphant City, where shall be no night nor darkenesse, saith the Pro∣phet. Againe, I have beene more large in this to con∣firme that truth, which some most idly (as not loving nor desirous to excell in those vertues which must be as measures of distinct degrees ofReve. 21. 17. glory; for one and the same is the measure of men and Angells) I say as some most idly would call in question; to weet, that there shall be a true varie∣ty and diversitie of glories and glorious Mansions1 Cor. 15. in that triumphant City; Some cleare like Chry∣stall; some bright like Saphire, some glittering like Iasper, others fresh and greene like Emerald &c. Mens Soules shall there differ in glory, and their bodyes in Clarity, even as the starres in the firmament do differ in Clarity each from o∣ther. This though it be a most evident truth, yet the wanton wills of many who have placed al san∣ctity in conceit, apprehension, perswasion, (I might say presumption) will not admit of the same, charme the Charmer never so wisely. But let the pious read seriously the 20. of this prophe∣sie,Reve. 20. 12. and he shall finde that the very Iudgements of God touching great and small, (great and smal) shal be according to what is written in the bookes. And that the levell measure and square is  according to their workes, that is, faith, love, patience, zeale, truth, &c. So just is God that he is to all those
that seeke after him in a holy feare, a faithfull re∣rewarder,Heb. 11. 6. giving to every man according as he may have done. Againe thirdly, I have beene herein the more large, to shew the surpassing felicity of that place; where the whole bodyes of the Saints and every part of them, yea those parts that are now estee∣med basest and vilest, shall shine and glitter like most precious Margarites and Pearles: they shall not onely then appeare without blemish and free from all deformity; cleare from corruption, without all difficulty; but they shall be filled within and compassed about without with Clarity, they shall be indowed and invested all over with Spiritualty; they shall be quickned and enlived with Agility; they shall be replenished and pos∣sessed1 Cor. 15. 43. 44. with Impassibility; for that which was sowne in corruption shal rise in incorruption; that which was sowne in dishonour shall be raised in glory; that which was sowne in weakenesse, rising againe in power; that which was sowne a naturall body, ri∣sing againe a spirituall body. Seneca perhaps had some obscure knowledge hereof, when as he writes thus of the state of the Godly after this life ended. These things (saith he, speaking of the joyes of this life) cease, but they perish not: yea,Seneca. epist. 36. death which we feare and shunne, changeth, but taketh not away life, the day will come which will place us in rest and light: Thus he, like a Christian, though not so fully nor so clearely, as that re∣nowned Father St. Austen most sweetly and di∣vinely. There shall be life without death; YouthAngust. in So∣loqui.
without ould age, beawty without deformity; strength without debility, joy without dolour, rest without labour, such an aeternall refection shall be to the glori∣fied bodyes: thus he. Surely the splendour and glory of the body is so great, that passes all explication, it goes beyond all apprehension; and according∣ly not onely in respect of the happinesse of the soule, but also in respect of the glory of the body we may well take up that of the Apostle, 2 Cor.2 Cor. 4. 17. 4. 17. That the momentany and short tribulations of this life doe worke (in us and for us) a weight of aeter∣nall glory. O that the wantons of these dayes (so full of va∣nity and presumption) who thinke themselves nobly adorned by their Pearles, Diamonds and o∣ther costly ornaments, would seriously thinke of the glorious and resplendāt Clarity of the bodyes of Saints glorified! how would they despise all those vanities in comparison, where on now they set their fancyes? If we call to minde how St. Peters soule was gladded and ravished with the on∣ly beholding of Christs glorified body uponMat. 17. 2. Mark. 9. 3. mount Thabor, though his body at that time received no part thereof; we cannot otherwise thinke, but that the joy of the beatified shall be exceedingly and surpassingly great, when they shall not onely behold the glorified body of Christ and see his glory, but withall shall see their owne bodyes and soules participants of the samePhil. 3. 20. brightnesse and glory. So, So, shall God heale the infirmities of his Saints, crowning them in mercyesPsal. 103. 3. 4. and miserations. So so, shall the faithfull be de∣livered from
the servitude of Corruption, into the liber∣tyRom. 8. 21. of such glory as beseemes the Sonnes of God: So, so, shall all those who instruct others to GodlyDan. 12. 3. life, shine as starres in the firmament for all aeternities. O that our soules might be truely enamoured with the love and desire of this Celestiall place and state! O how would we despise all transito∣ry flashes and sparkes of earthly pleasures; if we could but seriously thinke of those joyes andPsal. 16. 10. pleasures, which are layed up in Gods right hand for his Saints for evermore. Iacob, served seven yeares twice told, to ob∣teine his beautifull Rachell, and the dayes though so many, seemed to him but as few, in respect of the greatnesse of his love. O that the love of our soules were in like sort great after the Celestiall Rachell, so comely in state and glory; then should we think all the labours but light, all the tar∣riance but short, all the dayes but as moments, wherein and wherewith our heauenly Laban shall exercise us in these dayes of our Pilgrimage and mortality! O thou gracious God, Father of lights, Illustrate our understandings: O thou God foun∣taine of life, refresh our memories: O thou God, burning fire of love, enflame our wills and sanctifie our affections. O thou God our cheefest last and only good, the God of our hearts and our portiō∣for ever, be thou to us all in all things. O thou that hast made us for thy selfe, thou hast framed us ac∣cording to thy owne Image, we know none, we ac∣knowledgeGen. 1. 27. none, nor desire any other end of our selves to make us happy but thy selfe. O do vouch∣safe to
conduct us safe and to bring us sure to the heaven of thy happinesse, to the haven of our e∣ternall felicity: teach us thy paths wherein we shall walke, guide us with thy Counsell, and receive us into thy glory. To thee we confesse in all hum∣ble longing desires of our soules: Truely O LordAugust n So∣q. about the end. thou art great aboue all Gods, and great is thy reward, for thou art not great, and thy reward litle, but as thou art great so also is thy reward great; for thou art not one thing and thy reward another, but thou thy selfe art the too to great reward; thou the Crowner and the Crowne; thou the promiser and the promised; thou the giver and the gift; thou the rewarder and the reward itselfe of aeternall felicity. O be thou this to us in the truth of that glory when we shall enter into thy owne joy and see thee as thou art in thy selfe: to this guide us with thy Counsell and enable us with thy Spirit of grace, that running the way of thy Commandements we may in the end at∣taine thee the God of our hearts, our parts, and our Portion, for ever, Amen. SEVENTH SECTION. Wherein is breefely and in generall laid downe the meanes and way, whereby eternall happinesse is to be attained. FOr the more cleare handling of this point, we are to suppose, that whatsoever thing hath any perfection due unto it, as the end and con∣summate perfection thereof; If that perfection
be not naturall and essentiall to the thing it selfe; the same cannot be had without some action or motion leading thereunto: for example, God whoExod. 3. 14. is most essentially his owne (I am that I am) and whole infinite perfection is his owne being, most necessarily and essentially; needes not nor requires not, any action or motion to any thing that is without himselfe for his end and perfection. But so it is not in Creatures, whose natures being li∣mited and in themselves imperfect, neede and re∣quire some action or motion to that which is with∣out themselves, for the attaining of their ends and final perfection; which motion is that which now we have in handling, whereby man is to at∣taine his last end, and consummate happines. For this purpose I ponder that Principle of the Apostle, He that cometh to God must beleeve thatHeb. 11 6. he is, and that he is a rewarder of all those that en∣quire after him. In which words I find clearely, that the accession and comming to God in this life, (which is the way to that vision and fruition of God in the nextlife, the finall end of man) is by Faith, and a religious inquisition of and after him, which religious inquisition of and after him, if I should thinke not to be cheifely by Faith, hope and love, (as the heads of this way out of which many particular paths doe follow) I should wrong the judgement of all Orthodoxe Divines whatsoever; who doe distinguish the vertues that are conver∣sant and immediately exercised upon and about God into three, to weet, Faith Hope and Love. The later of which the Apostle himselfe termes
the more excellent way; writing thus to the Corin∣thians;Cor. 12. 31. And yet shew I you a more excellent way▪ which more excellent way alone, is to be taken as the spirit and path of Faith, and Faith againe, is to be reputed as the head way and soule of it, two in∣dividuall & inseparable twinnes, mutually ever im∣bracing each other and working each by other. And though there bee infinite ianglings and questions, about the vertue, extent and causalitie of these severall vertues in the matter of justifi∣cation, and about their manner of merrit or con∣currence to saluation, yet doe I not remember, that ever I have read of any, except the ungodly A∣nomistsAugust: ad quod vult de▪ heres. 14. and prophane Libertines (a broode of En∣nomius) or some indiscret Predicants, who have de∣nyed the necessitie of the two later; hope and love; As for the first, Faith, all requyre the same abso∣lutely necessary to salvation; Yea the Papists themselves require the same as the very first meanes and foundation for justification and sancti∣ficationCoun: Trident Bellar▪ Omnes Pontificii. out of an absolute necessitie: but not sole∣ly and alone without hope and loue. The Refor∣med Churches generally, hould her, (to weet faith) to be the sole and onely instrumentall cause of Iustification, by which as by a hand, the justice & righteousnesse of Christ is applyed unto the justi∣fied soule. So then by confession of all, an accessi∣on and motion to God there must be in this life, or else there can be no possession of him in frui∣tion in the next life. The happinesse of this life, is the way and motion to the happinesse of the next life. The happinesse of the next life (which is the
happinesse of the end) can be no other then the vi∣sion and fruition of God. The happinesse of this life which is the happinesse of the way, is also a vi∣sion and fruition of God, but it is by faith and love; and that which Eusebius calleth, the worship of God, not onely externall, but especially internall, and yet not so internall, but that there must also ne∣cessarilyEusib. de moust evanglica. be externall, for no man shal be crowned un∣lesse he shall manfully and lawfully have fought: and2 Timoth. 2. 5. againe, the Spirit of God saith thus, Hould thatReve. 3. 11. which thou hast, lest another take thy crowne. Which wee are not onely to understand of the internall sight of the soule, and inward constancy of our Faith, but also of the outward profession thereof,Rom. 10. 10. and the externall exercise of piety and godlinesse; If I be demaunded what I would call this, I cannot bethinke of a better name then Christian warfare, or the Imitation of Christ. The holy Apostle chea∣ringTit. 2. 12. up the faithfull, puts them in minde of a joy∣ous expectation after the comming of the glory of the great God; but he prefixes before by the way of necessary preparation; that they must live soberly, piously, and justly in this world: so that sobriety (which conteines the well ordering of man in himselfe,) against excesse &c. Piety, which comprehends the whole worship of God, Iustice which compri∣ses all duties that appertaine to equity, & right be∣twixt man and man; are prerequired as the very motion and way, by which they shall come to the ioyous meeting and glorious enioying of the glo∣rieVia Regni. of the great God. Thus then holy life and Christi∣an workes, are the very way and motion, to the glorious
vision and fraition of God. It is said generally, yea received by all Orthodoxe Divines, that good and godly workes are the way to the kingdome of glo∣rie. Which we are not to understand by the way of comparison onely to the materiall way, by which men in their corporall journies, doe walke from place to place, from Citie to citie; but even by the way of comparison, to the very motions, walkings and passings of men upon and along the same wayes; which we may call mens wayes to such and such places: so the pious and godly life of the faithfull, is their very moving, passing and walking to their journies end, the glorious vision and frui∣tion of God. And so in what manner wee may hold the movings and passings of men along their wayes, necessary for their arriving to such and such places: In like sort we must hould the mo∣ving and passing of man by godly life, to be ne∣cessary for his arriving to the kingdome of glory. No man, saith that Reverend Pastour Cowper, com∣methCowper apud D. Boyes, 8. Sonday after Trinit. epist. either to prison or pallace, but by the entrie there∣of. So man goeth to heaven or hell, but by the way thereof. If this which I have set downe, touching good workes, the very way of man to his eternall feli∣city, were not apparent in it selfe according to the tenure of sacred scriptures, requiring & com∣manding the same; yet the very manner of Christs investing and inducting his Saints with, and into glory, doth most evidently evince the same. ForMat. 25. 22. 23. 24. were it not a dishonour against the infinite pure Majestie of God, and impeachment to his allLuk. 19. 17.
knowledge, and wisdome, to thinke that he should otherwise give glory in time, then in such a man∣ner as he from all aeternities foreknew hee would give, and had predetermined to give? Or that he should not from al aeternities have foredetermined, & decreed so to give glory; as in the time of his ad∣mission of his Saints into glorie, he doth actually give & in truth of thing collate the same. Now how God doth actually giue & collate glory at the day of glorification, the Gospell is so cleere, that there is no declaration or amplificatiō of the same need∣full, for he admitteth into his kingdome of glorie, those that have beleeved in him, and be∣loved him; even as from all eternities he had pre∣paredIsa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9. the glorie, which eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, nor heart conceived, for those that love him. Love him, is expressed, but beleeve on him, is supposed: For it is not lesse possible to love God without Faith, then it is possible to please him without faith, which the Apostle concludeth to be altogether impossible. And thus doe the goodHeb. 11. 6. workes of the faithfull follow them. So, so, the Virgins,Reve. 14. 13. that have light and Oyle in their Lampes, with joyMat. 25. 10. finde admittance into the joye of the Bridgroome. So, so, all those that have on their weding garmentsMat. 22. 11. 12. are graciously admitted, all others wanting the same, are justly excluded. So, so, the iust judge that gives to every man according to his workes, re∣wardeth his diligent and faithfull Servants, whō hee findeth watchfull; and by their piety and obe∣dience,Mat. 25. 20. 22. in the good use of grace, (and this by grace) to have gained either five, two or more ta∣lents, according to the measure of grace recei∣ved.
So so are good works via regni, the way to the kingdome! as it is the joynt voice of all the peo∣ple of God. But yet we must know this very well, that we must not attribute eternall life, nor the means that leade thereunto, to any other, then to the grace of God. Concerning which truth, ve∣nerable Austen after a long discourse concludethAugust. de grat. et lib. arbit. c. 8. et 1▪ 15. 16. &c. thus, Therefore most deare, our good and godly life is nothing else, but the grace of God, and without doubt life everlasting, which is given to good life, is the grace of God; for it also is given, because that un∣to which it is given, is freely given; but that to which it is given is onely grace; but this which is given to it, because it is a reward thereof, it is a grace for a grace, as it were a reward for Righteousnesse, that that may be true, (because it is true) that God will reward every2 Cor. 5. 10. man according to his works, thus he: Which being so, as it is most evidētly so, that the life of Glory, is given too and according to the life of grace and sanctitie: O let vs all with joye and alacrity, a∣bound more and more therein, adding vertue &c.2 Pet. 1. 5. 6. as St. Peter adviseth; that this life being ended, and our races couragiously run through, wee may gloriously bee exalted into the vpper house of Gods glory, and Eternitie. O gracious God, how happie is hee whom thou shalt vouchsafe so to teachPsal. 94. 12. and instruct in thy Law, that dutiefully walking therein, hee may in the end, come to behold thee the God of Gods, in thy Caelestiall Sion.Psal. 84. 8. And so here, as I cannot but observe, so I can∣not but lament the infinite janglings of diverse, touching the causality of good works, to salva∣tion,
whether it be of condignity or congruity, whe∣ther they be as conditions (without which, not) as merrits. For cleere it is, that they are so necessary to Salvation, as the way thereunto, so that with∣out them, salvation shall never be had. In Philoso∣phy it is most true, from one extreame to another, no man can passe, but by & over the middle. So likewise in Divinity it is most true, that no man can passe from the extreame of sinfull misery, but by the middell and meanes of godly life and piety. When the Philosopher shewes, what manner of Causalitie the passing along vpon the way, hath for the pas∣sengers comming to the wayes end, then may the Divine in like sort, declare what manner of causalitie, the walking and going on along in pie∣ty, may have for the attaining unto the end there∣of, life everlasting: what neede such disputes? O how better is it to have an inward, true sense and testimony of justification, then to have such wrang ling and foolish logomachie about the formalitie of Iustification? We all on all sides, (I except the out∣witted Precisians and Libertines, Brownists and Se∣paratists) require faith as necessary, yea, as absolutely necessary to salvation. What neede then such hate∣ful disputes about the causality of them, to salvatiō? Let all rather endevour to abound in them, then to dispute of them, for so an abundant meanes of en∣trance2 Pet. 1. 12. into glorie, and of attaining their last endes shall be ministred unto them. How idle might that Duke or Prince, be thought to be, who being called by any free and powerfull State to be their absolute Lord and Sove∣raigne,
should first before he would goe to take the said Crowne dispute with his Sages, what man∣ner of causality, his going in Coatch or riding on horsebacke, might have for the attainement of the same? Is it not enough for the Duke to know that he cannot be Lord and King except he make his profection and his going to the place where this ho∣nour must be bestowed on him? Againe, is it not enough for him that is in danger of shipwracke, to know that he shall perish together with the ship, unlesse by some convenient meanes he escape to the land? How unwise should those have beene reputed who being in St. Paules company and inAct. 27. 44. danger of shipwrack, should have refused to have taken either board or planke whercon to swimme to the shore, before the Apostle had declared in expresse tearmes what manner of causaltty the ta∣king of such boardes and the swimming out upon them should have had for their deliverance? Is it not sufficient for the gamester and wrastler to know that except he contend manfully and wor∣thily he shall have no reward? So, so; let it be aboundantly sufficient for Christians to know and understand, that unlesse they fight a good fight, they2 Timoth. 2. 5. shall not be crowned; unlesse they hould fast that whichReve. 3. 11. they have, another shall take their crowne: unlesse their righteousnesse abound more then the righteousnesseMat. 5. 20. of the Scribes and Pharises, they shall not enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. Vnlesse they be diligent and painefull labourers in the vineyard, they shall receive noMat. 20. 8. day penney: unlesse they have the cable of faith and repentance, they shall not avoyd shipwracke: except
they persevere in faith and piety unto the end, they shall never attaine that last happy end, salvation. Fi∣nally, that according to their very workes, so they shall receive; either glory honour and immortalite;2 Cor. 5 10. Reve. 10. 12. Rom. 2. 9 10. or shame, dishonour, anguish and confusion, as the A∣postle St. Paule hath plainely delivered, and St. Pe∣ter most resolutely: Of a truth I have found that there is no acception of persons with God, but in every nation hee that feareth him, and worketh righteous∣nesseAct. 10. 34. 35 is accepted with him. Thus the word of God most clearely: accursed then be he that addeth or de∣tracteth any thing, or disputes against this truth; so clearely delivered, so strongly confirmed. Venerable Austen reproved some rash and pre∣sumptuousAugust. de vit. Christ. cap. 14. 10. 6. wits of his times, daring to blaspheme against this truth. And I have knowne others (saith he) whom the darke and obscure cloud of folly and im∣prudence so deludeth and deceiveth, that they thinke and affirme, that the faith which they pretend them∣selues to have shall profit them without workes of justice before God; & being deceived with this kynd of errour, without al feare they cōmit greivous crimes, whilst they beleeve God to be onely a revenger and Punisher of In∣fidelity,Mat. 15. 14. Luc. 6. 39. but not of other crimes. And such as these are not content themselves to perish alone, but they also endevour to entrappe others, in whom there is no light of divine knowledge, and the sentence of our Saviour is fulfilled in them. The blinde if he lead the blinde they shall both fall into the ditch. Thus he: which censure of his doth it not concerne those who in these dayes dare affirme that Obedience appertaines not to the Gospell, and that of the lawe, do this
and thou shalt live, appertaines not to the Gospell; and againe, that whatsoever sinnes the elect may com∣mit, they are not lesse acceptable in the sight of God. By which prodigious paradoxes it is evident, that they have placed all religion in apprehension and o∣pinion, which in the end will but deceave them. Thus having in generall shewed the way to the last end of man (endlesse happinesse and felici∣ty) to be faith and pious godly life, it shall not be a∣misse to adde a few words, touching that source & roote, whereout and whence out, a godly and pious life doth spring, yea solely and infallibly doth spring and arise. Cleare it is, that the life of every man is called his daily study, and conversation; and as cleere it is, that the daily studie and conversation of every man, are the vsuall actions and operations of every man; which actions and operations if pious & god∣ly, leading to glorie, they must needes proceede from a man renewed in spirit, and regenerate in his soule: so that though the very faculties & powers of the soule, to weet, the understanding, will, and me∣morie with such like, doe really and truely effectu∣ate and produce such actions and operations, yet they doe it by the vertue and efficacy of grace which is in them; I (sayeth the Apostle) have la∣boured1 Cor. 15. 10. more then they all, but not I, but the grace-of God which is with me; or thus, which is in me, or thus, with me; upholding divers readings. Againe Christ to his faithfull, when you shall stand before your adversaries,Luc. 21. 14. do yee not premeditate what or how to speake, for I will give unto you a mouth and wisdome, which all your
adversaries shall not be able to withstand; for it is not you that speake, but the Spirit of my Father which is in you. Of the Apostles it is affirmed, that they wereAct. 2. 4. all filled with the holy Ghost, and beganne to speake as the holy Ghost gave them utter ante. So in these, so in all actions godly, and supernaturall, man worketh according to that measure of grace which is given unto him: When given unto him? Sure∣lyEphe, 4 7. most specially in Regeneration, where as that whichIoh. 3. 6. is borne of the spirit is become Spirit, not by ceasing to be that substantiall naturall spirit which it wasIsa. 11. 2. Galat. 5. 22. Ephes. 4. 23. 24. Rom. 8. 20. 21. before, but because invested in herselfe, and in every faculty of herselfe, with the gifts and gra∣ces of the Spirit; she is by them truely renewed and innovated, yea changed from the servitude of sin full corruption, into the libertie of the children of God. Yea, so changed, that by the Spirit of God2 Cor. 5. 17. Galat. 6. 15. Ephes. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 7. they are called new Creatures, light in the Lord, Temples of God, seates of wisdome, with many such like glorious appellations: And no marvell, for the graces and gifts of the Spirit of God are so deare, and so gracious, that the Apostle Saint Peter dares to affirme, that by them the faithfull are made2 Pet. 1. 4. Partakers of the Divine nature it selfe. And these graces and giftes precious, so called by Saint Peter, are the very Source, roote, or fountaine of all those graces and motions which leade to aternity: and these graces the Apostle intendeth, when he thus divinely admonisheth, It is good to confirme and e∣stablish the heart with grace, & not with meates, whichHeb. 13. 4. have not profited those which walked in them. Now the reason why the sweete providence of
God doth invest the Regenerate soules with these graces and precious giftes, whereby the holy Ghost is said to dwell in them; is not onely, because they should have internall garments of sanctitie, befit∣ting his service, but also because, he would have those that doe his service and be his servants, to doe him acceptable service, yea, such acceptable service, as may leade and conduct them to glory immortall. He made man without man, (man in his making doing nothing), but he wil not so save man doing nothing, hand in hand, leaning his soules elbowes, on the cushion of presumption: no no, hee will not save man, without man (as Austen truely) not because man with & by virtue of his naturall power can cooperate with God, to salvation; but because man being in his soule and powers thereof, changed, renewed, and enabled, by the pre∣cious giftes of grace; shall and may cooperate to his salvation: yea the Apostle dares to professe him∣selfe2 Cor. 3. 9. and such like to be Gods-helpers, in the mini∣stery of salvation. If God did not requyre mans good and pious conversation, as a meanes and necessary way lea∣ding to salvation, then should not the faculties & powers of mans soule neede to be sanctified, and elevated with such supernaturall giftes and graces, for the working and effecting of such actions, of pietie and godlines: but seeing he requires them, yea most necessarily requires them, as welnye every page of sacred Scripture proclaimes; it should seeme a kinde of iniquity in God (which be farre from him) to require such actions of man, yea
and to condemne for the want of them, if hee should not by his graces be ready to enable man for the doing and performing of the same. Hee doth it then, and this surely, by no other meanes then by investing the soule and every power of her, with such divine gifts, graces and vertues, as so divine actions doe require. Bernard truely toBern. ser. 83. in canst▪ this purpose, The soule cannot seeke after God, un∣lesse she be prevented by grace. Austen more fully, Grace is therefore given, not because wee have done works, but that we may doe them; that is, not becauseEpist. 105. a sixt: to 2 circa¦med. we have kept the law, but that wee may keepe the law. And againe, Even as man should not have wisedome, understanding, counsell, fortitude, knowledge, piety, theIsa. 11. 2. feare of God, except according to the Propheticall say∣ing, he had received the Spirit of wisedome and un∣derstanding, and counsell and fortitude, and knowledge and piety, and the feare of God: and even as he should not have vertue, charity, continency, except he should have received the holy Spirit, whereof the Apostle speaketh, you have not received the Spirit of feare, but of vertue, charitie, contineney; so neither should hee have faith, unlesse he had received the Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I have beleeved & thereforePsal. 115. I have spoken, and we also doe beleeve, and therefore wee speake. So then, the source, roote and fountaine, of all these godly actions, and motions, which leade to salvation, are the graces of God, because procee∣ding from his graces enabling us for them; whichSap. 10. 25. graces he, who hateth nothing of all that he hath made, he that willeth all should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of his truth: He, who delighteth not in the1 Timoth. 2. 4. death of a sinner, but that he turne from his wicked∣nesEzec▪ 33. 11. and live. He who lightneth every man that com∣methIoh. 1. 9. into the world. Hee who hath placed his Taber∣nacle in the Sunne to runne his race with swiftnes, andPsa. 19. 6. to spread his beames with graciousnesse, that nothing can scape the warmth of his illuminations. He whoReve. 3. 20. standeth at the dore and knocketh, that if any man o∣pen to him, he will enter in, sup with him, and bee his guest. He I say, who is out of his goodnesse thusReve. 22. 17. graciously disposed towards his creatures, freely and frankely offers and presents the same unto them: in a holy serious manner, that they may have life, yea, have it more abundantly, accordingIoh. 10. 10. to that of himselfe, I am come that they may have life, and have it more aboundantly. And thus it appeareth how by grace presented and received (received by the efficacy of it selfe) the Saints and servants of God do walke in those wayes where by they come to be saved; where∣by they are enabled in some good measure truely to doe that which otherwise should be impossible to nature vitiated and corrupted. Austen forDe grat. et lib. arbitrio cap. 16 07. this purpose excellently thus. It is certaine we may keepe the Commandements, if wee will; but because the will must be prepared by the Lord, we must aske of him that we may have a will to do so much as wee ought willingly to doe. It is certeine that we do then well when we will, but he maketh us able that we may will good, of whom that is written, which I ex∣pressed a litle aboue; The will is prepared of the Lord: of whom it is said; The wayes of men are directed of the
Lord. And he it is that willeth their way of whom it is said, It is God that doth worke in us both to will & to doe. It is certaine that we doe when we doe; but he maketh that we may doe, giving most powerfull strength and ability to the will, who hath said, I will make you able that you may walke in my justifications, and keepe, and doe my judgements. Thus he, most excellently declaring the working of grace in us, and our working by grace. Grace the reward whereof is eternall life, and our good keeping of Gods Commandements in a partiall measure according to this state, not in a full & perfect mea∣sure of degrees. Thus concluding these my meditations touching the last end of man, I earnest∣ly intreate the religious Reader, seriously to thinke and meditate on the glory and aeternity of this Land of promise both shewed and promised so faithfully and seriously unto him in sacred Scriptures. The glories and excellencies thereof do infinitely sur∣passe the fruites, that were brought unto the chil∣dren of Israel out of the Land of promise, whichNum. 13. 28. notwithstanding did so prevaile on the hearts of the faithfull, that the desire to obtaine the said fruits enabled them with a spirit of courage to un∣dergoe all perills and hazards for the attaining of them; many there were indeed whom the spirit of feare and trembling restreined from going into that happy land, because they heard that the sonnes of Enacim, giants, robustious men were therein; and thereby perished deservedly for their incredu∣lity and disobedience: Oh let not the like spirit of Incredulity and disobedience have dominion over
the hearts of any Christians, I especially meane those who professe to know God arightly; for if we know God arightly, let us walke to him arightly, diligently, fervently. O gracious God, thou the onely wise and most powerfull God, doe thou vouchsafe for thy deare Sonnes sake, to en∣large and widen our streightened hearts by the Spirit of grace: that we may runne to thee, and in the end also attaine thee, by the way of thy Com∣mandements preset to us by thy selfe. To my soule I say and resolue, that it be praying to God the Father in his Sonns name, that shee may be en∣dewed with such a spirit of grace, that enamoured with the consideration and love of this happines, shee may in the imitation of that holy man ever breathe out thus. O my soule, if we ought continually, to endure tor∣ments, that we may see Christ in his glory with God the Father, and to be associated to the fellowship of his Saints; were it not meete, patiently, and willingly, to suffer all that is sorrowfull, that we might bee made partakers of so great a good; and so great a glory? Let the Devills therefore lye in waite, and pre∣pare their temptations, let fastings and hard-clothings breake and sub due our bodies, let labours oppresse, wat∣chings afflict, let that man disquyet me, this man crie out against me, let cold bowe and pinch me, heate burne me, let my head ake, my brest faint, my stomacke swell, my face waxe wanne, & pale, let me in every part be weakened, and let my life faile me in griefe & sorrow, my soule in mourning & heavinesse; let rottennes enter into my bones and abound under me, so that I may find
rest in the day of Tribulation, and may ascend up to the people of God. O my God, giue me a spirit to awake early in the morning unto thee, and that my soule may thirst after thee, yea that my very flesh may be manifestly and manyfoldly even bent unto thee. O be thou the Horizon of my heart at noone day, the desire of my soule at midnight. O let all that is with∣in me long after thee, that I may in the end come to see and behold thee; as thou art in thy selfe, my bles∣sed end, my happinesse, the God of my heart, my part, and my portion for ever AMEN. Recensui hunc Tractatum, cui Titulus est [Mans last end &c.] (unà cum Epistola De∣dicatoria ad Serenissimum Regem Carolum, et praefatione ad Lectorem.) qui quidem liber continet, pag. 83. in quibus omnibus nihil re∣perio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus con∣trarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica im∣primatur, ita tamen ut si non intra septem men∣ses proxime sequentes Typis mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita. Ex aedibus Fulhamiensibus prid. Calend. Septem. 1633. Guil. Bray. The Errata Page 10. lin 8. for that, read and p. 20. l. 5. reade, is his end. pa. 57 l. 29, for him r, sinne. p. 82, l. 30. for roule, r. walke. pa. 87, r. If we be found. p, 99, l. 2, r. or as merits pag 100. l, 31, r. table of faith. p. 102, l. 29, according to diverse readings. In the notes. Pag 25, read presences. pa, 43, for Trinitate, r, Civitate. pag 60, r, q. 82. p. 68, r. 19. p. 103. r. Cor. v, 16.
