23669 99846545 11521
A Pleasaunt Conceited Historie, called The Taming of a Shrew. As it hath beene sundry times acted by the right Honourable the Earle of Pembrooke his Seruants. G. STEEVENS. Printed at London by V. S. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstons Church yard in Fleetstreet. 1607.
G. STEEVENS ❧ A pleasant conceited Historie, called, The Taming of a Shrew. Enter a Tapster, beating out of his doores Slie drunken. Tapster. YOu whoreson drunken slaue you had best be gone, And empty your drunken panch somewhere else, For in this house thou shalt not rest to night. Exit Tapster. Slie Tilly vally, by crisee Tapster Ile fese you anone, Fills the tother pot, and all's paid for: looke you, I doe drinke it of mine owne instigation, Omne bene. Heere Ile lie awhile: why Tapster I say, Fills a fresh cushen heere, Heigh ho, heere's good warme lying. He falles asleepe. Enter a noble man and his men from hunting. Lord Now that the gloomy shadow of the night, Longing to view Orions drisling lookes, Leapes from th'antarticke world vnto the skie, And dims the welkin with her pitchie breath, And darkesome night oreshades the cristall heauens, Heere breake we off our hunting for to night.
Couple vppe the hounds and let vs And bid the huntsman lee them For they haue all deseru'd it well to daie. But soft, what sleepie fellow is this res heere? Or is he dead, see one what he Seruing man. My Lord, tis nothing but a drunken sleepe His head is too heauie for his bodie, And he hath drunke so much that he can go no furder. Lord. Fie, how the slauish villaine stinkes of drinke. Ho, sirha arise. What so found asleepe? Goe take him vp, and beare him to my house, And beare him easily for feare he wake, And in my fairest chamber make a fire, And set a sumptuous banquet on the boord, And put my richest garments on his backe, Then set him at the Table in a chaire: When tha  done, against he shall awake, Let heauey musicke play about him still, Go two of you away, and beare him hence, And then Ile tell you what I haue deuisde, But see in any case you wake him not. Exeunt two with Slie. Now take my cloke, and giue me one of yours, All fellowes now, and see you take me so: For we will waite vpon this drunken man, To see his countenance when he doth awake, And find himselfe clothed in such attire, With heauenly musicke sounding in his eares, And such a banquet set before his eyes, The fellow sure will thinke he is in heauen, But we will about him when he wakes, And see you call him Lord at euery word, And offer thou him his horse to ride abroad,
And thou his hawkes and houndes to hunt the deere▪ And I will aske what sutes he meanes to weare, And what so ere he saith see you doo not laugh, But still perswade him that he is a Lord. Enter one. Mes. And it please your honour your plaiers be come And doo attend your honours pleasure here. Lord. The fittest time they could haue chosen out, Bid one or two of them come hither straight, Now will I fit my selfe accordinglie, For they shall play to him when he awakes. Enter two of the plaiers with packs at their backs, and a boy. Now sirs, what store of plaies haue you? San. Mary my lord you may haue a Tragicall, Or acommoditie, or what you will. The others A Comedie thou shouldst say, souns thou'lt shame vs all. Lord. And whats the name of your Comedie? San. Marrie my lord tis calde The taming of a Shrew. Tis a good lesson for vs my L. for vs that are maried men Lord. The taming of a shrew, thats excellent sure, Go see that you make you readie straight, For you must plaie before a lord to night, Say you are his men and I your fellow, Hee's something foolish, but what so ere he saies, See that you be not dasht out of countenance. And sirha, go you make you readie straight, And dresse your selfe like some louelie ladie, And when I cal, see that you come to me, For I will say to him thou art his wife, Dally with him and hug him in thine armes, And if he desire to got to bed with thee,
Then faine some scuse and say thou wilt anon. Be gone I say, and see thou doost it well. Boy. Feare not my Lord, Ile handle him well enough And make him thinke I loue him mightilie. Ex. boy Lord. Now sirs, go you and make you ready too, For you must play assoone as he doth wake. San. O braue, sirha Tom, we must play before A foolish Lord, come lets go make vs ready▪ Go get a dishclout to make cleane your shooes, And Ile speake for the properties, My Lord, we must Haue a shoulder of mutton for a propertie, And a little vinegre to make our Diuell rore. Lord Very well sirha, see that they want nothing. Exeunt Omnes. Enter two with a table and a banquet on it, and two other, with Slie, asleepe in a chaire, richlie apparelled & the musick plaieng. One. So sirha, now go call my Lord, And tell him that all things are ready as he willd it. Another Set thou some wine vpon the boord, And then Ile go fetch my Lord presently. Exit. Enter the Lord, and his men. Lord How now, what is all things readie? One Yea my Lord. Lord Then sound the musicke and Ile wake him strait, And see you doe as earst I gaue in charge. My Lord, my Lord, he sleepes soundly, my Lord. Slie Tapster, giues alittle smal ale: Heigh ho. Lord Heere's wine, my Lord, the purest of the grape. Slie For which Lord? Lord For your honor, my Lord.
Slie. Who I, am I a Lord? Iesus what fine apparell haue I got. Lord. More richer far your honour hath to weare, And if it please you I will fetch them straight. Wil. And if your honour please to ride abroad, Ile fetch your lustie steedes more swift of pace Then winged Pegasus in all his pride, That ran so swiftlie ouer Persian plaines. Tom. And if your honour please to hunt the deere, Your hounds stands readie cuppled at the doore, Who in running will oretake the Row, And make the long breathde Tygre broken winded. Slie. By the masse I thinke I am a Lord indeed, Whats thy name? Lord. Simon and if it please your honour. Slie. Sim, thats as much to say Simion or Simon Put forth thy hand and fill the pot. Giue me thy hand, Sim am I a lord indeed? Lord. I my gracious Lord, and your louely ladie Long time hath mourned for your absence heere. And now with ioy behold where she dooth come To gratulate your honours safe returne. Enter the boy in Womans attire. Slie. Sim. Is this she? Lord. I my Lord. Slie. Masse tis a prettie wench, whats her name? Boy. Oh that my louelie Lord would once vouchsafe To looke on me, and leaue these frantike fits, Or were I now but halfe so eloquent, To paint in words what Ile performe in deedes, I know your honour then would pittie me. Slie. Harke you mistresse, will you eate a peece of bread?
Come sit downe on my knee, Sim drinke to hir Sim, For she and I will go to bed anon. Lord. May it please you, your honors plaiers be come To offer your honour a plaie. Slie. A plaie Sim, O braue, be they my plaiers? Lord. I my Lord. Slie. Is there not a foole in the plaie? Lord. Yes my Lord. Slie. When will they plaie Sim? Lord. Euen when it please your honor, they be readie. Boy My Lord, Ile go bid them begin their plaie. Slie. Doo, but looke that you come againe. Boy. I warrant you my lord, I will not leaue you thus. Exit boy. Slie Come Sim, where be the plaiers? Sim stand by me, And weele flowt the plaiers out of their coates. Lord. Ile cal them my lord. Ho where are you there? Sound Trumpets. Enter two yoong Gentlemen, and a man, and a boy. Pol. Welcome to Athens my beloued friend, To Platoes schoole and Aristotles walks, Welcome from Cestus famous for the loue Of good Leander and his Tragedie, For whome the Helespont weepes brinish teares, The greatest griefe is I cannot as I would Giue entertainment to my deerest friend. Aurel. Thankes noble Polidor my second selfe, The faithfull loue which I haue found in thee Hath made me leaue my fathers princelie court, The Duke of Cestus thrise renowmed seate, To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which, since I haue so happily attaind, My fortune now I do account as great As earst did Caesar when he conquered most, But tel me noble friend, where shal we lodge, For I am vnacquainted in this place. Poli. My Lord, if you vouchsafe of schollers fare, My house, my selfe, and al is yours to vse, You and your men shall staie and lodge with me. Aurel. With all my heart, I wil requite thy loue. Enter Simon, Alphonsus, and his three daughters. But staie; what dames are these so bright of hew Whose eies are brighter than the lampes of heauen? Fairer then rocks of pearle and pretious stone, More louely far then is the morning sunne, When first she opes hir oriental gates. Alfon. Daughters, be gone, and hie you to the church, And I will hie me downe vnto the key To see what marchandise is come ashore. Ex. Omns. Pol. Why how now my Lord, what, in adumpe, To see these damsels passe away so soone? Aurel. Trust me my friend I must confesse to thee, I tooke so much delight in these faire dames As I do wish they had not gone so soone: But if thou canst, resolue me what they be, And what old man it was that went with them, For I do long to see them once againe. Pol. I cannot blame your honor, good my Lorde, For they are both louely, wise, faire, and yong, And one of them, the yongest of the three I long haue lou'd (sweet frind) and she lou'd me, But neuer yet we could not find a meanes How we might compasse our desired ioyes.
Aurel. Why, is not her father willing to the match? Pol. Yes trust me, but he hath solemnly sworne, His eldest daughter first shall be espowsde, Before he grants his yongest leaue to loue: And therefore he that meanes to get their loues▪ Must first provide for her, if he wil speed, And he that hath her shall be fretted so, As good be wedded to the diuell himselfe, For such a skould as she did neuer liue, And til that she be sped, none else can speede: Which makes me thinke, that all my labors lost, And who soere can get hir firme good will, A large dowrie he shall be sure to haue, For hir father is a man of mightie wealth, And an antient Citizen of the towne, And that was he that went along with them. Aurel. But he shall keepe hir stil by my aduise, And yet I needes must loue his second daughter The image of honor and nobility, In whose sweet person is comprisde the summe Of Natures skill and heauenly maiesty. Pol. I like your choise, and glad you chose not mine, Then if you like to follow on your loue, We must deuise a meanes to find some one That will attempt to wed this deuilish skould, And I do know the man. Come hither boy, Go your waies sirha, to Ferandoes house, Desire him to take the paines to come to me, For I must speake with him immediatly. Boy. I will sir, and fetch him presently. Pol. A man I thinke will fit hir humour right, As blunt in speech as she is sharpe in tongue, And he I thinke will match hir euery way, And yet he is a man of wealth sufficient,
And for his person worth as good as she: And if he compasse hir to be his wife, Then may we freely visit both our loues. Aurel. O might I see the censer of my loule Whose sacred beauty hath inchanted me, More faire then was the Grecian Helena For whose sweet sake so many princes dide; That came with thousand ships to Tenedos. But when we come vnto hir fathers house, Tel him I am a Merchants sonne of Cestus, That comes for trafficke vnto Athens here, And here sirha, I wil change with you for once, And now be thou the Duke of Cestus sonne, Reuel and spend as if thou wert my felfe, For I will court thy loue in this disguise. Val. My Lord, how if the Duke your father should By some meanes come to Athens for to see How you do profit in these publike schooles, And find me clothed thus in your attire, How would he take it then thinke you my Lord? Aurel. Tush feare not Valeria, let me alone, But stay, here comes some other company. Enter Ferando and his man Sander with a blew coate. Pol. Here comes them an that I did tel you of. Feran. Good morrow gentleman to al at once. How now Polidor, what man still in loue? Euer wooing and canst thou neuer speed? God send me better lucke when I shal woo. San. I warrant you master and you take my councel. Feran. Why sirha, are you so cunning? San Who I twere better for you by siue mae And you could tel how to do it as wel os I.
Pol. I would thy ster once were in the vaine, To trie himselfe how he could woo a wench. Feran. Faith I am euen now a going. San. I faith sir, my master's going to this geere now Pol. Whither in faith Ferando? tel me true. Fera. To bonie Kate, the patientst wench aliue, The Diuel himselfe dares scarce venture to woo her, Seignior Alfonsos eldest daughter, And he hath promisde me six thousand crownes If I can win her once to be my wife, And she and I must woo with skoulding sure, And I will hold hir too't til she be wearie, Or else ile make her yeeld to grant me loue. Pol. How like you this Aurelius, I thinke he knew Our minds before we sent to him, But tell me, when do ye meane to speake with hir? Feran. Faith presently, do you but stand aside, And I will make hir father bring hir hither: And she, and I, and he, will talke alone. Pol. With all my heart, come Aurelius, Let vs be gone and leaue him here alone. Feran. Ho Seignior Alfonso, who's within there? Alfon. Seignior Ferando y'are welcome hartily, You are a stranger sir vnto my house, Harke you sir, looke what I did promise you Ile performe, if you get my daughters loue. Feran. Then when I haue talke a word or two with hir, Do you step in and giue her hand to me, And tell hir when the mariage day shall be, For I do know she would be maried faine, And When our nuptiall rites be once performde Let me alone to tame hir well inough, Now ll her forth that I may speake with hir. Enter Kate.
Alfon. Ha Kate, Come hither wench and list to me, Vse this gentleman friendly as thou canst. Feran. Twenty good morrows to my louely Kate. Kate. You jeast I am sure, is she yours already? Feran. I tel thee Kate I know thou lou'st me wel. Kate. The Diuel you do, who told you so? Feran. My mind sweet Kate doth say I am the man, Must wed, and bed, and marrie bonnie Kate. Kate. Was euer seene so grosse an asse as this. Feran. I, to stand so long and neuer get a kisse. Kate. Hands off I say, and get you from this place; Or I will set my ten commandements in your face. Feran. I prithy do Kate, they say thou art a shrew. And I like thee the better, for I would haue thee so. Kate. Let go my hand, for feare it reach your eare. Feran. No Kate, this hand is mine, and I thy loue. Kate. Y faith sir no, the woodcoke wants his taile. Feran. But yet his bil will serue, if the other faile, Alfon. How now Feranda, what, my daughter? Feran. Shee's willing sir, and loues me as hir life. Kate. Tis for your skin then, but not to be your wife. Alfon. Come hither Kate, and let me giue thy hand To him that I haue chosen for thy loue, And thou to morrow shalt be wed to him. Kate. Why father, what do you mean to do with me, To giue me thus vnto this brainsicke man, That in his mood cares not to murder me? she turnes aside and speaks. But yet I will consent and marry him, (For I me thinkes haue liu'de too long a maide,) And match him too, or else his manhood a good. Alfon. Giue me thy hand, Ferando loues thee well, And will with wealth and ease maintaine thy state. Here Ferando, take her for thy wise.
And sunday next shall be our wedding day. Feran. Why so, did I not tel thee I should be the man? Father, I leaue my louely Kate with you, Prouide your selues against our mariage day, For I must hie me to my country house In haste, to see prouision may be made, To entertaine my Kate when she doth come. Alfon. Do so, come Kate, why dost thou looke So sad? be mery wench, thy wedding daie's at hand, Sonne, fare you wel, and see you keepe your promise Exit Alfonso and Kate. Feran. So, al thus far goes well. Ho Sander. Enter Sander laughing San. Sander, I faith you are a beast, I crie God hartilie mercy, my harts ready to run out of my belly with laughing, I stood behinde the doore al this while, And heard what you said to hir. Feran. Why, doost thou thinke that I did not speake wel to hir? San. You spoke like an asse to hir, ile tell you what, And I had been there to haue woo'd hir, and had this Cloke that you haue, chud haue had hir before she Had gone a foot furder, and you talke of Woodcoks for al this. With hir, and I cannot tell you what. Feran. Well sirha, and yet thou seest I haue got hir San. I mary, twas more by hap then any good cunning, I hope sheele make you one of the head men of the parish shortly. Feran. Wel sirha, leaue your ieasting and go to Polidors house, The yong gentleman that was here with me, And tel him the circumstance of al thou knowst, Tel him on sunday next we must be married, And if he aske thee whither I am gone, Tel him into the countrey to my house, And vpon Sunday ile be here againe. Ex. Ferando.
San. I warrant you maister, feare not me▪ For doing of my businesse. Now hang him that has not a liuery cote To slash it out and swash it out amongst the prowdest On them. Why looke you now, ile scarce put vp Plaine Sander now at any of their hands, for and any Body haue any thing to do with my master, straight They come crouching vpon me, I beseech you good M. Sander speake a good word for me, and then I am so Stowt and take it vpon me, and stand vpon my pantofles To them out of all crie, why I haue a life like a giant Now, but that my master hath such a pestilent mind To a woman now of late, and I haue a prety wench To my sister, and I had thought to haue preferred my Master to hir, and that would haue bin a good Deale in my way, but that hees sped already. Enter Polidors boy. Boy. Friend, well met. San. Souns friend, well met. I hold my life he ee not my masters liuery coate, Plaine friend hop of my thum, know you who we are? Boy. Trust me sir it is the vse where I was borne, To salute men after this manner, yet notwithstanding If you be angry with me for calling of you friend, I am the more sorry for it, hoping the stile Of a Foole wil make you amends for all. San. The slaue is sorie for his fault, now we cannot be angry, well whats the matter that you would do with vs? Boy. Marry sir, I heare you pertaine to seignior Ferando. San. I and thou beest not blind thou maist ee, Ecce signum, here. Boy. Shal I intreat you to do me a message to your Master?
San. I, it may be, & you tell vs from whence you come. Boy. Marrie sir I serue young Polidor your maisters friend San. Do you serue him, and whats your name? Boy. My name sirha? I tel the sirha is cald Catapie. San. Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to haue a peece of thee. Boy. Why slaue, wouldst thou eate me? San Eate thee, who would not eate Cake and pie? Boy. Why villaine my name is Catapie, But wilt thou tel me where thy maister is. San. Nay thou must first tel me where thy maister is. For I haue good newes for him, I can tel thee. Boy. Why see where he comes. Enter Polidor, Aurelius, and Valeria. Pol. Come sweet Aurelius my faithfull friend, Now wil we go to see those louely dames, Richer in beauty then the orient pearle, Whiter than is the Alpine Christall mould, And far more louely than the terrene plant, That blushing in the aire turnes to a stone. What Sander, what newes with you? San. Marry sir my maister sends you word That you must come to his wedding to morrow. Pol. What, shal he be married then? San. Faith I, you thinke he standes as long about it as you do. Pol. Whither is thy maister gone now? San. Marry hee's gone to our house in the Countrey To make al things in a readinesse against my new Mistrisse comes thither, but heele come againe to morrow. Pol. This is suddainly dispatcht belike: Wel, sirha boy, take Sander in with you,
And haue him to the buttrey presentlie. Boy. I will sir: come Saunder. Exit Sander and the Boy. Aurel. Valeria, as erst wee did deuise, Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonsos house, And say that Polidor sent thee thither. Pol. I Valeria, for he spoke to me, To helpe him to some cunning Musition, To teach his eldest daughter on the lute, And thou I know wilt fitte his turne so well, As thou shalt get great fauour at his hands, Be gone Valeria, and say I sent thee to him. Valer. I will sir, and stay your comming at Alfonsos house. Exit Valeria. Pol. Now sweet Aurelius, by this deuise Shal we haue leisure for to court our loues, For whilst that she is learning on the lute, Hir sisters may take time to steale abrode, For otherwise sheele keepe them both within. And make them worke whilst she herselfe doth play. But come, lets go vnto Alfonsos house, And see how Valeria and Kate agrees I doubt his musicke scarce will please his skoller, But stay, heere comes Alfonso. Enter Alfonso. Alfon. What M. Polidor! you are wel met, I thanke you for the man you sent to me, A good Musition I thinke he is; I haue set my daughter and him togither, But is this gentleman a friend of yours? Pol. He is, I pray you sir bid him welcome, He's a wealthy Marchants son of Cestus. Alfon. Y'are welcome sir, and if my house afforde
You any thing that may content your mind, I pray you sir make bold with me. Aurel. I thanke you sir, and if what I haue got By marchandise or trauel on the seas, Sattins, or lawnes, or azure coloured silke, Or pretious fiery pointed stones of Indy, You shall command, both them, my self, and all. Alfon. Thanks gentle sir, Polidor take him in, And bid him welcome vnto my house, For thou I thinke must be my second sonne; Ferando, Polidor doost thou not know Must marry Kate, and to morrow is the day. Pol. Such newes I heard, and I came now to know. Alfon. Polidor tis true, go let me alone, For I must see against the bridegroome come, That al things be according to his mind, And so ile leaue you for an houre or two. Exit. Pol. Come then Aurelius, come in with me, And weele go sit a while and chat with them, And after bring them forth to take the aire. Exit. Then Slie speakes. Sli. Sim, when will the foole come againe? Lord. Heele come againe my Lord anon. Sil. Gis some more drinke here, souns where's The Tapster, here Sim, eate some of these things. Lord. So I do my Lord. Slie. Heere Sim, I drinke to thee. Lord. My Lord heere comes the Plaiers againe. Slie. O braue, heers two fine gentlewomen. Enter Valeria with a Lute and Kate with him. Vale. The sencelesse trees by musick haue bin mou'd, And at the sound of plesant tuned strings,
Haue sauage beasts hung downe their listning heads, As though they had beene cast into a traunce. Then it may be, that she to whome naught can please, With Musickes sound, in time may be surprisde. Come louely Mistris, will you take your lute, And play the lesson that I taught you last? Kate It is no matter whether I doe, or no, For trust me, I take no great delight in it. Val. I would, sweete Mistris, that it lay in me, To helpe you to that thing that's your delight. Kate In you with a pestlence, are you so kind? Then make a night-cap of your fiddles case, To warme your head, and hide your filthy face. Val. If that (sweet Mistris) were your harts content, You should commaund a greater thing than that, Although it were ten times to my disgrace. Kate Y'are so kind t'were pittie you should be hang'd, And yet me thinkes the foole doth looke asquint. Val. Why Mistris, doe you mocke me? Kate No, but I meane to mooue thee. Val. Well, will you play alittle? Kate Yea, giue me the Lute. Shee playes. Val. That stop was false, play it againe. Kate Then mend it thou, thou filthy asse. Val. What, doe you bid me kisse your arse? Kate How now jacke sawce? y'are a jolly mate, Y'are best be still lest I crosse your pate, And make your musicke flie about your cares▪ Ile make it and your coxcombe meet. She offers to strike him with the Lute. Val. Hold Mistris, sowns will you breake my Lute? Kate Yea on thy head and if thou speake to me,
There, take it vp, and fidle somewhere else, She throwes it downe. And see you come no more into this place, Lest that I clap your fiddle on your face. Exit Kate Val. Sowns, teach her to play on the Lute? The diuell shall teach her first, I am glad shee's gone, For I was ne're so fraid in all my life, But that my Lute should flie about mine eares: My maister shall teach her himselfe for me, For Ile keepe me farre enough without her reach, For he and Polidor sent me before, To be with her, and teach her on the Lute, Whilst they did court the other gentle women, And heere me thinkes they come together. Enter Aurelius, Polidor, Emelia, and Philena. Pol: How now Valeria, where's your Mistris? Val: At the vengeance, I thinke, and no where else. Aurel. Why Valeria, will she not learne apace? Val: Yes berladie, she haz learn'd too much alreadie, And that I had felt, had I not spoke her faire, But she all ne're be learnt for me againe. Aurel: Well Valeria go to my chamber, And beare him companie that came to daie From Cestus, where our aged father dwelles. Exit Valeria. Pol: Come faire Emelia, my louely loue, Brighter than the burnisht pallace of the Sunne, The eie-ight of the glorious firmament, In whose bright lookes sparkles the radiant fire. Wilie Prometheus slily stole from Ioue, Infusing breath, life, motion, soul, To euerie object stricken by thine eies. Oh faire Emelia, I pine for thee, And, either must enjoy thy loue, or die.
Emel: Fie man, I know you will not die for loue, Ah Polider, thou need'st not to complaine, Eternall heauen sooner be dissolu'd, And all that pierceth Phoebus siluer eie, Before such hap befall to Polidor. Pol: Thankes faire Emelia for these sweet words: But what saith Philena to her friend? Phil: Why I am buying marchandise of him. Aurel: Mistris, you shall not neede to buy of me: For when I cross'd the bubbling Canibey, And sailde along the cristall Hellispont, I fill'd my coffers of the wealthy mines, Where I did cause millions of labouring Moores To vndermine the cauerns of the earth, To seeke for strange and new found pretious stones, And diue into the Sea to gather pearle, As faire as Iuno offred Priams sonne, And you shall take your liberall choice of all. Phil: I thanke you sir, and would Philena might In any curtesie requite you so, As she with willing heart could well bestow. Enter Alfonso. Alfon: How now daughters, is Ferando come? Eme: Not yet father, I wonder he staies so long. Alfon: And where's your sister that she is not here? Phil: She is making of her ready, father, To goe to church, and if that he were come. Pol▪ I warrant you hee'l not be long away. Alfon: Go daughters, get you in, and bid your Sister prouide her selfe against that we do come, And see you goe to church along with vs. Exit Philena and Emelia. I maruell that Ferando comes not away.
Pol. His Tailor, it may be, hath bin too slacke In his apparrell which he meanes to weare: For no question but some fantastike sutes He is determined to weare to day, And richly powdered with pretious stones, Spotted with liquide golde, thicke set with pearle, And such he meanes shall be his wedding sutes. Alfon. I car'd not I, what cost he did bestow, In golde, or silke, so he himselfe were here, For I had rather lose a thousand crownes, Than that he should deceiue vs heere to day: But soft, I thinke I see him come. Enter Ferando basely attired, and a red Cap on his head. Feran. Good morrow father: Polidor well met, You wonder, I know, that I haue staide so long. Alfon. Yea mary sonne, we were almost perswaded, That we should scarce haue had our Bridegroome heere: But say, why art thou thus basely attired? Feran. Thus richly father you should haue saide, For when my wife and I are married once, Shee's such a shrew, if we should once fall out, Sheele pull my costly sutes ouer mine eares, And therefore am I thus attir'd a while: For many things I tell you's in my head, And none must know thereof, but Kate and I: For we shall liue like Lambes and Lions sure, Nor Lambs to Lions neuer were so tame, If once they be within the Lions pawes, As Kate to me, if we were married once, And therefore, come, le to church presently. Pol. Fie Ferando, not thus attired for shame, Come to my Chamber, and there  thy selfe,
Of twenty sutes that I did neuer weare. Feran. Tush Polidor, I haue as many sutes Fantastike made to fit my humor so, As any in Athens, and as richly wrought As was the Massie Robe that late adorn'd The stately legat of the Persian King, And this from them haue I made choise to weare. Alfon. I prethee Ferando let me intreat Before thou go'st vnto the church with vs, To put some other sute vpon thy backe. Feran. Not for the world, if I might gaine it so, And therefore take me thus, or not at al. Enter Kate. But soft, see where my Kate doth come, I must salute hir: how fares my louely Kate, What, art thou ready? shal we go to church? Kate Not I with one so mad, so basely tir'd, To marry such a filthy slauish groome, That as it seemes sometimes is from hi wits, Or ele he would not thus haue come to vs. Feran. Tush Kate these words adde greater loue in me, And makes me thinke thee fairer then before: Sweet Kate, thou louelier then Dianas purple to be, Whiter then are the snowie Apenis, Or icie haire that growes on Boreas chin. Father, I sweare by Ibis golden beale, More faire and Radiant is my bony Kate, Then siluer Zanthus when he doth imbrace The ruddie Simies at Ids feete, And care not thou, sweet Kate, how I be clad, Thou shalt haue garments wrought of Median , Enchac'd with pretious iewels fetcht from far, By Italian marchants that with Russian stemes, Plowes vp huge furrowes in the  Maie,
And better far my louely Kate shal weare: Then come sweet loue, and let vs to the church, For this I sweare shal be my wedding sute. Exeunt omnes Alfon. Come gentlemen go along with vs, For thus, do what we can, he will be wed. Exit. Enter Polidors Boy and Sander. Boy. Come hither sirha, boy. San. Boy, oh disgrace to my person! sounes, boy Of your face, you haue many boyes with such Pickadenaunts I am sure, souns would you Not haue a bloudy nose for this? Boy. Come, come, I did but iest, where is that Same peece of pie that I gaue thee to keepe? San. The pie? I, you haue more mind of your belly Then to go see what your maister dooes. Boy Tush, tis no matter man, I prethee giue it me, I am very hungry I promise thee. San. Why you may take it, and the diuel burst You with it, one cannot saue a bit after supper, But you are alwaies ready to munch it vp. Boy. Why come man, we shall haue good cheere Anon at the bridehouse, for your maister's gone to Church to be married already, and theres Such cheere as passeth. San. O braue, I would I had eate no meate this weeke, For I haue neuer a corner left in my belly To put a venson pastie in, I thinke I shall burst my selfe With eating, for ile so cram me down the tarts And the marchpanes out of all crie. Boy. I, but how wilt thou do now thy maister's Maried, thy mistres is such a diuel, as sheele make Thee forget thy eating quickely, shee'le beate thee so.
San. Let my master alone with her for that, for Heele make hir tame wel inongh ere long I warrant thee, For he's such a churle waxen now of late, that and he be Neuer so little angry he thums me out of all cry, But in my mind sirha, the yongest is a very Prety wench, and if I thought thy master would Not haue hir, Ide haue a fling at hir My selfe, ile see soone whether twill be a match Or no: and it will not, ile set the matter Hard for my selfe I warrant thee. Boy Souns you slaue, wil you be a Riuall with My master in his loue? speake but such Another word and ile cut off one of thy legs. San. Oh cruel iudgement, nay then sirha, My tongue shal talke no more to you, marry my Timber shal tell the trusty message of his maister Euen on the very forehead on thee, thou abusious Villaine, therefore prepare thy selfe. Boy. Come hither thou imperfectious slaue, in Regard of thy beggery, hold thee, theres Two shillings for thee, to pay for the Healing of thy left leg which I meane Furiously to inuade, or to maime at the least. San. O supernodical foole! wel, ile take your Two shillings, but ile bar striking at legs. Boy. Not I, for ile strike any where. San. Here take your two shillings againe, Ile see thee hangd ere ile fight with thee, I gat a broken shin the other day, Tis not whole yet, and therefore ile not fight. Come, come, why should we fal out? Boy, Wel sirha, your faire words haue something Alaid my choler: I am content for this once To put it vp, and be friends with thee,
But soft, see where they come al from church, Belike they be married already. Enter Ferando and Kate, and Alfonso, and Polidor, and Emilia, and Aurelius, and Phylema Feran. Father farewel, my Kate and I must home, Sirha, go make ready my horse presently. Alfon. Your horse! what son, I hope you do but iest, I am sure you wil o go so suddainely. Kate Let him go or tarry, I am resolu'd to stay. And not to trauel on my wedding day. Feran. Tut Kate I tel thee we must needes go home, Vilaine, hast thou sadled my horse? San. Which horse, your call? Feran. Souns you flaue, stand you prating here? Saddle the bay gelding for your mistris. Kate. Not for me, for I wil not go. San. The Ostler wil not let me haue him, you owe ten pence For his meate and 6 pence for stuffing my mistris saddle. Feran. Here villaine, goe pay him strait. San. Shal I giue them another pecke of lauender? Fera. Out slaue, and bring them presently to the dore. Alfon. Why son, I hope at least youle dine with vs. San. I pray you master lets stay til dinner be done. Fera. Souns vilaine, art thou here yet? Exit Sander Come Kate, our dinner is prouided at home. Kate. But not for me, for here I meane to dine: Ile haue my wil in this as wel as you, Though you in madding mood would leaue your frinds, Despite of you ile tarry with them still. Fera. I Kate so thou shalt, but at some other time, Whenas thy sisters here shall be espousd, Then thou and I wil keepe our wedding day, In better sort then now we can prouide,
For heere I promise thee before them all, We will ere long returne to them againe: Come Kate, stand not on termes, we will away, This is my day, to morrow thou shalt rule, And I will doe what euer thou commandes. Gentlemen, farewell, wee'l take our leaues, It will be late before that we come home. Exeunt Ferando and Kate. Pol. Farewell Ferando, since you will be gone. Alfon. So mad a couple did I neuer see. Emel. Thei're euen aswel matcht as I would wish. Phile: And yet I hardly thinke that he can tame her: For when he haz done, she will do what she list. Aurel: Her manhoode then is good I do beleeue. Pol: Aurelius, or else I misse my marke: Her tongue will walke, if she doe holde her hands. I am in doubt ere halfe a month be past Hee'l curse the Priest that married him so soone, And yet it may be she will be reclaimde, For she is very patient growne of late. Alfon. God hold it, that it may continue still, I would be loath that they should disagree, But he (I hope) will hold her in a while. Pol: Within these two daies I will ride to him, And see how louingly they do agree. Alfon: Now Aurelius, what say you to this? What, haue you sent to Cestus as you said? To certifie your father of your loue, For I would gladly he would like of it, And if he be the man you tell to me, I ghesse he is a Merchant of great wealth: And I haue seene him oft at Athens here, And for his sake assure thee thou art welcome. Pol: And so to me whilst Polidor doth liue.
Aurel: I find it so, right worthy gentlemen, And of that woorth your friendship I esteeme, I leaue censure of your seuerall thoughts, But for requitall of your fauours past Rests yet behinde, which when occasion serues, I vow shal be remembred to the full, And for my fathers comming to this place, I do exspect within this weeke at most. Alfon. Enough Aurelius: but we forget Our marriage dinner now the Bride is gone, Come, let vs see what there they left behind. Exeunt omnes Enter Sander with two or three Seruing men. San. Come sirs, prouide all things as fast as you can, For my maister's hard at hand, and my new mistris And all, and he sent me before to see all things ready. Tom. Welcome home Sander: sirrha how lookes our new mistris, they say shee's a plaguy shrew? San. Yea and that thou shalt find, I can tell thee and if thou dost not please her wel: why my master haz such ado with her, as it passeth, and hee's euen like a mad man. Wil. Why Sander, what doth he say? San. Why Ile tell you what: when they should Goe to church to be married, he puts on an olde Ierkin, and a paire of canuasse breeches downe to the Small of his leg, and a red cap on his head, and he Lookes as thou wouldst burst thy selfe with laughing When thou seest him: hee's ee'n as good as a Foole for me: and then when they should goe to dinner, He made me saddle the horse, and away he came, And ne'r tarried for dinner, and therefore you had best Get supper ready against they come, for
They be hard at hand I am sure by this time. Tom. Sowns, see where they be already. Enter Ferando and Kate. Feran. Now welcome Kate. Where's these villaines Heere? what, not supper yet vpon the boord? Nor table spread, nor nothing done at all, Where's that villaine that I sent before? San. Now, adsum, sir. Feran. Come hither you villaine, Ile cut your nose, You rogue, help me off with my bootes: wil't please You to lay the cloth? Sowns the villaine Hurts my foote: pull easily I say, yet againe? He beates them all. They couer the boord, and fetch in the meate. Sowns, burnt and scorch't, who drest this meate? Wil. Forsooth Iohn Cooke. He throwes downe the table and meate, and all, and beates them all. Feran. Goe you villaines, bring me such meate? Out of my sight I say, and beare it hence: Come Kate, wee'l haue other meate prouided, Is there a fire in my chamber sir? San. I forsooth. exeunt Ferando and Kate Manent Seruingmen and eate vp all the meate. Tom. Sownes, I thinke of my conscience my maister's madde since he was married. Wil. I laft what a boxe he gaue Sander For pulling off his bootes. Enter Ferando againe. San. I hurt his foote for the nonce man. Feran. Did you so, you damned villaine? He beates them all out againe. This humour must I holde me to a while,
To bridle and hold backe my head strong wife, With curbes of hunger, ease, and want of sleepe: Nor sleepe, nor meate shall she enjoy to night, Ile mew her vp as men doe mew their Hawkes, And make her gently come vnto the Lewre, Were she as stubborne, or as full of strength, As was the Thracian Horse Alcides tamde, That king Egeus fed with flesh of men, Yet would I pull her downe, and make her come, As hungry Hawkes doe flie vnto their Lewre. exit. Enter Aurelius and Valeria. Aurel: Valeria attend, I haue a louely loue, As bright as is the heauen cristalline, As faire as is the milke white way of Ioue, As chaste as Phoebe, in her summer sports, As soft and tender as the azure dowlne, That circles Cithereas siluer Doues. Her doe I meane to make my louely Bride, And in her bed to breathe the sweete content, That I, thou know'st, long time haue aimed at. Now Valeria, it rests in thee to helpe To compasse this, that I might gaine my loue, Which easily thou maist performe at will, If that the merchant which thou told'st me of, Will (as he saide) goe to Alfonsoes house, And say he is my father, and therewithall Passe ouer certaine deedes of land to me, That I thereby may gaine my hearts desire, And he is promised reward of me. Val: Feare not my Lord, Ile fetch him strait to you, For hee'l doe any thing that you commaund, But tell me, my Lord, is Ferando married then? Aurel: He is, and Polidor shortly shalbe wed, And he meanes to tame his wife ere long.
Val. Hee saies so. Aurel. Faith he's gon vnto the taming schoole. Val. The taming schoole! why is there such a place? Aurel. I: and Ferando is the maister of the schoole. Val. That's rare: but what decorum doth he vse? Aurel. Faith I know not: but by some odde deuise Or other, but come Valeria I long to see the man, By whom we must comprise our plotted drift, That I may tel him what we haue to do. Val. Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him straight. Aurel. Agreede then, lets go. Exeunt Enter Sandr and his mistris. San. Come mistris. Kate. Sander I prethee helpe me to some meat, I am so faint that I can scarcely stand. San. I marry mistris, but you know my maister Has giuen me a charge that you must eat nothing, But that which he himselfe giueth you. Kate. Why man, thy master needs neuer know it. San. You say true indeed. Why looke you mistris, What say you to a pece of bieffe and mustard now? Kate. Why I say tis excellent meat, canst thou helpe me to some? San. I, I could helpe you to some, but that I doubt the mustard is too chollerick for you. But what say you to a sheepes head and garlicke? Kate. Why any thing, I care not what it be San. I but the garlicke I doubt will make your breath Stincke, and then my master wil course me for letting You eate it But what say you to a fat Capon? Kate. That's meat for a king, sweete Sander help me to some of it. San. Nay berlady then tis too deere for vs, we must
Not meddle with the Kings meate. Kate. Our villaine, dost thou mocke me, Take that for thy sawsinesse. she beates him. San. Sounes are you so light fingred with a murrin, Ile keepe you fasting for it these two daies. Kate. I tel thee villaine, ile teare the flesh off Thy face and eate it, and thou prate to me thus. San. Here comes my master now, heele course you. Enter Ferando with a peece of meate vpon his. dagger point and Polidor with him. Feran. See heere Kate, I haue prouided meat for thee, Here take it: what, ist not worthy thanks? Go sirha, take it away againe, you shall be Thankful for the next you haue. Kate Why I thanke you for it. Feran. Nay now tis not worth a pin, go sirha and take it hence I say. San. Yes sir ile carrie it hence: Master let hir Haue none, for she can fight as Hungry as she is. Pol. I pray you sir let it stand, for ile eate Some with her my selfe. Feran. Wel sirha, set it downe againe. Kate. Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence, And keepe it for your owne diet, for ile none, Ile ne're be beholding to you for your meat, I tel thee flatly here vnto thy teeth, Thou shalt not keepe me nor feed me as thou list, For I will home againe vnto my fathers house. Feran. I, when ya're meeke and gentle, but not Before, I know your stomacke is not yet come downe. Therefore, no maruel thou canst not eat, And I will go vnto your Fathers house, Come Polidor let vs go in againe,
And Kate come in with vs, I know ere long, That thou and I shall louingly agree. Exit Omnes. Enter Aurelius, Valeria and Phylotus the Merchant. Aurel. Now Seignior Phylotus, we wil go Vnto Alfonsos house, and be sure you say As I did tel you, concerning the man That dwels at Cestus, whose son I said I was, For you do very much resemble him, And feare not: you may be bold to speake your mind. Phylo. I warrant you sir, take you no care, Ile vse my selfe so cunning in the cause, As you shall soone inioy your harts delight. Aurel. Thanks sweet Phylotus, then stay you here, And I will go and fetch him hither strait. Ho, Seignior Alfonso: a word with you. Enter Alfonso. Alfonso. Who's there? what Aurelius what's the matter That you stand so like a stranger at the doore? Aurel. My father sir is newly come to towne, And I haue brought him here to speake with you, Concerning these matters that I told you of, And he can certifie you of the truth. Alfon. is this your father? you are welcome sir. Phylo. Thanks Alfonso, for thats your name I gesse, I vnderstand my son hath set his mind And bent his liking to your daughters loue, And for because he is my only son, And I would gladly that he should do well, I tel you sir, I not mislike his choise, If you agree to giue him your consent, He shall haue liuing to maintaine his estate,
Three hundred pounds a yeare, I will assure To him and to his heyres, and if they do ioyne, And knit themselues in holy wedlocke band, A thousand massie ingots of pure gold, And twise as many bars of siluer plate, I freely giue him, and in writing straight I wil confirme what I haue said in words. Alfon. Trust me, I must commend your liberal mind, And louing care you beare vnto your son, And here I giue him freely my consent. As for my daughter, I thinke he knowes her mind, And I will inlarge her dowry for your sake, And solemnise with ioy your nuptial rites. But is this gentleman of Cestus too? Aurel. He is the Duke of Cestus thrise renowmed son, Who for the loue his honor beares to me, Hath thus accompanied mee to this place. Alfon. You were too blame you tolde me not before, Pardon me my Lord, for if I had knowne Your honor had bin here in place with me, I would haue don my duty to your honor. Val. Thanks good Alfonso. but I did come to see When these marriage rites should be performed. And if in these nuptials you vouchsafe, To honor thus the prince of Cestus friend, In celebration of his spousal rites, He shal remaine a lasting friend to you, What saies Aurelius father? Phylo. I humbly thanke your honor, good my Lord, And ere we part, before your honor here, Shal articles of such content be drawne, As twixt our houses and posterities, Eternally this league of peace shall last Inuiolate and pure on either part.
Alfonso. With al my heart, and if your honor please To walke along with vs vnto my house, We wil confirme these leagues of lasting loue. Val. Come then Aurelius I wil go with you. Ex. Omnes. Enter Ferando and Kate, and Sander. San. Master, the Haberdasher has brought my Mistris home hir cap here. Feran Come hither sirha: what haue you there? Haber. A veluet cap sir, and it please you. Feran. Who spoke for it? didst thou Kate? Kate What if I did? come hither sirha, giue me The cap, ile see if it wil fit me. She sets it on her head. Feran. O monstrous: why it becomes thee not, Let me see it Kate: here sirha take it hence, This cap is out of fashion quite. Kate. The fashion is good inough: belike you Meane to make a foole of me. Feran. Why true, he meanes to make a foole of thee, To haue thee put on such a curtald cap: Sirha, be gone with it. Enter the Taylor with a gowne. San. Here is the Taylor too with my mistris gowne. Feran. Let me see it Taylor: what, with cuts and jags? Sounes thou vilaine, thou hast spoil'd the gowne. Taylor Why sir, I made it as your man gaue me direc∣tion, You may read the note here Feran. Come hither sirha: Taylor read the note. Taylor. Item a faire round compassd cape. San. I thats true. Taylor. And a large truncke sleeue.
San. That's a lie maister, I said two truncke sleeues. Feran. Wel sir, go forward. Taylor. Item a loose bodied gowne, San. Maister if euer I said loose bodies gowne, Sew me in a seame, and beat me to death With a bottome of browne thred. Taylor. I made it as the note bade me. San. I say the note lies in his throate and thou too, And thou saist it. Tailor Nay, nay, ne'r be so hot sirha, for I feare you not. San. Doost thou heare Tailor, thou hast braued Many men: braue not me. Th'ast fac'd many men. Tailor. Wel sir. San. Face not me, i'le neither be fac'd nor braued At thy hands I can tell thee. Kate Come, come, I like the fashion of it wel inough, Heere's more adoe than needes, I'le haue it, I, And if you doe not like it, hide your eies, I thinke I shall haue nothing by your will. Feran. Go I say, and take it vp for your maisters vse. San. Souns villaine, not for thy life, touch it not: Souns, take vp my mistris gowne to his Maisters vse! Feran: Well sir, what's your conceit of it? San: I haue a deeper conceit in it than you Thinke for, take vp my mistris gowne To his maisters vse. Feran: Tailer, come hither, for this time make it: Hence againe, and Ile content thee for thy paines. Tailor I thanke you sir. exit Tailer Feran: Come Kate, wee now will goe see thy fathers house, Euen in these honest meane abiliments, Our purses shalbe rich, our garments plaine,
To shrowd our bodies from the winter rage, And that's inough, what should we care for more? Thy sisters, Kate, to morrow must be wed. And I haue promised them thou should'st be there, The morning is well, vp, lets haste away, It wil be nine aclocke ere we come there. Kate Nine aclocke, why tis already past two In the afternoone by al the clockes in the towne. Feran: I say tis but nine aclocke in the morning. Kate I say tis two aclocke in the afternoone. Fera: It shal be nine then ere you go to your fathers: Come backe againe, we will not goe to day: Nothing but crossing me stil? Ile haue you say as I doe ere I goe. exeunt omnes. Enter Polidor, Emelia, Aurelius, and Philema. Pol: Faire Emelia, summers bright sun Queene, Brighter of hew than is the burning clime, Where Phoebus in his bright Aequator sits, Creating golde and pretious mineralls, What would Emelia doe if I were forc'd To leaue faire Athens, and to range the world? Emel: Should thou assay to scale the feare of Ioue, Mounting the suttle airie regions, Or be snatcht vp as erst was Ganimede, Loue should giue wings vnto my swift desires, And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee, Or fall and perish as did Icarus. Aurel: Sweetly resolued, faire Emlia, But would Philema say as much to me, If I should aske a question now of thee? What if the Duke of Cestus onely sonne, Which came with me vnto your fathers house, Should seeke to get Philemas loue from me,
And make thee Dutchesse of that stately towne, Would'st thou not then forsake me for his loue? Phil: Not for great Neptune, no not Ioue himselfe, Will Philema leaue Aurelius loue, Could he enstall me Empresse of the world, Or make me Queene and guidresse of the heauen, Yet would I not exchange my loue for his, Thy company is poore Phylemaes heauen, And without thee, heauen were hell to me. Emel: And should my loue, as earst did Hercules, Attempt the burning vaults of hell, I would with pitteous lookes, and pleasing words, As once did Orpheus with his harmony, And rauishing sound of his mellodious Harpe, Intreate grimme Pluto, and of him obtaine That thou might'st goe, and safe returne againe. Phil: And should my loue as erst Leander did, Attempt to swimme the boyling Hllispont For Heros loue: no Towers of brasse should hold, But I would follow thee through those raging flouds, With lockes dis-sheuered, and my breast all bare, With bended knees vpon Abidaes shore, I would with smokie sighs and brinish teares, Importune Neptune and the warry gods, To send a guard of siluer scaled Dolphins, With sounding Tritons to be our conuoy, And to transport vs safe vnto the shore, Whilst I would hang about thy louely necke, Redoubling kisse on kisse vpon thy cheekes, And with our pastime still the swelling waues. Emel: Should Polidor as Aehilles did, Onely imploy himselfe to follow Armes, Like to the warlike Amazonian Queene, Pentheselea Hectors paramour,
Who foild the bloudy Pirrhus murd'rous Greeke, Ile thrust my selfe amongst the thickest throngs, And with my vtmost force assist my loue. Phyle. Let Eole storme: be mild and quiet thou, Let Neptune swel, be Aurelius calme and pleased, I care not, I, betide what may betide, Let fates and fortune do the worst they can, I recke them not: they not discord with me, Whilest that my loue and I do well agree. Aurel. Sweet Phylema bewties minerall, From whence the sun exhales his glorious shine, And clad the heauen in thy reflected raies, And now my liefest loue, the time drawes nie, That Himen mounted in his saffron robe, Must with his torches waite vpon thy traine, As Hellens brothers on the horned moone. Now Iuno to thy number shal I adde, The fairest bride that euer marchant had. Pol. Come faire Emelia, the priest is gon, And at the church your father and the rest Do stay to see our marriage rites perform'd, And knit in sight of heauen this Gordian knot, That teeth of fretting Time may ne'r vntwist, Then come faire loue and gratulate with me This daies content and sweet solemnity. Exeunt omnes Slie. Sim, must they be married now? Lord. I my Lord. Enter Ferando and Kate and Sander. Slie. Looke Sim, the foole is come againe now. Feran. Sirha, go fetch our horses forth, and bring Them to the backe gate presently. San. I will sir I warrant you. exit Sander. Feran. Come Kate, the moone shines cleere to night, me thinkes.
Kate. The moone? why husband you are deceiu'd, It is the sun. Feran. Yet againe, come backe againe, it shal be The moone ere we come at your fathers. Kate. Why ile say as you say, it is the moone. Feran. Iesus, saueth glorious moone. Kate. Iesus, saue the glorious moone. Feran. I am glad Kate your stomacke is come downe, I know it well thou knowst it is the sun, But I did trie to see if thou wouldst speake, And crosse me now as thou hast done before, And trust me Kate hadst thou not namde the moone, We had gone backe againe as sure as death. But soft, who's this thats comming here? Enter the Duke of Cestus alone Duke. Thus al alone from Cestus am I come, And left my princely court and nobl traine, To come to Athens, and in this disguise, To see what course my son Aurelius takes. But stay, heres some it may be trauels thither, Good sir can you direct me the way to Athens? Ferando speakes to the old man, Faire louely maide, yong and affable, More cleere of hew and far more beautifull Then pretious Sardonix or purple rockes, Of Amithests or glistering Hiasinth, More amiable far then is the plain, Where glistering Cepherus in siluer boures, Gaseth vpon the Giant Andromede, Sweet Kate entertaine this louely woman. Duke I thinke the man is mad he cals me a woman.
Kate. Faire louely lady, bright and Christaline, Bewteous and stately as the eie-traind bird, As glorious as the morning washt with dew, Within whose eies she takes her dawning beames, And golden sommer sleepes vpon thy cheekes, Wrapt vp thy radiations in some cloud, Lest that thy bewty make this stately towne Inhabitable like the burning Zone, With sweet reflections of thy louely face. Duke What is she mad too? or is my shape transformd That both of them perswade me I am a woman, But they are mad sure, and therefore ile be gone, And leaue their companies for feare of harme, And vnto Athens haste to seeke my son. Exit Duke. Feran. Why so, Kate, this was friendly done of thee, And kindly too▪ why thus must we two liue, One minde, one heart, and one content for both, This good old man dos thinke that we are mad, And glad is he I am sure, that he is gone, But come sweet Kate, for we will after him, And now perswade him to his shape againe. Ex. Omnes. Enter Alfonso and Phylotus and Valeria, Polidor, Emelia, Aurdius and Phylema. Alfon. Come louely sonnes, your marriage rites Performed, Lets hie vs home to see what cheere we haue, I wonder that Ferando and his wife Come not to see this great solemnity. Pol. No maruel of Ferando be away, His wife I thinke hath troubled so his wits,
That he remaines at home to keepe them warme, For forward wedlocke as the prouerbe sayes, Hath brought him to his nightcap long ago. Phylo. But Polidor, let my son and you take heed, That Ferando say not ere long as much to you. And now Alfonso, more to shew my loue, If vnto Cestus you do send your ships, My selfe wil fraught them with Arabian silkes, Rich Affricke spices, Arras counter pointes, Muske, Cassia, sweet smelling Ambergreece, Pearle, curtol, Christal, jet, and iuory, To gratulate the fauors of my son, And friendly loue that you haue shewne to him. Vale. And for to honor him and his faire bride. Enter the Duke of Cestus. Ile yeerely send you from your fathers court, Chests of refind sugar seuerally, Ten tun of tunis wine, sucket, sweet drugs, To celebrate and solemnize this day, And custom-free, your marchants shal commerce And interchange the profits of your land, Sending you gold for brasse, siluer for lead, Casses of silke for packes of wol and cloth, To bind this friendship and confirme this league. Duke. I am glad sir that you would be so franke Are you become the Duke of Cestus son, And reuels with my treasure in the towne, Base villaine that thus dishonerest me? Val. Sounes it is the Duke, what shall I do? Dishonor thee? why knowst thou what thou saist? Duke. Her's no villaine: he will not know me now, But what say you? haue you forgot me too? Phylo. Why sir, are you acquainted with my son? Duke With thy son? no trust me, if he be thine,
I pray you sir, who am I? Aurel. Pardon me father, humbly on my knees I do intreat your grace to heare me speake. Duke. Peace villaine, lay hands on th, And send them to prison straight. Phylotus and Valeria runnes away Then Slie speakes. Slie. I say weele haue no nding to prison. Lord My Lord this is but the play, the'yre but in iest. Slie. I tel thee Sim weele haue no sending, To prison thats flat: why Sim, am not I Don Christo Vari? Therefore I say, they shal not goe to prison. Lord. No more they shal not, my Lord, They be runne away. Slie. Are they run away Sim? thats wel, Then gis some more drinke, and let them play againe. Lord. Here my Lord. Slie. drinkes and then fals asleepe. Duke. Ah trecherous boy that durst presume, To wed thy selfe without thy fathers leaue, I sweare by faire Cintheas burning raies, By Merops head, and by seuen mouthed Nile, Had I but known ere thou hadst wedded her, Were in thy brest the worlds immortal soule, This Angry sworde should rip thy hateful chest, And hewd thee smaller then the Libian sandes, Turne hence thy face, oh cruel impious boy. Alfon. I did not thinke you would presume, To match your daughter with my princely house, And ne'r make mee acquainted with the cause. Alfo. My Lord, by heauens I sweare vnto your grace, I knew none other but Valeria your man, Had bin the Duke of Cestus noble son,
Nor did my daughter I dare sware for her. Duke. That damned villaine that hath deluded me, Whom I did send for guide vnto my son, Oh that my furious force could cleaue the earth, That I might muster bands of hellish feends, To racke his heart and teare his impious soule. The ceaselesse turning of celestial orbes, Kindles not greater flames in flitting aire, Then passionate anguish of my raging brest. Aurel. Then let my death sweet father end your griefe, For I it is that thus haue wrought your woes, Then be reuengd on me, for here I sweare That they are innocent of what I did, Oh had I charge to cut off Hydraes head, To make the to plesse Alpes a champaine field, To kil vntamed monsters with my sword, To trauel daily in the hottest sun, And watch in winter when the nights be cold. I would with gladnes vndertake them all, And thinke the paine but pleasure that I felt, So that my noble father at my return, Would but forget and pardon me my offence. Phyle. Let me intreat your grace vpon my knees, To pardon him and let my death discharge The heauy wrath your grace hath vowd against him. Pol. And good my Lord, let vs intreat your grace To purge your stomacke of this Melancoly, Taint not your princely mind with griefe my Lord, But pardon and forgiue these louers faults, That kneeling craue your gratious fauor here. Emel. Great prince of Cestus, let a womans words Intreat a pardon in your Lordly brest, Both for your princely son, and vs my Lord. Duke Aurelius stand vp, I pardon thee,
I see that vertue wil haue enemies, And fortune wil be thwarting honor stil. And you faire virgin too, I am content To accept you for my daughter since tis don, And see you princely vsde in Cestus court. Phyle. Thanks good my Lord, and I no longer liue, Then I obey and honor you in al. Alfon Let me giue thanks vnto your royall grace, For this great honor done to mee and mine, And if your grace wil walke vnto my house, I wil in humblest maner I can, shew The eternall seruice I do owe your grace. Duke. Thankes good Alfonso: but I came alone, And not as did beseeme the Cestian Duke, Nor would I haue it knowne within the towne, That I was here, and thus, without my traine: But as I came alone, so wil I go, And leaue my son to solemnise his feast, And ere't be long Ile come againe to you, And do him honor as beseemes the son Of mighty Ierobel the Cestian Duke, Til when ile leaue you, farewel Aurelius. Aurel. Not yet my Lord, ile bring you to your ship. Exeunt Omnes. Slie sleepes. Lord. Who's within there? come hither sirs, my Lords Asleepe againe, go take him easily vp, And put him in his own apparel againe, And lay him in the place where we did find him, Iust vnderneath the alehouse side below, But see you wake him not in any case. Boy. It shalbe done my Lord, come help to beare him hence. Exit
Enter Ferando Aurelius and Polidor and his boy, and Valeria and Sander. Feran. Come Gentlemen, nowe that supper's done, How shall we spend the time til we go to bed? Aurel. Faith if you wil, in trial of our wiues Who wil come soonest at their husbands cal. Pol. Nay then Ferando he must needes sit out, For he may cal I thinke til he be weary, Before his wife wil come before she list. Feran. Tis wel for you that haue such gentle wiues, Yet in this trial wil I not sit out, It may be Kate wil come as soone as I do send. Aurel. My wife comes soonest for a hundred pound. Pol. I take it. Ile lay as much to yours, That my wife comes as soone as I do send. Aurel. How now Ferando, you dare not lay belike. Feran. Why true, I dare not lay indeed: But how, so little mony on so sure a thing, A hundred pound: why I haue laid as much Vpon my Dog, in running at a Deere, She shal not come so far for such a trifle, But wil you lay fiue hundred markes with me, And whose wife soonest comes when he doth cal, And shewes her selfe most louing vnto him, Let him inioy the wager I haue laid, Now what say you? dare you aduenture thus? Pol. I, were it a thousand pounds I durst presume On my wiues loue: and I wil lay with thee. Enter Alfonso. Alfon. How now sons, what in conference so hard, May I without offence, know where about?
Aurel. Faith father a waighty cause, about our wiues, Fiue hundred markes already we haue laid, And he whose wife doth shew most loue to him, He must inioy the wager to himselfe. Alfon. Why then Ferando he is sure to lose it, I promise thee son, thy wife wil hardly come, And therefore I would not wish thee lay so much. Feran. Tush father, were it ten times more I durst aduenture on my louely Kate, But if I lose ile pay, and so shal you. Aur. Vpon mine honor, if I lose Ile pay. Pol. And so wil I vpon my faith I vow. Feran. Then sit we downe and let vs send for them: Alf. I promise thee Ferando I am afraid thou wilt lose. Aurel. Ile send for my wife first, Valeria, Go bid your mistris come to me. Val. I wil my Lord. Exit Valeria. Aurel. Now for my hundred pound, Would any lay ten hundred more with me I know I should obtaine it by her loue. Fera. I pray God you haue not laid too much already. Aurel. Trust me Ferando I am sure you haue, For you I dare presume haue lost it al. Enter Valeria againe. Now sir ha, what saies your mistris? Val. She is somthing busie but sheele come anone. Feran. Why so, did not I tel you this before, She was busie and cannot come. Aur. I pray God your wife send you so good an an∣swere She may be busie, yet she saies sheele come. Fera. Wel, wel: Polidor, send you for your wife.
Poli. Agreed, Boy desire your mistris to come hither. Boy. I wil sir. exit Boy Feran. I, so, so, he desires hir to come. Alfon. Polidor, I dare presume for thee, I thinke thy wife wil not denie to come, And I do maruel much Aurelius, That your wife came not when you sent for her. Enter the Boy againe. Pol. Now, wher's your mistris? Boy. She bade mee tell you that shee will not come, And you haue any businesse, you must come to hir. Feran. O monstrous intollerable presumption, Worse then a blasing star, or snow at Midsummer, Earthquakes, or any thing vnseasonable, She will not come: but he must come to hir. Pol. Wel sir, I pray you lets heare what Answere your wife will make. Feran. sirha, command your mistris to come To me presently. Exit Sander Aurel. I thinke my wife for all she did not come, Wil proue most kind, for now I haue no feare, For I am sure Ferandos wife, she will not come. Feran. The more's the pitty, then I must lose. Enter Kate and Sander But I haue won, for see where Kate doth come. Kate Sweete husband did you send for me. Feran. I did my loue, I sent for thee to come, Come hither Kate, whats that vpon thy head? Kate. Nothing husband but my cap I thinke. Feran. Pul it off and tread it vnder thy feet, Tis foolish, I wil not haue thee weare it. She takes off her cap and treads on it.
Pol. Oh wonderful metamorphosis. Aurel. This is a wonder, almost past beleefe. Feran. This is a token of her true loue to And yet Ile try her further you shall see, Come hither Kate, where are thy sisters? Kate. They be sitting in the bridal chamber. Feran. Fetch them hither, and if they wil not come, Bring them perforce and make them come with thee. Kate. I will. Alson. I promise thee Ferando I would haue sworne, Thy wife would ne'r haue done so much for thee. Feran. But you shal see she wil do more then this, For see where she brings her sisters forth by force. Enter Kate thrusting Phylema and Emelia before her, and makes them come vnto their husbands cal. Kate. See husband, I haue brought them both. Feran. Tis wel done Kate. Eme. I sure, and like a louing peece, your worthy To haue great praise for this attempt. Phyle. I for making a foole of her selfe and vs, Aurel. Beshrew thee Phylema thou hast Lost me a hundred pound to night, For I did lay that thou wouldst first haue come. Pol. But thou Emelia hast lost me a great deale more. Eme. You might haue kept it better then, Who bade you lay? Feran. Now louely Kate, before their husbands here, I prethee tel vnto these head-strong women, What dewty wiues do owe vnto their Husbands. Kate. Then you that liue thus by your pampered wils, Now list to me, and marke what I shal say, Th'eternal power that with his only breath,
Shall cause this end, and this beginning frame, Not in time, nor before time, but with time confus'd, For al the course of yeares, of ages, months, Of seasons temperate, of dayes and houres, Are tun'd and stopt by measure of his hand, The first world was, a forme without a forme, A heape confus'd, a mixture al deform'd, A gulfe of gulfes, a body bodilesse. Where al the elements were orderlesse, Before the great Commander of the world. The King of kings, the glorious God of heauen, Who in six daies did frame his heauenly worke, And made al things to stand in perfect course, Then to his image he did make a man Olde Adam, and from his side asleepe A rib was , of which the Lord did make The woe of man so termd by Adam then, Woman, for that by her  sinne to vs, And for her sinne was Adam doom to die. As Sara to her husband so should we, Obey them, loue them, keepe and nourish them, If they by any meanes do want our helpes, Laying our hands vnder their feet to tread, If that by that we might procure their ease, And for a president Ile first begin; And lay my hand vnder my husbands feet. She laies her hand vnder her husbands feet. Feran. Inough sweet, the wager thou hast won, And they I am sure cannot deny the same. Alfo. I Ferando, the wager thou hast won, And for to shew thee how I am pleasd in this, A hundred pounds I freely giue thee more. Another dowry for another daughter, For she is not the same she was before.
Feran. Thanks, sweet father, gentlemen, good night, For Kate and I will leaue you for to night, Tis Kate and I am wed, and you are sped: And so farewell, for we will to our beds. Exit Ferando, Kate, and Sander. Alfon. Now Aurelius, what say you to this? Aurel. Beleeue me father, I rejoyce to see Ferando and his wife so louingly agree. Exeunt Aurelius, and Philema, and Alfonso, and Valeria. Emel. How now Polidor? in a dumpe? what saist thou man? Phi. I say thou arte a shrew. Emel: That's better than a sheepe. Pol. Well, since tis done, come, lets goe. Exeunt Polidor and Emelia▪ Then enter two bearing of She in his owne apparrell againe, and leaues him where they found him, and then goes out: then enters the Tapster. Tapster Now that the darkesome night is ouerpast, And dawning day appeares in cristall skie, Now must I haste abroade: but soft, who's this? What Slie, O wondrous! hath he laine heere all night? Ile wake him, I thinke hee's starued by this, But that his belly was so stufft with ale: What now Slie, awake for shame. Slie Sim, giues some more wine, what all the Players gone? am not I a Lord? Tapster A Lord with a murrin: come, art thou drun∣ken still? Slie Who's this? Tapster, O Lord sirrha, I haue had the brauest dreame to night, that euer thou heardest in all thy life. Tapster Yea mary, but you had best get you home, For your wife will course you for dreaming heere to night.
Slie. Wil she? I know now how to tame a shrew, I dreamt vpon it all this night till now, And thou hast wakt me out of the best dreame That euer I had in my life: but Ile to my wife presently, and tame her too if she anger me. Tapster Nay tarry Slie, for Ile goe home with thee, And heare the rest that thou hast dreamt to night. Exeunt omnes. G. STEEVENS. FINIS.
