23812 99853473 18856
A Verry Merry VVherry-Ferry-Voyage: OR Yorke for my Money: Sometimes Perilous, sometimes Quarrellous, Performed with a paire of Oares, by Sea from London, by IOHN TAYLOR, and IOB PENNELL. And written by I. T. LONDON. Imprinted by Edw: All-de. 1622.
As much Happinesse as may bee wished, attend the Two hopefull, Impes of Gentility and Learning, Mr. RICHARD and GEORGE HATTON. YOu forward Payre, in Towardly Designes, To you I send these sowsde Salt-water Lines: Accept, Reade, Laugh, and breath, and to't againe, And still my Muse, and I, shall yours Remaine. Iohn Taylor.
Prologue. I Now intend a Voyage heere to Write, From London vnto Yorke, helpe to Indite Great Neptune! lend thy Ayde to me, who pa Through thy tempestuous Waues with man a blas And then I true describe the Townes, & me And manners, as I went and came agen.
A very Merry Wherry-Ferry-Voyage, Or, Yorke for my Money. THE Yeare which I doe call as others doe, Full 1600. adding Twenty The yeare of our Lord two: The Month of Iuly, that's for euer fam'd, (Because 'twas so by Iuly was nam'd so by Caesar. Iulius Caesar nam'd,) Iust when sixe dayes, and to each Day a Night, The dogged The Dog-dayes were 6. dayes en∣tred. Dog-dayes had began to bite, On that day which doth blest Remembrance bring, The name of an Apostle, and our King, On that remarkeable good day, Saint Iames I vndertooke my Voyage downe the Thames. The Signe in I obserue signes, win∣des, Tides, dayes, hou∣res, times, Scituations & manners. Cancer, or the Ribs and Brest, And Eolus blewe sweetly West Southwest. Then after many farewels, Cups and Glasses, (Which oftentimes hath made men worse then Asses) About the waste or Noone if you'le take it so. Nauell of the Day, Not being dry or Drunke, I went my way. Our Wherry somewhat olde, or strucke in age, That had endur'd neere 4. yeares Pilgrimage, And caryed honest people, Whores, and Thieues, Some Sergeants, Bayliffes, and some Boats are like Bar∣bars Chairs Hackneyes or Whores: common to all estates. vnder-Shrieues, And now at last it was her lot to be Th'aduent'rous bonny Barke to carry me. But as an olde Whores Beauty being gone Hides Natures wracke, with Artlike painting on:
So I with Colours finely did repaire My Boates defaults, and made her fresh and faire. Thus being furnish'd with good Wine and Beere, And Bread and Meate (to banish hungers feare) With Sayles, with Ancker, Cables, Sculs and Oares, With Carde and Compasse, to know Seas and Shores, With Lanthorne, Candle, Tinder-box and Match, And with good Courage, to worke, ward, and watch, Well man'd, well ship'd, well victual'd, well appointed, Well in good health, well timberd and well joynted: All wholly well, and yet not halfe Fox'd well, Twixt Kent, and Essex, we to Grauesend fell. There I had welcome of my friendly Host, (A Grauesend Trencher, and a Grauesend Tost) Good meate and Lodging at an easie Rate, And rose betimes although I lay downe late. Bright Lucifer the messenger of Day, His burnisht twinkling splendour did display: Rose cheek'd Aurora hid her blushing face, She spying Phoebus comming gaue him place. Whilest Zephirus, and Auster, mix'd together, Breath'd gently, as fore-boding pleasant weather. Olde Neptune had his Daughter Thames supplide, With ample measure of a flowing Tide, But Thames supposde it was but borrowed goods, And with her Ebbes, payde Neptune backe his Floods. Then at the time of this Auspicious dawning, I rowz'd my men, who Scrubbing, stretching, yawning, Arose, left Grauesend, Rowing downe the streame, And neere to Lee, wee to an Ancker came. Because the Sands were bare, and Water lowe, We rested there, till it two houres did Flowe:
And then to trauell went our Galley foyst, Our Ancker quickly weigh'd, our sayle soone hoyst, Where thirty miles we past, a mile from shore, The water two These star Sands are called the Spis. foote deepe, or little more. Thus past we on the braue East Saxon Coast, From 3. at morne, till 2. at noone almost, By Shobury, Wakering, Fowlenesse, Tittingham, And then wee into deeper water came. There is a crooked Bay runnes winding farre, To Maulden, Esterford, and Colchester, Which cause 'twas much about, (to ease mens paine) I left the Land, and put into the mayne. With speed, the crooked way to scape and passe, I made out straight for Frinton, and the Nasse. But being 3. Leagues then from any Land, And holding of our Maine sheate in my hand, We did espy a coleblacke Cloud to rise, Fore-runner of some Tempest from the Skies; Scarce had we sayl'd a hundred times our length, But that the winde began to gather strength: Stiffe Eolus, with Neptune went to Cuffes, With huffes, and puffes, and angry counter-Buffes, From boyst'rous Gusts, they fell to fearefull flawes, Whilest we 'twixt winde & water, neere Death's iawes Tost like a Corke vpon the mounting maine, Vp with a whiffe, and straight way downe againe, At which we in our mindes much troubled were, And said God blesse vs all, what Wethers heere? For (in a worde) the Seas so high did growe, That Ships were forc'd to strike their topsailes lowe, Meane time (before the winde) wee scudded braue, Much like a Ducke, on top of euery waue.
But nothing violent is permanent, And in short space away the Tempest went. So farewell it; and you that Readers be Suppose it was no welcome Guest to me: My Company and I, it much perplext, And let it come when I send for it next. But leauing jesting, Thankes to God I giue, Twas through his mercy wee did scape and liue. And though these thinges with mirth I doe expresse, Yet still I thinke on God with thankefulnes. Thus ceast the Storme and weather gan to smile, And we Row'd neere the shoare of Horsey Ile. Then did Illustrious Titan seeme to steepe His Chariot in the Westerne Ocean deepe: We saw the farre spent Day, withdraw his light, And made for Harwich, where we lay all night. There did I finde an Hostesse with a Tongue, As nimble as it had on Gimmols hung: Twill neuer tire, though it continuall toyl'd, And went as yare, as if it had bin Oyl'd: All's one for that, for ought which I perceiue, It is a fault which all our Mothers haue: And is so firmely grafted in the Sexe, That hee's an Asse that seemes thereat to vexe. Apolloes Beames began to guild the Hils, And West Southwest the winde the Welkin fils. When I left Harwich, and along we Row'd Against a smooth Calme flood that stifly flow'd, By Bawdsey Hauen, and by Orford Nasse, And so by Aldbrough we at last did passe. By Lestoffe, we to Yarmouth made our way, Our third dayes trauell being Saturday,
There did I see a Towne well fortifide, Well gouern'd, with all Natures wants supplide, The scituation in a wholesome ayre, The Buildings (for the most part) sumptuous, faire, The people courteous, and industrious, and With labour makes the Sea inrich the land. Besides (for aught I know) this one thing more, The Towne can scarcely yeeld a man a Whore: It is renownd for fishing farre and neere, And sure in Britaine it hath not a Peere. But noble Nash thy fame shall liue alwayes, Thy witty Pamphlet, the red It hath not a fel∣low in Eng∣land for fishing. A Booke called the praise of the red Herring. Herrings praise Hath done great Yarmouth much renowned right, And put my Artlesse Muse to silence quite: On Sunday we a learned Sermon had, Taught to confirme the good, reforme the bad; Acquaintance in the Towne I scarce had any, And sought for none, in feare to finde too many, Much kindnesse to me by mine Host was done, (A Marriner And a ship Car∣penter. nam'd William Richardson) Besides mine Hostesse gaue to me at last A Cheese, with which at Sea we brake our fast, The Guift was round, and had no end indeede, But yet we made an end of it with speede: My thanks surmounts her bounty, all men sees My Gratitudes in Print: But where's the Cheese? So on the Munday, betwixt one and twaine, I tooke my leaue, and put to Sea againe. Down Yarmouth Roade we Row'd with cutting speed, (The Wind all quiet, Armes must doe the deed) Along by Castor, and Sea-bord'ring Townes, Whose Cliffes & shores abide sterne Neptunes frownes,
Sometimes a mile from land, and sometimes two, (As depthes or sands permitted vs to do) Till drawing toward night, we did perceaue The wind at East, and Seas began to heaue: The rowling Billowes all in fury Roares And tumbled vs, we scarce could vse our Oares: Thus on a Lee shore, darknesse gan to come, The Sea grew high, the winds gan hisse and hum: The foaming curled waues the shore did beate, (As if the Ocean would all Norfolke eate) To keepe at Sea, was dangerous I did thinke, To goe to land I stood in doubt to sinke: Thus landing, or not landing (I suppos'd) We were in perill We were in a puz∣zell. round about inclos'd; At last to Rowe to shore I thought it best, 'Mongst many euils, thinking that the least: My men all pleas'd to doe as I command, Did turne the Boates head opposite to land, And with the highest Waue that I could spie, I bad them Row to shore immediatly. When straite we all leap'd ouer-boord in hast, Some to the knees, and some vp to the waste, Where suddainly t'wixt Owle-light and the darke, We pluck'd the Boat beyond high water marke. And thus halfe sowsde, halfe stewd, with Sea and sweat, We land at Cromer Towne halfe dry, halfe wet. But we supposing all was safe and well In shunning We were like Floun∣ders aliue in a frying Pan, that leap'd into the fire to saue them∣selues. Silla, on Caribdis fell: For why some women, and some children there That saw vs land, were all possest with feare: And much amaz'd, ranne crying vp and downe, That Enemies were come to take the Towne.
Some said that we were Pyrats, some said Theeues, And what the women saies, the men beleeues. With that foure Constables did quickly call, Your ayde! to Armes you men of Cromer all! Then straitway forty men with rusty Bills, Some arm'd in Ale, all of approued skills, Deuided into foure stout Regiments, To guard the Towne from dangerous Euents; Braue Captaine These were the names of the cum∣bersome Cromorian Consta∣bles. Pescod did the Vantguard lead, And Captaine Clarke the Rereward gouerned, Whilst Captaine Wiseman, and hot Captaine Kimble, Were in the mayne Battalia fierce and nimble: One with his squadron watch'd me all the night, Least from my lodging I should take my flight: A second (like a man of speciall note) Did by the Sea side all night watch my Boate, The other two, to make their names Renownd, Did Guard the Towne, and brauely walke the Rownd. And thus my Boat, my selfe, and all my men, Were stoutly Guarded, and Regarded then: For they were all so full with feare possest, That without mirth it cannot be exprest. My Inuention doth Curuet, my Muse doth Caper, My Pen doth daunce out lines vpon the Paper, And in a word, I am as full of mirth, As Mighty men are at their first sonnes birth. Me thinkes Moriscoes are within my braines, And Heyes and Antiques run through all my vaines: Heigh, to the tune of Trenchmoore I could write The valient men of Cromers sad affright: As Sheepe doe feare the Wolfe, or Geese the Fox, So all amazed were these sencelesse blockes:
That had the Towne beene fir'd, it is a doubt, But that the women there had pist it out, And from the men Reek'd such a fearefull sent, That People three People did come thither 3. or 4. miles about, to know what the matter was. miles thence mus'd what it meant, And he the truth that narrowly had sifted, Had found the Constables, had need t'haue shifted. They did examine me, I answer'd than I was Iohn Taylor, and a Waterman, And that my honest fellow Iob and I, Were seruants to King Iames his Maistie, How we to Yorke, vpon a Mart were bound, And that we landed, fearing to be drownd: When all this would not satisfie the Crew, I freely op'd my Trunke, and bad them view, I shew'd them Bookes, of Chronicles and Kings, Some Prose, some verse, and idle Sonnettings, I shewed them all my Letters to the full, Some to Yorkes Archbishop, and some to Hull, But had the twelue Apostles sure beene there My witnesses, I had beene nere the I had as good to haue said nothing. neere. And let me vse all Oathes that I could vse, They still were harder of beliefe then Iewes. They wanted faith, and had resolu'd before, Not to belieue what e're we said or swore. They said the world was full of much deceit, And that my Letters might be Diligent Officers. counterfeit: Besides, there's one thing bred the more dislike, Because mine Host was knowne a Catholike. These things concurring, people came in Clusters, And multitudes within my lodging Musters, That I was almost wooried vnto death, In danger to be stifled with their breath.
And had mine Host tooke pence a peece of those Who came to gaze on me, I doe suppose, No Iack an Apes, Baboone, or Crocodile 'Ere got more money in so small a The dan∣cing on the Ropes, or a Puppet play, had come short of his ta∣kings, ac∣counting time for time. while. Besides, the Pesants did this one thing more, They call'd and dranke foure shillings on my score: And like vnmanner'd Mungrells went their way, Not spending aught, but leauing me to This was more then I could willingly afford. pay. This was the houshold businesse, in meane space Some Rascals ran vnto my Boate apace, And turn'd and tumbled her, like men of Goteham, Quite topsie turuy vpward with her bottome, Vowing they would in tatters piece-meale teare, The cursed Pyrates Boate, that bred their feare; And I am sure, their madnesse (to my harme) Tore a Boord out, much longer then mine arme. And they so bruis'd, and split our Wherry, that She leak'd, we cast out water with a Hat. Now let men iudge, vpon these truthes reuealing, If Turkes or Mores could vse more barbarous dealing, Or whether it be fit I should not write, Their enuie, foolish feare, and mad despight. What may wise men conceiue, when they shall note That fiue vnarm'd men, in a Wherry Boate, Nought to defend, or to offend with stripes But one old And the sword was rusty with Salt-water, that it had neede of a quarters warning ere it wold come out. sword, and two Tobacco Pipes, And that of Constables a Murniuall, Men, women, children, all in generall, And that they all should be so valiant, wise, To feare we would a Market Towne surprise! In all that's writ I vow I am no lyer, I muse the Beacons were not set on fire.
The dreadfull names of Talbot, or of Drake, Ne're made the foes of England more to quake Then I made Cromer, for their feare and dolour, O braue sent.Each man might smell out by his Neighbours Collor. At last the ioyfull morning did approach, And Sol began to mount his flaming Coach, Then did I thinke my Purgatory done, And rose betimes intending to be gone; But holla, stay, 'twas otherwayes, with me The messe of Constables were shrunke to three Sweet Mr. Pescods double diligence Had horst himselfe, to beare intelligence, To Iustices of Peace within the land, What dangerous businesse there was now in hand, There was I forc'd to tarry all the while, Till some said he rode foure and twenty mile, In seeking men of worship, peace and quorum, Most wisely to declare strange newes before vm. And whatsoeuer tales he did recite, I'm sure he caus'd Sir Austine Palgraue, Knight, And Mr. Robert Kempe a Iustice there Come before me, to know how matters were. As conference twixt them and I did passe, They quickly vnderstood me, what I was: And though they knew me not in prose and lookes, They had read of me in my verse, and bookes, My businesses account I there did make, And I and all my Company did take, The lawfull Oath of our Alleageance then, By which we were beleeu'd for honest men. In duty, and in all humility I doe acknowledge the kinde courtesie
Of those two Gentlemen: for they did see, How much the people were deceiu'd in me. They gaue me Coyne, and Wine and Suger too, And did as much as lay in them to doe To finde them that my Boate had torne and rent, And so to giue them worthy punishment. Besides Sir He would haue had vs to haue stayed 3. or foure dayes with him. Austin Palgraue, bad me this, To goe but foure miles, where his Dwelling is, And I and all my Company should there Finde friendly Welcome, mix'd with other Cheare. I gaue them thankes, and so I'le giue them still, And did accept their Cheere in their goodwill. Then 3. a Clocke at afternoone and past, I was Discharg'd from Cromer at the last. But for men shall not thinke that Enuiously Against this Towne I let my Lines to flye: And that I doe not lye, or scoffe, or fable, For them I will write something Charitable. It is an Ancient Market Towne that stands Vpon a lofty Cliffe of mouldring Sands: The Sea against the Cliffes doth dayly beate, And euery tide into the Land doth eate, The Towne is Poore, vnable by Expence, Against the raging Sea to make defence: And euery day it eateth further in, Still wasting, washing downe the sand doth win. That if some Course be not tane speedily, The Towne's in danger in the Sea to lye. A goodly Church stands on these brittle Grounds, Not many fairer in Great Britaines Bounds: And if the Sea should swallow't, as some feare, Tis not Ten thousand pounds the like could Reare,
No Christian can behold it but with griefe, And with my heart I wish them quicke reliefe. So farewell Cromer, I haue spoke for thee, Though thou didst much vnkindly deale with me, And honest Marriners, I thanke you there Laboriously you in your armes did beare My Boat for me three furlongs at the least, When as the tyde of Ebb was so decreast, You waded, and you launch'd her quite a floate, And on your backes you bore vs to our Boate. Th'vnkindnes that I had before, it come Because the Constables were troublesome: Long'd to be busie, would be men of action, Whose labours was their trauels satisfaction, Who all were borne when wit was out of Towne, And therefore got but little of their owne: So farewell Pescod, Wiseman, Kimble, They long'd for imploy∣ment, and rather then be idle, would be ill occu∣pied. Clarke, Foure sonnes of Ignorance (or much more darke) You made me loose a day of braue calme weather, So once againe farewell, fare ill together. Then longst the Norfolke Coast we Rowde outright To Blakeney, when we saw the comming night, The burning eye of day began to winke, And into Thetis lap his Beames to shrinke: And as he went stain'd the departed skie, With red, blew, purple, and vermillion dye. Till all our Hemispere laments his lack. And mourning night puts on a Robe of black, Bespangled diuersly with Golden sparkes, Some moueable, some Sea-mens fixed markes. The milky way that blest Astrea went, When as she left this earthly Continent,
Shew'd like a Christall cawsey to the Thrones Of Ioue and Saturne, Pau'd with precious Stones. Olde Occeanus, Neptune, The God of Riuers, Springs, Brookes, Foords, & Fountains. Innachus, And two and thirty huffecapt Eolus, Had all tane truce and were in League combin'd, No billowes foaming, or no breath of Winde; The solid Earth, the Ayre, the Ocean deepe Seem'd as the whole world had bin fast asleepe. In such a pleasant Euen as this came I To Blackney, with my Ship and Company: Whereas I found my Entertainment good For welcome, drinking, lodging, and for food. The morrow when Latonaes Sunne gan rise, And with his Light illumines mortall eyes: When Cockes did Crow, and Lambes did bleat & blea, I mounted from my Couch, and put to Sea. Like Glasse the Oceans face was smooth and calme, The gentle Ayre breath'd like Arabian Balme: Gusts, stormes and flawes, lay sleeping in their Celles Whilest with much labour we Row'd o're the Welles. This was our greatest We Row∣ed aboue 100. miles that day. Day of worke indeed, And it behoou'd vs much, to make much speed, For why before that Day did quite expire We past the dangerous Wash, to Lincolnshire. And there in 3. houres space and little more We Row'd to Boston, from the Norfolke shore: Which by Report of people that dwell there, Is sixe and twenty mile or very neere. The way vnknowne, and we no Pilate had, Flats, Sands and shoales; and Tides all raging mad, Which Sands our passage many times denide, And put vs sometimes Sands ly∣ing crook∣edly in our way, ma∣king vs goe 3. or foure miles about at lowe wa∣ter. 3. or foure miles wide,
Besides the Flood Runs there, with such great force, That I imagine it out-runnes a Horse: And with a head some 4. foot high, that Rores, It on the sodaine swels and beats the Shores. It tumbled vs a Ground vpon the Sands, And all that wee could doe with wit, or hands, Could not resist it, but we were in doubt It would haue beaten our Boates bottome out. It hath lesse mercy then Beare, Wolfe, or Tyger, And in those Countries it is call'd the It is so call'd in Mr Daytons se∣cōd part of Polyalbion, in his trea∣tise of Hum∣ber. Hyger. We much were vnacquainted with those fashions, And much it troubled vs with sundry passions: We thought the shore we neuer should Recouer, And look'd still when our Boate would tumble ouer. But He that made all with his word of might, Brought vs to Boston, where we lodg'd all night. The morrow morning, when the Sunne gan Peepe. I wak'd and rub'd mine eyes, and shak'd off sleepe, And vnderstanding that the Riuer went, From Boston, vp to Lancolne, and to Trent, To Humber, Owse, and Yorke, and (taking paine) We need not come in sight of Sea againe. I lik'd the motion, and made hast away To Lincolne, which was 50. mile, that day. Which Citty in the 3. King Edwards Raigne, Was th'onely Staple, for this Kingdomes gaine For Leather, Lead, and Wooll, and then was seene Fiue times ten Churches there, but now fifteene, A braue Cathedrall Church there now doth stand, That scarcely hath a fellow in this Land: Tis for a Godly vse, a goodly Frame, And beares the blessed Virgin Maryes name.
The Towne is Ancient, and by Course of Fate, Through Warrs, and Time, defac'd and Ruinate, But Monarchies, and Empires, Kingdomes, Crownes, Haue rose or fell, as Fortune smiles or frownes: And Townes, and Citties, haue their portions had Of time-tost Variations, good and bad. There is a Prouerbe, part of which is this, They say that Lincolne was, and London is. From thence we past a Ditch of Weedes and Mud, Which they doe (falsely) there call It is a passage cut through the land 8. miles from Lincoln into Trent, but through ei∣ther the peoples pouerty or negligence it is grown vp with weeds, and mud, so that in the Sum∣mer it is in many pla∣ces almost dry. Forcedike Flood: For I'le be sworne, no flood I could finde there, But dirt and filth which scarce my Boate would beare, Tis 8. miles long, and there our paines was such, As all our trauell did not seeme so much, My men did wade, and drawe the Boate like Horses, And scarce could tugge her on with all our forces: Moyl'd, toyl'd, myr'd, tyr'd, still lab'ring, euer doing, Yet were we 9. long houres that 8. miles going. At last when as the Day was well nigh spent, We gat from Forcedikes floodles flood to Trent. Eu'n as the Windowes of the Day did shut, Downe Trents swift streame to Gainsborough we put, There did we rest vntill the morning Starre, The ioyfull doores of Dawning did vn-barre: To Humbers churlish streames, our Course we fram'd, So Nam'd, for Drowning of a King so nam'd. And there the swift Ebbe tide ranne in such sort, The Winde at East, the Waues brake thicke and short, That in some doubts, it me began to strike, For in my life, I ne're had seene the like. My way was vp to Yorke, but my intent Was contrary, for from the fall of Trent
I fifteene mile went downewards East Northeast, When as my way was vpward West Southwest. And as against the Winde we madly venter, The Waues like Pirates boord our Boate and enter, But though they came in fury, and amaine Like thieues we cast them ouer-boord againe. This Conflict lasted two houres to the full, Vntill we gat to Kingstone vpon Hull: For to that Towne I had a Proued friend, That Letters did and Commendations send By me vnto the worthy Maiestrate, The Maior, and some of's Brethren, in that State. Besides I had some Letters, of like Charge From my good Friend, the Master of the Barge Vnto some friends of his, that they would there Giue me I went 15. mile out of Trent, down Humber, on purpose to see Hull, when my way was quite con∣trary. Hull Cheese, and welcome and good Cheere. Sunday at Mr. Maiors much Cheere and Wine Where as the Hall did in the Parlour Dine, At night with one that had bin Shrieue I Sup'd Well entertain'd I was, and halfe well Cup'd: On Monday noone, I was inuited than To a graue Iusticer, an Alderman, And there such Cheere as Earth and Waters yeeld, Shew'd like a Haruest in a plentious Feild. Another I must thanke for his Goodwill, For he Prest Hull Che∣ese, is much like a loafe out of a Brewers Basket, it is Composed of two sim∣ples, Mault and Water in one Cō∣pound, and is Cosen germain to the mighti∣est Ale in England. on to bid me welcome still. There is a Captaine of good Life and Fame And, God The mea∣ning of those marks are onely knowne to the Towns∣men there. with vs, I oft haue call'd his Name: He welcom'd me, as I had bin his fellow Lent me his silken Colours, Blacke and Yellow, Which to our Mast made fast, wee with a Drum Did keepe, till we to Yorke in Triumph come.
Thankes to my louing Host and Hostesse Pease There at mine Inne, each Night I tooke mine ease: And there I gat a Cantle of Hull Cheese One Euening late, I thanke thee An inge∣nious man named Ma∣chabeus. Macabees. Kinde Roger Parker, many thankes to thee, Thou shewedst much vndeserued loue to me, Layd my Boat safe, spent time, Coyne and endeauour, And mad'st my money counted Copper euer. But as at Feasts, the first Course being past, Men doe reserue their Dainties till the last, So my most thankes I euer whilest I liue Will to the Mayor, and his Bretheren giue, But most of all, to shut vp all together I giue him thankes that did Commend Mr. I.I. me thither, Their Loues (like Humber) ouer-flow'd the bankes, And though I Ebbe in worth, I'le flowe in Thankes. Thus leauing off the Men, now of the Towne Some thinges which I obseru'd I'le heere set downe: And partly to declare it's praise and worth, It is the onely Bulwarke of the North. All other Townes for strength to it may strike, And all the Northerne parts hath not the like, The people from the Sea much Wealth haue wonne, Each man doth liue as hee were Neptunes Sonne. Th'Antiquity thereof a man may Reede In Reuerend Cambdens workes, and painefull Speede: How in King Edwards Raigne first of that Name Then called Wike. Then did they Kingston frame, And then the Townesmen cut a The Ri∣uer of Hull is 20. miles in length, cut with mens labor to the infi∣nite Com∣modity of the Coun∣trey. Riuer there, An exc'lent Hauen, a Defence or Peere: Built with excessiue Charge, to saue it from Fierce Humbers Raging, that each Tide doth come.
From time to time, more Greatnes still it gain'd, Till lately when the Eight King Henry Raign'd, He made it greater, by his oft Resort, And many times kept there his Royall Court, He Wall'd it well, built Battlements, and Gates, And (more with Honour to augment their States) He built two Blockhouses, and Castle strong To Guard the Towne from all Inuasiue wrong. He gaue them much Munition, Swords, Shafts, Bowes, And Brazen Ordnance, as the world well knowes, Which Guns he gaue them for the Townes defence, But were in 88. all borrowed thence, With promise they againe should be sent backe, But the performance euer hath bin slacke. Now in this Yron age, their Guns I see, Are mettle like the Age, and Yron be: And glad they would be if they could obtaine, To change that mettle, for their owne againe. Foure well built Gates, with bolts, and lockes & barres For ornament or strength, in Peace or Warres: Besides to keepe their Foes the further out, They can Drowne all the Land 3. miles about. Tis plentifully seru'd with Flesh and Fish, As cheape, as reasonable men can wish. And thus by Gods grace, and mans industry, Dame Nature, or mens Art doth it supply. Some 10. yeares since Fresh water there was scant, But with much Cost they haue supply'd that want: By a most exc'lent Water-worke that's made, And to the Towne in Pipes it is conuay'd, Wrought with most Artificiall engines, and Perform'd by th'Art of the Industrious hand
Of Mr. He built another faire Wa∣terwork, at Yorke, of Freestone, which doth the Citty exceeding seruice. William Maltby, Gentleman, So that each man of Note there alwayes can But turne a Cocke within his House, and still They haue Fresh-water alwayes at their will, This haue they all vnto their great Content, For which they each doe pay a yearely Rent. There is a Prouerbe, and a Prayer withall, That we may not to three strange places fall: From Hull, from Hallifax, from Hell, 'tis thus, From all these three A Prouerb Good Lord deliuer vs. This Praying prouerb's meaning to set downe, Men doe not wish deliuerance from the Towne: The Townes Nam'd Kingstone, Hulls the furious Riuer And from Hulls dangers, I say, Lord deliuer. At Hallifax, the Law so sharpe doth deale, That who so more then 13. Pence doth steale, They haue a Iynn, that wondrous quicke and well, Sends Thieues all Headlesse vnto Heau'n or Hell. From Hell each man sayes, Lord deliuer me, Because from Hell can no Redemption be: Men may escape from Hull and Hallifax, But sure in Hell there is a heauier tax, Let each one for themselues in this agree And pray, From Hell good Lord deliuer me. The Prouerbe and the Prayer expounded plaine, Now to the Orders of the Towne againe: I thinke it merites praise for Gouernment, More then all Townes in Britaines Continent, As first their Charity doth much appeare, They for the Poore haue so Mark, for all is true. prouided there, That if a man should walke from Morne till Night, He shall not see one Begger; nor a Mite
Or any thing shall be demaunded euer, But euery one there doth their best endeuour To make the Idle worke, and to Relieue Those that are Olde and past, or Sicknes grieue. All Poore mens Children haue a House most fit Whereas they Sowe, and Spin, and Card, and Knit, Where all of them haue something still to doe, As their Capacities will reach vnto, So that no Idle person, Olde or Young Within the Towne doth harbour or belong. It yearely Costs Fiue hundred pounds besides, To fence the Towne, from Hull and Humbers tides, For Stakes, for Bauins, Timber, Stones and Piles, All which are brought by Water many miles, For Workmens labour, and a world of things Which on the Towne excessiue Charges brings. All which with perill, industry and sweat, They from the bowels of the Ocean get. They haue a Bridewell, and an exc'lent skill To make some people worke against their will: And there they haue their Lodging and their meate, Cleane Whips, and euery thing exceeding neate, And thus with faire or foule meanes alwayes, they Giue idle persons little time to Play. Besides for euery Sea or Marine cause They haue a House of Trinity, whose Lawes And Orders doe Confirme, or else Reforme That which is Right, or that which wrongs deforme. It is a Comely built well ordred place, But that which most of all the House doth grace, Are Roomes for Widdowes who are Olde and poore, And haue bin Wiues to Marriners before.
They are for house-roome, foode or lodging, or For firing, Christianly prouided for, And as some dye, some doe their places win, As one goes out, another doth come in. Should I in all things giue the Towne it's due, Some fooles would say I flatter'd, writ vntrue: Or that I partiall in my writings were, Because they made me welcome, and good cheere: But for all those that haue such thoughts of mee, I rather wish that them I hang'd may see, Then that they iustly could report, that I Did Rime for victuals, hunger to supply. Or that my Muse, or working braines should beate, To flatter, fawne, or lye, for drinke or meate: Let Trencher-Poets scrape, for such base vailes, I'le take an Oare in hand when writing failes; And 'twixt the Boate and Pen, I make no doubt, But I shall shift to picke a liuing out, Without base flatt'ry, or false Coyned words To mowldy Madames, or vnworthy Lords; Or whatsoe're degree, or Townes, or Nations I euer did, and still will scorne such fashions. Hearesay, I write not by heare-say. sometimes vpon a lye may light, But what I see and know, I dare to write. Mine eyes did view before my Pen set downe, These things that I haue written of this Towne. A new built Custome-house, a faire Towne Hall, For solemne meetings, or a Festiuall: A Maior, twelue Aldermen, one Shriefe, Recorder, A Towne-Clarke, altogether in one order, And vniformity doe gouerne so, They neede not flatter friend, or feare a foe.
A Sword, a Cap of maintainance, a Mace Great, and well Guilt, to doe the Towne more grace: Are borne before the Maior, and Aldermen, And on Festiuities, or high dayes then Those Maiestrates their Scarlet Gownes doe weare, And haue sixe Sergeants to attend each yeare. Now let men say what Towne in England is, That truly can compare it selfe with this: For scituation, strength, and gouernment, For charity, for plenty, for content, For state? and one thing more I there was told, Not one Recusant, all the Towne doth hold, Nor (as they say) there's not a Puritan, Or any nose-wise foole Precissian, But great and small, with one consent and will, Obay his Maiesties Iniunctions still. They say that once therein two sisters dwelt, Which inwardly the prick of Conscience felt, They came to London, (hauing wherewithall) To buy two Bybles, all Canonicall, Th' Apocripha did put them in some doubt, And therefore both their Bookes were bound without, Except those two I ne're did heare of any At Hull, though many places haue too many. But as one scabbed sheepe a flock may marre, So there's one man, whose nose did stand a iarre: Talk'd very scuruily, and look'd ascue, Because I in a worthy Townes-mans Pue, Was plac'd at Church, when (God knowes) I ne're thought, To sit there, I was by the Owner brought. This Squire of low degree, displeased than, Said, I at most was but a Water-man.
And that they such great kindnesse setting forth, Made more a'th flesh, then e're the broth was worth: Which I confesse, but yet I answere make, 'Twas more then I with manners could forsake: He sure is some high minded Pharisie, Or else infected with their Heresie, And must be set downe in their Catalogues, They lou'd the highest seates in Sinagogues. And so (perhaps) doth he, for aught I know He may be mounted when I sit below: But let him not a Water-man despise, For from the water he himselfe did rise, And windes and water both on him hath smil'd Else, the great Marchant he had n'ere beene stil'd: His Character I finely will contriue, He's scornfull proud, and tatling talkatiue: A great Ingrosser of strange speech and newes, And one that would sit in the highest Pues, But bate an Ace, he'le, hardly winne the game, And if I list, I could rake But I was euer better with forks to scatter, then with Rakes to gather, therefore I would not haue the Townes-men to mistake chalke for Cheese, or Robert for Richard. out his name. Thanks Mr. Maior, for my Bacon Gammon, Thankes Roger Parker for my small fresh Sammon, 'Twas ex'lent good, and more the truth to tell ye, Boyl'd with a fine Plum-pudding in the belly. The sixth of August, well accompanide With best of Townes-men to the waters side, There did I take my leaue, and to my Ship I with my Drum and Colours quickly skip. The one did dub a dub and rumble, braue The Ensigne in the ayre did play and waue: I launch'd, supposing all things had beene done, Bownce, from the Block-house, quoth a roaring Gun,
And wauing Hats on both sides, with content I cride Adiew, adiew, and thence we went. Vp Humbers flood that then amaine did swell, Windes calme, and water quiet as a Well: We Rowde to Owse, with all our force and might, To Cawood where we well were lodg'd all night. The morrow, when as Phoebus gan to smile, I forwards set to Yorke, eight little mile: But two miles short of Yorke I landed than, To see that reuerend At Bishops∣thorpe, wher the Right reuerend Father in God, Toby Mathew Archbi∣shop of Yorke his Grace, did make mee welcome. Metropolitan, That watchfull Shepheard, that with Care doth keepe, Th'infernall Wolfe, from Heau'ns supernall Sheepe: That painefull Preacher, that most free Almes-giuer, That though he liue long, is too short a liuer: That man whose age the poore doe all lament, All knowing, when his Pilgrimage is spent, When Earth to Earth returnes, as Natures debter, They feare the Prouerbe, Seldome comes the better. His Doctrine and example, speake his due, And what all people sayes, must needes be true. In duty I most humbly thanke his Grace, He at his Table made me haue a place, And meate and drinke, and gold he gaue me there, Whilst all my Crue it'h Hall were fill'd with cheere: So hauing din'd, from thence we quickly past Through Owse strong Bridge, to Yorke faire Citie last, Our drowning scap'd, more danger was ensuing, 'Twas Size time there, and hanging was a brewing: But had our faults beene ne're so Capitall, We at the Vintners barre durst answere all. Then to the good Lord Maior I went, and told What labour, and what dangers manifold,
My fellow and my selfe had past at Seas, And if it might his noble Lordship please, The Boat that did from London thither swim With vs, in duty we would giue to him. His Lordship pawsing, with a reuerend hum, My friend (quoth he) to morrow morning come, In the meane space I'le of the matter thinke, And so he bad me to goe neere and drinke. I dranke a Cup of Clarret, and some Beere, And sure (for aught I know) heThere is some oddes betweene keeping & spending. KEEPES good chere. I gaue his Lordship in red guilded leather, A well bound Booke, of all my Workes together, Which he did take Heere I make a full point, for I receiued not a point in ex∣change.. There in the Citie were some men of note, That gladly would giue money for our Boat: But all this while good manners bad vs stay, To haue my good Lord Maiors yea, or nay. But after long demurring of the matter I thought it my duty (being wee had come a dangerous voyage) to offer our Boat to the chief Maie∣strate. For why should not my Boat be as good a mo∣nument as Tom Coriats euerlast∣ing ouer∣trampling land-con∣quering Shooes, thought I?, He well was pleas'd to see her on the water, And then my men Rowde halfe an houre or more, Whilst he stood viewing her vpon the shore. They bore his Lordships Children in her there, And many others, as she well could beare. At which his Honour was exceeding merry, Saying it was a pretty nimble Wherry: But when my men had taken all this paines, Into their eyes they might haue put their gaines. Vnto his Shop he did And for∣gat to say, I thank you good fel∣lowes. perambulate, And there amongst his Barres of Iron sate. I ask'd him if he would our Boat forgoe, Or haue her, and his Lordship answer'd, No. I tooke him at his word, and said God buye, And gladly with my Boate away went I.
I sold the Boat, as I suppos'd most meete, To honest Mr.A substā∣tiall wor∣thy Citi∣zen, who hath beene Shriefe of Yorke, and now keeps the George in Cunny streete. Kayes, in Cunny streete: He entertain'd me well, for which I thanke him, And gratefully, amongst my friends I'le ranke him. My kinde remembrance here I put in paper, To worthy Mr. Hemsworth there, a Draper, Amongst the rest he's one that I must thanke, With his good wife, and honest brother Franke. Now for the Citie, 'Tis of state and Port, Where Emperors & Kings haue kept their Court, 989. yeare, the foundation Was layde, before our Sauiours incarnation, By Ebrank was the 5. K. of Bri∣taine, after Brute. Ebrank who a Temple there did reare, (And plac'd a An Arch-Flammin which was as an Ido∣latrous high Priest to Diana. Flammin to Diana there, But when King Lucius here the Scepter swayde The Idols leuell with the ground were layde, Then Eleutherius, Romes high Bishop plac'd, An Archbishop at Yorke, with Tytles grac'd. Then after Christ, 627. Was Edwin Edwin and his whole family were bap∣tized there on Easter day the 12. of Aprill 627. baptiz'd by the grace of heauen, He pluck'd the Minster downe, that then was wood, And made it stone, a deede both great and good. The Citie oft hath knowne the chaunce of warres, Of cruell forraigne, and of home-bred iarres. And those that further please thereof to read, May turne the volumes of great Hollinshead. Yourkshire the grea∣test Shire in England, and 308. miles a∣bout. Speed.'Tis large, 'tis pleasant and magnificent, The Norths most fertile famous ornament: 'Tis rich and populous, and hath indeede No want of any thing to serue their neede. Abundance doth that noble Citie make Much abler to bestow, then neede to take.
So farewell Yorke, the tenth of August then Away came I for London with my men. To dinner I to Pomfret quickly rode, Where good hote Venson stay'd for my abode, I thanke the worshipfull George Shillito, He fill'd my men and me, and let vs goe. There did I well view ouer twice or thrice, A strong, a faire, and auncient Edifice:Pomfre Castle. Reedifide, where it was ruin'd most At th'high and hopefull PrincePrince Charles. of Wales his cost. I saw the roome where Exton Sir Peirce of Exton Knight. and his rowt Of Traytours, Royall Richards braines beat out:King Ri∣chard the second murdered there. And if that King did striue so many blowes, As hacks and hewes vpon one pillar showes, There are one hundred slashes, he withstood, Before the villaines shed his Kingly blood. From Pomfret then, vnto my noble friend, Sir Robert Swift at Doncaster we wend, An ancient Knight, of a most generous spirit, Who made me welcome farre beyond my merit. From thence by Newarke, I to Stamford past, And so in time to London at the last. Were friends and neighbours, all with louing harts, Did welcome me with pottles, pintes, and quarts. Which made my Muse more glib, and blyth to tell This story of my voyage. So farewell.
An Epilogue. Thus haue I brought to end a worke of paine, I wish it may requite me with some gaine: For well I wote the dangers where I venered, No full bag'd man would euer durst haue entered: But hauing further shores for to discouer Hereafter, now my Pen doth here giue ouer. FINIS.
