25627 S119970 99855174 20649
A SHORT, YET sound Commentarie; written on that woorthie worke called; The Prouerbes of Salomon: and now publi∣shed for the profite of Gods people. PSALM. 78.1, 2. Heare my doctrine, ô my people: incline your eares vnto the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a parable. I will plentifullie powre out hidden sentences of olde. LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Man. Decorative Border including depitctions of David and Moses 1589.
❧To the Honorable and his very good Ladie the Ladie Bacon: T.VV. wisheth abundance of all felicitie outward and inward in this life, and af∣terwards eternal blessednes through Christ in that life which lasteth for euer. AMongst the great, vnmeasurable and infinite bene∣fites, that GOD most rich in mercie and faithfull in performance, hath giuen vnto men of all estates and degrees, in this last (though worst) age of the world, as euident and infallible testimonies of his singular loue and bountie towards them, and as notable in∣struments to drawe and allure them soundly to knowe, vnfeignedlie to loue, and reuerently to feare him alone that is the only giuer there∣of: this in my poore iudgement (good Madame) seemeth vnto me (and I hope that others inlightned from God are of the same minde with me) not the least nor to be reckoned in the last place, namely, the excellent and most wonderfull light, not of manifold tongues onely, as Hebrew, Greeke, Caldee, Siriake, Latin, &c. neither yet of sundrie arts alone, as Grammar, Rhetoricke, Logicke, Musicke, Arithmetick, Geometrie, &c. but of the holy Scriptures and Christian religion spe∣ciallie: all which doubtles being heretofore through Sathans malice and mans ignorance, not cast aside amongst wormes and moathes, by little and little to wast and consume them; but sumptuouslie laied in graue, and deepely buried, & that almost without hope of quickning, God (that alwaies had and hath the fulnes of power in his hand) hath been pleased now at the last, for the ouerthrowe of superstition, ido∣latrie, and wicked life, and for the aduancement of his glorie, and fur∣therance of mens saluation, to recall as it were euen from the graue it selfe, and to reuiue from the dead. Wherin howsoeuer the Lord haue graciouslie vouchafed to declare his incomprehensible power, accom∣plishing so miraculous a worke, and to manifest his vnspeakable loue not onely in the multitude and varietie, but in the euidencie thereof; so that euen bleare eyed men & barbers (as is in the common by word) may cleerely perceiue the same, yet the strength of sinne hath so not onely obscured, but as it were defaced, though not the sight, yet the power and efficacie of Gods fauour, with the fruites and effects which should followe therevpon; that some through naturall blindnes and dimnes of their eyes, cannot behold them: other some againe through
dumnes of mouth, and hauing their tongues tied, will not acknow∣ledge them: other some againe through want of good iudgement, do with polluted hands irreuerently receiue them, and almost all through prophanenesse of hart, & cursed corruption vnsanctifiedlie (if not irre∣ligiouslie) vse them. So fewe are there found in the world now adaies that profite by them to faith vnfeigned, and humble thankfulnes be∣fore him that plentifully hath prouided the same for their good, if they could tell how to accept and vse the same. The contemplation and memorie wherof (I willingly and vnfeignedly confesse it) leaueth behind it no small skarre, but a great wound rather in mine heart, and that not only so much for mine owne iniquitie in that behalfe (though I knowe the same to bee high and hainous) as for the common abo∣mination, that euery where as a mightie streame that will not be stop∣ped, and forcible floud that cannot be withstood, ouerfloweth all; and for the fearefull desolation that in all probabilitie and likelihood of mans iudgement will ensue therevpon, because howsoeuer God be of long suffering and of great goodnes, yet he cannot, nor will not (for we are sure he is zealous ouer his owne glorie) continuallie suffer the vile and abominable of the world to trample and tread vnder their beastlie feete his exceeding blessings and singular fauours. And yet I cannot hide this within my selfe, but must of necessitie breake foorth into the declaration thereof, that I am againe somewhat recomfor∣ted, in that whether soeuer I cast mine eyes whether at home or a∣broad, I certainlie beholde, and that without deceit of sight, some a∣mongst all estates and degrees of men, high, lowe, rich, poore, young, olde, noble, vnnoble, magistrates, ministers, and people, and sundrie of them of my Christian acquaintance, on whose behalfe I daylie offer vp vnto God through Christ the duetie of thanks giuing, perswading my self further, that there is vpon the face of the earth a mightie num∣ber besides (though not known to me) whom God hath pleased in the multitude of his mercies doubtles, and for much good towards them and others in them, not onely to single and cull out as it were from the huge heape and wicked fellowship of the polluted and prophane, but richlie to replenish and adorne them (as it were with most precious pearles) with the singular graces of sound knowledge, stedfast faith, comfortable feeling, vnfeigned obedience, and sundrie such like holie and heauenlie gifts. Amongst whom, your sexe rightly considered, and the place you haue been in wisely respected, and your present e∣state well weighed, I know few matchable with you (good Madame:
flatterie is farre from my words, I humbly thanke God for it, & I hope pride remoued farre from your selfe in hearing your owne praise, as I wish enuie may bee from others as in regard of your due commenda∣tion) and not many to go beyond you. For though to be borne not on∣lie of worshipful parents, but of a sanctified stock, be some thing both before God and man: and though learned and holie education bee a good helpe towards the reformation of our corruption, and as it were the instilling of another nature into vs: and though to be richlie ioy∣ned in holy matrimonie be a token doubtles of Gods great fauour and loue: and though to haue in the vndefiled mariage bed, a blessed seed and lawfull issue, be a special blessing & mercie from God: & though to leade and liue a vertuous and vnreproueable life in the sight of men (who are wont neglecting themselues, with euill and curious eyes to looke vpon others) bee a happie thing: (with all which fauours you haue by the diuine prouidence, been euen laden as it were in your birth, bringing vp, youth, old age, virginitie, mariage, widowhood and posteritie) yet because many bee degenerate and start aside from their ancestors godlines: & some through carelesnes cause to perish the cost that hath been bestowed vpon them in good bringing vp: and others make themselues both in single and maried life lothsome to the Lord, and infamous before men, because either they haue not begun well, or haue not held on vnto the end: and other some by euill example, haue done the children of their wombe more hurt in the world, than they haue done them good in bringing them foorth to behold the light of the Sunne: and other some haue added to the weakenes of their sexe, not watchfulnes against sinne, as their duetie required, but laied the raines of their seuerall iniquities and manifold inticements to euill in their owne neckes: and many haue misused their places of honor and credit to all licentiousnes of the flesh, and carelesnes of God, and of the waies of his worship, and so consequently of eternal saluation: (from all which inconueniences and mischiefes the Lord hath mercifullie kept you in euerie condition of life wherein he hath been pleased to place you) me thinketh you haue wherein to reioyce, and that not on∣lie so much in the things themselues, freelie and plentifullie bestowed vpon you, as in the happie continuance and mightie encrease of these his goodnesses in you, you also hauing receiued grace from God to beautifie them with an vnblameable & holy conuersation. By meanes whereof it is come to passe, that as you are much beloued at home in the midst of Gods saincts and faithfull seruants here, and these not on∣lie
common professors, but many worthie ministers: (for kindnes to∣wards whom, and particularlie towards my selfe, I doo humblie here in all our names thanke GOD, and you as his gracious instrument) so you are made truely famous abroad in forraine Churches and coun∣tries, & highly reuerenced of many worthie men there, indued doubt∣les with singular graces for Gods glory, and the building vp of the bo∣die of the fellowship of Saincts. But what meane I to enter into this broad field of your Christian commendation, where breath would rather faile me, and time I am sure, with abilitie to wade into it as I should, than matter any manner of way bee wanting. Giue me leaue therefore (good Madame) I beseech you to desist from your praise, (which I knowe you doo not willingly heare, though it be deserued as on your part, and though perhaps it might bee as a quicke spurre in the dull sides of others to prouoke them to good things) and to turne my speach to exhortation rather and comfort. The course that you are entered into, and the race that now you haue a long time runne in, is holie and honorable. Hold on therfore in the same chearefullie, not∣withstanding the manifold hinderances that within and without bee cast in your way to turne you aside, if it might be: and bee not wearie of well doing at any hand, for as you knowe that your profession re∣quireth it, so God hath promised that the time wil come wherein you shall reape (as the saincts of God haue done before you) if you faint not. Let the assured faithfulnes and infinite power of him, that hath in his word made you large promises, be a pricke vnto you herein. And forasmuch as he hath giuen you grace to begin well, and to hold on hetherto, doubt not, but he that hath both the will and the deed in his owne hands to bestowe them where and as it pleaseth him, will make perfect in you euery good worke, euen till the day of Iesus Christ. Is it possible, that that incorruptible crowne of eternall glorie, which in his onely beloued he hath prepared for you, should fade away? Vpon these things I beseech you (hauing cast away worldly cares) fixe cōti∣nuallie the eye of your faith, that you may end your old yeeres in the Lords peace, and be indeed gathered vnto your fathers comfortablie, saying, as that holie Apostle old Paule saied: I haue fought a good fight, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith: from henceforth there is laied vp for me the crowne of righteousnes, which the Lord the righteous Iudge shall giue me at that day; and not to me onely, but vnto all them also that loue his appearing. Your learned father, your honorable husband, your lo∣uing brother, your deare sisters some of them, and (if I bee not decei∣ued)
some also of your owne holie seede (all of them hauing yeelded vp their spirites in the faith and feare of GOD) are I doubt not gone thether before you: and why should you your selfe, or any other thinke that you should be sundred from them? As for the lengthning of your life, aboue many before reckoned, surely God hath done it for his owne glorie, and the good of his Church, into which also you be∣ing religiouslie gathered as a sound member thereof, you haue euen in that an assured testimonie giuen vnto you, that warfaring here with his saincts as you doo, against sinne, the world and the diuell, you shall in good time, through him that hath loued you and washed you in his bloud, become more than a conquerour, and eternallie triumph toge∣ther with them and the rest in heauen. Till which time, as I rest resol∣ued, that God the author and perfecter of euery good thing in all his, will not withdrawe his gracious hand from you in any grace, speci∣allie spirituall and heauenlie: so I am certainlie perswaded that manie such as are led by his spirit, & know you in Christ Iesus, and loue you in the trueth, will not (GOD ayding them) neglect any duetie either outward or inward, that possiblie they can performe to further that worke. Amongst whom I, though the least and most vnworthie, as in respect of my selfe, yet tied thereto by the duetie of my profession from God, and bound to it by sundrie fauours receiued from you, will in my poore measure striue to do, though not so much as others, nei∣ther yet so much as I owe (which I freelie acknowledge as being pri∣uie to mine owne disabilitie and insufficiencie that way, and not vt∣terlie vnacquainted with other mens fulnes and vpheaped store) yet what God hath or shal be pleased to enable me to accomplish. Which that your good Ladiship may be the better assured of, I am bold now to present vnto you, and to publish vnder your name some short notes and meditations of mine (long since written for the dearest friend I had in the world) vppon that worthie booke of Salomons Prouerbes. What it is, I leaue to you, and the Church of GOD to iudge of: and yet this much I hope I may without pride protest, that though it bee not exquisite like vnto the worthie workes of manie Bezaleels in our age, yet it is sound; and though it bee not finelie polished, either in fit∣nes of wordes, or great store of arte, yet the trueth it is I hope, and ne∣uer a whit the more to be misliked, because it is naked and plaine, but the rather to be imbraced of Gods people; who I hope will shewe me
this fauour, that as they wil not reiect any good thing in it for any euil that may be found or suspected to be therin, neither yet admit any euil for the goods sake, but in a discerning spirit refuse the one and receiue the other: so they will assist me with their praiers to God for the in∣crease of any good thing that is within me, to Gods glorie, and the be∣nefite of his people; and in much loue, according to the spirit of loue wherwith they are replenished, either Christianly couer that which is amisse, or curteouslie cure it. And as for you (good Madame) though I rest perswaded that it shall bee well accepted of you, yet can I not but againe & againe beseech you to receiue it, not only as from the hand, but as frō the heart of him, who, if either his poore praiers in absence, or speach in presence, or any thing els either within him or without him, could any many manner of way, either further you, or answere some part of that christian kindnes which he hath receiued from you, would not bee wanting in any duetie toward you or yours that GOD shal inable him to performe. Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout; and grant that your whole spirit, soule and bodie may be kept blameles vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. London, the xxv. of this September. 1589. Your good Ladiships, as very much bounden, so in al things very readie in Christ to his poore power T.W. the Lords vnworthie seruant. To the godlie and Christian Reader. BE aduertised J pray thee (gentle Reader) and that for thine owne good, and better vnderstanding of the things thou shalt reade in this booke, that where∣soeuer thou shalt finde this .i. it signifieth as much as, that is to say: and where these two letters q.d. are vsed, it importeth thus much, as though he would say: and obserue withall, that vz. is to wit, &c. Other things I doubt not but thou wilt of thy selfe through Gods blessing well perceiue, as the more learned sort shall also without me: and yet for those that had not such skill, I could not but note these things; as for those that haue attained to more vnderstanding and knowledge this Distichon. Sperare in Christum, & vitae tolerare labores, Et benè posse mori disce: beatus eris.
Lord giue vs vnderstanding in all things, speciallie in the mysteries of thy holie Lawe; that wee maie like of, and allow those things onelie which be right and holie before thee, through Christ: So be it. An Exposition vpon the Prouerbes. THIS whole Booke as J take it may bee diuided into two Parts. Jn the first  Salomon teacheth vs, how we should stande affected towards God and his truth, and this is comprehended in the nine first Chapters of this Booke. Jn the second he deliuereth particular doctrines, speciallie such as concerne  our dutie towards men, & are to be referred to men, maners, words, deeds, and other circumstances: from chapter 10. to the end of the Booke. CAP. 1. THis Chapter (as I suppose) maybe diuided into three parts. In the first  is conteined a Proeme or Preface to the whole worke, setting out the Writer, the ende, vse, and profite of the same: from vers. 1. to the ende of the 6. In the seeond is comprehended an exhortation to goodnesse, and an  admonition to auoide the entisements of sinners; from vers. 7. to the end of the 19. In the third is declared the great paines that Gods wisedome ta∣keth  to drawe men vnto him, but how little it preuaileth amongst them: which sinne of theirs they shall not carrie away vnpunished; from vers. 20. to the end of the Chapter. Vers. 1. THe Parables [i.Se. the figuratiue and darke kinde of speaches (sée Psal. 49.4. also 78.2. sée also Matth. 13, 3.10, 11.34, 35.) True it is, that the Hebrue word signifieth all kinde of figura∣tiue speaches whatsoeuer; of which sorte wee shall sée manie in this Booke: somtimes expres∣sed by similitudes, sometimes by Allegories, sometimes by Metaphores, and sometimes by one meanes, and sometimes by another: and yet I thinke it may verie wel be taken for sentences, words or speaches, which as they are grauelie & shortlie vttered, so doo notwith∣standing containe in them plentie of good matter.] of Salomon, [Here we sée
who was the pen-man & vtterer of these graue sentences: sée 1. King. 4.32. and when he saith of Salomon, he meaneth, that Salomon spake them: and these I take as also all that follow, to be Salomons owne words speaking of himselfe in the third person] the sonne of Dauid [vz. who was a man accord∣ing vnto Gods owne heart; and this serueth both for the commendation of Salomon and of his Booke. So that we sée in this verse the work to be com∣mended: first, for the excellencie of it, vnder the word Parables: secondly, of the Writer, vz. Salomon the wisest man that euer was: thirdlie, of the Wri∣ters Parents, vz. Dauid a verie godlie man: & lastly, of the state & condition wherin either the Father or ye Writer or both were, vz. King of Jsrael: [i. ru∣ler & gouernor of the people, yt was called by the name of their great grand∣father Iaakob. And though this word King of Israel, may séeme to be refer∣red both to Dauid and Salomon, because they were both Kings ouer that people, yet I take it, that it ought chieflie and onelie in this place to be refer∣red  to Dauid.] Vers. 2. To know [vnderstand héere thus much; which pa∣rables and graue sentences were written to this end, that men might learne and know] wisedome, [i. absolute, stedfast and effectuall knowledge both of heauenlie and worldlie things,] and instruction [vz. concerning men & their duties, to the ende that they that by nature are rude and vnskilfull, may by this doctrine be reclaimed to a better trade and course of life,] to vnderstand [q. d. whereby also a man may vnderstand] the words of knowledge, [i. such spéeches and sentences, as are with skill, knowledge and iudgement vttered and spoken. Some thinke that there are thrée sorts of knowledge set down in this verse, which may be obteined by the reading of this Booke: vnder∣standing by wisedome, the certaine and assured knowledge of euerie thing: by instruction, the waies and meanes to attaine to that knowledge, which héere is set after it, because the other in dignitie and worthinesse goeth before it: and by vnderstanding the words of knowledge, he vnderstandeth prudence; as when by the helpe of wisedome and knowledge, a man obteineth abilitie  to iudge of matters, and to perceiue one thing by another.] Vers. 3. To receiue [vz. from the mouth of thy teacher, if thou be a scholler and learner: for in this verse he sheweth the profite that it will bring to learners, and in the next verse how it will inable teachers.] instruction [sée vers. 2. meaning also by instruction, good rules, holie counsell, and right order:] to doo wiselie, [vz. in all the waies that thou shalt walke, and all the things that thou shalt attempt,] by iustice, and iudgement, and equitie. [This place is turned, as though these things were meanes & instruments of a good mans wise dea∣ling: whereas I suppose it should be turned thus, as also some doo turne it] To receaue the instruction of vnderstanding, [i. wise and skilfull instruction] of iustice, iudgement, and euerie right thing. [vnderstanding by iustice, iust, holie, and good workes; by iudgement, that sentence whereby euerie man hath his owne yéelded him; and by equitie, or in the plurall number (as it is in the Hebrue text) equities, (which also maketh some to turne it euerie right
thing) vpright & equall dealing one with another.] Vers. 4. To giue [vz.  by the meanes of the master and teacher] vnto the simple [i. to him that not onelie hath little knowledge, and is (as a man would saie) vnskilled, but though he haue some iudgement, is notwithstanding easilie and in a mo∣ment (as it were) induced to beleeue anie thing; and is carried (as it were) hether and thether, from the waie of trueth: see Prouerb. 14.15. where the same word in our English text is turned, foolish] sharpnesse of wit, [he vnder∣standeth hereby, not onelie quicknesse of sight to perceaue the subtilties of the enemies; but also soundnesse of iudgement, that he be no more carried awaie, as he hath been.] and to the childe [i. vnto him that is vnaduised, and wanteth discretion it giueth] knowledge, [i. sound iudgement,] and discreti∣on, [viz. how and after what sort to behaue himselfe, and to walke: see Eph. 4.14.] Vers. 5. A wise man [q.d. These things profite not the simple and  vnlearned onelie, but euen they that haue attained some measure of light and knowledge, shall both be confirmed and increased in iudgement] shall heare [vz. these things: vnderstanding by hearing, not onelie the bending of the outward eares, but also the inclining of the minde thereto] & increase [vz. thereby] in learning: [i. in all maner of knowledge: q.d. he shalbe more wise and learned than he was before.] and a man of vnderstanding [i. he that by experience (as it were) hath attained to a more measure of knowledge and iudgement than others: see ver. 2. of this chap.] shall attaine [vz. by this meanes, meaning also by attayning, not only the getting, but the posses∣sing, keeping, and vsing,] vnto wise counsels [vz. not only in himselfe, but shall bee able to profite others thereby.] Vers. 6. To vnderstand [vz. by  meanes of the holie and wholesome rules propounded in this booke] a para∣ble [see vers. 1. of this chapter.] and the interpretation: [vz. of parables, or of any fine, or eloquent speech whatsoeuer.] the words of the wise [yea, though they speake neuer so wisely] and their darke sayings. [q.d. yea, though they speake neuer so darklie also. And all these profites, the holie Ghost allead∣geth, not only to shewe the excellencie of the booke, but also to drawe men to the loue and liking of his doctrine.] Vers. 7. The feare of the Lord [i. a re∣uerence  of Gods maiestie in mens hearts, with an acknowledgement that wee onely trust in him, and a care and a conscience, being loth and fearefull to displease him] is the beginning of knowledge: [i. is not onely the first meane and way to attayne the sound knowledge of God and all goodnesse, but is as it were the fountaine and foundation of all good things. Salomon in this followed his father Dauid, as may appeare Psalme 111.10.] but fooles [i. wicked and vngodlie persons: as generallie throughout this booke, and more particularlie Psalme 14.1.] despise [vz. either proudlie, or care∣leslie, but yet both wayes to their owne hurt] wisedome and instruction. [see vers. 2. of this chapter.] Vers. 8. My sonne [Salomon speaketh this to  euerie one that is willing to learn, as the teacher being great either in yeres or credit, may speake to the partie that is to be instructed: see Psalme 34.
12.] heare [vz. attentiuelie and diligentlie, sée also vers. 5. of this Chapter] thy fathers instruction, [i. the instruction and good counsell that thy father giueth thée] and forsake not [vz. at anie time, but kéepe carefullie with thée] thy mothers teaching: [i. those thinges which thy mother shall instruct and teach thée: he maketh mention of mother, because he had before spoken of fa∣ther, meaning by both together, the counsels and commandements of their parents: and yet because mothers admonitions & perswasions, are of great force in their children, while they are young, he speaketh also particularlie  of them.] Ver. 9. For they [i. the instructions and doctrines of thy parents, if they be rightlie receiued on thy behalfe] shall be a comely ornament vnto thy head, and as chaines for thy necke, [i. they shall garnish and decke thee verie excellentlie, euen as a Crowne set vpon the head, or a chaine about the neck adorneth a man, meaning that they shall make him gracious and acceptable both before God & men. And this is a reason of his exhortation, hauing re∣spect therein, to the very maners & affections of children, who are much mo∣ued with gifts, & sundrie sorts of ornaments: euen so men should be drawne to the obedience of Gods will, by his great & large promises.] V. 10. My  sonne, [see vers. 8. of this chapt.] if sinners [1. notorious wicked men, as Psal. 1.1, 5.] doo intise thee [vz. to any manner of wickednesse whatsoeuer, their intisements he rehearseth afterwards, vers. 11, 12, 13, 14.] consent thou not [vz. at any hand, to those their vngodlie prouocations, much lesse doo the  euill.] Vers. 11. If they [i. those wicked ones] saie [vz. either openlie or closelie, and that either by word or deede, for a mans gestures and actions, speake after a sort,] come, [vz. and go with vs, that is, be a companion with vs in the mischiefe we will performe.] we will lay waite [vz. closely and craf∣telie] for bloud, [i. for mens liues to take them away, meaning that they would commit murther, and all manner of outrage to other mens hurt: see Esay. 1.15. also Psalm. 5.6. also Psalm. 51.14. and sundrie other places.] and lie priuelie [vz. in waite: see Psalm. 10.8.9.10.] for the innocent [vz. to catch and snare him: see Psalm. 141.9.] without a cause [vz. on their behalfe gi∣uen, to practise so against them: see Psalm. 119.161. and these may bee ei∣ther the wicked mens words, who in the testimonie of their owne conscience say, they persecute the godlie without any cause at all, or els the words of the holie Ghost iustifying the good; but I incline rather to the former. And note, that as in this verse they bragge, what mischiefe they will closelie and craftelie performe against them, so in the next verse, they doo shamefullie  vaunt, what open mischiefe they will commit.] Vers. 12. Wee [vz. in the pride and crueltie of our owne hearts] will swallow them vp [i. will quite and cleane destroy the godlie] aliue [i. being either in good health and sound, or els florishing in glorie, wealth, &c. but the former is the better, though the Rabbins allow of the latter.] like a graue [i. euen as a graue doth receiue and take in dead corpses, and neuer is satisfied: see Prouerb. 30.15, 16. so will they destroy the good, and neuer leaue off.] euen whole [i. wee will spare no
part or peece of them, neither skinne, flesh, nor bones] as those that go downe into the pit. [i. as those that are buried whole, so shall these bee destroyed whole.] Vers. 13. Wee shall finde [i. not only certainlie finde, but assuredlie  also obteyne and possesse] all precious riches, [i. all manner of precious and rich things: and this perswasion is drawne from profite.] and fill our hou∣ses [i. we shall haue great store and aboundance] with spoyle [vz. of the good people: meaning that they should haue, as a plentifull pray, all manner of rich and precious things.] Vers. 14. Cast in thy lot amongst vs, [i. haue a  portion and a part with vs, and ioyne thy selfe vnto vs in these things. But I would rather reade it in the future tense, q.d. Looke what part wee haue, thou shalt haue the same: and we looke for none but good, therefore thy por∣tion shall be plentifull.] we will all haue one purse. [this is another intisement of the wicked: q.d. we will be share and share like, and as we put all into one bagge; so we will haue it equallie diuided, and none shall be preferred before another.] Vers. 15. My sonne, [see vers. 8. of this Chapter.] walke not  thou in the way with them, [i. be not conuersant with them at any hand, nei∣ther haue any fellowship or dealing with them, either openly nor priuately.] refraine thy foote from their path, [i. walke not in their wicked waies, least thou bee partaker with them, as of the same sinnes, so of the same punish∣ments.] Vers. 16. For their feete runne to euill [i. they are swift to commit  iniquitie] and make hast to shed bloud: [i. to murther and kill men, and to take away their liues: see vers. 11. of this Chapter: and this is a rea∣son, why the godlie should not hearken to the intisements of the wicked.] Vers. 17. and 18. as they are read in the Geneua text, seeme to carrie with  them this sense: that as the Fowler hath no cause giuen him on the be∣halfe of the bird to catch the bird, and yet notwithstanding doth take the same: so the wicked lye closelie in waite, to destroye the good, though the godlie haue giuen them no occasion so to doo. But others varieth both in sense and reading thus.] for in vayne [i. to no purpose at all.] is the net [vz. of the Fowler] spread before the eyes [i. openlie and in the sight] of all that hath wing, [i. of euerie birde and fowle, q.d. though these men make an account, as though they had gotten the praie, yet they can no more certainlie saie that they can bring to passe their counsels and purposes, than an vnskilfull fowler (which laieth his snares & grinns openlie) can cer∣tainlie affirme, that he will catch the birds that flie by, and obserue his nets: and so it is as another reason; that as before hee had perswaded them not to yeeld to the inticements of the wicked, because all things they did tended to iniustice and crueltie: so here he disswadeth them, because they can looke for no certeine euent of their purposes.] Vers. 18. Moreouer, [q.d. this is an  other reason, why you should not yeelde to their prouocations,] they them∣selues [i. the wicked and vngodlie] laie waite for their owne blood: [i. worke mischiefe, euen to the destruction of themselues] in that they hide themselues: [vz. thinking thereby to catch and insnare others:] it is against their owne
soules, [i. it is hurtfull to themselues: sée to this end Psal. 7.14, 15, 16. And so here is a third argument, taken from the heauie destruction of the wicked,  which they purchase vnto themselues by their own wicked doings] V. 19. Such [i. so dangerous and deadlie] are the waies [i. the purposes and practi∣ses] of euerie one [i. of what state or condition soeuer he or they be of] that is greedie of gaine, [i. that is giuen to it, and gapeth after vniust gaine,] he [i. the wicked] would take awaie [vz. for the satisfying of his owne greedie and couetous desire] the life of the owners thereof. [i. of such gaine or good things as other men haue and they desire. Some readeth it otherwise, & make an o∣ther sense of the latter part of the verse thus;] in such state [vz. both for wic∣ked purposes and great dangers] are the companies [i. the societies, fellow∣ships, or corporations (as a man would saie): for he seemeth to allude to that which was spoken before vers. 14. see Gen. 37.25. where mention is made of a companie of Ishmaelitish marchants also,] of all that are giuen to gaine. [i. to vniust gaine: and in that terme also he sheweth, that none of them can escape death and destruction; because the iudgement which God will laie vpon them cannot be auoided.] Gaine [i. vniust gaine] taketh awaie the soule of them [i. the life of them] that are giuen theretoo. [vz. greedelie and aboue measure. This is it (as I take it) that the holie Ghost dooth sententiouslie conclude, that the wicked shall not escape vnpunished: and all this is done, to draw the godlie that they consent not to their wicked allurements.] Ve.  20. Wisedom [It is in the Hebrue text in the plural number, by which he no∣teth most high & excellent wisedom, vz. euen the eternall wisedome of God (Iesus Christ) of whom see afterward chapt. 8. and in whome are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge Coloss. 2.3.] crieth [vz. earnest∣lie and continuallie: by which he setteth out his great loue to the conuersion of men.] without, [i. abroad and openlie,] she vttereth her voice [i. she spea∣keth freelie and plainlie] in the streetes: [vz. of the Citie: both these layde together, sound q.d. both openlie and priuatelie, in the citie and in the fields,  wisedome ceaseth not to call men to amendement.] Vers. 21. She calleth [vz. men to amendment] in the high streate among the prease, [q.d. she is in the great assemblie and concourse of people, taking thereby the greatest and best opportunitie of well dooing.] in the entring of the gates, [vz. whether people were wont to repaire for matters of iustice and iudgement: as Gen. 34.20. Ruth 4.1. q.d. both in the market place and in the iudgement place, wisedome seeketh to draw men vnto her,] and vttereth her words [vz. ve∣rie plainlie and sensiblie, that all may vnderstande] in the citie, [i. in euerie place and quarter of the citie: see Psalm. 55.9, 10, 11.] saying: [vz. vnto the  wicked and vngodlie:] Vers. 22. O ye foolish, [or simple rather, as ver. 4. of this chapter: for he vseth one and the selfe same wordes in both places.] how long will ye loue foolishnesse? [q.d. will ye neuer leaue off this sheepish∣nesse and simplenesse?] and the scornfull, [of these see Psalm. 1.1. who turne all things into scoffes, the wickedst people that can be] take their pleasure in
scorning? [i. how long wil you delight in it, to your own hurt and destruction in the end, vnlesse you repent?] & the fooles [this word doth not onlie com∣prehend such as are spoken of before vers. 7. of this chapter, who are giuen to false opinions, and follow waies directlie contrarie to wisedome; but also want wisedome, and giue not their mindes thereto] hate knowledge? [vz. offered them. Marke how in this verse he passeth sodainlie from the seconde person to the third.] Vers. 23. Turne you [vz. from your euil waies: nei∣ther  speaketh he this, as though they had either will or power to doo it with∣out God; but to shew that now the meane was offered them, which if they refused, it would be a greater iudgement against them.] at my correction, [i. now that I doo by words and speaches labor to correct and amend you,] loe [q.d. if you will doo this, see what benefites you shall draw and pull to your selfe.] J will powre out my minde vnto you, [i. I wil make you plentifullie ac∣quainted with the fulnesse of all good things which dwell in me,] and make you vnderstand my words. [i. the words which I shall speake for your amēd∣ment: q.d. till I giue you vnderstanding thereof, they can be no otherwise to you, but as a sealed or closed booke.] Vers. 24. Because I haue called  [vz. earnestlie vnto you, for your amendement and good] and ye refused; [vz. to hearken and yeelde obedience vnto my voyce.] J haue stretched out mine hand, [q.d. I haue beckened vnto you with my hand, and giuen you signes and tokens of my calling and protection,] and none [vz. amongest you] would regard. [vz. these testimonies and tokens of my loue towardes you.] Vers. 25. But [q.d. moreouer and besides all this] ye haue despised,  all my counsell, [i. through your rebellion you haue contemptuouslie cast frō you, all that I purposed and offered vnto you for your good:] and would none of my correction. [i. would not accept or regard anie meane that I vsed, either of word or chastisement for your bettering and amendment. In these two verses, he reckoneth vp their sinnes, in the next followeth their iudge∣ments.] Vers. 26. I will also laugh (i. I will not care for you or regarde  you. Laughter attributed to God according to man: see Psalm. 2.4.] at your destruction, [The word properlie signifieth a vapor, exhalation, or clowde; but here by a Metaphore it is taken for calamitie or miserie, which bringeth destruction vpon men; and that in a double respect, because as clowdes and vapors darken the daie, so calamitie and miserie make dark manie times the glorie and renowme of men: againe, as vapors and exhalations arise sodain∣lie, and sodainlie depart againe: so dooth the glorie of the wicked when the tempest of miserie beginneth once to blowe vpon it.] and mocke [vz you in your miserie: and this is spoken of God according to mans capacitie] when your feare cōmeth [vz. sodainly, as in the next verse vpon you: vnderstanding by feare, not only the things which the wicked feare, but also the time of their calamitie, in which they shall be in great feare & doubting; yea the very an∣guish & griefe of their hart also.] Ver. 27. When your feare [see ve. 26. com∣meth  [vz. vpon you, and that certainlie and assuredlie, which he signifieth by
speaking in the present tense.] like sodaine desolation, [i. like such destruction and wasting, as for the sodainnes of it, can neither be easely borne, nor well preuented. That word which is here turned desolation, dooth properly signi∣fie, a sodaine and furious breach or destruction of any thing, breaking and o∣uerthrowing euery thing that it méeteth with.] and your destruction [i. the destruction which is appoynted for you] shall come [vz. vppon you] like a whirlewind, [i. both sodainlie and with great violence: he expresseth one thing vnder sundrie termes] when affliction and anguish [i. when trouble and griefe, either outward in the bodie, or inward in the minde] shall come vppon you [vz. iustly from God: q.d. I will not only then laugh at your destruction,  but you your selfe shall pray and not be heard.] Vers. 28. Then [i. in the time of their trouble and sorrowe] shall they [i. the wicked: marke the so∣daine change of the person, from the second to the third] call vpon me [i. pray vnto me, as Psalme 50.15.] but I will not answere: [i. graunt them their re∣questes: yea, by with-holding the thinges they pray for, I will testifie my wrath against them,] they shall seeke me earely [i. very diligently, carefully, and as it were incessantly: q.d. they shall spare no paines, yea they shall breake their sleepes in the morning.] but shall not finde me, [vz. gracious and merciful vnto them in their griefes, because God wil be found of none but of such as seeke him according to his will reuealed in his word, and that  with the same affection of heart, which he in the same requireth.] Vers. 29 Because they hated knowledge, [see vers. 22. of this Chapter, he doth here a∣gaine repeate the causes of the ruine and destruction of the wicked.] and did not chuse [vz. when it was graciouslie tendred and offered them.] the feare  of the Lord] see vers. 7. of this Chapter.] Vers. 30. They would none of my counsell, but despised all my correction. [see vers. 25. of this Chapter. He mea∣neth that in the pride of their owne hearts, they were set, to contemne and  despise whatsoeuer God would do for them.] Vers. 31. Therefore [vz. for this their great contempt and rebellion] shall they eate [vz. in al aboundance, plentie and fulnes] of the fruite of their owne way [i. they shall bee satisfied, with their wicked counsels, and haue iust punishments layd vpon them for the same, euen the wickednesse which they haue sowne, they shall reape with all fulnes: see Chapter 22.8.] and be filled with their owne deuices: [i. with the punishments and mischiefes, which they themselues had deuised against  others.] Vers. 32. For ease [i. not only the peace and quietnesse which they here inioy, but their stubbornnes and setlednes in euill, wherein they please themselues, and promise vnto themselues all prosperitie: see Ieremiah 48.11. Zephani. 1.12.] slaieth the foolish [i. the simple, which knowe not how to vse it, as vers. 22. of this Chapter] and the prosperitie of fooles [i. that prospe∣ritie which fooles and wicked persons enioy] destroyeth them [i. plungeth  them daylie more and more into destruction.] Vers. 33. But he that obeieth mee [vz. in doing the things which I command him] shall dwell safelie [vz. from all naughtie men, or any mischiefe they can imagine against him: see
Psalm. 4.8.] and be quiet from feare of euill [i. not only, no euill it selfe, but no suspition or feare of it shall go to his heart, he shall bee so strengthened through Gods promises, and defended by his almightie power. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, that it is a great blessing,Do. when God giueth to any countrie or common wealth, wise and godlie Princes. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth vs, that Gods word is, and ought to bee the ground of all our knowledge. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that it ought to bee the rule of all our actions, either publique or priuate. Vers. 4. Proueth, that the knowledge of Gods worde belongeth euen to the simple, contrarie to the Popish assertion, which would haue none meddle with it, but great schollers and learned men. Vers. 5.6. Shewe, that euen the wisest also may out of the same learne, for in∣crease of iudgement and knowledge: so that wee may rightly say, that, the word are waters, wherein the great Elephant may swimme, and the little Lambe wade and goe. Vers.7. Teacheth vs, that wee can neuer come to sound knowledge of God and his truth, vnlesse there bee a right reuerence of his Maiestie in our hearts. Ʋers. 8. Teacheth vs, first that it is parents dueties, to instruct those, whom God hath giuen them. Secondly, that chil∣dren should reuerently hearken vnto the wholesome counsell of their friends and parents. Ʋers. 9. Teacheth vs, that it is a notable grace to bee bowable to the good wordes of exhortation. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, at no hand to consent, to wicked perswasions and inticements. Vers. 11, 12, 13, 14. Teach vs, that the wicked will leaue no stone vnrolled, to the end they may drawe some to commit wickednesse with them, sometimes setting before them pleasure, sometimes profite, and sometimes one thing, and some∣times another. Ʋers. 15. Teacheth vs two things: first to auoyd the com∣panie of the wicked: secondly, not to bee like vnto them in outward con∣uersation. Ʋers. 16. Sheweth, how egar and sharpe set, the wicked are vpon mischiefe. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs, that the wicked are not so sure of the ac∣cōplishment of their practises, as they suppose. Vers. 18. Teacheth vs, that through Gods iust iudgements, the vngodly are many times taken in the mischieuous imaginations of their owne hearts. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, that there is no wicked man, of what estate or condition so euer he be, which continueth in his sinne, that shall escape vnpunished. Vers. 20, 21, 22. Tea∣cheth vs, that the heauenlie wisedome vseth all meanes and opportunities, to bring men vnto it, which are stragling from it. Vers. 22. Sheweth, that the wicked preferre vanitie and sinne, before all goodnesse whatsoeuer. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, that those which vnfeignedlie turne to the Lord, shall not only escape iudgements in this life, and in the life to come, but shall bee throughlie instructed in all the waies of God. Vers.24, 25. Teacheth vs, that there can be no greater sinne committed against God, than rebellion, and the contempt of his maiestie. Vers. 26. Teacheth, that the Lord will haue no care of them, that haue no care of him. Ʋers. 27. Sheweth, that
both sodaine and fearefull destruction shall fall vpon all wicked contem∣ners of God and his truth. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, that those which refuse to heare God when he speaketh, shall not be heard when they pray vnto him. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, that this is a great sinne against God, euen the con∣tempt and refusall of graces offered: the same thing doth vers. 30. teach vs. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, that it is a iust with God, to punish sinne with sinne in the wicked, though he himselfe delight not in sinne. Vers. 32. Teacheth vs, that euen the very good things that the wicked haue, tend to their grea∣ter iudgement and condemnation. Vers. 33. Teacheth vs, that obedience to Gods lawe, is a good pledge to his children, that God will in his proui∣dent and fatherly care, continually watch ouer them. CHAP. 2. Co. SAlomon in the ende of the other Chapter, had brought in Gods wisedome speaking vnto men, and calling them to amendment, which being done, he be∣ginneth againe, either in his owne person, or in the person of wisedome (chuse whether you will accept of) to exhort men to imbrace her, and reuerentlie and rightlie to esteeme of her. Di. I Would thinke, that the Chapter, may be diuided into two parts. In the first, either Wisedome it selfe, or Salomon, admonisheth vs to obey her, both because it teacheth vs the feare of God, and also instructeth vs in his  mercie, prouidence, &c. In the second part he reckoneth vp, the great bene∣fites and blessings that that heauenlie Wisedome bestoweth vpon vs, and namelie that it shall deliuer vs, from euerie euill way, as slaunder, backby∣ting, adulterie, &c. The first part reacheth from vers. 1 to the end of the 9. verse: and the second from vers. 10. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. MY sonne [see chapt. 1.8.] if thou wilt receaue [i. e∣uen as it were gréedelie, earnestlie, reuerentlie & rightlie] my words, [i. the matters that I shall propound and speake vnto thée] and hide [vz. as most precious and deare things: see Psalm. 119 11.] my commandements, [i. the things & words which I command thee] within thee: [vz. in thy heart; yet so that they may be expressed also in thy outward conuersation.]  Vers. 2. And cause thine eares [vz. both of thy bodie and of thy minde] to hearken [vz. reuerentlie, attentiuelie, and diligentlie] vnto wisedome: [vz. that speaketh so often & so openly vnto thee, as chapt. 1. ver. 20. &c.] and in∣cline [vz. willinglie and vnfeinedlie] thine heart [vz. whollie & altogether] to vnderstanding. [i. to obtaine & get sound knowledge of Gods will reuea∣led  in his word.] Vers. 3. For [this word would be better turned yea: q.d.
if thou addest this further, that thou hast a minde to praie for wisedome.] if thou callest after knowledge [i. bend thy speach towards her, that thou maist (as it were) call her vnto thee, as when one calleth another, and so by that meanes she may become familiar and acquainted with thee.] and criest [vz. aloud and earnestly: by which he noteth care and diligence] for vnderstan∣ding. [i. for the obteining of it: as men when some are going apace frō them crie aloud that they may be heard. Some read this verse thus] Yea if thou call vpon wisedome, [i. reuerentlie call vpon God for the obteining of wise∣dome, as Salomon did 1. King. 3.6.] and criest aloud to vnderstanding, [i. prayest earnestlie to God, as God himselfe commandeth Iam. 1.5. And in∣deed I take this to be the better sense, by reason of that which foloweth ver. 6. of this chapter.] Ver. 4. If thou seekest her [vz. as diligentlie and payn∣fullie]  as siluer, [i. as thou thy self wouldest or any other man seeke siluer lost or hidden,] and searchest for her [vz. as carefullie & as narrowlie] as for trea∣sures [vz. which are hidden in some close, strong, and secret place, as in the earth, or otherwise, whether men cannot come, but by great labour and toile: q.d. if thou seekest it, with as earnest an affection, as siluer is sought, and treasures digged vp, and that thou art not content with a common kinde of searching; but if thou finde it not at once, thou wilt still seeke, till thou hast found, then thus and thus shall it be with thee. And marke here what de∣grees the holie Ghost vseth: first he would haue vs to be carefull to receiue, and to hold fast the doctrine of God. vers. 1. Then he would haue vs to bée carefull, by diligent attention, for the receiuing and remembring of it. ver. 2. Thirdly, he would haue vs to vse earnest praier for the obtaining of it. ver. 3 And lastly, he would haue vs to bestow all labour, studie and industrie. vers. 4.] Vers. 5. Then [i. when thou hast carefully striuen, to the performance  of these things] shalt thou vnderstand [vz. plainly, familiarly, rightly and soundly] the feare of the Lord, [see Chapt. 1. vers. 7.] and finde [vz. so that thou shalt obtaine and possesse] the knowledge of God. [i. such knowledge of him, as thou oughtest to haue, of which see Iohn 17.3. and also shalt knowe by experience, that he knoweth thee, that is, careth for thee, as may appeare by vers. 6, 7. following.] Vers. 6. For the Lord [vz. alone, and none but he]  giueth [vz. freelie of his owne mercie] wisedome [i. true and heauenlie wise∣dome. Iames 3.15, 17. q.d. I sayd before, that thou shouldest find wisedome & knowledge, but now least thou shouldest ascribe it to thine owne strength, I tell thee, it must come from God which giueth it plentifullie, &c. Iames 1.5.] out of his mouth [he meaneth Gods good will and pleasure manifested vnto vs by his word, vnderstanding his word also thereby: see Deutr. 8.3. Math. 4.4.] commeth knowledge, [i. all sound knowledge of his maiestie] and vnderstanding [i. right vnderstanding, of his holie mysteries.] Vers. 7.  He [i. God] preserueth [vz. by his almightie power and prouidence] the state of the righteous [i. he vpholdeth them that haue care and conscience of a righteous conuersation, in a good estate and condition. Some reade it thus]
He hath euery thing [vz. that is in déede good] layd vp in store for the righ∣teous [i. God so knoweth and prouideth for the righteous, that he causeth them to abound with all things, that are good in déede] he is a shield to them that walke vprightly, [i. he doth by his power, saue, preserue, and defende  them that studie and striue for a holy conuersation.] Vers. 8. That they may keepe [vz. through strength and grace from him] the waies of iudgement [i. such vpright pathes, as tend to iudgement and right towards all, specially towards their neighbour, to which the Hebrue word should most properlie be referred, (as I suppose) not declining any whit at all, from right and e∣quitie] and he [i. God alone, without the helpe or ayd of others] preserueth [see vers. 7. of this Chapter] the way [i. the whole course or trade of his life, whatsoeuer he thinketh, speaketh, doth, or taketh in hand: meaning that the Lord prospereth it also: see Psalme 1.3, 6.] of his Saincts. [i. of those which  he frameth to a holie life: see Psalme 16.3. also Psalme 149.1.] Vers. 9. Then [vz. when thou shalt be instructed with knowledge and wisedom from the Lord] shalt thou vnderstand [vz. through the light which God shall be∣stowe vpon thee] righteousnesse, and iudgement, and equitie, [see these words expounded before, cap. 1. vers. 3. And here he noteth another fruit of the stu∣die of wisedome, which is properly to bee vnderstood towards men: as the first, mentioned vers. 5. was towards God.] and euerie good path [i. euerie right course and order, to frame thy life, well and religiouslie, yea thou shalt  vnderstand euery good thing, through the desire of wisedome.] Vers. 10. When wisedome entereth into thy heart [i. findeth a fast and deepe seate in thee] and knowledge delighteth thy soule; [vz. aboue all: the end of the sen∣tence,  and meaning is to be looked for in the next verse.] Vers. 11. Then shall counsell [vz. which thou shalt learne out of Gods word] preserue thee, [vz. from all euill: see vers. 7.8. of this Chapter] and vnderstanding [vz. of Gods will reuealed in his worde] shall keepe thee [vz. safe and sounde.]  Vers. 12. And deliuer thee [i. from euery thing that is euill: so that thou shalt not attempt nor take in hande anie euill thing: yea from a disor∣dred life, into which thou slippest through infirmitie of nature; or, where∣vnto thou art prouoked by the wordes and déedes of the vngodlie.] and from the man [i. from men: for it is one number put for another.] that spea∣keth [vz. not onely in his hart, but with his mouth] froward things [vz. both  against God and men] Vers. 13. And from them [q.d. it will set the free also from such and such persons: and marke how sodainlie he changeth the numbers from the singular to the plurall. Some ioyne it to the former verse thus] which [vz. men, speaking peruerse things] leaue the waies of righteousnesse, [i. vpright, good, and holie wayes: and hee meaneth by this speach, that the wicked many times put out the light that God hath bestow∣ed vpon them.] to walke in the wayes of darknesse. [i. in corrupt and euil cour∣ses: for euerie one that dooth euill hateth the light. Iohn 3.20. also Rom. 13.12,  13. Ephes. 5.13.] Vers. 14. Which reioyce [vz. greatlie] in dooing e∣uill,
[i. when either they themselues doo anie, or heare of others which com∣mit it.] and delight [vz. verie much] in the frowardnesse of the wicked, [vz. man: yet I had rather turne it thus, in the frowardnesses of euill, that is, in the worst and most euill frowardnesses. Some referre the word reioycing to the minde, inwardlie; and the word delight to the bodie, outwardlie; because the motions of the minde manie times appeare outwardlie in the bodie: q. d. both outwardlie and inwardlie they are glad at all naughtinesse.] Vers.  15. Whose wayes [i. whose liues and dealings both towardes God and men] are crooked, [i. wicked and vngodlie, and lead not onelie to trouble, but to de∣struction also] and they are leawd in their paths. [i. their whole trade & course of life sauoreth of nothing but leawdnesse.] Verse 16. And it [i. wisedom  and true knowledge, if thou once apprehend it indéed] shall deliuer thee [sée verse 12. of this chapter] from the strange woman, [i. from the whore or har∣lot: who in the scripture is called by this name, because shee estrangeth her selfe from her husband, and giueth ouer the vse of her bodie to a stranger.] e∣uen from the stranger [i. the harlot] which flattereth [vz. verie swéetelie and pleasantlie] with her words. [i. with her intising speaches: sée Prouer. 7.10, 11, &c.] Verse 17. Which forsaketh [vz. both in action & affection, though  perhaps not in respect of bodilie presence, for she maketh an accompt of her husband also, as Prou. 7.19.] the guyde of her youth, [i. her husband which God gaue her in her youth, to guyde and gouerne her; not onlie then, but for euer: for the husband is the head of the wife 1. Cor. 11.3.] and forget∣teth [vz. vtterlie and altogether] the couenant of hir God. [that is the bond of mariage solemnlie passed betwéene the parties, God himselfe being Au∣thour thereof, and his name being called vpon at the contract made: sée Ma∣lach. 2.14.] Verse 18. Surelie [or as some reade it For, q.d. it is no small  blessing that thou shalt obtayne by hauing found wisedome; for it shall deli∣uer thee from deadlie danger and destruction.] hir house [i. euen the very en∣trance and going into her house: q.d. the verie first beginning of familiari∣tie and acquaintance] tendeth to death, [i. bringeth death & destruction with it if it be pursued] and hir paths [i. the treading in hir paths and walking in hir order of life and conuersation: see chapter 1.15. vnderstand heere, tend, or lead] vnto the dead. [i. vnto them that are dead alreadie and buried: sée Psalme 88.10. He meaneth that to follow the wayes of the harlot, bringeth with it death and destruction both of bodie and soule.] Verse 19. All they  [vz. of what state or condition soeuer they be] that go vnto her, [i. that haue but some familiaritie or beginning of acquaintance with hir] returne not a∣gaine, [vz. without touch or taint of some mischiefe: meaning also, that they hardlie returne to the Lord by vnfeined repentance] neither take they hold of the wayes of life. [i. they liue not againe, or returne into life: meaning also by life, and the waies thereof, a better order or course of life, than they lead before. And though he speake the same things in many wordes, meaning that they shall not at any hand escape destruction, yet the wordes must bee vnderstood,
of eternall death rather, than of temporal & bodilie death, which yet notwith∣standing the adulterers purchase and procure to themselues, by their inces∣sant  filthie life.] Vers. 20. Therefore [q.d. seeing thou seest what iudge∣ments shall fall vppon the wicked, ioyne thou thy selfe to the good: others reade it otherwise, but me thinketh this is plaine enough] walke thou in the way of good men, [i. be conuersant with them, and order thy life well, accor∣ding to the good orders and courses of their life] and keepe the waies of the righteous: [vz. in thy conuersation and behauiour: q.d. in thy life, followe  their good and holie steppes.] Vers. 21. For [he sheweth here a reason, ta∣ken from the iust iudgements of God, towards the good in this verse, and towards the wicked vers. 22.] the iust [1. those that haue care and conscience of iustice & wel doing] shall dwell in the land, [vz. which the Lord hath mer∣cifullie giuen them, for I take it, that he alludeth to the promises made in the lawe Exodus 20.12. and other places. Yet so, that vnder the same he meaneth all manner of blessings whatsoeuer: see Psalm 37.29.] and the vpright men [see Psalme 119.1.] shall remaine in it [vz. a long season.]  Vers. 22. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth [vz. through the iust iudgement of God against them for their sinnes] and the transgressors [i. such as transgresse against God and his lawe] shall be rooted out of it. [vnder this word, he meaneth, that the wicked shall assuredlie, sodainlie, and vtter∣lie be destroyed: see Psalme 37.36, 38. also Psalme 52.5. And héere vnder∣stand, by these outward and corporall things, inward, spiritual, and eternal, either life or death: and marke that this is vsuall with him to amplifie by the contrarie, as Chapt. 1.32, 33. Chapt. 3.35. and in sundrie other places. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth, to bring with vs, a mind readie & prepared to receiue good things. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, to haue care, faithfullie to retaine and keepe those good things which wee haue heard and learned. Vers. 3. Tea∣cheth vs, to vse earnest and continuall praier for the obtaining of al good things whatsoeuer. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, to spare no labour or cost, for the obtaining of good things, yea the better that the things are which we seeke for, the more earnestlie to trauaile therein. Ʋers 5. Teacheth vs, that if wee seeke for the things of God with that affection, that he requireth, and to the ende he commandeth, wee shall not lose our labour. Ʋers. 6. Tea∣cheth vs, that the gift of wisedom, knowledge, iudgement, and euery good gift whatsoeuer commeth from the Lord. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, Gods great care and singular prouidence ouer those that be his. Ʋers. 8. Teacheth vs, that God reuealeth knowledge and wisedome vnto those that bee his, to the end, that they might learne according to the same to direct all their waies. Ʋers. 9. Teacheth vs, that we know nothing of goodnes, till God make the same manifest vnto vs. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, both in the inward man, and in the outward man, to take delight and pleasure in good things. Vers. 11, 12. &c. Teach vs, what great benefites, sound and sincere know∣ledge
of Gods heauenly will, wisedom shall bring with it, to thē, that haue attained through Gods goodnesse to the same. Vers. 12. Teacheth vs, to auoid al frowardnes, whether it be in heart or speach. Ʋers. 13. Teacheth vs, to take heed that we bleare not the light, which God hath made mani∣fest vnto vs. Ʋers. 14. Teacheth vs, to beware of reioycing in euill and naughtinesse, for that is the height and toppe of all sinne. Vers. 15. Tea∣cheth vs, that when men delight in crooked waies, they more and more go astray from God in following the leaudnes of their own soules. Vers. 16. Painteth out very liuely the qualities and conditions of a harlot, or strum∣pet. Vers. 17. Sheweth, that in adulterie, there is a double transgression com∣mitted, one against God, and another against man, which is the husband. Vers. 18.19. Shewe how dangerous and deadlie a thing it is, to haue any fa∣miliaritie or acquaintance at all with light and dishonest women. Vers. 20 Teacheth vs, to set good men, in their goodnesse, before our eyes, to bee examples and patternes of good life and conuersation vnto vs. Ʋers. 21, 22. Set out the difference betweene the reward of the good and the bad, both in this life, but especiallie in the life to come. CHAP. 3. Co. IN the other Chapter, the holie Ghost had exhorted men to imbrace and o∣bey wisedome, and now because this doctrine is not easilie yeelded vnto, yea mans nature doth whollie rebell against the same, he beginneth new and fresh exhortations, prouoking men to earnest and vnfained imbracing of Gods word. Di. THe Chapter may be diuided into three parts. In the first he setteth out  the vse of Gods word, which teacheth vs to trust in God, to feare and honour him, and pacientlie to abide his corrections from vers. 1. to the end of the 12. In the second part he citeth promises and blessings, assuring vs  that all things shall fall out well to them, that subiect themselues to Gods word and wisedome, from verse 13. to the end of the 26. In the third he la∣boureth  to remoue such euils, as might hinder men from imbracing Gods word and wisedome, as the doing of iniurie, keeping companie with the wicked, &c. setting out the iustice of Gods iudgements against the dooing and doers thereof, from verse 27. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. MY sonne, [see Chapter 1.8.] forget not thou [vz. at any time] my lawe [i. my doctrine and instruction: and he calleth it his, not because he was the author of it, but the vtterer or penner of it [but let thine heart [whollie and soundlie] keepe [vz. within it, in respect of know∣ledge] my commandements [i. both the things that I command, & the words in which I expresse them.] Vers. 2. For they [i. the not forgetting and kee∣ping
of them] shall increase the length of thy daies, and the yeares of life, [i. of thy life. He meaneth not, that the daies and termes which the Lord hath set vs, shall bee lengthened or shortned, but he speaketh it according to the cu∣stome of the lawe, Exod. 20.12.] and thy prosperitie. [or as it is in the He∣brue, thy peace, vnderstanding thereby all manner of prosperitie, as it is sundrie times vsed in scripture, without which, long time should bee but mi∣serable.]  Vers. 3. Let not mercie [i. the seruice and worship of God, prescri∣bed in his lawe, which he calleth mercie, because God in mercie onely made the same manifest vnto men] and truth [i. vpright and true dealing towards men, commanded in the second table] forsake thee, [vz. at any time, but haue them in continual remembrance to doo and performe them: see Deut. 5.29.] binde them on thy necke, [vz. as a chaine or Iewell: see Chapt. 1.9. And he seemeth to allude to that which is written Deut. 6.8. where they are com∣manded to binde them vpon their hands, and to haue them as frontlets be∣tweene their eyes: meaning nothing but the great care, which they should haue to remember Gods word: see Exod. 13.9. see also verse 21. of this Chapter] and write them vpon the table of thine heart [i. lay them vp in thine heart, and thinke often vpon them, as men doo those things which they haue in writings or tables. Vnder these two words, binding and writing, and the words ioyned with them, the holie Ghost meaneth nothing els but this, but that he should continually thinke vpon them in his mind, and speake of them in his talke, that thereby he might be the more prouoked to obey them in his  workes.] Vers. 4. So [i. by this meanes if thou striue to performe these counsels and commandements] shalt thou finde [vz. assuredly and without all doubt] fauour [i. acceptation and good liking] and good vnderstanding [i. sound iudgement and wisedome, in deuising and performing thy matters] in the sight of God [who will accompanie thee with his prouidence] and man. [i. men, as Chapt. 2. vers. 1. whose hearts God would bowe to approue and  like of al his doings.] Vers. 5. Trust in the Lord [vz. only, and at all times, either in prosperitie or aduersitie] with all thine heart, [i. vnfeignedly: for God hateth men of two hearts and hypocrites] and leane not vnto [i. trust not in: see Isaiah 36.6.] thine owne wisedome [i. mans wisedome, or the wise∣dome of flesh and bloud, whether thou haue it in and of thy selfe, or from o∣thers: for it is nothing els but foolishnes before God. Roma. 8.6, 7. Iames  3.15.] Vers. 6. In all thy waies [i. whatsoeuer thou doest purpose, enter∣prise or performe,] acknowledge him, [i. stedfastlie beléeue, and vnfeignedlie confesse, that all is done by his excéeding great power, excellent wisedome, and wonderfull prouidence: see to this end Dauids exhortation to Salomon 1. Chron. 28.9.] and he shall direct thy waies. [i. he shall so gouerne and guide all thy matters, that thou shalt not be frustrate of thy hope: see Psal. 37.5.  also Psalm 55.22.] Vers. 7. Be not wise in thine owne eyes, [i. in thine owne iudgement and opinion: q.d. thinke not that thine owne wisedome is suffi∣cient to dispatch thine affaires withall, without the wisedome and worde of
God, but beware of such conceites] but feare the Lord, [i. worship and serue him, hanging only vpon him] and depart [vz. with speede and vnfeignedly] from euill. [i. euery thing that is euill: see Psalm. 37.77. Iob. 1.1.] Vers. 8.  So [i. by this meanes, or as some reade it But [vz. fearing the Lord and de∣parting from euill [health [i. all blessings, by one vnderstanding all, either outward or inward] shall be vnto thy nauell, [i. vnto thee thy self, putting one part of the man for the whole man] and marrowe vnto thy bones. [i. strength vnto thy whole man: it is as much, as if vnder these two termes he should say, both inwardlie and outwardlie, in bodie and in minde thou shalt bee well affected: but these promises are expressed vnder an allegorie, or allegories, by which the godlie, that are fostered in the Church, are compared to children in their mothers wombes, and therefore the word turned here nauell, would rather be turned wombe or bellie: for as by the meanes of the wombe, nou∣rishment is ministred vnto them, yea euen to the strengthning of the inward parts: so the godlie in the Church, are fed and brought vp by the faith, knowledge, feare, and obedience of God: and as without marrowe in the bones, no part of man, no not that which is of greatest value and force, is able to doo any thing: so the strength that they haue from God, is as the marrowe which strengthneth the bones, and maketh them apt to doo good things: see Iob 21.24. for this phrase.] Vers. 9. Honour the Lord with thy  riches, [though I denie not, but that it is to bee vnderstood of things giuen for the maintenance of the Priestes and Leuites, and of their Sacrifices de∣dicated to the Lord: yet I would haue it to be vnderstood so generally, that looke which way so euer our riches might aduance Gods glorie, euen that way wee should willingly imploy the same, vnderstanding by riches, golde, siluer, precious stones, &c.] and with the first fruites of thine increase [vz. whether it be of beastes and cattle] to be offered to the Lord, or of the fruites of the earth: see for this Exod. 23.19. also Deut. 26.2. &c. meaning not∣withstanding vnder first fruites, euen the best and chiefest of any thing they had, to offer vnto the Lord: see Malach. 1.8. &c. Vers. 10. So shall thy  barnes [i. all thy places, wherein thou laiest vp thy store, as sellers, ware∣houses, &c.] bee filled with abundance, [vz. of all good things] and thy presses shall burst with newe wine. [i. there shall bee such abundance and plentie of newe wine, as thy presses shall not be able to presse it out, but shall breake in péeces through the abundance of it: see Deutero. 28. and Malach. 3.10.] Vers. 11. My sonne, [see Chapt. 1.8.] refuse not [vz. at any hand, as though  it were a tedious and hurtfull thing vnto thee [the chastening of the Lord, [i. such corrections, whether they bee outward in the bodie, or inwarde in the minde, as the Lord shall lay vpon thée] neither be grieued [vz. either against him, or it; as though thou wouldest murmur against him, or repine at it] with his correction: [i. with his fatherly chastising of thee to thy amendment, as may appeare in the next verse: see this place largely expounded Hebr. 12.5. &c. and Reuelat. 3.19.] Vers. 12. For [this is a reason why they should not
be faint hearted, or murmur against God in their afflictions] the Lord cor∣recteth [vz. mercifullie and graciouslie] him, whom he loueth; [i. euery one whom it pleaseth him of his owne good will onely to fauour and affect] euen as the father doth [vz. correct] the child [i. his naturall sonne or daughter] in whom [vz. notwithstanding his correction] he delighteth. [vz. greatly or ve∣rie much. His purpose is to shew, first that afflictions come not vpō the god∣lie by chance, but by Gods prouidence and appoyntment. Secondly, that they proceede not from him, as from one that is angrie with vs, but are ra∣ther  tokens of his fatherly loue correcting vs.] Vers. 13. Blessed is the man [i. hee hath abundance of blessings, as Psalm. 119.1. vnderstanding by one many also] that findeth [i. through earnest labour and studie obtaineth] wise∣dome, [i. true and heauenlie wisedome] and the man [i. men as before in this verse, to wit, are blessed [that getteth [vz. from the Lord, and through his blessing, by the meanes mentioned chapt. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. verses] vnderstanding:  [i. sound and sincere knowledge of his will reuealed in his word.] Ver. 14. For the marchandise thereof [i. both the paines taken for obtaining of it, as the marchants are wont to trauaile sore for their goods, and the thing it self being once obtained] is better [i. both more profitable, and more of value, and therefore the better to bee esteemed] than the marchandise of siluer, [i. than the gaine or increase that ariseth of siluer, though a man might multiplie it vnto mountaines] and the gaine thereof [i. the increase that commeth by it] is better [see before in this verse] than gold, [yea than most fine gold: see Psalm. 19.10. The reason is plaine, because these things are temporall, but the fruites which she yeeldeth are eternall: and this verse comprehendeth a  reason, why wisedome should bee imbraced.] Vers. 15. It [vz. wisedome and vnderstanding] is more precious [vz. in it selfe, and ought so to be estee∣med of them that bee truely touched] than pearles: [i. than all sortes of pre∣cious  stones: see Psalme 119.14, 72.] Vers. 16. Length of daies [vz. of a mans life: q.d. long life: see verse 2. of this Chapter] is in her right hand, [i. in her power to giue to all those that apprehend and take hold of her] and in her left hand [i. on the other side of her, are] riches and glorie [i. abundance of other worldly blessings whatsoeuer. I take it that wisedome is set out here, as some honorable woman or great personage, that with both handes giueth good things to such as followe her: q.d. she hath all good thinges in her, and doth with both handes (i. plentifullie bestowe the fame) vnderstan∣ding also by these outward blessings, inwarde and spirituall no doubt, els  were the other outwarde of no great value to account of.] Vers. 17. Her waies [i. the courses and orders that she taketh and prescribeth] are waies of pleasure, [i. are pleasant waies, so that a godlie man shall take great pleasure to be conuersant in the same] and all her pathes [by pathes he vnderstandeth the same, that he did by peace before] prosperitie: [or as it is in the Hebrue peace, that is, abounding with all manner of prosperitie: see verse 2. of this Chapter. It is worth the noting, that he saith the waies of wisedome, are
not only pleasant, but prosperous and safe: for there are many waies which are pleasant, but yet dangerous; and on the other side, there are many safe, but yet without pleasure; but in the waies of wisedome, we shall finde both these commodities.] Vers. 18. She [i. wisedome] is a tree of life [i. a tree  that giueth life, and quickneth: or as one interpreteth it, a most assured signe of eternall life: whatsoeuer it is, he alludeth no doubt, to the tree mentio∣ned, Genes. 2.9. also Genes. 3.22.] to them [i. to all them] that lay hold on her [vz. surely, neuer letting their hold slippe, for so much I suppose the Hebrue worde may well import] and blessed is he [vz. of what state or condition so euer he be: see verse 13. of this Chapter] that retaineth her [vz. fast and sure with him, hauing an earnest care and indeuour neuer to let her go.] Ver. 19.  The Lord [vz. himselfe] by wisedome [i. by his eternall word: see Chapter 8.30.] hath laied the foundation of the earth, [i. hath founded it so firmely, that it shall not bee moued: see Psalme 102.25. also Psalme 104.5.] and hath stablished the heauens through vnderstanding. [i. by his eternall wise∣dome he hath established them and all the powers thereof, in that comelines and beautie, that we now see] Vers. 20. By his knowledge the depths are bro∣ken  vp, [by depths he vnderstandeth fountaines and flouds, breaking out, and as it were flowing from the nethermost partes of the earth, euen as though the earth did cleaue it selfe in sunder to giue them passage] and the clowdes [vz. of the ayre] droppe downe the deaw [vz. from heauen: and here he speketh of deaw, because it is very profitable for the increase of trées, herbs, plants, &c. Giuing vs to vnderstand hereby, that all things are directed and kept in their courses, by the eternall wisedome, knowledge, and prouidence of almightie God.] Vers. 21. My sonne, [see Chapter 1.8.] let not these  things [i. neither wisedome nor knowledge it selfe, nor the reasons which I haue vsed to mooue thée to obey it] depart from thine eyes, [i. be neuer forgot∣ten of thée, because we best remember those things that are in our sight] but obserue [i. diligently marke] wisedome and counsell, [i. that wisedome and counsell, which alone is true and holie, that thou maiest bee acquainted with it, and be partaker of the fruites of it.] Verse 22. So [i. by that meanes, and  after that sort receiued] they [i. the wisedome and word of God] shall bee life vnto thy soule, [i. shall quicken thee in the inner man, and shall bee as it were the seedes and nourishments of eternall life in thee] and grace [i. comelines, and an ornament] vnto thy necke. [i. to thy whole man, or to thée thy selfe, a part put for the whole: see also Chapter 1. verse 9.] Vers. 23. Then [vz.  when thou shalt bee thus instructed] shalt thou walke safely by thy way, [i. thou shalt prosperouslie performe whatsoeuer thou hast to doo] and thy foote shall not stumble. [vz. so that thou shouldest be grieuouslie hurt thereby: q.d. all things, which thou attemptest, shall haue good successe, and thou shalt liue peaceable, and plentifullie] Vers. 24. If thou sleepest [vz. in any place,  either in thy'ded or els where] thou shalt not be afraide, [vz. of any hurt or euill that may decide thee: because thou staiest thy selfe vpon his power and
prouidence, that neither slumbereth nor sleepeth] and when thou sleepest [vz. in any place, as before] thy sleepe [i. the sleepe that thou shalt take, and shall be giuen thee from God] shall be sweete [i. comfortable and profitable vnto thée]  Vers. 25. Thou shalt not feare [i. thou shalt not bee astonished or ouercome with feare] for any sodaine feare, [i. for any thing that comming sodainlie vpon men doth commonly make them afraied, and as it were take away their wittes and spirites from them] neither for the destruction of the wicked [i. that great destruction that shall come vpon the wicked: for then the Lord will either miraculouslie deliuer thee, or els howsoeuer thy bodie fall with the wicked, yet thy soule, yea and thy bodie also at the last shall bee receiued into euerlasting ioy] when it commeth: [vz. fearcelie, and sodainlie vpon thée:  see Chapter 1.27.] Vers. 26. For the Lord shall be for thine assurance, [i. he shall be in stead of a defence, and an assured place of refuge vnto thee] and shall preserue [vz. by his almightie power] thy foote [i. thee thy selfe: a part for the whole: and yet he doth not without cause vse this speech, because things are many times taken by the foote] from taking. [i. that thine enemie shall not catch thee, or thou thy selfe sticke fast in any manner of euill: see for all these promises, Psalme 91. vers. 1, 2, &c. where thou shalt finde the like  things almost.] Vers. 27. Withhold not the good [vz. which thou hast of another mans] from the owners thereof, [i. from them to whom it belongeth, as by the way of debt, or of Christian duetie, as in giuing almes, counsel∣ling, &c.] though there bee power in thine hand [i. though thou bee presentlie and fullie able] to doo it. [i. to hurt him and harme him, by the detaining of  that, which doth appertaine vnto him.] Vers. 28. Say not thou vnto thy neighbour [vz. when he is in distresse and neede] goe [vz. from me now] and come againe, [vz. another time, as we are wont to say] and to morrow [i. some other time hereafter] will I giue thee, [vz. somewhat toward the reliefe of thy néede: see Iames 2.16.] if thou haue it. [vz. in thy power and kéeping: hée meaneth the same thing, that he did in the other sentence, sauing that he tea∣cheth not only to doo well, but quicklie and with speede to doo well: for as it is in the Prouerb, he doth a double good turne, that doth a good turne in good season: and againe, the fauour that commeth too late, is little or nothing  worth.] Vers 29. Intend none hurt [vz. by thought, word, or déede, but spe∣cially in thought, for if that be repressed, the rest will easlie be beaten downe] against thine neighbour, [i. against any: but chiefly against those that dwell about thée, and haue dealt friendly with thée] seeing that he doth dwell [vz. as he supposeth and thinketh] without feare [vz. of any hurt from thée: mea∣ning, that he doth not so much as suspect, that thou wilt doo him any harme]  by thee. [i. nigh vnto thée, and thy house.] Vers. 30. Striue not [vz. either by priuate quarrelling, or publike iustice] with a man [i. with any man, or sun∣drie men, as verse 13. of this Chapt.] causeles, [i. without iust and good cause why,] when he hath done thee no harme [i. iniured or wronged thée, either by word or déede. He meaneth that wee should not without cause debate any
matter with any man, speciallie with him that hath wrought no euill against vs: for it is a great offence, and will vtterly ouerthrowe humanitie and fel∣lowship, to complaine of one, and to thunder out against him, that hath no∣thing at all offended him: and yet in the meane while, no lawe of God or man forbiddeth vs, to expostulate either priuatlie or publikelie, before the Magistrate with him, which hath offended and wronged vs, yea to conuince him of the iniurie if we be able, alwaies prouided, that wee doo it not, with a reuenging minde, nor burst forth into priuate reuenge.] Vers. 31. Be not  enuious [vz. either inwardly or outwardly] for the wicked man, [i for the good successe, and abundance of prosperitie, that thou seest him to inioye: see Psalme 37.11.] neither chuse any of his waies: [i. followe not his order and trade of life: he yeeldeth a reason in the next verse, why he would not haue men to doo so.] Vers. 32. For the froward [vz. person, vnderstanding by this  terme, one that regardeth not admonition, but giueth himself to al violence, crueltie and oppression] is an abhomination vnto the Lord, [i. the Lord ha∣teth, abhorreth, and cannot abide such a one: see Psalme 37.20.] but his se∣cret is with the righteous. [i. continually abideth with them: vnderstanding by secret, a most close, but yet most familiar communicating of his good will towards them, as may appeare by the verses following.] Vers. 33.  The curse of the Lord [i. iust plagues and punishments sent from God: see Malach. 2.2. &c.] is in the house of the wicked, [i. continueth & abideth there, howsoeuer they seeme to abound and flourish in all worldly wealth] but he blesseth [vz. continually with his fauour] the habitation of the righteous. [i. not onely the place where he dwelleth, but euen him himselfe, and al that he hath.] Vers. 34. With the scornefull [i. such as giue themselues to iesting,  scoffing, and contempt of all goodnesse] he scorneth, [i. he laugheth at them, or mocketh them, and deceiueth their hope: see Psalme 2.4. also Psalme 18.26. Prouerb. 1.26.] but he giueth [vz. freelie, and of his owne mercie] grace [i. all manner of goodnes both outward and inward] to the humble. [i. such as thinke lowlie of themselues: see Iames 4.6. also 1. Pet. 5.5.] Vers. 35.  The wise [i. such as are instructed with heauenlie wisedome] shall inherite glorie, [i. shall haue renowne and good report as a perpetuall inheritance] but fooles [vz. shall inherit or possesse] dishonor [i. shame and contempt, and that before God and man] though they be exalted, [i. how much soeuer they bée exalted, by their flatterers and clawbackes. Others reade this latter parte thus] but shame taketh away the foolish. [i. it carrieth both them and their hope away in a pinch of time, or twinckling of the eye as it were. The other sense and reading, is in my iudgement, as good as this, if not better. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, to haue good counsels in continuall remembrance, to the end we may be guided thereby. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth vs, that all bles∣sings shall be to such as obediently walke in the lawe of the Lord. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs to haue care and conscience of the performance of our dueties
towards God and our brethren. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, that obedience to the worde, maketh vs acceptable before God and man. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs two thinges: first, vnfeignedly to hang vpon the Lord: secondly, not to trust in our selues, or any thing that is in vs. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that the meane to haue all our waies and workes blessed, is to beleeue and confesse Gods wonderfull power and prouidence. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, first not to stand too much in our owne conceites: secondlie, that Christianitie con∣sisteth of doing good, specially to Godward, and of absteining from euill. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, that obedience to God procureth all blessings. Vers 9. Teacheth vs, that this is one principall end of our riches, to referre them to the aduancement of Gods honour and glorie. Vers 10. Teacheth vs, that God is no niggard in his gifts to his seruants. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, not to murmure or repine against GOD, for his fatherly corrections vppon vs. Ʋers 12. Teacheth vs, that Gods visitations vpon his children, are testimo∣nies, not of his displeasure, but of his great good will toward vs. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, that true blessednes consisteth in sound and holie wisedome. Vers. 14. Teacheth vs, that Gods word must be preferred before all earthly treasure. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs that nothing in the world is matchable with the holie wisedome that we learne out of Gods word. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, that long life, riches, estimation, &c. they are Gods gifts. Ʋers. 17. Tea∣cheth vs, that true pleasure is no where els to bee found, but in the heauenlie wisedome. Ʋers. 18. Teacheth vs, that there is no true life, without the knowledge of Gods will reuealed in his word. Vers. 19, 20. Teach vs, that all the things in heauen, and earth, are guided in their naturall course, by the power and prouidence of God. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, that it beho∣ueth vs to haue Gods word in continual remembrance. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs, that there is neither true life, nor true glorie in this life, without sound and sufficient knowledge of Gods heauenlie wisedome. Vers. 23. Tea∣cheth vs, that if we liue by the line and rule of the worde, wee cannot doo a∣misse. Vers 24. Teacheth vs, that if Gods word be once rooted and groun∣ded in our hearts, our sleepe and all things els shall be sweete and pleasant vnto vs. Vers. 25, 26. Teach vs, that staying our selues stedfastly vppon the truth of Gods prouidence, and promises, no hurtfull thing shall be able to dismay vs. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs, not to doo iniurie, though we bee able to do it. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, not to dferre and put off doing of good, when we are able to performe it. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, not to hurt any, speciallie such as are tyed to vs, by the bond of friendship, neighbourhood, or such like. Vers. 30. Teacheth vs, to auoide all manner of quarrelling and con∣tending, either publike or priuate. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, not only not to grudge at the wicked mens prosperitie, but also not to be drawne thereby to allowe or like of their euill behauiour. Vers. 32. Teacheth vs, that as the Lord can at no hand away with the wicked: so he greatly delighteth in the good, and is familiar with them. Vers. 33. Setteth out the vnlikely reward
that the good and the bad receiue of the Lord. Ʋers. 34. Teacheth vs, first that the wicked shall not carrie their sinnes away without punishment: secondlie the way to obtaine grace from God, is to humble ourselues vn∣feignedly, both before him and our brethren. Vers. 35. Teacheth vs, that howsoeuer flatterers exalt fooles, yet they shall inherite dishonor; and a∣gaine, that howsoeuer the wicked oppresse Gods children, yet they shall be truely honoured and exalted. CHAP. 4. Co. HE proceedeth in this Chapter, as in the other before, to exhort men to de∣light in, and to seeke after heauenly wisedome. Jn deede he doth it in other words and sentences, but that is, that we should not bee wearie of the oft repea∣ting of one and the selfe same thing. And yet if we would looke vnto it, this often exhortation is profitable for vs, who are carried hether and thether from it, with sundrie matters, and are as it were benummed and frosen, from carefull seeking after heauenlie wisedome. Di. THis Chapter may be diuided into foure parts. In the first he laboureth  to make his hearers and readers attentiue and fauourable to his cause, and that partly from the doctrine which he propoundeth, and partly from the example of the author: and this reacheth from verse 1. to the ende of the 4. In the second he exhorteth men carefullie to labour for the attaine∣ment  of wisedome, shewing certaine reasons, and alledging sundrie pro∣mises, the better to perswade them thereto: and this reacheth from vers. 5. to the end of the 13. In the third he teacheth the godlie to take heede and  to beware of the way of the wicked and their conuersation, shewing cer∣taine reasons also of that doctrine of his: from verse 14. to the ende of the 19. And in the last part he prouoketh men to hearken reuerentlie to Gods  word, and to put away from them frowardnes, & euerie other thing, which might hinder the great worke of God in them: from verse 20. to the ende of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. HEare [vz. with the eares, both of your vnder∣standing and minde] O ye children [before hée spake to them, in the name of one: as Chapter 1.8. Chapter 2.1. Chapter 3.1, 11, 21. Now he speaketh vnto many, vnderstanding hereby all the fauourers and louers of wisedom, whom he instructeth, as a father doth his children, deli∣uering them wholesome precepts] the instruction of a father, [i. the instruc∣tion that your father giueth you, according to his duetie] and giue care [vz. diligentlie and attentiuely] to learne [vz. from him, both by worde and ex∣ample]
vnderstanding, [vz. of the heauenlie and holie wisedome.] Vers. 2. For J doo giue you [i. deliuer and teach vnto you] a good doctrine: [i. a whole∣some, profitable, and pleasant doctrine] therefore [vz. because it is good] for∣sake ye not [vz. at any hand, or by any meanes] my lawe, [i. the things that I command you: meaning, that hee would not haue them in their liues and conuersation to depart from the same. Now he calleth it his lawe, not be∣cause he was the author of it, for that title properly belongeth to God, but  because he was his instrument to vtter and declare the same.] Vers. 3. For I [vz. my selfe: q.d. I lay no other burthen vpon you, but that which I haue borne my selfe in the time of my youth: and so he commendeth his doctrine from his owne example] was my fathers sonne, [i. tenderly and dearely belo∣ued of him, in so much that I was seldome or neuer out of his presence] tender and deare in the sight of my mother. [q.d. I was also dearely beloued of her: the worde that is turned heere deare, importeth, only sonne, as you would say, that is chiefly beloued aboue the rest, and brought vp with a sin∣gular affection, and not as though his mother had had no more, for wee see  the contrarie 1. Chron. 3.5.] Vers. 4. When he taught me [vz. as I do you now the fathers duetie, consisting specially in the instruction of his children. How Dauid performed this duetie see 1. Chron. 28.9.] and sayd vnto me, [vz. in the wordes following] let thine heart hold fast [vz. so fast, that they be neuer pulled out of the same by any meanes: q.d. haue continuall care of them, and remembrance to keepe them: see Chapt. 3.1.] my words [i. both my speaches, and the matters comprised therein] keepe my commandements [i. the things which I commande thee, keepe them I say; that is, labour to kéepe them, by thought, word, and déede, and thou shalt liue: [vz. both in this life, and in the life to come. And heere I suppose that Dauids wordes or speach do end (howsoeuer some would haue them to be continued to the ende of verse 9.) Salomon building the exhortations following vpon these spea∣ches.]  Vers. 5. Get wisedome; [i. take all paines to obtaine heauenly wise∣dome] get vnderstanding: [i. sound and sincere iudgement in the same] for∣get not, [vz. at any time: see Chapt. 3.1.] neither decline [i. goe aside either on the right hand or on the left, Deutro. 5.37.] from the words of my mouth.  [i. from the good things which I haue spoken and vttered.] Vers. 6. Forsake her not, [vz. by any meanes: speaking of wisedome: see verse 2. of this Chapter] and she shall keepe thee: [vz. from all danger or hurt] loue her [vz. vnfeignedlie and with a sincere affection] and she shall preserue thee. [vz. safe  and sound: see Chapter 2.11.] Vers. 7. Wisedome is the beginning: [vz. of all goodnes: for this word beginning, see Chapt. 1.7.] get wisedome there∣fore [q.d. seeing she is so excellent, spare no paines to attaine her] and aboue all thy possession get vnderstanding, [q.d. doo not only preferre it before all the riches thou hast, but haue such a desire to obtaine it, that thou wilt bee readie to aduenture all thy goods, and to spare no cost for the atchieuing of it:  sée Math. 13.44.] Vers. 8. Exalt her, [vz. both in iudgement and speach:
meaning, that he would haue his children to preferre her before all] all she shall exalt thee, [vz. both before God and man, and that with true glorie and exaltation in déede: this seemeth to bee spoken according to 1. Sam. 2.30.] she shall bring thee [i. aduance thee] to honour [i. to great and true honour] if thou imbrace her. [vz. willinglie and vnfeignedlie.] Vers. 9. She [i. wise∣dome  rightlie imbraced and apprehended] shall giue [vz. freelie] a comely or∣nament vnto thy head [see Chapter 1.9.] yea she shall giue thee a crowne of glorie [q.d. she shal plentifullie crowne thee with exceeding glorie.] Ver. 10  Heare [see verse 1. of this Chapter] my sonne, [see Chapter 1.8.] and receiue [vz. with reuerence and readines] my words, [i. the speaches and matters which I vtter: see verse 5. of this Chapter] and the yeares of thy life shall be many. [i. thou shalt liue many yeares through Gods fauour, & the obedience of his truth: see Chapter 3.16.] Vers. 11. I haue taught thee in the way of  wisedome, [q.d. that that I haue spoken, hath tended all & euery part of it, to bring thee the high & readie way to true and holie wisedome] and led thee in the paths of righteousnes. [i. I haue béen a guide vnto thee, to euerie good & righteous thing: see Psalme 23.3.] Vers. 12. When thou goest [vz. about  thy affaires and businesses] thy gate [i. the way that thou shalt go or walke in] shall not be straite, [i. dangerous; for straite and narrowe waies are com∣monlie perillous: see Psal. 18.36.] and when thou runnest [q.d. yea though thou runnest, or makest hast to dispatch thy matters] thou shalt not fall. [vz. to hurt thee any manner of way. The holie Ghost meaneth, that he shall al∣together prosper, and not be ouerthrowne with any aduersitie: see Psal. 1.3. Also Psal. 91.11. q.d. whatsoeuer thou takest in hand, shall be without dan∣ger of hurt or losse, yea though thou go about it very hastelie, yet shall it fall out well vnto thee, if thou follow the paths of that wisedome, which I teach thee.] Vers. 13. Take holde [i. lay sure and fast holde] of instruction, [i. of  that instruction which is giuen thee, or els he vnderstandeth by instruction, wisedome it selfe] and leaue not, [i. let not go thy hold for any thing, but con∣tinue it] keepe her [vz. with thee continuallie] for she is thy life. [i. the guider and gouernour of thy life, whether it respect God or man: for by it must we bee ruled, both in matters of manners and faith. Vers. 14. Enter not into the way of the wicked, [i. doo not so much as begin to followe their order and course of life, for hardlie can a man be reclaimed, that hath tasted of the plea∣sures and deceiptfulnes of sinne] and walke not in the way of euill men: [i. fol∣lowe not their wicked and vngodlie conuersation. He disswadeth men from haunting or vsing the vngodlies companie: see Chapt. 1.15. Chapt. 3.31. also Psalme 1.1.] Vers. 15. Auoide it, [vz. as much as thou canst: yea ab∣horre  it, and set thy self against it, as thou wouldest against infection or poy∣son] and go not by it, [i. come not nigh it, for feare thou bee taken and snared with it] turne from it [vz. with all speede possiblie, if thou hast so much as set but one foote forward toward it] and passe by: [vz. lightlie, or not at all re∣garding it. He speaketh the same matter in sundrie termes, but yet not
without great emphasis or force.] Vers. 16. For they cannot sleepe [vz. soundlie or sweetlie] except they haue done euill, [i. performed some mischiefe against some other men] and their sleepe departeth [vz. from them] except they cause some to fall: [vz. into their snares: either by violence, or flatterie, or both. He noteth a wonderfull desire that they haue to worke wickednesse, that can neglect or breake sleepe, one of the necessarie meanes to maintaine mans life by, to performe it: and it séemeth to bee a metaphore or a simili∣tude, taken from men that are emptie stomacked, who can hardlie sleepe, but for want of meate are euer and anone awaked: as if hée should say, euen so do these: for they preferre ill doing before meate and drinke, as the other in gréedines doo meate before sléepe: and therefore neuer rest, vnlesse they themselues commit some wickednesse, or drawe on others to do it.] Vers.  17. For they eate [that is to say, with gréedines and great pleasure] the bread of wickednesse, [that is, not onely bread gotten by wicked meanes, and cruell oppression, as the note in the Geneua Bible goeth: but also he meaneth that it is banquetting dishes and dainties to them, to do wickedly] and drinke [vz. with great pleasure and delight] the wine of violence: [i. they take as much pleasure in all manner of violence, as in most strong, swéete and pleasant wines. And marke that he here vseth this fine similitude, be∣cause he had before made mention of sleepe, which ariseth of such vapors from the stomacke, as after meate taken, ascend into the braine; it is there∣fore as much q.d. they sléepe not soundlie and sweetlie, till such time as they haue receiued this meate. Besides, as the meate is turned into the verie nourishment and substance of it that vseth it: so these are nourished with  wickednesse, yea they are compacted wholly of it, and that maketh them to sléepe, or els they would not sleepe.] Vers. 18. But the way of the righ∣teous [i. the life and conuersation of such as feare God] shineth as the light [vz. either of the morning, or of the sunne] that shineth more and more [vz. cléerely euen vntill the noonetide] vnto the perfect day. [i. vntill the noonetide (as before) which is the clearest part of the day: meaning, that the godlie growe forward daylie in the wisedome and feare of the Lord, euen as the  sunne, till it come to bee full South.] Vers. 19. The way of the wicked [i. their life and conuersation] is as the darknesse, [i. fearefull and most perilous, because darknesse, vnlesse it may be turned into light, which the reprobate can neuer looke for, bringeth with it great horror and danger] they know not [vz. so farre of are they from being able to shunne or auoide their iudge∣ments] wherein [i. into what danger and mischiefe] they shall fall. [vz. so∣dainlie  and certainlie.] Vers. 20. My sonne [see Chapt. 1.8.] hearken [vz. diligentlie] vnto my words, [i. the things that I shall speake and vtter in my words: see vers. 4.10. of this Chapter] incline thine eare [i. bee prest and readie with attention to marke] vnto my sayings, [this doubling of one and the selfe same thing, setteth out the great loue of the holie Ghost, and our  wonderfull dulnes to conceiue any good thing.] Vers. 21. Let them not de∣part
from thy eyes [see Chapter 3.21.] but keepe them [vz. safelie and sted∣fastlie] in the middest of thy heart: [i. within thy heart: q.d. hide them deepe∣lie and surelie in thy minde, as Chapter 2.1. In these two verses he men∣tioneth three principall parts of mans bodie, the eare, the eyes, & the heart, that he might thereby teach vs, to lend all our senses thereto, and to occupie all our affections about that: and yet wee must speciallie vnderstand him of the eares and eyes of the minde.] Vers. 22. For they [i. the words of holie  wisedome and counsell] are life [i. are effectuall meanes of right life in this life, and of eternall life in the life to come: see Chapter 3.18, 22. also verse 13. of this Chapter, in which respect it is called the word of life, Philip. 2.16.] vnto those [i. vnto all those of what state and condition so euer they be] that find them, [i. obtaine them, hearing them, laying thē vp in their hearts, and performing them] and health vnto all their flesh. [i. it shall bring sound∣nes vnto their whole man. And note, that by these outward blessings there are signified inward and spiritual blessings also: see Chap. 3.8.] Vers. 23.  Keepe thine heart [vz. from filthines, corruption and sinne] with all diligence, [i. be more diligent to watch and keepe it, than any other thing whatsoeuer: meaning, by kéeping of his heart, a watching ouer it, a trying of it, and inde∣uour to purge it from the euill that is in it, or els might otherwise assault it] for thereout commeth life. [i. as it is the fountaine of naturall life, so it should be the fountaine of good life in this world: for the heart and purging of it, see Math. 12.35. also Math. 15.18, 19.] Vers. 24. Put away [vz. by al meanes  thou canst] from thee [i. as farre as thou maist] a froward mouth, [i. a mouth that speaketh froward things: for otherwise the mouth is not froward of it selfe] and put wicked lippes farre from thee. [i. let not thy lippes vtter wicked things: because the mouth, lippes, and tongue, are hardly ruled, he doub∣leth his exhortation: see Iames 3.2, 3. &c.] Vers. 25. Let thine eyes behold  the right, [i. right, good, & holie things only, looking vpon nothing, wicked∣ly, indirectly, or inconstantly: see Psal. 119.37. also Iob. 31.1.] and let thine eye liddes direct thy way before thee. [i. let not thine eyes be wandring hether and thether, for then thou shalt easilie go out of the way. It is a metaphore taken from trauailers or runners, whose eyes must not wander hether and thether, but attend diligently vpon their way and iorney.] Vers. 26. Pon∣der  [vz. diligently and carefully, to sée whether they be right yea or no] the paths of thy feete: [i. all thy indeuours and actions: which things the scrip∣ture doth many times attribute to the feete, because they are instruments to carrie vs about the doing of them] and let all thy waies [i. all thy affaires and whole life, and conuersation] be ordered aright. [i. haue an eye that they may be rightly guided by the rule of holie wisedom and Gods word. Marke how in these foure verses 23, 24, 25, 26. the holie ghost requireth, that our mind be vpright and pure from euill: secondly, that our words be holie and good: thirdly, that our eyes be chast: and lastly, that our indeuours and actions be holie.] Vers. 27. Turne not [vz. from the right way of the word of God]
to the right hand or to the left, [i. to any side, whether it be of thine owne de∣uise, or of other mens corruptions] but remoue thy foote from euill. [i. from al manner of euill, of what sort, or in what persons soeuer; vnderstanding by remouing the foote, a quicke & speedie departure from it. And I take this to bee the conclusion of the former doctrines: q.d. shewe thy selfe vpright in all things, and a most diligent obseruer of that way, which God himselfe hath commanded: see Deutero. 4.2. also Deutero. 5.32, 33. see also verse 5. of this Chapter. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs: first, that it is parents duetie to teach their children: secondlie, that is childrens duetie to hearken reuerentlie, and to performe diligentlie the good things taught them. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, that parents must propound nothing but good & holie things to their children. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that the care which our parents haue had ouer vs, should bee an argument to prouoke vs to haue the like care ouer our children. Ʋers. 4. Teacheth vs, to lay vp Gods lawe within our hearts, and to keepe it so sure there, that nothing may pull it from them. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, to take all labour and paine, that we may attaine heauenly wisedome. Vers. 6. Tea∣cheth vs, that whosoeuer is indued with true wisedome indeede, shall bee kept safe and sound from perishing by any hurts. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, that wisedome must bee preferred before all treasures and possessions whatsoe∣uer, or els she is not rightly esteemed. Ʋers. 8. Teacheth vs, that the way to come to true honor & preferment, is reuerently to esteeme & to seeke the exaltation of Gods wisedome and word. The same doctrine doth verse 9. deliuer. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that long life is a blessing giuen from God to his children, for the care and conscience that they haue of obedience. Vers. 11 Teacheth vs, that parents should bee good guides and teachers vnto their children. Ʋers. 12. Teacheth vs, that all things shall prosper with them which vnfeignedly imbrace Gods wisedome. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, to take sure hold, and to continue in the care of holie wisedome. Vers. 14.15. Teach two things: first, that the companie and fellowship of the wicked is very dangerous: secondlie, that we should take heed, that we come not at any hand nigh vnto it. Ʋers. 16. Sheweth, that the wicked are so set on mis∣chiefe, that the very desire they haue to do it breaketh their sleepe Vers. 17. That to performe wickednesse, is meate and drinke to the vngodlie, and that they take as great delight and pleasure in the one, as in the other. Ʋers. 18. Doth not only shewe the great difference, that God in his account maketh betweene the good and the bad, but also teacheth, how that the faithfull doo daylie proceede and growe vp in all goodnesse. Vers. 19. Tea∣cheth vs, that the wicked are ignorant of their own destruction, & therfore vse no meanes to preuent it. Vers. 20. Teacheth yong folkes and children to be attentiue to the words of good counsell and exhortation. Ʋers. 21. Teacheth them, to keepe them in continuall remembrance, to the ende
they may doo them. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs, that there is no health, sound∣nes, or life indeede, without the knowledge and obedience of Gods truth. Ʋers. 23. Teacheth vs, to haue a speciall eye to the guiding and clensing of the affections, and corruptions of our heart: and to begin first there, be∣cause it is the seate and fountaine from whence all things flowe. Vers. 24. Teacheth the brideling of our tongues and wordes, and also to put away from vs frowardnesse, and hastinesse of speach. Ʋers. 25. Teacheth vs, to master our eyes, because they are the shoppe windowes, by which wicked∣nesse is conueied into our hearts. Ʋers. 26. Teacheth vs, narrowly & nigh∣lie to looke vnto our steppes: and by this particular enumeration of sun∣drie, we may learne this generall doctrine, that all the partes and actions of our bodies, should be directed to the aduancement of Gods glorie, and the good of others. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs, in al our actions and affaires to keepe euen that kingly broad way which the Lord hath sanctified, and set foorth vnto vs in his word. CHAP. 5. Co. THe holie Ghost proceedeth on in exhortation of men to imbrace wisedome, shewing by the effects and fruites, which it will bring forth, that it is a verie notable thing and worthie to be had in great regard and account: so that J take the beginning of this Chapter, to bee the continuance of that exhortation that was begun, Chapter 4.20. because the first verse differeth little or nothing from it, either in words or matter: as plainlie appeareth to him that will looke into it. Di. I Suppose this Chapter may very well bee diuided into two parts. In the  first, after his exhortation to attention, he sheweth how dangerous a thing whoredome is, exhorting men in time to beware, least afterwards they re∣pent too late, from verse 1. to the end of the 14. In the second, he putteth  downe sundrie instructions, as that men should liue of their owne, that they should auoide prodigalitie, keepe them to the wiues which God hath gi∣uen them, and pronounceth the ouerthrowe of the wicked: from verse 15. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. MY sonne, [this is sundrie times expounded before, and namely Cap. 1.8.] hearken [vz. diligentlie, and that not with thy bodilie eares onely, but with the eares of thy minde] vnto my wisedome, [i. vnto that wisedome which I teach thee,] and incline thine eare [vz. earnestlie and attentiuely] vnto my knowledge, [i. vnto the things which I vtter, not only sauouring of knowledge, but tending also to this end, to bring thee to wisedome and knowledge: see Chapt. 4.20.] Vers. 2. That thou
maiest regard [i. estéeme, and that rightly, to thine owne good and profite] counsell, [vz. in disposing and performing of thy things, that thou be not de∣ceiued] and thy lippes obserue knowledge: [i. keepe it: yet so, that thou maiest vtter the knowledge which thou hast obtained by my rules: he meaneth, that he might vse and declare wisedome, both in his works, & in his words]  Vers. 3. For the lippes [these wordes must be set against the former comman∣dement: q.d. hearken vnto me, and not vnto the counterfeit words of an har∣lot: and why so? for though she speake faire, yet she will destroy thee in the end: and by lippes, he vnderstandeth words, because that by the lippes they are vttered: see Chapt. 4.24. [of a strange woman [i. of an harlot: see Chapt. 2.16.] droppe as an honie combe, [i. seeme to haue plentie of pleasure and swéetnes in them] and her mouth [i. the words of her mouth: see Chapt. 4. 24.] is more soft than oyle: [vz. in outward appearance and shewe: meaning by this manner of speach that they seeme outwardly gentle and swéete, but  they are indeede sharpe and bitter.] Vers. 4. But the ende of her [i. not only of her her selfe, but of those which communicate with her] is bitter as worm∣wood, [i. is most bitter, for there are fewe things more bitter than it: and in this place he seemeth to allude to the constitution of the bodie, as though that a harlot were comely in the foreparts; but most filthie and vile on the backe] and sharpe as a two edged sword, [i. she woundeth deadlie, as a sharpe two edged sword doth, which may soeuer it strike: see Chapter 2.18, 19.]  Vers. 5. Her feete [i. her deuises and deedes: see Chapt. 4.26.] go downe to death, [or, to the graue: q.d. she, and those that she carrieth after her, are as nigh to destruction, as they whose feete are at the graues brincke, and readie to be put into it: see Chapt. 2.18.] and her steppes take hold on hell. [i. carrie her selfe and others that followe her, headlong thether: the holie ghost mea∣neth, that she and her companions runne with hast to destruction, both of bo∣die  and soule.] Vers. 6. She weigheth not [i. she little or nothing at all regar∣deth] the way of life, [i. of true and holie life here, which indeede leadeth to life eternall] her paths are moueable, [i. her orders and waies are vncertaine: one while she vseth one way, and another while another way] thou canst not knowe them. [vz. for the varietie and vncertaintie of them. Some reade  it otherwise, & giue another sense; but me thinketh this is plaine.] Vers. 7. Heare [see Chap. 4.1.] ye me [vz. counselling, teaching, & instructing you] now [i. while I instruct you, and you haue time to learne] therefore [q.d. see∣ing the dangers are so great, hearken to my counsell] O children, [i. see chap. 4.1.] and depart not [vz. at any hand, or on any side] from the wordes of my mouth; [i. from the precepts I giue you, and the rules which I vtter and  speake vnto you: see Chapt. 4.5.] Vers. 8. Keepe thy way farre from her, [q.d. come not nigh her, for there is infection and contagion with her com∣panie: see Chapter 4.14, 15. for the phrase, or manner of speach] and come not neere the doore of her house, [i. bee so farre off from hauing familiaritie with her, that looke thou come not into her house, nor once drawe nigh to
her dore.] Vers. 9. Least [this verse and some others following containe  reasons, why men should flye from whores and whoredome] thou giue [i. be∣stowe, and that with present pleasure, though paine insue] thine honor [i. whatsoeuer within thee or without thee may make thee honorable or estée∣med, as the flowre of thy age, the comelines of thy bodie, yea and thy bodie, thy strength, wit, riches, &c.] vnto others, [i. to the harlot her selfe, the chil∣dren begotten by her, and those that appertaine vnto her] and thy yeares [i. thy yong yeares, and the best part of thy life] to the cruell, [i. to the harlot who is cruell, for she consumeth both mens substance, and the powers both of their bodies and mindes.] Vers. 10. Least the stranger [vz. whom thou  knowest not] should bee filled with thy strength, [i. with goodes and riches which thou hast gotten through the strength of thy bodie] and thy labours [i. the things that thou hast laboured for, as wealth, monie, household stuffe, &c.] be in the house of a stranger, [i. in his possession and keeping, seruing to decke vp his house, and not thine owne, this is another reason.] Vers. 11.  And thou mourne [vz. pitiouslie and gréeuouslie, as one that roreth for paine] at thine end, [i. either at the end of thy life, or els when thou beginnest to finish and end that wicked course] when thou hast consumed [i. vtterly wa∣sted, and that through whores and whoredome] thy flesh and thy bodie, [i. thou thy selfe being consumed so, that both thy bones and marrowe, bee as it were eaten vp, either with vnsatiable satisfying of thy filthie mind, or with grieuous diseases which followe that sinne, and al thy wealth and substance vtterlie wasted, with whatsoeuer appertaineth vnto thee.] Vers. 12. And  say, [vz. when thou art thus spoyled: here is an excellent description of one that doth somewhat late repent him of his euill] how [i. how much] haue I hated [vz. euen from my heart, vtterly contemning and despising the same] instruction, [vz. giuen me by such as loued me, and my welfare] and mine heart despised correction? [he meaneth not by correction, bodilie chastisement; but the word of exhortation & sharpe reproofe, by which God went about to correct & amend men; but he could at no hand away with it.] Vers. 13. And  haue not obeied [vz. either inwardlie in thought, or outwardlie in worde or déede] the voyce [i. the wordes and sayings, and the good thinges which by those words they deliuered vnto mée] of them that taught me, [vz. good and holie things: q.d. how haue I refused euen God himselfe, & the good meanes that he appoynted for my reformation and bettering?] nor inclined mine eare [i. I shewed not my selfe attentiue, or willing to learne] to them that in∣structed me, [vz. in all good waies, which I did forsake: he repeateth the same thing, that is, his owne contempt, the more to expresse his peruersnes and frowardnes.] Vers. 14. I [vz. my selfe] was almost brought [vz. tho∣rowe  mine owne follie and sinne] into all euill [i. into all miserie, that possi∣blie could fall vpon a man in this life] in the middest of the congregation and assemblie. [i. openly and before all men, so that they might easilie behold my state: he speaketh this, because priuate and secret miseries are better borne,
than such as are open.] Vers. 15. Drinke the water of thy cesterne, [i. take héede of wrongfull getting, and wicked vsing other mens goods: looke that thou vse thine owne, & that lightly: he alludeth to the custome of the people of Israel, amongst whom there was great abundance of pittes, cesternes, and welles for the vse of water for themselues: which thing at this day is obserued (as writers affirme) in Venice, and some places thereabout] and of the riuers [vz. of water which flowe] out of the middest of thine owne well. [vz. which thou hast in possession, and doth truely belong vnto thee.] Vers.  16. Let thy fountaines flowe forth, [vz. from thée vnto others] and the riuers of waters [vz. which thou hast at thy vse & commandement] in the streates, [i. openlie and publikelie; that other men may glorifie God thereby, and be  stirred vp to do the like.] Vers. 17. But let them [i. the goods that God hath blessed thee withall] be thine, [i. appertaine vnto thée, as in the right posses∣sion whereof God hath placed thee] euen thine onely, [hée meaneth not, but that others also should haue the vse of them, as neede requireth, but that hée would haue the speciall proprietie to rest in him, auoyding alwaies prodiga∣litie] and not the strangers with thee. [q.d. bring not to passe, by thy follie and sinne, that being carried away, through lust and liking, thou shouldest  wast thy goods abroad, and suffer them by that meanes to be bestowed vpon strangers. For the word stranger, see verse 10. of this Chapter.] Vers. 18. Let thy fountaine be blessed, [vz. from God, vnderstanding by fountaine, the graces that God hath bestowed vppon him: q.d. haue a care, that the bles∣sings which thou hast receiued from God, may be vsed to his glorie, and the good of others, specially of his seruants] and reioyce [vz. louinglie and com∣fortablie, and that all the daies of thy life] with the wife of thy youth: [i. either with her, that thou diddest marrie in thine owne youth, or els diddest mar∣rie, she being yong: for in the daies of youth men are more inclined to loue,  and that loue is faster set.] Vers. 19. Let her be [vz. in thy iudgement, & to thée thy selfe [as the louing Hind, [vz. is to the Hart or Stagge] and pleasant Roe, [he meaneth nothing els by these allegories, or metaphores, but the earnest affection & louing mind yt men should beare towards their wiues: of the nature of these beasts and their great loue towards their females, he that listeth to reade, may see Aristotle libro sexto de historijs animalium, cap. 29. & Plinius lib. 8. cap. 32. & speciallie one Appianus, who hath written de Cer∣uis.] Let her breastes [vz. alone: vnderstanding by one part of her, her whole person as it were] satisfie thee at all times, [i. content thee] and delite [i. take singular pleasure] in her loue continuallie: [i. in louing her only: and these things which he speaketh of the loue of man towards his wife, must not be referred to the bodies only, and the vse thereof, but both to bodie and minde  in the Lord.] Vers. 20. For why [i. what reason is there] shouldest thou de∣lite [vz. at any time] my sonne,] see Chapter 1.8.] in a strange woman, [i. in a harlot: see verse 3. of this Chapter] or imbrace [i. affect, loue or like of: see Chapter 4.8.] the bosome of a stranger [i. her, or any part of her: and marke,
how vnder honest words, he expresseth filthie things: q.d. why shouldest thou doo this, and that, & not stay thy selfe only in thine owne wife, and sound loue to herward?] Vers. 21. For the waies of man [i. all that man thinketh, spea∣keth,  or doth] are before the eyes of the Lord, [vz. naked and open, as Hebr. 4.13. meaning that God knoweth them all] and he pondereth [i. vprightlie weigheth] all his pathes, [i. whatsoeuer he attempteth or taketh in hand: hée meaneth, that seeing Gods eyes go through the whole world, Zechar. 4.10 and behold al things, how closely or secretly soeuer done, that therefore they should thinke, it is not their close dealing can cause them to escape. Vers. 22.  His owne iniquities [i. either the abundance of sinnes which he himselfe hath wrought, or els the wickednesses which he had deuised against others] shall take [vz. both certainelie and sodainlie] the wicked himselfe, [vz. for al his might and cunning] and he shall be holden [vz. fast and sure] with the cordes of his owne sinne, [i. his owne iniquitie shall be cordes to tye him, so that hée shall not escape: q.d. he staying himselfe vpon his wickednesses, worketh his owne hurt, and maketh a halter to hang himselfe in: so that God needeth no tormentor, seeing he is so tied with his owne sinne, that he cannot onely not escape punishment, but also is punished in them.] Vers. 23. He shall dye [i.  he shall surely suffer both the first and the second death] for fault of instruc∣tion, [i. because he would not receiue it when it was giuen him, and not for want of it, for he had it bestowed vpon him, as verse 13. of this Chapter] and go astray [vz. from the right way prescribed him] through his great folly. [i. by reason of his gréeuous sinnes: q.d. he shall certainlie bee punished for his sinnes, and neuer finde fauour; but liuing he shall abide in perpetuall death. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, to yeeld to good counsell, while it is offered vs. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, that our words and all that commeth from vs, should sauour of holie wisedome. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, what flatterie and intising perswasions harlots will vse to drawe men to filthines. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, that euery thing is not continuallie good and sweet that seemeth so at the beginning. Vers. 5. Teacheth men to beware of whores, seeing they car∣rie death and destruction with them. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that persons or parties giuen to filthines, haue little or no regard of godlines and eternall life. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs in time to yeeld obedience to the word of good exhortation. Ʋers. 8. Teacheth vs to withstand the beginning of euill, and the first prouocations to sinne. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, that whoredome car∣rieth with it the impayring of a mans good name, credite, and power. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that whoredom & adulterie consumeth mens goods and substance. Ʋers. 11. Teacheth vs, that it wasteth euen their bodies and bones also. Ʋers. 12, 13. Teach vs, that the contempt of good counsell, is the mother and cause of all corruption and naughtines. Ʋers. 14. Teacheth vs, to haue an eye in time to returne from wickednes and sinne. Vers. 15.
Teacheth vs, to liue soberly and contentedly with those thinges that God hath blessed vs withall, and not to catch and snatch other mens goods. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, to auoide niggardlines, & to striue to vse true liberalitie. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs, to beware of prodigalitie, inspending wastfully ei∣ther our owne, or other mens goods. Vers. 18. Teacheth men to liue ioy∣fully and peaceably with their wiues. Vers. 19. Teacheth men, to loue and affect their owne wiues only, and that continually also. Vers. 20. Tea∣cheth vs, that there is no goodnesse or profite at all that can come by fol∣lowing strange flesh, but much hurt rather, as verse 9, 10. &c. of this Chap∣ter do sufficiently proue. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, that nothing that we do, though we doo it neuer so secretly, can be hidden from Gods knowledge. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs, that the more sinne the wicked and vngodlie com∣mit, the faster they doo binde themselues with the cordes of iustice, punish∣ment and wrath. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, that whosoeuer will not regard good counsell out of Gods word, shall surely dye the death. CHAP. 6. Co. SAlomon in the other Chapter taught them to beware of whoredome, and o∣ther wickednesses: and continuing his exhortation, he instructeth them in this Chapter, to flie from rashnes and hastines, in doing anything, to auoide idlenes, and many other wickednesses, whereunto men are very prone, through the continuall malice of Sathan prouoking them, and their owne naturall cor∣ruption stirring them. Di. THis Chapter may be diuided into three parts: in the first are compre∣hended certaine admonitions, instructing men to beware of suretiship,  and idlenes, or sloathfulnes, from verse 1. to the end of verse 11. In the se∣cond there is liuely set out the nature of wicked men, and their destruction, with a particular enumeration of certaine things which God abhorreth:  from verse 12. to the end of the 19. In the third part he exhorteth to im∣brace Gods worde, which rightly receiued, shall deliuer vs, as from the sub∣iection of all sinne generallie, so particularly of whoredome: and this rea∣cheth from vers. 20. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. MY sonne, [see Chapter 1.8.] if thou bee suretie [i. hast giuen thy word or promise] for thy neighbour, [i. for thy friend or companion; for so much I thinke doth the word import; because men be not suretie, but for them whom they knowe] and hast striken handes [i. hast giuen thy faith, or made a bargaine to pay that thou promisest, he put∣teth the signe for the thing it selfe, for wee vse giuing and striking of hands for assurance and performance of a bargaine] with the stranger, [i. with an
other man, whom thou knowest not so well as he. His meaning is not here, vtterly to forbid suretiship, for wee see the contrarie practised by good men, Genes. 42.37. Also Genes. 43.8, 9. but to teach men to take héede that they bee not rash in giuing their worde or hand, by writing or otherwise: and if they haue béen ouertaken, to seeke to set themselues free from the same, as soone as can be.] Vers. 2. Thou art snared [i. thou hast certainlie (though at  vnwares) cast thy selfe into a perilous snare and danger] with the wordes of thy mouth, [i. with these words which thou speakest] thou art euen taken [vz. fast, so that thou canst not escape, till thou hast payed and performed] with the words of thine owne mouth. [q.d. thou maiest thanke thine owne hastie & rash speach for thine intanglement: for whereas perhaps thou tookest them to be but bare & naked words, thou feest thou art snared; for bargaines (euen as nature & the Lawiers say) are free before they are made, but whē they are made, they bind ye parties bargaining: & therfore they say, words bind men.] Vers. 3. Do this [vz. that followeth, and which I counsell thee] now [i. very  spéedilie, without delay, as may appeare by the verses following] my sonne, [see Chapter 1.8. and sundrie other places in this booke] and deliuer thy selfe, [vz. from the dangers thou art in: and in this verse he sheweth two meanes wherby he may performe it: the first is, submitting thy selfe to him to whom thou art bound: the second, intreating him, for whom thou art bound and other thy friends, to pitie thy case, and their owne in thee] seeing thou art come [vz. through thine owne carelesnes and rashnes] into the hand of thy neighbour, [i. into his power, by giuing thy hand or word] goe [vz. quicklie, without any delay: Math. 5.25.] and humble thy selfe, [vz. to him, to whom thou hast giuen thy word: vnderstanding by humbling, all things whereby a man may be moued to pitie, as beseeching words, pitifull counte∣nances, & al other meanes, either inward & outward whatsoeuer] and solicite [i. earnestly call vpon, & by words labour to soften, and make gentle towards thee] thy friends. [i. both him to whom thou art bound, him for whom thou art bound, and others of thine acquaintance which be able to helpe thee: tell the one, doubt not of your debt, I will pay you God willing, though you forbeare for a while: tell the other, for your cause it is that I indure and beare this in my selfe, therefore destitute not your selfe in me, I pray you: and the third sort, that they would pardon your negligence, and helpe you out of this breach, hoping neuer to fall into the like againe.] Vers. 4. Giue  no sleepe to thine eyes, [i. take little or no rest at all,] nor slumber to thine eye-liddes, [vz. till thou bee deliuered from that suretiship: he doth not meane that men should not sleepe, for so they might easilie kill themselues, because sleepe is a necessarie meane for the maintenance of our liues, but that they should vse all carefulnes and diligence that possiblie they might.] Vers. 5.  Deliuer thy selfe [i. haue care, and labour what thou canst to set thy self frée] as a Doe [vz. doth labour by swiftnes of running to be deliuered] from the hand of the hunter, [i. from his power who seeketh to kill her] and as a bird
[vz. seeketh by flying to deliuer her selfe] from the hand of the fouler. [vz. who would faine catch her with his hand: q.d. thou art in the same state that the Doe is before the Hunter, and the bird before the fouler: and seeing this is the chiefest way of deliuerie, vz. swiftnes and speede, vse it, or els thou art  destroyed for euer.] Vers. 6. Go [vz. with speed and in good season] to the Pismire [vz. that little beast, and learne of her, diligence] O sluggard, [i. thou whosoeuer thou art that art giuen to idlenes and sloth] behold [vz. diligent∣lie, and with consideration] her waies, [i. the singular orders which she obser∣ueth: of which see Aristotle, de historijs animalium lib. 6. cap. 38. And Plin. lib. 11. cap. 30.] and be wise: [i. learne wisely by her example to auoide idlenes. God would haue a liuely image of vertues and vices to be in the creatures, that euen in them, we might be prouoked to vertue, and deterred from vice.]  Vers. 7. For she hauing no guide, gouernour, or ruler, [vz. ouer her, to checke or controll her, if she be negligent. He meaneth, that there is none amongst them that beareth rule one ouer another, and taketh vpon them to gouerne the actions of the rest, as other beastes haue, and namely the Bées: concer∣ning this matter of the Pismire, see Aristotle, de historijs animalium lib. 1. Great maruaile is it then, that men hauing so many lawes and rulers, can  not be prouoked to worke, and auoide idlenes.] Vers. 8. Prepareth [q.d. notwithstanding she lacke all these helpes which man hath, yet she prouideth by her trauaile] her meate [i. meate for her selfe, or that which shall main∣taine her] in the summer, [vz. against winter time to come; in which season by reason of cold and wet, and because there is nothing to bee had vpon the earth, she cannot worke] and gathereth her foode [vz. for the maintenance of her selfe] in haruest. [i. in the haruest time, because then there is much  graine spilt or shed, which they carrie into their holes or dennes. Vers. 9. How long wilt thou sleepe O sluggard? [q.d. seeing there is such paine, labor, and foresight in so small a beast, how long wilt thou bee idle and sleepe for shame?] when wilt thou arise out of thy sleepe? [q.d. wilt thou neuer be awa∣ked? Thus he sharply reproueth the sluggish person, and he maketh so much mention of sleepe, because that by it the sluggish person is knowne.] Vers.  10. Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber [he speaketh this, by an Ironia or scoffe, in the person of the idle ones: q.d. beare with vs a little, till we take some small rest: and is it but a little rest that you would haue, as you say? well rest on, you shall see what will come vppon you, which thing also he threat∣neth: vers. 11. such a pleasant speach looke vpon Math. 26.45.] a little folding of the hands to sleepe [i. that we may sleep both the more, and the more quiet∣lie.]  Vers. 11. Therefore [vz. for this thy sluggishnes, and through the same] thy pouertie [i. the pouertie that thou hast drawne vpon thy selfe ther∣by] commeth [vz. vppon thee] as one that trauaileth by the way, [i. sodainlie and or euer thou be aware: as in trauailing many men vpon the sodaine, and when they are not looked for, ioyne themselues one with another in compa∣nie] and thy necessitie [i. the want that thou must feele through slouthfulnes
and idlenes] like an armed man. [vz. which thou art not able to resist: q.d. beggerie will come vpon thee, sooner than thou thinkest, and that with such force, as thou shalt haue no power within thee, or without thee to resist it.] Vers. 12. The vnthriftie man [the word seemeth to signifie a man without a  yoke, q.d. the vnbrideled man] and the wicked man [i. he that giueth himself to wickednes] walketh with a froward mouth, [i. is altogether giuen to fro∣wardnes of speach, yea euen against God and men: which fault the holie Ghost had forbidden before, cap. 4.24.] Vers. 13. He maketh a signe with  his eyes, [vz. as men doo when they wincke] he signifieth [vz. some naughtie or lewd thing] with his feete, [as by scraping, stamping, or such like] he in∣structeth with his fingers. [i. he maketh some signes therwith what he would haue done: q.d. he frameth all the parts and members of his bodie, to false∣hood, and other wickednesse.] Vers. 14. Lewd things are in his heart, [this  the holie Ghost addeth, least we should thinke he did speake only of outward signes and gestures] he imagineth euill [vz. within himselfe against other men] at all times, [i. there is not season almost, wherein he deuiseth not some one mischiefe or other] and raiseth vp contentions. [vz. amongst neighbours, friends, and other men.] Vers. 15. Therefore [vz. for all these his sinnes]  shall his destruction [i. the destruction which God hath appoynted to fall vp∣pon him] come speedilie [vz. and certainely also vpon him: see Chap. 1.27.] he shall be destroyed sodainlie, [vz. by iudgement from the Lord] without re∣couerie [i. he shal neuer be able to recouer and helpe it by any meanes] Vers. 16. These sixe things [vz. besides those which haue been reckoned heretofore]  doth the Lord hate [vz. aboue some other things: not denying, but that he hateth all manner of iniquitie] yea his soule abhorreth [i. he can at no hand a∣way with] seauen. [i. one put vnto the other sixe, which in number make sea∣uen.] Ver. 17. The hautie eyes, [i. proud persons, which shewe forth pride  in their countenances. He putteth a part for the whole, or the signe of pride, for the thing it selfe, or the partie that vseth it] a lying tongue, [i. a man that is a lier, or giuen to lying: putting the tongue wherewith lyes are vttered, for the partie himselfe that vseth it] and the hands that shed innocent bloud, [i. men that are giuen to crueltie and bloudshed: and hee putteth the worde hands here, because they are the instruments of murther: and when he saith shed innocent bloud, he meaneth such as kill men, and take away their liues without any good cause.] Vers. 18. An heart [vz. of a man] that imagineth  wicked enterprises, [vz. against other men, speciallie those which are good, and marke that the heart is put here in the fourth place, and in the middest betwéene the sixe, because it is as it were the fountaine and roote of all these euilles] feete that be swift in running to mischiefe, [i. to accomplish and per∣forme mischiefe, he meaneth by this speach, such as are whollie set vppon working of mischiefe: of whom see before cap. 4.16, 17.] Vers. 19. A false  witnesse that speaketh lyes, [i. such a one, as before a Magistrate, either vppon his owne word or oath, vttereth an vntruth: and so it is diuers from the se∣cond
thing, because the tongue may be giuen to lying, without false witnes bearing,] and him that raiseth vp [vz. by any manner of meanes, as by tale-carrying, &c.] contention [i. any manner of quarrelling or chiding] among brethren. [vz. who should bee ioyned fast together: he meaneth here such a  one, as is an author of quarrelles and contentions.] Vers. 20. My sonne keepe thy fathers commandement, [i. practise the thing which thy father com∣mandeth thee] and forsake not thy mothers instruction: [i. set not light by at any hand, such good things as thy mother shall instruct and teach thee in: see  Chapter 1.8. where you haue almost the very same words.] Vers. 21. Bind them alway vpon thy heart, [i. thinke vpon them and remember them conti∣nually] and tye them about thy necke. [vz. that thou feeling and seeing them,  maiest be put in minde to practise them: see Chapter 3.3.] Vers. 22. It [i. the wholesome counsell of thy parents, giuen thee out of the law and word of God, and receiued by thee] shall leade thee [vz. into all truth and weldoo∣ing,] when thou walkest, [i. whatsoeuer thou takest in hand, or whether soe∣uer thou turnest thee] it shall watch for thee [vz. to keepe thée safe and sound, both in minde and bodie] when thou sleepest, [i. laiest thee downe, and takest thy naturall rest] and when thou wakest, [vz. to goe about thy busines and affaires] it shall talke with thee: [i. it shall not onely counsell thee, but also  teach thee, what & how to speake.] Vers. 23. For the commandement [vz. of God, meaning by commandement the whole word, because it consisteth spe∣cially of commandements: see Psalm. 19.8.] is a lanterne [vz. to lighten the beléeuers, and to go before them in the way of eternall life: see Psalme 119.105.] and instruction, [vz. out of Gods word] a light [vz. to our darke and blind consciences] and corrections for instructions [i. sharpe reproofes to in∣struct men, specially when they cannot otherwise bée reclaimed: for instruc∣tion so vsed, see Chapt. 5.12.] are the way of life, [i. the high and readie way, or as a man would say, effectuall meanes to bring vs to life: and I would reade this verse by a Parenthesis, and so ioyne the 22. and 24. together.]  Vers. 24. To keepe thee [i. the word shal instruct thee, to kéepe thée farre] from the wicked woman, [i. from a woman whollie giuen ouer to wickednesse] and from the flatterie of the tongue of the strange woman. [i. from the flatterie which the harlot vseth in the wordes which she vttereth with her tongue: of this see before Chapter 5.3. He meaneth that heauenly wisedome out of Gods word, shall kéepe him vntouched from all the assaults of pleasure, and from all hinderances in the doing of his duetie, so that neither by fleshly  pleasure, nor other euilles whatsoeuer, he shall be carried away.] Vers. 25. Desire not her beautie in thine heart, [i. take héed that thy heart be not ouer∣taken with desire and lust of her beautie: see Math. 5 28.] neither let her take thee [vz. leading thee from the right way, and stealing thy heart from thée] with her eye lids: [i. either with the fairenes of her eyes, or with the twinck∣ling of the eyes, or with setting thy eyes vpon her, or els with any other,  either wanton lookes, or whorish gestures.] Vers. 26. For because of the who∣rish
woman [i. for satisfying of her in her greedie desire] a man is brought [vz. to seeke] to a morsell of bread, [i. to extreame neede and beggerie, so that beg∣ging from dore to dore, he would be glad of a morsell of bread: see Prouer. 29.3.] and a woman [i. a wicked, adulterous, and whorish woman] will hunt for [i. by all the meanes that she can seeke, and neuer leaue of labouring, till she haue gotten] the precious life of a man, [i. mans life, which is a very pre∣cious and deare thing: and in this verse is contained a reason, why adulterie is vile, to wit, because it bringeth with it losse of goods, and destruction both of bodie and soule.] Vers. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosome, and his  clothes not be burnt? [q.d. It is impossible.] Vers. 28. Or can a man go vp∣pon  coales [i. hot burning coales, and without any thing vpon his feete] and his feete not be burnt? [q.d. it cannot be, for by this propounding of it in the way of a question, he noteth the hardnes, or impossibilitie rather of the thing. And here note that he compareth whoredome to a fire, of which see Iob. 31.12. shewing by two very apt similitudes, that he cannot auoide both bodilie hurt, and spirituall danger that hath any thing to do with a harlot, or hath any acquaintance or familiaritie with her.] Vers. 29. So he that goeth  into his neighbours wife, [i. lieth with her, and knoweth her: he vseth an ho∣nest and sober speach, to expresse a filthie and vile act: see 2. Sam. 16.21. see also Psalme 51. in the title] shall not be innocent. [i. cleare either before God or man, but subiect to iudgement, not onely to that which is inward and e∣ternall from God, but also that which is outward amongst men, to which he is subiect, if he be taken in it: and this sense is confirmed by that which fol∣loweth, where he compareth an adulterer to a chéefe, shewing the one to bee a greater offence than the other.] Vers. 30. Men do not despise [vz. very  much] a theefe [i. he that stealeth any thing] when he stealeth [q.d. no though he be taken in the fact of théeuerie, if it be] to satisfie his soule [i. his life, and maintaine it, when he standeth in neede, for wee knowe that the soule eateth not] because he is hungrie [vz. and he stealeth to satisfie his hunger onely.] Vers. 31. But if he be found [q.d. yea though the hardest fall out, that he bée  found in the deede doing] he shall restore [vz. to him, from whom he hath stollen] seauen fold, [i. very much: for otherwise the Scripture maketh men∣tion what he shall restore, and in what cases: see Exod. 22.1, 2, &c.] or [vz. if he be not able to restore] he shall giue all the substance of his house: [i. what∣soeuer he hath, yea and he himselfe to be sold, if he bee not able to satisfie it in goods: Exod. 22.3.] Vers. 32. But he [vz. whosoeuer he be] that commit∣teth  adulterie with a woman, [i. with another mans wife] he is destitute of vnderstanding. [i. he hath no sparke of spirituall or heauenlie knowledge, how wise soeuer he bee in worldly affaires] he that doth it destroyeth his owne soule, [i. casteth himselfe headlong into destruction both of bodie and soule.] Vers. 33. He [i. the adulterer] shall find a wound [vz. either from the  husband of the woman, with whom he hath committed adulterie, of whom he speaketh in the next verse, that he will not spare, or els from the Magi∣strate,
who will stone him and put him to death according to the lawe] and dishonor, [vz. both before God and man] and his reproach [vz. which he hath drawne vnto himselfe by filthines] shall neuer be put away: [vz. out of the re∣membrance of God and man. He meaneth that his bodie shall be punished,  and his life subiect to perpetual ignominie.] Vers. 34. For ielousie is the rage of a man, [i. it stirreth him vp to wrath and rage] therefore he will not spare [vz. him, that hath committed that villanie against him] in the day of ven∣geance. [i. at any time, when either he himselfe shall strike, or demand publike  iudgement of the Iudges.] Vers. 35. He [i. the husband so iniured] can not beare the sight of any ransome, [i. cannot abide to looke vpon any thing giuen for the deflowring of his wife] neither will he consent [vz. that thou shouldest not be punished] though thou augment [vz. euen as much as thou canst] the gifts. [vz. which thou wouldest giue him, to satisfie and please him withall. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, to beware of rash giuing either our words or hands for any. Vers. 2. Sheweth, that when a mans word is once passed, he is bound to performe that which he hath promised, though it bee to his hinderance. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, to vse all lawful meanes to be rid out of danger which we fall into, either through rashnes, or negligence. Ʋers. 4. Teacheth vs, that we should not delay to worke or procure our owne good. Ʋers. 5. De∣liuereth euen the same doctrine, vnder two very apt and fit similitudes. Ʋers 6. Sheweth, that for the correction of things which are amisse in vs, God doth many times send vs to the dumbe and insensible creatures. Ʋers. 7. Teacheth vs, that if without prouokers, wee should performe our dueties, much more should wee doo it, when he hath giuen vs meanes and aydes thereto. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, in the time of plentie and peace to pro∣uide against the daies of affliction and scarsitie to come. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, that it is not good to giue ouer our selues to much sleepe, because that is the mother of idlenes. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that the idle vse all meanes to continue them in the sinne of sloath. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, that sodaine and vnauoidable beggerie commeth vpon the slothfull person. Ʋers. 12. Teacheth vs, that frowardnes of speach, is a good note to discerne a wicked man by. Vers. 13. Teacheth, that the vngodlie abuse all the parts and mem∣bers of their bodies, to prouoke others to wickednesse, and in their owne persons to performe it. Vers. 14. Sheweth, first, that the wicked mans heart is alwaies deuising naughtines: secondly, that this is a sure marke of a naughtie man, to bee the author of contentions and strife. Vers. 15. Tea∣cheth vs, that the destruction of the wicked, shall be, as sodaine, so without hope of recouerie. Ʋers. 16. Teacheth vs, first, that God is a God that can not away with wickednesse at any hand: secondly, that there is a difference of sinnes, because God abhorreth some more than other some. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs to flie from pride, lying, and murther. Ʋers. 18. Teacheth vs,
to beware of wicked deuises, and pursuing naughtines with greedines and delight. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, to shunne false witnes bearing, and the sowing of strife and contentions among friends. Ʋers. 20. Teacheth children care∣fully to indeuour to keepe the holie and wholesome instruction of their parents. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, that obedience to good counsell out of Gods word, is the best and most profitable thing we can attaine to in this life. Ʋers. 23. Teacheth vs, that Gods word is a lanterne vnto our feete, and a true light vnto all our steppes. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, that there is no better bridle against whoredome, than sound knowledge out of Gods worde. Ʋers. 25. Teacheth vs, to withstand the beginning of euill and sinne in our selues, and to beware of such prouocations, as others will vse to draw vs on thereto. Vers. 26. Teacheth vs, that the ende of whoredome is beggerie on the one side, and destruction of bodie and soule on the other side. Ʋers. 27, 28. Doo teach vs by two apt similitudes, taken from the fire, that the sinne of adulterie carrieth with it great and fearefull danger. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, to striue to modestie, and cleanenes in our speach, yea euen then when we speake of immodest and vncleane things: secondlie, that man, of what state or condition soeuer he be, committing that sinne, shall not escape vn∣punished. Vers. 30, 31. Teach vs, that howsoeuer amongst vs, theeuerie is thought a greater transgression than adulterie, yet before GOD, and such men as be lightened by Gods word, adulterie is by many degrees more vile. Vers. 32. Teacheth vs, that the adulterer by his sinne, doth not only bewray his owne follie, but also laieth violent hands vpon his owne life. Vers. 33. Sheweth, that the adulterer shall neuer escape vnpunished, either before God or man, or both. Vers. 34. Teacheth vs, that we may safely pursue be∣fore a Magistrate, our iust causes, against an adulterer: and that without shewing any fauour or pitie to the offending partie. Vers. 35. Teacheth vs, to be altogether estranged from receiuing gifts, or setting on sale our wiues deflowring. Now let vs see, wherein theeuerie is lesse than adulterie: which appeareth to be so out of this text, because the theefe that stealeth to satis∣fie his neede, shall neither lose life nor honor, no though he bee found sun∣drie times dooing the deede, but shall be only bound to restore to the ow∣ner, according to the law. But the adulterers condition seemeth to be farre otherwise: for his life and honor is in danger, both by publike and priuate right, if the matter bee once knowne, and there will bee nothing taken for the satisfaction of his sinne.
CHAP. 7. Co. SAlomon had before deliuered certaine instructions of wisedome and know∣ledge, now in this Chapter he putteth downe certaine confirmations and proofes of the same, alledging his owne testimonie, and that experience which he had obserued in the state and cursed end of miserable men, following the intise∣ments of pleasure and sinne. Di. THe Chapter may bee diuided into three parts. In the first is contained an exordium or enterance, as it were, exhorting men to imbrace Gods wisedome and worde, shewing what fruites shall come to them thereby,  from verse 1. to the ende of the 5. In the second is comprehended a pithie narration or liuely description of the accursed manners of a harlot, from  verse 6. to the end of the 23. verse. In the third part, the holie Ghost putteth downe a dehortatorie conclusion, mouing men to shunne and auoide to their vttermost, harlots, and their companie, from verse 24. to the ende of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. MY sonne keepe my wordes, [i. the thinges that I speake to thée, vnderstanding by keeping an ear∣nest indeuour to obserue them in thought, word, and deede] and hide [vz. as precious Iewelles, and things of great importance] my commande∣ments [i. the thinges which I command] with thee, [i. in thy minde: meaning also hereby a fast  and sure keeping of them: see Chapter 2.1.] Vers. 2. Keepe my comman∣dements, and thou shalt liue, [i. surely thou shalt liue, not only in this life, but in the life to come: see Chapter 4.4. where Salomon maketh them his fa∣thers words vnto him] and mine instruction [i. the good and wholesome in∣struction, that I giue or shall leaue thee, vz. see that thou obserue and keepe it] as the apple of thine eyes, [i. most carefully and diligently: see Psal. 17.8.]  Vers. 3. Bind them on thy fingers, [he seemeth to allude to Deutero. 6.8. and Deutero. 11.18.] and write them vpon the table of thy heart: [see Chapter 3.3. q.d. haue them continually in thy hands, and let them be alwaies be∣fore thine eyes, and thinke vpon them in thy hart, that thou maiest do them:  see Exod. 13.9.] Vers. 4. Say [vz. with an vnfeigned heart] vnto wisedome [i. vnto the wisedome and word of God] thou art my sister, [i. very néere and deare vnto me, as sisters commonly be to their brethren: see Genes. 34.31. Also 2. Samuel 13.20, 22, 29. &c.] and call [i. bee not ashamed boldly to say and professe] vnderstanding [vz. of the will and word of God] thy kinswo∣man, [i. deare and familiar vnto thee: all is as much q.d. doo thou euen natu∣rally as it were esteeme and loue holie wisedome, and make thy selfe as fa∣miliar
with her, as possiblie can be.] Vers. 5. That they [i. wisedome and  vnderstanding from GOD] may keepe thee [vz. safe and sound] from the strange woman, [i. from the harlot, as sundrie times heretofore] euen from the stranger [i. the harlot] that is smooth in her words, [i. that cunninglie and craftelie flattereth: see Chapter 2.16. and 5.3. q.d. Thou hast great neede of the holie wisedome and commandements which I deliuer thee, that thou maiest take heede of whorish intisements, and of euery way of pleasure and corruption, which are in deede so great and dangerous, that thou maiest ea∣silie be taken in them, and drawne from the right way, vnlesse thou doo care∣fully shunne them, through the ayde and helpe of wisedome.] Vers. 6. As  I was [vz. standing] in the windowe of mine house, [vz. for my recreation] I looked through my window, [vz. into the streates. Whether this was a thing done, or that Salomon spake it in the way of a parable, it is not much mate∣riall. This chiefly is to be marked, that he doth liuely paint out the disposi∣tion, both of the vnhéedie yong man that seeketh after harlots, and of har∣lots themselues.] Vers. 7. And J sawe amongst the fooles, [i. such as were  vnheedie, and had little wit, who are easilie deceiued, and brought to any thing, yet there is hope of their amendment: for so much the word impor∣teth, as I take it] and considered [i. earnestly beheld] among the children [i. amongst the youth which were in the streate] a yong man [i. one aboue the rest] destitute of vnderstanding [i. void of holie vnderstanding and wisedom: see Chapter 6.32.] Vers 8. Who passed [vz. from his companie, and that  with some speede] through the streate [i. through diuers streates, til he came so, that he went] by her corner, [i. by the corner of the whores house, or els by some corner of a streate that led that way] and went toward her house [vz contrarie to the commandement giuen before, Chap. 5.8.] Vers. 9. In the  twilight [i. a little before it begun to waxe darke. Now he sheweth the time wherein the adulterer went about his wickednes] in the euening, [vz. some∣what late] when the night began to be black and darke, [and so supposed that none should see him, but I perceiued him well enough.] Vers. 10. And be∣hold  there met him a woman [vz. euen such a one as he looked for] with a har∣lots behauiour, [i. one that behaued her selfe like an harlot, as she was indéed] and subtile in heart, [i. craftelie deuising by all meanes, to hide her deceite, that she might the more cunningly lay baites for the vnwarie: see Chapter 5.6.] Vers. 11. She [i. the harlot: here he digresseth somewhat from his  narration, to describe harlots qualities and conditions, that he might the better arme yong men against them] is babling [i. full of words and tattle: see 1. Timoth. 5.13.] and loude, [vz. in her speaches. This word I take it, may better be turned peruerse, or stubborne, departing from the rule of her husband, and refusing to bee subiect to him: vnder the first word, the holie Ghost meaneth, that she aboundeth in words, which are apt to perswade, sée verse 21. of this Chapter: and vnder the second, that she is disobedient to God, to her husband, and the very lawes of nature and honestie] whose feete
cannot abide [vz. any long time] in her house, [i. in her owne house, but shée must bee running from place to place, as followeth vers. 12. He meaneth by this, that she is a stragler, which is against the duetie and behauiour of an honest matrone: see Iudg. 5.24. Psalme 68.12. 1. Timoth. 5.13. Titus 2.5.]  Vers. 12. Now [i. one while] she is without, [i. abroad in some one place or o∣ther, as in the fieldes, &c.] now [i. another while] in the streates, [i. she is a∣broad in the streates of the citie] and lieth in wait [vz. to catch vnwarie yong men, and to bring them home to her house] at euery corner, [vz. almost of all the streates of the citie: now in the next verse, he passeth from the descrip∣tion  of the harlots qualities to his narration.] Vers. 13. So she caught him [vz. fast, euen as it were by the hand, or imbraced him with her armes] and kissed him, [vz. contrarie to womanlike modestie] and with an impudent face [i. without any manner of blushing, euen as it were with a countenance past  all shame] sayd vnto him, [vz. as followeth] Vers. 14. J haue peace offerings, [i. part of that, which was offered: for in peace offerings by the lawe, the people that brought the sacrifices had somewhat allowed them: see Leuit. 7. vers. 11, 12, &c. q. d. I haue good store of meate; wee will make good cheare, for that is the nurse of whoredome] this day [vz. and no longer ago] haue I paied my vowes, [vz. which I vowed vnto the Lord: of which see al∣so  Leuit. 7.16.] Vers. 15. Therefore [i. because I haue these and these good things prepared] J came forth, [vz. out of my house, & that euen of purpose] to meete thee [q.d. and see now how readilie I haue found thee, whereas a∣ny other would haue contented her, as well as he; but all this she vttereth to drawe him the more on] that I might seeke thy face, [i. thee thy selfe, and yet she mentioneth the face, because she would insinuate, as though she were ouertaken with his beautie] and I haue found thee, [vz. euen as I wished and desired; for such an Emphasis this manner of speach includeth, as I  suppose.] Vers. 16. I haue decked [vz. very finely] my bed [vz. wherein I lye] with ornaments, [vz. of sundrie sorts] with carpets and laces of Aegypt: [i. which are made of the flaxe comming out of Aegypt, which for whitenes and softnes, is preferred before all other, as Plinie sheweth lib. 18. cap. 1.]  Vers. 17. I haue perfumed my bed with myrrhe, aloes, and cynamom, [i. I haue made it most swéete and pleasant: they did vse belike in those daies to per∣fume with myrrhe and aloes: see Psalme 45.8. All these I take to bee the harlots words, spoken after supper, alluring thereby, the yong man to tar∣rie  there all night.] Vers. 18. Come, [q.d. seeing all these things are so plea∣santly made readie] let vs take our fill of loue, [i. of the things which we loue and like of] vntill the morning, [i. all night long, and neuer be wearie] let vs take our pleasure in daliance: [q.d. you see all things prepared to satisfie lust,  therefore let vs go through with it.] Vers. 19. For mine husband [q.d. feare not him, but be bold] is not at home, [vz. now, neither wil be this good while] he is gone a iorney farre of, [i. he is gone a very long iorney from this place.]  Vers. 20. He hath taken with him a bagge of siluer, [i. good store of monie,
for the charges of his trauaile and iorney, & therefore thou maiest see, he is gone a long iorney, & will not returne shortly] and will come home at the day appoynted. [vz. and not before: q.d. if thou feare his returne, know thou, that he will not be here till such a time, for I haue his word for it. Behold the force of a harlots speach and perswasion.] Vers. 21. Thus with her great  craft [vz. both of heart and speach] she caused him to yeeld, [vz. to her intice∣ments and filthines] and with her flattering lippes [i. the flattering speaches which she vttered with her lippes] she inticed him, [vz. to lewdnes & sinne.] Vers. 22. And he followed her straight waies, [vz. without any striuing or  resistance: so strong are whorish perswasions] as an oxe that goeth to the slaughter, [i. willingly, not knowing whether he goeth, but supposing to goe to good, he goeth to destruction] and as a foole to the stockes [i. willingly also, and chearefully, not thinking the time of his punishment to be nigh] for cor∣rection, [i. to bee corrected and chastised.] Vers. 23. Till a dart striketh tho∣rowe  his liuer, [i. till he be deadly wounded, and that not in bodie only, but in soule also. It seemeth to be a metaphore, taken from Archers in warre, who hit so right, that with darts and arrowes they strike euen to the heart] as a bird hasteth to a snare, not knowing that he is in danger. [vz. to bée taken: vn∣der this similitude, the holie Ghost noteth two things: the one is, the haste that the wicked vse to performe wickednesse: the other is their ignorance, and lacke of heed, who are so carried away with pleasure, that they are trap∣ped in an vnauoidable danger before they bee ware.] Vers. 24. Heare [vz.  both with thy bodilie eares, and the eares of thy vnderstanding, yea specially with them] me [vz. thy father, who doth giue thee good instruction and coun∣sell] now [q.d. euen while it is time, delay not] therefore [vz. because of the dangers before rehearsed] O children, [see Chapter 4.1.] and hearken [vz. attentiuely and diligently] to the wordes of my mouth, [i. both to the wordes and matter that I shall vtter. This, and the like sentences haue béen sundrie times repeated heretofore in this booke.] Vers. 25. Let not thy heart decline  to her waies, [i. doo not so much as in thy minde affect or like of her lewd and wicked dealing, yea, if it be possible thinke not vpon it] and wander thou not [vz. neither in word nor déed] in her paths, [i. in the things which she would haue thee to performe: for the further thou straiest that way, the lesse hope of returning.] Vers. 26. For [this is a reason of his exhortation] she [i. the  harlot] hath caused many to fall downe wounded, [vz. very sore and gree∣uouslie, as Sampson, and Salomon himselfe who writ this booke: q.d. learne by other mens dangers to beware] and the strong men, [q.d. yea the mightie and powerfull men] are slaine by her: [i. by her meanes, haue béen brought to death and destruction, both of bodie and soule, without the great grace of God.] Vers. 27. Her house [i. the knowledge, familiaritie and acquaintance  of and in her house] is the way [i. the high and readie way] vnto the graue [i. euen vnto death it selfe] which [vz. way, or waies of her] goeth downe [or go down in the plural number: meaning, that they runne hastelie, as things
that be carried downward doo] to the chambers of death. [i. to most certaine, yea eternall death, from which mens steppes are hardly called backe: see Chapter 2.18. He meaneth, that the fellowship and familiaritie of an har∣lot, doth bring with it assured and certaine death, both of bodie and soule. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs to yeeld obedience and reuerence to good and holie counsell. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs two things, first, that true life dependeth vp∣pon the obseruation of Gods lawe: secondlie, that we should most dearely esteeme it. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, to haue good and wholesome lessons in continuall remembrance to doo them. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs carefullie to striue to bee familiarly acquainted with holie and heauenly wisedome. Ʋers. 5. Teacheth vs, that there is no better buckler against whoredome, and the intising words of harlots, than Gods word it selfe. Vers. 6, 7. Tea∣cheth vs, now and then to haue an eye ouer others, not only to instruct them if they goe awrie, but also to learne by their examples to auoide euill. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, that it is a perilous thing to drawe nigh to suspected places. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, that euery one that doth euill, flieth and ha∣teth the light. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that euen mens and womens beha∣uiours, many times bewray what they are. Ʋers. 11, 12. Teach vs, that these bee two things that womankind specially should auoide: vz. tatling and loude speach: and also much gadding abroad. Ʋers. 13. Teacheth vs, that harlots, when they once take vpon them that profession, doo vtterly put off shamefastnes. Ʋers. 14. Teacheth vs, that arrant strumpets will many times pretend great shewe of religion and godlines. Vers. 15, 16, 17, 18. Do liue∣lie set out all the whorish and strumpet-like inticements that harlots doo vse: wherein also their condemnation, is and shall, without repentance bee the greater, because they abuse the good things of God, to the more gree∣die satisfying and fulfilling of their lust. Vers. 19, 20. Teach vs, that the wicked take euery light and little occasion, for the satisfying of their filthie desires, specially, opportunitie and seasonablenes of time, as they thinke. Also they teach, that the vngodlie more feare the face and countenaunce of men, than the sight and presence of the Almightie God. Vers. 21. Tea∣cheth vs, that flattering and intising words haue great force in them to drawe, if Gods spirit doo not mightely preuaile against the same. Vers. 22, 23. Doo vnder three fit similitudes taken from oxen, birdes, and fooles, expresse two notable poynts: the one is, how readilie, and willingly the wicked runne to their owne destruction: the other is, how sodainlie, and as it were vnawares, they are through ignorance intrapped in wonderfull dan∣gers. Ʋers. 24. Teacheth vs, when good counsell is offered, in good time to accept of it. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, neither in affection, nor in action to consent to whores. Vers. 26. Teacheth vs, that our owne wisedome and strength, are but weake things to ouercome whorish perswasions by, vn∣lesse wee bee better staied from aboue: because great and wise men haue
been ouertaken therewith. Vers. 27. Setteth out the great danger and as∣sured destruction, that followeth the familiaritie and haunting of harlots. CHAP. 8. Co. IN the next Chapter before going, be confirmed the excellencie of holie and heauenlie wisedome, euen by that experience which God had giuen him: now he proceedeth in this, and the next Chapter following, in the same matter, ad∣ding more confirmations for the same thing, which are fet from the very testi∣monie of God himselfe, and his eternall wisedome. Di. THis Chapter may bee diuided into three parts: the first is a short narra∣tion,  setting Gods wisedome before our eyes, as it were passing by vs, and this is contained in the three first verses. In the second, he bringeth in  wisedome, commending her selfe for her excellencie, riches, power, and e∣ternitie: and all this is done, to the end men might the more speedilie im∣brace her: from verse 4. to the end of 31. In the third, is contained her ex∣hortation,  prouoking all men to loue and followe her, for the good things that be in her: from verse 32. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. DOth not Wisedome [i. good, holie, and hea∣uenlie wisedome] crye, [vz. aloude and o∣penly, and not whistining, and in the dark, as harlots doo. For against them, spoken of in the other Chapter, he opposeth Gods holie wisedome here: see Chapter 1.20. and he vttereth it by the way of a question, that it might haue greater force: q.d. cer∣tainlie she doth so] and vnderstanding [vz. of Gods will reuealed in his word] vtter her voyce? [vz. openly and plainly, so that none can pretend ignorance.] Vers. 2. She standeth in the toppe of  the high places [vz. to the end she may be the better and more plainly heard] by the way [i. at euery waies side, watching her opportunitie to doo good vn∣to men] in the place of the pathes, [i. in euery place, that hath pathes where men vse to walke: q.d. wheresoeuer there is any resort of men, and where men vse to meete, there she is, and offereth her selfe.] Vers. 3. She [i. wise∣dome]  cryeth [vz. very loude and plaine: In the Hebrue text it is a verbe of the plurall number, and then it must bee referred to wisedome and vnder∣standing, as verse 1. of this Chapter] besides the gates, [vz. of the citie: and this he mentioneth, because the people repaired to the gates of the citie for iustice: see Chapter 1.21.] before the citie, [this may either bee referred to wisedome, thus, as though she called to men before they entered into the ci∣tie: or els to the gates, which stand before the citie, and bee as it were the
dores of the citie, to which I rather incline] at the entrie of the dores. [vz. of euery mans particular house: q.d. both publikely and priuatly, she calleth vn∣to  men, saying, as followeth in the next verses.] Vers. 4. O men [vz. of what state and condition so euer you be] I call [vz. plainly and with a loude voyce] vnto you [vz. for your good] and vtter my voyce [vz. plainly and sensiblie, as verse 1. of this Chapter] to the children of men. [q.d. euen vnto the young ones: meaning, that he would haue none exempted from the imbracing of  his doctrine.] Vers. 5. O ye foolish men [i. O ye that are simple, and readie to be deceiued with euery thing. These are called simple: Chapt. 1.4. See also verse 32. of the first Chap.] vnderstand wisedome, [i. labour to attaine her, while you may haue her, and she offereth her selfe vnto you] and ye O fooles [hereby he meaneth such as are altogether voide of vnderstanding, as Chapt. 1.22.] be wise in heart, [i. applie your hearts vnto wisedome, least  you goe continually forward in your foolishnes and dulnes.] Vers. 6. Giue eare [i. bee attentiue and diligent] for I will speake [vz. plainly and openly vnto you] of excellent things, [i. of high and noble things, euen such as it be∣commeth Princes and great personages to speake of, and their inferiours duetifully to heare: such a reason of attention is to be found Psalm. 49.34.] and the opening of my lippes [i. euen the very beginning of my speach] shall teach things that be right: [i. shall propound and deliuer nothing els, but  right and holie things.] Vers. 7. For my mouth [i. I my selfe putting the mouth, and the instruments therein contained, by which the voyce is framed for the person himselfe speaking] shall speake the truth, [i. the whole truth, and nothing but the truth] and my lippes abhorre [vz. to speake: or els wee may take this word lippes, as mouth before in this verse, for the person him selfe] wickednesse. [i. false and vntrue things, wherewith the vngodlie are  greatly delighted.] Vers. 8. All the words of my mouth are righteous, [i. both the words which I speake, and the thinges that I command, tende to righteousnes and well doing, both before God and man] there is no lewdnes nor frowardnes in them, [i. there is no wicked or vngodlie thing in them, or commanded by them: and in these two verses he commendeth his doctrine,  because it is right, true, iust, and holie.] Vers. 9. They [i. the words which I vtter] are all [vz. and euery one of them] plaine [i. easie, and manifest] to him [vz. whosoeuer he bee] that will vnderstand, [vz. them: not meaning that any either will or can vnderstand, till God haue giuen both the one and the other, but alluring men rather, who are discouraged with hard things] and straight [i. manifest and euident, without any turning or winding] to them [i. to all them of what state and condition soeuer they be] that would finde knowledge. [i. that haue a care and indeuour to attaine it, and to seeke  for it. And here he commendeth his doctrine for the easines.] Vers. 10. Re∣ceiue [vz. readilie and with a good will] mine instruction [i. the instruction that I shall giue you] and not siluer [i. rather than siluer, as may appeare by that which followeth: for it is not his purpose here to condemne siluer, but
to shewe that Gods word must bee preferred before it] and knowledge [vz. of the heauenly mysteries, and that from me] rather than fine gold, [vz. how pure and precious so euer it be. And note, that in this verse, and in the next he commendeth his doctrine, because it is most precious and profitable.] Vers. 11. For wisedome [i. the wisedome of God] is better [vz. by thousands  of degrees] than precious stones, [though they bee most rich, and neuer so much esteemed] and all pleasures [vz. of this life, how great, many, or sun∣drie soeuer they be] are not to be compared [vz. at any hand, or in any respect] vnto her, [i. vnto true and holie wisedome: see Chap. 3.14, 15.] Vers. 12.  I wisedome [i. who am the eternall wisedome of the father: for this must bée vnderstood, not of the written word onely, but of the person of the Sonne, who is made of God vnto vs wisedome, 1. Corint. 1.24, 30.] dwell with pru∣dence, [i. after some, am most familiarly acquainted with her: after other some, am most prudent and wise my selfe: both are good, but I rather al∣lowe of this latter: q.d. I call you not to mée without cause, for I am she without whom no man can be wise] and I finde forth [i. not only of my selfe, but cause also them, that reuerence and esteeme me, to seeke and find] know∣ledge and counsels. [vz. of the will of God reuealed in his word, which other∣wise should be but a sealed booke to all them that looked into it.] Vers. 13.  The feare of the Lord is to hate euill [This appertaineth (though perhaps it seeme not so to some) to the praise of wisedome, because the reuerence and feare of God is the speciallest part of wisedome, as Chap. 1.7. Also Chap. 9.10. Some ioyne it with the former verse thus:] I haue with me the feare of the Lord, and the hatred of euill, [q.d. I am most iust, teaching to doo euery good thing, and to lothe euery wicked thing: and then addeth] J hate [vz. vnfeignedly] pride and arrogancie, [vz. both of hart, bodie, and countenance] and the euill way, [i. euery wicked order and course of life whatsoeuer] and a mouth that speaketh lewd things, [i. euery person or man that giueth his mouth to speake wicked and peruerse matters.] Vers. 14. I haue [vz. with  me, and in my power] counsell and wisedome, [i. abundance of all good fore∣sight, counsell and holie knowledge] J am vnderstanding, [q.d. without mée there can be no sound iudgement] and I haue strength. [vz. in my selfe, mea∣ning by strength, power and authoritie also to doo what he would: all this verse is as much: q.d. I am most wise in taking of counsell, and I am most mightie in performing my deuises.] Vers. 15. By me [i. by the authoritie  which I communicate vnto them] Kings [i. all Kings, how great or little so euer they be] reigne [vz. vpon earth, and amongst their owne people: mea∣ning, that all the authoritie they haue, they haue it from him, as Daniel 2.21. Rom. 13.1.] and Princes [vz. of the earth] decree iustice, [i. establish, ordaine, and execute iust and holie things.] Vers. 16. By me [i. by my per∣mission  and appoyntment] Princes rule, [vz. others] and the Nobles [vz. doo so likewise] and all the Iudges of the earth. [vz. doo the selfe same thing by the authoritie which I haue giuen vnto them. And marke, that in these two
verses, the holie Ghost vseth foure wordes, which though they serue all to expresse one thing, yet euery word in signification differeth from another. He putteth Kings in the first place, as the highest and greatest of all: to these he ioyneth Princes, who were as it were of counsell with Kings, and did vnder them constitute and ordaine lawes: concerning both these, see Psalme 2.2. Next he addeth Nobles, who haue their name of the largenes and liberalitie which they exercise to their vnderlings: and lastlie in a generall terme of Judges, he comprehendeth all them that gouerne the world, and handle mat∣ters  of state. Vers. 17. I loue them [vz. vnfeignedly, and continually] that loue me, [vz. with a good hart. He meaneth that Gods grace, by his meanes, floweth vppon all such as loue him: see Iohn 14.21.] and they that seeke me earely [i. painfully, carefully, and diligently] shall finde me [vz. assuredlie and without all faile: q.d. I will voutchsafe to shewe my selfe vnto them.]  Vers. 18. Riches and honor [i. true riches and honor, specially Gods great blessings vpon the minde] are with me, [i. in my power, to giue and bestowe them, when and vpon whom I list] euen durable riches [i. such riches as shal continue, when other mens melteth away, as waxe before the Sunne] and righteousnes. [i. vpright dealing, which indeede is one good meane to make  wealth firme and stable: see Chapt. 3.16.] Vers. 19. My fruite [vz. which I communicate to them that loue me I dwelling in them, and they also walking in the righteousnes that I prescribe: vnderstanding by fruite, the graces also which he bestoweth vpon them: of which he seemeth to make two sortes, the one temporall for this life, vers. 20. the other eternall for the life to come, vers. 21.] is better [vz. by many degrees] than gold, [vz. how pure or precious soeuer it bee] yea than fine gold [q.d. yea than all the finest gold that can be got] and my reuenues [i. the giftes which I bestowe vppon mine, speaking here as great Princes doo, who according to the largenes of their rents and reuenues, giue great gifts to their subiects and seruants] better than fine siluer. [q.d. yea though it haue béen neuer so often fined and  tried: see Psalme 12.6.] Vers. 20. I cause [vz. men, and those that imbrace me] to walke [vz. vprightly, without going either on the right hand or on the left, and that continually also] in the way of righteousnes, [i. in equall, vp∣right and iust waies: meaning thereby a holie order and conuersation of life] and in the middest of the pathes of iudgement, [i. in such a plaine way of vp∣right dealing, that it is impossible for them to goe out of the way: and this  is the fruite that wee receiue in this life, to wit sanctification.] Vers. 21. That [vz. by the meanes of guiding them in the right way] I may cause them that loue me [vz. vnfeignedly: meaning, that for their sakes he might bring this to passe] to inherite substance, [i. the thing that is, and shall neuer cease to be, to wit, eternal life] and I will fill [vz. with al abundance and store] their treasures. [meaning it, not only of worldly, but also of spirituall and heauen∣lie blessings: and thus hetherto he hath commended wisedome for her ex∣cellent effects, as afterwards he commendeth her for her antiquitie, great
power, &c.] Vers. 22. The Lord [vz. the eternall God] hath possessed me  [vz. his eternall sonne and wisedome] in the beginning of his way [i. before he began to make or create any thing. He commendeth this wisedome, of the nature of it, because he is one eternall God, with the Father and the ho∣lie Ghost: q.d. I was with God euen then, when by the creation of al things he manifested plaine testimonies of his Maiestie. See Iohn 1.1, 2, &c. Co∣loss. 1.16.] I was [vz. eternall, and God with him, for nothing is eternall but God only] before his workes [i. before al, or any work that euer he made] of old. [i. which he made of old, or long time agoe: see Psal. 93.2. Vers. 23.  I was set vp [or after some annointed: meaning, that by Gods eternall decrée he was placed in his office, of Kingdome, Priesthood and Prophecie: for such a metaphore he vseth in this place] from euerlasting, [i. from before all be∣ginnings whatsoeuer] from the beginning [vz. of the world: neither doth the word from, note, that then he began, as 1. Ioh. 1.1.] and before the earth. [vz was created: all this tendeth to set out the perpetuitie and eternitie of this great wisedome.] Vers. 24. When there were no depthes, [vz. either of wa∣ter  or earth] was I begotten, [vz. of the father] when there were no fountaines [vz. made, nor yet] abounding with water. [i. hauing plentie of water with∣in them: q.d. before all these, and whatsoeuer things els was I, who was the eternall sonne of the eternall father, & begotten of him before any thing that is or was, as may appeare by the verses following] Ver. 25. Before the  mountaines were setled, and before the hilles [vz. were created] was J begot∣ten. [vz. of the eternall father: q.d. I was God eternall before the earth, mentioned generally, verse 23. or any part therof, spoken in this verse, was] Vers. 26. He had not yet [vz. when I was] made the earth, [vz. no nor be∣gun  to make it] nor the open places, [vz. of the world: meaning hereby the champion and plaine countries] nor the height of the dust in the world. [he vnderstandeth by height, the excellent creatures; and by dust, though all were made of the earth, the more base creatures: q.d. when neither the one sort, nor the other were created, I was.] Vers. 27. When he [i. God the  Father] prepared [i. created and framed as we see] the heauens, [i. that same great frame which is ouer our heads, passing as it were from the earth to it] I was there, [vz. together with him, and was a creator in that most excellent workmanship: see Iohn 1.3.] when he set the compasse [i. the earth, which he calleth by this name, because it seemeth to be round] vpon the deepe. [i. vpon the waters: see Psalme 24.2.] Vers. 28. When he established [i. appoyn¦ted  and set by the word of his power] the cloudes aboue, [vz. in the firma∣ment, that they might be kept there, as it were in tunnes and bottles, till he would haue them to powre downe their deaw or raine] when he confirmed [vz. to keepe within the boundes and compasses which he had set them] the fountaines of the deepe, [vz. belowe in the earth, which fountaines yeeld forth water, and make them to growe as it were into bottomles pits: q.d. before the waterie cloudes aboue, and the waters vnder the earth were created, I
was, with that same eternall God.] Vers. 29. When he gaue his decrees to the sea, [vz. touching the bounds and listes of the same, how farre it should goe, and how farre it should not goe] that the waters [vz. of the sea, and of the flouds] should not passe his commandement: [i. goe beyond the bounds, which by his word and commandement he had set them] when he appoynted the foundations of the earth, [i. when he founded and laied it, that it should  remaine vnmoueable.] Vers. 30. Then was I with him [vz. working to∣gether with him in that great worke of his creation] as a nourisher, [i. as a maintainer and vpholder of that his excellent workmanship of creation] and I was daylie [i. alwaies] his delight [i. one whom the father tooke conti∣nuall pleasure in, as Math. 3.17. and Math. 17.5.] reioycing alwaies before him, [i. being continually in his sight, euen as his deare and tenderly belo∣ued  sonne.] Vers. 31. And tooke my solace in the compasse of his earth: [i. not only reioyced at the excellent workmanship, but also blessed all things created in the earth] and my delight is with the children of men. [i. as I pow∣red vpon all creatures abundance of my sweete blessings, so chiefly vppon man, induing him with all bodilie and spirituall graces: and amongst men,  specially those which are my Church.] Vers. 32. Therefore [q.d. seeing my commendations and graces which I giue be so great] now [vz. while you haue time, and grace is offered you] hearken, [vz. diligently and attentiuely] O children, [see Chapter 7.24.] vnto me: [vz. Gods heauenly wisedome, who calleth you to goodnes] for blessed are they [i. abundance of blessings shall light vpon them, and he speaketh it in the present tense, as though they had the things in possession alreadie] that keepe [vz. vnfeignedly and with a good heart] my waies. [i. the waies that I prescribe them: vnderstanding  by waies, his ordinances and commandements.] Vers. 33. Heare instruc∣tion, [vz. from me, or the instruction which I giue you] and be ye wise, [i. learne to be wisely ordered and gouerned thereby] and refuse it not: [vz. least it turne to your owne hurt and destruction] blessed is the man [see verse 32. of this Chapter. Also Psalm 1.1.] that heareth me, [vz. speaking vnto him, vnderstanding by hearing, obedience also of the things propounded, as Ioh. 10.27.] watching daylie [i. continually] at my gates, [i. at the dores of my house. He meaneth such, as both continually, though with great labour and paine, and also vnfeignedly, euen with their whole hart and soule seeke him. It may be a metaphore taken from clients, who will not depart from their Aduocates or counsellors dores, till they haue talked with them. Or it may be taken from painfull schollers, who watch the schoole dores so, that they be first in vpon the opening of them, and last out vpon the shutting of them] and giuing attendance [vz. diligently, least I escape] at the postes of my dores.  [vz. where I should come out.] Vers. 34. For he [vz. whosoeuer he bée] that findeth me [vz. seeking carefully and painfully for me] findeth life, [i. me that am life, as Iohn 11.25. Also Iohn 14.6. Meaning it also both of tem∣porall and eternall life] and shall obtaine fauour of the Lord: [i. great and ex∣céeding
grace from him.] Vers. 35. But [now he amplifieth by the contra∣rie]  he [vz. whosoeuer he bee] that sinneth against me [i. that doth not reue∣rently esteeme me, nor applie himselfe diligently to obtaine me: for wee can not neglect Christ, but with great offence] hurteth his owne soule, [i. de∣stroyeth himselfe, both here, and in the life to come] and all that hate me [vz. of what state or condition soeuer they be] loue death. [vz. both of bodie and soule, how much soeuer they would seeme to abhorre it and flie from it. Verse. 1. Teacheth vs, that the Lord speaketh clerely vnto vs, to the ende we might be the sooner and more effectually drawne vnto him.] Vers. 2, 3. Setteth out Gods great mercie, who neglecteth no occasion, time, or place, to doo vs good. Ʋerse 4. Teacheth vs, that God doth generally direct his word vnto all, though happelie it bee fruitfull but in some. Verse 5. Tea∣cheth vs in time to returne from our follie and dulnes of spirite. Ʋerse 6. Teacheth vs, that the more excellent things are offered vs, the more atten∣tiue we should be to heare and learne the same. Verse 7. Teacheth vs, and that euen in the example of God himselfe, to speake nothing but the truth, and to abhorre al wickednesse of wordes whatsoeuer. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, that Gods word is righteous, iust, pure and holie. Vers. 9. Is profitable for doctrine, because it sheweth that God speaketh plainly and familiarly vn∣to vs in his word, which may teach vs, not to be discouraged from the hea∣ring or reading of it, through the hardnes of it, and it is profitable also for confutation of Papistes, who accuse it of darknes. Verse 10, 11. Teach vs, co preferre Gods word, before all the pleasures & profites of this life what∣soeuer. Ʋerse 12. Teacheth vs, that nothing can be rightly or wisely done, without sound knowledge out of Gods word. Ʋerse 13. Teacheth vs, that seeing God our father abhorreth pride, wickednesse, and vngodly speach, we should likewise hate and lothe the same things. Verse 14. Teacheth vs, that the Lord is most wise in all his counsels; and most mightie to per∣forme whatsoeuer pleaseth him both in heauen and earth. Ʋerse 15, 16. Teach vs, that all earthly authoritie is from the Lord only, whatsoeuer it be. Verse 17. Teacheth vs, to loue the Lord, and if we will obtaine him and his fauour, earnestly and diligently to seeke after the same. Ʋers. 18. Tea∣cheth vs, that true riches and honor are to bee found onely with the Lord. Verse 19. Teacheth vs, that Gods graces bestowed vppon his children are more precious, than all the things of this life whatsoeuer. Verse 20. Tea∣cheth vs, that without light from Christ, wee walke in by pathes, and wan∣der continually from the Lords waies. Ʋerse 21. Teacheth vs, that there is an euerlasting inheritance, and plentie of all blessings laied vp for the faithfull. Verse 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.27, 28. Doo prooue the eternall deitie or Godhead of our Sauiour Christ, contrarie to the Arrian heresie. Verse 28. Setteth forth Gods great power, in vpholding the clowdes, and the raine in the same from drowning the world. Ʋerse 29. Teacheth vs, that euen
the sea is obedient vnto him, so that looke what courses and bounds he set∣teth it, it walketh in the same. Vers. 30. Sheweth, that by our Sauiour him selfe all things were made & maintained. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, that though Christ bee carefull for all, yet chiefly for mankinde, and specially for his Church gathered out of it. Ʋers. 32. Teacheth vs, that obedience to Gods commandements, is a meane to bring blessings vpon vs. Vers. 33. Teacheth vs, to giue diligent attendance vpon God and his truth, least it doo at any time, or by any manner of way escape vs. Vers. 34. Teacheth vs, that with∣out Christ, there is no fauour nor life to be had from God, but in and with him we haue all things. Ʋers. 35. Teacheth, that it is in vaine to offend a∣gainst Christ: for besides that our displeasing of him can do him no hurt, we do vtterly destroy our selues. CHAP. 9. Co. THe holie Ghost continueth in this Chapter that which he had begun in the other two, but specially in the eight Chapter before going: to wit, by the te∣stimonie of God, and his owne eternall wisedome, he confirmeth those doctrines and instructions which he had deliuered, concerning the imbracing of this hea∣uenlie wisedome. And here by another similitude he teacheth the same which he did before, vz. that Wisedome calleth all such vnto her, as be desirous to im∣brace her: and this he doth, by supposing her to bee building her house, that she might receiue her guestes into it; by preparing her dainties, &c. Di. THis Chapter may be diuided into three parts. In the first, the heauenly wisedome of God, that is, his eternall sonne calleth al vnto his banquet, and the precious thinges he hath prepared for them, from verse 1. to the  end of the 6. In the second, the holie Ghost describeth the wayward na∣ture of the vngodlie, and sheweth what fruites wisedome yeeldeth, from  verse 7. to the end of the 12. In the third, he doth liuely paint out the loth∣some qualities and conditions of an harlot, from verse 13. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. WIsedome [i. Gods eternall Sonne: of which hath béen spoken of before, Chapt. 1.20. Also Chap. 8. through out] hath built [vz. very beautifullie and stronglie] her house [that is, his spirituall Church, which is called the house of God, 1. Ti∣moth. 3.15. which Christ beginneth in this life, but perfecteth the same in heauen] and hewne out [vz. very artificially and finely] her seuen pillers. [i. he hath made the Church very full and perfect. For we knowe, that the number of seuen in Scripture, signifieth fulnes and perfection: and all this is spoken in an allegorie concer∣ning
the Church, as also that which followeth touching the great banquet: meaning nothing thereby, but the absolute founding, establishing, and per∣fect decking of it.] Vers. 2. She [i. Gods eternall wisedome] hath killed her  vittailes, [i. hath minded to prepare and to performe a banquet for you, as may appeare, by killing meate] drawne [vz. out of the vessels] her wine, [i. the wine that she will giue you: q.d. you must therefore come quickly, seeing all things are in such readines. The word that is turned here drawne, signi∣fieth in the Hebrue mingled, [vz. with water, speaking according to the man∣ner of those hot countries] and prepared her table [vz. for the guestes to sit at: q.d. all things are in a readines, there lacketh nothing but guestes to fur∣nish the borde. To allegorise vppon the words, vittailes, wine, tables, &c. were vaine: the Scriptures must be handled with greater sobrietie.] Vers.  3. She hath sent forth her maidens [vz. to call men to her banquet] and [vz. she her selfe] crieth [vz. aloude, so that al men may heare: q.d. Gods heauen∣lie wisedome, both by himselfe, and his messengers, inuiteth men to come] vpon the highest places of the citie, [i. openly and euery where, so that none can pretend ignorance: see such a like parable Math. 22.1, 2, 3. &c.] saying, [vz. after this manner] Vers. 4. Who so is simple, [see Chapt. 1.4. and yet  this word is sometimes vsed in the good part, as Psalme 116.6. and Math. 10.16.] let him come hether, [vz. to my house and feast, and he shall haue his simplicitie reformed] and to him that is destitute of wisedome, [i. lacketh the true and holie wisedome of God] she saieth, [vz. also: q.d. I refuse to take paines with none, how simple or foolish soeuer they be, so that they will dili∣gently applie their eares, and willingly hearken to my voyce.] Vers. 5.  Come, [vz. willingly and quickly] and eate of my meate, and drinke of my wine [i. bee partakers of all the good things which the father hath giuen to communicate vnto you, and to bestowe vppon you] that I haue drawne. [see verse 2. of this Chapter: and marke, how that which wisedome speaketh here somewhat darklie, he speaketh in the next verse more plainly.] Vers. 6.  Forsake [vz. with all speede possiblie] your way, [vz. wherein you walke, meaning, the imaginations and deuises of their owne hearts, and the cor∣rupt worke of their owne flesh] ye foolish, [he calleth them here foolish, whom he called verse 4. simple,] and ye shall liue: [vz. not only here in this life, but for euer also with God: and that word shall, noteth the certaintie of it] and walke [vz. carefully and diligently] in the way of vnderstanding. [i. in those waies and orders of life, which vnderstanding setteth before you: q.d. applie your minde to wisedome, and frame and fashion your whole life, according to the rules thereof.] Vers. 7. He [vz. whosoeuer he be] that reproueth [i.  laboureth by the way of reproofe or admonition, to instruct & teach] a scorner, [i. a man that wickedly scoffeth both at the truth, and the person vttering it, and barketh like a dogge, or grunteth as a swine against it: see Psalme 1.1.] purchaseth, [vz. not by the dooing of it, but by reason of the peruersnes of the partie, who will doo nothing els, but labour, either by taunting to make him
blush, or els by slaundering to discredit him] to himselfe shame: [vz. before men: see Math. 11.16, 17, &c.] and he that rebuketh the wicked [vz. whe∣ther it be sharply or mildely done] getteth himselfe a blot. [vz. because that  through enuie being moued, they will slaunder him.] Vers. 8. Rebuke not a scorner, least he hate thee: [he meaneth not that wee should abstaine from reprouing others, for feare of their displeasure and hatred: for that is not to be esteemed, if he would hearken vnto wholesome counsell: but because it is to be doubted least we should lose our labour and receiue nothing but hatred for our paines] but rebuke [vz. for his offence: see Leuit. 19.17. and doo it plainlie] a wise man, [i. such a one as is so prepared in minde, that he wil not scoffe at thee and thy admonitions, but willingly heareth wisedome, and gladlie suffereth himselfe to be informed according thereto: see Prouer. 10.8.] and he will loue thee. [vz. the better, and the more vnfeignedly for that.]  Vers. 9. Giue admonition to the wise, [i. admonish him that is wise of any thing that is amisse in him] and he will be the wiser: [i. he will thriue in wise∣dome by that admonition and reproofe, and become the better, both in prac∣tise and obedience thereby] teach [vz. good things, and that in the spirite of méekenesse & of loue] a righteous man, [i. he that hath care of an vpright con∣uersation] and he will increase in learning. [vz. by the meanes of those admo∣nitions, and vnder the name learning, he comprehendeth not knowledge on∣lie, but obedience and practise also, for we haue learned so much as we know  and practise.] Vers. 10. The beginning of wisedome is the feare of the Lord, [see Chapt. 1. verse 7. Also Psal. 111.10. He sheweth here what is true wise∣dome, and what way men must take, if they will obtaine her, to wit, that they bring with them a reuerent feare of God in their hearts. For in vaine shall any man thinke, without the feare of God, to obtaine wisedome, or to make any procéedings in her] and the knowledge of holie things, [i. of all ho∣lie things whatsoeuer, specially of holie men] is vnderstanding. [vz. right and sound vnderstanding of Gods will reuealed in his word: q.d. without that, there is no way to knowe any thing that is good. He maketh here two parts, as it were, of heauenly doctrine: the one is the duetie of reuerence to∣wards God, the other is the duetie of fellowship with the Saints: and ei∣ther of them is called the beginning of wisedome and vnderstanding, because they are in this life begun in vs by the word, and shall not be finished till the prophecie cease, and wee bee placed together in the heauenlie places with  Christ.] Vers. 11. For thy daies [i. the daies of thy life] shall be multiplied [vz. very greatly. He meaneth, that the godlie imbracing heauenly wise∣dome, shall obtaine a long life: and this he speaketh not, as though the daies which God hath numbered vnto vs, shall be shortned or lengthened, but ac∣cording to the custome of the lawe] by me, [vz. if vnfeignedly thou receiue and imbrace me] and the yeares of thy life shall be augmented. [vz. excéeding∣lie.]  Vers. 12. If thou be wise, [i. truelie and holilie wise] thou shalt bee wise for thy selfe, [i. for thine owne good and commoditie, not forbidding vs to
imploy our wisedome to doo good vnto others also, but shewing that we our selues shall reape the speciall commoditie by it] and if thou be a scorner, [see verse 7. of this Chapter] thou alone shalt suffer. [vz. the iust paine and pu∣nishment of thy scoffing and scorning: q.d. thy scorning shall not, as thou thinkest, hurt him, that tendereth thy saluation, but shall through Gods iust iudgement light vpon thine owne head.] Vers. 13. A foolish woman [i. one  giuen ouer to wickednesse and sinne] is troublesome: [vz. both in word and deede, it is the same word that he vsed before Chapt. 7.11.] she is ignorant, [vz. of euery good thing] and knoweth nothing. [vz. soundly and vprightly, either of her duetie towards God or man.] Vers. 14. But she sitteth [vz. as  an idle bodie, and one that would allure men] at the dore of her house [i. with∣out, for she cannot abide to be within dores] on a seate [q.d. yea she sitteth on a seate prepared for her] in the high places of the citie, [i. in the open streates where she may bee seene. For high places, see Chapt. 8.2. He meaneth by this that she is a gadder: see Chapt. 7.11, 12.] Vers. 15. To call them [vz.  vnto her: meaning by this speach to allure them] that passe by the way, [vz. about their businesses and affaires] that go right on their way, [i. that are carefully bent and set vpon the performance of the things that they haue to doo, without thinking any whit of her, or her lewdnes, till she allure them] saying, [vz. after this manner also.] Vers. 16. Who so is simple, let him come  hether, [vz. to me] and to him that is destitute of wisedome, she saith also, [these are the same wordes with verse 4. of this Chapter, but vtter to another end, vz. to drawe men from the way of true wisedome, so that wee may see here, that we are not to beléeue bare words only.] Vers. 17. Stollen waters  are sweete, [I take these to be the words of the harlot intising the foolish and simple man: q.d. wee will secretly commit whoredome, which to the flesh in deede, seemeth very pleasant and sweet: and not only because it is not seene or knowne, but also because the desire and vse of strange flesh (which is cal∣led in this place the euerie) is, or at the least seemeth delectable for the time] and hidde bread is pleasant. [i. bread eaten in corners: which they dare not eate openly, either because it was forbidden them, or because it was stollen. Vnder these two similitudes, she meaneth one thing, that is secret or close committing of whoredom: and here we may see, that euen by the account of whores and harlots, whoredome is condemned as a vile sinne.] Vers. 18.  But he [vz. who is so intised of her] knoweth not [vz. being deceiued through the sweetnes and pleasures of sinne, which indure but for a while] that the dead are there, [i. that such as vse her house, and frequent her companie, are dead alreadie, as 1. Timoth. 5.6,] and that her guestes [i. such as she hath bidden, and doo yéeld to her bidding] are in the depth of hell. [i. are alrea∣die condemned: some referre it to the graue, but the other sense also is true, vnlesse it please God to giue them vnfeigned repentance and amend∣ment of life. Do.
Verse 1, 2, 3. Set out the great loue that God beareth towardes man, which teacheth vs on the otherside, not to requite it with vnkindnesse, as when he louinglie calleth, we should chorlishly refuse to come, but thank∣fully to accept of the time of his gracious and fatherly visitation. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, that our ignorance or wickednesses, should bee no cause of e∣stranging our selues from God, but rather spurres to prouoke vs to drawe nigh vnto him for the amendement thereof. Verse 5. Teacheth vs, reue∣rently and louingly to imbrace Gods graces offered. Ʋers. 6. Teacheth vs, that Christian righteousnes consisteth of these two partes, in hating the e∣uill, and doing the good things. Ʋers. 7. Setteth out rather the nature of the wicked, who cannot away with the word of reproofe, than discourage vs a∣ny whit at all from performing of that great duetie of charitie and loue. Verse 8. Teacheth vs, that godly admonition bringeth not foorth the like fruites and effects in all. Verse 9. Teacheth vs, that the godlie can alwaies well away to be reproued and admonished. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs the right and reuerent feare of Gods Maiestie, and also the true feeling of the so∣cietie and fellowship of the brethren. Verse 11. Teacheth vs, that whoso∣euer vnfeignedly imbraceth Gods heauenly wisedome, shall haue abun∣dance of graces bestowed vpon him. Ʋerse 12. Sheweth, that scorners and scoffers shal not escape vnpunished. Verse 13. Sheweth, that these are two properties of a harlot, brauling, and ignorance. Ʋerse 14. Teacheth vs, that this is another note of a light person, gadding, and fisking abroad. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, that harlots are for the most part impudent and shamelesse. Ʋerse 16. Teacheth vs, not to beleeue all words; for harlots many times will labour to allure with the same words that holie wisedome doth, and all to make her perswasions more plausible. Verse 17. Teacheth, that adulterie is a notorious kind of the euerie or robbing. Verse 18. Teacheth, that how pleasant soeuer the delights of sinne be for a while, yet their end is sharpe and miserable. CHAP. 10. Co. HEtherto the holie Ghost was occupied, speciallie in the commendation of ho∣lie wisedome, which chiefly respecteth our dueties towards God: now ha∣uing dispatched and finished that poynt, he proceedeth in this and the other Chapters following, to speake both of the generall and particular dueties, that in God and for God we owe one of vs to another: and this he doth not in any cu∣rious methode or order, no more than they doo which take vppon them in few wordes to deliuer rules of life, such as amongst the heathen were sundrie, as Cato, Isocrates, and others. And yet wee will indeuour and assay to make as apt, both connexions and diuisions of the Chapters, as it shall please God to giue vs grace. Di.
TRue it is, that sundrie and seuerall instructions of doctrine are contai∣ned in this Chapter, as also in the Chapters following, and therefore can hardlie admit any apt diuision: notwithstanding, I suppose it may well be diuided into three parts. In the first the holie Ghost speaketh of wise and  foolish children, of goods wickedly gotten, of Gods prouidence towards the good, and his iustice against the bad, of idlenes, and sloth, of Gods fa∣uour and iustice towards the godly and vngodly, of the waies of the wic∣ked and the godlie, of hypocrites and of good men: and this reacheth from verse 1. to the end of the 11. In the second, he intreateth of hatred and loue,  of wise men and fooles, of riches and pouertie, of obedience, hypocrisie, babling, the godly mans words, and the wicked mans heart: from verse 12. to the end of the 21. In the third, he intreateth of Gods fauour, of fooles  and their feare, and destruction of slothfull persons, of the good and the bad, and of their vnlikely fruites and rewardes: and this reacheth from verse 22. vnto the end of the Chapter. Se. THis Chapter hath as it were a title thus:] The Parables of Salomon. [see the same wordes expounded before Chapter 1.1.] Vers. 1. A wise sonne [i. a good and god∣lie  child, whether it be sonne or daughter] maketh a glad father: [i. causeth the father much to reioyce: vnder∣standing by father, both the parents and kinsfolkes, be∣cause he is chiefe: see Chapter 15.20.] but a foolish sonne [i. a wicked and a lewd childe] is an heauines [vz. of heart and great griefe] to his mother. [i. to his parents, &c. as before, one being put for ma∣nie.] Vers. 2. The treasures of wickednes [i. such treasures as wicked men  get by wicked meanes, how much soeuer it be, and thinke will stand them in stead: see for this phrase Luke 16.9.] profite nothing: [vz. at all, that is, can not stand him in stead against the euils which are readie to fal vpon him, and death that hangeth presently ouer his head: see Psalme 49.6, 7, &c. [but righteousnes [i. vpright and faithfull dealing, yea, though a man haue no treasure at all] deliuereth from death. [i. ouercommeth all euilles and dan∣gers whatsoeuer, and causeth that euen death it selfe is not hurtfull to the righteous.] Vers. 3. The Lord [vz. who is faithfull and iust in all his pro∣mises]  will not famish [vz. through any want or neede] the soule of the righ∣teous: [i. the good mans life: see Psalme 34.10. Also Psalme 37.25. He mea∣neth, that howsoeuer they be afflicted on euery side, yet shall they not bee di∣stressed or destituted for euer: see 2. Cor. 4.8.] but he casteth away [or scat∣tereth, vz. as a thing of no account] the substance of the wicked. [i. all that he hath and possesseth: and this he doth, either by taking it vtterly from him, or denying him the vse of it, though he haue it in possession: or by taking his blessing of strength and profite from him and it. Vers. 4. A slothfull hand  [i. the hand that is giuen to idlenes and sloth, and will not labour, vnder∣standing
by one part all the rest that must concurre in that action of worke] maketh poore: [vz. him that hath it, or is the owner of it. The word that is turned here slothfull, signifieth also deceitfull: q.d. he that is sluggish in do∣ing of his duetie, and thinketh by craft to attaine other mens goods, shall surely come to beggerie] but the hand [i. the labour performed with the hand and other parts and members of the bodie] of the diligent [i. of such as dili∣gently go about their owne businesses, and abstaine from coueting, or craftie scraping together of other mens goods] maketh rich. [i. maketh men rich, and that through Gods especiall blessing, for otherwise it is impossible to  obtaine them: as Psalme 127.2.] Vers. 5. He that gathereth [vz. things méete and necessarie for his maintenance] in sommer, [i. while time serueth, and he hath a good season. See what is said before concerning the Pismire, Chapt. 6.8.] is the sonne of wisedome: [i. is a wise and good child, as he pro∣ueth by effect, while in his vnderstanding and knowledge he taketh heed be∣fore hand, to keepe him and his from shamefull beggerie] but he that slee∣peth [i. he that is sluggish and slow, and doth no more than if he slept sound∣lie: see Chapt. 6.10.] in haruest, [i. when he hath fit and conuenient time to doo things well in: Chapt. 6.8.] is the sonne of confusion. [i. is such a one as by his follie bringeth shame of face vpon himselfe, and all those that ap∣pertaine  vnto him.] Vers. 6. Blessings [i. plentifulnes and abundance of all manner of blessings, which he noteth by speaking in the plurall number] are vpon the head of the righteous: [i. are plentifully powred vpon the righteous man himself, putting a part for the whole, as Chap. 11.26. And yet because euery good gift commeth from aboue, Iames 1.17. he doth chiefly speake of the head, because it lighteth first vpon it, and so from it descendeth to the rest of the members: see Psalme 113.2.] but iniquitie [i. the sinne which the wicked committed against God and men, after that it is knowne] shall couer the mouthes of the wicked. [i. shall so stoppe and shut vp their mouthes, that they shall not only haue nothing to say, but shall bee choked as it were with  their owne violence, as if a mans breath were stopped.] Vers. 7. The me∣moriall [i. the remembrance or thinking vpon] of the iust [vz. whether he be aliue or dead] shall be blessed: [i. shall bee esteemed as a sweete and pleasant thing, yea worthie great praise] but the name of the wicked [i. all his glorie, and whatsoeuer seemeth excellent in him] shall rot. [vz. as a corrupt and vile thing: meaning further, that euer before God and man, it shall bee hated and lothed, euen as things that stinke through rottennes and corruption.]  Vers. 8. The wise in heart [i. he that is truely and indeede wise, for many out∣wardly make a shewe of wisedome and haue it not within] will receiue [vz. reuerently & willingly, carrying with him also a purpose to obey the same] commandements: [vz. either from God and his word, or els from good men according to the same] but the foolish in talke [i. he whose disorderous heart moueth his lippes to murmur against good counsell] shall be beaten. [vz.  for his rash hastie and murmuring speaches.] Vers. 9. He that walketh [i.
leadeth the course of his life] vprightly, [vz. towards God and man, hauing a care that he stray not] walketh boldly: [vz. because he is assured of Gods good will towards him, walking faithfully in his calling] but he that per∣uerteth his waies [vz. from the rules of righteousnes and truth, which God hath set him] shall be knowne. [vz. at the last, how close or secret soeuer it bee for a time.] Vers. 10. He that wincketh with the eye, [i. he that secretly de∣uiseth  or worketh mischiefe, he putteth the signe for the thing it selfe: see Chapt. 6.13.] worketh sorrowe, [vz. both to others, and himselfe also in the ende] and he that is foolish in talke, [i. such a one as neuer feareth to vtter his wickednes] shall be beaten. [see verse 8. of this Chap. He compareth the euill which is done dissemblingly, and as it were with the wincking of the eye, with that which is done openly, & with the manifest rayling of the tongue.] Vers. 11. The mouth of a righteous man [i. the words which he vttereth and  speaketh] is a welspring of life: [i. bring with them all manner of plentie and continuance of good things] but iniquitie couereth the mouth of the wicked. see verse 6. of this very chapter. Vers. 12. Hatred [vz. once conceiued and  setled in the minde] stirreth vp [vz. very forciblie and quicklie] contentions: [vz. both in word and deede amongst men, and that many times for small causes or none at all: vnderstanding also by contentions, both backbitings, and quarrellous vpbraidings one of another with the offences and sinnes which they haue committed, which is very farre off from the duetie of huma∣nitie or charitie] but loue [vz. if it bee vnfeigned, of one of vs towards ano∣ther] couereth [vz. from other mens sight, hearing and knowledge] all tres∣passes. [vz. committed one of vs against another. This taketh not away brotherly admonition, or the Church discipline, but speaketh of priuate in∣iuries and offences against our selues, which holie loue doth keepe close, if in a good faith and holie conscience they may be kept close, dissembling them as it were, or els doth in tender pittie and compassion labour the amende∣ment of them: Leuit. 19.17.] Vers. 13. In the lippes of him that hath vnder∣standing  [i. in the speach and wordes of a wise man: he putteth one instru∣ment wherewith words bee vttered for the words themselues] wisedome is found, [i. a man shall easilie espie and perceiue great wisedome] and a rod [i. punishment and correction, euen as it were with a rod] shall be [vz. sent from God, yea and many times from men also] for the backe of him [i. vpon his backe [that is destitute of wisedome. [vz. and yet notwithstanding wil speake hand ouerhead whatsoeuer commeth into his mouth.] Vers. 14. Wise men  [i. they that are indeede truely wise] lay vp knowledge: [vz. of good things, meaning by laying of it vp, hiding it as it were within themselues, as chap. 2.1. and Chapt. 7.1. Yet so, that when neede shall require, and occasion bee offered, they may bring it forth and vse it: see Math. 12.35. Also Math 13.52.] but the mouth of a foole [i. the wordes which a foole or wicked person vttereth with his mouth] is a present destruction. [i. bring with them euen de∣struction, not only to the partie vttering, but many times to some person
hearing: q.d. the wicked mans follie and want of knowledge is so great, that he can scarce begin to speake, but he will vtter wordes tending either to  his owne destruction, or the great hurt of others.] Vers. 15. The rich mans goods [i. the land, monie, and whatsoeuer els he hath] are his strong citie: [i. are as sure an ayde and defence vnto him, as he supposeth, as if he were in a walled towne] but the feare of the needie is their pouertie. [i. their pouertie maketh them to feare this and that, and least one inconuenience or other  should fall vpon them.] Vers. 16. The labour of the righteous [i. those things which good people labour for and get by their labour: see labour so vsed, Chapter 5.10.] tendeth to life: [i. to the maintenance and vpholding of his owne life, and other mens too in this life, see Ephes. 4.28.] but the reuenues of the wicked [i. all the increase how great or little so euer it be that the wic∣ked hath] to sinne. [i. serueth not for his neede, but for pleasure, and the satis∣fying of his wicked affections, one while in oppression, another while in  whoredome, &c.] Vers. 17. He that regardeth [vz. diligently and atten∣tiuely] instruction, [vz. whether it bee from God, or men as his meanes and instruments] is in the way of life: [i. is entred into that course that will bring him, not only to goodnes in this life, but in the end to eternall life also] but he that refuseth correction, [vz. as though he were a disobedient and rebel∣lious child] goeth out of the way. [vz. which leadeth to true blessednes either  in this life, or in the life to come.] Vers. 18. He that dissembleth hatred [i. the corrupt affection of his heart] with lying lippes, [i. with fained words, which indéed are but lyes, making as though he bare a man good wil, where∣as indéed he hateth him cruelly, and that vnto death] and he that inuenteth slaunder, [i. slaunderous and false reports against another man] is a foole. [i. a very wicked person. He noteth here two kind of persons, which regard not instruction, to wit, hypocrites, and obstinate fellowes: see before verse 10. of  this Chapter.] Vers. 19. Jn many words [vz. spoken rashly and vnadui∣sedly] there cannot want iniquitie: [i. it cannot be auoided, but that there is great sinne] but he that refraineth his lippes [vz. from rash and hastie speach, see Psalme 34.13. is wise. [i. is truely wise indeed. He meaneth that a wise man is spare in his speach, and vttereth nothing rashlie, but doth before hand well ponder the same: otherwise it is a hard matter, but that amongst such as rashly, and without choyce speake many things, there shall be much sinne in their speaches. Neither mindeth he here to condemne abundance of words  which tend to edification and doctrine.] Vers. 20. The tongue of a iust man [i. the wordes and speaches which he vttereth with his tongue, as before verse 11. The mouth of a righteous man] is as fined siluer: [i. is as precious and excellent, as the most fine siluer: see Chapter 8.19. Meaning by this manner of speach, that they are most excellent and therefore to be imbraced] but the heart of the wicked is little worth. [i. is worth little or nothing at all. Now, if the heart, from whence the speach first commeth bee of no regard, then much lesse to be esteemed are the words themselues: so that he vnder∣standeth
by heart, the words also, which doo manifest the same, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh: see Math. 12.34.] Vers. 21.  The lippes of the righteous [i. his good and holie words, as verse 13. of this Chapter] doo feede many, [vz. with good things, as with the gift of know∣ledge, iudgement, vtterance and such like] but fooles shall dye for want of wisedome. [q.d. so farre off is it, that they can feed many or any by their word and speach, that for want of sound iudgement and knowledge, they shal pull destruction vpon themselues.] Vers. 22. The blessing of the Lord, [vz. only,  or alone] it [vz. indeed and nothing but it] maketh rich, [i. maketh men rich, as verse 4. of this Chapter. And how true this is, wée haue it daylie confir∣med by experience, and finde it written also Psalme 127.1, 2, &c.] and he doth adde no sorowes with it. [i. God doth most perfectly make men rich, and setteth his farre off from al griefes, that the wicked haue with their riches.] Vers. 23. Jt is a pastime to a foole to doo wickedly: [i. he taketh great delight  and pleasure in the same, as men doo in their sports or pastimes] but wise∣dome is vnderstanding to a man. [i. it bringeth him to great iudgement and vnderstanding, both of Gods matters and mens.] Vers. 24. That [vz. euill  and punishment] which the wicked feareth, [vz. to bee powred forth vppon him] shall come vpon him: [vz. both sodainlie and certainly: see Chapter 1.26, 27.] but God will graunt [vz. in great mercie] the desire of the righteous. [i. such good things as godlie men wish and pray for according to his will.] Vers. 25. As the whirle wind passeth, [vz. away, and that with great vehe∣mencie  and sodainnes] so is the wicked no more: [vz. to bee seene, but he pas∣seth from his place with as great swiftnes: see Psalme 37.37. but the righ∣teous is as an euerlasting foundation. [i. shall remaine stedfast for euer and e∣uer, as a foundation that cannot be remoued.] Vers. 26. As vineger is [vz.  hurtfull] to the teeth, [vz. of a man, because the power and force of it, special∣lie if it be taken in any great quantitie, doth dull the teeth] and as smoke [vz. is hurtfull] to the eyes, [vz. of men, because it doth not onely trouble them much many times, but also in some is a meane to drawe humors downe too fast] so is the slothfull [i. idle or negligent person] to them that send him. [vz. about any affaires, either publike or priuate. He exhorteth men from vsing heauie and sluggish persons, in performance of any their businesses, because they can get nothing by such but trouble and griefe.] Vers. 27. The feare  of the Lord [i. an vnfeigned reuerence of God in mens hearts] increaseth the daies [vz. of mans life, he meaneth by this speach, that it is a meane to bring them with greater peace and prosperitie to the yeres which they should liue by Gods appoyntment, or by their owne nature, or by the constitution of their bodies] but the yeares of the wicked [i. of their life] shall be diminished. [vz. very much: And as Dauid saith in one of his Psalmes, the vngodlie shall not liue out halfe his daies.] Vers. 28. The pacient abiding [vz. for  the execution and performance of Gods will] of the righteous [i. which the righteous haue and vse] shall be gladnes: [i. shall certainlie in the ende bee re∣compenced
with abundance of ioy, for he speaketh of the plural number: and this must be vnderstood, not only because they hope they shall inioy gladnes, but also because their hope shall end in gladnes, and they obtaine that which they hoped for, and so be made throughly glad] but the hope of the wicked [i. both the thinges which he hoped for, and the hope he had to receiue them] shall perish. [i. come to naught, and so he shall be ouerwhelmed with sorrowe,  because he is frustrate of his hope.] Vers. 29. The way of the Lord [i. both the things which he commandeth, and the knowledge which good men haue of his prouidence and gouernment] is strength to the vpright man: [i. matter of great strength and boldnes against all euill and sorrowe whatsoeuer] but feare [i. great sorrowe and griefe, and continuall trembling] shall be for the workers of iniquitie. [or to them, when they shall looke vpon Gods waies and gouernment: see Hosea 14. vers. 9. And touching these words, workers of  iniquitie, see Psalme 6.8.] Vers. 30. The righteous shall neuer be remoued: [vz. from the hope and feeling of good things, euen in this life] but the wic∣ked shall not dwell [vz. long] in the land. [vz. but shall shortly be rooted out of  it, and cut from it.] Vers. 31. The mouth of the iust shall be fruitfull in wise∣dome: [i. he shall most pleasantly and plentifully vtter wise and holie things, euen as fruite yeeldeth abundance, wherevpon words are called the fruites of the lippes. Isaiah 57.19.] but the tongue of the froward shall be cut out. [i. he that giueth himselfe to speake frowardly and peruersly, shall be depriued  of his speach, because the meane thereof shall be taken from him.] Vers. 32. The lippes of the righteous knowe what is acceptable: [i. they knowe and can speake those thinges, which will procure fauour, both before GOD and men] but the mouth of the wicked speaketh froward things. [i. the vngodlie spare not to speake such things as may displease both God and men. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth parents to reioyce in the gifts that God bestoweth vp∣pon their children: & it teacheth children to striue to obtaine such things, that they may indeede make glad their parents hearts. Vers. 2. Teacheth men to take heede how they get their goods: vz. that they doo it vpright∣lie and not deceitfullie. Vers. 3. Doth comfortablie expresse the great care that God hath ouer his children, and his great iudgements against the wic∣ked. Vers. 4. Teacheth euery man to walke faithfully and diligently in his calling auoiding idlenes. Ʋers. 5. Teacheth vs, to vse the opportunities, that GOD in mercie giueth vs, for the performance of any good thing. Vers. 6. Teacheth, that God indueth the godlie with al manner of blessings, but vtterly confoundeth the wicked and vngodlie. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, that nothing that the wicked hath, is of any great continuance. Vers. 8. Tea∣cheth vs two things: first paciently to beare the words of admonition and reproofe: secondlie, to beware of rash and hastie speach. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, that there is no wickednes so secret, but God will at some one time or other bring it to light. Ʋers. 10. Teacheth vs, to beware of hypocrisie on
the one side, and of open workings of euill on the other side. Vers. 11. Tea∣cheth vs, that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things. Ʋers. 12. Teacheth vs to flie hatred, and earnestly to im∣brace sound and sincere loue. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, that mens wordes are many times meanes to manifest either the wisedome or the follie of him that speaketh. Ʋers. 14. Teacheth vs, how dangerous and hurtfull rash and hastie speaches are. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, that the wicked many times repose trust and affiance in the multitude of their riches. Vers. 16. Sheweth, both what contentednes the godlie haue, when it pleaseth God to blesse their labours, and how the wicked abuse euen their riches, and all thinges they haue, to the increase of iudgement against their owne soules. Vers. 17. Tea∣cheth vs, how dangerous a thing it is to refuse good counsell. Vers. 18. Tea∣cheth vs to flie from dissimulation, lying and slandering. Ʋers. 19. Tea∣cheth vs to shunne vaine babling, and multitude of words. Vers. 20. Tea∣cheth vs, that the words of such as are truely wise bee very precious, but the imaginations and deuises of the vngodlie are of no account. Ʋers. 21. Tea∣cheth vs, that we ought to referre our wisedom and knowledge to the good of others. Ʋers. 22. Teacheth vs, that it is not mans wit or labour, but the blessing of the Lord only that maketh men rich. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, that the wicked reioyce, and take pleasure in the performance of their wicked∣nes. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, that the vngodlie shall haue the selfe same pu∣nishments fall vppon them that they feare: also that God will graciouslie grant the requestes of his seruants. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, that the vngodlie shall be destroyed, but the godly shall florish continually. Vers. 26. Tea∣cheth vs, what hurt a sluggish person doth, both to himselfe, and them that imploy him in any seruice. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs, that long yeares shall be to the godlie, but short and fewe daies to the wicked. Ʋers. 28. Teacheth vs, not only paciently to tarrie the Lords leisure, but sheweth vs, that if we doo so, we shall haue a ioyfull issue and end thereof. Ʋers. 29. Teacheth vs, that Gods prouidence is a great comfort to those that are his, and his iudgements terrible to the wicked. Ʋers. 30. Teacheth vs, what difference there is betweene the estates of the good and the bad. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, that a godlie wise mans words, tend both to his owne commendation, and also to the good and profite of others. Ʋers. 32. Sheweth, that it is a great grace to speake in place and time conuenient. Also it teacheth, that the wicked giue their tongues libertie to vtter whatsoeuer euill their fro∣ward hearts can imagine.
CHAP. 11. Co. IN the other Chapter, specially in the last verse of it, he had taught men to vse good and gracious words, and to auoide all euill and corrupt speaches. Now in this Chapter, and specially in the first verse of it, he teacheth men to looke to their dealings and actions, and so proceedeth on to other instructions. Di. THis Chapter may be diuided into three parts. In the first he speaketh against false weights, pride, the frowardnes of the wicked, trust in vn∣certaine riches, and against the wicked themselues, exhorting men on the other side to striue to all vpright dealing, true humilitie, and other good fruits, annexing a promise thereto for the better fructifying of his doctrine,  and this reacheth from verse 1. to the end of the 9. In the second, he intrea∣teth of the blessings which come by good and wise gouernours, of the hurt that pride, slandering and idlenes yeeld, and by the contrarie he sheweth, what inconueniences insue for want of good gouernours, &c. from vers. 10.  to the end of the 21. In the third, he dealeth against foolish women, nig∣gardlines, couetousnes, trust in riches, contention, and such like: and on the other side, commendeth liberalitie, care for obeying of good things, and for winning of men to God, &c. And this reacheth from verse 22. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. FAlse balances [vz. vsed in buying and sel∣ling, he putteth the balance for all thereto appertaining] are an abhomination vnto the Lord: [i. are such things as the Lord abhorreth and condemneth by the Lawe: see Leuit. 19.35, 36. Deuter. 25.13, 14, 15, 16. And vnder this he condemneth all fraudulent dealing in buying and selling whatsoeuer] but a perfect weight [i. an vpright and iust weight: In the Hebrue text it is stone, because they were  wont to weigh with stones] pleaseth him. [vz. greatly or much.] Vers. 2. When pride commeth, [vz. vppon any man, i. when any man beginneth to waxe proude against or aboue others] then commeth [vz. vnto him] shame: [vz. amongst and before men. He meaneth, that contempt is the companion of pride: see Prouerb. 16.18.] but with the lowlie [vz. in heart, as well as in outward shewe] is wisedome. [i. true wisedome, which lowlines and wise∣dome ioyned together doo truely exalt a man: see Prouerb. 15.33. Also 18.12.]  Vers. 3. The vprightnes of the iust [i. their vpright and iust dealings towards God and men] shall guide them: [vz. euen whether they would come, or els it shall keepe them safe and sound for euer, and leade them tho∣rowe
out the whole course of their life, till they come to the hauen of safetie here, and of heauen in the life to come, as may appeare by the verses follow∣ing] but the frowardnes of the transgressors [i. of such as trāsgresse Gods law: meaning by peruersnes or frowardnes, not onely that which is in them∣selues, but also that wherewith they doo, either on the one side oppresse o∣thers, or on the other side peruert, or make them like naught vnto them∣selues] shall destroy. [i. shall be a forcible meane to pull vpon them from God a iust destruction.] Vers. 4. Riches [vz. whether they bee gotten iustly or  vniustly, that is not the matter] auaile not [vz. any whit at all] in the day of wrath: [i. at any time when God sheweth himselfe angrie: q.d. such as trust, when God laieth any either publike or priuate calamitie vpon them, to bée deliuered through their riches, they are much deceiued: see Ezech. 7.16. Zepha. 1.18.] but righteousnes deliuereth from death. [i. the righteous are deliuered either from bodilie punishments in this life, or els altogether from eternall death: see this expounded before, Chapt. 10.2.] Vers. 5. The righ∣teousnes  [i. the good conscience and faithfull dealing] of the vpright [vz. in heart as well as in word, for both must concurre] shall direct his way: [i. kee∣peth him vpright in this life, and ordereth the whole course of the same, so that he hath good successe in all things, and falleth not, because he laboureth continually to followe Gods will] but the wicked shall fall [vz. certainlie and assuredly] in his owne wickednes. [i. either as he is walking in his owne wicked and crooked waies, or els in that wickednes that he hath deuised a∣gainst others, he shall be snared: but I rather like of the first sense.] Ver. 6.  The righteousnes of the iust [see before verse 5. of this Chapter] shall deliuer them: [vz. from eternall death, and all hurtfull dangers in this life, as verse 4. of this Chapt.] but the transgressors [vz. of Gods lawe] shall be taken [vz. certainly and sodainly] in their owne wickednes. [i. in that which they had de∣uised against others, and indéede laied vpon them: see Psalme 7.15. or els expound it as verse 5. of this Chapter.] Vers. 7. When a wicked man dieth,  [vz. here amongst men] his hope [i. both the hope he himself had to oppresse others, and the hope that other men had in him] perisheth, [vz. vtterly, and commeth to nothing] and the hope of the vniust shall perish. [q.d. be assured of this, that his hope shall take no effect: and he repeateth the thing for the more certaintie of it: I knowe other men reade it and expound it otherwise, but me thinketh this is plaine.] Vers. 8. The righteous escapeth [vz. tho∣rowe  the goodnes and mercie of God] out of trouble, [i. out of sundrie and manifold troubles: see Psalme 34.19.] and the wicked shall come in his stead. [vz. into affliction and troubles: q.d. we doo oftentimes see it fall out, that the wicked man commeth into the place of the righteous man being de∣liuered from trouble, euen as it were a redemption for him.] Vers. 9. An  hypocrite [i. he that thinketh one thing with his heart, and speaketh another thing with his mouth] with his mouth [i. with his false & counterfeit words: mouth, put for words vttered with the mouth, as sundrie times before] hur∣teth
his neighbour: [vz. either while he bringeth men to the state of dissimu∣lation that he himselfe is in, or els, while he seemeth friendly in words, yet in heart wishing him euill, he laboureth to destroy him and his substance] but the righteous shall be deliuered [vz. through Gods grace and goodnes, from such hypocrites and dissemblers] by knowledge. [vz. of their falsehood and hypocrisie, and by a wise foresight shall deliuer himselfe and others from  their corruption.] Vers. 10. In the prosperitie of the righteous [i. when good men prosper, florish, and are exalted] the citie [i. the people of the citie, if they be godlie wise, and indued with vnderstanding: and this must not only bée referred to cities, but to kingdomes, he putting a part of a kingdome for the whole] reioyceth, [vz. excéedingly, and as it were with singing and shouting; for so much I suppose the Hebrue word and text will yéeld] and when the wicked perish, [vz. from amongst men, meaning when they dye] there is ioy. [vz. yea great ioy, amongst the people of the kingdome or citie: they reioyce in the one, because of the good they receiue from them, and reioyce at the de∣parture of the other, because of the euilles they indured vnder them.] Ver.  11. By the blessing of the righteous, [i. by the good deedes and good words of godlie men, which are called blessings, because that by them God doth after a sort powre blessings vpon the people] the citie is exalted: [vz. very much, that is, it hath a great name, and florisheth mightelie] but it is subuerted [i. quite and cleane destroyed] by the mouth of the wicked. [i. by wicked wordes and counsels that the vngodlie vtter and giue, see verse 9. of this Chapter.]  Vers. 12. He that despiseth [vz. either in countenance, worde, or deede] his neighbour, [i. any man that is any manner of way ioyned vnto him] is destitute of wisedome: [i. bewraieth himselfe to bee a very foolish man] but a man of vnderstanding [i. he that is truely wise indeede] will keepe silence [i. will temper himselfe, and abstaine from shewing contempt any manner of  way against another.] Vers. 13. He that goeth about as a slanderer, [vz. of other men. It seemeth to bee a metaphore taken from pedlers, who mingle sundrie sortes of ware together, and go from place to place to vtter those things which they haue receiued of others: so slanderers tell that to one, which they haue heard of another, and goe hether and thether to gather vp tales to tell to other men, and yet many times tell them otherwise than they heard them] discouereth a secret: [which is a wicked thing, specially if it bée committed to a man: this gadding from place to place with tales, is forbid∣den by God. Leuit. 19.16.] but he that is of a faithfull heart, [vz. towards God and his brethren] conceileth [i. keepeth close] a matter. [vz. committed  vnto him: meaning it of such matters as ought to be kept close.] Vers. 14 Where no counsell is, [i. In what place soeuer, there is not holie and right counsell: for otherwise there is no state so corrupt but hath a counsell: wher∣by we see, that a wicked counsell is as no counsell before God] the people fall: [vz. by sundrie meanes into sundrie mischiefes, that cannot be auoyded] but where many counsellers are, [i. where there is store of graue, wise, and holie
men, to giue good counsell, and their counsell bee accepted and regarded] there is health. [vz. to the people and subiects: meaning by health, all out∣ward blessings, as prosperitie, peace abroad, quietnes at home, and a great number of such like. The Rabbins referre this to warre; but I take it to be such a sentence as verse 11. of this Chapter is, and to be general, stretching it selfe to the right gouernment of Magistrates, and their wholesome coun∣sels.] Vers. 15. He shall be sore vexed, [vz. amongst men, and euen in him∣selfe]  that is suretie [vz. to another man] for a stranger, [i. for one whom he knoweth not] and he that hateth suretiship, [vz. vnlesse he haue good cause to enter into the same] is sure. [vz. from danger, griefe and vexation. How this must be vnderstood, see Chapt. 6. vers. 1, &c.] Vers. 16. A gracious wo∣man  [i. such a one as is indued with a right reuerence of God, and decked with that hidden man of the heart, which consisteth in a méeke and quiet spi∣rite, which spirite also is acceptable before God, & obtaineth fauour amongst men. 1. Pet. 3.4.] atteineth honor, [vz. amongst men, by her good and ver∣tuous demeanes, and so consequently praise and commendation, as Pro. 31.30.] and and [I suppose this would rather be turned as] the strong men [in Hebrue it is violent, meaning such as being terrible, and fearefull to others, get riches by all manner of meanes, whether lawfull or vnlawfull, it skilleth not] atteine riches. [vz. amongst men.] Vers. 17. He that is mercifull [vz.  towards others, specially when they are distressed and néedie] rewardeth his owne soule: [i. doth good vnto himselfe, also as well as vnto others; for so it pleaseth God to reward the good workes of his seruants] but he [vz. who∣soeuer he be] that troubleth [vz. vniustly and without cause, by what means so euer it be, either in word or déed] his owne flesh, [i. his neighbour, or other men: as Isaiah 58.7.] is cruell. [vz. not only to them, but euen against him∣selfe also. Some reade it thus] but the cruel man [i. he that is hard hearted and cruelly bent against others] troubleth his owne flesh, [i. hurteth himselfe, while he casteth from him all lawes of nature and curtesie. Indéede I con∣fesse that the Antithesis or opposition of this verse, more plainlie appeareth so, and yet I see no reason why the other sense may not as well stand.] Vers. 18. The wicked worketh a deceitfull worke: [vz. both to himselfe, and  against others: to himselfe, because he is deceiued of that which he thought to obtaine as a reward, many times getting a cleane contrarie thing, as mi∣serie for prosperitie: and against the good, because he seeketh by deceitfull meanes to destroy them] but he that soweth righteousnes, [i. is plentifull in vpright and well doing: see Galath. 6.7, 8, &c.] shall receiue [vz. from the Lord, yea and many times from men also] a sure reward. [i. a reward that shall not deceiue him, neither whereof he shall be deceiued.] Vers. 19. As  righteousnes leadeth to life: [vz. both here and in the world to come: vnder∣standing by righteousnes the sound fruites of a holy conuersation, both to∣wards God and men] so he that followeth euill, [i. fostereth and feedeth the same within him, and seeketh the performance therof] seeketh his own death.
[vz. both of bodie and soule, without vnfeigned repentance and amendment  of life.] Vers. 20. They that are of a froward heart, [vz. either against God or men: meaning such as are neuer pleased with any thing] are abomination to the Lord: [i. are such as the Lord abhorreth and cannot abide: see verse 1. of this Chapter] but they that are vpright in their way, [i. haue care of a ho∣lie and iust conuersation towards God and man: see Psalme 119.1.] are his  delite. [i. are such as he much delighteth in.] Vers. 21. Though hand ioyne in hand, [i. though the wicked indeuour by all the strengthes, subtilties, and aydes that they haue or can procure] the wicked shall not be vnpunished: [q.d. for all that they cannot escape Gods punishments: see Chapter 16.5.] but the seede of the righteous [i. euen his posteritie] shall escape. [vz. iudgements and punishments sent from God, though sometimes it pleaseth him to cor∣rect them to their amendement: q.d. not only the godlie, but their posteritie shall be deliuered; whereas the vngodlie, though he get many to take his part shall not escape, when as the godlie shall deliuer both himselfe and o∣thers.]  Vers. 22. As a iewell of gold [vz. is an vnseemely thing] in a swines snout, [vz. because the swine will defile it with dirt and myre] so is a faire wo∣man, [i. so is it vnseemely for one to be indued with beautie, which indeede is a good gift from God] which lacketh discretion. [vz. to gouerne her selfe mo∣destlie, soberlie, and in the feare of God: q.d. beautie doth as little become a  mad or foolish woman, as a precious iewell doth become a sowe.] Vers. 23. The desire of the righteous is only good, [i. they desire nothing but that which is good, for that word only is an exclusiue particle, shutting out euill things. Not meaning, that they neuer wish euill, but rather that for the most part they desire good] but the hope of the wicked [i. the wicked may hope or looke for nothing els] but indignation. [i. vengeance from God, or els such thinges  as shall vexe and grieue them, and make them angrie.] Vers. 24. There is [vz. a man, putting it also for a certaine number of men] that scattereth, [i. liberally bestoweth the goods and possessions, which God hath blessed him with all: see Psalme 112.9.] and is more increased: [vz. in riches and abun∣dance, through the speciall blessing of God, and the right vse of these things] but he that spareth more [vz. either from himselfe or others, which is the common fault of couetous persons and niggards] then is right, [i. than he may and ought to doo] surely commeth to pouertie. [vz. notwithstanding all his pinching and sparing: q.d. so farre off is it, that the niggardly man shall increase and waxe rich, as the liberall doth, that he shall haue euery day lesse  than other, and become more needie.] Vers. 25. The liberall person [vz. towards others, but specially towards the godlie poore] shall haue plentie: [vz. giuen him from the Lord] and he that watereth, [vz. others with his store] shall also haue raine. [vz. giuen him from the Lord, that he may more and more doo good vnto others. The metaphores of watering, and hauing raine, would bee considered, and marke that this verse differeth not much  from the next before going.] Vers. 26. He [vz. whosoeuer he be] that with∣draweth
the corne, [vz. from the market, where it should be sold, keep  against a deare time] the people will curse him: [i. speake, as iustly they haue occasion, all manner of euill of him, as that he is couetous, miserable, &c. see for this fault Amos 8.5, 6, &c.] but blessing shall be vpon the head of him [i. he himselfe shall be blessed and well spoken of amongst men, whosoeuer he be, see Chapter 10.6.] that selleth corne. [vz. plentifully and good cheape, so that the poore may be prouided for: vnderstanding by corne in this verse, all manner of vittaile and prouision.] Vers. 27. He that seeketh [vz. careful∣lie  and diligentlie: for so much doth the Hebrue word import] good things [vz. not only for himselfe, but for other men also] getteth fauour: [vz. there∣by, and that both before God and men] but he that seeketh euill, [vz. either a∣gainst himselfe or others, whether it bee of ignorance or of knowledge, see verse 19. of this Chapter, where he turneth it by following euill] it shall come to him. [vz. certainlie and assuredlie, and that many times before he thinke of it, or be aware of it.] Vers. 28. He that trusteth [vz. any whit at all, yea  though it be neuer so little] in his riches, [i. in the riches which GOD hath giuen him, or he hath gotten] shall fall: [vz. as a withered leafe, or rotten bowe, falleth from the tree: see the trueth of this Luke 12.15, 16, &c.] but the righteous shall florish [vz. excéedingly, or very much: meaning by florish∣ing, prospering] as a leafe. [vz. which shall not fall or fade, as Psalme 1.3. The word turned here a leafe, signifieth also a branch, as Nehem. 8.15.] Vers. 29. He that troubleth his owne house, [vz. by vnwise gouernment of the  things which God hath giuen him, either prodigally consuming them on the one side, or miserably sparing them on the other: vnderstanding by these words his owne house, all the things that God hath blessed him withall, as patrimonie, goods, &c.] shall inherite the winde, [i. shall bring to passe, that his possession shall goe into the winde as it were, and he haue nothing left him: q.d. he shall be brought to such extremitie, that he shal haue nothing left him but the ayre] and the foole [i. the wicked man brought into such want] shall be seruant. [i. shall be glad to be a seruant] to the wise in heart. [i. to him that is truely wise in God.] Vers. 30. The fruite of the righteous [i. the com∣modities  and fruites which men may receiue from a righteous person] is as a tree of life, [i. as a tree that giueth life: see before Chapt. 3.18. He mea∣neth, that the righteous man is liuely in his doctrines and precepts] and he that winneth soules, [i. gaineth and getteth men to God, and bringeth them to the sound knowledge and worship of his Maiestie: see for this phrase Iames 5.20.] is wise. [i. is right wise, or wise in God, vsing his knowledge and talent, not only to his owne good, but to the good of others.] Vers. 31.  Behold, [q.d. I speake a strange and wonderfull thing, therefore marke it well] the righteous shall be recompenced [vz. with iudgements from God, for his transgressions] in the earth: [i. while he liueth here vpon the earth] how much more then the wicked and the sinner. [q.d. how much more shall they feele Gods heauie iustice vpon them. By wicked and sinner he vnder∣standeth
men notoriously euil, as Psalm. 1.1, 6. And for the true meaning of this place see. 1. Peter 4.17, 18. &c. Do. Verse 1. Teacheth vs to auoide falshood, and to practise truth in all our dealings. Vers. 2. teacheth vs to auoide pride, and to imbrace true humilitie of minde. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, to followe vpright dealing, and to shunne all peruersnes, and frowardnes. Ʋers. 4. Teacheth vs, that riches, cannot put back from vs, Gods iustice for our sinnes, and that we should careful∣lie striue to holy conuersation. Ʋers. 5. Teacheth vs, that vpright dealing shall neuer want a blessing, and that the wicked, rather than he should not be punished, shall be ouertaken with his owne sinne. Verse 6. Deliuereth the selfe same doctrines. Vers. 7. Sheweth that death sent from God shall preuent the wicked, from enioying those things they hoped for. Verse 8. Setteth out Gods mercie towardes the good, and his iustice vpon the wic∣ked. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, to flie from hypocrisie, and to auoyde also all words that may hurte any. It teacheth also that the knowledge which God giueth his children, is very profitable, both for themselues and others. Vers. 10, 11. Teacheth, that it is a great blessing from the Lord to haue godly and wise Magistrates: and that it is a curse, where the Magistrates bee wicked and foolish: also that the people may reioyce, as in the prosperous estate of the good, so in the ruine and decay of the wicked. Ʋers. 12. Teacheth vs, to auoide all manner of contempt of others, and to learne holy silence, vn∣lesse great occasion be offred of speache. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, two things, first to auoide slaundering and the disclosing of secrets: secondly to bee faithfull in such matters, as be committed to our credit. Vers. 14. Teach∣eth vs, how necessarie it is, for men admitted to gouernement, to bee furni∣shed, with wisedome, experience and many other good graces: as also what good effectes and holie blessings doo flowe and followe therupon. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, to take heed and beware of suretiship. Ʋers. 16. Sheweth, that modestie in women, is a notable meane to bring them to credit. Verse 17. Teacheth vs, both to take heede of cruelty and hard heartednes, and also to excercise the deedes of pittie and mercie. Ʋerse 18. Teacheth vs, what great ods there is, both betweene the workes, and therewardes, of the god∣ly and vngodly. Vers. 19. Setteth out the vnlikely reward of good and e∣uill dealing. Vers. 20. Teacheth vs, to auoide frowardnes of heart, and to labor to a sincere life and conuersation. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, first that no strength and pollicie, can preuent or driue away Gods vengeance that shal light vpon the wicked: also that God is gratious, to the faithfull and their seede. Ʋers. 22. Teacheth, that outward proportion and comelines of bo∣die without holy qualities of the mind, is not onely nothing worth, but a great disgrace also, to the partie that hath it. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, to wish and desire good things onely. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, to practise liberality, and to abhorre niggardlines. The same doth also, vers. 25, 26. teache vs,
that if God haue blessed vs with store we should prouide, that other might be plenteously releeued, and not couetouslie to hoord vp against the day of dearth. Verse 27. Teacheth vs, to procure good, both to our selues and o∣thers, as much as in vs lyeth. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, to cast away from vs, vaine trust and confidence in worldly riches. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, for feare of after-claps to beware of prodigalitie on the one side, and of misera∣ble pinching on the other side. Verse 30. Teacheth vs, to haue a care, for the conuersion and winning of others to GOD. Verse 31. Teacheth vs, that abundance of plagues, shall fall euen in this life, vppon the impenitent sinners. CHAP. 12. Co. THis Chapter hangeth vpon the former thus; In the last verse of the other he sheweth what great iudgements from God are prepared for the wicked e∣uen in this life, and in the first verse of this Chapter, he sheweth one good meane, whereby those punishments may be auoyded, to wit, in reuerent hearing of holy counsel, and in laboring to profit by the corrections, which God layeth vpon men. Di. I Suppose this chapter, as the former may be diuided into three partes: the first reacheth from verse 1. to the end of the 8. Wherein hee intreateth of  obedience to good counsell, and Gods corrections, of Gods fauour towards the good, and his iustice towards the bad, of the stabilitie of the righteous, and the fleeting estate of the wicked, of a good and euill woman, of the thoughts, wordes, and counsels of the good and bad. The second parte rea∣cheth,  from verse 9. to the end of the 16. wherein hee dealeth against the vaineglorious, the cruell, the idle, the proude, and the wrathfull persons, commending on the other side, the contented minde, pitifulnes of heart, diligence in labor, true humilitie, and the brideling of hate or anger. The third reacheth from vers. 17. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaketh  against bitter wordes, lying speeches, deceite, idlenes, &c. And contrari∣wise intreateth of truth, quietnes in words, diligence in trauaile, and of the vnlikely reward of the good and bad. Se. Vers. 1. HE [vz. who soeuer he bee] that loueth [vz. in∣déede and vnfeinedly] instruction, [vz. either from God by his word, or from men as his Mi∣nisters] loueth knowledge: [i. sounde and fincere iudgement: and the reason hereof is, because that by instruction men come to knowledge: q.d. hee that loueth and liketh of a good meane whereby a good thing is obteyned, doth loue and like of the good thing it selfe] but he that hateth correction [vz. either from God or man] is a foole
[i. a wicked person. He meaneth, that the righteous, who yeeldeth to the in∣structions and corrections of the Lord, doth not onely thankfully receaue the same, but is prouoked thereby, more and more to growe vp in heauenlie  wisedome: see Psalme. 94.12.] Vers. 2. A good man [i. hee that hath care and conscience, both to knowe, and to performe good things] getteth fauour of the Lord [i. is accepted and well liked of the Lorde: and yet hee maketh mention of getting, because we must by prayer and other holy meanes séeke it, though we knowe it is by God speciall gifte, that so we may be prouoked to praye, and exercise our faythe] but the man of wicked imaginations [i. hee who thinketh nothing els but euill against other, yea and himself also in the  end] will he condemne. [i. the Lord wil pronounce him guiltie of wickednes] Vers. 3. A man cannot be established [vz. long to continue vpon the earth] by wickednes [i. by deuising and performing euill things: q.d. let the wicked thinke by their wickednes to make their state strong, yet is it a matter im∣possible, that they should long continue and indure,] but the roote of the righ∣teous [i. the righteous himselfe and all thinges whatsoeuer appertayning to him] shall not bee moued. [vz. for euer: it seemeth to bee the same in other wordes which is expressed before chap. 10.25. And he maketh mention of the roote, because if the roote bee sound and prosper, the body and braunches  cannot chuse but doo well.] Vers. 4. A vertuous woman [vz. such a one, as is described afterwards in this booke. chap. 31.10, 11. &c.] is the crowne of hir husband [i. is a great glorie, honor, and credit vnto him: see Philip. 4.1. 1. Thessal. 2.19. also 1. Corinth. 11.7.] but she that maketh him asha∣med [vz. by her euill manners, folly, or wicked life, meaning also, by making him ashamed, bringing of him into contempt amongst men] is as corrupti∣ons in his bones [i. as greeuous and paynefull vnto him, and almost as incu∣rable, as greeuous diseases, that haue not onely eaten the flesh, but entered  into the bones.] Vers. 5. The thoughts of the iust are right [i. they thinke vpon iust, right, and holy things] but the counsels of the wicked [i. their con∣spiracies, and practises] are deceitfull [i. full of crafte and subtiltie: he oppo∣seth to the godly, the wicked, and to their thoughtes, the subtilties and crafts  of the vngodly.] Vers. 6. The talking of the wicked [i. all their words and speech is to lye in waite for bloud [i. tendeth all to this end, to spoyle men and to take their liues from them:] but the mouth of the righteous [i. good mens words and speeches: see chap. 10.31.] will deliuer [vz. from danger and  destruction] them. [i. those, for whose life, the wicked lye in waite.] Vers. 7. God ouerthroweth the wicked [vz. thorowe his iust iudgement against them for their sinnes: or it may bee turned thus,] the wicked ouerthrowe them∣selues [vz. thorow their owne vngodlines] and they are not: [vz. to be found amongst men aliue, but dye and decaye: see Ierem. 31.15. and Matth. 2.18.] but the house of the righteous [i. he and all whatsoeuer apperteyneth vn∣to him] shall stande. [vz. firme and sure and not be shaken: see chap. 10.25.  chap. 11.21.] Vers. 8. A man [vz. of what state or condition so euer he
be] shall be commended [vz. amongst men] for his wisdome: [i. for his wise, and sincere handling of matters: it may be vnderstoode also, as though hee should be commended, according to the measure and proportion that he hath receaued of it] but the froward of heart [i. he that doth things rashly and fro∣wardly] shall be despised. [vz. both of God and men.] Vers. 9. He that is  despised [vz. of other men] and is his owne seruant, [q.d. and yet notwith∣standing, is sufficient of himselfe, dooing his owne busines, wheresoeuer it be] is better [i. is in a better case, and that by many degrees] than hee that boasteth himselfe [vz. of his great honor, riches, &c.] and lacketh bread. [i. suffereth want, and hath little or nothing to mainteyne himselfe with all. For bread here is put for all manner of mayntenance.] Vers. 10. A righte∣ous  man [i. a good and faithfull dealing person] regardeth the life of his beast, [i. hath a good eye to preserue it, meaning by this speeche that hee is merci∣full, if to beastes, much more to men: q.d. he is so gentle and curteous, that he neglecteth not his owne cattell, but giueth them their meate, attendance, and all other things necessary in due time, how much more then doth he care for his houshold and needy persons] but the mercies of the wicked [vz. if hee haue any at all, which also may be doubted of] are cruell [i. tend euen to cru∣eltie, and haue crueltie mingled with them. Some reade it thus,] but the mercies of the wicked, are the mercies of a cruell man [i. they haue no more mercies, then a cruell and outragious person hath.] Vers. 11. He that  tilleth his land [i. is faithfull and paynefull in his calling, for hee putteth one sorte, vz. husbandrie for all] shallbe satisfied with bread [i. shall not onely haue sufficient maintenance, but fulnes of it, hee vseth the worde bread, for meate, drinke, cloth, and all things necessarie, for the maintenance of mans life,] but he that followeth [vz. as an example in his dealings and behauior, and trade of life] the idle [i. idle headed fellowes, and such as giuing them∣selues to vanitie, woulde not followe any honest trade, or occupation. The same word, is turned Iudges 9.4. vaine.One referreth it rather to the things than to the persons, and indeed I suppose the Antithesis or comparison would better stand so] is destitute of vnderstanding [i. of right vnderstand∣ing, how wise so euer he seeme notwithstanding in his owne eyes.] Vers. 12. The wicked desireth, [vz. very greatly and earnestlie] the net of euills  [i. all manner of meanes, whereby he may cast others into many euills and mischiefes, and so hurt and grieue them. Some turne it thus] the net of euill [vz. men: q.d. he wisheth to vse the same deceites to oppresse good and inno∣cent people with all, that the wicked vse. Some turne it thus] the wicked desireth the ayde of euills [i. ayde and defence against them: q.d. he hath an earnest desire to be established and defended from all euills, but his desire is in vaine, as vers. 3. of this chap. and this I rather like of] but the roote of the righteous [see before vers. 3. of this chap.] giueth fruite. [I would rather read giueth it, [vz. defence against euill and mischiefe.] Vers. 13. The euill man  is snared [vz. fast, and caught very sure] by the wickednes of his lippes, [i. by
his wicked wordes vttered with his lippes: q.d. the naughty man, by his owne lewde words, bringeth all manner of greefe and destruction vpon him∣selfe] but the iust shall come out of aduersitie [vz. by the wisedome of his words and speech, hee shall escape great affliction, and manifolde dangers, meaning, that eyther by the wise weighing of his words, he taketh heed of distresse, or if he fall into any trouble, doth thereby deliuer himselfe from the  same.] Vers. 14. A man [i. a good and wise man] shall be satiate with good things [i. shall obteyne plenty and abundance of good things] by the fruite of his mouth, [i. by the good, wise, and holy words which he vttereth with his mouth, as thankes giuing is called the fruite of the lippes, Heb. 13.15: q.d. euery good man shall receaue moste large and excellent fruite of his speech, when he shall speake learned, right, and holy things] and the recompence of a mans hands, shall God giue vnto him [i. God will recompence him, meaning euerie man according to the works done in this flesh: and so in this parte of  the verse, he passeth from wordes to deedes.] Vers. 15. The way of a foole [i. the trade of life and conuersation which hee affecteth, yea whatsoeuer thing he liketh, vnderstanding by foole, a peruerse wicked man] is right in his owne eyes: [i. seemeth so to be in his owne iudgement, how crooked & froward soeuer it bee before God and good men] but he that heareth counsell [i. good and holy counsell, meaning also by hearing of it, practising and obeying of it] is wise. [vz. in deed: q.d. whatsoeuer a foole dooth, he dooth it without aduise or counsell of other men, why so? Because he is caried away, with an ouer∣weeuing of his owne deuises, whereas the wise man vseth other mens coun∣sels,  and trusteth not to himself.] Vers. 16. A foole in a day [i. very quick∣lie and soone, yea euen in that day and at that present, wherein he shall be pro∣uoked to wrath, shall be knowne to be a foole, because he cannot suppresse his raging wrath] shal be knowne by his anger: [vz. against others: q.d. he can∣not put off or defer his wrath, but by and by manifesteth it, and so withall be∣wrayeth his folly] but he that couereth shame [vz. offered vnto him, by some iniury or outrage: he meaneth not here to allow of hypocrisie and dissimu∣lation, but that whosoeuer hee is, which can paciently put vp wronges, of∣fered or done him, and stirreth vp no brawles or contentions, but rather will suffer than reuenge, or declare his rage and furie vnto men, (which thinge also after a sort, might purchase shame to himselfe) hee I say, that  thus can doo] is wise [vz. indeede, or truely wise.] Verse 17. Hee that speaketh [vz. from his heart, and that plainly and openly] trueth, [i. true things] will shewe righteousnes: [i. will not bee either afraide or ashamed to declare too, and before others his vpright dealing] but a false witnes vseth de∣ceit. [i. all manner of deceit both in heart and word, that he may the more  cunningly couer his craft.] Vers. 18. There is [vz. a man, meaning there∣by great numbers in the world: see Chapt. 11.24. Also Chapt. 13.7.] that speaketh words like the pricking of a sword: [I would rather turne it,] like the persings or thrustings in, or through with a sword, [that is, that speaketh such
sharpe, bitter, and pernicious words, which pearce a man as much as gree∣uous thrusts with a swords poynt, whether it be by false witnes bearing, or otherwise by the euil speach and deadly poison of the tongue] but the tongue [i. the words and speaches, because they are vttered by the tongue] of wise men [i. of men which are truely wise indeede] is health. [i. healthfull and pro∣fitable both to themselues and others.] Vers. 19. The lippe of trueth [i. not  only true speaches, but specially and chiefly the persons vttering them] shall be stable for euer: [i. shall not only last and continue, but be alwaies like vnto themselues, not varying in tales or speaches] but a lying tongue [i. lyes and lyers] varieth incontinently. [i. are not onely variable in the matters they deale withall, but vanish away quicklie, because they are of no longer conti∣nuance but a moment.] Vers. 20. Deceit is in the heart of them that ima∣gine  euill: [vz. against others, meaning that they performe their mischiefes against others by craft and deceit: but I rather allowe his reading who tur∣neth it thus] deceit falleth into the heart of such as imagine euill: [i. the wic∣ked are many times destroyed by their owne subtiltie and craft, the conside∣ration whereof bringeth vnto them most gréeuous sadnes] but to the coun∣sellers of peace [i. to such as shall perswade and counsell men to good things] shall be ioy. [vz. both of heart and bodie, and so the Antithesis agreeth very aptly.] Vers. 21. There shall none iniquitie [i. no gréeuous punishment for  sinne or iniquitie committed, for he doth not mind to exempt good men from sinning in this life] come [vz. from the Lord] to the iust: [i. to the good and holie man: q.d. whatsoeuer iudgements fall vpon him for sinne, he shall not liue long in the same, as though he were an abiect: sée vers. 13. of this Chap. but the wicked are full of euill. [vz. both of transgression, and of punishment for it, committed against God.] Vers. 22. The lying lippes [i. both lyes and  lyers] are abomination to the Lord: [i. the Lord cannot abide them: see Chapter 6.17. Also Chapter 11.1.] but they that deale truely [vz. both in word and déede] are his delight. [i. are such as he taketh delight and pleasure in: see Chapt. 11.20.] Vers. 23. A wise man conceileth knowledge: [i. the  knowledge that he hath, not that he kéepeth it close altogether, but hauing it in him as it were in a treasure house, doth vtter it in fit time and place, and as may bring greatest grace to the hearers] but the heart of the fooles publi∣sheth foolishnes. [i. as they haue conceiued foolishnes in their hearts, so they spare not shameleslie as it wre to vtter it: see Eccles. 10.3.] Vers. 24. The  hand of the diligent [i. such as be laborious and painefull in their callings: he putteth a part for the whole] shall beare rule: [vz. ouer others, Chapter 10. verse 4. He saith, maketh rich: and here he vseth another word, because that through riches they obtaine power, and so get rule ouer others] but the idle shall be vnder tribute. [vz. of others, meaning hereby that they shall be in slauerie and very poore estate.] Vers. 25. Heauines [vz. of heart, specially  if it be once déepely rooted and setled in the same] in the heart of man [vz. of what calling or state soeuer he bee] doth bring it downe: [i. doth through sor∣rowe
depresse and kéepe it vnder, meaning the heart: for we know that sad∣nes doth no whit at all profite men, but rather cast them many times into deadlie and gréeuous diseases] but a good word [i. euen one word of comfort spoken chearefully] reioyceth it. [i. many times maketh it glad againe: the  plaine proofe of this is euery mans owne particular experience.] Vers. 26. The righteous is more excellent [vz. by many degrées, and in euery respect] than his neighbour: [vz. who careth not for righteousnes and goodnes: and this he speaketh, because the world and common sort of people think the iust men to be abiects] but the way of the wicked [i. the order of life and conuersa∣tion wherein they walke] will deceiue them. [vz. at the last, howsoeuer they florish in the pleasures of sinne, which last but a while, as the Apostle saith to  the Hebrewes.] Vers. 27. The deceitfull man [i. he that giueth himselfe to deceit] rosteth not [i. hath neither pleasure nor profite of that] that he tooke in hunting: [i. of that which he atchieued, either by intollerable paines taking, as hunters doo, or els by stealth and indirect meanes, such as hunters vse many times: the reason is, because that betweene his mouth and the morsell he hath many discommodities and lets, so that he cannot inioye that which he hath gotten] but the riches of the diligent man [i. of him that tra∣uaileth faithfully and painfully] are precious. [i. excellent and very good. One readeth it thus] but the diligent person enioyeth the precious substance of a man. [i. is made owner and possessor of precious and excellent things, be∣longing  many times to a wicked person.] Vers. 28. Life [vz. both true life in this world, and eternall life in the world to come] is in the way of righte∣ousnes, [i. is to be found and obtained by a righteous and holie conuersation] and in that pathway [vz. of a good and holie life] there is no death. [vz. which is eternall, though the bodilie death apprehend the good as well as the bad, as appeareth by many examples. Do. Verse 1. Teacheth vs, that he that harkeneth to good counsell, and profi∣teth by the Lords corrections, is in a blessed estate: as on the other side, he must needes be miserable that thriueth not by the one or the other. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, that God loueth the good and hateth the euill, also that euill thoughts and imaginations are sinne before God. Verse 3. Teacheth vs, that wickednes hath no certaintie or assurance, but that godlines shall con∣tinue and abide for euer and euer. Ʋerse 4. Teacheth vs, what a blessing it is to haue a good wife, and what a curse it is to haue an ill wife. Verse 5. Sheweth, what great difference there is betweene the thoughts of the wic∣ked, and the deuises of the godlie. Vers. 6. Sheweth, that the very words of the wicked sauour of crueltie, and the speaches of the godlie tend to mer∣cie. Vers. 7. Setteth out Gods iudgements against the wicked, and his mer∣cie towards the good. Ʋerse 8. Teacheth vs, that wisedome is praise wor∣thie, and follie and frowardnes shall be despised. Ʋerse 9. Teacheth vs, that the poore man in his pouertie is better, than the vainglorious boaster that
hath nothing. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, that we should haue care for the pre∣seruation of those things which God giueth vs, much more for reasonable creatures: it teacheth vs also that the wicked haue no bowelles of compas∣sion at all. Verse 11. Teacheth vs, to followe the calling wherein God hath placed vs with all diligence, and to auoide idlenes. Verse 12. Teacheth vs, that no aide that the wicked hath or can desire will helpe them against Gods iudgements. Verse 13. Teacheth vs, that euill words are hurtfull to the partie vsing them, and good words profitable to the partie vsing them, and to others also. Ʋerse 14. Teacheth vs, that God rendereth vnto euery one according to his words and deedes. Ʋers. 15. Teacheth vs, not to bee wise in our owne eyes: also to hearken to the graue counsell of others. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, that wrath and rage of men bewraieth their follie, and pa∣cient bearing of reuenge argueth great godlines. Ʋerse 17. Teacheth vs to speake truth, and to auoide false witnes bearing. Verse 18. Teacheth vs to abstaine from sharpe and bitter words, and to giue our selues to charitable and profitable speaches. Ʋerse 19. Teacheth vs, that as godlie men are con∣stant in their speaches, so the wicked, and such as giue themselues to lying, varie alwaies in their talke. Verse 20. Teacheth vs, to perswade and coun∣sell men to good things. Verse 21. Teacheth vs, that in the middest of all pu∣nishments vpon the wicked, God will either fatherly correct, or els altoge∣ther deliuer his children. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs to abhorre lying, & to speake the truth from the bottome of our harts. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, to take heed that we do not bewray the follie of our hearts by much babling: also that wee direct our speach in such sort to such persons, and at such time, as may bring most grace to the hearers. Verse 24. Teacheth to vse diligence in our callings, & to auoide idlenes. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, to speake good & com∣fortable words to the heauie hearted & sorrowfull. Verse 26. Teacheth vs, that the godlie are better, than the wicked of the world account of them: also that sinne is deceitfull. Ʋerse 27. Teacheth vs, that the wicked, thorow Gods iust iudgement vppon them, haue not the vse of those things which they enioy and possesse. Verse 28. Teacheth vs to followe the way of godli∣nes, because it doth not only deliuer vs from eternall death, but bring vs to euerlasting life. CHAP. 13. Co. IN the 28. verse of the last Chapter, he earnestly commended a holie conuersa∣tion. And in the first verse of this Chapter, he sheweth by what meanes this may be attained, vz. by diligence both in hearing and obeying of all holie in∣structions. Di. THe Chapter may bee diuided into three parts: the first reacheth from  verse 1. to the end of the 8. wherein he teacheth the right vse of the eares
and mouth, commendeth diligence and dispraiseth idlenes, and speaketh against lying, slaundering, hypocrisie, & other manner of wickednesses. In  the second, he speaketh against pride, contention, vaine riches, contempt of the word, and follie: commending on the other side, the righteous, the wise, the diligent, the obedient person, and such as vnfeignedly feare God,  from verse 9. to the end of the 16. In the third part he dealeth against vn∣faithfull messengers, contempt of instruction, wicked companie, &c. and commendeth faithfulnes, obedience, choyce of companie, Gods fauour to∣wards his children, and the good which commeth by moderate correction: from verse 17. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. A Wise sonne [i. childe, whether it bee sonne or daughter] will obey [vz. in deed and truth] the instruction of his father: [i. which his father shall giue him: vnderstanding by the name fa∣ther, parents, as by the name sonne before, child] but a scorner [i. such a one as doth de∣spise the doctrines of wisedome] will heare no rebuke. [vz. from other men for his amende∣ment: meaning by hearing, regarding: for this word scorner, see Chapt. 9.  7, 8, 12.] Vers. 2. A man [i. a good and wise man] shall eate good things [i. shall finde and enioy them] by the fruite of his mouth: [i. by his good and wise words: see Chapt. 12.14.] but the soule of the trespassers [i. the trespassers themselues both in bodie and soule: and yet he maketh mention of the soule, because it is the principall part] shall suffer violence. [vz. from God, and ma∣nie  times from men, as Genes. 6.11.] Vers. 3. He that keepeth his mouth, [vz. from idle or euill speach: meaning hereby, such a one as hath a care, not in words to passe the bounds of his calling, or godlines] keepeth his life: [vz. in peace, quietnes and prosperitie] but he that openeth his lippes, [vz. to lewd and wicked speaches: in the word opening is a metaphore taken from har∣lots, as appeareth Ezech. 16.25.] destruction shall be to him. [i. he shall bée  destroyed by his lewd words and speaches.] Vers. 4. The sluggard lusteth, [i. he hath a desire or wishing onely, and nothing els] but his soule [i. he him∣selfe] hath nought [vz. besides his bare wishes: q.d. the slothfull desire many things, and feede themselues with bare wishes, but in the meane while, be∣cause they labour not, they obtaine nothing of the things which they desire] but the soule of the diligent [i. the diligent and laborious person himself] shall haue plentie. [vz. of all good things, yea more many times than they wish or  desire: see Chapt. 11.25. Vers. 5. A righteous man hateth [vz. vnfeigned∣lie, and euen as it were a filthie and stinking thing] lying words: [i. lyes, and all things thereto appertaining] but the wicked causeth slander and shame. [vz. to himselfe and others by his lying speaches: meaning also, that he doth so much loue and imbrace falshood, that he will be contented to be coun∣ted
a filthie person, and hated of all good men, rather than depart from it.] Vers. 6. Righteousnes [i. faithfull and holie dealing] preserueth [vz. before  God and euen in this life] the vpright of life: [i. such as leade an vpright and blessed life] but wickednes [vz. against God and men] ouerthroweth [vz. through Gods iust iudgement] the sinner. [i. the notorious euill men: see Chapt. 1.10.] Vers. 7. There is [vz. a man, that is sundrie men: see Chap.  12.18.] that maketh himselfe rich, [vz. by his boasting words, and so would be accounted by the pompe he beareth amongst men] and hath nothing: [q.d. and yet for all that, he is worth little or nothing] and [vz. there is another man, or another sort of people] that maketh himselfe poore, [i. would seeme so to be before men] hauing [vz. notwithstanding that] great riches. [i. great abundance of riches. Most interpreters agree, that the first part of the sen∣tence is spoken against vaineglorious boasters, amongst whom little or no∣thing is to be had: and the latter to bee vnderstood of such as haue contented mindes: the former I like well, but the latter I like not, because the compa∣rison is not so fit, and therefore I would haue it to bee vnderstood as before, vz. of feigning pouertie, when they haue great abundance.] Vers. 8. A  man [i. euery man that hath wit and vnderstanding] will giue [vz. francklie and freelie] his riches [i. all the riches that he hath] for the ransome of his life: [i. for the redemption of it, or to redeeme it, if he bee in danger to lose it: see Psalme 48.7, 8.] but the poore [vz. man] cannot heare [vz. as to redresse it] the reproch. [vz. vttered against him. His meaning, I thinke, commeth to this much in effect, that riches and pouertie haue both their commodities and their discommodities: for as to rich men their riches are profitable for the maintenance and pompe of this life, and pouertie is discommodious to the poore; so riches are sundrie times discommodious to the rich, because they procure many dangers to the owners thereof, and yet pouertie is com∣modious at the least in this respect, because mens hearts are free from the feare of enuious persons, who would insnare them, and they haue not so rea∣die an occasion to reuenge themselues as otherwise.] Vers. 9. The light of  the righteous [i. the great blessings and good things which in great plentie shall be powred forth vpon them. It is vsuall in the Scripture, by light to vnderstand all good and prosperous things: and I take it to be a metapho∣ricall speach borrowed from the light of the Sunne, which first rising, and afterwards increasing in brightnes, séemeth it selfe to reioyce, whilest lighte∣ning all things, and euen the whole face of the earth it maketh them glad] reioyceth: [i. maketh glad both themselues, and other that behold it: q.d. the righteous shall continuallie enioy felicitie, glorie, life, gladnes, &c. see Psalme 97.11.] but the candle of the wicked shall be put out. [i. that little estate of fe∣licitie and prosperitie which they seeme to haue in this life, shall sodainlie va∣nish away: q.d. there is as great difference betweene the ioyes of the good and the bad, both in respect of the greatnes and continuance thereof, as is betwéene the Sunne and a candle, and their seuerall lights and continuance:
see Chapt. 4.18, 19.] Vers. 10. Only by pride [i. through pride of heart: meaning vnder the word only, that pride is not the only cause of contention, but one of the chiefest: for many times men braule euen of peruersnes and of fond emulation and enuie against other] doth man [i. doo men, for he spea∣keth of them all, as though they were but one] make contention: [i. stirre vp strife one of them with another] but with the well aduised [i. with such as both can giue good counsell, and will humblie hearken to other mens good speaches] is wisedome. [vz. to take heede that they kindle not strife, or foster  contention.] Vers. 11. The riches of vanitie [i. after some, vaine riches, which are so called, because they vanish away; but I suppose that he mea∣neth such riches as are gotten by any vaine, false, or vngodlie way whatsoe∣uer] shall diminish: [vz. certainlie, meaning that indeede they should bee brought to nothing and consumed] but he that gathereth [vz. riches and goods] with the hand, [i. with the labour of his owne hands] shall increase them. [vz. through Gods especiall blessing, for otherwise it cannot bee: see Chapt. 10.2, 4. Also Chapt. 12.24. His purpose is to commend diligence,  and to teach men to auoide idlenes, craft, and whatsoeuer els.] Vers. 12. The hope that is deferred, [i. the thing hoped for, if it be put off from time to time, and not quicklie performed] is the fainting of the heart: [i. it maketh a mans minde to faint and quaile] but when the desire [i. the thing desired, wi∣shed, and looked for] commeth [vz. vnto men, i. is granted them] it is as a tree of life. [i. it is a most sweete and pleasant thing, and as a man would say, a very proper and healthfull medicine for a minde that languisheth in lusting  and desiring: see Chapt. 3.18.] Vers. 13. He that despiseth the word, [vz. of almightie God, or the good word of exhortation drawne from the same] he shall be destroyed: [vz. certainly, and assuredly, through the iust iudge∣ment and vengeance of GOD vppon him] but he that feareth the com∣mandement, [vz. of GOD, vnderstanding by feare, an humble reue∣rence and loue, and by one commandement all commandements of God whatsoeuer, yea euen the whole lawe] he shall be rewarded. [vz. from the Lord: neither can the Papistes gather, neither neede any man feare out of this, merites; because there is a great difference betwixt desert, and  reward.] Vers. 14. The instruction of a wise man [i. such holie and wise instructions as hée giueth] is as the welspring of life [i. is not onely plen∣tifull of good thinges but also bringeth with it, both to himselfe, and those whome he instructeth life in this life, and afterwards eternall life: see chap. 10. vers. 11.] to turne away [vz. men: q.d. it serueth also to this ende, for this is added, for the more plaine and full declaration of the matter] from the snares of death [i. from such snares, as if men be caught therewith, kill them: he meaneth specially sinnes, which bring with them eternall death.] Vers.  15. Good vnderstanding [vz. of such things as God hath manifested vnto vs in his worde, vnderstanding also hereby good wit, holy wisedome, and the gift wisely and learnedly to vtter good things] maketh [vz. men that haue it]
acceptable [vz. both before God and men: see chap. 3.4.] but the way of the disobedient [i. their order of life, and course of conuersation] is hated. [vz. both of God, and also of good men.] Vers. 16. Euerie wise man [i. euery one that  is truely wise] will work [vz. the things that he doth] by knowledge [i. sound and right knowledge: q.d. whatsoeuer he doth, he will doo it with wisedome and iudgement, and not rashly] but a foole will spread abroad [i. bewray and publish] folly [i. his owne folly: see chap. 12.23.] Vers. 17. A wicked mes∣senger  [i. an vnfaithfull one, and such a one as dooth not truely execute his message or charge] falleth [vz. many times thorowe Gods iust iudgements, and that or euer he thinketh of it] into euill: [i. into affliction, sorrowe, grief, and punishment, and so hurting himself also, smarteth iustly, for his vnfaith∣fulnes] but a faithfull Ambassador [i. hee that faithfully performeth his charge] is preseruation [vz. to himselfe, to him or them that send him, and to those also, for whose cause he is sent.] Vers. 18. Pouertie and shame [vz.  from God, but yet in the presence of men] is to him [vz. whosoeuer he bee] that refuseth instruction: [vz. of goodnes: q.d. he that will not regarde good and holy counsell, shall fall into beggery, and be made a shame amongst men] but he that regardeth correction [vz. to followe it, and to become the better by it] shall be honored [i. he shall florish with riches and honor, and be accep∣ted both of God and men.] Vers. 19. A desire [i. the thinge desired, as  vers. 12. of this chap.] accomplished [vz. by good and holy meanes, for here he speaketh of the desiring of good things, and the lawfull accomplishment thereof] delighteth [vz. very greatly] the soule: [i. the party wishing or desi∣ring the same: one parte put for the whole, and yet hee dooth not without cause make mention of the soule, because in it is the quality or faculty of de∣siring] but it is an abhomination vnto fooles [i. a lothsome and tedious thing, yea such a matter as their affection dooth vtterly abhorre] to departe from e∣uill, [i. from that euill whereunto they are naturally giuen, and which they foster and feede in themselues, thorowe a vaine pleasure and delight in the same.] Vers. 20. He that walketh with the wise: [i. is conuersant and  familiarly acquainted with wise persons] shall be wise [i. thorowe Gods blessing shall become wise by meanes of wise speeches and talkes, that shal passe from them] but a companion of fooles [i. he that ioyneth himselfe in society and fellowship with the wicked] shall bee afflicted. [vz. euen as they themselues, either because he committeth sinne with them, or consenteth to euill: as Rom. 1.13.] Vers. 21. Affliction [i. punishment and vengeance  sent from the Lord] followeth [vz. euen as the shadowe doth the body, mea∣ning also, that it dooth euen pursue them so egerly, that it leaueth them not, till they be vtterly destroyed] sinners [i. peruerse and obstinate sinners: see chap. 11.31.] but vnto the righteous, God will recompence [vz. of his large liberality and goodnes] good, [i. all good things for this life, and the life to come.] Vers. 22. The good man shall giue [i. leaue behind him] inheritance  [i. goodes and lands to be inherited] vnto his Childrens Childerne [i. vnto his
posteritie for many generations: see Psalme. 128.6. he meaneth, that the Lord will in mercy shewe such fauour to good men, that not onely they them∣selues shall enioye their landes and liuing, but euen their issue after them, vnto many generations.] and the riches of the sinner [i. the goods and lands that he possesseth] is laid vp [vz. safe and sure] for the iust. [vz. that they may possesse and enioye them. Hee meaneth that neither the wicked them∣selues, nor their vngodly seede and posteritie after them shal inioy them, but the good shall haue them. How true this is, see Iob. 27.16, 17. see also Ester.  8.7, 11.] Vers. 23. Much foode [i. much graine and corne méete for foode: so is the word taken Gen. 42.2.] is in the feild [vz. that is well tilled and manured, though perhapes the soyle it self be somwhat barren] of the poore: [i. of that man, who though he be poore, yet notwithstanding is diligent in his labour] but the field is destroyed without descretion. [he meaneth, that the corne in the field, can come to little or no profit, where there is not good hus∣bandrie, and good gouernement. One readeth it thus:] But there is [vz. a man] who consumeth himselfe [i. both himselfe and all that he hath] thorowe sluggishnes [or els vnskilfulnes, for the word importeth both, and is set here against the knowledge and diligence of the poore laboring man: q.d. by idle∣nes and want of skill hee commeth to nothing, and is vtterly consumed.]  Ver. 24. He that spareth [i. withholdeth from the correction and chastising of his child,] his rodde, [i. the rodde of correction, which God hath committed into his hands] hateth his sonne: [i. his child, as ver. 1. of this chap. meaning that he is euen as though he did hate him, because that not correcting him, he is a cause, that he falleth into euill, by meanes whereof, he doth at the length, pul vpon him his owne destruction] but he that loueth him, [vz. vnfeinedly, and with the loue of a godly father] chasteneth him [vz. measurablye: and according to the offence committed] betime. [i. in good season, and while that he is tender and yong, least growing in yeres, he growe in strength and cou∣rage, and so either little regarde, or vtterly refuse, all fatherly correction.]  Vers. 25. The righteous eateth, [vz. of the giftes and blessings which God hath bestowed vpon him,] to the contentation of his minde: [i. to the satisfying of himself, for he noteth vnder that word, not onely contentednes, but abun∣dance also] but the bellie of the wicked [i. the wicked himselfe, a part for the whole, putting also bellie, for the stomack, wherein resteth appetite] shall want [vz. many times great store of Gods blessings: he meaneth that good men, haue alwaies sufficient and abundance, but the wicked neuer: see Psal. 34.10. also Psalme 37.16. Do. Verse 1. Teacheth children their duty, vz. to obey the good instructi∣ons of their parents: it teacheth vs also, to beware of scorning, and of con∣tempt of admonition. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, that the good wordes of good men are profitable both to themselues and others: also that the wicked shall not escape iudgement. Ʋers. 3. Teacheth vs, to be warie and circumspect
in our words, and to auoyde babling and much speech. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, to auoyde sluggishnes, and to bee painefull and faithfull in our callings. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, to abhorre lying. Vers. 6. Setteth out the vnlikelie rewarde of righteousnes and wickednes. Vers. 7. Teacheth to beware, as of vayne boasting on the one side, so of counterfeiting pouerty on the other side. Ʋers. 8. Teacheth vs, that riches and pouertie haue either of them, their profite, and their disprofits. Ʋers. 9. Teacheth vs, Gods fauour to∣wards the good, and his iudgements vpon the wicked. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that pride is the mother of strife: but they that are humble, will yeeld to good counsell and peace. Ʋers. 11. Teacheth vs, that euill gotten goods shall come to nothing: also that diligence and labor is a meane to get and increase riches. Vers. 12. Teacheth vs, to doo good quicklie and in good season, least otherwise the gift either come too late, or be not so acceptable. Ʋers. 13. Teacheth vs, that the contempt of Gods word, shall neuer escape vnpunished. Vers. 14. Teacheth vs, that good counsell is a good meane, to make men to auoyde the snares of sinne. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, that Gods gifts in any must be reuerenced, and sinne and iniquitie abhorred. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, to doo all things according to iudgement and discretion: and to take heed, that either by word or deede wee bewray not the follie of our harts. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs, to deale faithfullie in the charges wherein we are placed, both that wee may thereby auoyde euill and also procure good vnto our selues and others. Ʋers. 18. Teacheth vs, that contempt of good counsell is a meane of beggery and shame: as on the other side obedience to good speeches, is the high way to honor and estimation before GOD and men. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, that we may reioyce, when lawfull and holy things are done for vs; also that it is a very harde matter, to drawe the vn∣godly from sinne. Vers. 20. Teacheth vs, to make choyce of our companie, cleauing to such as are good, and flying from the euill. Vers. 21. Setteth out, the vnlikelie reward of the good and the bad from God. Vers. 22. Tea∣cheth vs, that good men thorowe Gods blessing, leaue their goods and lands to their posteritie, euen many ages togeather one after another: also that God in his iustice doth many times depriue the wicked of their wealth, and giueth it to the good. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, that labor is a meane to make men rich: also that for want of labor and good gouernement, many things are consumed. Vers. 24. Teacheth parents, to correct their chil∣dren, but yet so, that they doo it in measure, and in such sort, and at such a time, as it may doo the parties corrected most good, not onely for the time present, but also for the time to come. Ʋers. 25. Setteth out Gods fauor towards the good, and his iustice towards the wicked and vngodlie.
CHAPT. 14. Co. IN the latter end of the other chapter, he had spoken of Parents and children, and now he beginneth this chapter, with a teatie of women, passing on from thence, to describe generall dueties, appertayning to all states, ages, and sexes whatsoeuer. Di. THis chapter may bee diuided into foure partes. In the first hee intrea∣teth, of a wife and foolish woman, of the feare and contempt of God, of pride, and humilitie, of labor, and husbandrie, of a faithfull and lying wit∣nesse, of the scorner and wise person: of the foolish, and the prudent or righ∣teous  man, from vers. 1. to the end of the 9. In the second he intreateth of the heart or conscience, of the wicked and the Godly, of an vpright way, of hea∣uinesse of heart, of a wicked heart, of easines to beleeue euerie tale, and of the foolish and the wise man: from vers. 10. to the end of the 18. In the  third he speaketh of the euill persons, of the poore and rich, of the proud, and the mercifull, of euill thinkers and good men, of painfull labor and wicked words, of riches and follie, of a faithfull and lying witnes, and of the reuerence and feare of the Lord: from vers. 19. to the end of the 27. In the  fourth part, hee speaketh of kings and their power, of bridling anger, of en∣uie, of oppression and pitie, of the ends of the wicked and the godlie, of wis∣dome, iustice, and the fauor or displeasure of a Prince, and this reacheth from vers. 28. to the end of the chapter. Se. Vers. 1. A Wise woman [i. euery woman that is truely wise, fearing God, and regarding their hous∣hold affaires in holines and modestie,] buil∣deth her house [vz. not so much with out∣ward furniture and shewe, as while that by hir labor, and the right gouernement of her houshold, she doth by all meanes keepe, de∣fende, and increase the same] but the foolish [vz. woman, who is set against the wise woman mentioned before] destroy∣eth it [i. her house and familie] with hir owne hands [i. whilst that vnheede∣ly, by hir naughtie deedes, negligence, and euill gouernement, she suffereth  all things to goe to wracke.] Vers. 2. He that walketh in his righteousnes, [i. leadeth an vpright life voyde of hypocrisie: and it is called his righteous∣nes, not because he hath it of himselfe but because God in great mercie hath communicated the same vnto him] feareth the Lord [vz. vnfeinedly] but he that is leaude in his waies, [i. leadeth a leaud and lose life] despiseth him [i. of∣fereth as much as in him lyeth despite and contempt against the Lorde, be∣cause he despiseth his lawe: q.d. by the order of a mans life, euen as it were
by certaine fruites, may a man be knowne, whether he be godly or wicked.] Vers. 3. In the mouth of the foolish [i. in wicked mens wordes vttered with  their mouth] is the rodde of pride: [i. is there great and wonderfull pride, wherewith in the height of his minde, hee dooth not onely strike sometimes and hurt other men, but giueth other men standing by and hearing, staues, and clubbs as it were, to strike himselfe,] but the lippes of the wise [i. words vttered with their lippes, as sundrie times before] preserue [vz. from hurt and danger,] them [i. both the wise themselues, and others that depende vp∣on them: the reason is, because they obserue a measure, and wisedome in their speeches, that they neither hurt themselues nor others: see chap. 12.6.] Vers. 4. Where none Oxen are, [vz. such as can worke and goe to plowe, be∣ing  accustomed to the yoke and tillage. Vnderstanding hereby all worke∣men, and whatsoeuer appertayneth to husbandrie] there the crib is emptie: [i. there is nothing, no not for the beastes to eate, much lesse is there any thing in the barnes or storehouses: for vnder one hee vnderstandeth all the rest] but much increase commeth [vz. to the good husbandman,] by the strength of the Oxe, [vz. that laboreth in tillage, meaning thereby, all hus∣bandrie and tillage, with al things thereto appertaining whatsoeuer.] Vers. 5. A faithfull witnesse, [i. a faithfull man being called foorth to witnesse any  thing] will not lye: [vz. for any cause whether it be for fauor, feare, flatterie, or otherwise,] but a false record [vz. against men] will speake lies. [vz. for euerie cause and in euerie place: meaning that hee that hath falsified his faith in publike iustice, will not spare to strayne it in priuate speeches: see chap. 6.19.] Vers. 6. A scorner [i. he that scoffeth and scorneth at all good things,  see chap. 1.22.] seeketh [i. maketh as though he would seeke for, or els in∣deede seeketh for it, but not to a right end] wisedome, [i. Gods heauenlie wisdome] and findeth it not: [q.d. for all that hee findeth it not: the reason is because he seeketh it not as he should, that is diligently and earnestly, and to a right end, that is Gods glorie, and the comfort of his children,] but knowledge [vz. of God and his mysteries] is easie to him that will vnderstand [i. that hath a minde, and laboureth to atteyne it: and he saith it is easie, mea∣ning to be founde, because she offereth hir selfe vnto all: as chap. 1.20. And Chapter 8.1.] Vers. 7. Depart [vz. quickely and with hast] from the foo∣lish  man, [i. from the wicked man, that hath his heart seased and possessed, with all manner of follie and euill] When thou perceauest not in him [i. so soone, as thou findest that he hath not] the lippes of knowledge. [i. words that sauor of sounde knowledge, iudgement and wisedome.] Vers. 8. The wis∣dome  of the prudent [i. the wisdome, that he hath] is [i. consisteth specially in this] to vnderstand [i. to haue a diligent and watchfull eye to] his way: [i. his whole life, and the course thereof whether he imploye it, in words, déeds, or both: q.d. this is his duety, and herein his wisdome appeareth, diligent∣ly and with iudgement to weigh whatsoeuer hee attempteth, auoyding al∣waies rashnes,] but the foolishnes of the fooles is deceit [i. tendeth wholy and
altogether to deceit: q.d. the fooles in their folly, regard this thing specially to  deceaue others. Vers. 9. The foole [i. all foolish and wicked persons, as appeareth because the word is of the plurall number in the Hebrewe text] maketh a mocke of sinne, [i. maketh no more account of it, than of a mat∣ter of sport or play: see Chapter 10.23.] but among the righteous there is fauour. [i. vnfeyned good will one of them towards another. Some readeth it farre otherwise, and maketh another sense of it, which also I rather allow of, thus] Sinne [vz. which the wicked and vngodlie men com∣mit, and they knowe one by another,] maketh fooles to agree [vz. one of them with another: q.d. their partaking in wickednes, ioyneth the wickeds minds one of them towards another,] but among the righteous: [i. the good and holy people] that which is acceptable [vz. before God & good men,] ma∣keth agreement, [vz. among themselues: q.d. good things only tie good mens  minds together.] Vers. 10. The heart [vz. onely] knoweth [vz. perfectly and thorowly] the bitternes of his soule, [i. the heauines and grief that the soule in∣dureth] and the stranger [i. whatsoeuer is without] shall not meddle with his ioye. [i. with the ioye of the heart or soule. For the inward ioye which wee haue in the heart, none knoweth so well as wee our selues, neither are wee able by any outward signes to expresse the greatnes of the inward ioye. In the meane while we learne, not to giue our selues too much ouer to sadnes or  ioy, but to kéepe the golden rule of measure or mediocritie in both.] Ver. 11. The house of the wicked [i. he, and all that he hath] shall be destroyed: [vz. through Gods iust iudgement] but the tabernacle of the righteous [i. he him∣selfe, and all that appertaineth to him] shall florish. [vz. through the fauour and goodnes of God: against a large and faire house in outward shewe, he  setteth a weake and lowe tabernacle.] Vers. 12 There is a way [i. there is an order and course of life] which seemeth right to a man: [vz. in his owne iudgement] but the issues [vz. or ends] thereof [i. of that way] are the waies of death. [i. leade the high and readie way to death and destruction: because we are easilie deceiued with the shew of right, he counselleth vs not to stand to our owne imaginations, but to trie both our manners and opinions by  the rule of Gods word.] Vers. 13. Euen in laughing [i. while men laugh] the heart is sorowfull, [i. their hearts are possessed with great sorowe, though many times they would couer the same, and shake it off with laughter] and the end of that mirth [vz. which is made so from the téeth outward] is hea∣uines. [i. great and much sorowe, specially of heart: q.d. It falleth out many times, that while a man laugheth, and laboureth either to ease or shake off the griefe of his heart, that he returneth notwithstanding to sorowe and hea∣uines.]  Vers. 14. The heart [i. the man himselfe, and yet he speaketh of the heart, because there is the fountaine and beginning of euill] that declineth [i. turneth aside, either to the right hand or to the left, from the lawe and word of God] shall be saciate with his owne waies: [i. shall walke so long in the wic∣kednes that his owne heart hath deuised, that he shall bee filled as it were
with wickednes, and at the length be ouertaken with Gods iudgements for the same: see Chapter 1.31.] but a good man shall depart [vz. quicklie, and with as much speed as he may for feare of afterclappes] from him. [vz. that starteth a side from the obedience of Gods commandements.] Vers. 15.  The foolish will beleeue [vz. very easilie, and without any great perswasion] euery thing: [vz. which is tolde them] but the prudent will consider [vz. déep∣lie and earnestlie] his steppes. [i. the waies wherein he shall walke, and the things which he shall doo: q.d. he will doo nothing rashlie, but diligentlie will examine and weigh whether he ought to beleeue or doo it: see before vers. 8. of this Chapter.] Vers. 16. A wise man [i. a godlie wise man] feareth, [vz.  the euill that is for to come, meaning corporall punishments in this life, and eternall in the life to come] and departeth from euill: [i. sinne and transgres∣sion, which is a meane to drawe both temporall and eternall punishments vpon vs,] but a foole [i. a wicked man] rageth, [vz. very sore, both against God and men] and is careles. [vz. of that which is to come: q.d. he boldly runneth headlong into rage, and in his furie desperatly committeth all man∣ner of euils whatsoeuer, for he feareth not Gods iudgement, or any punish∣ments to come, and therefore casteth himselfe headlong into the same.] Vers. 17. He that is hastie to anger, [i. he that hath no stay of himselfe, but suf∣fereth  his anger against others speedelie to breake out] committeth follie, [i. not onely bewraieth the foolishnes of his heart, but is making post hast to great and greeuous sinnes] and a busie bodie [vz. such a one as is a conti∣nuall medler in other mens causes and affaires] is hated. [i. purchaseth ha∣tred to himselfe, both from God and man. The word which is here turned busie bodie, is in Hebrue, the man of imaginations, which phrase sundrie men take diuersly: some in euill parte, as though he should meane such a one, as is not hasty to wrath, but thinketh long vpon the mischief he will doo, and so he should compare two contrarie vices: the one is headlongnesse to anger: & the other is, malice long meditated and thought vpon. Other some take it in the good parte, meaning by a man of thoughtes, a man circumspect and wary in his words and deedes, and then it is read thus: He that is hastie to anger committeth follie, [yea he is hateful to a circumspect or wise man: and this I take to be the best, the holie Ghost minding to note the discommodi∣ties, that hastines to wrath bringeth with it.] Vers. 18. The foolish doo in∣herit  follie: [he meaneth not onely that folly is borne with them, and is as it were their inheritance, but also, that in processe of time, they doo receaue the fruite of their follie also,] but the prudent are crowned with knowledge. [hee meaneth that knowledge which they haue to performe good things by, is as it were a crowne vpon their heads, and that they shall in the end receaue al∣so, a moste glorious fruite of the same.] Vers. 19. The wicked shall bowe,  [vz. in token of reuerence and submission] before the good, [i. such as God maketh good:] and the wicked [vz. shall stand waiting thorow néede of one thing or other,] at the gates of the righteous. [i. before their doores. Thus it
pleaseth the Lorde, to make things some times fall out in this life, for the  comfort of the godly, and the example of the wicked.] Vers. 20. The poore [i. he that commeth by any meanes into pouertie] is hated, [i. lothed, and despised,] euen of his owne neighbour, [i. euen of him that in all reason and duety, should moste tender and pittie his case:] but the frends of the rich are many, [i. such as haue riches and store haue aboundance of frends, for the  world will loue his owne.] Vers. 21. The sinner [i. the notorious wicked man: as sundrie times before] despiseth his neighbour: [vz. because hée is poore] but he that hath mercie vpon the poore [i. pittieth them, and prouideth for them. Psalm. 41.1.] is blessed [vz. of God, or els by blessed, he meaneth, is praysed and commended amongst men. Some reade it thus.] This sin∣ner [vz. which hateth the poore man, and estéemeth the rich] shall be despised of his neighbour: [vz. for that his sinne: q.d. God will bring this iudgement vpon him, that hee which despiseth others, shall of others bee despised him∣selfe] but, O blessed is he [q.d. certainely of what state or condition so euer he bée, hée is blessed] that sheweth fauor [vz. either in countenance, word, or  déede] to the poore [i. to them that are in néede.] Vers. 22. Doo not they erre [vz. from the right way, which God hath prescribed vnto them] that ima∣gine euill [vz. against others. This demaunding noteth a more certaine and assured affirming of the matter: q.d. without doubt they goe astray, and therefore must of necessitie miserably perish,] but to them that thinke [vz. earnestly and déepely] on good things, [vz. towards God and man] to doo the same,] shall bee mercie and trueth: [vz. from the Lord bestowed vpon them, yea and men also shall deale mercifully and truely with them: q.d. God will faithfully performe his promises, in the accomplishment whereof, is manifested both his mercie and truth, and he will moue men also in truth  and mercie to deale with them.] Vers. 23. In all labor, [vz. which a man taketh vpon him, in his ordinary calling, vnderstanding by labor, diligent and faithfull imploying of a mans selfe in his owne function] there is abun∣dance, [vz. of good things and blessings, meaning that he which giueth him∣selfe painefully to followe labor in his calling, shall thriue and prosper,] but the talke of the lippes, [i. bare and vaine words, as when a man will labor with his tongue, and let the rest of his members bee idle,] bringeth onely want: [i. bringeth nothing with it but pouerty: that word onely I would re∣fer, rather to the first words, reading it thus, but the talke of the lippes onely, [q.d. where there is no more but labor in the mouth, and no performance of  it in deed, there must of necessity be beggery & pouerty. Ve. 24. The crowne of the wise is their riches [i. the riches which wise men thorowe Gods goodnes possesse, and haue them annexed vnto their wisdome, they are a singular or∣nament vnto them: this word crowne, is sundry times so vsed before] and the follie of fooles is foolishnes, [q d. though fooles haue neuer so great rich∣es they auaile them nothing, to remoue their folly, but their folly is meere folly notwithstanding all that, yea they are so farre of from adorning them,
that they rather serue to stayne them, because they are instruments and ar∣guments, to cause them more and more to bewray their folly.] Vers. 25.  A faithfull witnes [i. he that being called to witnes a matter, speaketh faith∣fullie and truely] deliuereth [vz. from danger and distresse] soules: [i. men, or persons: see Exod. 1.5. meaning such as were ready to be destroyed and were oppressed thorowe euill reports] but a deceiuer, [i. a deceitfull and false witnes] speaketh lies: [vz. against men, by which he indeuoreth to bring men to death and destruction: he setteth deceit against trueth, and speaketh of lies against deliuerance, because that lies many times bring men to great danger and destruction.] Vers. 26. In the feare of the Lord is an assured  strength [i. hee that hath a right and reuerent feare of Gods Maiestie plan∣ted in his heart, neede not feare any thing, for the Lord will bee an assured strength and defence vnto him] and his children, [i. Gods children, whome he hath in Christ begotten vnto himselfe, by the incorruptible seede of his word, that they might walke in his reuerence and feare: for I had rather re∣ferre it vnto them, than to the posteritie and children of good people, (though I knowe that sense also may stand) because good fathers many times, haue euill children,] shall haue hope. [i. an assured hope in the Lorde, which shall not make them ashamed, as Roman. 5.5.] Vers. 27. The feare of the Lord  [i. the right and reuerent feare of his Maiestie, planted in mens hearts] is as a wel-spring of life, [i. blessednes in this life, and eternall life in the world to come, doth aboundantly proceede from it: see Prouerb. 13.14. also chap. 10.11.] to auoide [i. to teache men to auoyd and shunne] the snares of death: [i. such snares, as in which if men be caught and escape not from them, there is no way, but death both of bodie and soule: see chap. 13, 14.] Vers. 28.  In the multitude of the people, is the honor of a king [i. it is a great honor and credit for a king, to haue many people willingly subiect vnto him, and rea∣dy to performe his will: and therefore for the increase of the same he ought to vse equitie and clemency, and not tyrranie and cruelty to lessen them,] and for the want of people commeth the destruction of the Prince. [vz. because his countreyes and territories, are easily subdued to the power of his ene∣mies, because he hath not forces sufficient wherewithall to resiste and so are the borders of his gouernement diminished. Vers. 29. Hee that is slowe to  wrath [vz. against other men, laboring to master the rage of his affections: sée Iames 1.19.] is of great wisdome: [i. declareth thereby, that God hath blessed him with abundance of wisdome, while he can refraine his rage, and doo nothing rashly] but hee that is of an hastie minde: [vz. against others, meaning such a one as is furious, and soone stirred vp:] exalteth follie, [i. doth openly commit it, as though hee woulde lifte it vp that all men might sée it: see vers. 17. of this chap.] Vers. 30. A sounde heart [i. a heart frée from  vicious affections, specially from euill will, and despight against others] is the life of the flesh: [i. bringeth health and soundnes to the whole man that hath it: hee putteth a parte for the whole] but enuie [vz. once conceaued
in the heart against other men] is the rotting of the bones: [i. will quickely consume a man, and bring him to his end, as the diseases, which lye in the boanes, and eate them vp: sée chap. 12.4. q.d. hee that is of a courteous, gentle, and free heart, shall haue a sound body, and passe away his dayes in quietnes reioycing other men also: but the trouble which enuie bringeth with it, leaueth not the strongest parts of the body sounde, but infecteth and corrupteth them, and maketh the whole man, in all mens iudgement filthie,  and stincking.] Vers. 31. He [vz. of what state or calling so euer hee bee] that oppresseth [vz. by fraude, force, slaunder, or other wise, for the word is generall, and reacheth to any kinde of oppression,] the poore, [i. the needie, and he that is not able to make his parte good against him] reprooueth, [vz. by his wicked and leud dealing,] him that made him: [i. God, who appoin∣ted that hee should bee poore, and this hee speaketh, because the wicked man thinketh, that God either cannot, or will not deliuer him out of his hands: it may bee taken also thus, that whosoeuer releeueth not the poore, despiseth God: [see Matt. 25.35. &c.] but he honoreth him: [i. the Lord, and why doth he honor him? Because hee dooth a worke appoynted by God in his lawe] that hath mercie on the poore. [i. sheweth him pittie and compassion:  see vers. 21. of this Chap.] Vers. 32. The wicked shall be cast away [vz. from the Lord, and from the enioying of his gracious presence, which the godly alwaies behold] for his malice: [1. for the euill and naughtines which he hath committed against God and man,] but the righteous hath hope [vz. of Gods fauor and goodnes towards him, and of his owne deliuerance] in his death, [i. either when he dyeth, or else is set in most grieuous distresses, the greatest whereof is death: q d. though he should dye, yet he would not doubte of Gods goodnes towards him. Psalme 23.4. for euen death it selfe  should be for his good.] Vers. 33. Wisdome [i. holy and heauenly wisdome from God,] resteth [vz. as it were in his owne house or dwelling place] in the heart [i. in the soule and minde] of him that hath vnderstanding: [i. of all that delight in wisdome and vnderstanding,] and is known [i. wisdome is made manifest] in the midst of fooles [i. openly and in their sight, so that they can pretend no ignorance. A worthie man readeth this latter parte by rea∣son of some supplie of words, farre better in my iudgement thus,] but the foolishnes which is in the foolish: [i. their owne follie and want of wit] offe∣reth it selfe to be knowne. [i. it cannot long bee dissembled, for they will pre∣sently manifest, and bewray the same: see Chap. 12.23. Chap. 13.16. and  also vers. 29. of this Chap.] Vers. 34. Justice, [i. the execution of iustice vprightly, without any fauor, feare, or hatred] exalteth a nation: [i. maketh it famous, not onely for the time present, but also establisheth the same in lastingnes for the time to come: see Chap. 16.12.] but sinne [vz. either a∣gainst GOD or man] is a shame to the people: [i. is an effectuall instrument,  to bring the people to shame and confusion.] Vers. 35. The pleasure of a king is [i. euery good and wise king, taketh great pleasure and delight] in
a wise seruant: [i. a héedie, circumspect, and diligent officer] but his wrath [i. the Kings great displeasure] shall be towards him [i. shall iustly fall vppon him] that is lewd. [vz. in his dealing and behauiour, by which he worketh shame, and discredite to his Prince: and indéede so much doth the Hebrew text yéeld. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, what great difference there is betweene a godlie wise woman, and a foolish wicked woman. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth vs, to haue care and conscience of a holie life before men: also, that wee cannot offer greater contempt against God, than to followe a lewd and prophane life. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, the discommoditie of rash and foolish speaches: also what benefite commeth by wise wordes. Ʋers. 4. Containeth a singular commendation of husbandrie, and painfull labour in seuerall callings. Ʋers. 5. Setteth out the great difference betweene a lying and a false wit∣nes. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that Gods holie wisedome cannot dwell in a scorning or scoffing spirit: also that Gods word and will, through the light that he giueth vs, is easie, though the Papistes, by accusing it of hardnes, would feare men from it. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, to shunne the companie of the wicked and vngodlie, after we haue had triall of them. Ʋers. 8. Shew∣eth, that holie wisedome teacheth men which imbrace her, to direct their whole conuersation. Verse. 9. Teacheth vs, in what little account vngodlie men haue sinne and wickednes. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, not to giue ourselues too much to mirth or ioye, but to keepe a good measure and proportion therein. Vers. 11. Setteth out the vnlikely reward of the good and the bad. Ʋers. 12. Teacheth vs, not to followe whatsoeuer seemeth good in our owne eyes, but alwaies, and in all things to aske counsell of the Lord in his word: it is also a strong place to ouerthrowe good intents. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, to auoide hypocrisie, both in our mirth and sadnes, and to bee that indeede which wee would seeme to bee. Vers. 14. Teacheth vs, that the sinne and disobedience of the wicked, shall neuer escape vnpunished. Vers. 15. Tea∣cheth vs, first not to bee too light to beleeue euery report that is brought vs: secondlie, deeplie and duelie to consider all our thoughts, wordes and deedes. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, that a reuerent feare of Gods Maiestie in good mens hearts, is a notable meane to make them to auoide sinne: also it doth liuely paint out the nature of the desperate transgressors. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs, to withstand the vnbridlednes of our owne affections, and to beware of being ouer busie in other mens affaires. Vers. 18. Teacheth vs, that knowledge is a meane of great credit and estimation, euen before men. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, that God many times in this life, for the manifesta∣tion of his mercie and iustice, exalteth his owne children, and casteth down the wicked. Ʋers. 20. Doth liuely paint out the nature of the world, which doth easilie despise poore men, though neuer so good, and readilie imbrace
wealthie men, though neuer so bad. Ʋers. 21. Teacheth vs, not to despise any, but euen for our owne good to shewe pitie and compassion to all. Ʋers. 22. Teacheth vs, that euill thoughts are sinne before God: also that the Lord will be mercifull towards his owne. Ʋers. 23. Teacheth vs, faith∣fully and painfully to labour in our callings: and to take heede that wee labour not with the lippes only, and giue the other parts of our bodies to idlenes. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, that euery thing to the godlie is a credite and glorie, whereas all things to the wicked tend to their shame. Vers. 25. Tea∣cheth vs, in matters of controuersie to speake the trueth, and to abhorre all lyes. Vers. 26. Sheweth vs, what a sure staffe to stay vppon they haue that doo rightly feare the Lord. Ʋers. 27. Teacheth vs, what commodities come by the reuerent feare of GOD planted in our hearts. Vers. 28. Teacheth Kings as to vse all holie meanes whereby to increase their people: so to take heede, that they trust not in them at any hand. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, to be slowe to wrath, and to beware of hastines of heart or word. Vers. 30. Teacheth vs, louingly to doo whatsoeuer wee doo, and to flye from enuie and hatred. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, that oppression of the poore is a gree∣uous offence against God. Ʋers. 32. Propoundeth the miserable end of the wicked, and the ioyfull end of the godlie. Vers. 33. Sheweth, that the heart is indeede the seate of wisedome. Vers. 34. Sheweth, what good commeth by iustice, and what hurt by iniustice, and that not only to the parties exe∣cuting the same, but also to their people and subiects. Vers. 35. Teacheth vs, that wisedome is a meane to make men delight in vs. CHAP. 15. Co. IN the last verse of the other Chapter he shewed, that frowardnes and ill de∣meanour was a meane to prouoke wrath against vs: and now in the first verse of this Chapter he sheweth vs how wee may quench it, if it bee once kindled, and so proceedeth in instructing men, to haue an eye to their speaches and words. Di. THe Chapter may be diuided into three parts. In the first he giueth in∣structions concerning mens words and speaches, concerning the sight, and knowledge of God, and concerning the wise and the foolish, the good and the bad, &c. and this reacheth from verse 1. to the end of the 11. In the  second, he intreateth of scorners, of ioye and sorowe of the heart, of the wise and foolish, of quietnes, and contentednes with the portion which God gi∣ueth vs, of anger, slothfulnes, follie, and good counsell: and this reacheth  from verse 12. to the end of the 22. In the third, he speaketh of good words, of the way of life, of proude persons, and of the widowe of wicked mens thoughts, of gaine and gifts, of babling, of Gods fauour vpon the good, and
his punishment vpon the wicked, of receiuing and refusing good counsell, and of the feare of the Lord, from verse 23. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. A Soft answer [i. gentle, quiet, and méeke words] putteth away wrath: [vz. of another man, either conceiued or expressed against vs: see Chapt. 25.15.] but greeuous words [i. words that worke griefe in the partie against whom we speake] stirre vp anger. [vz. against vs: and here he teacheth what things followe mens speach; to wit, peace followeth vpon quiet words, and trouble vpon bitter and hastie speaches.] Vers. 2.  The tongue of the wise [i. the wise man himselfe: a part for the whole, and yet he nameth the tongue, because wisedome and knowledge is expressed therewith] vseth knowledge aright: [i. doth aptly and profitably, and seaso∣nably vtter it, and maketh it more acceptable, vsing it in time and place] but the mouth of fooles [i. fooles themselues: and yet he nameth the mouth, be∣cause they doo especially by that meanes bewray it] bableth out [vz. rashlie, and without any regard] foolishnes. [i. their owne follie: see verse 28. of this Chapter. In this verse he teacheth men to frame their speaches with know∣ledge, or according to knowledge.] Vers. 3. The eyes of the Lord [i. his cer∣taine  sight and knowledge. He speaketh of God according to man, not that God hath eyes, but because we doo most assuredly knowe those things which we see] in euery place [vz. wheresoeuer it be] behold [vz. plainlie and mani∣festlie, for nothing can bee hid from his sight: Hebrew. 4.13.] the euill [vz. men] and the good. [vz. men, meaning also euery word and déede that com∣meth from them: q.d. seeing the Lord looketh vppon you, looke that your words be vttered in the reuerence and feare of his Maiestie.] Vers. 4. A  wholesome tongue [i. a tongue that speaketh wholesome & profitable things, and vttereth whatsoeuer it vttereth in wisedome and knowledge, with equi∣tie and vprightnes, and that to other mens profite] is as a tree of life: [i. bringeth both to himselfe speaking, and to others that heare him, life: for this phrase see before Chapt. 3.18. Also Chapt. 13.12.] but the frowardnes thereof [i. of the tongue: of which see Iames 3. almost throughout: meaning by frowardnes, the froward things also vttered thereby] is the breaking of the mind. [i. is great griefe and sorowe vnto the heart. One readeth it thus, and better in my mind:] but the frowardnes which commeth by it, is as a breach made by the winde. [meaning of the Easterne wind, which is most vehement and forcible: q.d. He that is of a peruerse and froward speach, shall fall into most gréeuous hurt and danger, and shall pull vpon himselfe most sodaine and violent calamities.] Vers. 5. A foole [i. a wicked and vngodlie child]  despiseth [i. little or no whit at all regardeth] his fathers instruction: [i. the in∣struction and counsell that his father and parents giue him: q.d. he is foolish whatsoeuer he be that regardeth not his parents aduise or good counsell] but he that regardeth [vz. rightly and reuerently] correction, [vz. in wordes or
déedes, from whom soeuer it come] is prudent. [i. is rightly wise, or wise in∣déede.]  Vers. 6. The house of the righteous hath much treasure: [i. the righ∣teous mans house is well stored and filled with good things, meaning also thereby, that he hath both the vse and possession of them] but in the reuenues of the wicked [i. in that which the wicked haue, how much or little soeuer it be] is trouble. [i. great and excéeding trouble: vz. for the keeping of it, if it bée  much, and for the spending of it, if it be little.] Vers. 7. The lippes of the wise [i. their words vttered with their lippes, or you may take it simplie: because the lippes are the instruments of speach] doo spread abroad know∣ledge: [vz. wheresoeuer they can, or doo come, for they haue a desire to make men partakers of their gifts] but the heart of the foolish doth not so [vz. be∣cause it is voide of knowledge and iudgement, and so cannot vtter wisedom,  but bewray follie rather, as Chapt. 13.16.] Vers. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked [i. which they themselues bring, or offer vnto the Lord, vnderstan∣ding by sacrifice, all ceremonies and outward things whatsoeuer, though they were done neuer so solemnely and sumptuously in Gods seruice: and against these he setteth the bare and simple praier of the righteous onely] is abomination to the Lord: [i. he lotheth and abhorreth it: see Chapt. 11.1. all sacrifices are reiected, where godlines is not annexed] but the praier of the righteous [i. such supplications as procéede from his heart] is acceptable vnto him. [i. vnto the Lord, but that is in the only mediation of Christ, for other∣wise  all things comming from vs, are abominable likewise.] Vers. 9. The way of the wicked [i. his order & course of life] is an abomination to the Lord: [see verse 8. of this Chapter: he meaneth that the Lord abhorreth whatsoe∣uer commeth from the wicked, either in thought, word or déede, because it all tendeth to the euill and hurt of others] but he loueth [vz. with an vnfeigned and perpetuall loue] him [vz. whosoeuer he be] that followeth [vz. earnestlie and egerlie, see Psalme 34.14.] righteousnes. [i. holie life and good dealing.]  Vers. 10. Instruction [vz. giuen by any] is euill [i. it seemeth so to bee in his iudgement, vpon whom it is bestowed, or els he meaneth, that it is vnprofi∣table, for euill is not put here, as directly contrarie vnto GOD, because in∣struction is alwaies good] to him that forsaketh the way, [vz. which GOD hath prescribed in his word] and he that hateth [i. cannot away withall or abide, but abhorreth as an euill thing] correction, [see verse 5. of this Chap. shall dye. [vz. certainlie and sodainlie, or els eternally, for it may bee taken  both waies.] Vers. 11. Hell and destruction are before the Lord: [i. there is nothing so deepe or secret, but the Lord doth most throughly knowe it: see verse 3. of this Chapter] how much more [vz. easilie and plainlie doth he knowe] the hearts of the sonnes of men? [i. whatsoeuer men and their whole posteritie can imagine, thinke, or deuise: and in this respect is it that God is so often called in the Scripture the knower of the heart, and the sear∣cher  of the heart and reines.] Vers. 12. Ascorner [i. he that not only refu∣seth, but scoffeth at counsell and admonition: see Chapt. 1.22. Also Chapt.
3.34.] loueth not him [vz. any whit at all, but hateth him rather] that re∣buketh him, [vz. iustly or wisely for his euill and naughtines] neither will he go vnto the wise. [i. he will not keepe companie with them, because he know∣eth they will reproue him: q.d. The scorner hateth both the doctrine of God, and those that should teach him also, and that euen for the doctrines sake.] Vers. 13. A ioyfull heart [i. a glad and merrie minde] maketh a chearefull  countenance: [i. maketh the whole man merrie; and yet he speaketh of the countenance, because that is one of the meanes whereby the mirth of the minde and heart is manifested; for there can hardly be a merrie countenance where there is a heauie heart, vnlesse that should fall out which was saied before: Chapter 14.13.] but by the sorowe of the hart [i. by meanes of that griefe and sorowe, which seaseth and possesseth many times a mans heart] the mind [vz. of a man] is heauie. [i. is made or become heauie and sad: some reade, and the Hebrue text also seemeth to import so much] the spirit is bro∣ken [i. the man sigheth often, and draweth his breath very hard: q.d. his life is almost at an end.] Vers. 14. The heart of him [i. he himselfe, a part for  the whole, and yet he speaketh of the heart, because if the heart or minde bée not set vpon it, wee shall hardly obtaine it] that hath vnderstanding, [i. that through Gods goodnes hath obtained some measure of it] seeketh [vz. care∣fully and diligently] knowledge: [i. increase of knowledge: q.d. he hath care to bee euery day more skilfull than other] but the mouth of the foole [i. the foole himselfe: and yet because meate is first receiued into the mouth before it go into the stomacke, and so become nutritiue, he maketh mention of it] is fed [vz. continually, meaning that the foole taketh as great delight in the same, as in all manner of dainties] with foolishnes. [i. with his owne follie, and other mens also, who frame themselues to his humour.] Vers. 15. All  the daies [vz. of the life of a man, from the time his affliction and griefe be∣ginneth, till it haue an end] of the afflicted [i. of any which is afflicted & trou∣bled in minde, because his state and condition in this life is no better: mea∣ning it of a poore man that is not content with his owne portion, as may ap∣peare by the verses following] are euill: [i. grieuous, tedious, and bitter, spe∣cially to flesh and bloud] but a good conscience [i. he that hath in himself peace towards God, quietnes before men, and contentednes in his owne soule] is a continuall feast. [i. bréedeth as great pleasure and delight to him that hath it, as if he were daylie fed with most fine dainties.] Vers. 16. Better is a  little [vz. which a man hath of his owne through Gods blessing] with the feare of the Lord, [i. hauing a reuerence of Gods Maiestie in his heart, both quieting his minde, and teaching him the right vse of it] than great treasure [vz. howsoeuer it be obtained] and trouble therwith. [vz. to the owner there∣of, and in his minde which wauereth, and is vnquiet, either for the sure kée∣ping of it, or for the sodaine forgoing of it.] Vers. 17. Better is a dinner of  greene hearbes [i. a very meane & slender dinner] where loue is, [vz. towards the parties bidden, and among the parties themselues, because there all
things shall bee well accepted] than a stalled oxe [vz. prepared for a dinner or banquet: meaning also thereby a most sumptuous feast] and hatred there∣with. [i. an euill affection either towards the parties bidden, or one of them  towards another.] Vers. 18. An angrie man [i. one giuen much to anger] stirreth vp strife: [vz. in euery companie wheresoeuer he commeth, yea ma∣ny times amongst them where there is great peace and quietnes: see Chap. 29.22.] but he that is slowe to wrath, [i. will hardly, or not at all be moued thereto, see Chapt. 14.29.] appeaseth [vz. by all the meanes he can he inde∣uoureth to quiet and pacifie] strife. [vz. kindled, and stirred vp before, so  farre off is he from prouoking men thereto.] Vers. 19. The way [i. the order and course of his life] of a slothfull man [i. of him that sluggishly and sloth∣fully goeth about his duetie] is as an hedge of thornes: [i. is so slow and hard, as if it were all beset with thornes & briers, meaning, that so it seemeth also vnto himselfe; and therefore he euer findeth some let or stay that he dare not go forward: see Chapt. 26.13.] but the way of the righteous [i. the order and course of life which he taketh] is plaine. [i. most easie and commodious, so that he findeth nothing to hinder him to walke on chearefully therein.]  Vers. 20. A wise sonne reioyceth the father: [i. maketh the father to reioyce and be glad: see Chap. 10.1.] but a foolish man [i. a wicked disobedient and vngodlie child] despiseth [i. setteth little by, or regardeth not at all] his mo∣ther. [i. neither her person, nor any good thing that commeth from her.]  Vers. 21. Foolishnes [i. wickednes and sinne] is ioye [i. is a matter of mirth and delight] to him that is destitute of vnderstanding: [i. to a wicked and vn∣godly man, which knoweth nothing of heauenly wisedome. I take it to be the same almost that is sayd, Chapt. 14.9, 24.] but a man of vnderstanding [i. a godly and wise man] walketh vprightly. [i. ordereth all his actions, and frameth his manners to that which is good and right, neuer straying from  the right way.] Vers. 22. Without counsell [i. without right, holie, and good counsell] thoughts [i. all things thought vpon and deuised] come to nought: [i. to no effect and purpose: q d. it is not enough to thinke vpon things, but there must be counsell taken how to performe the same] but in the multitude of counsellers [i. of good and faithfull counsellers] there is stedfastnes. [vz. both of purpose and performance, if the thing bee good: see Prouerb. 11.14.]  Vers. 23. A ioye commeth to a man [i. there is a man which hath great and singular ioy] by the answer of his mouth: [i. by the words and speaches which he vttereth with his mouth, whether he answer things demanded, or speake otherwise: q.d. when a man speaketh wisely to any person in any place, he hath great occasion and matter of ioye giuen him] and how good [q.d. it is a hard thing to expresse how swéete and profitable: so haue you the word good vsed, Psalme 133.1.] is a word [vz. spoken or vttered] in due season? [i. in fit and conuenient time, see Psalm 1.3. Al is as much: q.d. a wise man is much refreshed, and greatly reioyceth when hée seeth his counselles to fall well  out, and things to come to passe as he said.] Vers. 24. The way of life [i. the
way that leadeth vnto life, yea the very true life it selfe] is on high to the pru∣dent, [i. is in heauen, and therefore he thinketh of heauenly things, and ten∣deth thetherward, Philip. 3.20. Coloss. 3.2.] to auoide [i. that walking in the same he may auoid] from hel beneath. [i. both from death and destruction, which the desire of earthly things bringeth with it, and also from the place of eternall torment.] Vers. 25. The Lord [vz. himselfe in his iust iudge∣ment]  will destroy [vz. vtterly, and as it were pull vp by the rootes] the house of the proud men: [i. them themselues, their seede, rase, substance, and what∣soeuer belongeth vnto them; for so large I take the signification of the word house to be] but he will establish [vz. firme and sure] the borders of the wid∣dowe. [i. all that doth appertaine to the poore and abiect persons as it were. He setteth against proud persons, poore widdowes, then who, none are com∣monly more iniured amongst men.] Vers. 26. The thoughts of the wicked  [i. wicked mens thoughts, and the things they thinke vpon] are an abomi∣nation to the Lord: [i. are such things as he cannot abide] but the pure [vz. in heart and conuersation] haue pleasant words, [i. speake such things as are good and acceptable before God, and profitable to the hearers.] Vers. 27.  He [vz. of what calling or condition soeuer he be, specially if he be a Magi∣strate] that is greedie of gaine, [i. that gapeth after it, and careth not by what meanes he come by it, so he haue it: see Chapt. 1.19.] troubleth his owne house: [i. whereas he thought to get peace thereby, and to inlarge his sub∣stance, purchaseth trouble, and many times the decrease of his familie: see Chapt. 11.29.] but he that hateth gifts, [vz. offered him to peruert iustice, or to performe ill causes: see precise commandements against giftes taking Exod. 23.8. Deut. 16.19.] shall liue. [vz. well and plentifully in this life, notwithstanding his refusall of the same, but specially in eternall life.] Ver.  28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answere: [vz. not only when hée is demanded, but also to speake, for so doth the Scripture vse that word of an∣swering: see Math. 11.25. He meaneth, that the good man speaketh nothing but that which he hath long meditated of before, least his tongue should runne before his wit: and therefore he commonly speaketh right and good things] but the wicked mans mouth babbleth [i. rashly and hastely powreth out] euill things. [vz. against other, and such as in the end turne to his owne hurt and destruction: see verse 2. of this Chapter.] Vers. 29. The Lord is  farre of from the wicked: [i. from helping them, or hearing their voyce: for otherwise God is in euery place, and nigh to all things: he meaneth that God will not heare them, no more than men heare them that are very farre of calling vnto them] but he heareth [i. graciouslie granteth] the praier of the righteous. [i. the things that the righteous praied for: see ver. 8. of this chap. Also Psalme 145.18.] Vers. 30. The light of the eyes [i. for a man to see  with the eyes, and to haue the vse of them] reioyceth the heart, [vz. of a man; that is, maketh man and his heart glad] and a good name [i. good fame, and report amongst men] maketh the bones fat. [i. euen reioyceth and strengthe∣neth
all the inward parts: so haue you the word bones vsed before, chapt. 12.4. Also chapt. 14.30. Some reade it as though it were a similitude thus] as the light of the eyes reioyceth the heart: so a good name maketh the bones fat. [i. as the eye by the beholding of good things, maketh the whole man mer∣rie: so doth the eare by hearing good & wholesome things, of which he spea∣keth  in the next verse following.] Vers. 31. The eare that hearkeneth [vz. diligently and attentiuely] to the correction of life, [i. to such correction, re∣proofe, and admonition as leadeth to life] shall lodge among the wise. [i. shall not onely dwell with them, and be accounted as they are, but shall haue the selfe same blessing from God that they haue, both in this life and in the life to come. And this he speaketh, not of an outward hearing onely, but of such  as yéeld sincere obedience to the things heard.] Vers. 32. He that refuseth [vz. by withdrawing himselfe from it] instruction, [vz. of good things, be∣ing tendered and offered vnto him] despiseth his owne soule: [i. maketh little account of his life, specially in respect of the life to come] but he that obeyeth correction, getteth vnderstanding. [vz. how in this life to behaue himselfe to∣wards God and man, so as he may, after the daies of this wearisome pilgri∣mage  are finished, come to eternall life.] Ver. 33. The feare of the Lord [vz. rightly planted in mens hearts] is the instruction of wisedome: [i. is such an instruction or doctrine as bringeth men to holie wisedome. One in my mind readeth it better thus] The instruction of wisedome goeth before the feare of the Lord, [i. before a man can obtaine wisedome, and bee led with the reue∣rence of God and his feare, which is the beginning of wisedome, Chapt. 1.7. Also Chapt. 9.10. He must of necessitie be taught and learne the precepts of wisedome] and before honor [vz. from God] goeth humilitie. [i. true and vnfeigned humbling of his children: q.d. there is the same order of the fruits which come from the instruction and feare of God, as is of the things them∣selues: for to learning, there is ioyned casting downe of men and humilitie: and to the reuerence and feare of God, there is ioyned excellent honor, which God bestoweth vpon them that feare him. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, to auoide bitter wordes, and to vse soft and gentle speaches. Ʋers. 2. Sheweth what great difference there is between the words of the wise, and the words of the foolish. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that GOD knoweth and seeth all things euery where. Ʋers. 4. Teacheth vs, what pro∣fites and disprofites arise of a good and of an euill tongue. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, reuerently to regard good counsell. Ʋers. 6. Teacheth vs, that the good haue plentie of blessings, and enioy them with quietnes, whereas the wic∣ked haue great trouble and vexation with the same. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs to vse knowledge in our callings, to the benefite and good of others. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, that nothing proceeding from a wicked person can please the Lord: also that God in Christ regardeth the praiers of his seruants. Vers. 9. Setteth out the great loue of God towards his seruants, and his disliking of the wicked. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that malicious wicked persons will sel∣dome
or neuer regarde good counsell: also what danger there is, in contem∣ning the words of godly admonition. Ʋers. 11. Teacheth vs, that GOD knoweth all things, yea euen the very depths of mens hearts. Ʋers. 12. Tea∣cheth vs, that wicked men, shunne the companie and speach of good men. Vers. 13. Declareth the profits and disprofits of a glad and sorrowfull heart. Vers. 14. Teacheth vs, that we must carefully and continually seeke for wis∣dome. Vers. 15. Setteth out the commodities of a good conscience, and contented minde. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, that mans blessing consisteth not speciallie in the multitude of his riches. Vers. 17. Commendeth vnfeined loue, and dispraiseth hatred. Vers. 18. Teacheth vs, to bridle wrath, and to beate downe contentions amongst men, what we may. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, to auoide slothfulnes, and idlenes. Vers. 20. Sheweth what benefit or blessing it is, to haue good children, and on the other side what a punish∣ment it is, to haue wicked children. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, that the wicked reioyce in sinne, and that there is no godlie conuersation indeede without the light of Gods holy word. Ver. 22. Teacheth vs, to pursue good thoughts, by good counsell, and to labor to bring them to good effect. Ʋers. 23. Tea∣cheth vs, that we may reioyce in Gods gifts, bestowed vpon vs: also, that in our speaches, we should haue regarde of time, place, persons &c. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, to studie and seeke for heauenlie things. Vers. 25. Decla∣reth Gods great iudgement against proude persons, and his singular loue, towards the poore and afflicted. Vers. 26. Teacheth vs, that wicked thoughts are sinne before the Lord: also that our words & speaches should bring grace to the hearers. Ʋers. 27. Teacheth vs, to auoide greedie gaping after gayne, and hastie or readie receauing of rewards. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, to beware of rash and hastie speach, and alwaies to speake with as great aduisement, as possible we can. Vers. 29. Declareth Gods iustice vpon the wicked, and his singular fauor towards the good. Vers. 30. Teacheth vs, that it is a good blessing to haue the sight of our eyes: also that wee shoulde striue, to be of good name and reporte. Ʋers. 31. Sheweth what good men shall get, by obseruing wise and good counsell. Ʋerse 32. Declareth, what euill shall come vpon them that regarde it not. Verse 33. Teacheth vs, two thinges, first that no man can rightly feare God, but hee that hath been some what trained vp in wisdomes schoole: secondlie that we cannot come to true honor before God and men, till the Lord haue effectuallie humbled vs vnder his almightie hand. CHAPT. 16. Co. IN the latter end of the other Chapter, the holie Ghost had shewed, that wee could not tell how vse our eares a right, but by grace from God: and now hee sheweth vs, in the beginning of this Chapter, that we knowe not how to guide our tongues, except the Lord assiste vs: and direct vs in the same. Di.
I Would diuide this chapter into fowre partes. In the first he sheweth that we cannot thinke or speake rightly without God, that the Lorde seeth all things, that his blessing giueth good successe to all our attempts, that hee dooth what pleaseth him; he speaketh against the proud, commendeth the mercie, trueth and feare of the Lord, setteth out his loue towards his chil∣dren, and speaketh of contentednes of minde, from ver. 1. to the end of the 9.  In the second he speaketh of good rulers, true weights, and the excellencie of wisdome, shewing also, what a dangerous thing it is, to purchase the  kings wrath and displeasure, from vers. 10. to the end of the 17. In the third he intreateth of pride and humilitie, of trust in the Lorde, of wise men and wisdome, of gentle words, and of an vpright way: from vers. 18. to the end of the 25. In the last parte hee speaketh of the painefull person, also of wic∣ked; froward, and vngodlie men, of good old age, of bridling anger, and of  the prouidence of God from vers. 26. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. THe preparations of the heart are in man: [i. a man hath power to prepare his heart, and wit to direct, how and in what order he will speake or doo any thing. And this he speaketh not, as though it were so, but by the way of concession for if he cannot speake, surely he cannot thinke or deuise without God, but it is: q.d. be it that man haue innumerable thoughts in his heart, and in his head deuiseth this and that,] but the answere of the tongue [i. yet the wordes which hee shall speake and vtter] is of the Lord [i. commeth from him, because without him  he cannot so much as wagge his tongue.] Verse 2. All the waies of a man [i. euerie thing that a man thinketh, speaketh or dooth,] are cleane [i. seeme so to be vnto him] in his owne eyes: [i. in his owne iudgement: putting eyes for iudgement, because we take those things to bee moste sure and sufficient which we see] but the Lord pondereth [i. diligently weigheth and déepelie considereth] the spirits, [vz. of men, meaning thereby, all their imaginati∣ons, words, and workes, because they haue their beginning, in the spirite or vnderstanding of a man, and proceede from the same: q.d. God, euen as it were by number and weight, that is, most certainely searcheth whether that be pure and right that men thinke so to be, and knoweth it by many degrées  better than they.] Verse 3. Commit [vz. in a stedfast fayth] thy workes [i. all thy affayres whatsoeuer] vnto the Lord [q.d. in all thinges depende vpon him for a good successe and blessing,] and thy thoughtes shall be direc∣ted: [vz. thorowe his prouidence and power, to a good end, vnderstanding by thoughts, (which are the beginning of all actions,) euen the very deedes themselues also. This sentence intreateth of Gods power and prouidence, teaching vs to referre all things thereto: see the like Psal. 37.5. also Psal.  55.22.] Vers. 4. The Lord [vz. of Heauen and earth] hath made [vz. by
his almightie power,] all things, [i. all creatures whatsoeuer] for his owne sake, [i. to this end, that his glorie might appeare in them:] yea euen the wicked [vz. man, meaning thereby all the vngodlie] for the daye of euill: [i. not onely against the time of affliction in this life, but for eternall torments in the life to come: not that God is the author of any wickednes, but because he not onely suffereth, but also hath aforehand decreed, that the wicked shall oppresse the good, the Lorde reseruing them for it against the day of iudge∣ment, wherein he will shewe his power and iustice, by which he is glorified: q.d. the chiefe end of the creation of all things, is Gods glorie, which glorie of his most plainely appeareth and is declared, both in the eternall saluation of the vessells of mercie, and also in the destruction of the vessells of wrath, appoynted beforehand to that destruction: see Roman. 9.22.23. Iude. vers. 4.] Vers. 5. All that are proude in heart [i. all proude persons of what e∣state  or condition so euer they be. He maketh mention of the heart, because there is the first beginning of pride, and from thence it floweth. Marke 7.22.] are an abhomination to the Lord: [i. the Lord doth loth them and can∣not abide them: wee haue had this phrase oftentimes, as Chap. 11.1. also Chap. 12.22. chap. 15.26. &c.] though hand ioyne in hand, [i. though they ioyne power and forces together to auoyde Gods iudgements,] he [i. the proud man, or the proud persons, by one vnderstanding al] shall not be vnpu∣nished. [i. escape vnpunished from the Lord, howsoeuer hee doth for a while deferre his iudgements: see Chap. 11.21.] Vers. 6. By mercie [vz. from  God] and trueth, [i. Gods faithfull accomplishment of his promises, he ma∣king his children by the zeale of his spirite to feele the same: see Psalme 85.10. I knowe, some vnderstand by mercie and trueth, the dueties of charitie and vpright dealing one man with an other, and I denie not though they sée it not, that mercie is so vsed. Matth. 12.7. but I approue rather the other sense] iniquitie [i. sinne it selfe, and the punishment deserued for it] shall bee forgiuen, [vz. before the Lorde, meaning that the Lorde freely, euen for his owne mercie and trueth sake, will forgiue the sinnes of his people,] and by the feare of the Lord [vz. rightly and sincerely planted in the hearts of his children, vnderstanding by feare, a reuerence of his Maiestie ioyned with loue] they departe [vz. speedilie] from euill [i. from naughtie conuersation, and all things, that may pull on to the same: see 1. Thessalo. 5.22.] Vers. 7. When the waies of a man [i. his purposes, deedes, and the whole course of  his life] pleaseth the Lord, [i. be such, as he accepteth and alloweth of, which is, when they are framed according to the rule of his word,] he [i. God the Lord] will make [vz. by his mightie power and working] his enemies at peace with him: [i. so farre off shall it be, that they that neuer hated him shall attempt any euill against him, that euen his very foes and aduersaries, shal procure all manner of good for him, for so much I suppose he vnderstandeth by the name of peace.] Vers. 8. Better is a little [vz. gotten and atchieued]  with righteousnes, [i. with vpright and iust dealing,] than great reuenues
[vz. though they come yearely, monethly, or daylie in] without equitie, [i. gotten with the iniurie and opression of other men: see Chap. 15.16.] Vers.  9. The heart of man purposeth his waie: [i. he waieth and thinketh vpon the things which hee hath to doo, tossing them too and fro in his thought and i∣magination,] but the Lord [vz. alone] doth direct [vz alwaies by his pow∣er, and prouidence,] his steppes. [i. euery thing that he taketh in hand, for the sense of this place, see vers. 1. of this Chap. also Ierem. 10.23. and Prou.  19.28.] Vers. 10. A diuine sentence [i. a true and certaine iudgement, e∣uen as it were from God himselfe. I know that the word signifieth, diuina∣tion, or foretelling, such as Soothsayers, Astrologers, &c. vse. But he mea∣neth it not thereof, for it is forbidden, Deuteron. 18.10, 11. &c. but rather noteth, that the word of the king, is and ought to bee a moste sure worde, as those things which they foretel, seeme at the least, to the parties themselues, and those that credit them to be] shall be [vz. or ought to be, prescribing as it were his dueties, which word I suppose might be better added here] in the lippes of the king [i. in his words and speaches vttered with his lippes: put∣ting the word king, for al Magistrates whatsoeuer] his mouth shal not trans∣gresse in iudgement, [i. while hee sitteth in iudgement, hee shoulde not pro∣nounce or award vniust sentences, but deale vprightlie in all causes, as may  appeare by the verses following.] Vers. 11. A true weight and balance [i. vpright and faithfull dealing in euery respect: and this seemeth to be a rea∣son of the former rule: q.d. the iudgement and vprightnesse which Magi∣strates and other men faithfullie execute, is not from men themselues, but of God: see Deuteron. 1.17. 2. Chronic. 19.6. and hee meaneth most exact obseruation of iudgement and iustice, by weight and balance,] are of the Lord [i. are ordeyned of him, and commaunded by him: see Deuteron. 25.13, 14, 15. also Chap. 11.1.] all the weights [vz. how great or how little so euer they bee,] of the bagge [i. which men put into the bagge, for the better and more safe keeping of them: he alludeth to Deuteron. 25.13. meaning it al∣so of iust and equall weights] are his word, [i. the Lord hath made and or∣deyned the same to bee vsed, as appeareth by the place before alledged.]  Vers. 12. It is [vz. or els it ought to be,] an abhomination [i. a horrible and lothsome thing] to kings [i. to great and mightie men, or to Magistrates of what degree or calling soeuer they be,] to commit [vz. in thought, word, or deede,] wickednes, [i. any manner of wickednes, either against God or man: and this he speaketh speciallie because of their great callinges, and high places wherein they are set] for the throne [vz. of the king or king∣dome, meaning thereby the kingdome it selfe, a parte for the whole, as sun∣drie times in the psalmes, and namely Psalme 93.2. also Psalme 132.12.] is established. [i. is made firme and sure, with great likelyhoode of continu∣ance] by iustice, [vz. by faithfull and diligent executing of iustice and equi∣tie.]  Vers. 13. Righteous lippes are the delight of kings [i. kings and Ma∣gistrates, should take speciallie delight and pleasure in such persons, as spea∣keth
righteous and good things: a part put for the whole person, and one in∣strument wherewith the voyce is framed, put for the words themselues] and the King [i. all rulers and magistrates] loueth [i. ought tenderly to affect] him [i. those whosoeuer they be] that speaketh right things. [vz. vnto them. This he speaketh, because Princes do many times more delight and sauour flatterers, than plaine dealers.] Vers. 14. The wrath of a King [i. that in∣dignation  and displeasure, which a great man beareth against another] is as messengers of death: [i. is at it were deadly to him with whom he is angrie, and bringeth as it were present death, euery thing then threatning death as it were, which wee see by daylie experience. And he saith messengers in the plurall number, that it might haue the greater force] but a wise man will pa∣cifie it. [vz. in time, and by all the lawfull meanes he can hée will indeuour the quenching of it, for feare of inconueniences and mischiefes that may in∣sue thereon.] Vers. 15. In the light of the Kings countenance [i. in his fa∣uourable  countenance: q.d. when it pleaseth the King with a pleasant and merrie countenance to shewe that he fauoureth men] is life: [i. there is hope of all manner of prosperitie and florishing] and his fauour [vz. so expressed and declared towards other men] is as a cloude [vz. which is full, and there∣fore powreth downe raine: see Eccle. 11.13.] of the latter raine. [vz. which falleth somewhat before haruest, before the corne ripe, and maketh the yéeld of fruit to be great: see Deutero. 11.14. Iames 5.7.] Vers. 16. How much  better is it [q.d. It can hardly be tolde, or a man is not able to expresse what great oddes and difference there is] to get [vz. by industrie and paines ta∣king] wisedome [i. heauenly wisedome, and knowledge of Gods will reuea∣led in his word] than gold? [yea, than fine and precious gold; for so much the word importeth] and to get vnderstanding [vz. of Gods word and truth. The Rabbins referre wisedome to spirituall and diuine things, and vnder∣standing to worldly and humane; but me thinketh the other sense is plaine] is more to be desired [vz. by many degrées, and to be sought for] than siluer. [i. than chosen or fined siluer: see Chapt. 3.14. Also Chapt. 8.10. Meaning that holie wisedome is to bee preferred before all thinges.] Vers. 17. The  path of the righteous [vz. wherein he walketh] is to decline from euill, [i. the righteous man hath a great care and conscience, in all his conuersation and actions to abstaine from sinne and iniquitie, and all that may allure thereto: see verse 6. of this Chapt.] and he keepeth his soule, [vz. from destruction: meaning also by soule, himselfe, a part for the whole] that keepeth his way. [vz. vpright in the obedience of Gods commandements: vnderstanding by way, the whole orders and affaires of his life.] Vers. 18. Pride [vz. both  of minde and bodie] goeth before destruction, [vz. of the partie that is posses∣sed with it: he meaneth, that ruine and shame is the inseperable companion of pride] and an high minde before the fall. [vz. of the partie that hath it: q.d. Such as exalt themselues, are very nigh to ruine and destruction: see chapt. 11.2.] Vers. 19. Better [vz. by many degrées] it is [vz. in the eyes and
iudgement of all that be soundly taught of God] to be of an humble mind [i. to haue true humilitie indeede, both inward and outward] with the lowlie, [i. as they are, and to enioye their companie] than to diuide the spoyles [i. than to get great riches, and so by that meanes to come to honor] with the proud.  [vz. as they doo, and to be in their companie.] Vers. 20. He that is wise in his busines, [i. he that wisely and faithfully can dispatch the things he hath to doo] shall finde good: [i. shall, through Gods blessing, increase in riches and substance by that meanes] and he that trusteth in the Lord, [vz. vnfeignedly and with all his heart, wayting for blessings from him] he is blessed. [vz. in∣déede: q.d. he may be as sure of blessing, as though he had it: see Psal. 125. This verse is read otherwise of some, but me thinketh this sense is plaine  enough, and this reading good.] Vers. 21. The wise in heart [i. he that is truely wise indéede, and he maketh mention of the heart, because it is the seate of all affections] shall be called prudent: [vz. of other men, and so estee∣med and taken of them, not onely because they say so, but also because he is so] and the sweetnes of the lippes [i. the sweete words of doctrine and comfort that he shall speake to others] shall increase doctrine. [vz. both in himselfe, because speach is a meane to increase iudgement, and in those that heare  him.] Vers. 22. Ʋnderstanding [vz. of Gods will reuealed in his word] is a wel-spring of life [i. yéeldeth life plentifully: see Prouer. 10.11. Also chap. 13.14.] vnto them that haue it: [i. vnto them, vpon whom it pleaseth God to bestowe it, and vnto others also by their meanes] and the instruction of fooles [vz. which they giue and bestowe vppon others] is follie. [i. not onely without sense and wit, but also very wickednes and sinne it selfe, the reward  whereof is death, Roman. 6.23.] Vers. 23. The heart of the wise [vz. man: he speaketh of the heart, because it is the fountaine & wel-spring of all déedes and words] guideth his mouth [vz. to speake] wisely, [i. aptly, well, and with aduise or iudgement: q.d. The wise mans heart so directeth his mouth, and teacheth his tongue, that he speaketh nothing rashly, or vnaduisedly] and addeth doctrine [i. continually ministreth newe occasion of good speach and good counsell] to his lippes. [i. to himself, a part for the whole; and yet he spea∣keth of the lippes, because they are instruments of speach vnto others.] Ver.  24. Faire words [i. gentle, soft, and swéet speaches, he calleth them Chap. 15.26. pleasant words] are as an honie combe, [i. sweete and profitable, vz. to the partie, to whom they are spoken] sweetnes to the soule, [i. they bring swéetnes to the inward part] and health to the bones. [by health he meaneth all out∣ward blessings, and by bones, the whole bodie: a part for the whole, see chap. 12.4. Also 14.30. He meaneth that God and godlie speaches are pleasant, profitable, and necessarie, both to soule and bodie, that is, to the whole man, as honie is sweet to the tast, and profitable to mitigate the griefes of sundrie  members.] Vers. 25. This whole verse is the same in words and sense, with verse 12. of the 14. Chapter. He meaneth, that no man must either in manners or opinions follow that which seemeth good to himselfe; but Gods
word must in all things be the onely rule vnto vs.] Vers. 26. The person  that trauaileth, [vz. in his ordinary and lawfull vocation] trauaileth for him selfe: [vnder this word himselfe, he comprehendeth both his owne person, and those that depend vpon him: see 1. Tim. 5.8.] for his mouth craueth it of him. [i. after a sort doth demand it: for if meate bee not by the mouth con∣ueyed into the stomacke, the bodie will perish. And that word crauing, doth not onely import the earnestnes of it, but the manner also, euen as though it were with bowing and humbling it selfe, it did beseech him. Some reade it otherwise, and giue another sense, but I freely confesse, that for mine owne part, I see no reason of it.] Vers. 27. A wicked man [i. a vniust, violent, and  peruerse fellowe] diggeth vp [i. not onely deuiseth, but also seeketh by all meanes to performe] euill, [both against others, and himselfe also in the end] and in his lippes [i. in the words which he vttereth with his lippes] is like burning fire. [i. there is somewhat in them that will consume both himselfe and others, as fire doth wood and stubble. He meaneth, that though the thoughts of the wicked be hurtfull, yet they hurt not so much, as when they burst forth into words and déedes, for then they hurt as much as burning and flaming fire doth, whereas, while it is kept vnder the ashes, it lyeth as it were hidden.] Vers. 28. A froward person [or as it is in the Hebrue text, a  man of frowardnesses, i. such a one as giuen altogether to frowardnes] soweth strife: [vz. betwéene man and man, meaning that he is a batemaker] and a tale teller [i. he that heareth, and whistereth to the hurt of another man] ma∣keth diuision [i. doth what he can to set strife] among Princes. [i. amongst great and excellent personages. I would rather turne this latter part thus] diuideth [vz. from his friend] the prince [vz. of friendship, meaning thereby a chiefe friend: and so haue you the word vsed Chapt. 17.9. Also Psal. 15.13. though there it be turned guide, and Micah. 7.5. where the same word is turned a friend.] Vers. 29. A wicked man [i. a violent and iniurious per∣son,  or as it is in Hebrue, a man of violence, that is, one that is altogether gi∣uen to doo iniurie to another] deceiueth [vz. one while by fraude, another while by force] his neighbour, [i. him, whom he should doo all manner of good too] and leadeth him [i. some other of his neighbours, and that by his flatte∣ring & intising words; for so much I thinke the Hebrue word importeth: see Chapt. 1.10.] into the way that is not good. [i. into a disorderous course and euill trade of his life: so haue wee had the word way sundrie times vsed.] Vers. 30. He [i. the wicked man] shutteth his eyes [vz. that he may the better  thinke vppon the mischiefe he will doo, because that when the eyes are open, the inward senses are drawne hether and thether] to deuise [i. that he may the more earnestly thinke vpon] wickednes: [vz. against others, meaning by wic∣kednes, mischiefe: see Chapter 10.10.] he moueth his lippes, [i. he doth but as it were begin to speake] and bringeth euill to passe. [i. he presently perfor∣meth mischiefe against other men.] Vers. 31. Age [i. old age: he vseth a  word, which signifieth gray heares, putting the signe of old age for old age it
self] is a crowne of glorie, [i. is a glorious crowne, meaning, that it bringeth euen as great glorie to a godlie old man, as a crowne to a King: concerning this word crowne, see before Chapt. 4.9. Also Chapt. 14.24. and in other places] when it is found [vz. to be passed ouer and spent] in the way of righ∣teousnes. [i. in a holie and righteous life, meaning it of such old age, as spen∣deth the time of life, godly & iustly, and not of al old age without exception.]  Vers. 32. He that is slowe vnto anger, [i. seldome or not at all bursteth into it, howsoeuer he be prouoked thereto: see chap. 14.29. chap. 15.28.] is better [vz. by many degrees] than the mightie man: [vz. in bodilie strength and power: by how much the power of the soule is better than the strength of the bodie, the soule it selfe being better than the bodie] and he that ruleth his owne minde, [i. that subdueth and keepeth vnder the raging affections thereof] is better [vz. by much] than he that winneth [i. conquereth or get∣teth] a citie. [vz. either by power or policie. The reason of this speach is, be∣cause that the warre that a man hath with himself, and with his own mind, and which is made against wrath and other affections of it, is more grieuous and hard, than that which is attempted against others: and therefore he is better that conquereth himselfe, than he that conquereth others. Besides, he that ouercommeth himselfe, doth it to this end, to profite himselfe and to hurt none, yea to doo good vnto others thereby, whereas a mightie man that ouercommeth others, and subdueth cities, can hardly performe it, without  bloudshed and great danger of other men.] Vers. 33. The lot [vz. for the triall of any thing in controuersie. This was much in vse amongst the peo∣ple of God in diuiding lands: Numb. 26.55. and in other causes, as Leuit. 16.8. Acts 1.26. and in other places] is cast into the lappe: [i. into some se∣cret and close place, putting one for many others, as into hattes, pots, caps, boxes, &c.] but the whole disposition thereof [i. the ordering, guiding, and gouernment of it] is of the Lord▪ [vz. onely: q.d. nothing seemeth more sub∣iect to fortune in mens iudgement than lots, and yet that falleth not out by fortune or chance, for there is no such thing, but God by his infinite proui∣dence and wisedome, doth both generally and particularly guide and go∣uerne the same, according to his good pleasure. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth, that both the thoughts of mans heart, and the words of mans mouth are gouerned of the Lord. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth vs, that nei∣ther we our selues, nor the things that wee doo, are such, as wee esteeme of them, but are so to be taken as God alloweth of them. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, in all our thoughts, words, and works, to depend vpon the Lord for his special blessing. Ver. 4. Teacheth vs, that Gods glorie appeareth in al things, yea euen in the destruction of the wicked and vngodlie. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, to auoide pride of heart: secondly, that there is no wisedome nor power against the Lord. Vers. 6. Sheweth vs, that there is no other cause of the for∣giuenes of sinne, than Gods own mercie & truth: also, that there is no bet∣ter bridle to stay men from wickednes, than to haue a reuerēt feare of Gods
maiestie setled in our harts. Ver. 7. Teacheth vs, that a holy conuersation cō∣mendeth vs, both to God & men, also that God hath mēs harts in his hands to turne them as pleaseth him. Vers. 8. Teacheth men, to get that which they haue, how little or much soeuer it bee, by good and iust dealing. Ʋers. 9. Teacheth vs, that in all, both our imaginations, and actions, wee are gouer∣ned by God, because, that in him, we liue, moue, and haue our beeing. Ʋers. 10. Teacheth Magistrates and rulers, to pronounce iust and true sentences. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, to vse vprightnes in all our dealings: and that they which vse false weightes, measures, &c. sinne not onely against men, but a∣gainst the Lord also. Vers. 12. Teacheth kings, euen for example sake, to absteine from all manner of euill, speciallie from iniustice and wrong doo∣ing. Vers. 13. Teacheth kings, to abhorre flatterers and flattery, and to de∣light in such, as will speake the trueth fully and boldlie. Vers. 14. Teach∣eth wise men, in time to labor to quiet the iust rage of a Prince, least other∣wise, there fall out great mischiefes. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, to purchase and delight in the fauor of Princes and Potentates: alwaies prouided, that wee doo it, by lawfull and holy meanes. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs to preferre hea∣uenlie wisdome, before all earthlie things whatsoeuer. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs, first that none can be counted good, but such as haue an vnfeined care to shunne thinges that bee naught, secondlie that a holie life is very profitable both for soule and bodie. Ʋers. 18. Teacheth vs, to auoide pride, least con∣tinuing in it, we be ouerthrowne. Ʋers. 19. Teacheth vs to imbrace true humilitie and lowlines of minde. Vers. 20. Teacheth vs, to bee carefull in the dooing of our affayres: also continually to trust in the Lord, and the trueth of his promises. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, to giue a iust commendati∣on, to the giftes and graces of God in any: also to vse profitable, comforta∣ble, and good speaches to others. Ʋers. 22. Teacheth vs, to haue a care, to obteine spirituall vnderstanding and knowledge. Ʋers. 23. To beware of rash speach, and to thinke well of our words, before we vtter them. Ʋers. 24. Teacheth vs, to vse gentle, softe and good speaches. Ʋers. 25. Tea∣cheth vs, not to hang vpon our owne iudgements, but vpon the rule of Gods word onely. Ʋers. 26. Commendeth vnto vs, painefull trauaile, in our se∣uerall callings. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs, to auoide, both imagining and doing euill against any. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, to take heede, that we bee not authors of strife or tale carriers Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, to beware of offering any man any iniurie, or intising any man, to those things that are e∣uill. Vers. 30. Teacheth, that we must neither by word nor countenance, practise or performe euill against others. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, that god∣ly old age, is greatlie to be reuerenced and esteemed. Vers. 32. Teacheth vs to imploy all our forces, to the subduing of the rage of our owne affecti∣ons. Vers. 33. Teacheth vs, that nothing falleth out by fortune or chance, but is whollie and altogether directed, by the infinite and eternall proui∣dence of almightie God.
CHAP. 17. Co. THis Chapter dependeth vpon the former thus: he had shewed before, that all thinges were guided according to the determinate counsell and purpose of God, which ought to teache vs contentednes with whatsoeuer it shall please God either of our owne, or of other mens to bestowe vpon vs, which J take to bee the meaning of the first verse. Di. THe Chapter may be diuided into three partes. In the first he intreateth of contentednes of minde, of a good seruant, of the assured knowledge which God hath, of wicked and lying persons, of scorners at other mens miseries, of Children and posteritie, of a proude foole, and a lying Prince, of rewards, and of loue and contention, from vers. 1. to the end of the 9. In  the second, he speaketh of reproof, of seditious persons, of the rage of fooles, of wrath not preuented in time, of recompensing euill for good, of the rich man that is a foole, of frends and brethren and of suertiship: from vers. 10.  to the end of the 18. In the third hee dealeth with proude and contentious persons, with froward and euill tongued people, foolish parents, and ill children, also hee speaketh of the sorrowe and ioyfulnes of the heart, of bribes and giftes, of the wise man and foole, of euill children, of vpright iudgement, of fewe words: from vers. 19. to the end of the chapter. Se. Vers. 1. BEtter [vz. by much] is a drie morsell [vz. of bread, meaning a morsell of drie bread without drinke, or any other thing with it] if peace bee with it: [i. if men haue it in peace and quietnes, and with vnfeined good wil one of them towards another] than an house full [i. very great store and plentie] of sacrifices [i. meat left of freewill offerings, which are cal∣led sacrifices because they are parte of that which was sacrificed: see Chap. 7.14.] with strife [vz. one of them a∣gainst  another, such a like sentence we had before, Chap. 15.17.] Vers. 2. A discreete seruant, [i. a faithfull, painefull, and wise seruant, hee calleth such a one Chap. 10.5. the sonne of wisdome: and Chap. 14.35. a wise ser∣uant,] shall haue rule ouer a leude sonne [i. shall bee preferred before him, yea so, that many times he shall rule and gouerne him: this fellowe is called the sonne of confusion, Chap. 10.5.] and he shall diuide the heritage [vz. thorowe Gods ordinance and the fathers appoyntment, as it were by will,] among the brethren. [It was a common matter, to haue goods, possessions, and lands, deuided to the sons or daughters, amongst the people of the Iewes,
see Nombers 36.2. also, Luke. 12.13. his meaning is, that wisdome exal∣teth the basest, and follie casteth downe them that are very high.] Vers. 3.  As is the fining pot for siluer, and the fornace for gold, [i. as the fining pot and the fornace, serue to trie good siluer and gold from drosse and corrupti∣on:] so the Lord tryeth [vz. by many meanes and waies] the hearts [vz. of men: meaning thereby also, all the thoughts, affections, and imaginations thereof, yea the whole man himself, both inward and outward: q.d. as men by their arte trie all things, which is well done; so God is he alone, that sear∣cheth the hearts and raines: see Ierem. 17.9, 10.] Vers. 4. The wicked  [i. he that selleth himselfe ouer to worke wickednes,] giueth heede [vz. ve∣rie attentiuelie and diligentlie] to false lippes, [i. to false words vttered with the lippes against other men, or to false accusing persons, a parte for the whole,] and a lyer [i. he that is a lyer himselfe] hearkeneth [vz. heedilie] to the naughtie tongue. [vz. of an other man, who is like to himselfe: meaning tht one wicked man, will regard and estéeme another, euen in those things which be euill and wicked, and whereof in deed they ought to be ashamed.] Vers. 5. He that mocketh [vz. either by word or deed] the poore [i. hee that  is any manner of way afflicted and cast downe,] reprocheth him that made him [i. God: q.d. hee doth after a sorte, scorne and scoffe at God: see a like sentence, Chap. 14.31.] and he that reioyceth at destruction, [i. at the hurte or hinderance of another man, or at any euill whatsoeuer that falleth vpon him] shall not bee vnpunished: [i. shall bee certainelie punished, and by no meanes escape it: see Chap. 11.21. and Chap. 16.5.] Vers. 6. Childrens  children, [i. properlie Neuewes, but the holy Ghost meaneth hereby a long race and posteritie, as Psalme 128.6.] are the crowne, [i. are the glorie re∣nowme and decking: see Chap. 12.4. also Chap. 16.31.] of the elders [i. of their graundfathers, great graundfathers, &c. This hee speaketh of good, holy, and obedient children] all the glorie of the children, [i. a singular meane whereby the children, come to glorie and renowme] are their fathers. [i. their wise and godly Parents.] Ver. 7. High talke, [i. talke of high and great  matters, as of vertue, wisdome, &c.] becommeth not a foole, [i. is not séeme∣lie in his mouth, because howsoeuer hee can babble of the things, yet he hath them not in effect:] much lesse lying talke a Prince, [q.d. much lesse dooth it beseeme a great personage, to bee ouertaken with lying, or any other euill, either in word or deede. One readeth it otherwise, and giueth another sense of it; but I like this as well, if not better.] Vers. 8. A rewarde [vz. gi∣uen  to a mightie man, or Magistrate] is as a stone pleasant, [i. is like a preci∣ous and pleasant stone, meaning that it is of great regarde and estimation] in the eyes [i. in the iudgement and opinion] of them that haue it [vz. giuen them by others] it prospereth [i. taketh good successe,] whether soeuer it tur∣neth [i. to what end soeuer it be applied: his purposes is, to describe the great corruption of bribes and giftes: q.d. a corrupt reward is with couetous Iudges verie forcible to peruert iust iudgement, and therefore whosoeuer
giueth it, the Magistrate receauing it, great likelyhoode there is, that his  cause, whether it be good or badde, shall be preferred.] Vers. 9. He that co∣uereth [vz. by all lawfull meanes, and what he may, or as much as in him lyeth] a transgression [vz. committed against another man] seeketh loue: [i. indeuoreth thereby to mainteyne and vphold loue betweene them. He mea∣neth, that he that keepeth close, offences committed by one against another, and blaseth them not abroad to any, is a verie good preseruer and increaser of true frendship: see Prouerb. 10.12. also Chap. 16.28.] but he that repea∣teth a matter, [vz. done long before against another, meaning by repeating of it, reporting of it in speach,] seperateth the Prince. [see this expounded Chap. 16.28. meaning hereby the chiefe frends, and the alienating, and tur∣ning  of their minds and affections one of them from another.] Vers. 10. A reproofe [vz. alone vttered in bare words, but yet wisely and charitably expressed] entereth more into him [i. taketh deepe roote, and bringeth forth more profit in him] that hath vnderstanding, [i. that is truely wise indeed] than an hundred stripes into a foole [i. than great correction bestowed vpon a foole and wicked person: q.d. a wise man will be more built vp in goodnes  by a bare word, then a foole by thousands of words or blowes.] Vers. 11. A seditious person [i. a man giuen to disquietnes and trouble] seeketh onely e∣uill [i. studieth nothing els, but how he may performe mischief, but hee shall gaine nothing thereby, as appeareth by that which followeth] and a cruell messenger, [i. either a tormentor, or some other who shall execute the iudge∣ment of God, and the Magistrates against him, not repenting] shall bee sent [vz. from God, or man, or both] against him, [vz. to punish him according  to the greeuousnes of his offences.] Vers. 12. It is better, [i. there is lesse danger in it] for a man [vz. that is himselfe alone vnprepared, or vnarmed,] to meete [vz. in the wildernes, or els where] a beare [the worde is of the Masculine gender, and signifieth notwithstanding the Femall also or shee beare] robbed of hir whelpes, [i. whose yong ones haue been taken from hir, by some one meanes, or other. The beares when they haue lost their whelps, are verie fearce and cruell, speciallie the shee beares, as whose affection see∣meth to bee greater towards them: concerning the greatnes of the danger, which may befall men by beares. see 2. Samuel. 17.8. 2. king. 2.24. Hoseah. 13.8.] than a foole in his follie. [i. then a wicked man in the extremitie of his wickednes and rage: q.d. it were lesse euill to fall into the power of the one,  than of the other.] Vers. 13. He [vz. whosoeuer he bee,] that rewardeth, [i. rendreth and yeeldeth vnto another man,] euill [i. mischief and hurt] for good, [i. for the good and profit, that hee hath receaued by him,] euill [i. plagues and punishments from God, and manie times displeasure from men also.] shall not depart from his house [i. from him, or from his wicked poste∣ritie. It is a sinne against all lawe, yea euen against nature, to requite good with euill: see it forbidden. Roman. 12.17. where wee are forbidden to re∣compence euill for euill, much lesse to recompence good with euill.] Vers.
14. The beginning of strife, [i. the beginner of strife, he putteth the thing for the persons: q.d. he that is the worker of the beginning of strife] is as one that openeth the waters: [vz. which were shut vp in standing pooles or ponds, which being once let out, they ouerflowe, and carrie away euery thing that standeth before them, and cannot againe be shut vp and inclosed: q.d. the hole or since, by which they are let foorth, at the first seemeth narrowe, but after∣wards by the rage of the waters, it is made greater; and so is it with strife and contention] therefore or the contention be medled with, [i. before it be any whit at al begun] leaue of. [vz. from it. He would haue vs to withstand and quench the beginning of strife.] Ver. 15. He that iustifieth [i. declareth either  by word or déed as iust: so haue you the word oftentimes vsed both in ye old & new Testament Exod. 23.7. Isaiah 5.23. Math. 11.19. 1. Tim. 3.17.] the wicked [vz. man] and he that condemneth [i. either by word or deed pronoun∣ceth sentence of condemnation against] the iust, [i. the vpright & innocent per∣son] euen they both [vz. of what state, condition or calling soeuer they be] are an abomination to the Lord. [i. lothed, & disliked of him: see chapt. 11.1. for this phrase, and for the matter & words almost, see the like sentence Chapt. 24.24.] Ve. 16. Wherfore [i. to what end & purpose] is there a price [i. means  as riches, or monie, wherby a thing prised may bee bought] in the hand [i. in the power, as sundry times in the scripture] of the foole [i. of the wicked & vn∣godlie man] to get wisedome, [vz. by it] & he hath none heart? [vz. to obtaine it: meaning, that he hath no affection or pleasure thereto: q.d. It auaileth the foole nothing, yea rather it is a miserable thing vnto him to haue full hands, or great power, & no heart or wil at all to obtaine good things. For he is vn∣worthie of good things that disdaineth wisedom, yea those very good things shall tend to his greater iudgement.] Ver. 17. A friend [i. he that is a faith∣full & trustie friend] loueth [vz. vnfeignedly & with a good heart, his familiar  friend or acquaintance] at all times: [vz. both of aduersitie and prosperitie, for nothing can turne away his minde] and a brother [i. a naturall and deare friend, for I suppose he speaketh not of naturall brethren onely] is borne [i. is brought foorth as it were into the worlde, and so made manifest] for aduersitie. [i. euen against the daies of troubles and trialls come: q.d. then doth the force of naturall friendship appeare, which before in prosperitie lay as it were hidden.] Vers. 18. A man destitute of vnderstanding [i. an vn∣wise  and foolish man] toucheth the hand, [vz. of another, giuing him his hand and word, as it were, for the payment and performance of some thing: see Chapt. 6.1.] and becommeth suretie [vz. by that meanes] for his neigh∣bour. [i. his familiar friend and acquaintance: see chap. 1.1, 2, &c. Also chap. 11.15.] Vers. 19. He loueth transgression, that loueth strife: [vz. either be∣twéene  himselfe and some others, or els betwéene other men, though he him∣selfe be none of the parties striuing, He meaneth, that the author of conten∣tion loueth all manner of euill, because there is almost none euill, but it ari∣seth and is increased by contention] and he that exalteth [i. setteth on high]
his gate [i. the gate or doore of his house, meaning in an allegorie hereby, he that despising others, lifteth vp himselfe, which is fitly shadowed out by this speach, because it sometime falleth out, that they that set their doores high, fall backward from thence, and so bruse, hurt, and wound themselues] see∣keth  destruction. [i. his own hurt and danger.] Vers. 20. The froward heart [i. the man giuen to frowardnes: a part for the whole, and yet he nameth the heart, because it is the seate of affections, from whence also they flowe] fin∣deth no good: [i. obtaineth no good thing, either before God or man, but much euill and hurt rather] and he that hath a naughtie tongue, [i. he that vseth his tongue to speake either lewdlie and filthilie, or els vntruely or falsely against any] shall fall into euill. [i. shall be ouertaken with Gods iudgements for the same, and haue those things light vpon him, that his tongue hath pronoun∣ced  against other men.] Vers. 21. He that begetteth a foole, [i. the parents of a foolish child. He putteth the first part of procreation for the whole, and the education thereof also; because in the first generation no man knoweth what his sonne or child shalbe: and of the habite, which the child afterwards getteth, either by the parents negligence, or euill bringing vp: or though he haue béen well instructed, yet notwithstanding he hath an euill hart or mind] getteth himselfe sorowe, [vz. through the follie of his child] and the father of a foole [i. his parents] can haue no ioye. [vz. in their foolish children, and so long as they continue such: see Prouerb. 10.1. Also 15.20. And also verse  25. of this Chapter.] Vers. 22. A ioyfull heart [i. a heart that is truely tou∣ched with ioye: for he doth not speake of a dissembled or counterfeited ioye] causeth good health: [vz. to the whole man: vnderstanding also by the word health, all good things] but a sorowfull mind [i. the mind which is wounded and oppressed with sorowe] drieth the bones. [i. corrupteth and consumeth  the whole man, yea his most inward parts: see Chapt. 14.13.] Vers. 23. A wicked man [i. a man giuen to wickednes: and this may bee vnderstood either of the man giuing the bride, or of the Iudge receiuing it] taketh a gift [vz. either which he had prepared to giue the Iudge, or the Iudge knew he had brought] out of the bosome, [i. closely and priuily, as men are wont to doo things which they take out of their bosomes] to wrest [i. to peruert and turne vpside downe: q.d. the one giueth it, and the other receiueth it, to that end] the waies of iudgement. [i. iust and vpright matters, in which, as in broad  and high waies, the Iudge should walke without all partialitie.] Vers. 24. Wisedome is in the face of him that hath vnderstanding: [i. the very staied and pleasant countenance of a wise man, is sufficient to set out the wisedome that is in him] but the eyes of a foole are in the corners of the world. [i. wander h∣ther and thether, which is sufficient enough to bewray the vnstaiednes of his mind, and the follie of his heart. He meaneth, that euen by the countenance,  men may many times iudge of wisedome and follie.] Vers. 25. A foolish sonne [i. a wicked, lewd, and disobedient child, whether he be sonne or daugh∣ter] is a griefe [vz. of heart, that is a great griefe] vnto his father, [vz. that
begot him, if he liue to see, behold, or heare of his wickednes] and a heauines [vz. of heart also] to her that bare him. [i. to his or her mother: see Chapter 10.1. For no greater griefe can come to parents in this life, than to know or heare of the ill demeanour of their children.] Vers. 26. Surely it is not good   [i. it is a very hurtful and euill thing] to condemne the iust, [vz. any manner of way: see verse 15. of this Chapter: and this appertaineth to Magistrates, putting them in mind of their dueties, to execute iustice, & to minister right] nor [vz. is it good, but euill and hurtfull] that the princes [i. the Magistrates and rulers] should smite [i. any manner of way punish] such [i. iust persons] for equitie. [i. for their vpright and good dealing: withall, he putteth Princes in minde to beware of tyrannie.] Vers. 27. He that hath knowledge [i. he  that is indéede wise, and indued with sound knowledge] spareth his words, [i. oftentimes refraineth his speaches, he doth not rashly powre out by his words the thoughts of his heart, no though they bee good things, but obser∣ueth time, place, &c. see Chapt. 15.23, 28. Also Chapt. 29.11.] and a man of vnderstanding [i. one indued with right vnderstanding and knowledge] is of an excellent spirit. [Some reade,] is precious in spirit [i. is of a rare spirit, for the excellencie of it, as the word of God is sayd to be precious, 1. Sam. 3.1. Others reade, cold in spirit: meaning, that hee is moderate and well staied, and easilie bursteth not foorth into anger, but doth diligently take héed of the heate of his heart: the senses doo not much differ.] Vers. 28. Euen a  foole [q.d. so great is the commendation of silence, that if vnwise people hold their tongues, they may be déemed and taken for wise many times] when he holdeth his peace [i. speaketh not to the bewraying of his follie] is counted wise, [vz. many times, because wise men iudge not but by words and déedes] and he that stoppeth his lippes, [vz. from speaking] prudent. [i. is counted, or may be counted prudent and wise. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, how good a thing peace is, and how hurtfull strife and contention is. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth seruants to striue to diligence, faith∣fulnes, and wisedome in all their masters affaires. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that God knoweth all thinges, either within man, or without him, and many times trieth him by many meanes to make him pure vnto himselfe. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, not to lend our eares to false accusations, or lying tales. Vers. 5. Teacheth, that we ought not to reioyce at any mans pouertie, affliction, or hurt whatsoeuer. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that to haue posteritie, is a good bles∣sing from the Lord, and that it is a great grace to haue good fathers. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, that wicked men should not talke of good things, nor great personages giue themselues to lying and iniurie. Vers. 8. Setteth out, what great hurt commeth by giuing and taking of rewards or bribes. Ʋers. 9. Teacheth vs, to couer such matters as may breake and hinder growth in loue. Vers. 10. Teacheth vs, that reproofes are profitable to Gods children, and that nothing will amend the wicked and vngodlie. Ʋers. 11. Setteth
out the nature of sedicious people, and the iudgement that they shal receiue from God and men. Vers. 12. Setteth out the great rage and madnes of the wicked and vngodlie. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, not to recompence euill with euill, as worldly men doo, much lesse to requite good with euill, but to doo good for good, and to ouercome euill with well doing. Ʋers. 14. Teacheth vs, to withstand the beginnings, as of all euill generally, so particularly of strife and contention. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, to beware what we vtter, ei∣ther with or against men. Ʋers. 16. Teacheth vs, that neither wealth, nor a∣ny outward things can attaine heauenly wisedome. Ʋers. 17. Teacheth vs, that amongst Gods children there should be at all times a stedfast bond of loue, speciallie in the daies of aduersitie. Vers. 18. Teacheth men to beware of suretiship. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, to beware of contention with others, and also of pride or lifting vp our selues aboue others. Ʋers. 20. Teacheth vs, to flie from frowardnes of heart, and naughtines of speach. Vers. 21. Tea∣cheth vs, that lewd and ill children are great griefe vnto their parents. Vers. 22. Setteth out what commodities ioye of heart bringeth with it, and also the discommodities of a sorowfull heart. Vers. 23. Declareth what great mischiefe bribes and rewards giuen and taken doo worke. Vers. 24. Tea∣cheth vs, that mens countenances many times bewray, either their wisedom or their follie. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, that euill children are matters of great griefe to their parents. Ʋers. 26. Teacheth Magistrates iustlie to execute iustice, and to punish no man for well doing. Ʋers. 27. Teacheth vs to a∣uoide multitude of words and babbling, for where there are many words, there is much sinne. Ʋers. 28. Teacheth vs, that there seldome or neuer commeth any hurt by silence, but rather credite sundrie times. CHAP. 18. Co. IN the latter end of the other Chapter, he spake of a prudent or wise man: now in the beginning of this he sheweth, that such a man will spare no cost nor la∣bour, to the end he may haue his desire satisfied in obtaining holie and heauen∣lie wisedome. Di. THis Chapter may bee diuided into three parts. The first reacheth from vers. 1. to the end of the 8. wherein he speaketh of the desire of wisedom, of the foolish and wicked man, of wise words, of respect of persons, of the words of fooles and tale bearers, and the hurt which commeth by them  both. The second reacheth from verse 9. to the ende of the 16. wherein he speaketh of the slothfull person, of Gods power, of riches of pride, and hu∣militie, of hastie answers, of the griefe of bodie and soule, of paines to get  wisedome, and of the power and force of gifts or rewards. The third rea∣cheth from verse 17. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaketh of the first complainer, of the vse of the lot, of the wrath of brethren, of good
words and speaches, of a good wife, of the poore and rich, and of a true frend or brother. Se. Vers. 1. FOr the desire thereof, [i. for the earnest affection that hee hath to obteyne holy and heauenly wisdome] hee, [i. a good man] will seperate himselfe [vz. from all that hee hath, that may let him] to seeke it, [i. to the end hee may seeke and finde it: see Matth. 13.44, 45, 46.] and occu∣pie himselfe: [i. he will carefullie imploy himselfe, and diligentlie also,] in all wis∣dome, [i. in wisdome it selfe, and in all the meanes whereby hee may growe and increase in the same: others I knowe reade it otherwise, and giue ano∣sense, but me thinketh this is plaine inough.] Vers. 2.] A foole hath no  delight [vz. at all] in vnderstanding, [i. either in the thing it selfe, or in the meanes, whereby it may be obteyned] but [vz. his delite is] that his heart, [i. the things that be in his heart] may be discouered. [vz. to other men, and that by his vaine babbling and speaking of euerie thing that commeth in∣to his mind: q.d. he is onely delighted with his owne follie, which he labo∣reth to publish and make knowne to all men.] Verse 3. When the wicked  commeth, [i. wheresoeuer there is a wicked man,] then commeth [vz. with him, i. there is] contempt [vz. of other men, hee meaneth that this is pro∣per to the wicked, and is as it were his inseperable companion, to despise o∣thers,] and with the vile man, [vz. there is alwaies] reproach, [i. disdaine∣full vttering of reproches against others. I denie not, but that this verse may be taken, as though God should punish the wicked and vile men, with contempt and reproach, but the other sense in my iudgement, is more simple and plaine.] Vers. 4. The words of a mans mouth, [i. such words and spea∣ches,  as proceed from a wise mans mouth] are like deepe waters, [vz. which cannot be drawne emptie, neither can a man come to the bottome of them: so the wisdome and learning of a wise man, neuer ceaseth, but the more he vtte∣reth, the more he may,] and the welspring of wisdome [i. the great plentie and abundance he hath of it, meaning hereby also, the wise mans mouth powring it out, and largely communicating it to others] is like a flowing riuer. [i. is like to a riuer that floweth continuallie: hee meaneth by these Metaphors and similitudes, that there is neuer scarsitie of wisdome in him.] Vers. 5.  It is not good: [i. it is verie euill and hurtfull, as chap. 17.26.] to accept [i. to regard or looke vpon] the person of the wicked: [i. any thing in him at all, as his authoritie, wit, words, giftes, &c: see this forbidden, Deutero. 1.17.] to cause [vz. thereby] the righteous to fall [i. to bee ouerthrowne] in iudge∣ment. [i. where iudgement is to be pronounced. This belongeth to Iudges, and Magistrates, who are many times so moued, with the power, &c. of the
wicked, that the iust and porer sorte come to ruine thereby, which fault should  bee corrected.] Vers. 6. A fooles lippes [i. the wordes which a foole vtte∣reth with his lippes] commeth with strife, [i. haue alwaies strife annexed vnto them, as an inseperable companion, and are mingled altogether with contentions,] and his mouth [i. the wordes which hee speaketh with his mouth] calleth for stripes. [vz. to bee layde vppon him for his follie, meaning that his owne wordes are meanes to hurte himselfe.] Verse  7. A fooles mouth, [i. words spoken with his mouth] is his owne destructi∣on, [i. bring hurt and destruction vnto himselfe] and his lippes, [i. speaches vttered with his lippes] are a snare for his soule: [i. are instruments and meanes, to bring him within the danger of the losse of his life: see chap. 10.14.  also chap. 13.3.] Vers. 8. The words of a talebearer [vz. which he vt∣tereth to some against other some] are as flatterings, [i. they seeme pleasant and sweete, yea to be more gentle than oyle or butter: see Psal. 55.21.] and [i. but for all that, or els thus: and vz. yet notwithstanding] they go downe into the bowells of the bellie, [i. into the bowels which are within the bellie, meaning that they wound euen the verie entrailes, which being once peri∣shed, there is no hope of life, and therefore it is as much: q.d. they wound  men most grieuouslie, yea deadlie.] Vers. 9. Hee also [vz. as well as the talebearer, is to be misliked] that is slothfull, [i. giuen to idlenes and loyte∣ring] in his worke: [i. in dooing the thing he is set about, and should indeed performe] is euen the brother of him that is a great waster [vz. of the things which he hath: he meaneth that he is cosin german as it were, with the prodi∣gall person, because looke what the one looseth by superfluitie and ryot, the o∣ther  forgoeth thorow sloth and idlenes.] Vers. 10. The name of the Lord [i. his Maiestie, goodnes and power, as sundry times in the Psalmes, and namelie Psalme 20.1.] is a strong tower [vz. to all such as stedfastly trust therein, meaning by strong tower, a mightie defence to shielde him, and to keepe him safe, from all the dangers, of such as would anoye him: see Psal. 61.3.] the righteous [vz. at all times, but speciallie in the dayes of his di∣stresse] runneth [vz. with all possible hast and speed] vnto it [i. to this assu∣red tower of Gods strength, might, power, goodnes, &c.] and is exalted, [i. lifted vp, vz. into a high place, where hee shall be safe and sound, from the  attemptes of all his enemies.] Vers. 11. The rich mans riches [i. the ri∣ches which he presentlie possesseth,] are his strong citie [i. hee maketh them vnto himselfe a defence against all attemptes and assaultes made against him: see before Chap. 10.15.] and as an hie wall in his imagination. [i. hee fondlie imagineth, that they are sufficiently able, not onely to keepe him from the violence of men, but also to shield him and couer him so, that ney∣ther  God nor man shall behold his leudnes.] Vers. 12. Before destruction [i. before the calamitie, fall, or hurt of any man come] the heart of a man is hautie [i. a man himselfe is proude and loftie: a parte for the whole, and yet he mentioneth the heart, because from thence pride groweth, and floweth:
see Chap. 11.2. also 16.18.] and before glorie, [i. before a man come to glo∣rie and estimation amongst men] goeth lowlines [vz. of heart and bodie: q.d. humilitie is a meane to come to glorie: see chap. 15.33. as pride is a meane to come to contempt.] Vers. 13. Hee [vz. whosoeuer he be] that answe∣reth  a matter, [i. that taketh vpon him to shape an answere to a thing] be∣fore he heareth it [vz. thorowly out, or els thus] before he heare it, [i. before he vnderstand it,] it [i. that manner of dealing, and his answere also] is fol∣lie and shame vnto him, [i. bewrayeth his owne follie, and purchaseth him great discredit, because he will bee so rash and hastie.] Vers. 14. The spirit  of a man, [i. a man, that hath a bold spirit and good courage, specially giuen him from God,] will susteyne. [i. indure and beare, and that with great pati∣ence and constancie] his infirmitie: [i. all outward griefs and discommodi∣ties whatsoeuer,] but a wounded spirite, [i. a man striken with the wrath of God, and wounded in conscience, for his sinnes, or other great causes: see Psal. 51.17.] who can beare it? [i. who is able to indure it long, without great and gracious assistance from God: q.d. there is no man, nor any thing els: for as for the bodie, it cannot doo it, because it is not his office to rule the spirite and minde, but rather the minde and soule it selfe, although it be cari∣ed about in the bodie, to rule, guide and gouerne it: see Prouerb. 15.13. and the note of the Geneua bible, is very good also.] Vers. 15. A wise heart [i. he  that hath obteyned some measure of wisdome alreadie] getteth [vz. daylie more and more,] knowledge, [vz. of Gods will reuealed in his worde] and the eare of the wise, [i. the wise man himself by attentiue harkening] seeketh learning, [i. seeketh daylie increase of the same, he ioyneth the heart, and the eare together, though vnder eyther of them he vnderstand ye whole man, be∣cause that from a heart desirous of knowledge, procéedeth the attentiue eare, which is apte to learne, and earnestly seeketh after it.] Vers. 16. A mans  gifte [vz. which hee giueth, or bestoweth vpon another,] enlargeth him, [i. deliuereth him from distresse] and leadeth him before great men: [i. bringeth him into their presence, so that he may tell his owne tale, and speake for him∣selfe. And here he teacheth what men are wont to doo, and not what may bée done, though sometimes a man may giue gifts to be deliuered from danger, when otherwise he cannot: but he must beware with all, that he be not there∣by iniurious to any other] Vers. 17. He that is first [vz. before the iudge  or magistrate] in his owne cause, [i. in laying out his owne cause, and the things apperteyning thereto] is iust, [i. so seemeth to bee, meaning that he seemeth to haue a iust and good cause,] then [i. afterwards] commeth [vz. before the iudge] his neighbour [i. he betweene him and whomthere is some controuersie,] and [vz. the iudge, vpon his appearance and speach] maketh inquirie of him, [i. inquireth of either of them, how the case standeth, labo∣ring by demaunds and questions to get the certeintie thereof: q.d. hee that first bringeth his cause to the Iudges, seemeth to pleade a right cause, til his aduersarie bee heard, and the Iudge vnderstand the trueth of the matter.]
Vers. 18. The lot [vz. whose direction is from the Lord, as Chap. 16.33.] causeth [i. ought to cause] contentions to cease, [vz. amongst men, vnlesse they will after the manner of giants, fight against God and his decree,] and maketh a partition, [vz. iustly and vprightly,] among the mightie. [i. yea e∣uen among them, that are at great dissention, and by reason of their strength and power might hurt one another very much. Ioyne this, with the other verse thus. If the matters betweene men, bee so hard and doubtfull, that the trueth of them cannot bee knowne then let the lot, decide the controuersie.]  Vers. 19. A brother offended [i. greeued and that with his brother, for some one cause or other] is harder to winne, [i. it is a harder matter to winne him to reconciliation] than a strong citie, [i. than a citie well defen∣red: so hard a matter is it, to master mens affections: see Chap. 16.32.] and their contentions [i. the strifes betweene them] are like the barre of a pal∣lace, [which must of necessity bee strong & sure, to keepe the gates of such a great and sumptuous building, wherein also many times, things of great price, are layed vp: he meaneth, that the angers of brethren one of them to∣wards another, are so sharpe and vehement, that they can no more easilier be subdued, than strong defenced townes conquered, or easilier broken, then  most strong barres.] Vers. 20. With the fruite of a mans mouth [i. with his words, which are called the fruite of his mouth, because they come from it, as fruite from a tree,] shall his bellie be satisfied, [i. hee shall haue inough of it,] and with the increase of his lippes, [i. with the abundance of wordes that his lippes shall vtter, and the increase that shall come thereof,] shall hee be filled. [i. he shall haue plentie and abundance, he meaneth that euery man shall receaue the fruite of his owne speach, either good or euill, euen as hee hath spoken either wel or euil, and these Metaphors, of the bellie, satisfying, and so forth, serue but to note the abundance that he shall haue either the one way, or the other: see before Chap. 12, 13, 14. also Chap. 13.2, 3.] Ver.  21. Death and life, [i. all manner of euill and good, all prosperitie and ad∣uersitie] are in the power of the tongue: [i. in the tongue itselfe, rightly vsed or abused] and they that loue it [i. to vse it, either the one way, or the other] shall eate the fruit thereof. [vz. accordingly; meaning that they shall receiue according to the goodnes, or illnes of their speach, see Matth. 12.37. It is of the same sense and meaning, that the other verse before going is. Thus we see, that such as speake well, doo themselues and others good, and they  that speak euill, hurt both themselues and others.] Vers. 22. He that fin∣deth [vz. by the special appointment of God] a wife, [i. a good, diligent and wise wife] findeth a good thing: [i. a profitable and pleasant thing,] and re∣ceaueth [vz. euen in that] fauor of the Lord. [i. a sure testimonie and token of Gods fauor towards him: see Chap. 19.14. he meaneth that a good and  godly wife, is a singular blessing from the Lord,] Vers. 23. The poore [vz. man or men, putting one for many] speaketh [vz. vnto others] with praiers: [i. humbly and beseechingly as a man may say,] but the rich [vz. man, or
persons] answereth [vz. when he is demanded any thing, or els answering here is put for speaking, as before chap. 15.1, 28. Also chap. 16.1.] roughlie. [i. bitterly and sharply: wee see the truth both of the one and the other by ex∣perience.] Vers. 24. A man that hath friends, [i. he that through Gods  blessing, & his owne good dealing hath gotten friends] ought to shew himselfe friendly: [vz. towards them and others also] for a friend [i. a faithfull and vnfeigned friend] is neerer [vz. vnto vs, in fast and sound loue many times] than a brother. [i. than a naturall brother or kinsman: q.d. there are many friends found that will shewe in words and countenances, and performe in déedes and truth more stedfast friendship and loue, than brethren: see to this purpose before Chap. 17.17. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, that nothing should bee so deare vnto vs, as Gods heauenly wisedome. Ʋers. 2. Sheweth, that fooles delight in the disclosing of their own follie. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that we can looke for nothing from wicked men, but contempt and reproach of others. Ʋers. 4. Setteth out the excellencie of a wise man and of his words. Ʋers. 5. Teacheth Magistrates, to banish farre from them all respect of persons. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that wicked men, out of the abundance of their wicked heart, speake wicked things. Ʋers. 7. Teacheth vs, that the wicked many times speake such things as doo greatly indanger themselues. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, to auoide tale ca∣rying and flatterie: also, that though it be pleasant at the first to heare tale tellers, yet the end is dangerous and deadlie. Vers. 9. Teacheth men to be∣ware of idlenes on the one side, and prodigalitie on the other. Vers. 10. Tea∣cheth vs, continually to trust in the goodnes and power of God. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, to auoide trust and confidence in riches, for they are not such sure things as the world maketh account of. Vers. 12. Teacheth vs to auoide pride, and to imbrace humilitie. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, that rash and hastie speaches bewraieth the follie of him that vseth them, and procureth his shame. Vers. 14. Sheweth, what an vnbeareable burthen the affliction of the soule and spirit is. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, to applie our hearts and eares, and all the parts and members of our bodies and mindes to attaine heauenlie wisedome. Vers. 16. Setteth out what great power gifts and rewards haue. Vers. 17. Teacheth Magistrates not to beleeue any one partie, but to exa∣mine both. Vers. 18. Setteth out the right vse of the lot. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs, that there is no strife matchable to the strife amongst brethren. Verse 20. Teacheth vs, that we shall receiue the profite of our words, either good or euill as they were. Ʋers. 21. Deliuereth the same doctrine. Vers. 22. Tea∣cheth vs, that if any man hath receiued a good wife from the Lord, he hath receiued also therewith a good testimonie of his fauour. Ʋers. 23. Decla∣reth what great difference there is betweene the rich and the poore, and the words of either. Vers. 24. Teacheth men to shewe themselues friendly to∣wards such, as from whom they haue receiued friendship, and to preferre a faithfull friend before a naturall brother.
CHAP. 19. Co. HAuing in the latter end of the other Chapter spoken of a faithfull and sure friend, he doth in the beginning of this Chapter shewe, that sound friendship consisteth not in the lippes only, nor in abundance of riches, but in vprightnes and sinceritie of heart, though the partie be poore that professeth it. Di. THe Chapter may be diuided into the three parts. In the first he intreateth of a sound and counterfeit friend, of knowledge, of the peruersnes of the heart, of riches and pouertie, of false witnes bearing and lyes, of the Prince and liberall person, of the decaied man, of the wise person, of fooles and ser∣uants,  from verse 1. to the end of the 10. In the second, he teacheth men to bridle wrath, and speaketh of the fauour and displeasure of Princes, of euill children, and brauling wiues, of a good wife, of idlenes and deceit, of obe∣dience, and contempt of the word, of pitie vppon the poore, of due correc∣tion, of wrath, and of good counsell: from vers. 11. to the end of the 20. In  the third he speaketh of mans deuices and Gods purposes, of poore men and lyers, and of the feare of God, and the fruites thereof, of the idle person, of scorners, also of foolish and wise men, of disobedient children, of auoy∣ding ill counsell, of false witnesses, and of punishment for the wicked and vngodlie, from vers. 21. till you come to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. BEtter [vz. by much or many degrées, as sundrie times before] is the poore [vz. man, or friend] that walketh in his vprightnes, [i. that walketh vprightly both in word & deed towards them, with whom he is ioyned in friendship,] than he that abuseth his lippes, [vz. by pretending great good will in words, and yet hath nothing in effect] and is a foole. [i. and so bewraieth his follie: other reade it otherwise, and giue another sense of it, but me thinketh  this is plaine: for the first part of this verse see Chap. 28.6.] Vers. 2. For without knowledge [i. sound and sincere iudgement] the mind [i. the affection and good will] is not good, [i. is not right and sound, but hurtfull, both to the one partie and the other: for this phrase, it is not good, see Chapter 17.26. Also Chap. 18.5.] and he that hasteth with his feet, [i. he that runneth ha∣stely to euill] sinneth. [vz. against God and his owne soule: q.d. as he hath little regard of himselfe that looketh not to his feete, that he may discerne good waies from bad, yea is in great danger of continual falling; so he that hastely and without great deliberation runneth to this and to that, it is very  likely he shall fall into transgression before he be aware.] Vers. 3. The foo∣lishnes of a man peruerteth his way. [q.d. men must ascribe it to their owne
follie that things goe not well with them, for here he toucheth them that would accuse GOD of the euill successe of their things] and [vz. yet for all that] his heart fretteth against the Lord. [i. he is impatient, and after a sort ascribeth his euill happe, as we say, to God, and not to himselfe.] Vers. 4.  Riches [i. rich men: he putteth the thing for the person, and yet we may not∣withstanding vnderstand it simplie of riches] gathereth many friends: [vz. to him that hath them] but the poore [vz. man or person] is seperated [vz. in friendship & familiaritie] from his neighbour. [vz. for the want of his riches: for the word seperating: see Chap. 17.9. And for the whole verse, see Chap. 14.20. q.d. all men will be friends with rich persons, but euen such as were before friendly to the poore person, depart from him for his pouertie sake.] Vers. 5. A false witnes [i. he that beareth false witnes] shall not be vnpuni∣shed:  [vz. either before God or man: see Deut. 19.19. and in many other pla∣ces of this booke: as Chap. 6.19. Also verse 9. of this Chap.] and he that speaketh lyes, shall not escape. [vz. the iudgement and punishment of almigh∣tie God.] Vers. 6. Many [vz. men] reuerence the face of the Prince, [i. doth  greatly estéeme the person of a great man: for this word face, see Deut. 1.17.] and euery man is friend to him that giueth giftes. [vz. vnto other men: meaning that the liberal person hath many friends.] Vers. 7. All the bre∣thren  [i. all the kinsfolkes, how nigh or farre off so euer they be, if they be a∣liue, and be richer than he] of the poore [vz. man, that is fallen into decay] do hate him: [i. doo despise him, or little regard and set by him] how much more [vz. soone or easilie] will his friends [i. his counterfeit and feigned friends: for of his faithfull ones he had sayd the contrarie before] Chap. 17.17.] de∣part farre from him? [vz. in the time of his affliction and distresse] though he [vz. so afflicted and brought into pouertie] be instant with words, [i. doo ear∣nestly and heartily intreate them for some comfort, reliefe or fauour] yet they will not. [vz. stand fast by him, or minister vnto his need.] Vers. 8. He that  possesseth [i. kéepeth sure and fast] vnderstanding, [i. heauenly wisedome] lo∣ueth his owne soule, [i. himselfe: a part for the whole, or els prouideth well for himselfe. The word in Hebrue is heart, which he vseth, because vnder∣standing & wisedome hath his proper seate in the hart] and keepeth wisedome [which he hath obtained and gotten] to finde goodnes. [i. that thereby he may come to that goodnes which neuer shall decay.] Vers. 9. is the same both in  words and sense, with verse 5. of this Chapter, sauing that there it was said, he shall not escape, and here it is said, he shall perish: q.d. he shal certainlie come to naught.] Vers. 10. Pleasure [vz. in the vse of all Gods blessings] is not  comelie for a foole, [vz. because he knoweth not how to vse it] much lesse [vz. comely is it] for a seruant [vz. that is bound to another man] to haue rule o∣uer Princes. [i. to rule such as should rule others: he meaneth, that fooles should rather haue stripes, as Chapter 10.13. and seruants, seruice or bon∣dage, and not abundance of pleasures and delightes, or rule ouer others, be∣cause they knowe not how to vse them well.] Vers. 11. The discretion of a
man [i. the wisedome and vnderstanding that a man hath, through Gods especiall gift] deferreth [i. is a very good meane to make him to put off, yea to remoue and put away] his anger: [vz. conceiued, or readie to be expressed to∣wards others] and his glorie is [i. it maketh much for his glorie and credit] to passe by [vz. without any great regard: meaning by this maner of speach, easilie to forget and to forgiue] an offence. [vz. committed against him.]  Vers. 12. The Kings wrath [vz. against any of his subiects] is like the roring of a lyon: [i. fearefull and terrible, and threatning as it were present death. The Hebrue word signifieth a yong lyon, which hath more courage, & roreth much more strongly, which serueth also to aggrauate the danger: see Ho∣sea 3.4, 8. q.d. as the lyon feareth men and beastes by roring: so doth the Princes wrath terrifie men, but specially his subiects: see Chap. 16.14.] but his fauour [vz. towards any] is like the deaw vpon the grasse. [i. both comfor∣table to coole it after some great heate, & profitable to make it grow: meaning that the fauour of great men is profitable for their people, and gladdeth their  harts: sée chap. 16.15.] Vers. 13. A foolish sonne [i. a wicked child, whether it be sonne or daughter; but yet it more grieueth a man, when he in whom the hope of his name is left, shall be dissolute] is the calamitie of his father, [i. bringeth grieuous and intollerable miserie vpon his parents: see Prou. 10.1. Also Chap. 15.20. Chap. 17.25.] and the contentions of a wife [i. such as procéede from a wife, or els a contentious woman or wife her selfe] are like a continuall dropping. [vz. or raine or water vpon stone or timber, which eateth into it or rotteth it: meaning, that they doo euen consume a man & his house∣hold,  see Chap. 21.9. Also Chap. 27.15.] Vers. 14. House [i. lands] and riches [i. goods and wealth whatsoeuer] are the inheritance of the fathers: [i. are such inheritances as fathers leaue to their children] but a prudent wife [i. a godlie, vertuous, and wise wife] commeth of the Lord. [vz. onely as a spe∣ciall gift and blessing from him, sée Chap. 18.22. He meaneth not that inhe∣ritances come not from the Lord, but because they come by the meane of the parents, they seeme in our iudgement further off from God, than a good wife; and yet neither of them fall out but according to his will, though it appeare more immediatly in match of mariage, than in inheritances or pos∣sessions.]  Vers. 15. Slothfulnes causeth [vz. men in whom it raigneth] to fall a sleepe, [i. to be careles and negligent of their affaires] and a deceitfull person [i. he that giueth himselfe ouer to deceiue others] shall be affamished. [vz. for lacke of foode: meaning, he should fall into great pouertie and extremitie: he ioyneth deceit and slothfulnes together, because they are companions that can hardly bee sundred, shewing that both the sluggards, which cease from doing of their duetie, and the deceitfull, that liue against all charitie, shall bée  punished from God.] Vers. 16. He that keepeth [vz. vnfeignedly, & with al his heart] the commandement, [vz. of the Lord, meaning thereby his holie law, which consisteth in commandements, one being put for all, because the law giuer is but one, & obedience to the whole tendeth but chiefly to one end,
that is Gods glorie, though indéed eternal saluation be annexed thereto] kee∣peth his owne soule [i. he himself: a part for the whole, meaning that thorow o∣bedience he doth deliuer himself from danger of eternal death & destruction] but he that despiseth his waies [i. maketh no account, how or after what sort he doth liue, nor hath care to frame his life according to the prescript rule of Gods worde] shall dye. [i. shall certeinely perish speciallie in the World to come. Vers. 17. He that hath mercie [i. sheweth pittie and compassion, ei∣ther  by word or deed, or both] vpon the poore, [i. vpon such as bee distressed, and are not able to helpe themselues] lendeth vnto the Lord [vz. all that whatsoeuer he doth which he bestoweth vpon the poore: the reason is because the Lord maketh account of the godly poore, and things done to them, as of himselfe, and performed to him: see Matth. 25.40.] and the Lord will re∣compense him [vz. to the full, yea in the largenes of his mercie, giue him a thousand times more] that which he hath giuen. [vz. willingly, and chere∣fullie to the poore. 2. Corinth. 9.7. and that in his name, Mark 9.41. He shooteth at this marke in this one verse: that is to teach them tender harted∣nes towards the afflicted, which that he may the better perswade them too, hee setteth before them both a plentifull, and also an assured reward from God.] Vers. 18. Chasten [vz. moderately, and with good discretion] thy  sonne, [i. thy child, as sundrie times before] while there is hope, [vz. that thy correction will amend him, and doo him good: meaning while hee is yong, for if he growe to a head of stubbornes, it will be a hard matter to reforme him] and let not thy soule [i. thy fatherly affection and pittie, which are called the soule, because they haue their seate in the soule] spare [vz. him, or correcting of him, so it be done as before is prescribed] for his murmering. [vz. against thée: q.d. though hee murmur and grudge, yet forbeare not to correct him, when he deserueth the same.] Vers. 19. A man of much anger, [i. he that  is oftentimes angrie] shall suffer punishment [vz. either publikely or priuat∣ly, for the transgressions, which his wrath causeth him to commit,] and though thou [i. any man] deliuer him [vz. by good perswasion from com∣mitting euill, or by intreatie and sute set him frée from the hand of the Ma∣gistrate] yet will his anger come againe, [q.d. he will be little or no whit at al the better, but fall to his rage & wrath againe. Other men read it otherwise, and giue other senses, but me thinketh this is plaine.] Vers. 20. Heare [vz.  diligentlie and carefullie] counsell, [i. good counsell giuen thee] and receaue whilst thou mayest haue it,] instruction [vz. in the waies and trueth of the Lord,] that thou maist be wise. [i. atteyne wisdome] in thy latter end. [vz. when thou art ready to departe from the world, and goe to GOD, not but that he would haue him to be wise before also, but to note that then heauen∣ly wisdome shall stand him in best steed, when he is to wrastle with death.] Vers. 21. Many deuises are in a mans heart: [i. many men tosse many  matters too and fro in their imaginations, and yet bring them to no effect or issue,] but the counsell of the Lord [i. whatsoeuer hee hath determined in his
counsell] shall stand [vz. stedfast and sure, both in the purpose, and in the performance thereof, hee mindeth to note the difference betweene Gods  waies and works, and mans.] Vers. 22. That that is to be desired [i. the thing that a man ought speciallie to desire and wish in this life] is his goodnes [i. that he deale religiously towards God, and vprightly towards men,] and [it may be turned for, or but, without any iniurie to the text,] a poore man, [vz. though he be neuer so poore, if he be godly] is better [vz. by many de∣grées, both before God, and also in the iudgement of all goodmen, not mea∣ning hereby that a lyer being poore is good] than a lyer. [i. than one that gi∣ueth  himselfe to lying, though he be neuer so rich.] Vers. 23. The feare of the Lord, [i. a reuerence of his Maiestie, ioyned with an vnfeyned loue there∣of settled in mens hearts] leadeth to life, [i. to a blessed life in this world, and to eternall life in the world to come,] and hee that is filled therewith, [i. hee that hath receaued it fréely and plentifullie from the Lorde, euery one accor∣ding to his measure] shall continue [vz. safe, sound, and stedfast,] and shall not be visited with euill [vz. to his hurt and destruction; for his purpose is not here to exempt Gods children from chastisements and corrections.] Vers.  24. The slothfull [vz. man or person,] hideth his hand in his bosome [vz. in the time of some great cold] and will not put it to his mouth againe, [vz. that thereby he might feede himselfe: q.d. he is so giuen to idlenes and sloth, that euen when great neede and occasion requireth his labor for himselfe and his owne good, he will not doo it, much lesse would he performe it for others, sée  Chap. 26.15.] Vers. 25. Smite [i. correct and chastise, either by wordes or stripes: see Chap. 17.26.] a scorner, [i. one of whome there is no hope of amendment, for a scorner is in the highest degrée of transgression. Psal. 1.1.] and the foolish [i. such as thorowe simplicitie and ignorance, are caried forward to euill] will beware: [vz. of the like fault, for which thou smitest the scorner,] and reprooue the prudent [vz. for some thing, wherein hee hath sayd or done amisse] and he [i. the simple ignorant person] will [vz. in pro∣cesse of time,] vnderstand: [i. atteyne to vnderstand by that meanes] know∣ledge. [vz. of a better trade and course of life. He sheweth that there are two waies to instruct simple ones: the one is sharpe correction of the obstinate,  and the other is louing reproofe of the godly.] Vers. 26. He that destroyeth his father [vz. by bringing him to great losses and hinderances on the one side, or by greeuing him thorowe leudnes on the other side,] or chaseth away his mother,] either out of the house wherein shee dwelleth, or from his pre∣sence with his froward speach] is a leud and shamefull childe, [i. is a very wicked fellowe, and must looke for shame to fall vpon him, and all manner of confusion. Others reade it otherwise, but the sense is all one, vz. that wic∣ked children waste many times thorowe their leudnes their fathers goods, and so turne away their minds from them, that they are glad when they are  out of their sight.] Vers. 27. My sonne [see Chap. 1.10. and other places] heare no more [i. be so farre of from obeying, that see thou heare not any lon∣ger]
the instruction that causeth to erre from the wordes of knowledge, [i. such instruction as carrieth thee away from the right way of holie wisedom: q.d. applie thy selfe altogether to holie doctrine, and therefore withdraw thy minde and thy thought from the vse or custome both of euill words and euil deeds.] Vers. 28. A wicked witnes, [i. a corrupt and false witnes] mocketh  at iudgement, [i. maketh no more account, eyther of right causes them∣selues, or of Magistrates that are placed to execute iustice, or of God him∣selfe that will punish false witnesses, for so largely I suppose, the worde iudgement may bee taken, than of a iest, or thing to bee laughed at,] and the mouth of the wicked: [i. the wicked and vngodly person himselfe, and yet he mentioneth the mouth, because of the Metaphor swalloweth vp following] swalloweth vp [vz. with great delight and pleasure, as dronkards doo strong wine, and gluttons delicate meates: meaning also thereby the abundance of iniquitie, which the vngodlie commit] iniquitie [vz. against God and men. One readeth it thus:] so iniquitie swalloweth vp the mouth of the wicked. [q.d. in that wicked witnesses, doo scorne iudgement, they doo it euen of obstinacy and malice, which doth wholy possesse them, & euen swallowe vp as it were all their words, so that they can speake or vtter nothing but iniquitie. An other sense also may be giuen, as when our text sayth, swallowe vp iniquitie: it meaneth thereby, hiding and couering of the same, as meates and drinkes deuoured and swallowed vp, are not seene: q.d. with the color of their words, and shewe of their reasons, they indeuor to couer their iniquitie.] Vers. 29.  But [q.d. but for all their scorning and cunning speaches,] iudgements, [i. punishments: and the plurall number noteth the variety and multitude of them] are prepared [i. not onely appoynted, but euen in a readynes to be exe∣cuted, eyther by the Magistrate, or els by the Lord himselfe, eyther in this life, or in the life to come, or both] for the scorners, [i. for such as scorne at God, and all goodnes,] and stripes for the back of fooles. [hee meaneth that which hee spake before, expressing it vnder other termes, vnderstanding hereby not onely bodily punishments in this life,] but also eternal in the life to come. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, that the godlie poore estate, is not the worst: also,Do. that we should not giue our lippes leaue to runne at randome. Vers. 2. Tea∣cheth vs, that sounde knowledge is the informer of the minde, also that we should bridle the partes and members of our bodies from wickednes. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that lacke of sound iudgement, is the very mother of all the corruptions, which we commit against God or man. Ʋerse. 4. Teacheth vs, that wee should not regarde a man for his riches onely, nor despise him for his pouertie, but respect rather his good, or his euill dealing towards God and men. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, to abhorre false witnes bearing, and and lying. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, rightly to esteeme great personages, and to practise liberalitie, as a vertue which doth much commend vs to GOD
and men. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, that pouertie, dooth many times estrange the hearts of frends and kinsfolkes, from such as fall into it. Vers. 8. Tea∣cheth vs, that heauenlie wisdome, is the meane to preserue vs, both in this life, and in the life to come. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, to flee from false wit∣nes bearing and lying. Ver. 10. Teacheth vs, that things vncomely are not to be allowed of. Ver. 11. Teacheth vs, to bridle the rage of our angrie affecti∣ons, and to be readie to forgiue offences committed against vs. Ʋers. 12. Sheweth what great difference there is betweene the grace and displeasure of Princes and mightie men. Ʋers. 13. Setteth out the miseries that come by euill children, and wicked wiues. Vers. 14. Sheweth what a great bles∣sing, and that from the Lorde, a good wife is. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, to a∣uoide idlenes on the one side, and deceit on the other side. Ʋers. 16. Set∣teth out the good that commeth by obedience of Gods lawe, and the mise∣rie that insueth vpon carelesnesse of holie conuersation. Vers. 17. Tea∣cheth vs, pittie and liberalitie towards the poore. Ʋers. 18. Teacheth pa∣rents, to giue moderate and due correction to their offending children or seruants. Ʋers. 19. Setteth out the great miserie, that commeth, by giuing our anger the reynes, Vers. 20. Teacheth vs, alwaies to receaue good coun∣sell. Vers. 21. Sheweth, as the varietie of mans minde, and the inconstan∣cie of all his deuices, so the assurednes of the Lordes purposes. Ʋerse 22. Teacheth vs, that this is the especiall marke, wee shoulde shoote at in this life, euen goodnes and wel doing, and neuer to refuse a man, for his pouertie, but for his lying. Vers. 23. Setteth out the effectes and fruites of the feare of God. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, to shunne idlenes. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, that reproofes can neuer be vttered in vaine, but that it shall doo good, though perhappes not to the partie reprooued, yet to others which are by. Vers. 26. Teacheth men to auoide all vnnaturalnes towards their parents. Ʋers. 27. Teacheth vs, not to giue eare towards that will prouoke to sinne. Vers. 28. Doth liuelie painte out the nature of the wicked and vngodlie. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, that they shall not escape vnpunished for the same. CHAP. 20. Co. IN the other Chapter, and last end thereof, he taught men, for feare of punish∣ment to take heede how they gaue themselues ouer to any wickednes, and namelie to false witnes bearing. And now in the beginning of this Chapter, hee willeth them, for the inconuenience that may insue thereof, to beware of dron∣kennes and the meanes of that vice, and so proceedeth to deliuer other doctrines and exhortations. Di. THe Chapter may be diuided into three parts. The first reacheth from vers. 1. to the end of the 10. Wherein he intreateth of dronkennes, of a kings wrath, of contention, of idlenes, of the depth of mans heart, of boast∣ing,
of fond dealing, of a good King and his duetie, of naturall corruption, and of false weights and measures. The second reacheth from verse 11. to  the end of the 20. wherein he speaketh of good or euill workes, of the right vse of the eye and eare, of sleeping or idlenes, of craft and deceit, of the ex∣cellencie of knowledge, of sureties and their estate, of aduice or counsell, of slandering and flatterie, of vnnaturalnes towards parents. The third reach∣eth  from verse 1. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaketh of ill got∣ten goods, of patience, of false weights, of Gods prouidence, of the right vse of holie things, of a good King or Prince, of the power and force of Gods word, of mercie and iustice the two props of all kingdomes, of yong men and old persons, and of corrections. Se. Vers. 1. WIne [vz. taken and receiued immoderatly] is a mocker, [i. a deceiuer of him that so vseth it; for where as he vainely supposed, that it was swéete and pleasant vnto him, it is become hurtfull] and strong drinke [the Hebrue word importeth euery drinke that may make men dronken] is ra∣ging: [i. it carrieth those men that excessiuely vse it, into outrage and violence against others] and whosoeuer [vz. of what state or condition soeuer he be] is deceiued thereby, [i. is ouertaken therewith] is not wise. [i. sheweth thereby, that he hath not as yet tasted of the heauenlie wisedome. I allowe not the note in the Geneua bible, which referreth it to the persons.] Vers. 2. The feare of the King [vz. being once angrie against  a man: meaning by feare, that terror with his wrath or anger striketh into men with whom he is offended] is like the roring of a lyon: [i. is very fearefull and terrible: see Chap. 19.12. Also Chap. 16.14.] he [vz. how great soe∣uer he be] that prouoketh [vz. by his ill demeanour] him [i. the King] to an∣ger, [vz. against himselfe] sinneth against his owne soule. [i. putteth his life in very great danger, for the Kings wrath shall bee towards him that is lewd, Chap. 14.35.] Vers. 3. It is a mans honor [i. it is a glorious and very ho∣norable  thing for a man: see Chap. 19.11.] to cease [vz. what in him lieth, and as much as is possible] from strife: [vz. with al other men: see Rom. 12.18.] but euery foole [i. euery one that is foolish, & not rightly taught of God] will be medling. [vz. busilie with other men and their matters, which is in∣déede the mother and nurse of all contention.] Vers. 4. The slothfull [vz.  man or person] will not plow, [i. diligently and faithfully followe his calling: for by one, which is as it were the principall, Chap. 14.4. he vnderstandeth all the rest] because of winter: [i. because of the cold of winter: meaning, that euery little blast is as a meane strong enough to make him idle] therefore [i. for his idlenes sake] shall he begge [vz. of others] in sommer, [i. in haruest time] but haue nothing. [vz. giuen him: he meaneth, that the slothfull per∣son shall fall to extreame pouertie, and though he begge to get his liuing, yet
the bowels of compassion shall be shut vp against him.] Vers. 5. The coun∣sell in the heart of man [i. the deuices & purposes that a man thinketh vpon, and tosseth too and fro in his vnderstanding] is like deepe waters: [i. can either verie hardly, or not at all be attained vnto: q.d. mans thoughts are so déepe, that no man knoweth them, but the spirit of man which is in him, 1. Cor. 2.11.] but a man that hath vnderstanding [i. he that is lightned from God by his word and spirit] will drawe it out. [vz. by one meane or other, as by de∣manding questions, by obseruing diligently his gestures and behauiours,  &c.] Vers. 6. Many men [vz. that are in the world] will boast, [vz. vaine-gloriouslie, meaning that hee will to his owne glorie, tell and set abroad] euery one [vz. of them] of his owne goodnes: [i. either of the good things that be in him himselfe, or of the kindnes and benefites that he hath performed towards others. I incline to this latter] but who [vz. for all this boasting of theirs] can finde [vz. amongst them all] a faithfull man? [i. such a one, as either will performe the things he braggeth of, or els do it without boasting. And his propounding of it in the way of a question doth note, how rare such  men are to be found.] Vers. 7. He that walketh [i. leadeth a good and a ho∣lie life] in his integritie, [i. in the soundnes and vprightnes that the Lord hath giuen him, which is called his; not because he hath it of himselfe, but it is by God bestowed vpon him] is iust: [vz. before God & men: before God, because he is so accepted: and before men, because his conuersation is such, as they cannot iustly reprooue it] and blessed [vz. from the Lord] shall his chil∣dren [i. his posteritie] be after him.] He meaneth, that it shall not onely goe well with him himselfe whilest he liueth, but with his posteritie also, which is a common thing in Scripture to promise blessings to the iust and to their  seede, Exod. 20.6.] Vers. 8. A King [vnder the chiefe he meaneth not him only, but all inferiour Magistrates] that sitteth [vz. carefully and continual∣lie] in the throne of iudgement, [i. in that place from whence iustice & iudge∣ment is pronounced: meaning also hereby, the execution of iustice and right] chaseth away [vz. quicklie and easilie] all euill [i. all manner of vice and cor∣ruption whatsoeuer] with his eyes. [i. while he himselfe looketh into causes,  taketh knowledge thereof, and giueth sentence according to right.] Vers. 9. Who [vz. amongst all men] can say, [vz. iustly and truely] I haue made mine heart cleane, [vz. from vnholie and vnhonest affections: he beginneth with the heart, because it is the fountaine from whence corruption floweth: mea∣ning by this interrogation, that no man neither hath in himselfe power so to doo, neither can rightly so say] J am cleane from sinne? [vz. committed either  in thought, word, or deed against God and men, see 1. King. 8.46.] Ver. 10. Diuers weights [vz. to buy and sell by, as to buy by the more heauie, and to sell by the more light] and diuers measures, [vz. as one great and another little] both these [yea and all such kind of craftie and couetous dealing, for vnder these two he comprehendeth all of the same sort: see before Chap. 11. 1. Also Chap. 16.11. where you shall finde a reason why the Lord hateth
them, because he hath made them to be iust and vpright.] Vers. 11. A child  also [It would bee better turned thus, euen a child, for otherwise that word also, maketh it darke, as though it were referred to somewhat before going] is knowne [vz. of men] by his doings, [i. by the things he doth commit] whe∣ther his worke [i. the things that he doth: one part for many] bee pure and right. [vz. before God and man: q.d. yong children doo by the manners and feates of their childhood, many times bewray what course they will take af∣terwards in the rest of their life to come.] Ver. 12. The Lord [vz. himselfe]  hath made [vz. by his secret and almightie power] both these, [vz. excellent parts and members of our bodies] euen the eare to heare, [vz. his holie word and lawe] and the eye to see. [vz. his great and wonderfull works: q.d. it be∣houeth vs therefore rightly and well to vse them.] Ver. 13. Loue not sleepe  [vz. ouer much: q.d. giue not thy selfe to ouer much sleepe. His meaning is to turne men from slothfulnes, which commonly causeth men to fall a sléepe Chap. 19. verse. 15. Also Chap. 6.9.10.] least thou come vnto pouertie: [vz. thereby. A reason why he would not haue men to be idle, because idlenes be∣getteth and bringeth foorth beggerie] open thine eyes, [vz. to labour: q.d. bée watchfull, and diligently and carefully applie thy busines] and thou shalt bee satisfied with bread. [vnder this phrase he meaneth, that it shall go well with him, and he shall haue plentie and abundance of all things necessarie for the maintenance of his life: see Chap. 12.11.] Ver. 14. It is naught, it is naught,  [i. it is starke naught, or worth very little or nothing: for so much doth the doubling of the word import, as I take it] saith the buyer: [vz. of any ware or marchandise] but when he is gone a part, [vz. from him of whom he bought it] he boasteth. [vz. of his good peniworths, and what a good thing he hath bought: q.d. the buyer, that he may get his ware good cheape, defileth his tongue with lying, saying this and that in the dispraise thereof, but when he hath bought it, he commendeth it greatly, committing as it were an offence on both sides.] Vers. 15. There is gold, [i. great store of gold, and it is much  desired of men] and [vz. besides that there is] a multitude [i. an infinite num∣ber] of precious stones: [vz. in the world] but the lippes of knowledge [i. a god∣lie wise man, who hath sound and holie knowledge in his heart, and can vt∣ter it with his mouth, yea that very knowledge it selfe] are [vz. indeede] a precious iewell. [i. more precious than the things before named, and therfore more to bee accounted of.] Vers. 16. Take his garment, [vz. as a pleadge or  pawne for the assurance of the monie] that is suretie [vz. rashly, and without good aduice] for a stranger, [vz. either to thee, or to himselfe: see Chap. 11. 15.] and a pledge of him [vz. that is become suretie vnto thee] for a stran∣ger. [Expound this as before: q.d. feare not to demand a pawne or pledge of him that will easilie thrust himselfe into other mens businesses, and rashly for another giue his word; for if he be rash and vnaduised in his owne mat∣ters, he will not be wise in thine. Neither is this against Gods commande∣ment, Exod. 22.26. for there he speaketh of the poore brother, who for the
néede of their household were constrained to lay pawnes or gages; but here  of rash and lauish sureties: see Chap. 22.20. Also Chap. 27.13.] Ver. 17. The bread of deceit [i. all manner of maintenance craftely compassed & got∣ten] is sweet [i. so seemeth to be at the first] to a man: [i. to a worldly minded man] but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with grauell. [i. monie and goods so gotten shall bee full of hurt and destruction to him, see Chap. 9.17.18.]  Vers. 18. Establish the thoughts [vz. of thy heart and head] by counsell, [i. by holie counsell and good aduice: q.d. that thing is sure and stedfast, which is not attempted rashly, but with good aduice] and by counsell [i. by good and deliberate counsell] make warre. [vz. against thine enemies: vnderstanding by this one particular, the attempting of all the like: q.d. doo nothing at all  but deuise of it well before.] Vers. 19. He that goeth about [vz. from place to place, and from house to house] as a slanderer, [vz. of other men] discoue∣reth [vz. at some one time or other, either for fauour, feare, or flatterie] se∣crets: [vz. committed vnto him to keepe: see before Chap. 11.13.] therfore meddle not [vz. at any hand, that is to say, haue nothing to doo, much lesse communicate any close matter to such a one as followeth] with him that flat∣tereth  with his lippes. [i. a flatterer and a fawner vpon other men.] Ver. 20. He [vz. whosoeuer he be] that curseth [i. notoriously disobeyeth, and with re∣uiling and cursing speaches speaketh vnto] his father and his mother, [i. his parents] his light shall be put out in obscure darknes. [i. his name and memo∣rie shall be vtterly taken away, yea he shall be depriued of all prosperitie and blessing, and shall be accursed both in this life & in the life to come: see Exod.  21.17. Leuit. 20.9. Deut. 21.18. &c.] Vers. 21. An heritage [i. any thing whatsoeuer, as goods, lands, and such like] is [vz. many times] hastelie got∣ten [yea, and that by indirect and vnlawfull meanes] at the beginning, [i. at the first atchieuing and getting therof] but the end thereof [i. of that heritage or possession so hastelie and vnlawfully gotten] shall not be blessed. [vz. from the Lord: the reason is, because goods hastelie gotten, are commonly gotten  by iniurie and deceit.] Vers. 22. Say not thou, [vz. either in thy heart, or with thy words] I will recompense euill: [vz. done against me: q.d. abstaine from all reuenge and requiting of iniurie, either in word or deede, yea abstaine from the very affection of reuenging] but waite [vz. with patience] vpon the Lord, [vz. to whom vengeance doth belong, Deut. 32.35. Psalm. 94.1. and for the execution of his iudgements] and he [vz. alone] shal saue thee. [i. kéepe thée safe & sound from the rage of all thine enemies, & al hurts whatsoeuer.]  Vers. 23. Diuers weights [see verse 10. of this chap.] are an abomination vn∣to the Lord, [see chap. 11.1.] and deceitfull balances [i. weights & balances, by which & with which deceit is practised, for otherwise balances are hardly deceitfull of themselues] are not good. [i. are much hurtfull & euill: see Chap.  17.26. Also Chap. 18.5.] Vers. 24. The steppes of man [i. all the actions and affayres of man, specially concerning good things] are ruled [vz. euen euery one of them wholly and altogether] by the Lord [i. by God himselfe,
and by his almightie power and prouidence,] how can a man then [vz. as he is a man] vnderstand [vz. rightly to dispose, and knowe the effect and issue of] his owne way, [i. his thoughts, words, and purposes: see Psalm. 37.23. Prouerb. 16.9. Ierem. 10.23.] Vers. 25. It is a destruction, [i. it bringeth  destruction with it to the party committing the offence afterwards expressed] for a man [vz. of what state or calling so euer he be] to deuoure that, which is sanctified: [vz. to the Lord, and to holy vses, as it were in sacrifices: to eate the Lords parte: q.d. he purchaseth death vnto himselfe whosoeuer hee be, who either taketh away from God any thing, that is offered vnto him, or holdeth back, that which is due vnto him] and after the vowes, [i. the things vowed to the Lord, and offered to him, to take them away from him, and the vses he hath appoynted them too,] to inquire. [vz. whether they may doo so, yea or no: q.d. when sinne is committed it is to late to inquire of it. Vers. 26. A wise King [i. a good and a godly Magistrate] scattereth [vz. by his  vpright and good gouernment] the wicked, [vz. people of his land and coun∣trie: we had a like sentence before in this Chapter. vers. 8. sauing that that is spoken of euill things especially, and this of wicked persons,] and causeth the wheele to turne ouer them. [i. sharpely, and seuerely punisheth them: put∣ting one kinde thereof for all. He meaneth, that good princes, cannot away with wicked persons Psalm. 101.7, 8. but rooteth them out as a good hus∣band man doth the chaffe from the Wheate, vnder the word wheele, he allu∣deth to the manner of threshing, vsed among the Iewes, whereof see Isai∣ah. 28.27.28.] Vers. 27. I would restore this whole verse out of a wor∣thie  interpreter thus,] Mans soule [vz. wherein is placed the gift of reason and vnderstanding] is as it were the Lords light [i. is such an excellent parte, as into which God hath powred great light, and wherein also his glorie doth wonderfully appeare] which [vz. soule and vnderstanding of man,] searcheth [vz. out and thorowly] all the bowells of the bellie. [i. all the most secret and inward things q.d. GOD hath put into mans soule a light, by which he searcheth out the most deepe and secret things, I take it to bee the same in meaning, though not in words, with vers. 6. of this Chapter.] Vers. 28. Mercy, [i. pittie and compassion towards such as are oppressed] and  trueth [i. ministring of iustice, truely and vprightly] preserue [vz. from all violence and danger,] the King, [i. both his person and state: vnderstanding also there by the name of King, all Magistrates, both superior and inferior: see Psalm. 101.1.] for his throne [i. he and his kingdome, a parte of prince∣like pompe, put for the whole] shall bee established [vz. assuredly to conti∣nue and abide for euer] with mercie. [i. with practising pitie and compassion as before in this verse.] Vers. 29. The beautie of yong men [i. that which  maketh yong men beautifull and glorious amongst others] is their strength, [i. the strength, agilitie, and good giftes of the bodie that God hath indued them withall, speciallie if they vse them to the good of the countrie and com∣mon wealth wherein they liue,] and the glorie of the aged, [i. that which
bringeth glorie and credit to the olde folkes] is the gray head, [i. experience, wisdome, counsell, and other giftes, which in length and processe of time, they haue atteyned too: see Chap. 16.31.] Vers. 30. The blewnesse of the wound [vz. which ariseth by sharpe and seuere punishments: putting the thing following punishment, for hard and sharp punishment it selfe] serueth to purge the euill: [vz. that resteth and remaineth in wicked persons] and the stripes, within the bowells of the bellie [vz. serue to the same end, meaning by stripes within the bowels of the bellie, sharp and cutting corrections, which pearse as it were euen to the entrailes, he meaneth that wicked people can∣not be reformed, but by sharpe and vehement corrections, no more than dan∣gerous diseases can be cured, without byting and pearsing medicines. Do. Verse 1. Teacheth vs to beware of dronkennes, and whatsoeuer may drawe vs on thereto. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs to take heed, how we prouoke any Magistrate against vs, speciallie the chiefest. Ʋers. 3. Teacheth vs, to beware of contention, and to take heed, that wee bee not busie bodies in o∣ther mens matters. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, to auoide idlenes for feare of pouertie, that will insue thereof. Ʋers. 5. Teacheth vs, that mans heart, is a froward, and vnsearchable euill: also that the wise notwithstanding the depth thereof, can perceiue many things therein. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, to shunne vaineglorious boasting, also that the number of trustie men is small. Ʋers. 7. Commendeth vnto vs vpright walking and conuersation. Vers. 8. Setteth out the great profit, that commeth by good Magistrates. Ʋers. 9. Teacheth vs, that none is free from sinne. Vers. 10. Teacheth faithfull dea∣ling in all trades. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, that wordes and deeds doo many times bewray great corruption of the heart. Vers. 12. Teacheth vs, rightly to vse the eare, the eye, and all the partes and members of our bodies. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, to auoide idlenes, and whatsoeuer may prouoke thereto, and diligentlie to imploy our selues in our callings. Ʋers. 14. Teacheth vs, both in buying and selling, to auoide all craft and subtiltie. Ʋers. 15. Teacheth vs, that the knowledge of God and his trueth, is better woorth than all precious things whatsoeuer. Ver. 16. Teacheth men to deale sharpe∣lie with such, as rashelie take vpon them suertiship. Ʋers. 17. Teacheth vs, that deceipt and craft, cannot long prosper. Ʋers. 18. Teacheth vs, to doo or thinke nothing rashlie, but with verie good aduise. Vers. 19. Teacheth vs to shunne, first slandering of others, secondlie, disclosing of other mens sinnes, and thirdlie, flatterie. Ʋers. 20. Teacheth vs, that disobedient chil∣dren shall not prosper. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, that goods quicklie gotten, are not onely suspicious amongst men, but also accursed before GOD. Verse 22. Teacheth vs, not to render euill for euill vnto any, it tea∣cheth vs also, in patience to waite for the Lords worke, either towards our selues, or others. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, to deale vprightlie and faithfullie, in our weightes and measures. Ʋers. 24. Teacheth vs, that men can neither
thinke nor doo any thing without the Lord. Ʋers. 25. Teacheth vs, at no hand to meddle with any thing that appertaineth to the Lord. Vers. 26. Teacheth princes and Magistrates their dutie, to wit, that they sharpely pu∣nish wicked men. Vers. 27. Describeth, the excellencie of that immortall parte of man his soule. Vers. 28. Setteth out the dueties of Magistrates and iudges. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, to referre all that wee haue, to the glorie of God, and the good of the Common wealth wherein we liue. Ʋers. 30. Tea∣cheth, that the Magistrate should vse sharpe and seuere punishment against such, as will not otherwise be reformed. CHAP. 21. Co. IN the other Chapter and the last verse thereof, hee spake of correction that magistrates should execute against the obstinate wicked, and now in the first verse of this Chapter, hee sheweth, that they cannot doo, neither that, nor any thing els, but by speciall motion and grace from God, who both in them and o∣thers worketh all in all. Di. I Would diuide this Chapter into fowre partes. The first reacheth from  vers. 1. to the end of the eight, wherein hee intreateth, of the prouidence and knowledge of God, of vprightnes towards men, of pride, of diligence, and speaketh against rashnes, deceite, theeuerie, &c. The second reacheth from vers. 9. to the 16. Wherein he speaketh of a contentious woman, of the crueltie of the wicked, of chastisement, of Gods iudgemēt against the wic∣ked, of hard hartednes against the poore, of giftes, and of the punishment of the wicked, and the blessing of the good. The third reacheth from vers. 17. to the end of 24. Wherein he dealeth against excesse in pleasure, wine, &c. and the contentious woman, and commendeth the wise, and the righteous person, speaking also of the bridling of the tongue, and against pride and wrath. The fourth reacheth from ver. 25. to the end of the chapter wherein he speaketh against the slothfull and couetous person, and the offering of wicked men, also against false witnes bearing, hard hartednes in sinne, and trust in any thing, saue in the Lord onely. Se. Vers. 1. THe Kings heart [vz. and the disposition there∣of] is in the hand of the Lorde [i. in his power, to bee ruled, as he will,] as the riuers of waters [vz. are in mens powers, to bee drawne hether and thether through their labor, as they shall thinke meete,] hee [i. God] turneth it [i. the Kings heart and affection] whether soeuer it pleaseth him, [q.d. as gardners and others, for the watring of their gardens and grounds, or for trade of marchandise bring riuers of water, sometimes
to one place, sometimes to another: so dooth the Lord guide Kings hearts: not but that he gouerneth other men also, but because this seemeth a more  hard matter, to dispose of Kings and their affayres.] Vers. 2. Euerie way of a man [i. euery matter that a man attempteth, either in thought worde, or deed] is right, [i. seemeth so to be] in his owne eyes: [i. in his owne iudge∣ment: he putteth one, yea the surest of his senses, such as the eye or sight is, for iudgement and vnderstanding] but the Lord pondereth [vz. vprightlie and iustly] the hearts [vz. of men, that is not onely their outward actions,  but their affections also, see chap. 16.2.] Vers. 3. To doo iustice and iudge∣ment [i. for one man to deale vprightly and iustlie with another: see Micah. 6.8.] is more acceptable [i. is better liked of, and that by many degrees] to the Lord, [vz. who alone knoweth what is right and good] than sacrifice, [i. than any or many sacrifices, yea though GOD himselfe haue prescribed them, without iustice and iudgement: hee meaneth that God preferreth obe∣dience, yea and that to the morrall lawe, before sacrifice: see 1. Samuel. 15.22.  Isaiah. 1.10, 11, &c. Hosea. 6.6. Micah. 6.6, 7, &c.] Vers. 4. A hau∣tie looke [i. euen the very shewe of pride manifested in the countenance or eyes, see Chap. 6.17.] and a proude heart, [i. a heart giuen to pride] which is the light of the wicked: [i. which the wicked taketh to be his glorie, estima∣tion and credit] is sinne [vz. against God, and is so reputed and esteemed al∣so  before men.] Vers. 5. The thoughts of the diligent [vz. person meaning such a one as doth diligentlie and faithfullie followe his calling, dooing all things wisely in time, place, &c. doo surelie bring abundance: [vz. of profit and good things with them: see Chap. 10.4. also Chap. 13.4.] but who so∣euer is hastie, [i. rash in his purposes and deedes] commeth surelie to pouer∣tie. [i. cannot chuse but bee a poore man at the last, for that is one of the pu∣nishments,  which God hath laide vpon hastines or rashnes.] Vers. 6. The gathering of treasures by a deceitfull tongue, [i. goods and treasures gotten thorow lying and deceite] is vanitie [i. like to a vaine thing, or a thing of no weight or importance, as chaffe, dust, &c.] tossed too and fro [vz. by the wind] of them that seeke death: [he meaneth that it is the vaine delight of fond and foolish men, to seeke to get riches vnlawfullie, which is a matter of no more importance than dust: or els he setteth out a double discommoditie of riches wickedlie, gotten; to wit, that they perish quickely, and bring with them de∣struction, see Chap. 10.2. also Chap. 13.11. One readeth it thus. Treasures gathered together with the tongue of falshood, [i. riches and goods gotten by any false meanes whatsoeuer] are tossed too and fro like vanitie: [i. they are not durable, or last not long with the parties or their posteritie so gathering them] they that seeke them [i. those riches, or to be rich by such meanes] seeke death. [i. destruction vnto themselues: q.d. euill gotten goods are many times ill consumed, and destroy them that haue them, as appeareth in the  next verse.] Vers. 7. The robberie of the wicked [i. that the euerie which the wicked commit against other, and the goods gotten thereby] shall [vz.
certainly, and assuredly] destroye them, [i. the wicked themselues] for they haue refused [i. they haue stubbornly and wilfully denied] to execute iudge∣ment. [i. to deale iustly and vprightly, if we referre it to the common sort; but if we referre it to iudges and rulers, then it importeth in iudgement to yéeld to euery man his right.] Vers. 8. The way of some [i. the life and conuersa∣tion  of many] is peruerted [vz. from all equitie and right] and strange: [vz. from the order that God himselfe hath prescribed in his word, and his chil∣dren allowe and like of] but of the pure man, [i. of him that dealeth vp∣rightly, and with a single heart] his worke [i. the thinges that he doth] is right. [i. iust, plaine, and good.] Vers. 9. It is better [i. it shall be more ease  and quiet for a man] to dwell [vz. euen alone, and without companie] in a corner of the house toppe, [i. in a most inconuenient place, yea though it doo not onely want necessarie roome, but also bee subiect to the heate of sommer, the coldnes of winter, the force of the winde, the beating of the raine, &c.] than with a contentious woman [i. with a woman giuen to brauling and chiding] in a wide house. [i. in a very large, pleasant, and profitable roome to dwell in: see Chap. 25.24. And concerning a contentious woman, see Chap. 19.13. Also Chap. 27.15.] Vers. 10. The soule [i. the very heart and affection] of  the wicked [vz. man] wisheth [vz. continually] euill: [i. hurt and mischiefe to all but himselfe, he is so kindled with enuie] and his neighbour [i. he that dwelleth by him: meaning also thereby any other; for he that doth not good to those that bee about him, is hardly drawne to profite others] hath no fa∣uour in his eyes. [i. findeth no friendship at his hands, yea he is so farre of from dooing him good, that he will not yéeld him a good countenance. He de∣clareth the great readines that is in the wicked to hurt others, who is so farre off from benefiting others, that he will not pleasure his friends and compa∣nions.] Vers. 11. When the scorner is punished, [vz. by the Magistrate and  men in authoritie] the foolish is wise: [i. becommeth wise, or learneth wise∣dome thereby to auoide wickednes. By scorner, he vnderstandeth him that is as it were desperatly set vpon all wickednes; and by foolish, such a simple one as is of ignorance deceiued: see Chap. 19.25.] and when one instructeth [vz. rightly and soundly] the wise, [i. he whose heart is inclined to wisdom] he will receiue knowledge. [vz. by that instruction and exhortation.] Ver. 12.  The righteous teacheth [vz. both by word and example, and all to drawe on to goodnes] the house of the wicked: [i. the vngodlie man, and all that belong vnto him] but [vz. for all that] God [vz. himselfe in his iustice and iudge∣ment] ouerthroweth the wicked [vz. because they will by no meanes be bet∣tered, but despise admonition, reproofe, &c.] for their euill. [i. for their sinne committed against him and men. I knowe there are other reading and sen∣ses of this verse, but me thinketh this is plaine.] Vers. 13. He [vz. who∣soeuer  he bee] that stoppeth his eare [vz. that he may not heare: meaning hereby also, he that vseth any meane to turne away himselfe, and his com∣passion from the poore] at the crying of the poore, [i. when the poore and néedie
crieth vnto him for reliefe and succour] he shall also crie [i. earnestly call vpon or intreate, either God or man, or both] and not be heard. [i. be neuer a whit the better for it, for it is a iust thing with God, yea and with good men also  many times, so to punish vnmercifulnes.] Vers. 14. A gift [vz. both giuen and receiued also to any, either high or lowe offended with thee] in secret [i. closely and secretly giuen] pacifieth anger, [vz. conceiued against a man] and a gift in the bosome [i. caried in the bosome, and so giuen to another man] great wrath. [i. pacifieth and stilleth mightie and raging wrath: see Prouer. 17.8.  Also Chapt. 18.16.] Vers. 15. It is ioye to the iust [i. the iust man taketh great delight and pleasure] to doo iudgement: [i. to deale vprightly and iust∣ly with euery man, see verse 3. of this Chap.] but destruction shall bee to the workers of iniquitie. [i. all vniust and vngodly persons shall be destroyed: for  workers of iniquitie see Psalm. 5.5. Also Psalm 6.8.] Vers. 16. A man [vz. whosoeuer he be] that wandereth [vz. either of ignorance, or malice, or both, if he continue in the same] out of the way of wisedome, [i. out of the course that Gods wisedome reuealed in his word prescribeth] shall remaine [vz. for euer] in the congregation of the dead. [i. amongst that great number of peo∣ple, that either are dead alreadie both in bodie and soule, or els through their  wickednes make haste vnto the same.] Vers. 17. He that loueth pastime, [i. to satisfie his delight and pleasure in all thinges] shall bee a poore man [vz. though he were neuer so rich before] and he that loueth wine and oyle [i. he that giueth himselfe to ryot, excesse, and all kinde of pleasures] shall not bee rich. [vz. very long, for the following of these things will consume his  wealth.] Vers. 18. The wicked shall bee [vz. as it were] a ransome for the iust, [i. when the righteous shall bee deliuered from distresse, the other shall fall into it] and the transgressor for the righteous. [it is the same which hee  spake before in other words, see Chap. 11.8.] Vers. 19. It is better to dwell [see verse 9. of this Chap.] in the wildernes, [i. in a most rude, and wanting place] than with a contentious and angrie woman. [vz. though the place wherein they should dwell together, were neuer so large and faire: see chap.  19.13. Also chap. 25.24. Also 27.15.] Vers. 20. In the house of the wise [i. in his storehouse or treasurie] is a pleasant treasure and oyle: [i. there is to be found plentie of things that are to bee desired: and he nameth speciallie oyle, because it is a notable thing: see Iudges 9.9.] but a foolish man deuou∣reth it. [vz. euen that which he himselfe, or others for him, as his parents or friends haue laied vp in store: q.d. A wise man doth abundantly get vnto himselfe goods and ornaments, and keepeth them that are prouided for him,  which the wicked man doth consume and waste.] Vers. 21. He that follow∣eth after [i. doth earnestly pursue, and carefully practise or performe: see Hebrew. 12.14. Also Psalm. 34.14.] righteousnes [i. good and faithfull dea∣ling, yéelding to euery man his right] and mercie, [vz. towards such as bee afflicted and in distresse] shall [vz. certainly and assuredly] finde [vz. both be∣fore God and man, for the Lord will bring to passe that no man shall be in∣iurious
vnto him, but euery where yéeld him his right] life, [i. all manner of blessings in this life] righteousnes, [i. vpright and faithful dealing towards him] and glorie. [vz. both here, and in the life to come.] Vers. 22. A wise  man [i. he that is truely wise indéed] goeth vp [vz. through his wisedome, and that as a conquerour, in peace without any resistance] into the citie of the mightie, [i. into a citie that mightie men possesse and keepe] and casteth downe [vz. through his excellent wisedome] the strength of the confidence thereof. [i. the walles and bulwarkes of it wherein they much trusted, think∣ing themselues thereby to be safe: he meaneth, that wisedome is more ex∣cellent than strength: see Eccle. 9.16.] Vers. 23. He that keepeth [vz.  through the grace and assistance of God bestowed vpon him] his mouth and his tongue, [vz. from vttering euill things] keepeth his soule [i. his life, and he himselfe] from afflictions. [i. from manifold both outward and inward trou∣bles. The reason is, because that death & life are in the power of the tongue, Chap. 18.21.] Vers. 24. Proud, hautie, and scornefull [vz. both before God  and men] is his name [i. is he himselfe, and the glorious report that goeth of him] that worketh [vz. against other men] in his arrogancie [i. in the pride of his heart] wrath. [vz. how much, or how little soeuer it be: q.d. the proud and angrie person shall bee contemned both of God and man.] Vers. 25.  The desire of the slothfull [i. the thing that the slothfull desireth, being de∣laied, and not performed towards him] slaieth him: [i. killeth him, or grie∣ueth him at his heart] for his hands refuse to worke. [vz. thereby to get his li∣uing, and to maintaine himselfe: q.d. he doth nothing but wish, and vseth not the meanes to obtaine, and therefore he must needes perish: see Chap. 13.4.] Vers. 26. He [i. the slothfull person or the wicked] coueteth greedilie,  [vz. another mans goods to satisfie his néed withall, & yet hath neuer a whit the more] but the righteous giueth [vz. vnto such as are in distresse, God hath blessed him with such abundance] and spareth not. [vz. to giue franklie and freelie, according to the portion which he hath receiued: see Psalme 37.25.26.] Vers. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked [i. that seruice whatsoeuer it bee,  which the wicked performe to God] is an abomination: [i. an abominable thing to the Lord, and such as he cannot like of: see Chap. 15.8.] how much more [vz. is it abominable] when he bringeth it [vz. into the Lords presence or into his temple to be offered there] with a wicked mind? [i. when his hart is seased with wickednes, rendering it, thinking thereby the better to per∣forme some wickednes, as Balaam and Balaak did: Num. 23. or els by wic∣ked and vnlawfull meanes, as Malach. 1. q.d. It is alwaies euill, but then most wicked indéede, see Isaiah 1.13.] Vers. 28. A false witnes [i. he that  beareth false witnes, telling lyes for truth, and babbling out vncertaine mat∣ters, which he himselfe knoweth not of, howsoeuer he haue heard them] shall perish: [i. shall certainlie come to naught and be punished: see Chap. 19.5.] but he that heareth, [vz. the trueth of matters, knowing also the same, and is as it were an eye witnes: he putteth one sense for sundrie] speaketh [vz.
the trueth, and nothing but it] continually. [i. alwaies and in all places when he is called thereto: q.d. he may boldly speake, because he vttereth nothing  but certaine and knowne things.] Vers. 29. A wicked man hardeneth his face: [i. boldly and impudently, without feare of God or shame of men, go∣eth on to performe the wickednes he purposed] but the iust, [vz. man] he [q.d. hee indéed] will direct [vz. according to the trueth of Gods word, and all equitie] his way. [i. all his waies, wordes, thoughts and deedes, and the whole course of his life: q.d. the vngodlie doth obstinately respect his lust, and not his duetie, and casteth from him all shamefastnes; whereas on the other side, the godlie diligently and wisely pursueth the thinges he hath to doo.]  Vers. 30. There is no wisedom, [vz. in man] neither vnderstanding, nor coun∣sell [by these particulars he meaneth, that there is nothing in man, either wit, will, or power, that can infringe or let the Lord in his purposes and workes, which thing he declareth also by a particular example in the next verse following] against the Lord. [i. that is able to withstand him and his  purposes.] Vers. 31. The horse is prepared [i. not onely made readie, but al∣so furnished] against the day of battel: [i. against the time that men goe to fight with their enemies: q.d. men make readie all things necessarie & méete for their owne defence. For I suppose that wee may vnderstand by this one particular of the horse, all outward aydes whatsoeuer: see Psalme 33.16, 17.] but saluation [i. deliuerance from danger and distresse] is of the Lord. [vz. onely: see Psalme 3.8. where the word saluation is likewise vsed also. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, that God by his power and prouidence gouerneth all things whatsoeuer, both generall and particular. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, not to stand vpon our owne imaginations, but vpon the approbation of the Lord. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs to deale vprightly and faithfully with all. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs to auoide pride both in heart and countenance. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, aduisedly and diligently to performe the things we are to do, and to beware of hastines and rashnes. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that euill got∣ten goods shall not long prosper. Vers. 7. Teacheth vs, that the wicked shall not carrie their robberie away vnpunished. Ʋers. 8. Teacheth vs to flie from euill, and to doo good, and that the one is a note of goodnes, and the other of euill. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, what a hurtfull thing a disquiet life is betweene a man and his wife. Ʋers. 10. Sheweth the nature of the wicked, who are giuen to wish and doo euill against other men. Ʋerse 11. Teacheth vs, that punishments laied vppon some, profite other some to goodnes. Ver. 12. Teacheth vs, to haue a care to instruct one another, yea euen the very vngodly: it setteth out also the iudgement of God against the wicked and their vngodlie rase. Vers. 13. Giueth vs to vnderstand, what a great sinne hard hartednes, & the want of compassion is. Vers. 14. Declareth what power and force gifts secretlie giuen haue. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, what
ioye and consolation the godly should take in wel dooing: also what iudge∣ment the wicked must looke for. Ʋers. 16. Teacheth vs, what danger it is to straye from the word of God. Vers. 17. Teacheth vs, to beware that we haue not our hearts caried away, euen in the vse of lawfull things. Vers. 18. Setteth out Gods fauor towards the good, & his punishmēt of the wicked. Ʋer. 19. Teacheth the discommoditie of a brawling and chiding wife. Ver. 20. Teacheth vs, that godlines is crowned with abundance: and wickednes with want. Vers. 21. Teacheth that good dooing shall neuer be left vnre∣warded. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs, that godlie wisdome is better than strength. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, to bridle our tongue and speach. Ʋers. 24. Tea∣cheth vs to beware both of pride and anger. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, to be∣ware of idlenes. Ʋers. 26. Teacheth vs to shunne couetousnes, and to im∣brace true liberalitie. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs, that nothing that the wicked doo, is acceptable before God. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, to auoid false wit∣nesse bearing, and to speake nothing, but that whereof we haue the certeine knowledge. Vers. 29. Teacheth vs, to beware of hard hartednes and impu∣dencie in sinne: and to order all our actions, according to trueth. Ʋerse. 30. Teacheth vs, that nothing within man, or without man, can hinder Gods purposes. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, that howsoeuer meanes be vsed, yet there can be no deliuerance, but by the Lords grace and working. CHAP. 22. Co. IN the end of the other Chapter, he intreateth of matters concerning God, to wit of his power and goodnes, sauing men from danger and distresses: and now he passeth from them in the beginning of this Chapter, and dealeth with some things which directlie concerne men, as a good name, fauor, wise dealing, &c. Di. I Would diuide this Chapter into three partes. In the first hee speaketh of  good reporte and fauor, of the rich and poore, of the wise and foolish, of humilitie and the feare of God, of a froward and circumspect person, of childrens bringing vp, of the borower and the lender, of the wicked and the liberall man, and of the scorner and contentious person, from vers. 1. to the end of the 10. In the second he entreateth of purenes of heart, of Gods sauor  and iustice, of the idle man, of a whore, of foolishnes and correction, of op∣pression of the poore, of obedience to the word, and the fruites that shall come thereby, from vers. 11. to the end of the 21. In the third, he speaketh a∣gainst  oppression of the poore, acquaintance with angriemen, rash and vn∣aduised suertiship, remoouing of auncient bounds, and exhorteth to dili∣gence, from vers. 22. to the end of the Chapter. Se.
Vers. 1. A Good name [vz. amongst men: meaning hereby a good reporte] is to bee chosen [vz. by such as loue and feare the Lord, and the fellowship of his saints] aboue great riches, [i. more than any riches a man can attaine too in this life: see Ec∣clesiast. 7.3.] and a louing fauor [vz. from good men, obteyned also, by good dealing: and hee speaketh here of the fauor and good will of men, because it is a common com∣panion of good reporte, and is no more sundred from it, then the shaddowe from the bodie] is [vz. more worth, or more to be desired, or as hee saide be∣fore, to be chosen] aboue siluer and aboue golde. [i. aboue all the rich and pre∣cious treasures of this world whatsoeuer: see for this phrase Psalm. 19.10.]  Vers. 2. The rich [vz. men of the world,] and the poore [vz. people also] meete togeather, [vz. many and sundrie times, euen as it were waifaring men, the Lord thereby sensiblie preaching as it were vnto them, that riches and pouertie are not natural, but laied vpon them according to his good plea∣sure] the Lord [vz. alone,] is the maker of them all, [i. hee maketh one rich and another poore: see Chapter. 14.31. also Chap. 17.5. for making of the poore. And in this, God hath shewed his singular prouidence and wisdome, for if all were rich, no man would labor, and if all were poore, they could not  ayde and succor one another, see Chap. 29.13.] Vers. 3. A prudent man, [i. he that hath learned holy and heauenlie wisdome] seeth [vz. by the eye of faith] the plague [vz. comming: vnderstanding by plague, any euill or dan∣ger whatsoeuer,] and hideth himselfe, [i. laboreth by all lawfull meanes to escape the same: or els committeth himselfe to the prouidence of God vntill those dangers bee ouerpast, as Dauid saith in one of his Psalmes] but the foolish, [i. the wicked and vngodlie] goe on still [vz. in their iniquitie and transgression, and are euen rashlie, and impudentlie caried, whether so euer their minde leadeth them,] and are punished [vz. from God, and that iustly, by reason of their sinnes committed against God and their brethren.] Vers.  4. The reward [vz. both from God and men] of humilitie, [i. that true hum∣blenes of minde hath] and the feare of God [i. the rewarde, which the feare of God bringeth with it,] is [vz. certainely and assuredly] riches and glorie and  life: [i. all good things both in this life, and in the life to come.] Vers. 5. Thornes and snares, [i. most greeuous calamities and punishments] are [vz. to be found] in the way of the froward, [i. in those waies and courses which he taketh: q.d. for his wicked and froward behauiour, such and such calami∣ties hang ouer his head: and so it is set, as it were against the other verse] but he that regardeth his soule [i. hath care and consideration of his owne sal∣uation: a parte put for the whole,] will departe [vz. with all possible and con∣uenient speede] farre from them, [i. either from the men themselues, or from such miseries as hang ouer their heads, or from such misdemeanors, as haue  pulled such iudgements vpon them.] Vers. 6. Teach a childe, [i. euerie
childe, for the commandement is generall] in the trade of his way, [i. in the order and course of his life, meaning thereby, vertuous and good education: in holy and good things,] and when he is old, [i. growne to more age] he shall not departe from it, [i. hee shall verie hardlie, or not at all departe from that good course: q.d. Instruct him, to passe his life godlie, iustlie, honestlie and lawfullie, in all the things, which concerne Gods worship, or holy fellow∣ship amongst men.] Vers. 7. The rich [vz. man] ruleth the poore, [i. is pre∣ferred  before him, and exerciseth an authoritie ouer him, many times vniust∣ly] and the borower is seruant to the man that lendeth: [vz. vnto him, in the time of his neede: q.d. it commonly so falleth out amongst men, that the rich rule the poore, and that the detters are seruants to their creditors, whe∣ther this be don rightlie or wrongfullie he expresseth not, but onely teacheth, what is vsuallie don.] Vers. 8. He that soweth iniquitie, [i. he that giueth  himselfe ouer with greedines to commit sinne] shall reape affliction, [i. pu∣nishment and calamitie, speciallie from God: see Iob. 4.8. also Galath. 6.7, 8.] and the rodde [i. the power, and force, the signe of a thing, put for the power thereof,] of his anger [vz. towards others,] shall fayle. [vz. in such sorte, that he shall not be able to accomplish any mischiefe.] Vers. 9. Hee  that hath a good eye, [i. he that is mercifull and liberall towards others, as an euill eye, is put for an enuious or euill affection, see Matth. 20.15.] Hee shall be blessed: [vz. mightilie, and that from the Lord] for hee giueth [vz. freely and liberallie] of his bread: [i. parte of his foode and sustenance] vn∣to the poore. [vz. that wanteth the same, and is in need thereof.] Vers. 10.  Cast out [vz. of thy companie, countrey, common welth, Citie, or house, wherein thou dwellest] the scorner, [i. him that giueth himselfe to scoffing and deriding, speciallie at good men and matters,] and strife [vz. betweene him and others well affected] shall goe out [vz. from amongst you, and that immediately: q.d. there is no way to auoide contention with scorners, but by thrusting them out of companie, for while they giue themselues to scof∣fing, and take a certaine pride and pleasure therein, they doo nothing but prouoke brawling and quarrells,] so [i. by that meanes, of throwing them out] contention [vz. amongst men, whilst many times there is partaking,] and reproach, [i. shame, following such contention] shall cease [vz. both quicklie and assuredlie; he meaneth, that the scorner being present, strifes are stirred vp, and from strife, shame, and reproach, but if he be once absent, all those things cease.] Vers. 11. He that loueth [i. maketh much of, and  fostereth] purenes of heart, [i. soundnes, sinceritie, and vprightnes in the in∣ward man] for the grace of his lippes [i. because he vttereth also gracious and grateful things, & not such as tickle the eares, but proceed from the soundnes of the inward man: q.d. hee that is indued with these two holy giftes, vp∣rightnes of heart, and wisdome of speach,] the king shall be his friend. [i. hee shall be well and frendlie vsed of great personages, for the king either will, or should delight in such persons.] Vers. 12. The eyes of the Lord [i. his
gracious mercie and great prouidence: for he speaketh of God according to the manner and capacitie of men,] preserue [vz. safe and sound, from all hurt and danger,] knowledge [i. men indued with true knowledge and wisdome, the giftes and qualities of the minde being put for the persons indued there∣with,] but he ouerthroweth [vz. vtterly, and that in his great iudgement] the wordes [i. the thoughts, wordes, and deedes, for vnder this speach, hee comprehendeth them all] of the transgressor. [i. of all such, as transgresse his  holy commandements, by one meaning all of the like.] Vers. 13. The slothfull man, [i. he that is giuen to sloth and idlenes,] saith [vz. openlie e∣uen in the hearing of many, speciallie of those that are to imploy him:] a Li∣on is without [vz. in the way, that hee shoulde goe,] J shall bee slaine in the streate: [i. hee bringeth in the idle person, who shunning labor, imagineth many dangers and difficulties, where either there are none at all, or els ve∣ry  smallones, see Chap. 15.19.] Vers. 14. The mouth, [i. the faire spea∣ches, and flattering words, vttered with the mouth] of strange women: [i. of harlots, or whores,] is as a deepe pit, [i. full of great danger, into which if a man fall, he can hardlie get out againe: see Chap. 2.16. also Chap. 7.25, 26, &c.] he with whome the Lord is angrie [vz. for his greeuous sinnes and transgressions committed against him,] shall fall therein. [vz. as a punish∣ment  for his iniquitie and transgression.] Vers. 15. Foolishnes [i. wanton∣nes and wickednes] is bounde [vz. very fast, because he hath it by nature] in the heart [hee toucheth this parte because it is the seate of affections] of a childe, [i. of euery childe, as vers. 6. of this Chap.] but the rodde of correcti∣on [i. a rodde vsed to correct, or els correction with a rodde] shall driue it a∣way from him, [i. shall bee a very good meane to remooue it: q.d. follie, though it be fast fixed in youth, may yet notwithstanding by correction be re∣moued, and therefore, the father must not spare to correct the childe while he  is yong: see Chapter. 19.18.] Vers. 16. He, that oppresseth [vz. by any meanes, either by fraud, force: or otherwise, for so much I suppose the word importeth] the poore [i. the needie and such as bee in want] to increase him∣selfe: [i. to make himselfe more rich and mightie thereby] and giueth [vz. giftes and bribes] vnto the rich, [vz. that therby he may purchase and pro∣cure his fauor, speciallie in wrong causes] shall surelie come to pouertie, [vz. for the indirect and vnlawfull meanes, which he vseth to vphold himselfe by: q.d. they sinne alike, and therefore shall haue alike punishment, that gather their gayne, by the hurte of the poore, and bestowe vpon the rich, that which  they should giue to the needie.] Vers. 17. Incline thine care [vz. vnto the good things that I shall propound] and heare [vz. with thy heart and vn∣derstanding] the words of the wise: [i. such excellent matters, as the godlie wise shall vtter] and apply thine hand, [i. bend all the partes and powers of thine outward and inward man] vnto my knowledge. [i. vnto the knowledge that I shall teach thee, it is a graue exhortation, to receaue the Doctrines,  both going before, and following after.] Vers. 18. For it [i. the doctrine
that I shall truely and soundly propound] shall be pleasant, [vz. vnto thee: meaning by pleasant, sweete and comfortable: and this is one argument that he vseth to perswade men to the imbracing of his doctrine] if thou keepe them [vz. safe and sure] in thy bellie, [i. in thy minde or heart: and here is a Metonomie, the thing containing for the thing cōtained, which also is vsual amongst the Hebrues] and if they be directed together in thy lippes. [i. if to∣gether with thy knowledge inwardly, thou ioyne the expressing of them by wordes outwardly.] Vers. 19. That thy confidence [i. thy hope and trust]  may bee [vz. firmely and stedfastly fixed] in the Lord, [i. vpon him, and the trueth of his word and promises] I haue shewed thee [vz. openlie and plain∣lie, euen the will and word of God] this day: [i. all this while, as Psalme 95.7. And so he sheweth what is the ende of Gods word, vz. to strengthen our faith in God] thou therefore take heede. [vz. to the things that I speake: q.d. It standeth thee in hand so to doo; for what art thou without hope and trust in God, which thou canst neuer attaine without his word.] Vers. 20.  Haue I not written vnto thee [vz. excellent and notable things: vnderstan∣ding also by writing, all the meanes of publishing the same] three times [i. sundrie and many times, as 2. Corinth. 12.18.] in counsels and knowledge, [i. such things as consist in knowledge and counsels: q d. I haue, for to that ende serueth the demand.] Vers. 21. That I might shewe thee [vz. plainlie  and manifestly] the assurance of the words of the trueth, [i. the great certaintie that these words containe] to answer [i. that thou also maiest thereby bee in∣structed to answer] the words of trueth [i. true and sound words] to them that send to thee? [vz. to the ende they may knowe the same, and be instruc∣ted by thee therein. And this is another commendation of his doctrine ta∣ken from the excellencie and profite thereof.] Vers. 22. Robbe not [vz. by  any meanes] the poore, [vz. man or person] because he is poore, [and there∣fore not able to put backe iniurie offered] neither oppresse [vz. any manner of way] the afflicted [i. he that is alreadie in miserie] in iudgement. [i. vnder the pretence and shewe of iustice and iudgement. In Hebrue it is in the gate, putting the place where iudgement was executed, for iudgement and iustice it selfe. He toucheth two faultes: the one oppression of the poore, be∣cause great men may the more easilie doo it: and the other is spoyling of them, vnder pretence of iustice and equitie. And marke here, that the sen∣tences following from this place, euen to the fiue and twentie Chapter, bée for the most part comprised in two or three verses together, one hanging vpon another, and are as it were the causes, effects, or euents of the same.] Vers. 23. For the Lord [vz. himselfe, if men should neglect it] will defend  their cause, [i. the right of the poore: see Chapter 23.11.] and spoyle the soule [i. take away from them, sometimes by one meanes, sometimes by ano∣ther] of those that spoyle them. [i. of all such as take any thing by any wicked way from them. And this is a reason why they should surcease from wic∣kednes.]
Vers. 24. Make no friendship [i. seeke not to bee acquainted or familiar] with an angrie man, [i. with one that cannot rule and subdue his outragious and angrie affections] neither goe [vz. in the way, as though thou wert familiarlie acquainted] with the furious man, [i. with him that is  whollie giuen to heate and furie: see Prouerb. 15.18.] Vers. 25. Least thou learne [vz. by kéeping companie with him] his waies, [i. to bee like vnto him in his furie, rage, and vnbridled affections] and receiue [vz. either from God or men, yet so that thou hast by thy misdemenour, pulled it vpon thy head] destruction to thy soule. [i. to thy selfe, a part put for the whole, and here is contained a double reason why men should auoide furious persons  companie.] Vers. 26. Be not thou of them [i. be not thou like them, or take héed that thou bée not reckoned in the number of them] that touch the hand, [vz. of another man: meaning thereby, striking of hands, or making of a bargaine] nor among them [i. of that sort and number] that are suretie [vz. to other men] for debts. [vz. of other men: q.d. shunne suretiship, least thou hazard thine owne goods, and at lengeth bée brought to necessitie, for that I take to bée the meaning of the next verse: see Chapter 6.1, &c. Also Chap∣ter  11.15.] Vers. 27. If thou hast nothing to pay, [i. if thou bée not able to performe that which thou hast promised] why causest thou [vz. through thy negligence and rashnes] that he [vz. to whom thou hast giuen thy hand and word] should take thy bed [vz. wherevpon thou lyest] from vnder thee? [vz. as thou lyest vpon it: a reason against rash suretiship: q d. Why doest thou through thine owne follie commit, that if thou be not able to pay that which thou art become suretie for, thy bed, if thou hast nothing els to giue, should with thy great losse and shame bée taken from thée, and so thou haue no∣thing  to lye on: see Chapter 20.16.] Vers. 28. Thou shalt not remooue [vz. either by force or fraude, openly or secretly, in the day or in the night] the ancient bounds [vz. of landes or grounds, labouring thereby to inlarge thine owne, and to pull from other] which thy fathers [i. thy ancestors many yéeres before thee] haue made. [i. haue set: q.d. If they had no right, how  canst thou pretend any? see Deuteronomie 19.14] Vers. 29. Thou seest [q.d. thine owne experience and knowledge teacheth thee] that a diligent man in his busines [i. he that faithfully and painfully occupieth himselfe in his vocation, and in the things he hath to doo] standeth before Kings, [i. is much in great personages presence, and they vse them much in the accom∣plishment of their affaires] and standeth not before the base sorte. [i. is not much conuersant with the common people, nor much regarded of them: the reason is, because he is more highly called and preferred, for otherwise all would bée glad of him: all is as much, q.d. seeing diligence aduanceth men, imbrace and practise the same. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, to esteeme and make much of good report amongst
good men and their fauour. Ʋerse 2. Teacheth vs, that riches, and pouer∣tie, and all come from the Lord. Ʋerse 3. Teacheth vs, in a holie wise∣dome, not onely to foresee, but also to preuent what wee may, dangers hanging ouer our head. Verse 4. Teacheth vs, to striue to attaine true humblenes of minde, and a right and reuerent feare of Gods Maiestie in our hearts. Ʋerse 5. Teacheth vs to auoide, both the waies and companies of froward and peruerse men. Ʋerse 6. Teacheth parents, in time to traine vp their children in the nurture and information of the Lord. Ʋerse 7. Sheweth, how that man in the corruption of his heart, abuseth many times those things, to the maintenance of his pride and tyrannie, that God hath giuen him for the good of others. Ʋerse 8. Teacheth vs, that the vngodlie shall reape a iust reward of that wickednes which they sowe. Vers. 9. Tea∣cheth vs, vnfeignedly to imbrace liberalitie. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, to a∣uoide the scorners companie, shewing vs what good shall insue thereof. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, to imbrace vprightnes and soundnes of heart. Vers. 12. Teacheth vs, that God is gracious to his children, but a sharpe punisher of the words and works of the wicked. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, to auoide sloth and idlenes. Verse 14. Teacheth vs, to auoide whores and whoredome. Verse 15. Teacheth vs, that moderate and ordinarie correction, is a good meane to reforme things amisse in children. Verse 16. Teacheth vs to flie from oppression and briberie. Ʋerse 17. Teacheth vs, to hearken to good counsell. Verse 18. Setteth out the sweetnes and pleasure of the word of God. Verse 19. Teacheth vs, that the word is published to begin and to confirme faith in vs. Verse 20. Teacheth vs, that a good lesson may be often times deliuered vnto vs. Verse 21. Setteth out both the certaintie of Gods word, and also what effect it worketh in them that imbrace it, to wit, it ma∣keth them able to answer al things demanded of them. Verse 22. Teacheth vs, to beware of oppression, whether it bee committed by force, the partie being not able to resist, or by fraud, and namely vnder the pretence of iu∣stice. Ʋerse 23. Setteth out Gods fauour towards the afflicted, & his iudge∣ments against them that afflict. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, to auoide anger, and wrath, and all the meanes whereby we may be prouoked thereto. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, how hurtfull and dangerous a thing it is to keepe companie with the vngodlie. Ʋers. 26. Teacheth vs to beware of rash and hastie suretiship. Ʋers. 27. Teacheth vs to take heede, that by our owne vnad∣uisednes, wee bee not the authors of our common woe and miserie. Verse 28. Teacheth vs, not to incroch vpon any, but to bee content with the portion which the Lord hath giuen vs from our ancestors. Ʋerse 29. Teacheth vs, to bee diligent, painfull, and faithfull in all our actions and affaires.
CHAP. 23. Co. THe holie Ghost declared in the last verse of the 22. Chapter, that diligence aduanceth men to the presence and speach of great personages, and now in the beginning of this Chapter he sheweth how they should behaue themselues when they come before them, speciallie when they sit to eate with them. Di. THis Chapter may be diuided into three parts: The first reacheth from verse 1. to the end of the 11. wherein he teacheth men to bridle their ap∣petite, he sheweth the vncertaintie of riches, he speaketh against the nigard∣lie and couetous person, also against contemners of exhortation, and extor∣tioners,  and oppressors of the poore and needie. The second reacheth from verse 12. to the end of the 25. wherein is contained an exhortation to im∣brace wisedome, to correct children, he speaketh of the ioye that parents haue by good children, he teacheth men to feare the Lord continuallie, to auoide euill companie, to obey parents, to get the knowledge of trueth,  wisedome, &c. The third reacheth from verse 26. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaketh against whores and whoredome, and against dron∣kards and dronkennes, setting out most largely and plentifully the sower fruites that come thereof. Se. Vers. 1. WHen thou sittest [vz. at the table] to eate [vz. meate] with a ruler, [i. with a great personage or gouernor of the people] consider diligently [i. carefully thinke vpon and weigh] what is before thee, [i. what things are set before thee, least, through varietie of dishes, thou knowing not where to begin, thou bewraie  want of good manners, or els ouer charge thy stomacke.] Vers. 2. And put the knife [vz. that thou hast in thy hand, or is vpon the table for thee to vse] to thy throte, [He meaneth by this manner of speach, that men should vse all meanes they could to bridle their greedie desire and eating of dainties] if thou be a man giuen to the appetite. [vz. of such daintie and sweete things.]  Vers. 3. Be not desirous of his daintie meates: [i. of the fine, sweet, & pleasant cates of a King, or great person. The Hebrue word importeth such things as sauour wel to the tast, & are swéet & pleasant] for it is a deceitful meate. [i. it wil easily draw men on by dainties to gluttonie: or it may be called deceit∣ful, because it will not last long: or els because the mightie suppose thereby to work some craft & deceit against the other. In these thrée verses I thinke he specially shooteth at these two poynts: the one is to teach vs to vse iudge∣ment & wisedome, & to bridle our affections when we are to deale with great personages in any thing, which he expresseth by one particular, that is, sitting at the table with them. The other is, to take héed that we be not not ouertaken
with daintie and sweete delicates, thereby bewraying, that there is not that wisdome in vs, that hath been supposed or reported.] Vers. 4. Trauaile  not too much to be rich, [q.d. thinke not, by great and tedious trauaile, thou shalt be rich whether God will yea or no, for riches are Gods gift: Psalm. 127.2. neither is this contrary to many sentences already rehearsed, where∣in men are exhorted, to bee laborious and diligent: but hee forbiddeth, first immoderate toyling & care, wherevnto our sauior seemeth to allude, Matt. 6.25. and secondly a desire, to waxe sodainly rich, which is also condemned by Gods word,] but cease [vz. vtterly and as much as in thee lyeth] from thy wisdome, [i. from that same worldly wisdome of thine owne, which in∣deed may rather be called distrust in God, or couetousnes, as when a man is violently caried away, with a desire to be rich, than wisdome.] Vers. 5. Wilt  thou cast thine eyes [i. wilt thou set thine heart and affections] vpon it, [i. vpon riches] which is nothing [i. which is as it were nothing, or a matter of no great importance, and this is one reason why men should not so greedi∣lie gape after riches, because when they haue atteyned them, they haue got∣ten, as much as a thing of nothing. And another reason he addeth in the se∣cond parte of this verse taken from the vncertainty,] for riches taketh hir to hir winges [i. flieth swiftly and fastly away,] as an Eagle [vz. doth,] and fli∣eth into the heauen, [i. goeth so farre as it is an impossible and hard matter to attaine the same: q.d. set not thy affections vpon riches, for they sodainely vanish away, and when thou hast gotten them, there is an hundred waies to forgoe them, as fire, water, euill detters, &c. and that in a moment.] Vers. 6. Eate thou not the bread [i. any manner of sustenance, as bread, meate,  drinke, &c. but because bread is the principall he nameth it] of him that hath an euill eye: [i. of the couetous, hard harted, and nigardly minded man: sée the contrary of this, Chap. 22.9.] neither desire his daintie meates: [q.d. be so farre off, from eating them, that thou haue no affection or appetite that way, see vers. 3. of this Chap.] Vers. 7. For as though he thought it in his  heart [vz. when indeed he doth it not,] so will hee say vnto thee, [vz. when thou eatest of such things, as he hath prepared,] eate and drinke: [vz. of such as wee haue: or as wee say, you are welcome, I am sorie I haue no better cheare, &c.] but his heart is not with thee. [i. standeth not vprightly affected towards thee: hee giueth a reason, why men should not eate such mens meates, because they are hollowe hearted and full of hipocrisie, pretending in words liberalitie, whereas they foster niggardlines in their soule.] Vers. 8. Thou shalt vomit [vz. euen for very griefe and sorrowe,] thy morsels  which thou hast eaten, [i. all that thou hast eaten of his: q.d. because thou hast eaten of his meate, & perceiued his niggardly minde, thou shalt wish all vomited vp whatsoeue it be, it shall greeue the so much,] and thou shalt loose thy sweete words. [i. the good communication and speach, which in the time of eating thou hast vsed shall bee as it were labor lost. One readeth this and the former verse also otherwise, and giueth another sense, but mee thinketh
this is plaine inough.] Vers. 9. Speake not [vz. graue wise, and good things] in the eares of fooles, [i. in the hearing of a very wicked and vngodly man,] for he wil despise the wisdome of thy words, [i. he wil little or nothing esteeme such things, as thou shalt wisely and learnedly vtter. I take it to be the same in sense, which our Sauior speaketh in other words, Matth. 7.6.] Vers.  10. Remoue not the auncient bounds [see for this, Chap. 22.28.] and enter not [vz. either by fraude, or force, or otherwise, to take any thing away from thence, that is not thine] into the feilds, [i. into the groundes, houses, lands, or possessions] of the fatherles, [i. of any that are weaker than thy selfe, and not able to resist: for the word vsed here, signifieth such ones, as thorrowe want of age, are not able to defende themselues, nor to put back iniurie:  whose father, the Lord is called, Psalm. 68.5.] Vers. 11. For [this verse conteyneth a reason, why men should not oppresse the poore,] hee that redee∣meth them [vz. from danger and distresse, meaning also, thereby that hee will redéeme them, and yet to the end the godly might be rightly perswaded, of the continuall care of the almightie toward them, hee speaketh in the pre∣sent tense,] is mightie, [vz. so mightie, as no one man, no not all the crea∣tures in the world, are able to withstand the least parte of his power: q.d. though thou now oppresse them, because they cannot resist thee, knowe yet, that the Lord, who is mightier and greater than all, wil redeeme and defend them,] hee will defend their causes aganst thee. [see this expounded before,  Chap. 22.23.] Vers. 12. Applie thine heart to instruction, [i. bend all the powers and senses of thy minde, to receaue it,] and thine eares to the words of knowledge. [i. applie all the partes and powers of thy bodie also, to imbrace such things, as are not onely skilfully propounded vnto thee, but al∣so may builde thee vp in knowledge and iudgement: he vseth a parte of the inward, and a parte of the outward, for the whole man, both inward and out∣ward,  see Chap. 22. vers. 17.] Vers. 13. Withhold not [vz. at any hand] correction, [i. moderate and due punishment, such as the partie punished is able to beare, and his fault requireth] from the childe: [vz. that by any meanes deserueth the same,] if thou smite him [i. chastise and correct him] with the roode [vz. of correction,] he shall not dye. [i. either thou shalt not kill him, or hurt him, or els by that meanes, thou shalt withdrawe him from many euils, that would leade to the death both of body and soule: see for cor∣rectiō  cha. 13.24. also 19.18. also 22.15.] Ver. 14. Thou shalt smite him with the rodde, [this is expounded ver. 13.] and shalt deliuer [vz. by that meanes] his soule [i. him himselfe: a parte for the whole] from hell. [i. from danger  and death, both of body and soule.] Vers. 15. My sonne, [see before chap. 1.8, 10.] if thine heart be wise, [i. if it be inclined to imbrace wisdome, and thriue and growe therein,] my heart shal reioyce [vz. very much or greatly:] and I also, [vz. my selfe, in my whole man, shall take wonderfull delight and  pleasure therein.] Vers. 16. And my reynes shall reioyce [i. euen from the inward affection of my minde, I will be glad, for the scripture attributeth,
the seate of will and affections to be in the reynes, as where it sayth, God is the searcher of the heart and reynes,] when thy lipps speake righteous thinges. [i. when thou shalt vtter good, holy and wise things, hee putteth lippes for speach, because they be helping instruments to vtter the voyce by.] Verse 17. Let not thine heart bee enuious against sinners, [vz. because thou seest  them prosper or florish. Many of Gods children haue been sore assaulted with this temptation: as Dauid Psalme 37.1. Ieremiah, and others, and therefore it is not without cause, that this commandement is so of∣ten put downe,] but let it be [vz. fast fixed, set, and grounded] in the feare of the Lord [i. in a sincere reuerence of his Maiestie] continuallie [i. at all times, both in prosperitie and aduersitie, &c.] Vers. 18. For [this verse con∣teyneth  a reason, why they should cease from emulating at the wicked, and fixe their hearts continually vpon the feare of GOD,] surely [i. without al doubt: and this affirmation serueth for the certaintie and trueth of the thing] there is an end, [vz. not onely of the wickeds prosperitie and florishing, how great or much so euer it be, but also of thine owne patience and hope] and thy hope shall not be cut off. [i. made frustrate, or deceaued, but thou shalt in good time haue the thing that thou didst hope for.] Vers. 19. O thou my sonne  [vnder this terme, he meaneth euery particular one, that is apt and ready to heare or learne, see vers. 15. of this Chap.] heare [vz. diligently and atten∣tiuely, both with the eares of the body, and the minde] and be wise [i. learne wisdome by hearing good and holy things] and guide thine heart [i. frame and fashion, the affections of thy soule, yea labor to rule them in such sorte, that thou mayst walke] in the way [vz. which I shall shewe thee, that is in the right way of Gods commandements: see Psalm. 32.8.] Vers. 20. Keepe  not companie [vz. at any hand: this he addeth, both because youth are great∣lie delighted in eatings and drinkings, and also because that thereby, they are many times drawne from the way of vertue and well doing, with dron∣kards [in Hebrue, it is bibbers of wine, meaning thereby such as would quaffe of cuppe after cuppe, and neuer bee satisfied, such a one the Iewes did falsely accuse our Sauior Christ to be. Matth. 11.19.] nor with gluttons [i. such as ouer charge their stomacks with meate: q.d. haunt not such mens compa∣nie, nor haue any familiaritie with them.] Vers. 21. For [this verse con∣teineth  a reason why they should not haunt their companie, because beggery and pouertie is the ende thereof.] the dronkards and gluttons shall be poore: [i. fall into pouertie though they be verie rich, for what vanitie more consu∣sumeth mens substance? Wee see that apparrell, and building remayneth: but if a man haue gulled in, of all dainties, euen as much as his panche will hold, yet with in sixe, eyght, tenne or twelue howres, hee hath appetite a∣gaine] and the sleeper [i. the idle and slothfull person, who is called a sleeper, because idlenes prouoketh to sleepe, Chapter 19.15.] shall be cloathed with ragges [i. with ragged and torne apparrell meaning also, that he should fall into beggerie and pouertie, euen as the other.] Vers. 22. Obey thy father
[vz. in the Lord, as Ephes. 6.1.] that hath begotten thee [i. that hath been a meane of thy being, & it may be vsed, as it were a reason to induce obedience] and despise not [vz. at any hand, but reuerence very much] thy mother when she is old, [vz. and not able as it were to helpe hir selfe, see chap. 1.8.] Vers.  23. Buy [vz. euen by departing, from all the pleasures and profits that thou hast] the trueth [i. the knowledge of Gods trueth, meaning, that they should by all meanes seeke to obteyne it, when they want it] but sell it not: [vz. at any hand: q.d. when thou hast gotten wisdome bargaine it not away, that is departe not from it for any price, or for any cause,] likewise, [vz. buy and sell not] wisdome, and instruction, and vnderstanding, [these words haue been expounded before, Chap. 1.2, 3.] I take this to bee the same with that  which our Sauior sayeth. Matth. 13.44, 45, 46.] Vers. 24. The father of the righteous [i. he that begetteth a good and a godly childe] shall greatlie reioyce [vz. in that his childe] and he that begetteth a wise childe, [i. one that is giuen to holy wisdome] shall haue ioye of him, [i. shall receaue great ioye and pleasure in him and by him: the contrarie of this sentence, see before  Chap. 17.21.] Vers. 25. Thy father and thy mother, [i. thy parents, kinsfolkes, and frends,] shall be glad [vz. in and of thee, if thou bee giuen to godlines, and well disposed] and she that bare thee [i. thy mother] shall re∣ioyce [vz. greatly in thy well dooing: I take it to be vsed as an argument, to  prouoke children to well dooing.] Vers. 26. My sonne [see vers. 15. of this chap, also vers. 19,] giue me thine heart, [i. applie thy selfe wholy to my pre∣cepts: and this he speaketh in the person of the heauenlie wisdome] and let thine eyes delight [i. take thou thy selfe singular pleasure] in my waies: [i. in those wayes, which I shewe and teach thee: the worde which we turne here delight, being a compound word of another word, that signifieth to bee wil∣ling, and to keepe, dooth not onely note the great delight we should haue in good wayes, but also expresseth the care and diligence that should be in them  to obserue the same.] Vers. 27. For a whore [the holy ghost sheweth a rea∣son here, why men should cleaue to holy wisdome, and auoide all euill, vnder one comprehending all sortes of naughtines,] is as a deepe ditch, [vz. out of which a man can hardly get: see Chapter 22.14.] and a strange woman [i. an harlot: this word hath been expounded sundrie times before,] is as a nar∣rowe pitte. [vz. wherein a man cannot stirre himselfe, to deliuer himselfe out of danger hee is so shut in on euerie side: q.d. a man may easilie fall into whoredome, but when they are once gotten into that same bottomles pit, and narrowe hole, they can hardlie or not at all come out againe, see Chap.  2.19.] Vers. 28. Also she lieth in waite [vz. secretly and closelie] as for a praye [i. as it were to catch a pray: see Chap. 7.10.] and she increaseth [vz. by her intising and wickednes] the transgressors [i. the number of transgres∣sors] among men. [vz. vppon earth: q.d. although without whoredome there were infinit wicked persons vpon the earth, yet whores, by intise∣ments, make thousands wicked also, and vnfaithfull to GOD and man.]
Vers. 29. To whom is woe? to whom is sorowe? [the words here turned woe  and sorowe, are in the Hebrue tongue particles, or interiections of mourning and exclamation: q.d. who haue cause to mourne, complaine and crie out? euen dronkards] to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? [i. who is a con∣tentious, brabbling, and repining or murmuring person? euen a dronkard. For dronken men raise vp strifes and braulings: see Chapter 20.1.] to whom are wounds without cause? [who abound in stripes, and are much bea∣ten and hurt? euen dronkards: and that speach without cause, may bee in∣terpreted thus, either that they haue them not in warfare, and fighting with others, but because they many times fall & so hurt themselues: or els, whilest that without any cause, rashly powring out contentious words a∣gainst other persons, they doo slaunder & reproch them, and so receiue stripes and wounds for the same] and to whom is the rednes of the eyes? [i. abun∣dance of hot humors in the eyes: q.d. who by their very countenances be∣wray themselues to bee great drinkers of wine and strong drinke, but dron∣kards? And in this verse is comprehended the question: the answer follow∣eth in the next.] Vers. 30. Euen to them that tarrie long at the wine, [i. to  such as sit drinking and swilling, wasting that time, which they should im∣ploy in their ordinarie affaires in quaffing] to them [vz. also [that goe [vz. from their owne houses to other places, and trot as it were vp and downe from house to house] and seeke [vz. carefully, and curiously enough I war∣rant you] mixt wine. [He speaketh this according to the custome of the coun∣tries of the East, which are hot, where they did not drinke wine, but well mingled and alaied: meaning thereby, that they satisfied their pleasure greatly in the same.] Vers. 31. Looke not thou vpon the wine when it is red,  [i. take heede thou be not deceiued with the pleasant colour of the wine: and withstand euill in the beginning] and when it sheweth his colour [vz. glori∣ouslie and faire to the eye] in the cuppe, [i. when it is put into the goblet, glasse, &c.] or goeth downe [vz. through thy throte into thy stomacke] plea∣santly. [i. swéetly, and with delight to thee that art the drinker: q.d. withstand euen the very beginnings & prouocations to dronkennes, and al the meanes whereby thou maiest be prouoked thereto.] Vers. 32. Jn the end thereof [I  take this verse to bee a reason why dronkennes is to bee auoyded, because it bringeth with it many griefes and sorowes: and it is as much, q.d. thy wine may be pleasant for a while, but at the length it will sting thee and bite thee in the head, stomacke, and whole bodie] it will bite [vz. thee] like a serpent, [he meaneth by this speach, very sore, yea so grieuouslie, that it will infect thee] and hurt [vz. thee thy selfe] as a cockatrise. [I had rather reade with some, a viper, which yéeldeth forth her yong ones with the destruction of her selfe: meaning by these two similitudes the great griefe and hurt that dron∣kards through their owne follie drawe vnto themselues.] Vers. 33. Thine  eyes shall looke vpon strange women, [i. thou shalt become shamelesse and vn∣chast, if thou giue thy selfe to dronkennes: vnderstanding by strange women,
harlots, as sundrie times heretofore: and this is another reason why dron∣kennes is to be auoyded, because vnchastnes is ioyned with it, as an insepe∣rable companion] and thine heart [i. thou, out of the abundance of thy heart, Matth. 12.32. for otherwise the heart speaketh not] shall speake [vz. openly and in the presence of others] lewd things. [i. filthie and vnseemelie things. Another reason why dronkennes is to be auoyded, because of the euil speach  that is ioyned with it.] Vers. 34. And thou shalt be [vz. when thou art so dronke] as one that sleepeth in the middest of the sea, [that is, it will make thée careles and secure, as the sléepie man is [and as he that sleepeth in the toppe of the mast. [i. as one that is in great and continuall danger, readie (through the rage and violence of the sea) to be cast out of the mast into the maine sea. Here is two reasons contained: the one, because it maketh men carelesse: the other, because they are in wonderfull great danger, though  perhaps they themselues feele it not.] Vers. 35. They [i. sundrie men] haue striken me, [vz. grieuouslie and very hard] shalt thou [vz. O dronkard] say, [vz. when thou art waked out of the dead sleepe of thy dronkennes] but I was not sicke: [i. I was not grieued or pained for all their blowes] they haue beaten me, [vz. very much] but J knewe not [vz. that they had so dealt with me, for dronkennes taketh away almost all the senses] when I awoke: [vz. out of the sléepe of my dronkennes, till such time as other made me know it by some one meane or other] therefore will I seeke [vz. diligently and care∣fully] it [i. strong and pleasant wine: meaning thereby, that he would pur∣sue dronkennes, notwithstanding all these inconueniences] yet still. [i. some∣what longer: q.d. dronkennes will make thee so much the more miserable, by how much thou shalt glorie of the dulnes of thy bodie and minde, yea, which is worse by many degrees, thou shalt of purpose prouoke thy selfe to continue and increase in thine old excesse, ryot, and dronkennes: a horrible thing no doubt. Do. Verse 1. Teacheth vs, to haue regard of time, place, persons, &c. Vers. 2. Teacheth vs, that it is a hard matter to bridle appetite, and also that wee must deale earnestly in the subduing thereof. Verse 3. Teacheth vs, that we may easilie be ouertaken with daintie fare, vnlesse wee take good heed to our selues. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs to auoide couetousnes, and trusting too much in our owne wit. Verse 5. Setteth out the incertaintie of riches, and the vanitie thereof. Verse 6. Teacheth vs, to auoide the companie of nig∣gardlie minded men. Verse 7. Setteth out the hypocrisie of the niggard, speaking one thing and meaning another. Verse 8. Teacheth vs, that there is not onely no good gotten, but much hurt done, both to our selues and o∣thers, by resorting to niggards tables and feastes. Ver. 9. Teacheth vs, to take heede that wee despise not good counsell. Ʋerse 10. Teacheth vs, not to incroch vpon any, but to be content with our owne. Verse 11. Setteth out Gods fauour and loue towards the poore afflicted. Ʋerse 12. Teacheth vs
to imploye and lend all our forces to obtaine heauenly wisedome. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, moderatly and in good order, to correct such as GOD hath committed to our bringing vp. Ʋerse 14. Declareth what good commeth by reasonable correction. Verse 15. and 16. Teach vs, that good and wise children reioyce continually the hearts of their parents and friends. Vers. 17. Teacheth two things: first, that wee should not be enuious at the wickeds prosperitie: secondly, that we should continually meditate and thinke vp∣pon the reuerence and feare of Gods Maiestie. Verse 18. Teacheth vs, not onely in patience to waite for good things, but to bee assured also, that wee shall in good time obtaine them. Ʋerse 19. Teacheth vs, that Gods word should be a continuall direction of the affections of our hearts. Verse 20. Teacheth vs to shunne euill companie. Verse 21. Setteth out the inconue∣niences of gluttonie and idlenes. Verse 22. Teacheth obedience to supe∣riours, and others whom God hath placed ouer vs. Verse 23. Teacheth vs, not onely to vse all meanes to get knowledge in Gods trueth, but when we haue obtained it, to make much of it. Verse 24. Teacheth vs, that good children are matters of great ioye to their parents. Vers. 25. Teacheth the same thing. Ʋers. 26. Teacheth vs diligently to hearken to the good coun∣sell of our parents and friends. Vers. 27. Setteth out the dangers of whore∣dome. Vers. 28. Describeth the qualities and properties of harlots. Verse 29. Declareth the great miseries and mischiefes that insue vpon dronken∣nes. Verse 30. Teacheth vs to beware that we be not ouertaken euen with the vse of lawfull things. Verse 31. Teacheth vs, to withstand the begin∣nings, and to auoide the occasions of dronkennes. Verse 32. Setteth out the hurts that followe vpon it. Verse 33. Teacheth vs, that dronkennes hath either whoredome, or inticements to whoredome annexed with it. Verse 24. Teacheth vs, that dronkennes thrusteth men headlong into most dangerous dangers. Verse 35. Teacheth vs, that it bereaueth men euen of their senses for the time: and instructeth vs further, in time to cease from euill, least going on in the same, an vnauoidable iudgement ouertake vs. CHAP. 24. Co. THe holie Ghost hauing before liuely painted out wicked men, and namely dronkurds, knowing also our readines to imbrace such vices, beginneth this Chapter with an admonition to auoide such companie, which thing also he ex∣pressed before Chap. 23. vers. 17, 20. so that it seemeth to bee as it were a conti∣nuance of the same doctrine. Di. I Would diuide this Chapter into three especiall parts. In the first, he tea∣cheth  men to auoide euill companie, & commendeth wisedome, know∣ledge, vnderstanding, and counsell: he speaketh also against such as imagine
mischiefe, and scorne at others, and instructeth patiently to beare aduersi∣tie, and to defend and maintaine the innocent, from verse 1. to the end of the  12. In the second he setteth out the excellencie of wisedome, exhorteth the wicked to leaue off their wickednes, and not to reioyce at the fall of any, he teacheth men not to bee grieued at the wickeds prosperitie, to yeeld obe∣dience to God and Magistrates, and to beware of sedicious persons, for feare of punishments that shal fall vpon thē, from vers. 13. to the end of the  22. In the third, he willeth men to beware of hauing respect of persons, and of iustifying the vngodlie, and teacheth them to speake good things, and to deale wisely and prouidently in all their affaires, to beware of false witnes bearing, and of recompensing euill for euill, and of idlenes, which bringeth nothing with it but beggerie and pouertie, from verse 23. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. BE not thou enuious against euill men, [it is the same in meaning that wée had be∣fore, Chap. 23.17. though it differ some∣what in words] neither desire [i. haue not so much as an affection] to be with them. [vz. in companie, or acquainted with them: and hereof he sheweth a reason in  the next verse.] Vers. 2. For their heart imagineth [i. they themselues doo nothing els but imagine and deuise] destruction, [i. hurt and harme against other men: and marke how he saith their heart, meaning, that the wicked haue but as it were one minde, specially in working mischiefe] and their lippes speake [i. they with their lippes boldly vtter] mischiefe. [vz. against other men: q.d. they feare not with their mouthes to speake the mischiefe that  they haue deuised.] Vers. 3. Through wisedome [He meaneth this of hea∣uenly wisedome and knowledge] is a house builded [He speaketh not onely of the outward framing of a house, but of the increase also of a mans fami∣lie, and the attaining of things necessarie for the same] and with vnderstan∣ding [vz. of Gods will reuealed in his word] it is established. [vz. firme and  sure, so that it cannot be moued: see Matth. 7.24, 25.] Vers. 4. And by knowledge [i. right skill to gouerne the things wherewith God hath blessed men] shall the chambers [i. all the parts and péeces of the house: yet he ma∣keth speciall mention of the chambers, because men commonly lay vp things in them] bee filled [vz. plentifully and abundantly] with all precious and pleasant riches. [He meaneth no doubt specially outward and earthly riches, yet so that vnder them he comprehendeth the true and right riches: q.d. hée that shall skilfully gouerne his house, shall obtaine all sortes of bles∣sings.]  Vers. 5. A wise man is strong [hée still commendeth wisedome,
shewing that it hath other excellent qualities adioyned to it] for [I would rather reade it, and] a man of vnderstanding, [i. he that is indued with right knowledge and wisedome] increaseth his strength. [i. is indéede very mightie, and many times doth that by his wisdome, which the strong cannot doo by their strength: and therefore is to be preferred: see Eccles. 9.13, 14, &c. also Chap. 21.22.] Vers. 6. For with counsell, [i. with right  and holy counsel] thou shalt enterprise thy warre: [i. the warre that thou shalt make against other men,] and in the multitude of them [i. where there are many, or great store is,] that can giue counsell [i. good and right counsell, as before] is health. [i. great store and abundance of all manner of blessings: see Prouerb. 11.14. also 15.22. also 20.18. and this is a reason why wis∣dome is to be preferred, because of the good successe it giueth.] Vers. 7. Wis∣dome  [i. holy and heauenlie wisdome] is high to a foole, [i. to a wicked and vngodly man: q.d. A foole cannot attaine wisdome, but a wise man easilie getteth it, see Chap 14.6.] therefore [i. because it is such an excellent thing, and not obteyned by him,] hee [i. the foole or wicked man] cannot open his mouth [i. speak, see Matth. 5.2. also Acts. 10.34. the beginning of speach put for speach it selfe, for a man must open his mouth before hee can speak] in the gate, [i. the place of publike assemblies: see Chapter 1.21. and other places: in which méetings, wisdome should most especiallie be manifested.] Vers. 8. Hee that imagineth [vz. in his heart: see vers. 2. of this Chap.] to  doo euill: [i. hurt and mischief against other men,] men [i. many men, speci∣allie good men] shall call him [vz. iustly, and thorow his owne wicked deme∣rits,] an author of wickednes. [i. a most wicked and vngodly person, as hee that is the author of any euill is counted the most notorious amongst them all.] Vers. 9. The wicked thought of a foole, [i. the wicked man, which  thinketh nothing but wicked things, yea euen his wicked thoughts] is sinne: [vz. before God, though perhaps men deeme not so] and the scorner [i. he that derideth all matters appertaining either to God or men] is an abhomi∣nation vnto men. [i. is loathed and abhorred of them, speciallie of the good people.] Vers. 10. If thou be faintt [vz. harted] in the day of aduersitie: [i.  in the time of trouble, whether it lye vpon thy self or others] thy strength [i. the force and power that seemed to be in thee] is small. [i. will then appeare to be nothing when calamitie shall set vpon thee.] Vers. 11. Deliuer [vz.  what in thee lyeth, and by all the meanes thou canst,] them that are drawne to death: [i. them that are vniustlie oppressed by what meanes, danger, or extremitie soeuer it be, Psal. 79. they are called the children of death,] and wilt thou not [vz. what in thee lyeth,] preserue [vz. by thy power] them that are led to be slaine? [vz. by others: q.d. If thou doost it not, it shall bee thy great sinne.] Vers. 12. If thou say, [q.d. If thou wouldst lay for an excuse]  behold we knewe not of it, [vz. that he was ignorant: q.d. though thou woul∣dest pretend ignorance of the man or the matter, or both,] hee that pondreth the hearts [i. God, for this is a Periphrasis of him, because to him only it be∣longeth
to search the heartes and reynes,] dooth not hee vnderstand it [vz. both his iust cause and thy neglect of his defence: q.d. certainely he doth, and will take the matter into his owne hands, as followeth in this verse,] and he that keepeth thy soule [i. defendeth thee thy selfe from danger and distresse, whereinto thy neighbour is fallen, and that to this end that thou shouldest helpe the oppressed: see Esther. 4.13, 14.] knoweth he it not? [q.d. it cannot be, but that he doth knowe it, and will reuenge it, for in both places the inter∣rogation or demaund importeth so much,] will not hee also recompense [vz. vprightly, and iustly, and to the full,] euerie man [vz. of what state or cal∣ling soeuer hee be] according to his worke [vz. which hee hath wrought: see  Psalm. 62.13. Roman. 2.6.] Vers. 13. My sonne [see before Chap. 1.8, 10.] eate honie, for it is good, [i. healthfull, and profitable to the bodie,] and the honnie combe, for it is sweete vnto thy mouth, [i. pleasant and delectable to thy taste: q.d. there is two commodities come by it, vz. profit, and plea∣sure:  see Psal. 19.10.] Vers. 14. So [i. both profitable and pleasant] shall the knowledge of wisdome, [i. the vnderstanding, feeling, and practise of Gods word, for so large is the word knowledge in this place in my minde] be vnto thy soule, [i. vnto thee thy selfe: and yet hee dooth not without cause name the soule, because therein consisteth both the beginning and continu∣ance of all these things,] if thou finde it, [q.d. if thou once rightlie and true∣ly finde it, and laye holde of it: and this hee speaketh, because hee would not haue men goe away, in an idle imagination of the thing, not hauing the thing it selfe,] and there shall be an end [vz. of thy studie and labor, meaning such an end, as he himselfe could well wish and desire] and thy hope shall not be cut off. [see Chap. 23.18.]. These two verses may be resolued by a simi∣litude thus, as honie is both profitable and pleasant to them that haue it and vse it, so is heauenly wisdome, though perhaps it seeme not so at the first.]  Vers. 15. Lay not waite [i. deale not subtillie nor craftely] O wicked man [vz. whosoeuer thou art] against the house of the righteous [i. against him∣selfe, or any thing appertayning vnto him] and spoyle not, [vz. by might and crueltie] his resting place: [i. the things that apperteyne vnto him: one, that is, his house, being put for all. So hee forbiddeth two meanes whereby the wicked molest the good, the one is fraude or crafte, the other is force or  might.] Vers. 16. For [this is a reason, why he should ceafe from working iniurie] a iust man falleth [vz. into dangers and distresses, and that many times by meanes that wicked men procure against them] seauen times, [i. many and sundrie times: a number certeine for an vncertaine, Psalm. 119.164.] and riseth [vz. thorowe the ayde, strength and fauor of God] againe. [vz. out of those dangers and euills: q.d. though thou mayst be incouraged to tread him downe, thorowe his often calamities, yet knowe that the Lord will rayse him vp, for which see Psalm. 34.19. And for the number of sea∣uen:  see Iob. 5.19.] Vers. 17. Be not thou glad [vz. in thy heart: neither yet declare any such thing, by any outward shewe,] when thine enemie falleth
[vz. into calamitie and miserie, as vers. 16. of this Chap.] and let not thine heart reioyce [i. be not so much as inwardlie ioyfull] when he stumbleth [vz. at any thing, or any manner of waye, and so commeth into miserie: he forbid∣deth men to reioyce at the distresse of their foes, yea though that they iustlie suffer or haue deserued the same, by some one meanes or other.] Vers. 18.  Least [this is not spoken as though he doubted whether God sawe it or no, but here he speaketh of GOD according to the manner of men: see for the same word, Malach. 4.6. and it is rather a particle of threatning here, and there also, than of doubting] the Lord see it [i. thy hard hartednes and wic∣kednes,] and it displease him [vz. greatlie, yea so much that] & he turne his wrath from him [vz. that is afflicted and distressed, and powre it foorth vpon thee. And this is a reason why men should not reioyce in other mens mise∣ries, because it is the next way to pull miserie vpon themselues.] Vers. 19.  Fret not thy selfe, [i. be not angrie or greeued in thy selfe] because of the ma∣licious [vz. men, that is because they either florish and prosper, or els in the malice of their hearts attempt hard things against thee,] neither bee enuious at the wicked. [see before Chap. 23.17. also vers. 1. of this Chap.] Vers. 20. For there shall be no end of plagues to the wicked man: [i. he shall bee, as  it were by one plague in anothers necke punished in this life, and if he escape them yet shall he be punished eternallie in the life to come,] and the light of the wicked shall be put ott [i. both his felicitie and whole life, shall be voide of all glorious remembrance: see Chap. 13.9.] Vers. 21. My sonne: [see  Chap. 1.8, 10.] feare [vz. withall thine heart, and that with the reuerence and feare of children] the Lord [vz. thy God, who is iust and powerfull] and the King [vz. who is his substitute and deputie, hée setteth God before ma∣gistrates, because in God and for God, they must bee feared and obeyed: see 1. Peter 2.17.] and meddle out [vz. at any hand: q.d. haue nothing at al to doo,] with them that are seditious: [the worde signifieth such as varie, vz. from the commandements of God, and the kings commandements a gree∣ing therewith.] Vers. 22. For [a reason of the premisses taken from the so∣daine  and continuall euill that shall fall vpon such people,] their destruction [i. destruction layde vppon them from the Lorde] shall rise [vz. vp against them] sodainely, [i. when they thinke least of it. 1. Thessal. 5.3.] and who [vz. amongst men] knoweth the ruine [i. the great and horrible destructi∣on: for so much I suppose, the manner of propounding it in a demand impor∣teth] of them both? [i. that shall fal vpon those two sortes of men mentioned vers. 19.20, 21. of this Chapter.] Vers. 23. Also these things [vz. either  following or going before, or both of them] pertaine to the wise, [vz. to know and vnderstand them.] It is not good, [i. it is euill and hurtefull, as sundrie times before, and namely Chapter 17.26. Chap. 18.5. to haue respect of a∣ny person, [vz. of what state or condition soeuer he be, whether poore or rich, good or badde] in iudgement, [i. in the place of publike iudgement, or in pronouncing of sentence: see Chap. 18.5. also Deutero. 1.17. q.d. it is a
very euill thing to looke vpon any mans person: the thing that is to be re∣garded is the matter and not the man, and accordingly must the magistrate  proceede either in iustifying or cōdemming.] Vers. 24. He [vz. whosoeuer he be] that sayeth [vz. in good earnest] to the wicked [vz. man,] thou art righte∣ous, [i. thou art a good man, & mainteynest a good cause:] him shall the people curse [i. either they haue a good cause so to doo, or els in the frowardnes of their owne hearts shall doo it, not allowing hereby cursing of others, which is condemned, Rom. 12.14. but shewing, that such mens wicked dealings, prouoketh other men to great extremitie also,] and the multitude [vz. of men and people,] shall abhorre him. [i. loth and detest him as a leude and e∣uill  man: see Prouerb 17.15. also Isaiah. 5.20, 23.] Vers. 25. But to them [vz. whether they be priuate men or magistrates, but specially magistrates, for of them hee seemeth to speake in this place] that rebuke [vz. sharpely, and according to the notoriousnes of the fault,] him, [i. the wicked, and the vngodly person] shall be pleasure [i. great store & abundance, of pleasant and good things, yea euen from the Lord,] and vpon them shall come [vz. with∣out all fayle and most assuredlie] the blessings of goodnes. [i. good and graci∣ous blessings. Some vnderstand it thus, as though al good mē should blesse, that is not onely speak well of, but pray for, and wish all good things to bee  bestowed vpon them.] Vers. 26. They [i. the people] shall kisse the lippes of him [i. both loue and reuerence him: hee putteth the signe for the thing it selfe: see 1 Samuel. 10.1. 1. King. 19.18. Psalm. 2.12. and Hosea. 13.2.] that answereth [i. speaketh: as Matt. 11.25.] vpright wordes. [vz. in iudge∣ment,  meaning also hereby iudging iustly.] Vers. 27. Prepare thy worke without [i. haue an eye to those things of thine that are abroad, as corne, cat∣tell, &c.] and make readie [vz. with what speede conueniently thou mayest] thy things in the field, [i. such things as thou hast abroad,] and after [i. when thou hast performed these things] builde thine house. [i. doo that that thou art to doo for thine owne good, and the good of thy people, and furnish so thy whole house with things necessarie; to which purpose, thou must of ne∣cessitie get in such things as are abroad, wherevpon thou mayest liue with∣in doores. This may bee a good sense: and yet I take this rather to bee his meaning: that before he attempt any thing, hee should be furnished with all the meanes whereby hee might performe it, whether thinges in his owne  ground or in other mens possessions.] Vers. 28. Be not a witnesse [vz. in a∣ny matter, nor for any mans cause] against thy neighbour [i. against any, speciallie against him that dwelleth nigh vnto thee] without cause: [i. false¦ly: for otherwise he doth not forbid to beare witnesse in a trueth:] for wilt thou deceaue [vz. other men] with thy lippes? [i. with thy words which thy lippes shall vtter: a reason why men should not vse false witnes bearing, be∣cause  there is ioyned with it deceipt.] Vers. 29. Say not [i. neither thinke nor speake, for if it be vnlawfull to speake, it is vnlawfull to thinke,] J will [if I liue or be able] doo to him [vz. that hath done me iniurie] as hee hath
done to me, [i. doo him iniurie or wrong] I will recompense euery man [vz. that dealeth iniuriously with me] according to his worke. [vz. which he hath prac∣tised or performed against me: see Chap. 20.22.] Vers. 30. I [vz. trauai∣ling]  passed by the field of the slothfull, [i. ground appertaining to an idle and sluggish person] and by the vineyard of a man destitute of vnderstanding. [i. by a negligent and careles mans vineyard, whom he saith to bee destitute of vnderstanding: or as it is in the Hebrue, voide of a heart, because he seldome or neuer thinketh vpon his busines or affaires.] Vers. 31. And lo, it was  all growne ouer with thornes, [i. lying vntilled and vnhusbanded, it was bar∣ren and vnfruitfull, for thornie ground is not good: see Matth. 13.7.] and nettles had couered the face thereof, [i. the vpper or outward part of it: he no∣teth thereby, the barrennes and vnfruitfulnes of it] and the stone wall there∣of [i. that which was made for the defence of it] was broken downe. [vz. so that it lay as it were a wast or common plot, readie to be spoyled: see Isaiah 5.5. Also Psalme 80.12. He noteth in this verse the confusion that idlenes worketh.] Vers. 32. Then I beheld [vz. both the ground, and the discom∣modities  which followed of idlenes] and I considered it well: [i. I weighed it déepely in my minde: and he speaketh of them both together, as it were of one thing, because they followe one another, as the shadowe doth the bo∣die] I looked vpon it, [vz. attentiuely and diligently] and receiued instruction. [vz. thereby, that I might learne by his example to beware of idlenes and sloth.] Vers. 33. Yet a little sleepe, [These bee the words of the idle person,  who though he haue slept neuer so much, yet desireth more] a little slumber, [q.d. besides that I haue had, counting notwithstanding euen a great deale but a litte] a little folding of the hands to sleepe. [see Chapter 6.10. And also Chapter 19.15. where it is sayd, that slothfulnes causeth sléepe.] Vers. 34.  So [vz. as is before expressed, by meanes of thy idlenes and slothfulnes] thy pouertie [i. the néede and want that thou must indure] commeth [vz. vppon thée and thine] as one that trauaileth by the way, [i. very sodainlie and spee∣delie, as the wayfaring man will not stay long or much till such time as hée come to his iornies end] and thy necessitie [i. that necessitie and want, which through idlenes shall fall vppon thee and pinch thée] like an armed man [i. with great force and violence, so that thou shalt not be able to resist or with∣stand it: see Chap. 6.11.] Verse 1. Teacheth vs, to shunne fellowship and societie with the wicked.Do. Ʋerse 2. Doth not onely teach the disposition of the wicked and vngodlie, but instructeth good men also to labour the reformation of their thoughts and words. Vers. 3. Teacheth vs, that wisedome is able to bring great and hard things to passe. Verse 4. Teacheth vs, that wisedome is many times crowned with great store of pleasure and profite. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, that wisedome is better than strength. Ʋerse 6. Setteth out not onely the commodities that come by wisedome, but also teacheth vs to attempt no∣thing,
but in a wise consideration of the same before hand. Ʋers. 7. Tea∣cheth vs, that wicked and worldly minded men cannot attaine heauenlie wisedome. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, to bridle our hearts from imagining euill. Ʋerse 9. Teacheth vs, that wicked thoughts are sinne, also to auoide scor∣ning and scoffing. Ʋerse 10. Teacheth vs, in the daies of affliction to striue to bee of good courage. Ʋerse 11. Teacheth vs, to vse all the power and lawfull meanes that GOD hath indued vs withall, to deliuer the innocent being oppressed. Ʋerse 12. Teacheth vs, that ignorance of any matter, will be no excuse before God: it setteth out also the knowledge and proui∣dence of God, and manifesteth Gods great and eternall iustice. Ʋers. 13. Teacheth vs, with moderation and thankes giuing to receiue and vse the blessings of God. Verse 14. Teacheth vs, to imbrace holie and heauenlie wisedome, for the fruites and effects that it will worke in vs. Ʋerse 15. Teacheth vs, to doo no iniurie to any, but specially to the good people. Verse 16. Teacheth vs, that many are the miseries of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth them out of all. Ʋerse 17. Teacheth vs, not to reioyce at the miserie, hurt or hinderance of any. Verse 18. Teacheth vs, first that God seeth all things: secondly, that for the sinne of hard hartednes he pu∣nisheth very sharply. Verse 19. Teacheth vs, that the prosperitie of the wicked should not make vs either to murmur against God, or to bee ma∣litious against the vngodly themselues. Verse 20. Teacheth vs, that the prosperous and florishing estate of the wicked shall soone come to an end. Vers. 21. Teacheth vs, to obey first God, and then in and for God, the Ma∣gistrate: also to beware of seditious and rebellious people. Ʋerse 22. Doth teach vs, not onely what great iudgement shall ouertake the wicked, but also how sodainlie it shall come vpon them. Ʋers. 23. Teacheth vs, to cast from vs all respect of persons. Ʋers. 24. Teacheth vs, not to flatter or commend the vngodly in their sinne. Verse 25. Teacheth vs, to rebuke plainlie, according to the notoriousnes of the offence, any offending partie. Verse 26. Teacheth vs, that vpright and faithfull dealing both in words and deedes, is the way to obtaine both reuerence and loue. Ʋerse 27. Tea∣cheth men in wisedome, to bee sure of the meanes to performe a thing by before they attempt the same. Ʋers. 28. Teacheth vs, to beware of vniust of false witnes bearing. Verse 29. Teacheth vs, that we should not recom∣pense euill with euill, but rather ouercome euill with weldoing. Verse 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Tend all to the dispraise of idlenes and sloth, shewing what effects it bringeth foorth: as first, vnfruitfulnes and barrennes of ground. Verse 31. Secondarilie, speedie and vnauoidable beggerie. Vers. 34, 32. Tea∣cheth vs further this doctrine, euen by the hurt of others, to learne to make our owne good and profite: as when we see any giuen to any vice, to learne in the beginning of it in them to shunne it in ourselues.
CHAP. 25. Co. THis Chapter dependeth vpon the other thus, that the holie Ghost proceedeth still in deliuering vnto vs more of Salomons prouerbes and sentences, which may appeare by the word also, vers. 1. q.d. not onely these that you haue heard alreadie were Salomons, but these that followe vnto the end of the booke. Di. THis Chapter may bee diuided into three parts. In the first, he speaketh  generally of Kings and Magistrates: also he dealeth against proud boa∣sters and vaineglorious persons, and against contentious men, and willeth men not to discouer secrets, from verse 1. to the end of the 10. In the second,  he speaketh of seasonablenes of speach, of good reproofes, of faithfull mes∣sengers, of false boasting, of gentle words, of moderate vse of pleasure, and dealeth against ouer much boldnes, against false witnesses, vnfaithfull men, and oppressors, from verse 11. to the end of the 20. In the third, he teacheth  men to ouercome euill with weldoing, to beware of receiuing reports, and sheweth the discommodities of a brauling woman: he speaketh of good tidings, of the state of the godlie vnder tyrants, of seeking mens owne glo∣rie and praise, and of not bridling the appetite, from verse 21. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. THese [vz. following, as well as those that goe before] are also parables of Salomon, [i. such as he himselfe spake and writ, and seeme to be contained amongst those thrée thousand mentioned 1. King. 4.32. Con∣cerning the word parables, see chap. 1.1.] which the men of Hezekiah [i. the seruants of King Hezekiah] king of Iudah [of him you may reade, and of his acts, 2. King. chap. 18, 19, 20.] copied out. [vz. of sundrie writings or bookes, and made as it were but one bodie or matter of them.] Vers. 2. The glorie of God is to  conceale a thing secret: [i. because Gods iudgements are vnsearchable, and his waies past finding out, as Rom. 11.33. his glorie is so much the more great and excellent] but the Kings honor is [i. it is a very honorable and glo∣rious matter for him] to search out [vz. very diligently, and when hee hath found it, to manifest the same vnto others] a thing. [i. euery thing or matter that he may set out: q.d. on the other side, nothing is so honorable for a king, as to looke throughly into all matters, and to knowe euery thing, and to make manifest euery thing that appertaineth to kingly dignitie, and may get credite thereto.] Vers. 3. The heauens in height, [vz. doo excéede mans  knowledge and skill] and the earth in deepenes [vz. goeth beyond al the reach
of his vnderstanding and reason] and the Kings heart [i. the imaginations, deuises, and actions that he thinketh vpon, and performeth. Here he putteth the heart for them all, because it is the fountaine from whence they procéed] can no man [vz. how wise or cunning so euer he bee] search out. [vz. by any meanes: q.d. as the height of the heauens and the depth of the earth cannot certainlie bee comprehended of man, so can no man search the affections of a King, no not of any other, as to haue a certaine knowledge thereof: see 1.  Cor. 2.11.] Vers. 4. Take [i. let a man take] the drosse from the siluer, [vz. after it is fined] and there shall proceede [vz. from the siluer so fined] a vessell [i. a good and a profitable vessell] for the finer. [.either for his vse or sake that  fineth it.] Vers. 5. Take away the wicked [i. let the vngodlie bee remoued] from the King, [i. from the Magistrates presence, house, court, or kingdome] and his throne [i. his whole kingdome shall by that meanes] be established [vz. very certainlie and surely] in righteousnes. [i. in vpright and iust dealing: see Chap. 20.8. I would ioyne these two verses together, and reade them as a similitude: q.d. as when the drosse is remoued from the siluer, there re∣maineth nothing but good and pure matter for the finer to frame a good ves∣sell: so the way to haue his kingdome established in peace and prosperitie, is to take away the wicked: for he resembleth the wicked to drosse, the King  to the finer, and his kingdome to fined siluer, or a vessel made thereof.] Ver. 6. Boast not thy selfe [i. make no glorious shewe of the things thou hast, either in wordes, countenance, apparell, &c.] before the King, [i. in his presence, court, or kingdome] and stand not [vz. either ouer long, or els gloriouslie] in the place of great men. [i. either in their palaces, or in such places as doo properly appertaine to them: q.d. be content with thine owne place and cal∣ling, He meaneth, to drawe men from ambition, and to teach them, not to af∣fect  places or callings that are too high for them.] Vers. 7. For it is better, [vz. by much or many degrees] that it be said vnto thee, [vz. openly and be∣fore others, & that by them that are the rulers and gouernours of the house] come vp hether, [vz. higher, and so shouldest be exalted] than thou to bee put lower [vz. for lifting vp thy selfe too high, and that to thy great shame] in the presence of the prince [i. before some great or noble personage] whom thine eyes hath seene. [i. to whom thou hast drawne nigh, that thou mightest very  familiarly looke vpon him as it were: see Luke 14.7, 8, 9, 10.] Vers. 8. Goe not foorth [vz. at any time, out of thine owne house, land, or limites] ha∣stelie [i. rashly, vnaduisedly, or without cause] to strife, [vz. against thy neigh∣bour or any man] least [vz. thou be thereby brought to such extremitie, that] thou knowe not what to doo [vz. against thine aduersarie, or in thine owne defence: and this hée speaketh, not onely because rashnes maketh men rush into vnlawfull thinges, but depriueth them as it were for a time of all their senses] in the end of thereof [i. at the end of that strife and conten∣tion] when thy neighbour, [i. he that dealeth against thee, or against whom thou hast dealt] hath put thee [vz. by the sober and wise handling of his mat∣ters,
and thorowe thine owne rashnes and hastines] to shame. [vz. before men.] Vers. 9. Debate, [q.d. conferre rather quietlie betweene thee and  him] thy matter [i. the cause that thou hast] with thy neighbour, [i. with him whome thou hast to deale: our Sauiour seemeth to giue the same counsell and to allude thereto Matth. 5.25, 26. Matth. 18.15.] and discouer not [vz. at any hand] the secret [vz. of another man, which is commited to thee,] to another. [vz. that is not acquainted with that cause.] Vers. 10. Least hee  that heareth it [vz. from thy mouth thou blabbing abroad, another mans se∣cret,] put thee to shame: [vz. not onely by calling thee a blabbe, but also by blasing it about, to the discredit of the partie whome it toucheth, and thine owne discredit also that cannot better keepe counsell] and thine infamie [i. that infamie, that thou shalt indure and suffer] doo not cease [vz. amongst men: we may see by that, that there ariseth a double, yea a treble discommo∣ditie, of blasing abroad secrets, first the man vttering them may bee iustlie counted a blabbe, or babler, and vnfaithfull; secondly, the partie whome it toucheth, may by that meanes, be brought to such a dislike, as frendship will neuer growe betweene them afterwards; thirdly both the parties shall in∣curre, an vnauoideable reporte, the one of vntrustines, the other of his euill committed.] Vers. 11. A word [i. a speach which may giue sense and vn∣derstanding  to the minde: he putteth one parte for the whole,] spoken in his place [i. fitly, and when there is regarde and consideration had to time, place, persons, manner of dooing, &c.] is like appels of gold [i. like golden apples, i. golde cast or made in the forme of appels,] with pictures of siluer, [i. which golden apples also haue pictures of siluer set about them, or grauen in them, whatsoeuer it is, the holy Ghost meaning vnder these two termes, is no∣thing els, but to note, that such speaches are most precious and pleasant, euen as things made of siluer and Gold, which are either cunningly grauen, or els haue pictures, figures and shapes set about them.] Vers. 12. He that re∣prooueth  [vz. discreetely,] the wise [vz. man, or men,] and the obedient care [i. such a one, as will attentiuelie hearken to good counsell] is as a golden ea∣ring, and an ornament of fine gold [i. is to bee esteemed, as a most comely and precious thing, as who is not onely decked himselfe, but also indeuoreth to adorne others with good things. And though this be a good sense, yet I ra∣ther allowe, both his text and sense: that turneth it thus.] A wise reproouer, [i. one that can in holy wisedome and discretion reproue another] is to an o∣bedient eare, [i. to one that will hearken vnto him] as an ouch or collor of sil∣uer, and as an ornament of fine gold, [i. is vnto him a singular ornament, be∣cause the one laboreth to reforme, and the other yeldeth consent to amend∣ment, which is also his grace and glorie: see Prouerb. 1.9.] Vers. 13. As  the cold of the snowe [i. euen as great cold, vz. is pleasant and profitable to trauailers and workemen for their refreshing: for he meaneth not, that it did snowe in the summer time] in the time of haruest, [i. in a very hot season or time is, as was said before comfortable and profitable vnto them] so is
[vz. both pleasant and profitable:] a faithfull messenger [i. one that faithful∣ly deliuereth the errands committed to him, and dealeth trustily in the same with as speedy a returne as may be,] to them [vz whosoeuer they bee] that sende him: [vz. about any businesse whatsoeuer,] for he refresheth the soule of his Masters, [i. of such as imploy him in any seruice: by soule he meaneth the whole man, who during the time of his absence because hee did greedily desire to heare an answere, was sometimes in feare and doubt almost halfe dead, but when hee was returned tooke as it were his spirites againe vnto him, by reason of the good message which he brought him, see Chap. 13.17.  also vers. 25. of this Chap.] Vers. 14. A man [vz. who soeuer hee bee] that boasteth [vz. in his words,] of false liberalitie: [i. of a liberalitie, which he hath not done: or els thus, he that promiseth mountaines of gold, and yet performeth little or nothing] is as cloudes and winde without rayne, [i. haue a shewe of some what in words, and yet in deed and effect haue nothing at all:  see Iude. vers. 12.] Vers. 15. A Prince, [i. a great personage] is pacified [vz. many times meaning that he is sometimes let & hindered from his out∣ragious purposes] by staying of anger: [i. by seeking some meanes, to turne away his wrath: which how greeuous and fearefull a thing it is, see Chap. 16.14. which cannot be better performed, than by gentlenes and long suffe∣fering] and a softe tongue, [i. softe & gentle words, vttered with the tongue] breaketh the boanes, [i. most harde things, meaning thereby that it putteth backe the greatest rage and anger, see before chap. 15.1. and examples there∣of.  Iudges 8.2, 3. 1. Samuel. 2.23, 24, &c.] Vers. 16. If thou [vz. of what calling so euer thou bee,] haue founde [i. atteyned and gotten] honie: [i. a∣ny manner of sweete or daintie thing] eate that is sufficient for thee, [vz. and no more:] least thou bee ouerfull [vz. by eating ouer much,] and vomit it [vz. to the hurte of thy stomack, and shame of thine owne person, for that thou couldest not bridle thine appetite. This may be vnderstood, either par∣ticularly of honie, which because it is sweete may easilie bee immoderately taken, and because it is hot being taken immoderately doth prouoke vomit: or els it may be vnderstoode of all pleasures and delicates, putting a particu∣lar  one for all.] Vers. 17. Withdraw, [i. be carefull to withdraw and hold back] thy foote [vz. from often going,] from thy neighbours house, [he mea∣neth not to forbid fellowship or frendship, but willeth vs to take heede, least by ouer much boldnes, we make not the party wearie of vs] least he be wea∣rie of thee [vz. and of thine aquaintance also,] and hate thee. [i. loath and dislike thee, in steed of his former loue and frendship, for things that be com∣mon breede lothsomnes, whereas such things as are rare, are farre more ac∣ceptable.]  Vers. 18. A man that beareth false witnes, [i. a false witnes bearer against any, but speciallie] against his neighbour [for this circum∣stance aggrauateth the offence] is like a hammer and a sworde, and a sharpe arrowe: [q.d. he vseth all the meanes he can to destroy him, and is by al man∣ner of meanes most deadlie and dangerous vnto him: see Psalm. 120.3, 4.
Prouerb. 12.18. 1. King. 21.13.] Vers. 19. Confidence, [i. trust and affi∣ance  reposed] in an vnfaithfull man [i. in one that dealeth not faithfullie] in time of trouble [i. when a man is in trouble and distresse] is like a broken tooth [vz. which is vnprofitable to chewe meate withall] and a sliding foote [vz. which is ready to fall, and not able to goe when a man hath need: q.d. there is no more trust to be had in an vnfaithfull frend, than in a broken tooth or sliding foote.] Vers. 20. He that taketh away [vz. from another man,  or withholdeth from himselfe] the garment, [vz. which hee should we are] in the cold season [vz. of the yeare, as in the winter, &c.] is like vineger pow∣red vpon niter: [i. a consumer and deuourer of others, for vineger doth waste and dissolue niter which is a matter or substance much like salte, but is not salte, and is of color light ruddie, with holes like a spunge: it is of some cor∣ruptibly taken for salte peeter,] or like him that singeth songes to a heauie heart: [vz. who is so farre off from being comforted thereby, that he rather hath his griefe increased. This may be a sense, but I approoue his text and sence rather that readeth it thus:] as hee that putteth vpon him a garment in the time of cold [vz. doth thereby depell and put back cold,] or vineger vpon niter: [vz. doth thereby dissolue and waste it, and that very easily because it is most cold, for that this is the nature of niter, (which is a certaine work∣manship of the earth, made thick, by a dry heat) as Aristotle sheweth. lib. 4. Meteoro. cap. 6, 7.] so is he that singeth songes [vz. of mirth and ioy,] to a heauie heart, [i. to one that is distressed and oppressed with heauines: q d. as garments put backe the force of cold, and vineger dissolue niter: so dooth musick or singing put away sadnes and heauines of heart: see examples hereof in Saule 1. Samuel 16.23. in Elisha. 2. King. 3.14, 15. in Darius  Daniel 6.18.] Vers. 21. If he that hate thee be hungrie, [i. be distressed any manner of way, hee putteth one kinde of distresse for all,] giue him bread to eate, [i. relieue him and succor him] and if he be thirstie, [i. distressed any manner of waie, as before in the word hungrie:] giue him water to drinke, [i. relieue and comfort him what in thee lyeth: by hunger and thirst, hee mea∣neth any miserie whatsoeuer: by bread and water, he vnderstandeth all kind of vitaile, yea euery good turne whereby a man may helpe another q.d.: do good to them that hate and persecute you. Matt. 5.44. see also Rom. 12.20. Exod. 23.4, 5.] Ver. 22. For [this verse conteyneth a double reason why  we should doo good to our enemies, the one taken from their persons, the o∣ther from Gods large liberalitie,] thou shalt lay coales vpon his head, [i. by that meanes, thou shalt so mooue him, that laying downe his hatred he shall become thy frend, for thy benefits bestowed vpon him shall be euen as light burning coales, shewing the earnestnes of thine affection towards him:] and the lord shall recompence thee. [vz. that kindnes that thou hast done vn∣to him: q.d. though he should bee vngratefull, and would not acknowledge thy loue, yet the Lord will requite that vnto thee that thou hast bestowed vpon him.] Vers. 23. As the north winde driueth away the raine, [vz. out
of that quarter especiallie: not meaning that it dooth alwaies so, but some∣times it doth,] so doth an angrie countenance, [vz. either of a man or magi∣strate, into whose presence slanderers and backbiters come: putting also the signe of displeasure, for displeasure it self:] the slandering tongue. [i. him that with his tongue is giuen to slander and backbite other: the reason is, because that when hee seeth his tales are not regarded, hee will bee quicklie  trudging.] Vers. 24. It is better [vz by many degrees,] to dwell [vz. so∣litarie and alone,] in a corner of the house toppe, [i. in a very narrowe, straite, and incommodious place,] than with a contentious woman [i. one giuen to brawling and chiding,] in a wide house, [i. in a most large, and commodious house, see before chap. 19.13. yea the very same sentence and words chap.  21.9.] Vers. 25. As are the cold waters, [i. as cold waters are pleasant and profitable] to a wearie soule: [i. to a person or man wearied with labor, and by that meanes also waxen dry, for so much I think the word wil beare properly signifying wearie, and yet because drought cleaueth to them that are wearie, including them also,] so is good newes [vz. brought] from a farre countrey: [vz. either concerning any thing he hath there, or any friend of his: not meaning also but that good newes brought from a more nigh place is pro∣fitable  also.] Vers. 26. A righteous man falling downe [i. humbling him∣selfe, or otherwise cast downe thorowe aflictions,] before the wicked [vz. or vngodly man,] is like a troubled well, [i. is disgraced and defaced: as the clearenes and sweetenes of the well, is by the grauell or other thinges in it when they are stirred vp,] and a corrupt spring. [i. like a spring of water, which of it selfe is good, yet by the accesse of other hurtful waters, is marred: he meaneth hereby, not onely that it is against all right and reason, that the wicked trouble the good, but also that the good themselues, are by such meanes much disturbed, yea and many times vnles God wonderfully kéepe  them greatly corrupted.] Vers. 27. It is not good, [i. it is hurtfull: see Chap. 18.5. also Chap. 24.23.] to eate much honie, [vz least thou surfet through the sweetenes thereof, and be driuen to vomit thereby: see vers. 16. of this Chap.] so [vz. for men, or for any man,] to searche their owne glorie, [i. to seeke prayse, glory, & commendation vnto themselues] is not glory [vz. but shame and confusion rather, yea a dishonest and wicked thing, see Iohn  5.44.] Vers. 28. A man that refraineth not his appetite: [vz. euen by all the meanes that possiblie he can, of which see before chap. 23.2.] is like a ci∣tie which is broken downe [vz. by the enemies, that besieged it, or else by in∣ward factions and stirres in it selfe: meaning that he is in a dangerous and desperate case,] and without walls, [and therefore the enemie may more ea∣silie enter, meaning thereby, that he hath not onely, been once conquered, but that he is subiect dayly and howrely euen at the will of the enemie, to a new spoyle. Do. Ʋers. 1. Teacheth vs, to haue a care to reserue monuments and coppies
of good things. Verse 2. Teacheth vs, what is the duetie of good Princes, vz. to search into all causes. Verse 3. Doth not onely confute the Astrono∣mers, that will measure the height of the skie, but sheweth that the imagi∣nations of mens hearts cannot be searched out. Verse 4, 5. Teach kings and princes this, that they are to remoue from about them wicked and vngod∣lie persons. Verse 6. Teacheth vs, to beware of pride, vaineglorie, and boasting. Verse 7. Teacheth, that humilitie is the way to come to honor. Verse 8. Teacheth vs, quicklie to cut off the occasions of strife and conten∣tions. Verse 9. Teacheth vs two things: first, in matters of controuersie to vse charitable conference one of vs with another: secondlie, faithfullie to conceale matters committed to our credit. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, to la∣bour to preuent and put away shame and ignominie amongst men. Vers. 11, 12, 13, 14. Doo by excellent similitudes teach vs, first to speake wiselie and seasonablie: secondlie, to reproue others charitablie and discreetlie: thirdlie, to deale faithfullie in the matters or messages committed vnto vs: and lastlie, to beware of boasting when we haue no cause. Verse 15. Tea∣cheth vs, to represse wrath, and to vse curteous and gentle words. Verse 16. Teacheth vs, to beware of surfetting, specially in those things that are sweet and pleasant, and drawe vs on to eating. Verse 17. Teacheth vs, to beware that we doo not by ouermuch resorting to our friends make them wearie of vs. Verse 18. Teacheth vs, to flie false witnes bearing. Verse 19. Teach∣eth vs, to take heede that we trust not vntrustie persons. Verse 20. Teacheth vs, that honest and good mirth is a meane to put away heauines of heart. Verse 21. Teacheth vs, not onely to loue, but also to doo good vnto our ene∣mies. Verse 22. Teacheth vs, that God will leaue nothing vnrecompensed that we doo in his feare. Ʋerse 23. Teacheth vs, to declare our disliking of slanderers, both by word, deede, and countenance. Ʋers. 24. Setteth out the discommoditie that doth arise by brauling and contentious women. Verse 25. Sheweth vs, that good newes are delectable to the partie whom they concerne. Ʋerse 26. Sheweth, that the godlie in the hands of the wic∣ked are in a poore case. Verse 27. Teacheth men not to seeke their owne glorie. Verse 28. Teacheth men to bridle their appetites, for feare of after-clappes and mischiefes that may otherwise insue. CHAP. 26. Co. IN the latter end of the other Chapter he shewed that men should not seeke for honor and glorie: and now in the beginning of this Chapter he sheweth to whom it doth not belong, and by the contrarie to whom it doth appertaine. Di. I Would diuide this Chapter into two parts onely. In the first, he dealeth  chiefly and principally against such as are destitute of the heauenlie wise∣dome, whom he calleth fooles, not so much, because they wanted wit, as
because they were destitute of the heauenly light: and this reacheth from verse 1. to the ende of the 12. In the second, he dealeth more particular a∣gainst idle and slothfull persons, against busie bodies, against deceitfull persons, against talebearers and contentions people, and against such per∣sons as will craftilie colour the hatred of their heart with glorious and glo∣sing speaches, from verse 13. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. AS the snowe in the sommer, and as the raine in the haruest are not meete, [i. as snowe and raine doo not agrée to those seasons, & therefore it is coun∣ted as a miracle to haue raine in wheate haruest, 1. Sam. 12.17. And Ieremie writeth, that while hée was in Iudea hée neuer sawe raine there in Iune and Iulie, yea he affirmeth it to bee an im∣possible thing that any should fall there then] so is honor vnseemely for a foole. [i. titles and places of honor appertaine not to him, either because he know∣eth not how to vse them, or els abuseth them to the oppression of others, and  his owne hurt.] Vers. 2. As the sparowe by flying, [vz. from place to place escapeth danger] and the swallowe by flying escape [vz. from hurt or snares] so the curse that is causeles, [i. the curse that one man doth without cause or reason with to fall vpon another] shall not come. [vz. vpon him whom he did without cause curse, but shall passe away into the ayre as those birds doo.]  Vers. 3. Vnto the horse belongeth a whippe, [vz. to make him goe apace, and couragiouslie] to the asse a bridle, [vz. to rule and direct him in the way. He speaketh this according to the custome of that countrie, who did vse horses in warre, as Psalm. 20.7. Psalm. 76.6. Prouerb. 21.31. and asses to trauaile withall. Genes. 22.3.] and a rodde to the fooles backe. [i. chastisements & cor∣rection appertaineth to fooles: see Prouerb. 10.13. Also Chapter 17.10.]  Vers. 4. Answer not a foole according to his foolishnes, [i. in talke and speach betweene thee and him deale not with him with bitter and cursed words, as he doth with thee] least thou also be like him. [vz. in that behalfe, following his foolish veine: q.d. vse wisedome in thy talke with fooles, and marke dili∣gently  what, when, where, and how thou speakest] Vers. 5. Answer a foole according to his foolishnes, [i. in speaches betwéene you, deale with him accor∣ding to the naughtines he doth bewray or commit] least [vz. thou not re∣prouing him] he be wise in his owne conceit. [i. he take an occasion thereby to thinke better of himselfe, than there is any cause why. And so these contrarie sentences are reconciled, not in respect of being silent in the first and speaking in the last, as some haue thought, but by answering in both, hauing notwith∣standing alwaies regard to the circumstances of time, place, persons, man∣ner  of doing, &c.] Vers. 6. He [vz. whosoeuer he be] that sendeth a message [vz. into any place, or to any person] by the hand of a foole [i. by a foole him∣selfe, or vnwise man; a part, that is the hand wherein consisteth power, put
for the whole: q.d. he that committeth any thing, either message, or matter to a foolish fellowe to doo] is [vz. as vnwise in that behalfe] as he that cutteth off the feete, [vz. of the messenger whom he sendeth: meaning, that he doth depriue himselfe of the meanes whereby his purposes should be performed: for as one that lacketh his legges is not fit to goe on arrands; so a foole is as vnfit to bee imployed about any thing, because he wanteth wisedome, di∣ligence, &c.] and drinketh iniquitie. [i. taketh that vnto him that will hurt him: meaning, the conceit and good opinion that he hath of a foole, which is also iniquitie, for he that iustifieth the wicked, and condemneth the righte∣ous, sinneth both alike against the Lord. One giueth another sense and rea∣deth it otherwise thus] As though a man did cut off a messengers feete, so shall he drinke vp the punishment of violence that sendeth messages by a foole. [i. he doth as much iniurie to himselfe that sendeth a foole to be his messen∣ger, as he that cutteth off his owne messengers feete: for neither can the foole performe things enioyned him, neither he that hath his feete or legges cut off dispatch his iornie or message.] Vers. 7. As they [vz. lose their la∣bour  and doo an vnseemelie thing] that lift vp the legges of the lame [vz. thin∣king thereby to make a lame man goe of himselfe without the ayde & helpe of another] so [vz. vnprofitable and vnseemelie] is a parable [i. a wise sen∣tence] in a fooles mouth. [i. vttered by a foolish and wicked man. Some reade it otherwise, & giue it another sense, but me thinketh this is plaine enough.] Vers. 8. As the closing vp of a precious stone in an heape of stones, [i. amongst  other common and contemptible stones: q.d. it is a very vnseemely and fond thing for a man to place a precious iewell euen amongst stones of the stréet, both because it shall be troden vpon, and that is not the place for it] so is he [vz. fond and vnwise, that is to say, he is so to be accounted] that giueth glo∣rie to a foole. [he meaneth it of more glorie than belongeth vnto him.] Vers.  9. As a thorne standing vp in the hand of a dronkard, [vz. is many times hurtfull both to himselfe and others] so is a parable in the mouth of fooles. [see verse 7. of this Chapter. q.d. A foole doth not better vse words, than a dron∣ken man doth thornes or briers, who (the strength of wine carying away his minde] woundeth both himselfe and all that he meeteth.] Vers. 10. The  excellent [i. God, who is called great and excellent, because he excelleth all o∣ther] that formed [i. made and fashioned, and that of nothing] al things, [vz. both in heauen and earth] both rewardeth the foole [i. punisheth him for his want of wisedome] and rewardeth the transgressors. [i. punisheth all other manner of offenders whatsoeuer. Others reade it otherwise, and make o∣ther senses of it, but I like this well enough.] Vers. 11. As a dogge turneth  againe to his owne vomite, [i. to eate vp that which he had vomited before, so filthie a beast he is] so a foole turneth to his foolishnes. [i. in like sort the wic∣ked doo often repeate and commit one and the selfe same thing which they haue obserued to bee hurtfull vnto them: see 2. Pet. 2.22.] Vers. 12. Seest  thou [i. doest thou knowe by familiar acquaintance] a man wise in his owne
conceit? [i. one that in his owne iudgement thinketh highly of himselfe, and liketh all things that commeth from himselfe] more hope is [vz. there, of the conuersion and winning] of a foole [i. one that hath no wisedome at all] than  of him. [vz. that standeth so high in his owne imagination.] Vers. 13. The slothfull man saith, [vz. because he would not doo the things he should doo] a lyon is in the way, a lyon is in the streetes. [i. he putteth many difficulties and doubts which either are not indeed, or els maketh them greater than they  are: see Chap. 22.13.] Vers. 14. As the doore [vz. or gate of a house] tur∣neth vpon his hinges, [i. vpon the hinges and hookes wherevpon it is set, and yet is not remoued from the place] so doth the slothfull man vpon his bed. [i. he turneth him often, and yet will not lift vp himselfe, or be remoued or rai∣sed  there from.] Vers. 15. The slothfull [vz. man or person] hideth his hand in his bosome, [vz. and will not pull it out to worke or labour: see Chap. 19.24.] and it grieueth him [vz. very much] to put it againe [vz. when he hath taken it away, so sluggish and slothfull is he] to his mouth. [vz. to feede and nourish himselfe: q.d. he will not onely not labour for his sustenance, but  when he hath meate he is so idle that he will scarse eate it.] Vers. 16. The sluggard is wiser in his owne conceite, [i. as he himselfe thinketh of himselfe, or he seemeth so to himselfe, and in his owne mind, and not that he is so indéed] than seuen men [i. than a great number: a number certaine, for an vncertaine] that can render a reason. [vz. of the things they doo or speake: he meaneth hereby very wise men. One readeth it thus] than seuen calling him back vn∣to reason. [i. than many wise men, labouring in their wisedome to reclaime  him from his follie.] Vers. 17. He that passeth by [vz. the way when men are striuing together] and medleth with the strife that belongeth not vnto him, [i. is angrie, or beginneth to chide and braule for another mans cause that appertaineth not vnto him] is as one that taketh a dogge by the eares. [vz. without any cause, thereby stirring him vp, and prouoking him to bite him: he meaneth hereby, that hée pulleth by so doing danger & hurt vnto himselfe that medleth with other mens iarres when hée may abstaine there from.]  Vers. 18. As he that faineth himselfe mad, [i. either is mad indéed, or so fai∣neth himselfe] casteth [vz. abroad & at other men, if he can get to them] fire brands, arrowes, and mortall things, [i. all manner of things that come to his  hands, which may hurt others.] Vers. 19. So dealeth the deceitfull man with his friend [i. a deceitful person & one that circumuenteth his friend, yea though he doo it as he saith afterward, vnder the pretense of iest & sport, is no better to bee regarded than a mad man] and saith, [i. and yet in the way of excuse or color he saith] am I not in sporte? [i. did I not iest or dallie with you? q.d.  you may see I did so.] Vers. 20. Without wood, the fire is quenched: [i. If there be not a new supplie made of wood, the fire will go out, for wood is the matter of fire,] and without a talebearer strife ceaseth: [i. if there be not some that carrie tales betweene man and man, strife will dye quicklie, for a tale ca∣rier fostereth strife, hee spake the same before, Chapter 22.10. of a scorner:
and sure it may well be, for commonly a scorner, is a tale carier also.] Vers. 21. As the coale [vz. vnkindled, for so much difference I take to be in the  hebrew and latine word, betweene this word and the word following] ma∣keth burning coales, [i. is apte and fit, not onely to be kindled it selfe, but to kindle and burne it selfe, and others also,] and wood a fire: [i. is apte and meete to make a fire with all,] so the contentious man, is apte [i. is very méete, prone, and readie] to kindle strife. [vz. not onely in himselfe, but in and betweene others also.] Vers. 22. The words of a talebearer, [i. such  words and speaches, as he speaketh against other men] are as flatterings, [i. are as sweet and pleasant to the partie that heareth them & delighteth there∣in, as if he were flattered:] and they goe downe [vz. smoothly, sweetly, and pleasantlie] into the bowels of the bellie. [i. into the most secret place: meaning hereby, that they are not onely readilie receaued, but earnestlie laide vp, and deepely remembred: see before chap. 18.8. the same sentence and words.] Vers. 23. As siluer drosse ouer layde vpon a potshard, [vz. is but a base and  contemptible thing: for what is a potshard, and what is drosse, though per∣haps the vnwise may bee deceaued therewith?] so are burning lippes, [i. hot and great words of frendship and loue,] and an euill heart: [i. a heart that thinketh otherwise than the words make shewe of. q d. an enemie in heart, making outward shewe of a duetifull frend, is no better than a potshard, co∣uered ouer with the drosse of siluer.] Vers. 24. Hee that hateth [vz. ano∣ther  man, and that without cause] will counterfeit with his lippes, [i. will speake fayre in words,] but in his heart he layeth vp deceite, [i. hee doth not onely imagine mischiefe, but also waiteth his opportunitie and time to per∣forme it: see examples hereof in Caine, Ioab, Iudas, and others.] Vers. 25.  Though he [vz. that hateth thee,] speake fauorablie, [vz. either for thee, or to thee,] beleeue him not [vz. for all that, for many haue done so, and yet per∣formed mischiefe:] for there are seauen [i. a wonderfull number: see vers. 16. of this chap.] abhominations [i. things to be abhorred, as mischiefes, hurtes, and such like:] in his heart [vz. he thinking vpon them to performe them in conuenient time.] Vers. 26. Hatred [vz. conceaued in the heart of a man]  may be couered [vz. for a season] by deceit: [vz. of the partie whom it posses∣seth, as by glorious words, faire countenances, and such like hypocriticall dealings] but the malice thereof [i. the chiefe mischiefe that it deuised, and the extremitie and rigour of the same] shall be discouered [vz. in good time, and that manie times without the hurt of him to whom mischiefe is pretended] in the congregation. [i. before the people, q.d. openly and plainely.] Ver. 27.  He that diggeth a pit [vz. for to take another man in it, or to hurte him] shall fall therein: [i. thorowe Gods iust iudgement shal be taken in the same snare: see Psalm. 7.15. also Ecclesiastes. 10.8.] and he that rolleth a stone [vz. vp∣wards, and as it were towards the top of an hill] it shall returne [vz. with violence,] vnto him. [i. vpon him, and to his owne hurte.] Vers. 28. A  false tongue [i. a man, that vseth his tongue to falshoode and lying, howsoeuer
he flatter with his words for a time, yet he] hateth [vz. in heart and deede] the afflicted [i. him that is in pouertie and miserie:] and a flattering mouth [i. the partie that vseth his mouth, to flatterie,] causeth [i. worketh and that by his flatterie,] ruine. [i. hurt and destruction, and that to another man, whilst beleeuing his fayre words, he thinketh to bee in good estate, when in∣déede he is nigh to danger and hurt.] Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, that godlie and wise men shoulde bee aduanced to titles and places of honor. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth vs, that we should not feare rash curses, and such as are vttered without cause and aduise. Ʋers. 3. Tea∣cheth vs, that correction is a good meane to amend men that goe astray. Vers. 4. Teacheth vs to beware, that we fall not into the furie or follie of the vnwise. Ʋers. 5. Teacheth vs, according to the notoriousnes of an offence committed in word to reprooue it. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, to make speciall choyce of them, whome we will imploy about our affayres. Ʋers. 7. Tea∣cheth vs, that wise and graue speaches are vnseemely in the mouthes of foo∣lish persons. Vers. 8. Teacheth vs, not to giue glorie to any, but to them to whome indeede it doth appertaine. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, that wise words in a fooles mouth, are very hurtfull things. Vers. 10. Setteth out the iu∣stice and iudgement of God against the wicked. Ʋers. 11. Teacheth vs, that the vngodlie performe with greedines all naughtines, and are hardly, or not at all reclaymed from the same. Vers. 12. Teacheth vs, to beware of trusting in our owne wit and wisdome. Vers. 13. Teacheth vs, that the slothfull fayneth many excuses, because he would not bee imployed in la∣bor. Vers. 14. Teacheth vs, that the sluggish person loueth his bed well. Vers. 15. Teacheth vs, what fruites idlenes bringeth foorth, vz. neglect and contempt euen of a mans selfe. Vers. 16. Teacheth vs, that commonly the slothfull man standeth high in his owne iudgement, and contemneth other men in respect of himselfe. Ʋers. 17. Teacheth vs, to beware of busying our selues in other mens matters. Vers. 18, 19. Teacheth vs, neither to vse deceitfull dealings with our frendes, neither to cloake it with any colorable words. Vers. 20. Teacheth vs, to beware of tale carying. Vers. 21. Tea∣cheth vs, to shun the fostering of contention, either in ourselues or others. Ʋers. 22. Teacheth vs, not to beleeue euerie tale that is tolde vs, though they seeme pleasant and profitable vnto vs. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, that a friend in words onely, and not in deede and trueth, is not to bee much regar∣ded. Vers. 24. Teacheth vs, that with hatred, there is commonly ioyned hipocrisie, the better thereby to performe wickednes pretended. Vers. 25. Teacheth vs, not by and by to trust euerie faire and fawning word. Vers. 26. Teacheth vs, that howsoeuer hatred lye lurking a while, yet God will dis∣couer it in the end. Vers. 27. Setteth out Gods iustice against the imaginers, deuisers, and performers of wicked things. Vers. 28. Teacheth vs, to beware of false speaches, and flattering words.
CHAP. 27. Co. IN the last verse of the other Chapter, hee spake against such persons as abu∣sed their tongues in lying and flatterie. And now because such men are puf∣fed vp into pride and boasting, perswading themselues that with their tongues they will preuaile and doo great things, he beginneth this Chapter, and willeth men to take heede of vaine glorious boasting, saying wee will doo this, and wee will doo that, &c. Di. I Would diuide this Chapter into three partes. The first reacheth from  vers. 1. to the ende of the 10. Wherein hee speaketh against boasters, and vaineglorious persons, and against anger and enuie, hee speaketh also of re∣bukes, of full and hungrie persons, of inconstant men, and of the pleasure and profit, that commeth by old and faithfull frends. The second reacheth  from vers. 11. vnto the end of the 19. Wherein he setteth out the duetie of parents, and prouident persons, teacheth men to beware of suertiship, and flatterie, and speaketh against contentious women, and haste to wrath, and prouoketh men to diligence in their calling. The third reacheth from vers.  20. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaketh of mans eyes, of magi∣stracie or gouernement, of foolish persons, of prouident, painefull, and rich men, and of the bodilie giftes of this life, which we receaue from the Lord, and of the sole and right vse thereof. Se. Vers. 1. BOast not thy selfe [vz. of any thing thou wilt doo,] to morrow: [i. against to mor∣row, as though thou wouldst doo this and that, see Iames 4.13, &c.] for thou knowest not [vz. at any hand] what a day may bring foorth. [i. what thinges may fall out in a dayes space: q.d. In a dayes space some things may fall out which may hinder thee from the perfor∣mance of that thou diddest boast thou wouldest doo the day following.] Vers. 2. Let another man prayse thee [vz.  for well doing,] and not thine owne mouth, [i. thou thy selfe, for it is not seemely for a mā to praise himself,] a stranger, [i. one that knoweth thee not] and not thine owne lippes. [i. thine owne words vttered with thy lippes: qd. let another man praise thee, rather than thou thy selfe.] Vers. 3. A stone  is heauie [as may appeare, by that it is carried downeward,] and the sande weightie: [vz. specially by reason of moisture in it,] but a fooles wrath [vz. conceaued or vttered against another,] is heauier [i. more intollerable and hard to be borne] than them both, [i. than stones or sand.] Vers. 4. Anger
[vz. conceaued against another man] is cruell, [i. neuer leaueth off or is sa∣tisfied, till it haue committed crueltie,] and wrath is raging [i. ful of rage and furie, see Iob. 5.2.] but who can stand [vz. fast and sounde without hurt] before enuie? [i. before an enuious person: q.d. enuie is more dangerous, by  much than anger or wrath.] Vers. 5. Open rebuke [vz. for a faulte com∣mitted,] is better [vz. by many degrees,] than secret loue. [i. loue kept close and not manifested by word or deede, shewing it selfe when neede is.] Ver.  6. The woundes [i. the graue and sharpe reprehensions, which seeme for the time euen as it were to wound] of a louer, [i. of one that dooth vnfeynedly loue, and beare good affection] are faithfull: [i. such as a man may trust, be∣cause they proceede from a louing and faithfull heart,] but the kisses of an e∣nemie [i. the fayre and flattering countenances or behauior of one that ha∣teth a man. In the woord kisses, he alludeth to the manner vsed in the Eastern countries, who did vse to kisse one another,] are pleasant. [i. seeme to be so, but indeede are bitter, and therefore to bee shunned: looke in Ioabs example 2. Samuel. 3.27. also 2. Samuel. 20.9. And for reproofe: see Psal. 14.4, 5.]  Vers. 7. The person that is full, [i. hath meate and drinke at his wil, and that in all abundance,] despiseth a honie combe, [i. al delicate and sweete meates.] but vnto the hungrie soule, [i. to him that is indeede pinched with hunger and wants] euerie bitter thing is sweete. [i. he alloweth and liketh of most meane  and base fare.] Vers. 8. As a bird [vz. is in great danger,] that wandereth [vz. without good cause] from hir nest: [vz. wherein hir yong ones are, or she hir selfe resteth,] so is a man [vz. in great danger] that wandreth from his owne place. [i. that strayeth from the standing or place wherein God hath placed him: q.d. he that rashly changeth his dwelling place, and stayeth not in the state wherein God hath set him, but enterpriseth newe things, and that not being well assured of Gods wil, and his owne calling, is no wiser or bet∣ter  stayed than a bird, that fluttereth hither and thether.] Vers. 9. As oynt∣ment [vz. applyed outwardly to the bodie,] and perfume [vz. being put in∣to the fire, by their sweete sauor and smel] reioyce the heart: [i. euen affect and pearce the inward partes, and that to their great good and delight,] so dooth the sweetnes of a mans frend [vz. much delight and reioyce him, speciallie when it is declared] by hartie counsell. [i. by sounde and sincere aduise in eue∣rie thing, and by mutuall conference and communication speciallie of the  best matters: see Psal. 55.14.] Vers. 10. Thine owne frend, [i. one whome thou haste had triall of to be frendlie to thee,] and thy fathers frend [i. hee that hath continued frendship to thy father also:] forsake not, [i. cast him not off at any hand, nor breake not friendship with him: he willeth men to con∣tinue friendship with those whom they haue had good triall of. In which re∣spect one saith well, forsake not an old friend, for the new shall not be like him: a newe friend is as new wine, when it is olde thou shalt drinke it with pleasure] neither enter into thy brothers house [i. thinke to haue as little suc∣cour from thy brother and the things that he hath as may be, for all the bre∣thren
of the poore hate him, Chapter 19.7.] in the day of thy calamitie: [i. when thou art distressed and in pouertie] for better [i. more comfortable and profitable] is a neighbour [i. any friend or acquaintance whatsoeuer] that is neere. [vz. not onely in respect of place, but good will: the reason of this is, because a friend loueth alwaies: Chap. 17.17. see also 18.24.] Vers. 11.  My sonne, [see Chap. 1.8, 10.] be wise, [i. striue by all the meanes thou canst to obtaine and get wisedome] and reioyce mine heart, [i. make me glad by thy wisedome, and by thy godly conuersation as a fruit of the same: by which thinges indéede parents are made glad, as Chap. 10.1. also Chap. 23.24, 25.] that I may answer [vz. boldly and truely] him [i. any man] that repro∣cheth me. [vz. either for lacke of doing my duetie towards thee, or for thy euill behauiour, or for any other cause: q.d. let thy life and conuersation ap∣proue how faithfully I haue performed the duetie of a good parent: see Psal. 127.3, 4, 5.] Vers. 12. A prudent man [i. one that is inlightened with ho∣lie  and heauenly wisedome] seeth the plague, [vz. approching or drawing néere: vnderstanding by plague, calamities and afflictions of all sorts sent from God] and hideth himselfe: [vz. from it: meaning, that he laboureth by all meanes to put it from him, and to escape it] but the foolish [i. the wicked and vngodlie] goe on still, [vz. forward in their sinne and naughtines] and are punished. [vz. iustly for the same: q.d. God doth iustly afflict them, seeing they will not be reclaimed: see this very sentence Chap. 22.3. [Vers. 13.  Take his garment &c. [This verse is also word for word put downe before Chap. 20.16. where you may see it also wholly expounded.] Vers. 14. He  [vz. whosoeuer he be] that praiseth his friend [vz. with a flattering minde, and fauning words. I suppose the Hebrue word would better stand here it selfe, and the sense also be more plaine thus.] He that blesseth his friend [i. wisheth wel vnto him in words only & not in heart, and that to this end that he may be seene of men] with a loud voyce, [i. so that he may bee heard of o∣thers, and by that lewd meanes purchase fauour from the partie] rising early in the morning, [vz. for to doo it, and that before others] it shall be counted to him as a curse. [i. it shall be so farre off, this kind of dealing of his, from being esteemed as a blessing or good wishing, that it shall bée taken rather as a cer∣taine kind of cursing, because it sauoureth of flatterie: not that he forbiddeth vs, either to salute or to commend our friends iustly, but alwaies to haue an eye to auoide flatterie and ostentation in the same: q.d. the false flatterer which maketh a shewe as though he did at all times his duetie, is rather cur∣sed of God and men than well liked of.] Vers. 15. A continuall dropping  [vz. into a mans house, or vpon the goods in the same] in the day of raine, [i. when it raineth much] and a contentious woman [i. a woman giuen either altogether or very much to brauling and chiding] are a like [vz. both dange∣rous and discommodious: for as the raine rotteth the things it falleth vpon, and consumeth in time the same, so doth contentions and braulings a man and his familie: see Chap. 19.13. Also Chap. 21.9.] Vers. 16. He that hi∣deth
her, [i. he that laboureth to keepe close her braulings and iarres] hideth the winde, [i. laboureth as much in vaine, as if he would goe about to couer, keepe, close, or shut vp in a place the winde it selfe] she is the oyle in his right hand that vttereth it selfe. [vz. by the smell and sauour thereof, though per∣happes it may not bee seene, by reason it is kept close, or hidden in some ves∣sell: q.d. her rage can be restrained by no meanes, no not by shame amongst people, but spread abroad it will be; for a man may sooner keepe the winde in his hand, or represse the sauour of ointment that other should not smell it, than stoppe her in her course, or kéepe backe the flander that she pulleth vp∣pon  her selfe.] Vers. 17. Iron sharpneth iron, [i. as man by one iron maketh sharpe another, which wee may see to bee true by daylie experience by whet∣ting one knife vpon another] so doth a man sharpen the face of his friend. [i. so doth one man stirre vp and prouoke another: which I referre not to wrath and anger, as the Geneua note doth, but to the partaking of studies, coun∣sels, conferences, &c. One readeth this whole verse more plainlie, and giueth a better sense of it thus.] As a man sharpeneth iron by iron: so doth the face of his friend sharpen a man. [i. a friend, by the friendship and presence of his friend is instructed, doth increase, and is as it were whet on to good things.]  Vers. 18. He that keepeth [vz. diligently and carefully, trimming and dres∣sing it, that it may yeeld fruite] the figge tree, [i. his owne figge tree which God hath giuen him: meaning hereby, he that looketh to the things wherein God hath blessed him] shall [vz. in good time] eate the fruite thereof: [vz. through Gods especiall blessing] so he that waiteth [vz. diligently and pain∣fully] vpon his master, [vz. whom the Lord hath placed ouer him] shall come to honor. [i. shall be highly estéemed both of his master and other, and in the end also be much aduanced. And here he maketh mention of figge trées, be∣cause Iudea was full of them, and beareth as we knowe a most swéet fruite: besides, as one of their owne Rabbins doth note, the fruite of it is not all at one time ripe together, but as it were one after another, wherevpon a man doth by the diligent keeping thereof, receiue a continuall profite as it were:  and so shall he that faithfully and diligently obeyeth his master.] Vers. 19. As in water face answereth to face, [i. as a man may in water see the face of another man that is there with him, and looketh into the water as he doth] so the heart of man [vz. is seene and knowne] to man. [i. to another man. True it is that mans heart is secret, and God onely is the searcher thereof, yet it is many times declared by outward shew, as the semblance & propor∣tion  of the face in the water: see Chap. 20.5.] Vers. 20. The graue, [vz. receiuing dead corpses] and destruction [i. death that bringeth them thether] can neuer bee full, [i. are neuer satisfied, but alwaies receiue though a man bring daylie newe: see Chap. 30.15, 16.] so the eyes of a man [i. either his bodilie eyes, or the eyes of his mind] can neuer be satisfied. [vz. with looking, seeing, or beholding, specially of newe and pleasant things: see Eccle. 1.8. we may vnderstand also by eyes, either the lust of the eyes, as 1. Iohn 2.16.
or els the minde which vseth the eyes as ministers and meanes to conuay things to it.] Vers. 21. As is the fining pot [vz. serueth] for siluer, [i. for the  fining of siluer] and the fornace [vz. serueth] for gold: [i. for the trying of it, that it may appeare good: see for this part Chap. 17.3.] so is euery man [vz. to be esteemed and thought of] according to his dignitie. [vz. whereunto he is aduanced, and that for good causes: q.d. As siluer is fined in the pot, and gold in the fornace purged from the drosse, so by the laudable workes that any man hath done, or by the authoritie whereunto he is iustly exalted, he is to be knowne and allowed what manner of man he is.] Vers. 22. Though  thou shouldest bray a foole in a morter among wheate braied with a pestle, yet will not his foolishnes depart from him. [q.d. Though thou wouldest vse great and vehement meanes to reforme some, yet it will not preuaile: not that he forbiddeth vs to labour the amendment of wicked persons, but that there are some such as by no meanes can be bettered. Some ioyne these two verses 21, 22. together thus: All things and instruments haue their vse, and a way or order to bring them to their vse: gold and siluer are tried and purged after their manner, and all things are through mans skill made fit for their good and laudable vse: but there is no way to purge, prepare, make fit, or instruct a foole.] Vers. 23. Be diligent to knowe the state of thy flocke, [by  one particular he meaneth all: q.d. looke carefully to thy household affayres] and take heed to the heards: [vz. of beastes that thou hast, that if they be wel, thou maiest see them so continued: or if they bee otherwise, thou maiest in good time labour their redresse.] Vers. 24. For riches remaine not alway,  [vz. with a man] nor the crowne [i. glorie and estimation, to wit, continueth] from generation to generation. [i. for euer: this is a reason why he should haue a diligent eye: q.d. Doest thou thinke that thy riches are glewed to thée, and that thou canst neuer forgoe them? thou art much deceiued so to déeme: for they are brittle and flitting things, yea though they bee neuer so great and glorious: therefore looke to thy things well, and rest not slothfully in ano∣ther mans labour.] Vers. 25. The hey discouereth it selfe, [vz. when it is  méete and readie for cariage] and the grasse appeareth, [i. springeth out of the earth, and that in great abundance] and the hearbes of the mountaines [i. the grasse that the mountaines yéeld] are gathered. [vz. together, that they may be food and nourishment for the cattle: q.d. all these things shew themselues, and doo after a sort craue thee as it were to gather them for thine owne good, and the good of thy beasts, as shéepe, oxen, horses, &c.] Vers. 26. The lambes  are for thy clothing, [i. serue to minister cloath vnto thée and thine] and the goates [i. the increase that commeth of them] are [vz. sufficient enough, not onely to pay] the price of the field. [i. the rent of the grounds wherein they go, but also to inlarge thine owne possessions, and to make thee a purchaser of lands. And in this verse he setteth out Gods great goodnes in giuing man these gifts: as in the next he setteth out the moderate and sober vse of them.] Vers. 27. And let the milke of thy goates bee sufficient for thy foode, [he mea∣neth
not to tye men onely to this kinde of sustenance, but to teach them fru∣galitie and sparing] for the foode of thy familie, [q.d. good reason there is that thy household should be content with it when thou thy selfe art] and for the sustenance of thy maides▪ [i. of the maidseruants that thou hast.] Do. Ʋerse 1. Teacheth vs, to hang vpon God, and not vpon our selues for the accomplishment of all our purposes. Verse 2. Teacheth vs, to take heede that wee praise not our selues, but rather to indeuour that others for our good dealing may do the same. Ʋerse. 3. Teacheth vs, to beware that wee prouoke not fooles to wrath. Verse 4. Teacheth vs to beware of an∣ger, wrath and enuie. Verse 5. Teacheth vs, that open rebukes are many times better, than secret loue. Verse 6. Teacheth vs, not to condemne our friends reprehensions, nor to regard of our foes flatteries. Verse 7. Teach∣eth vs, to beware that we be not ouertaken with excesse: and that hunger is the best sawce. Verse 8. Teacheth vs, to stand in the callings wherein God hath set vs. Verse 9. Teacheth vs, what an excellent thing holie friendship and sound aduise is. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, not to forsake old friends for newe. Ʋerse 11. Teacheth children to striue to all goodnes. Ʋers 12. Teacheth vs, to labour to preuent Gods iudgement, and to take heede of continuance and growth in sinne. Ʋerse 13. Teacheth vs, to beware of rash and hastie suretiship. Verse 14. Teacheth vs to beware of flattering or fanning vppon any, speciallie without good cause. Ʋerse 15. Declareth what a continuall consumer a contentious woman is. Ʋerse 16. Teacheth vs, that the rage of women will hardlie (if at all) bee kept vnder. Ʋerse 17. Teacheth vs, that presence and conference of friends is a great meane to in∣crease loue. Verse 18. Teacheth vs, that as the diligent reape profite by in∣crease of their fruites, so doth the painfull seruant promotion by obedience and diligence to his master. Verse 19. Teacheth vs, that a man many times either by his owne experience, or other mens behauiours may enter deeplie into other men. Verse 20. Teacheth vs, that the sight and concupiscence of a man is vnsatiable. Ʋerse 21. Teacheth vs, that men are to be esteemed according to the good things that God hath bestowed vpon them. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs, that some men are so hardned in their sinne, that there is no hope of their amendement. Ʋerse 23. Teacheth men to haue a prouident eye to the things wherewith God hath blessed them. Ʋerse 24. Teacheth vs, the instabilitie and vncertaintie of riches. Ʋerse 25, 26. Shewe, that God giueth all his creatures for mans vse and great good. Ʋerse 27. Tea∣cheth vs, the moderate and sober vse thereof.
CHAP. 28. Co. THe holy Ghost in the beginning of this Chapter, passeth from oeconomicall and houshold affaires, which hee had dealt in in the latter ende of the other Chapter, to more generall poynts; as to the euill conscience of the wicked, and the bold perswasion of the righteous, and to speake of euill and good Magi∣strates, &c. Di. THis Chapter may be diuided into fowre partes. In the first he speaketh  of a good and euill conscience, of godly and wicked magistrates, of op∣pressors, of godly and vngodly persons, and of their seueral qualities, of the godlie poore man, and the wicked rich, from vers. 1. to the end of the 7. In the second he speaketh against vsurers, contemners of Gods worde, deui∣sers  of wicked practises, vngodly rich men, also against keeping close of sinnes, and against hardning of mens hearts in their iniquitie, from vers. 8. to the end of the 14. In the third he dealeth with wicked magistrates, vio∣lent and froward people, idle and slothfull men, couetous and partiall per∣sons:  and sheweth by the contrarie, what good fruites come of vpright wal∣king, painefulnes, faithfulnes, &c. from vers 15. to the end of the 21. In the fourth, he intreateth of making haste to be rich, of rebukes or reproofes, of  leud children, of pride and hautines of heart, of liberalitie towards the poore, and of the exaltation and perishing of the wicked, from vers. 22. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. THe wicked [i. euerie one of the wicked, for hee v∣seth a nominatiue case singular with a verbe plu∣rall, as though hee would declare that one of the wicked flying, ye rest followe after:] flee [i. indeuor to escape by all the meanes that they can,] when none pursueth: [vz. them, except it be the testimo∣nie of their owne conscience, sée Psalm. 53.5. And this seemeth to be taken from the great threatning, which is pronounced in Gods lawe against the wicked. Leuit. 26.36.] but the righteous are bold [vz. not with any trust in themselues, but by the faith they haue in God, and that in all their afflictions, how great or how little so euer they be:] as a Ly∣on. [i. fearing nothing, for as a Lyon feareth no other beasts, so shal not they dread any tempests whatsoeuer.] Vers. 2. For the transgression of the land  [i. for the sinnes, that the people inhabiting the land doo commit,] there are many princes; [i. rulers and gouernors of it: not at one time, as some haue thought (though that be a great confusion) but by often changing: euery one of them raigning but a small season,] but by a man of vnderstanding and knowledge [i. by wise men and magistrates, specially, such as feare God: he
putteth one for many] a realme likewise indureth long. [i. a kingdome on the contrarie side is preserued a great while: see Hosea. 13.11. The holy ghost meaneth, that whereas in any common wealth or kingdome, either the princes, or the people, or both departe from their duetie, there are often changes; but where, either both states, or any one of them, yea some wise man amongst them dooth by his authoritie guide and gouerne the whole or some parte of them in vprightnes, there the state is durable and florishing:  see 2. Samuel. 20.16, &c.] Vers. 3. A poore man [i. a man of a meane estate,] if he oppresse [vz. either by fraude, or by force, by bargayning or o∣therwise] the poore, [vz such as he himselfe is, whose cause he should tender and pittie, because in them hee is put in minde of his owne estate] is like a raging rayne [i. is like great riuers and floods which arise by abundance of rayne, or els like a great storme and tempest of rayne] that leaueth [vz. re∣mayning vpon the land, or behind it] no foode. [vz. for cattel or men to liue  vpon, whereupon must followe of necessitie great famine.] Vers. 4. They that forsake the lawe, [vz. of God, and will not haue it to be the rule of their life,] prayse [vz. very highly,] the wicked [vz. man or men, euen such as are like themselues,] but they that seeke the Lord [vz. earnestly, and with an vn∣feined heart striue to performe it,] set themselues [vz. both in word and déed]  against them. [i. against such notorious wicked persons.] Vers. 5. Wic∣ked men [i. giuen to wickednes:] vnderstand not iudgement, [i. knowe not, or regarde not to performe their dueties to God and man,] but they that seeke the Lord [vz. earnestly, and with an vnfeigned heart,] vnderstand all things. [i. knowe and indeuor to performe the dueties which they owe both  to God and man: see 1. Corinth. 2.15.] Vers. 6. Better [vz. by many de∣grees] is the poore [vz. man,] that walketh [i. leadeth a life and conuersati∣on] in his vprightnes, [i. vprightly: and it is called his vprightnes, not be∣cause he hath it of himselfe, but because the Lord hath giuen it him] than he [vz. whosoeuer hee bee] that peruerteth his waies [vz. from the light and trueth of the word of God, which is the onely way of righteousnes,] though he be rich. [i. though he be neuer so rich, or of neuer so great credit. And whē he saith it is better, wee must not vnderstand him, as though the other were good; for it is alwaies a vile thing to goe astray from the holy commande∣ment, but hee speaketh here according to the common custome of men: see  Prouerb. 19.1.] Vers. 7. He that keepeth [i. indeuoreth to keepe, and that vnfeynedly, and with a good heart,] the lawe [vz. of GOD, and the good in∣structions that his father shall giue him out of the same:] is a child of vnder∣standing: [i. is, and sheweth himself to be a wise, and obedient child,] but hee that feedeth the gluttons [vz. with his meate, and so is familiarly acquainted and keepeth companie with them: vnder glottons he meaneth al other vngod∣ly ones whatsoeuer, and yet he maketh speciall mention of them, because hée vsed the word feeding] shameth his father. [i. doth what in him lieth, to bring his parents to shame and contempt, for the leudnes of the sonne, is many
times ascribed to the parents: and as hath been sundrie times before, there is no greater griefe to them in this life, than the leudnes and wickednes of their children: see Chap. 10.1.] Vers. 8. He that increaseth his riches, by  vsurie and interest, [i. by any vnlawfull meane, for vnder these two, he com∣prehendeth all of what sorte soeuer they bee] gathereth them [vz. though happilie he himselfe think not so,] for him that will be mercifull to the poore. [i. not onely kinde minded but liberall handed also towards them: q.d. the Lord dooth appoint, that the riches the vsurer hath wickedly gotten, shall be taken either from him or his posteritie, and come into a good mans hand, who will giue the poore that which was before taken from them vniustly: sée Chap. 13.22.] Vers. 9. He [vz. how great or how little soeuer hee bée]  that turneth away his eare from hearing the lawe; [vz. of GOD, read or taught vnto him: by turning away his eare, he meaneth all maner of contem∣ning and despising of it; and by hearing, hee meaneth all the exercises of the word, as hearing, reading, meditating, &c. q.d. he that any manner of way contemneth, either all, or any of the exercises of Gods word,] his praier shall be abhominable [vz. before the Lord. q.d. the Lord will loth and abhorre the prayer he maketh, and not heare him: see Chap. 21.13. where the same is spoken of contempt of the poore.] Vers. 10. He that causeth [i. indeuoreth  to cause, or els by perswasion at the length preuaileth,] the righteous to goe astray [vz. from the way that God hath prescribed in his word] by an euill way, [i. by causing him to turne into an euill way which God hath condem∣ned:] shall fall into his owne pit, [i. shall not only loose the labor and time that hee spendeth in intisement and prouocation, but shall thorowe Gods iust iudgement fall into the danger that he supposed the other should fall into: sée Chap. 26.27.] and the vpright [vz. in heart, who God shall haue stayed from falling,] shall inherit good things. [i. shall be blessed with great and con∣tinuall blessings contrarie to the imagination of the wicked, who thought to bring him into all miserie and danger.] Vers. 11. The rich man is wise in  his owne conceate, [i. he deemeth so of himselfe, because hee seeth all things to fall out prosperously vnto him,] but the poore [vz. man] that hath vnder∣standing [vz. of Gods will reuealed in his word:] can trie him [i. by the light that God hath giuen him, can diligently consider and weigh his whole life and actions, and that not by outward shewe onely, as the rich man doth, but by the rule and word of God: q.d. The rich man looketh not vpon him∣selfe, but vpon his substance; and by that iudgeth of himselfe, but the wise man though he be a poore man, iudgeth by another rule, both himselfe and the rich man.] Vers. 12. When the righteous men reioyce [i. when good men  are exalted to dignitie and honor: he putteth that which followeth glorie, to wit gladnes, for glorie it selfe] there is great glorie, [i. there is all kinde of honor and goodnes,] but when the wicked come vp [vz. to authoritie and cre∣dit in the common wealth,] the man [i. euerie man] is tryed [vz. what is in him, and what he hath: q.d. when good men rule, all are in good case, and the
common wealth florisheth, but when the wicked are aloft, no man doth safe∣ly possesse the things hee hath, but either by fraude or by force euen the sea∣cretest things hee hath are searched out and looked into, that they may bee a pray to the vngodly: see Chap. 11.10, 11. also verse the last of this Chap.  and Chap. 29.2.] Vers. 13. He that hideth his sinnes [vz. which hee hath committed: meaning by hiding, cloaking or couering of them from God which he cannot doo: or concealing them from men, or lessening them when they are made manifest,] shall not prosper: [vz. long, either before GOD or men,] but he that confesseth them [vz. vnfeynedly and fully, either before God if they be secret, or before men if they be open] and forsaketh them, [i. loatheth and abhorreth them, carrying with him a purpose neuer to fall in∣to the like] shall haue mercie. [i. shall obtaine grace and fauour before God  and man: sée 1. Iohn 1.9. also Psalme 32.5. Vers. 14. Blessed [vz. euen be∣fore God, howsoeuer hee séeme miserable in his owne eyes or othermens iudgements,] is the man [vz. of what state or condition soeuer he be] that feareth alway: [vz. to offend God and breake his lawe: neither is this con∣tinuall feare against stedfast trust in GOD, but is put downe as a fruite of faith and repentance: see 2. Corinth. 7.11.] but he [vz. whosoeuer he bee] that hardneth his heart [vz. against God and his lawe, so that he either re∣gardeth not, or feareth not to breake Gods precepts:] shall fall into euill. [i. it cannot be auoided, but that he must runne into sundrie sortes of sinnes, and  at the end, into Gods most fearefull iudgements.] Vers. 15. As a roaring Lyon [vz. is fearefull and terrible to the rest of the beastes of the Forrest Amos. 34.] and an hungrie Beare [vz. that runneth vp and downe for to seeke a pray, will neuer bee in quiet till it bée obteyned:] so is a wicked ruler [i. cruel and deuouring] ouer the poore people. [vz. that cannot resist him, no more than the lambe the Lyon, or the Ridde the Beare: hee meaneth that a tyrant spoyling and praying vpon the weake and poore people, dooth in his  rage and crueltie exceede all brute beastes.] Vers. 16. A prince desti∣tute of vnderstanding [i. voyde of the knowledge of Gods wil reuealed in his worde] is also [vz. as well as the tirannous ruler,] a great oppressor: [vz. of the poore: he sheweth that the lacke of the knowledge of the trueth of Gods word, is the mother and nurse of all naughtines in magistrates,] but he that hateth [vz. vnfeynedly & from his heart] couetousnesse [i. the desire of hauing more than he hath: and will not seeke by any vnlawfull meanes to get money] shall prolong his dayes. [vz. vppon the earth before men, for I  take it to bee but the promise of a temporall blessing.] Vers. 17. A man that dooth violence against the blood of a person, [i. hee that in rage and vio∣lence doth shed mans blood, or take away his life,] shall flie vnto the graue, [i. shall make haste vnto destruction, because all meanes that hee looked and ho∣ped for shal fatle him] and they [i. neither men nor meanes, which he reposed some confidence in,] shall not stay him. [i. shall not bee able to staye him, or deliuer him from death and destruction: q.d. it shall so fall out that the mur∣therer
thinketh himselfe in no place safe, and flying from place to place, as Caine saith of himselfe according to Gods iudgement pronounced before, Genes. 4.12, 14. shall fall into such great danger, as none shall haue either abilitie or will to deliuer him there from: see Genesis 9.6. Exodus 21.14.] Vers. 18. He that walketh vprightly [i. he that leadeth a godlie and iust con∣uersation:  see Chap. 10.9. Also verse 6. of this Chap.] shall be saued: [vz. not onely from hurt and danger in this life, according to Gods good plea∣sure, but brought at the end to eternal saluation] but he that is froward in his waies, [i. leadeth a peruerse and dissolute life both towards God and men] shall once [vz. at the last, though presently he seeme to stand strongly] fall. [vz. into Gods most horrible and fearefull iudgements: see 1. Cor. 10.12. Also Hebr. 10.31.] Vers. 19. He that tilleth his land, [i. painfully trauai∣leth  in the vpholding and maintenance of the things wherewith God hath blessed him, vnder one kind comprehending all the rest] shall be satisfied with bread: [i. shall haue abundance of all necessarie and good things: see Chap. 12.11.] but he that followeth the idle, [vz. in their idlenes, and is idle as they are] shall be filled with pouertie. [i. shall bee most poore and miserable: for beggerie is the end of idlenes. Chap. 23.21. Also Chap. 24.34.] Vers. 20.  A faithfull man [i. he that dealeth vprightly and soundly with men, decei∣uing none: which may appeare, because in the Hebrue text he calleth him a man of faithfulnesse] shall abound in blessings: [vz. both from God and man: q.d. All men shall wish him good, and speake well of him, and he shall be bles∣sed also of the Lord] and [I would rather turne it, but] he that maketh hast to be rich, [vz. not respecting whether it be by right or by wrong, so he haue it, but dealing vnfaithfully with men] shall not bee innocent. [i. shall not bee counted cléere, nor escape punishment before God and good men: for this phrase, see Chapter 6.29. For making hast to be rich, see Chapter 20.21.] Vers. 21. To haue respect of persons [vz. in iudgement, as to regard a great  man, and to despise a poore man] is not good: [i. it is hurtfull and euill, not on∣lie to the partie vsing it, but to the man that thereby is iniured and wronged, yea to the partie that hath that fauour shewed him, because he is flattered as though he had a good cause, when indeed he maintaineth a bad one: see chap. 24.23.] for that man [vz. that so respecteth or regardeth mens persons] will transgresse [vz. Gods lawe and mans lawe, by peruerting iudgement] for a peece of bread. [i. for a very small matter, or a thing of no importance: for this phrase, see Chap. 6.26.] Vers. 22. A man with a wicked eye [i. that  hath a wicked eye: meaning thereby, a miserable, niggardly, and couetous person, as Chap. 23.6.] hasteth to riches, [i. maketh hast to be rich, which how dangerous a thing it is, see before verse 20. of this Chap.] and knoweth not that pouertie shall come vpon him. [vz. sodainly and or euer he looke for it, so doth God dispose of mens purposes and practises.] Vers. 23. He that  rebuketh a man, [vz. vpon iust cause, and in the spirit of loue and méekenes] shall finde more fauour [vz. of him which is so rebuked] at the length, [q.d.
though at the first the one seeme to be displeased, & the other to get no good] than he that flattereth [vz. another man] with his tongue. [i. with his speach and words vttered with his tongue. Some reade it otherwise and giue ano∣ther  sense, but this is as good and plaine in my minde, if not better.] Ver. 24. He that robbeth his father and mother, [i. spoyleth them of the goods and things they haue] and saith [vz. either within himselfe, or to others] it is no transgression, [vz. against God or man] is the companion of a man that de∣stroyeth. [vz. himselfe or others: q.d. he is to be reckoned with a murtherer. And the holie ghost doth not onely speake this, as though hée would haue men so to esteeme of such prodigall and wastfull children, who if they could tarie the Lords leisure, should bee heires of their fathers goods; but that hée would also haue Magistrates to punish them for it: q.d. a stubborne childe that ryotously consumeth his fathers goods, and scorneth at the admonition of his parents, should as well be punished by death, as a man murtherer: see  Deut. 21.18, 19, &c.] Vers. 25. He that is of a proude heart, [vz. either a∣gainst GOD or man, trusting in himselfe and not in the Lord] stirreth vp strife: [vz. amongst others, and that to his owne hurt] but he that trusteth [vz. stedfastly and vnfeignedly] in the Lord, [vz. onely] shall be fat. [i. shall bee abounding with all manner of blessings from the Lord: see Chap. 11.  verse 25. and the text according to the Hebrue set in the margine.] Ver. 26. He that trusteth in his owne heart, [i. in himselfe, or any thing belonging vn∣to him] is a foole: [i. a wicked man, and therefore cannot chuse but perish] but he that walketh in wisedome, [i. wisely: q.d. he that prudently behaueth him∣selfe, and continually hearkeneth to the counsell and precepts of wisedome, following the same, and not his owne minde and fond perswasion, leaning vpon himselfe onely] shall be deliuered. [vz. through Gods goodnes, and that  from manifest and manifold euills.] Vers. 27. He that giueth [vz. liberal∣lie, willinglie, and freelie] vnto the poore, [i. to such as are in néede and di∣stresse] shall not lacke: [vz. any thing that God shall see to be good and méete for him] but he that hideth his eyes, [vz. from the poore, or beholding of their miserie: meaning hereby, he that wanteth compassion towards them] shall haue many curses. [vz. laied vpon him from God, and become himselfe most miserable and needie. He meaneth not that the people should curse him, as though that were allowable in them, but that God should pursue him with  most grieuous plagues.] Vers. 28. When the wicked rise vp, [vz. to honor, and are exalted to gouernment] men hide themselues: [vz. euen for feare: q.d. there is great occasion giuen of feare and trembling] but when they pe∣rish, [i. when the wicked and vngodly decay or dye] the righteous increase. [vz. both in number and in courage, because those that for feare kept them∣selues close before, doo then boldly bewray themselues: see verse 12. of this Chapter. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth what great difference there is betweene the testimo∣nie
of a good conscience and an euill conscience. Ʋerse 2. Teacheth vs, that the sinnes of the people pull vpon them all alterations of state: also what a good blessing it is to haue a good Magistrate. Verse 3. Teacheth vs, that there is no oppression to the oppression that one poore man exer∣ciseth towards another. Ʋerse 4. Teacheth vs, to be so farre off from com∣mending the vngodlie, that wee must rather by all meanes lawfull oppose and set our selues against them. Verse 5. Sheweth, that God reuealeth his will and all good things to them that seeke him vnfeignedly. Vers. 6. Tea∣cheth vs, that no good man should be despised for his pouertie, nor no wic∣ked man esteemed for his riches. Verse 7. Teacheth vs, to haue care and conscience to walke in the obedience of Gods lawe: also to beware of keeping companie with gluttons and dronkards, and to take heede that we bring not our parents name into discredite and obloquie. Verse 8. Tea∣cheth vs to auoide vsurie and interest: also that man purposeth one thing, but that God doth according to his pleasure dispose it another way. Verse 9. Teacheth vs, to beware that we offer no contempt to the word, nor any ex∣ercises therof: also that the praiers of such as despise Gods word are abomi∣nable in his sight. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, what punishments shall fall vp∣pon the intisers and prouokers of other men to mischiefe, and also what graces GOD will powre vpon his owne seruants. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, that a poore man which is wise, is better than a rich man that is foolish. Verse 12. Teacheth vs, that it is a great blessing to haue good gouernours, and that it is a great testimonie of Gods wrath when the Magistrates are euill. Ʋerse 13. Teacheth vs, humblie and vnfeignedlie to confesse our sinnes, and not at any hand to couer them. Verse 14. Teacheth vs, alway to stand in awe of Gods iustice and iudgement, and of offending his Maie∣stie, and to take continuall heede that wee haue not our hearts hardened through the deceitfulnes of sinne. Vers. 15. Setteth out the crueltie and ra∣pine of wicked Magistrates. Verse 16. Doth the same, declaring further, that it is a goodly vertue for al, but especially for magistrates to hate coue∣tousnes. Verse 17. Teacheth vs, that God will neuer suffer man murtherers to be vnpunished. Verse 18. Teacheth vs holie conuersation, and that we should decline from euery crooked path. Verse 19. Teacheth vs, to be di∣ligent in our callings, and to auoide idlenes. Ʋers. 20. Teacheth vs faith∣fulnes and vprightnes in all our dealings, and to beware of desire to be so∣dainlie rich. Verse 21. Teacheth Iudges and Magistrates not to respect any mans person in iudgement. Ʋerse 22. Doth liuely paint out the mind and condition of miserable and niggardly men, shewing also that none can bee rich without Gods especiall blessing. Verse 23. Teacheth vs, as on the one side plainlie and charitablie to reproue, so on the otherside to beware of flatterie and dissimulation. Verse 24. Teacheth vs, first to beware of vnnaturalnes towards our parents: secondlie, to take heed that we doo not iustifie our sinnes: and thirdly, it declareth how grieuous disobedience and
vnnaturalnes towards parents is. Verse 25. Teacheth vs, to trust in nothing neither within vs nor without vs, but in the Lord onelie. Verse 26. Tea∣cheth vs, that obedience to godly wisemen, shall be a meane to deliuer men from many dangers. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs to be liberal towards the poore, and to beware of hard heartednes towardes them. Ʋerse 28. Sheweth in what a miserable case good men are when euill Magistrates are set vp, and in what good case they are when it pleaseth the Lord to remoue them and to take them away. CHAP. 29. Co. IN the 23. and 28. verses of the former Chapter he had spoken of rebukes, and of wicked Magistrates, and now as it were resuming those matters againe, he sheweth in the beginning of this Chapter, and namely vers. 1, 2. what an euill thing it is to harden a mans heart against rebukes, and to haue an euill Ma∣gistrate and ruler: and so from these proceedeth on to other matters in the Chapter. Di. THis Chapter may bee diuided into three parts. The first reacheth from verse 1. to the end of the 9. wherein he speaketh of such as contemne ad∣monitions, of wicked Magistrates, of whorehunters, of bribers, of flatte∣rers, of the wicked and the godlie, of scorners, and such as can endure no re∣proofe  howsoeuer vttered. The second reacheth from verse 10. to the end of the 18. wherein he speaketh of cruell men, of fooles, of credulous Magi∣strates: of the poore and vsurer, of a good King, of correction of children, of the wicked and the godlie, and of the want of the word how hurtfull it  is. The third reacheth from verse 19. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he dealeth against euill seruants, against hastie men, against angrie persons, against proude men, against theeues and theft: and sheweth what it is to trust in the Lord, and not in men: declaring, that the godlie cannot abide the vngodlie, nor the vngodlie the godlie. Se. Vers. 1. A Man [i. any man, of what calling so euer he be] that hardneth his necke [i. that willingly submit∣teth not himself: it is a metaphore, taken frō oxen or other beasts, that refuse the yoke which should bée put vpon their necke, and will not bowe their necke vnto it,] when he is rebuked, [vz. iustly of o∣thers for his transgressions: and the hebrue phrase as I take it importeth some what more, for hee is called a man of rebukes, that is such a one as hath been sundrie and seuerall times reprooued of others for his naughtines] shall sodainely be destroyed [vz. euen then when he thin∣keth least of it:] and cannot bee cured, [vz. by any meanes of the afflictions
that God shall lay vpon him for the contempt of corrections and admoniti∣ons, which God himself and his children gaue him: he meaneth, that he shal be destroyed and that there shall be no remedie nor hope of restoring.] Vers. 2. When the righteous are in authoritie, [vz. ouer others,] the people reioyce: [i. they haue good cause giuen them to bee merrie and glad:] but when the wicked beareth rule, the people sigh. [vz. euen for griefe and sorrow of heart, or at the least they haue a good cause so to doo: see Chap. 11.10. also Chap. 28.12, 28.] Vers. 3. A man that loueth [vz. vnfeynedly] wisdome, [i.  heauenly wisdome] reioyceth his father: [i. maketh his parents glad thereby: see Chap. 10.1. also Chap. 15.20.] but hee that feedeth harlots, [vz. with the goods and substance hee hath: meaning hereby not onely keeping compa∣nie with them, but mainteyning them also,] wasteth his substance. [i. con∣sumeth all that he hath, and commeth in the end to beggerie: see Chap. 5.9. also Chap. 6.26. see also Luke. 15.13.] Vers. 4. A king [i. a good king  and ruler] by iudgement, [i. by faithfull execution of iustice and iudgement to euerie one, without partialitie of persons] maintaineth [vz. in peace and prosperitie,] the countrey: [vz. wherein God hath placed him to raigne, or whereof through Gods appoyntment he is made ruler and gouernor:] but a man receauing giftes, [vz. to peruert iudgement: that is a magistrate which is a bribe taker] destroyeth it. [i. doth what in him lyeth to pull destruction vpon it, and to ouerthrowe it.] Vers 5. A man that flattereth his neigh∣bor,  [i. speaking him faire when hee shoulde reprooue him, and calling euill good in him] spreadeth a net for his steppes. [i. goeth about secretly to hurte and hinder him, or els layeth waite for his life: q.d. while he flattereth him he laieth snares and grinnes for him to catch him in, euen as the fowler doth for the bird, and laboreth to bring him into euill.] Vers. 6. In the trans∣gression  of an euill man [i. in the very sinne that a wicked man committeth,] is his snare: [i. is his owne snare to catch him in: q.d. the wicked neede no∣thing to intangle them but their owne sinne,] but the righteous [i. such as haue a care for righteousnes of life,] doo sing and reioyce. [vz. because they feare no snares or intanglings: q.d. the wicked mans sinne, doth at the last bring with it sorrowe and heauinesse; but the godly doo possesse grace and ioy.] Vers. 7. The righteous knoweth the cause of the poore: [i. doth not onely  in his iudgement approoue it, but laboreth that right also according thereto may bee yeelded vnto him,] but the wicked regardeth not knowledge. [i. hee hath no right knowledge to looke into, or to defend the cause of the poore: for he that vnderstandeth a cause, and defendeth it not as it is good, is as though he vnderstoode it not at all: yea his not regarding of it, is as much as if hee neglected it vtterly.] Vers. 8. Scornefull men [i. men giuen to scoffing and  scorning, specially of good things] bring a citie [vz. in which they dwell] in∣to a snare: [i. into very great danger, and bee as it were the authors of the ruine thereof,] but wise men [i. such as are rightly wise indeede, for many haue the shewe of wisdome and not the thing:] turne a way [vz. from it, and
that by their wisdom,] wrath. [i. either the wrath of God, or of men concei∣ued  and ready to be practised against it.] Vers. 9. If a wise man contend [vz. by word or otherwise, meaning by this speach, reasoning with him for his amendment] with a foolish man, [i. with a wicked and vngodly man,] whether he [i. the iust man] be angrie [i. deale roughly, or hardly with him] or laugh, [i. deale more gentlie or mildly with him] there is no rest. [i. hee gaineth neither ease nor profit by it, the other is so incorrigible: q.d. what way soeuer a wise man vse to reforme a foole, yet he preuaileth nothing, but  the other remaineth still in his frowardnes and peruersnes.] Vers. 10. Bloodie men [i. cruell and hard hearted men, which are giuen to shedding of blood,] hate [vz. deadly, and pursue euen vnto the death,] him that is vp∣right: [vz. in his waies, meaning such a one as looketh narrowly to his steps either towards God or man,] but the iust [i. godly and kinde harted people whome hee calleth iust, because of the fruites of iustice and righteousnes which they shewe foorth] haue care of his soule. [i. care greatly to mainteine  and defend his life which the vngodly would faine take away.] Vers. 11. A foole powreth out all his minde, [i. he hath nothing within him, but hée will easilie bewray it,] but a wise man keepeth it in, till afterward. [i. hee contey∣neth whatsoeuer hee hath in his minde, that hee may afterwards vtter it in time and place most commodious and fit for it: see chap. 14.33. also chap.  15.2, 28.] Vers. 12. Of a prince that hearkeneth to lyes, [i. not onely hea∣reth them but consenteth vnto them,] all his seruants are wicked. [for such  as the king is, such commonly his officers are wont to be.] Vers. 13. The poore [vz. man] and the vsurer [i. the rich, he giueth rich men this name, ey∣ther because commonly vsurers are rich men, or els because they attaine their riches by vsurie] meete together, [i. are conuersant and liue here toge∣ther in this life,] and the Lord lighteneth both their eyes. [i. giueth either of them their life and being, see Iohn. 1.9. Acts. 17.28. or as hee saide before, Chap. 22.2. the Lord is the maker of them all, and not onely this, but pre∣serueth  and mainteyneth them in the same.] Vers. 14. A king [i. euerie Magistrate, but he nameth him because he is chiefe] that iudgeth the poore in trueth, [i. dooth pronounce true and vpright iudgement for the afflicted, not pitying his cause for his neede sake, nor yet wronging him therefore] his throne [i. his kingdome and gouernment, a part put for the whole] shall bee established for euer. [i. it shall continue and indure long: see Chap. 20.28.  also Chap. 25.5.] Vers. 15. The rodde and correction [vz. giuen with the same, vsed yet moderatly and tempered according to the notoriousnes of the fault] giue wisedome: [i. are instruments and meanes to make the parties vpon whom they are occupied, wise] but a child set at libertie [vz. to followe his owne will, and doo what he lusteth, and not being restrained there from] maketh his mother ashamed. [vz. by his dissolutenes and lewdnes: meaning vnder shame, not onely reproach before people, but also inward griefe and sorow of her owne hart: see cha. 13.24. also cha. 22.15. also cha. 23.13, 14.]
Vers. 16. When the wicked are increased, [vz. either in number or in authori∣tie,  as being exalted to gouernement] transgression increaseth: [vz. by that meanes: for the more wicked people, the more sinne; and the higher a man is in authoritie (if he be naught) the more boldly dare he offend, & the more of∣ten also,] but the righteous shall see their fall. [i. the destruction and ouer∣throwe of the vngodly: see Psal. 91.8. also Malach. 4. almost throughout.] Vers. 17. Correct thy sonne, [vz. for his fault: meaning by sonne, children: one  of one sexe being put for many of both sexes,] and he will giue thee rest, [i. thou shalt see pleasure and profit insue thereupon vnto thee,] and will giue pleasures to thy soule. [i. he shall greatly delight thee both inwardly and out∣wardly, so that thy whole man shal take delight and pleasure in him: see cha. 13.24. also vers. 15. of this Chapter.] Vers. 18. Where there is no vision,  [i. where there is no sounde and sincere preaching of Gods doctrine out of the lawe and prophets: now as the doctrine is here called a vision, and so likewise Isaiah. 1.1. so the prophets and messengers thereof are called seers 1. Samuel. 9.9. for vision, see also Samuel. 3.2.] the people decay: [i. it cannot be auoyded but that they must come to ruine both of body and soule,] but he that keepeth [i. striueth vnfeinedly to keepe] the lawe [vz. of God] is blessed. [vz. from the Lord: meaning also that he shall bee blessed; for the Scripture vseth to speake of things to come, as if they were present or done already by reason of the certaintie of them.] Vers. 19. A seruant [i. a stubborne and  rebellious seruant,] will not bee chastised [i. corrected and amended] with words; [vz. onely but men must now and then vse stroakes, as the faultes shall deserue,] though he vnderstand, [i. though he knowe what you meane by your words] yet he will not answere. [vz. according to that you speak and propound vnto him: this is a reason why stripes must be ioyned with words: q.d. bare reproofe of words mendeth not a seruant, which is deafe to good exhortation or reproofe.] Vers. 20. Seest thou a man hastie in his matters,  [i. one that is headlongly caried without aduise to take in hand euery thing,] there is more hope of a foole [vz. that thou shalt reclaime him,] than of him. [vz. that is so hastie in dooing his things: see Chap. 26.12.] Vers. 21. He that delicately bringeth vp his seruant [vz. both in meate, drinke, ap∣parell,  &c.] from youth, [i. from his first beginning euen a long season after] at length he wil be euen as his sonne, [i. hee wil at the length through that de∣licacie, take state vpon him, and bee as it were a sonne and a Lord to the rest. One readeth it thus,] at length he shall be voide of children. [i. that delicate seruant shal goe about, either to displace his masters children, or to slay them, as Ieroboam, and other of the kings of Israell did.] Vers. 22. An  angrie man [i. a man giuen to anger] stirreth vp strife, [vz. both to himself and others by the meanes of his strife: see Prouerb. 15.18.] and a furious man [i. he that giueth his furie and rage the raines] aboundeth in transgres∣sion. [i. is not onely prone to many euills, but committeth sundrie sinnes.] Vers. 23. The pride of a man [vz. either in his heart, or expressed by worde,
deede, countenance, gesture, apparrell, or such like] shall bring him low: [i. shall be a meane to debase him: see Chapter 15.33. Chap. 18.12.] but the humble in spirit [i. such as are of a lowly mind] shall inioy glorie. [vz. both be∣fore  God and man: see Iob. 22.29. also Luke. 14.11.] Vers. 24. He that is partner with a theefe [vz. any manner of way either by counsell or consent, or in the act of the euery, or in receauing of stolne goods,] hateth his own soule: [i. dooth after a sorte lay violent hands vppon himselfe and his owne life: for not onely they that doo euill, but such as fauor them that doo it, are guiltie Rom. 1.31.] he heareth cursing, [vz. either against God or man,] and de∣clareth it not. [vz. abroad and therefore consenteth to sinne: see Leuit. 5.1.  This latter parte may be taken as a reason of the former.] Vers. 25. The feare of man [i. that feare that a man hath in himselfe, as while hee dooth not whollie commit himselfe to God and depend of him, being perswaded of his good will towards him] bringeth a snare: [i. great danger to him that is sea∣sed therewith: for snare: see vers. 8. of this Chap.] but he that trusteth [vz. continually and assuredly [in the Lord [vz. onely] shall bee exalted. [vz. in∣to  such an high place as he shall not neede to feare.] Vers. 26. Many [vz. men] doo seeke [vz by all meanes possible] the face of the ruler: [i. his fa∣uor and to obtaine his good will, and that they may obtaine right at his hands, they doo humbly intreate him: see chap. 19.6.] but euerie mans iudge∣ment [i. the iudgement of euerie mans cause] commeth from the Lord: [vz. who vseth man as his instrument to pronounce the same: q d. men may well goe to Magistrates and Iudges, but yet they should first goe to GOD, in  whose hand the kings heart is, Chap. 21.1.] Vers. 27. A wicked man is an abhomination to the iust, [i. a good man loatheth and cannot abide a wicked man; not because he is a man, but because he is wicked,] and he that is vpright in his way [i. leadeth an vpright, godly, and holy life,] is abhomi∣nation to the wicked. [i. the wicked and vngodly cannot abide such a man: see vers. 10. of this Chap. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, readily and willingly to yeeld to good counsell, for feare of destruction. Ʋers. 2. Teacheth vs, what a great blessing it is to haue good magistrates, and what a miserie it is to haue wicked ones. Ʋers. 3. Teacheth vs, that whoredome bringeth with it beggerie and pouertie, Vers. 4. Teacheth vs, that iustice is the proppe of kingdomes, and briberie the ruine thereof. Vers. 5. Teacheth vs, to auoide flatterie, and sheweth the danger thereof, to him that is flattered. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, that a wic∣ked mans sinnes, are cords strong inough to tye him, so that hee shall not stirre. Vers 7. Teacheth vs, to looke into, and to defende the iust cause of the poore. Vers 8. Setteth out the discommodities of scorning, and the commodities which insue of holy wisdome. Vers. 9. Teacheth vs, that there is no way to reclaime a man, that is frosen in the dregges of his owne sinne. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, that the vngodlie cannot abide the good, but
the godlie for all that, yea the rather for that, should make much of, foster, and defend one another. Ʋerse 11. Doth teach vs, not onely not to blabbe out our owne secretes, but to reserue the vttering of them to a most conue∣nient time and place. Ʋers. 12. Teacheth vs, that wicked men and Magi∣strates haue many times wicked seruants and officers. Ʋerse 13. Teacheth vs, that al the being, that al men either good or bad haue, they haue it from the Lord. Verse 14. Teacheth vs, that execution of iustice is a notable meane to make a kingdome sure. Ʋerse 15. Sheweth what difference there is be∣tweene a reasonable correction and letting children and seruants runne as they list. Ʋerse 16. Sheweth, that the vngodlie may florish for a time, but they shall come downe at the last. Ʋerse 17. Teacheth parents mo∣deratly to correct their sonnes and seruants. Verse 18. Declareth, in what a miserable case those people are that haue not the word preached amongst them. Verse 19. Teacheth men to correct froward seruants, not with words onely, but with stripes also. Verse 20. Sheweth, that it is easier to reclaime a foole, than a man giuen ouer to hastines and vnaduisednes in his affaires. Ʋerse 21. Teacheth vs, to beware that wee bring not vp our seruants ouer daintilie. Vers. 22. Teacheth vs to auoide anger and furie. Ʋerse 23. Teacheth vs, to shunne pride, and to imbrace humilitie. Ʋerse 24. Teacheth vs, to beware of all consenting to any manner of euill whatsoe∣uer it be. Ʋerse 25. Teacheth vs, that such as trust stedfastly in the Lord shall neuer bee confounded. Verse 26. Teacheth vs, to goe to God in our iust causes before wee goe to the Magistrate, and afterwards to goe to him for iustice, and then no doubt wee shall speede better. Ʋerse 27. Teacheth vs, that the wicked cannot abide the godly, and that the godly on the other side should loath them in their wickednes. CHAP. 30. Co. THis Chapter cannot well bee connexed to the former otherwise than thus, that the holie Ghost proceedeth in deliuering other holie and wholesome in∣structions concerning faith and manners, but yet by the ministerie and mean of another than Salomon, as may appeare by the title and inscription of this Chapter. Di. I Would diuide this Chapter into foure parts. In the first he sheweth how  blind we are in the comprehension of GOD and his matters, how pure and perfect Gods word is, and putteth downe a praier, desiring to bee deli∣uered from vanitie, lying, pouertie, abundance of wealth pride & despaire: from verse 1. to the end of the 9. In the second, he dealeth against vniust ac∣cusers,  disobedient children, hypocrites, proud persons, cruell and outra∣gious men, couetous men, and contemners of parents: and this reacheth from verse 10. to the end of the 17. In the third, he intreateth of things be∣yond
his reach, of the trade or order of an adulteresse, and of certaine things that breed great disorder and confusion in the earth: also of some creatures which in their kinde doo instruct men, and this reacheth from verse 18. to  the end of the 28. In the fourth, he speaketh of the lyon, of a grayhound, of a goate, and of the maiestie of a King, teaching men to beware of pride, and wrath: from verse 29. to the end of the Chapter. Se. I Would make but one verse of the title of this Chapter & the first verse it self, & reade them both together thus.]  Vers. 1. The words of Agur [vz. which hée spake, are these that followe. Some would haue this Agur to bée Salomon, but I see no likelihood of it: and me thinketh the petition which is made verse 7. of this Chap. should plainlie proue it, because Salomon was a King, and had great store of riches, and a promise giuen vnto him thereof: see 1. Kings 3.13. I rather thinke some other good man, whose name is not expressed saue here, was the writer, and that these were ioyned to Salomons Prouerbes, both for the likenes of the argument, and the breuitie or shortnes of the sen∣tences] the sonne of laketh. [He expresseth also his fathers name: of which name we reade in no place of the scripture but in this onely, the holie Ghost teacheth vs thereby, not curiouslie to search into these things, seeing it hath not pleased him to reueale more concerning them.] The prophecie [i. the good and holie speach; for prophecie is taken here for a speach concerning good and holie matters] which the man [vz. Agur himselfe] spake [vz. plainlie and pithilie also as followeth] to Ithiel, euen to Ithiel, and Vcal. [i. to these & these men who were (as it is well noted) either his schollers or his friends, who also he did instruct in good and necessarie matters. I knowe some both reade it otherwise, and from the interpretation of the names giue another fense, applying it to Christ the Messiah; but with the good leaue of so good men, I hope I may vpon some good reason dissent from them in it: for though the sense may be good, and the doctrine gathered vpon it, yet I would not so al∣legorise vpon the scripture, specially when we haue other plaine places euen in the olde Testament, that are plaine prophecies indéede of our Sauiour Christ: and therefore I take Ithiel and Ʋcal to be mens names, for whose  causes he propounded these poynts following.] Vers. 2. Surely J am more foolish than any man, [It may be, and I doo not much dissent from some of the Rabbins in this, that Ithiel and Vcal demanded his iudgement concer∣ning hard matters: and that he beginning to speake of them, setteth out his owne vnméetnes: q.d. you thinke thus and thus of me, but I surely may ra∣ther say vnto you, why aske you these things of me that am so vnskilfull my selfe, as no man more, and so he extenuateth or debaseth his iudgement, be∣ginning euen in his speach to them with that] and haue not the vnderstan∣ding of a man in me. [i. haue not so much vnderstanding in me as a meane
man: for he vseth the word Adam here, which in the Hebrue tongue signi∣fieth for the most part one of the common sort of people, as the word Isph doth a noble and excellent personage.] Vers. 3. For I haue not learned wise∣dome,  [a reason of his debasing of himselfe: q.d. so farre of is it that I can well speake of these things, that I haue not yet attained wisedom or know∣ledge] nor attained to the knowledge of holie things. [vz. such as God and his word are, of which he speaketh in the next verses: some reade of the saincts: meaning thereby Angels, and such faithfull ones as are alreadie gathered to God in heauen, but the other is more plaine: q.d. I am not instructed with the knowledge of diuine things, that I should bee able to declare such hard poynts as these are.] Vers. 4. Who [vz. amongst men] hath ascended vp to  heauen, [vz. that he should fetch from thence the knowledge of God] & des∣cende? [vz. from thence, that he might tell vs what things he hath seene and learned there: see Deutero. 30.12, &c. It is true that Paule and o∣thers haue béen rapt vp thether, but yet not of themselues, but by God; and withall they haue seene things that it was not lawfull for man to speake: see 2. Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.] who hath gathered the winde in his fist? [i. who doth hold the wind in his hand that it bloweth not, and letteth it lose when he will to blowe. This onely can God aboue doo, and not any man: see Isaiah 40.12.] who hath bound the waters in a garment? [i. as it were in a garment: q.d. is it not God onely that kéepeth the waters in the clowdes as it were in a garment, and afterward when he seeth it good, dissolueth them into raine that falleth vppon the earth? see Psalme 104.3. Some vnderstand by the waters here, the waters which are aboue the firmament, and are vpholden by the wonderfull power and prouidence of almightie God, of which you may reade Genesis 1.6, 7. and in other places: but I thinke it better to vn∣derstand them of the waters in the ayre and firmament, which is often in scripture called heauen] who hath established all the ends of the world? [q.d. by whose meanes is it that the earth and all the wastes thereof remaine so firme and stable as they are, is it not by the onely power of the almightie?] what is his name, [q.d. canst thou name a man that can performe these things] and what is his sonnes name, [he speaketh this according to the cu∣stome of the Iewes, who vsed to make men knowne by their kindred, as I∣saiah the sonne of Amos, Michaiah the sonne of Imlah, and such like: q.d. that he may bee the more knowne and famous, tell what is his kindred or stocke, and what is his sonnes name] if thou canst tell? [q d. if thou canst name any let vs heare. I am not ignorant that many good writers applie his to God the Father, and to his sonne Christ; but the former is the more plaine and simple sense. His meaning is, that none can doo or tel these things but God onely, and therefore he is most méete to deale in those hard matters and speaches concerning the same. And thus hauing laied downe, as it were by the way of extenuation, his owne insufficiencie, he entereth in his measure to discourse of the points, and first he treateth of the word of God.]
Vers. 5. Euery word of God [i. both the whole word of GOD generally, and euery part and particle of the same] is pure: [i. true, iust, holie, and frée from all corruption whatsoeuer: see Psalme 12.6. Psalme 18.30. Psalme 19.8.] he [i. God himselfe] is a shield [vz. of defence and protection against the rage and assaults of their enemies: see Psalm 18.2.] to those [i. to all those, both generally and particularly] that trust [vz. stedfastly and vnfeignedly] in him.  [vz. onely: see Chap. 29.25.] Vers. 6. Put nothing [vz. of thine owne in∣uention and deuise] vnto his words, [i. vnto the word that he hath deliuered vnto thée: and he speaketh nothing here of taking away, because men be more prone to adde, vnder the shewe of interpretation and fense, than to take a∣way: see Deutero. 4.2. Also Deutero. 12.32. Reuelat. 22.18, &c.] least he reprooue thee, [vz. for thy sawcines and malapertnes: vnderstanding also by reprouing, correcting and punishing] and thou be found [vz. by that meanes] a lier. [for lying is committed not onely by speaking lesse than the trueth, but also by speaking more. So he sheweth that there is a double sinne com∣mitted by adding to the word: the one is the sinne of pride and presumption,  the other is the sinne of lying.] Vers. 7. Two things [vz. particularly and by name: as may appeare verse 8.] haue I required of thee: [vz. earnestly and oftentimes, yea I require and craue them still: for the phrase see Psal. 27.4.] denie them me not [i. graciouslie grant me the same] before I dye. [He meaneth that he would haue and inioye the same so long as he should liue here: for after the course of this life were once finished, they would stand him  in no stead.] Vers. 8. Remoue [vz. of thy goodnes] farre from me [vz. yea so farre that it may neuer take hold of me] vanitie [i. all vaine delights, as Psal. 119.37.] and lyes: [i. all vniust and vnfaithfull dealing: vnderstanding also by one, all manner of transgressing: q.d. pardon all my former sinnes, and giue me grace daylie more and more to preuaile against the seede of all corruption in me] giue me not pouertie, nor riches: [i. not too much of either: he sheweth the reason in the next verse: and wee must note, that though the condition be not here expressed, yet he meaneth according to Gods will, and so farre foorth as he should see it good for his glorie] feede me [vz. of thy gra∣cious goodnes and liberalitie: see Psalme 104.27, 28.] with foode conue∣nient for me, [I take it to bée the same in other wordes that our Sauiour Christ teacheth vs to pray, Matth. 6.11. meaning as much or as little, as  God shall thinke méete to maintaine this life.] Vers. 9. Least [vz. if thou giue mee abundance of riches,] I be full [vz. of all plentie and aboundance,] and deny thee, [vz. to beare sway ouer me, and forget thee; for fulnes wor∣keth many times pride, securitie, and forgetfulnes: see Deutero. 8.10.12.14. also Deutero. 31.15. Ezech. 6.49.] and say [vz. either within my selfe, or openly vnto others] who is the Lord? [vz. that I neede to care for him, sée Exod. 5.2.] or least I be poore. [that is a reason why he would not be pinched with pouertie,] and steale [vz. for the satisfying of my neede: see Chap. 6.30, 31.] and take the name of my God in vaine: [either by false swearing
as the poore people doo to get somewhat, or els by my theueerie and loose life slander that glorious name and profession after which I am called: marke that both riches and pouertie are from the Lord.] Vers. 10. Ac∣cuse  not [vz. falsely, or without good and great cause] a seruant to his Ma∣ster, [i. any to his superior; for by a seruant he vnderstandeth all in subiection to others: hee meaneth by this, that hee would haue men to haue peace and frendship with all, yea euen with the meanest, and to foster concord amongst all sortes] least he curse thee [i. least by his prayer vnto God he pull a curse from him vppon thee, who is the defender and reuenger of the poore: see Exod. 22.23.] when thou hast offended. [vz. against him, accusing him false∣ly, and without any iust cause.] Vers. 11. There is a generation [i. a sorte  and kinde of people] that curseth their father, [i. both wisheth and speaketh all manner of euill against him,] and doth not blesse their mother. [i. doth not wish well vnto hir, meaning thereby cursing of hir: for the punishment of such children, read Exod. 21.17. And this kinde of hebrue speach where one and the selfe same thing is repeated by the contrarie with a deniall, is vsuall in Scripture: see Deuteron. 33.6. and other places: his meaning is: q.d. such children, as prouoke, contemne, and despise their parents, and vtter slanderous and cursed speaches against them are a vile kinde of people, and shewe themselues to be rebellions persons.] Vers. 12. There is a generati∣on  [see before vers. 11.] that are pure in their owne conceit, [i. thinke them∣selues holy, iust, &c.] and yet [vz. for all their owne imagination and out∣ward shewe to others] are not washed [vz. by the water of the worde and spirit; he meaneth that they are not made cleane: for washing, see Psal. 51.2, 7.] from that filthines. [vz. from that filthines of sinne which they haue both in body and in spirit: see 2. Cor. 7.1. In the other verse hee spake a∣gainst peruerse & stubborne people: and here he dealeth against hipocrites (a perilous kinde of people) who outwardly making shewe of holines of life, are notwithstanding in their minde most impure, and many times euen by deedes declare the same, though that they think by an outward vizard of ho∣lines to couer their filthines.] Vers. 13. There is a generation [see verse  11. of this Chap.] whose eyes are hautie, [i. who doo declare the pride of their heart by their verie lookes] and their eye liddes are lifted vp. [vz. on high farre aboue others: he putteth the signe of pride for pride, because euen in the eyes and countenance there is a manifestation of pride, as chap. 6.17. or els for proude persons themselues vsing the same; against whom hee here dea∣leth.] Ver. 14. There is a generation whose teeth are as swordes, [i. very sharpe  and keene] and there chawes as kniues, [vz. ready and prepared to cut,] to eate vp [i. vtterlie to destroy and deuoure] the afflicted [i. the poore and nee∣die] out of the earth, [i. from dwelling in the same] and the poore from among men. [vz. that they alone might dwell vpon the earth: Isaiah 5.8. And here he speaketh against tyrannous men and oppressors of the poore.] Vers. 15. The horse-leach [The creature here named is well knowne] hath two daugh∣ters
[in her tongue, whereby first she pricketh and pearceth the skinne, and afterwards sucketh the bloud: see Plin. lib. 32. cap. 10.] which crie [vz. in their manner] giue, giue [vz. vnto vs: meaning by the doubling of the word, that they are seldome or neuer satisfied. And vnder this speach he setteth out the insatiable desire of such as oppresse the poore: q.d. as the horse-leach is neuer satisfied but when she is filled, at which time she falleth of; & yet after∣wards if she take hold either of the same place or some other, shee will sucke more bloud: so these oppressors are not content once to haue spoyled men, but come againe, and neuer leaue till they haue depriued them of all their ri∣ches and substance.] There be three things that will not be satisfied: yea foure that say not, it is inough; [these wordes and the meaning thereof are plaine,  what the things are he rehearseth particularly in the next verse.] Vers. 16. The graue, [for that is neuer satisfied with bodies, but doth deuour al things put therein, how many or how great soeuer they bee: see Chapter 1.12.] and the barren wombe, [I doo not onely referre this as some doo vnto barren women, but to incontinent women also whose lust is neuer satisfied] the earth that cannot bee satisfied with water, [but drinketh in all water powred vpon it, yea that great store of raine that falleth from heauen, and is alwaies ready (as it were) to receaue more] and the fire that saith not, it is inough: [for how much wood or other matter soeuer is laide vpon it it burneth and consu∣meth the same. I suppose that all these similitudes tend to expresse the insa∣tiable desire of the couetous men & oppressors, that as these are neuer satis∣fied,  so the wicked men haue neuer inough.] Vers. 17. The eye [i. the per∣son himselfe, a parte put for the whole: and he speaketh of the eye, both be∣cause it is a very excellent parte of mans bodie, and also because in it many times is contempte and scorning most bewrayed] that mocketh his father, [vz. for any cause,] and despiseth the instruction of his mother: [i. the good counsell that she shall giue him,] let the Rauens of the valley picke it out, [he maketh mention of those Rauens; that abide commonly in valleyes and by riuers that runne in valleys, because they are thought of some to bee more fearce and cruell vpon their prayes: and that which is read here by the way of a wish (as it were) some read it by the way of a prophecie, thus; they shall picke it out: but the sense commeth all to one: meaning that he should bee de∣stroyed,] and the yong Eagles [vz. who are more busie, and better able with there beakes and talents to deuoure their pray,] eate it. [vz. vp, and vtter∣ly spoyle it, so that there bee no memorie or remembrance of him nor his  name.] Vers. 18. There are three things hidden from me, [i. they are more high than I can atteyne vnto, and exceed my capacitie farre,] yea foure [vz. things there are: all which foure hee reckoneth vp in the next verse] that I knowe not; [vz. how to yéeld a certaine and sound naturall reason of them.]  Ver. 19. The way of an Eagle in the ayre, [i. flying in the ayre: for she leaueth no notes or pathes (as it were) of her flights: & though this be common to all other birds, yet he nameth specially the Eagle, both because she is the chie∣fest
of birds or fowle, and also flieth most high, and very swift with all,] the way of a Serpent vpon a stone, [vz. or sharpe and stéepe rock: that a Serpent, as an Adder, or snake should crawle vpon the earth being flat and euen, is no great matter: but how shée shoulde goe vp into craggie and stéepe moun∣taines, is very wonderfull] the waye of a ship in the middest of the sea, [this is strange also: for though it be true, that when the ship goeth (specially in a calme) there is some path of it left; yet after that the waters haue come toge∣ther againe it cannot be séene: sée Iob. 9.26.] and the way of a man, [i. the order, course, dealing, or knowledge of a yong man: hée speaketh of an vn∣cleane and dishonest thing in cleane and honest termes,] with a maide. [i. with one that would so bée taken, and so will shamelesly affirme hir selfe to be, when it is neither so nor so: as may appeare by that which followeth in the next verse.] Vers. 20. Such is the way also of an adulterous woman, [i.  so close and vnknowne: f to that end had hée alledged these foure strange things rehersed before by certaine similitudes (declaring as it were) the close subtill and impudent dealing of harlots,] shee eateth, and wipeth hir mouth; [i. when shée hath committed wickednes, shée maketh a goodly shewe as though she were honest: in good termes expressing euill matters teaching vs thereby to auoide filthie talk,] and saith; [vz. impudently and shamelesly,] J haue not committed iniquitie. [and yet hir owne heart and knowledge can tell hir the contrarie: all this tendeth in my minde, to set out the closenes and shamelesnes of strumpets, whose wicked facts can hardly be knowne: q.d. when they haue committed whoredome they will deale as some doo, who when they haue deuoured somewhat which they should not, they will wipe their mouthes, as though they had not done it: so in the shamelesnes of their face they will deny the fact of euill, and behaue themselues towards their husbands as though they had not deceaued them, because no note or marke of their filthines appeareth whereby it may bée knowne.] Vers. 21. For  three things [vz. amongst men,] the earth is mooued, [i. either the inhabitants of the earth themselues haue good occasion to tremble and shake: or els, by Hyperbole to expounde it thus; that it were reason when thrée things fol∣lowing are done vpon the earth, the earth it selfe shoulde as it were tremble for horror and feare:] yea for foure [vz. things, which hée reckoneth vp after∣wards, vers. 22.23.] it cannot susteyne it selfe. [vz. in any good strength and order: he meaneth nothing else hereby, but that the things themselues are intollerable amongst men.] Vers. 22. For a seruant when he reigneth,  [i. when any vnmeete for high callings are aduanced to the same: for they knowe not how to vse authoritie, but abuse it, both to their owne hrt, and oppression of others,] and a foole [i. a wicked man] when hee is filled with meate, [i. when hee hath all abundance and plentie of euerie good thing: for both he abuseth the things in excesse, and being puffed vp through pride be∣commeth hatefull to all.] Verse. 23. For the hatefull woman [i.  hir that  is giuen to hatred of others: which affection of hate in hi  [quiet the
husband to whome she is maried, and the whole houshold. One readeth] for the hated woman [i. for hir that is hated of hir husband for her euil man∣ners and conditions, and for the same is put away: see Deutero. 24.1. see also Deut 21.15.] when she is married [vz. to another man, which cannot chuse but be intollerable and grieuous to hir first husband, besides that, it is the plaine committing of adulterie as Christ sheweth. Matth. 19.9. which should cause the land to tremble because it defileth the same as Ierem. 3.1. and this latter doo I allowe of,] and for a handmayde [i. for one that hath been a seruant before] that is heire to her mistres, [i. is maried to hir ma∣ster, and so possesseth all that hir mistres had before: the reason is, because that hauing gotten a better state, she will swell and waxe proude, and hard∣ly  beare any equall, by reason of the height of hir minde.] Vers. 24. These [vz. things following] be foure small things in the earth, [i. bee foure of the smallest creatures in the earth,] yet they are wise [vz. in their kind] and full of wisdome; [yea so full, that men many times are sent to them to learne of  them.] Vers. 25. The pismires, a people not strong; [i. a very weake sorte of creatures: and hee resembleth them to people, because of their multitudes] yet prepare they [vz. very wisely] their meate [i. their foode and sustenance which shall nourish them] in summer, [i. in summer season: he meaneth that these little thinges while they can and the season is conuenient, labor to get against an vnseasonable and hard time that which may keepe them: see  Chap. 6.6, &c.] Vers. 26. The connies [One readeth the mice of the moun∣taines; whereunto also I doo consent, because connies are seldome to bee found in the mountaines or the rocks, as it is said hereafter in this verse: and also because Ierome writing to Sunia and Fretella, affirmeth that Syria (that is the land of Iudah and the countries thereabout) was full of such mice,] a people not mightie: [i. a companie or troope not able for all their companie to performe any great thing:] yet make they their houses [i. places for them to dwell in] in the rocke. [by their continuall labor: q.d. through labor and con∣tinuance  in it they ouercome most hard things.] Vers. 27. The grashopper [i. the multitude of grashoppers: one for many,] hath no king [i. no principall or chiefe ruler of them, as the bees haue (as some affirme)] yet goe they forth [vz. to destroy and eate vp the fruite of the earth,] all by bands, [i. not onely in good order, but as it were all consenting to one thing; euen as though they  had but he captaine that did leave the whole band.] Vers. 28. The spider taketh hold with hir hands, [vz. of the thed or webbe which she hath spunne: he saith with her hands, not that they are hands indeede, but because they are set some of one side, and some of another as mens handes are, and because they doo the office of hands; that is apprehend and lay holde of thinges, o∣therwise in proper speach indeede they are fee] and is in kings palaces: [laboring busily about his ebbe: of the Spiders nature and diligence, see  Plini. lib. 11. cap. 24.] Vers. 29. There be three things [vz. amongst other creatures] that order well their going, [i. that goe very stately and comely,]
yea foure things [vz. which follow hereafter] are comely in going, [vz. about any thing they doo.] Vers. 30. A lyon which is strong [i. most strong] among  beastes, [vz. of the field or forrest] and turneth not [vz. backe againe out of his way or pace] at the sight of any: [vz. either man or beast.] Vers. 31. A  lustie grayhound, [i. a swift and very nimble dogge for a race or hunting. I allowe rather his reading, who turneth it] a horse girded in the loynes, [i. not onely well trussed, but apt and prepared for a race: the metaphore being ta∣ken from the people of the East and their custome, who when they went chearefully about any thing, would trusse vp their garments about their loynes: and I rather yéeld vnto this, not onely because there is no great state or comelines in a grayhound, but also for that which is written concer∣ning the horse: Iob. 39.22, 23, &c. And I thinke the nature of the word will also somewhat helpe it:] a goate, [vz. going stately, and with great cheare∣fulnes before the rest of the flocke] and a King, [i. a Magistrate or ruler] a∣gainst whom there is rising vp. [vz. either by his home enemies, or by his for∣raine foes. He meaneth a mightie and strong Prince whom none dare resist, neither dare any offer himselfe to stand against him.] Vers. 32. If thou hast  been foolish [i. if thou haue declared thy selfe to be vnwise] in lifting thy selfe vp, [vz. aboue others: q.d. If thou hast bewraied pride, or hast been proude, beware thou doo so no more: and I referre it not onely to pride, but to anger and contention the inseparable companion of pride; and that so it must bée vnderstood the verse following sheweth] and if thou hast thought wickedly, [vz. against another man or men] lay thine hand vpon thy mouth. [i. doo not abstaine onely from speaking of it, as Iob. 29.9. but continue not in those euill imaginations, much lesse in the performance of that euill.] Vers. 33.  When one churneth milke, [vz. a good while together] he bringeth forth but∣ter: [vz. at the last] and he that wringeth his nose, [i. bloweth it often and rubbeth it very hard] causeth [vz. at the length] bloud to come out: [vz. of his nose] so he that forceth wrath, [i. prouoketh other men to wrath by his lewd speaches] bringeth forth strife. [vz. betwéene himselfe and others: q.d. as churning bringeth forth butter, and the rubbing and wiping of the nose bloud, which may be hurtfull to him that vseth it: so he that is stirred vp to wrath in himselfe, or prouoketh other men thereto, stirreth vp contention and strife: therefore men must take héed that they be not stirred vp to wrath in themselues, neither prouoke others thereto, for therevpon riseth conten∣tion, which is the cause of many and great mischiefes. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, to haue care of other men, and to instruct them what we can. Ʋerse 2. Teacheth vs, to thinke lowlie and humblie of our selues. Verse 3, 4. Teach vs, that no man, as man, is able to discourse of such high and great secrets, as God hath reuealed in his word. Verse 5. Teacheth vs, the excellencie of Gods word: also how good the Lord is to those that trust in him. Vers. 6. Teacheth vs, the perfection of Gods word, and in∣structeth
vs to bridle our owne presumption that would many times adde thereto. Verse 7. Teacheth vs, that earnest praier to God is the meane to obtaine from him such things as we neede. Verse 8. Teacheth vs, to hate vanitie and lyes: also to pray for contentednes in whatsoeuer state GOD shall place vs. Verse 9. Teacheth vs, that riches commonly breede pride; and pouertie distrust in God and theeuerie, vnlesse men be marueilously assisted with grace from him. Verse 10. Teacheth vs, to beware of al false accusations. Vers. 11. Teacheth vs, to beware how we practise frowardnes and vnnaturalnes towards our parents. Verse 12. Teacheth vs, to take heed of hypocrisie, and that we thinke not our selues holie, when indeede wee are filthie. Ʋerse 13. Teacheth vs, to beware of pride, and of all outward shewes appertaining thereto. Verse 14. Teacheth vs, to shunne violence and oppression of others. Vers. 15, 16. Teach vs, to beware of couetousnes and an insatiable desire of riches. Verse 17. Declareth, what punishment shall fall vpon contemptuous and disobedient children. Verse 18, 19, 20. Teach and set out, not only the vnsearchablenes of a harlots heart, but the hypocrisie that is in her, yea euen then when she hath committed filthines. Verse 21. Teacheth vs, that confusion and disorders should make men, yea and the earth it selfe to tremble and shake. Ʋerse 22. Sheweth vs, that go∣uernement is not meet for a man of meane condition, and that abundance and riches cannot agree with a foole. Verse 23. Teacheth vs, that it is a great confusion for a man to marie another mans wife, that without iust cause is diuorced from her: also that it is an vnseemely thing for a master to marie his maid-seruant. Verse 24. Teacheth vs, that wee may many times learne good instructions euen from the least of Gods creatures. Verse 25. Teacheth vs, in the Pismire to learne in time conuenient to pro∣uide for vs, and those that depend vpon vs. Verse 26. In the examples of the mice of the mountaines, to bee laborious and diligent in those things that concerne our owne good. Vers. 27. Teacheth vs, by the Grashopper to learne to ioyne together in order and vnitie, though wee had none to conduct and leade vs. Ʋerse 28. Teacheth vs, that we should not inshame leane off our worke for any mans presence, no more than the spider doth hers in the Kings pallace. Ʋers. 29. Teacheth vs, that we may euen in the creatures many times behold excellent qualities, that God the creator hath put into them. Verse 30. Sheweth, that in the lyon there is great courage. Verse 31. Teacheth vs, that there is great liuelines and swiftnes in a horse: and that there is also great maiestie in a good Prince. Ʋerse 32. Teacheth vs to beware of pride, and also to take heede that wee conceiue no euill in our thoughts, or if we doo, to represse it there, and not to let it breake forth either in words or deedes. Verse 33. Teacheth vs, rather to beate downe wrath and contention in our selues and others, than to foster it our selues or others.
CHAP. 31. Co. THe holie Ghost in the other Chapter had interposed certaine notable and godlie speaches of one Agur the sonne of Iaketh, betweene some sentences of Salomons before going and those now following; which being dispatched, he re∣turneth againe in this Chapter, and putteth downe certaine graue speaches that Salomon speaketh, as it were from his mothers mouth. Di. THis whole Chapter being an exhortation of Salomons mother made to him, may bee diuided into two parts. In the first, with wonderfull mo∣ther  like affections she instructeth him to beware of whoredome and dron∣kennes, and teacheth him how to behaue himselfe in the publike gouern∣ment of his kingdome, from verse 1. to the end of the 9. In the second, she  doth excellently paint out (and Salomon as from her mouth deliuereth the same) the vertues and qualities of good women, which in summe are these; she loueth and obeieth her husband, flieth sloth, is liberall towardes her household, is an example of diligence, labour, godlines, looketh into the waies of her people, taketh care of her children, and greatly feareth the Lord, from verse 10. to the end of the Chapter. Se. Vers. 1. THe words of King Lemuel: [i. which he himselfe spake, hauing before receiued them as instruc∣tions from his mother: no doubt but this Le∣muel was Salomon, because he is named a king] the prophecie [i. an excellent doctrine, which also for the notablenes thereof might bee estéemed as a prophecie: see Chap. 30.1.] which his mother [vz. Bathsheba, 2. Samuel 12.24.] taught him. [vz. being certainly perswa∣ded that God had ordained him to be king, as appereth 1. King. 1.13. What time she taught him, as whether it was before he was king or after, it is vn∣certaine: and yet I suppose rather before than after, because then he was in∣dued with most singular wisedome: see for this purpose Chapter 4.3, 4.] Vers. 2. What my sonne! [vz. I say vnto thee: she beginneth as it were with  a doubt, which doth notablie expresse not onely her motherly affection, but also most euidently declareth the grauitie and weight of the speach follow∣ing] what the sonne of my wombe! [i. my naturall sonne, and most tender and deare vnto me: see Isaiah 49.15.] and what O the sonne of my desires! [i. whom I haue not onely greatly desired, but for whose cause also I haue made and performed many vowes vnto the Lord (for so much the worde im∣porteth) as mothers were wont to do for their children, specially for their males or sonnes: sée 1. Samuel 1.11.] Vers. 3. Giue not thy strength vnto  women, [i. to strange women or harlots: by strength she vnderstandeth not
onely his substance, but also the very powers and strength of his bodie and minde: see before Chap. 5.9, 10.] nor thy waies, [i. make not thy indeuours, purposes, and actions knowne to such] which is to destroy Kings, [q.d. that will doo nothing els but bring destruction vpon Kings and Kingdomes: see  Deut. 17.17.] Vers. 4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, [i. it doth not belong vnto them] to drinke wine, [vz. excessiuely, or immoderatly] nor for Princes [vz. it doth not belong vnto them neither: by Princes, he meaneth such as pronounce sentence of law to others] strong drinke, [i. to drink strong drinke excessiuely or immoderatly. Wine and strong drinke soberly vsed are not here forbidden, but dronkennes: for Kings and Magistrates are to vse the one soberly, and carefully to flie the other, because the whole people is commit∣ted to their charge, least also being ouercome with wine, they should forget  their office and duetie, as followeth in the next sentence.] Vers. 5. Least he [a reason of that which goeth before: and marke how sodainly he changeth the number from the plurall to the singular] drinke [vz. ouermuch] and forget [vz. by that meanes] the decree, [i. not onely the lawe and ordinance of God, but also the certaine and appoynted order of lawe and equitie] and change [i. turne vpside downe and peruert, as where he should helpe and suc∣cour to hurt and hinder] the iudgement [i. the right sentence and iudgement] of al the children of affliction. [i. of al those that are greatly afflicted: meaning least being ouercome with drinke, he should pronounce a wrong sentence a∣gainst them. And he maketh speciall mention of these, rather than of the rich because they are more subiect to iniurie and oppression, and for the most part  are vsually neglected and contemned.] Vers. 6. Giue ye strong drinke vn∣to him [q.d. I will shewe you to whom abundance of wine and strong drinke appertaineth] that is readie to perish, [vz. through the manifold afflictions, both inward and outward that lye vpon him. Some interprete it to such as are condemned to death, and readie to be executed for their faults: but I ra∣ther vnderstand it of those that are afflicted, either inwardly or outwardly, by reason of some great calamitie] and wine [i. giue wine] vnto them [i. vn∣to such: a sodaine change of the number: he sayd before, him: now he saith  them] that haue griefe of heart. [i. are sad and heauie at their heart, which al∣so they testifie by heauines of countenance.] Vers. 7. Let him drinke [vz. either of wine or strong drinke] that he may forget [vz. thereby] his pouer∣tie, [i. the pouertie and want that lieth vpon him, and vnder one kind he com∣prehendeth all his calamities or euills: and this sheweth that it cannot well be referred to thē that by law are appoynted to dye, but to such as are other∣wise afflicted] and remember his miserie [i. the miserie that he is in] no more. [vz. for a long while, for wine or strong drinke dispatcheth mens cares,  and casteth all carefull burthens for the time out of their mindes.] Vers. 8. Open thy mouth [i. speake boldly and plainly] for the dumme, [i. for such as cannot defend themselues, either for feare of their mightie aduersaries, or els dare not doo it, or haue no skill to lay open their owne causes: q.d. defend
them boldly, and that in publike iudgement, which are not able or meete to defend and declare their owne cause and right, whether they bee dumme, deafe, blinde, or any other manner of way distressed: for vnder one he com∣prehendeth all; yea the rather for their wants should the Magistrate succor them] in the cause [q.d yea open thy mouth in the iust cause and defence] of all the children of destruction: [i. of all such as are in great miserie, and in the present danger of their liues as it were: see Psalm. 79.11.] Verse 9.  Open thy mouth, [this is expounded before, ver. 8. and yet he repeateth it not againe without cause, thereby declaring how hardly men are brought to the performance of their dueties] iudge righteouslie, [vz. to euerie man, not re∣specting the person of any] and iudge [vz. vprightly and soundly,] the af∣flicted and the poore. [i. such as are in miserie and want many things, or ra∣ther haue nothing of their owne: for somuch one of the hebrue words here signifieth.] Vers. 10. Who shall finde [vz. by any thing that he himselfe can  doo] a vertuous woman? [i. a good and holy woman indued with blessed ver∣tues: he speaketh thus in the way of a question, not onely because good wo∣men are hard to be founde for the scarsitie of them, as Eccles. 7.30. but also because such women are Gods rare and singular giftes: see Chap. 18.22. also chap. 19.14.] for her price is farre aboue the pearles. [q.d. she is not one∣ly as rare as most precious stones: but being once obtayned a man cannot set too great a price or value of hir. And I take this parte of the Chapter to depend vpon the former thus, that Salomon after he had recited his mothers rules and doctrines deliuered vnto him, doth by occasion thereof annexe ther∣to the praise of a godly and painfull matrone, beginning euery verse with the seuerall letters of the Alphabet as Psalm. 119. dooth, also Psalm. 145. and some of the Chapters of Ieremiahs lamentations.] Vers. 11. The  heart of hir husband trusteth in her: [vz. not onely for hir chastitie, but also doth vnfeynedly commit the gouernement and disposing of the things that are within doore vnto hir,] and he shall haue no neede of spoyle. [vz. because by the labour and good gouernement of his wife hee shall waxe rich. One readeth] and spoyles want not. [i. his familie dooth abound in all good things, euen as souldiers doo when they haue sacked a citie, or ouercome their ene∣mies: but I allowe rather the former.] Vers. 12. She will doo him good, and  not euill [i. she will deserue well of him, and neuer bee greeuous vnto him, but alwaies shewe hir selfe pleasant and courteous, and prouoke him to loue hir vnfeynedly, by reason of the good dueties shee will performe to∣wards him,] all the dayes of hir life [i. continuallie, so long as they shall liue to gether: see Chapter 12.4.] Verse 13. Shee seeketh [vz. diligent∣ly  and carefullie,] wooll and flaxe, [i. euerie manner of thing whereon shee may keepe hir houshold in worke: for vnder these two, hee comprehendeth all] and laboreth cheerefullie with her hands, [i. she hir selfe layeth hir hands to worke as well as others, and she taketh great delight and pleasure there∣in, to the end that by hir example she may drawe them on.] Vers. 14. Shee
is like the shippes of Merchants, [he sheweth wherein in the next parte of this verse,] she bringeth hir foode from a farre. [q.d. as Merchants shippes fetch thinges necessary from farre countreyes, and goe and come with all conunie∣ent spéede, losing as little time as possiblie they may: so shee prouideth for hir familie, yea euen from farre places many times all things meete for hir familie, as meate, drinke, cloth, &c, and spending as little time in the dooing of  it as may be.] Vers. 15. And she riseth [vz. from hir sleepe, and out of hir bed,] whiles it is yet night [i. very early in the morning, and that long before day, speciallie in the winter season] and giueth the portion [vz. of meate and drinke allowed them for the day: see Psalm. 111.5. see also Luke. 12.42.] to hir houshold, [i. to euery one of hir houshold both old and yong,] and the ordinarie [vz. of work and labor,] to hir maydes. [i. to hir seruants that she hath in house with hir: q.d. shee both prouideth meate and worke for them; because meate without worke breedeth idlenes, and worke without meate  cannot be performed.] Vers. 16. She considereth [vz. deepely and careful∣lie] a field, [vz. either offered to be solde: q.d. she maketh no bargaine rash∣ly; but as she looketh whether she be able to pray, so she considereth whether the thing be worth hir money, not deceauing any in buying, or buying any thing lesse than the value:] and getteth it; [vz. for the price agreed vpon,] and with the fruite of hir hands [i. with the labor thereof: for labor is the fruite of the hands, as praise and thankes-giuing is the fruite of the lippes, Hebrew. 13.15.] she planteth a vineyeard. [vz. in the ground or fielde that she hath bought: meaning by this, that she imployeth it to the best commo∣ditie according to the nature of the soyle, as in grazing, tillage, or such like,]  Vers. 17. Shee girdeth hir loynes with strength, and strengtheneth hir armes. [i. she diligently and cheerefullie prepareth hirselfe to hir work, and careful∣lie performeth it, sparing no labor. It hath been sundrie times heretofore noted, that when in the old time they went about diligently to do any thing, they girded their loynes: see Iob. 38.2. also 40.2. and because great strength (as we know) is in the armes, he therfore maketh special mention of them.]  Vers. 18. She feeleth [i. perceaueth, and that by experience] that hir mar∣chandise [i. euery labour and worke which she taketh in hand: q.d. she kno∣weth that while warely she gouerneth hir houshold matters, and by dili∣gence increseth the same, it is as profitable to hir as any traffick or merchan∣dise]: is good [i. commodious and profitable,] hir candle is not put out by night: [i. she is very watchfull and diligent about hir businesse: he putteth the whole night for a good parte of it; meaning that she is more giuen to la∣bour  and worke, than to sleepe and ease.] Vers. 19. She putteth hir hands to the wherle, and hir hands handle the spindle, [or after some distaffe, which for my parte I doo rather allow of: he meaneth that she is continuallie well oc∣cupied in spinning, and dooing things necessarie for hir selfe and familie.]  Vers. 20. She stretcheth out hir hand to the poore, and putteth forth hir hands to the needie [i. shee is very liberall to such as want thinges necessarie: the
doubling of the sentence noteth (in my minde) the aboundance of hir libera∣litie: and this he addeth, least any should thinke that because he had sayd be∣fore, she was so painefull in hir worke, shee were miserable, and had no care of the poore.] Vers. 21. She feareth not the snowe for hir familie: [i. least  it should hurt them of hir houshold: the reason is, because she hath in good sea∣son prouided all things necessarie for them to put back the force of the cold,] for all hir familie is cloathed with scarlet. [i. they haue not onely things for necessitie, but for comelines and pleasure: and so the reason is strong, that if abilitie will serue to minister things tending to the decking of the bodie, it will serue to minister things necessarie for the vse thereof.] Vers. 22. Shee  maketh her selfe [i both for hir selfe, and with hir owne hands also,] carpets, [the word (as I take it) importeth rather couerlets for beds, and is the same word, that is vsed before Chap. 7.16.] fine linen and purple [i. cloth of pur∣ple colour] is her garment. [i. she weareth fine linen and purple: see Luke. 16.19. and that of hir own making, and that not so much for ryot as that she may be honestly and comely apparailed. And this also setteth out hir dili∣gence, that she maketh such things at home as clothes hir self and hir whole familie; and that not to couer nakednes onely, but for honest and comely at∣tyre: which is not to be neglected of any, according to the ability that GOD hath giuen him, or the place or calling wherein hee is occupyed in the com∣mon wealth.] Vers. 23. Hir husband is knowne [vz. vnto others,] in the  gates [i. in the places of publike iudgement,] when hee sitteth [vz. there] with the elders of the land. [i. with them that haue the rule and gouernement of the people thereof; and sit there vprightly to heare, and iustly to determine all causes: and this I vnderstand thus, not onely that this appertaineth to the good womans prayse, that as shee hir selfe is excellent in value, so shee hath a noble and famous husband; but also that hir labor and diligence appea∣reth in the comely attyre of hir husband, and such other apparell as is besee∣ming his dignitie: and that thus it should bee vnderstoode, both that which goeth before, and that which commeth after dooth sufficiently prooue.] Ver. 24. She maketh [vz. with hir owne hands] sheetes, [i. all kinde of necessarie  and profitable linnen] and selleth them [vz. for gayne: that not onely she and hir familie may liue thereby, but also waxe rich] and giueth [i. deliuereth to be sould] girdles [i. sundrie kindes of ware: vnder one, cōprehending many] vnto the Merchant: [vz. that tradeth them to other places. In the He∣brue text it is word for word to the lowe people? Which name is giuen to Merchants, because these people dwelling nigh to the Sea, traded much that way: see Zephan. 1.11. Of merchandise he spake before also in the 18. verse of this Chap.] Vers. 25. Strength and honour is hir cloathing, [It  is sayd of God, Psalm. 104.1. that he is cloathed with glorie and honour; the same he speaketh here (but in another sense) of a good woman: q.d. she is so compassed with strength and adorned with glorie on euerie side, that all that she dooth, she dooth couragiouslie and comelie: for strength and glorie
stick as fast vnto hir as hir garments,] and in the latter day, [i. in all times afterwards to come, whether it be the day of death, or iudgement, or winter, or famine, old age, or any other calamitie whatsoeuer,] she shall reioyce. [or as it is in the hebrue laugh: by which kinde of speach, the holy Ghost doth note  in the Scriptures, securitie and safetie: see Iob. 39.10, 25.] Vers. 26. She openeth hir mouth [i. she both beginneth speach, and continueth therein: see Matth. 5.2.] with wisdome [i. wisely: q.d. she speaketh wisely, and fra∣meth hir selfe to speake not of toyes and vaine things, as women common∣ly vse to doo, but of graue matters, as of wisdome and vertue,] and the lawe of grace is in hir tongue, [by lawe of grace in hir tongue hee meaneth that shee dooth euer propounde the doctrine, and shew the way how to doo good vnto o∣thers: q.d. she is alwaies speaking, how and by what meanes she & others may exercise liberalitie to such as are in néede, and how they may shewe foorth the dueties of charitie: for by grace, he vnderstandeth kindnes to∣wards  others.] Vers. 27. She ouerseeth [vz. with a very watchfull eye] the waies of her household, [i. the whole order of the right gouernment there∣of, & the life & conuersation of those that are therein] and eateth not the bread of idlenes. [i. she is not slothfull, neither eateth meate slothfully, & consumeth the time in idlenes, nay rather feedeth not but when she hath diligently performed her worke: the contrarie of this is called the bread of sorowe,  Psalme 127.2.] Vers. 28. Her children rise vp, and call her blessed: [q.d. her vertues are so great and so many, that her owne children seeing the same, cannot chuse but commend her for them, yea euen her husband, as followeth in the last part of this verse: by rising vp, he meaneth preparing, or prouo∣king of themselues to doo somewhat, because they that sit, and would take somewhat in hand, doo rise vp to attempt and execute the same] her husband also shall praise her, [vz. euen as her children doo for her good vertues and qua∣lities,] saying: [vz. of her, and that vnto her selfe, as may appeare by that  which followeth.] Vers. 29. Many daughters [vz. of men: meaning by this terme, not maides onely, but women or maried wiues] haue done ver∣tuouslie: [vz. towards their husbands, households and children, and that in many great and gracious respects] but thou surmountest them all. [vz. in thy good dealings, and that by much or many degrées. And thus he commendeth her, in preferring her for her good gouernment before many others.] Vers.  30. Fauour [vz. of a womans face] is deceitfull, [vz. because it continueth not long] and beautie [vz. in the countenance] is vanitie: [i. is not much to be regarded, for it wil vanish away: vnder these two he cōprehendeth al out∣ward qualities and graces whatsoeuer] but a woman that feareth the Lord, [vz. vnfeignedly and from the bottome of her heart] she shall bee praised. [i. highly esteemed, and magnified both of God and man. Where first of al we are to vnderstand, that with all things before reckoned he would haue Gods feare ioyned, or els that the rest are little or nothing worth. And these words I take to be Salomons owne, declaring wherein specially consisteth the true
praise and commendation of a good woman, and not the words of her chil∣dren, as some imagine, mentioned before verse 28. see 1. Peter 3.3, 4. Also 1. Timoth. 2.9, 10.] Vers. 31. Giue her of the fruite of her hands, [i. attribute  vnto her the praise, which by performing of her dueties, she hath deserued: see Ierem. 23.16. where he biddeth them giue glorie to the Lord their God] and let her owne workes [vz. which she her selfe hath done] praise her [vz. though others would bee silent and say nothing thereof] in the gates. [i. o∣penly, and by the publike consent of all: see verse 23. of this Chapter. I take these to be the words of him that writ the booke, and to be generally ap∣plied to all: q.d. seeing that the excellent qualities of a good woman are so great, and so many praise her, as her workes deserue which she hath done, that so she may receiue the fruite of her labours, and bee worthelie commen∣ded therefore, and that not only secretly, but in the places of publike and po∣litike méetings; and though other men conceale her commendation, yet doo you set it forth still. Do. Vers. 1. Teacheth vs, in the person of Lemuel, to haue care to deliuer good things ouer to our posteritie: it teacheth mothers also what great care they should haue to instruct their children. Verse 2. Teacheth what tender af∣fection mothers should carrie towards their children, (prouided alwaies that they traine them not vp wantonly) and that they should many times commend their sonnes and their daughters to God in their praiers. Ʋers. 3. Teacheth all men, but chiefly Magistrates, to beware of whoredome. Ʋerse 4. Teacheth Magistrates and rulers to abstaine as from dronkennes, so from the excessiue vse of wine or strong drinke, which may prouoke thereto. Ʋerse 5. Teacheth vs, that dronkennes depriueth men of memo∣rie of good things, & causeth the parties to be void of the feeling of other mens miseries. Ʋerse 6. Teacheth vs, that pleasant things belong to the heauie & sorowful harted, rather than to such as are fraught with pleasures, because extremitie of pleasures comming together, it is a hard thing if man be not caried away therewith. Ʋerse 7. Teacheth vs, that when men are op∣pressed with miserie, they should vse all lawfull meanes to put it away. Ʋerse 8. Teacheth Magistrates to defend the iust cause of all such as cannot pleade for themselues Verse 9. Teacheth them also to iudge vpright iudge∣ment. Ʋerse 10. Teacheth vs, first that good women are very rare and skant: secondly, that where men through Gods blessing haue found the same, they should esteeme them as very excellent iewells. Ʋerse 11. Tea∣cheth vs, that a wife of good gouernment maketh a rich husband. Vers. 12. Teacheth women to doo good to all, but specially to their husbands and families. Ʋerse 13. Teacheth women, not onely to set their owne seruants on worke, but to labour themselues also what they may Verse 14. Teacheth women with speede, and yet with good aduise and labour also to prouide things necessarie for their familie. Ʋerse 15. Teacheth them to be diligent
in  fearefullie to prouide, that seruants may haue, as their  their worke, and not the one without the other. Ʋers. 16. Tea∣ch  not to attempte any bargaine rashly or vnaduisedly, but to con∣sider as of their owne abilitie, so of the thing it selfe. Vers. 17. Teacheth them cheerefullie and couragiouslie, to goe about their affaires. Verse 18. Teacheth women to pursue profit, while the Lord maketh offer thereof, or giueth them knowledge and experience of the same. Ʋers. 19. Sheweth, that a good woman is not so fine fingred, as many daintie dames are at this day, but will lay hir hands to any worke, that may either saue, or get. Vers. 20. Teacheth vs, that good women haue the bowels of compassion to∣wards them that want. Vers. 21. Teacheth a good Mistresse to preuent the feare of all danger, not onely that might fall vpon hir selfe, but vpon hir familie, also to prouide not onely things necessarie, but for comelines. Vers. 22. Sheweth that good people, and namely good women, may not only vse things of profit but of pleasure and comelines also. Vers. 23. Teacheth vs, that a good wife is euen a great glorie and crowne vnto hir husband. Vers. 24. Teacheth, not onely that good women should be diligent for gouerne∣ment of things within doore, but also to be dealing in those things abroad, that may rayse vp some mainteynance to the houshold. Vers. 25. Tea∣cheth vs, that it is a faithfull walking in a good womans calling, that giueth hir peace of conscience in the dayes of affliction. Ʋers. 26. Teacheth good women, to leaue tatling, and to speake wisely, and to stirre vp, both hir self and other women also to liberalitie to the needie. Ʋers. 27. Teacheth a good woman, to haue an eye to the manners, and to the matters of hir houshold, and alwaies to take heede of idlenes, in hir self or them. Vers. 28. Teacheth, that if there be good things in any, that either by nature, mariage, or otherwise apperteyne to vs, we may safely commend them for the same. Ʋers. 29. Teacheth vs to keepe a iust measure in our commendation, and to take heede we goe not beyond trueth. Vers. 30. Teacheth vs, that though fauour and beautie bee to bee regarded, yet without the feare of God, they are nothing, and that women hauing that, are to bee preferred before all. Vers. 31. Teacheth vs, to commend of good things as they are meete, not to come to short; for that is to depriue them of that which is due vnto them, neither to goe too farre, for that is lying and falshood. HEBREVV. CHAP. 13.20, 21. The God of peace, that brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus the great Shepheard of the Sheepe, thorowe the bloud of the euerlasting couenant, make vs perfect in all good workes to doo his will, working in vs that which is pleasant in his sight, through Iesus Christ, to whome bee prayse, for euer and e∣uer, So be it. FINIS.
