3445 99851617 16902
THE SACRIFICE OF A SINNER, TO CHRIST OVR REDEEMER. 1. CHRIST of thy Saints the Eph. 4.15. Head, the Luk. 1.33. King, Whose bounties vn-exhausted spring Doth to thy meanest Ioh: 1 16. members bring Eternall streames of grace. Giue mee, (sweet Saviour) Thee to sing, In holy hymnes, with heart condigne Which eating age, nor envyes sting Shall in no time deface. 2 Thou Lord, with glorious beams Ioh: 1.9 all bright lazing around thy Throne of light Outreaching farre my feeble sight,Exod 33.20 heere, in deaths shade exylde, ns clouds dispell; guilts loade make light Which doth surcharge my fainting spright,1. Tim. 6 16 hat J may spreade thy praise, thy might, with heart pure, vndefyl'de.
3 Ioh: 4.24.With worship chast, in soule sincere, Thou shouldst bee celebrate in feare. Hence, yee Mat. 7.6. vncleane, that darre appeare with hands, with hearts prophaine. O let a Esay. 6.6, 7. Seraphim draw neare A slamming Coale, whose hand doth beare My lips, my heart, from Heauens high sphear to purge from double staine. 4 Then shall these documents divine, By which thy crosses ruits, doe shyne To happie Life, conducting Thyne, my Thoughts by day, by night. With meditation deepe confyne: At morne, midday, my weake engyne While Heavens clear Torch his course decli shall in thy praise delight, 5 Sonne, with thy Syre, in Ioh. 1.12. yeares, in mig In all Phil. 26 15. co-equall: Ro. 11.33. mans dimme sight Transcending: heb. 1.3. Cl. 1.6 67 like thy paterne bright An Other, and the Same. True God of God; myld Matt: 1.16.1. Maid-borne wi Blest gen. 13 12. Ladder, reaching earth aright, Co-apting things of greatest hight with lowe: Lights glorious beame.
6 Safetie of Soules, sight of the blinde, Haven, where the shipwrakt shelter finde, End of all toyles, Ease of the minde, press'd downe with sinfull loade. Reward of works, due in no kinde, To conflict past the Palme assignde, Soules cure, with sins sore sicknesse pynde, the banisht mans aboade. 7 Blest gen. 9.14. bow▪ bepaynting azure aire, Thy pledge who did the World repaire, gen. 6.14.Arke, rendring Thine secure from care of oerflowing floods, Their Crowne that fight, their pryze most rare That run; earths peace, heauens joy: hells feare; A saving 1. Cor. 10 4.Rocke to thine, a 1. Cor. 12.3. snare to such as sinne secludes. 8 u 2.32Israels glory, luc. 10. Gentiles light, Summe of the fathers wisht-for sight, Of Paradise, the deare delight. Eternall Tree of life. gen. 2 9.On source which watering day and night In foure cleare streames divided right Preserues, from yeares, from dayes despight, but arte, or gardners knife.
9 The Rom. 10.4. Lawes, the Act. 10.43. Prophets scope, who she Thy face, when Thou the 2. Cor. 3.14. vaile withdrew Of Types; of Col. 2.17. Shads the body true; Io. 1.36 Lambe, Heb. 13 10. Altar, Heb. 2.17. Priest at ones; Rev. 13 8.Lambe kild before the Worlds first view; Altar, which sinne inherent slew, Priest, who in man did grace renew mounting alone Heb. 9 24 heauens Thrones▪ 10 J sing my Heb. 9.15. Mediators praise, Whose hand o're all the scepter swayes, Who Col. 1.20 Angels fall did stint, yet stayes, 1 Cor. 1.30.man falne, did raise againe. Who filde the breach, by wondrous wayes, Of Heauens proud Apostats, hells preyes, Earthlings adornde with Angells rayes 'mong'st the immortall traine: 11 But say (sweet Iesu) what procurde Thee, in a Phil. 2.7. servants shape immurde, To pittie man in sinne obdurde Gods rebell to beefriend? To pleade for him who thee abjurde, Suffring thy Godhead lurke obscurde, Last, on the Phil. 2, 8. Tree (O Tears) indurde, an ignominious end?
12 Tim. 1 15.Else perisht had the World for aye, Col. 1 20.No other Meanes Gods wrath could lay, Rom. 6.4.None else, could, (working deaths decay,) Mans Image fist, infuse; Gal. 3.13.None else, Laws paine severe could pay; Heauens wal's to scale no other way, To vernish fresh graues rotten prey, Means, Thou alone couldst vse. 13 ithout Thee Lord, Rom. 8.11. supremely blest; Whom highest honour doth invest,Phil. 2.9.10, 11. For Man with paines extremly prest, by spoyles of conquer'd HellEsay 53 7.10. eavens glorious courts had neere encrest: or should our fleshes loade, to rest boue the Spheares, its selfe addrest 'mid'st heauens blest hosts to dwell. 14 ence, sprang Mans ease exyling toyle s hopelesse groanes, which, so did boyle y breast, that Thou pourd'st in the Oyle of Mercie, in his wounds. is Plaints procur'd thy soules turmoyleEsay 5 at Thou his lt distake, to foyle ne, Death and Hell O Glorious spoyle! hich, reasons ray confounds.
15 Our guilts soule shame, sname did deface, Empurpring thy vnstained face: Thy clouds, thy care, our light, our peace, our Victorie thy liftes, Thy hels, in heauen procurde vs place, Our honour grew by thy disgrace, O Wisedome, if not found by grace, Mans wit involves in mists. 16 O sauing Knowledge, which of right 1. Cor. 1.21.The deepest Polititans sight O'resyles, drownde in eternall night, Jn clowdes of self-conceate! O contrares, which by nature fight Thus reconcil'de, mix'd by thy might, Things weightie ballancing with light, O change! O wonders great! 17 Thy dumpes, our dooefull hearts did c Our teare-blind sights, thy teares did cle Thy deepe afflictions calmde our feare, Thy bands vs fred from paine. 2 Cor. 8.9.Thy wants our wealth procur'de; we Roabs, by thy rags: grieves, thou didst Our greifes, our languishings, en-deare thy blood, did ours restraine.
18 luc.  44That crimson sweat, these drops which drownd Thy blessed face, with rayes ours crownde, Rev.  5.Sins leprous spots, which soules confound, from Parents seede they purgde. Thou, shak'd by deaths approaching wound, 'gainst death mad'st vs secure be found, Thou of our innocence the ground, for vs, with guilt was vrgde, 19 Ma 27.46And when thou seemde some space to bee, Depriv'de from heauen of all supplie, Yet banisht Man, still deare to Thee Thou neuer didst forsake. Mans state was still before thine Eye Till entring Hell, Thou sett him free, O deut. 23.Crosse once curst, now happie Tree, Source, whence all good wee take. 20 When Thou thy selfe triumphde o're sho's Nailde to the Crosse, exposde to blo's, Chargde by thy proud insulting foes with infamie, with shame. Torne, naked, pale, a mappe of woes, Whilst floods of wrath thou vndergoes, Thy syde trans-fixde, from which forth flo'es a Ioh. 19 34.double gushing streame,
21 luk. 23.46Thy soule commending to thy Syre, While twixt two luk. 23.39. Theeues, Thou didst expire Col. 2.15.Loe, then enlarging thine Jmpire Thy foes Thou Captiues led, Triumphing on the Tree, hells ire, hos. 13.14.Deaths sting, Earths Kings that did conspire Bound, hand and foote, thy wraths hote fyre their shame, before Thee bred. 22 Thou ledst (great Victor) foylde in fight Those heb. 2.14. bands, in darknesse that delight Roots of mans ruine, foes to right, Rom. 8.2.Sin, bound Thou didst detaine; To Heauens high courtes, a glorious sight, Gods Rebells vanquishde by thy might, Condemnde in chains of horride night for euer to remaine. 23 Loe, heere, deaths 1 Cor. 15.26. double-poynted sting, 1 Cor 15.56.Laws hand writ there traverst, (deaths spring) Trode vnderfoote, in triumph bring Thou didst, Col. 2.14. nail'd to thy crosse. Thee, swallowing vp (death conqu'ring King) 1. Cor. 15.55.Death to it selfe, the graue did bring: On rav'ning Wole, preyde ravishde thing, Victorious by losse.
24 By death insulting, held as dead, Deaths death Thou was, and deaths remeed. O Thou who dost Gods secreets spread,Iohn. 1.18. Author, revealer wise, Heauens pure delight, the womans seede, Who gen. 3.15. treading downe the Serpents head, To wretched Man, didst pittie plead, Way, leading to the Skyes, 25 Oh, what had beene our fearefull fate, Deare soules Redeemer? what our state? Of ire, what hudge inunding spaite had quenchde our of-spring weake? Without thee Lord? hells preys of late, Col. 1.1.Who mongst thy saints didst vs relate, And mounting heauens with glorie great, deathes brazen barres didst breake. 26 Who saues vs in the day of ire, When all shall bee refinde with fire Who with thy Sp'rit dost vs inspire, Co 5.5.Arls of eternall Life. Thy SP'RIT of peace, our pledge, our hyre, Who,1. Eph. 13 14. all vnites of thy empire To Thee, our Head, our soules desire, for ever shunning strife.
27 His seuen-fold grace doth vs defend From snares, the World, the flesh, forth send, From Fiends infernall, which doe bend theirs pow'rs 'gainst Thine, by night, Which flie like psal. 91 5.6. pestes by day, in end On winges, with faith and hope empen'd, Heauens starrie circuits, wee transcend by vertue of his might. 28 Hee, who eternallie foorth came With Father, and with Sonne, the Same Third 1. Ioh. 5 8. branch, joynd with that twofold stream, Rom. 8.16. witnesse on earth to beare, By him confirmde, wee Eph. 2.18. accesse claime, To Gods hie Throne: with feare and shame Brought low; by him wee doe proclaime, Rom. 8.15.Abba, O Father deare. 29 Rom. 8.36.He sending vp a secreet grone, Doth penetrat Gods eares anone, No wordes, no cryes can reach his Throne, nor speedier pierce the skies, He doth vnsyle the eyes alone Of soules sincere, to them is showne The lawes hid sense Hee doth enthrone the lowe; the proud despise,
30 Soules languishing his grace revives, To wandring steps hee regresse gives; The falne liftes vp, deathes throe's releiues, by warme light of his flame. The hardest heart of flint hee reaves, For iubjects, Rebells home receiues; Subdues the stubburne, that believes, no hardnesse breedes him shame. 31 Ev'n as perfumes, which most excell, Worke on weake sents, and doe dispell All former loathings: So befell Thy Saints, the Virgines deare: Cant. 1.2.3. How soone thy Names sweet fragrant smell Was powred foorth, all prostrate fell, Who gainst Thee did before rebell, Thy yoke now gladly beare. 32 O let this dewy showre descend, Of thy sweet Oyle, that We in end That Rocke of safetie may ascend, admitting no retreat. Conduct vs who on thee depend, (Col. 3.4.Life-giuing essence) vs defend, Who here our days in dangers spend which vs each moment meete.
33 Lead vs, poore Pilgrims, vnexpert, Our Compasse, Pilote, Pole, who art, Through this inhospitall desert, this vaile of bitter teares, Where perill lurkes in euerie part, Where Asps their poys'nous stings forth dart, Whose plaines, no pleasures else impart but scrotching drought, and feares. 34 Esay. 55 1. Lead vs, those rivers to frequent Where milke and honey yeelds content. O! euer blesse, with good event, the wrestlings of thine owne Till, comming in the firmament Unlookt for, by earths trembling tent, When times last Rev 10.6. Period shall bee spent, Thy glory thou make knowne. 35 That Day shall rest, Reu 6.14 Heauens rolling spheares, Earthes refluous tumults, deathes pale feares, Reu 23.5.O day, which neuer night outweares, Night, by no day displac't! Then, to the source floods course reteires, Time lurking then, no more appears, Hid in the vast abysse of yeares, from whence, it first did haste.
36 Rev: 21.4O day, which doth all blesse impart To all, who vpright are in heart; Rev: 21.8.O day of horrour, full of smart, to all of sprite impure! Reu: 21.4.Day, which shall sobs of saints convert In songes of Joy: Day which shall dart, Wrath on the wretcht, who then shall start wak'd from their sleepe secure. 37 Mat. 1 34.31.That Trumpets terrifying sound That day, their ears, their souls, shall wound In sine deepe Lethargie, long drownde, to heare a fearefull doome, Whose noise, whose murmurings profound Shall call, what e're earths limits bound Or who in floods,Rev: 20 13 o'rewhelmde are found hid in the Oceans wombe. 38 Who cheardare with the Worlds bright Eye, nvest'd yet with mortalitie,Thess. 4 16.17. Or whose dead ashes scattered flie, dispersde through earth or aire, his dayes sharpe tryall all must see, sentered once lifes miserie, ea, babes, which scarce yet breathing bee, must at this found appeare
39 2. Thes. .8.When flammes shall furiously confound (Lightning thy glorious Throne around) What e're shall bee their object found, in this inferiour Frame. Shaking the World, ev'n to the ground, Razde from its center, laid profound, Dissolving what earths fabricke crownde with greatest Arte, or fame. 40 Mark. 13 24.The Suns cleare beames, clouds shall enfold, Rev: 6 13Starres losse their light (earths pride controld) What Earthlings did most pretious hold 2 Pet. 3.10.records of wit, of strength, 2. Pet. 3 10.Shall with this mouuments rare mold, More quicklie melt than can bee told, All this great All shall, (as of old) a Chaos turne at length, 41 Esay. 19 20.Then when the screiches, and frightfull cryes Of such Gods wrath as vnderlyes, Encrease the noise of rushing skies, of earthes disjoynted frame, Mat. 25 22.Hee makes divorce, that's only wise, The damned goates hee doth despise Poynts out his lambes, Rev. 7 14.whose sinfull dyes hee pugde with bloody streame.
42 Rev: 7 9.When blessed soules shall fred of feare Thy Throne encircling, Thee draw neare, As dayes comforting Beame, the spheare the Orbe of purest heauen. Rev: 11.12The clouds transcending, Rev: 14.14shining cleare, Thy footsteps streatched foorth to beare, Those trembling bands shall streight reteare downe to the Center driven. 43 Trembling to heare the thundring noise, Of thy three-forked fearefull voyce, Which streight their soules, with sad annoyes with terrours strange shall pierce. Mat. 2.41.Hence, hence yee cursed, hells convoyes, Who of this Portion earst made choyse, In chaines of darknesse, end your Joyes, amidst hells furyes fierce. 44 Goe curst for aye, exyde from light, From hope, from Rev: 14 1. rest, from all delight, Where wormes ne're dying, wrath and spight Matt. 25.20gnashing of teeth, and teares. then, what horrour, what affright, hall on those hopelesse prisners light, ebarrde eternally his fight, who on the throne appeares,
To the right Vertuous and WORSHIPFULL, THE MUSES Deare Minion, St. W. MVRE, Knight. Author. Epigram. WHen thy sweet Sophoclean straines I read, Motions of Love, and Admiration breed Within my breast; for thy soule-charming Songes (To whom the Laurell as thy due belongs) Haue rais'de in Mee hotte flammes of kinde Desire That I must love Thee still, and still admire, Thy glorious choyse, and with deserved praise Stirre vp thy Muse, a higher flight to raise, Well dost Thou now disclaime that Dwarfling fond, And builds thy Thoughts vpon a divine ground. Walter Forbes
DOOMES-DAY Containing, HELLS horrour, and HEAVENS happinesse. By Sr WILLIAM MVRE yo: of Rowallane Knight 1 BUT now, my Sprite refresht a space, Forbearing pressed steppes to trace Aspires aboue the vulgare prease, to raise a second flight. I feele my bosome peece and peece Warmde with vnusuall flammes: Giue place Eare-charming fancies, Artes disgrace, affoording false delight. 2 Thoughts, which aboue the spheares inclyne, Wings, furnish to my weake engine, If Thou, O Lord, the 2. Sam. .3.Horne of Thine in mee, this Rapture wrought Bee present by thy power divine, Grant in my lines thy might may shyne, From drosse of sinne, my spr'ite refine, raise from the earth my thought.
3 But why thus pants thou in my breast Affrighted soule, deprivde of rest? What sudden feares thy joyes molest, what jarres disturbe thy peace? Why tremblest thou, with terrours prest, To heare that fearefull doome exprest By that great Judge, who euer blest is just, as full of grace. 4 Heere pause a space, (My Soule) acquent Thy selfe this judgement to prevent: No moment of our time is spent, which thither doth not lead. The dangers seene, which doe torment Thy troubled minde with discontent gainst them, let fervent sutes bee sent Jmmunitie to plead. 5 Haste, haste my Soule, shake off delay, Which too much of thy time makes prey Lay vp provision for that Day, there boldlie to arriue. Where Reprobats, accurst for aye, Shall wish in vaine their lifes decay, That earth would to their soules make, way them swallowing vp aliue.
6 Oh! what encounter sad shall bee Twixt soules, from darknesse chaines set free, And bodies, mates in miserie calde foorth, to bee combynd, Not for reciprocall supplie As friends new joynde in amitie, But neuer dying, aye to die, in quenchlesse flammes confynde. 7 Deaths loathsome den, detested Jayle, Scout, following sin with stretched sayle, Which fleeting froaths, which pleasures fraile, On Rocke of shipwrack led. Maske of mischiefe, sins slender vaile, Good Motions euer bent to quaile, Which in the birth thou didst assaile Them burying as they bred. 8 Wretch, who to pamper dust, didst doate, Whom Hell attends with open throate, Readie to retribute the lote to thy deservings due. Oh! what hath violate deaths knot, That still in graue thou didst not rot, Masse overspred with sins foule spot, raisde, anguish to renue?
9 Thus (too too late) the Soule shall rayle; Re-entring this abhorred Iayle, Which recombynd, while both bevaile Lifes misgoverned raines, Then Angels shall to Judgement haile. There, whence no party can appeale, To heare deathes sentence countervaile, Lyfes Ioyes, with endlesse paines. 10 O wretch, who Judgement heere delayes, Whom false securitie betrayes, Who ne're thy Sins blacke summe surveyes which future anguish breedes. Then, shall the Auncient of dayes Who all mens works in ballance layes, Examine all thy wordes, thy wayes, thy thoughts, thy foule misdeedes. 11 None shall this search euere eschew, From bookes laide open to his view, A summar processe shall ensew, conforme to thy trespasse. Thy sins all summond, Thee which slew, Approving thy damnation due, When all the blest coelestiall crew, shall on thee, verict passe.
12 Thou, who to lewdnesse now art prone, What shame, what smart, (lifs pleasures gone) Shall on thee feaze, when gazde vpon By eath, by angrie heauen? When naked, comfortlesse, alone Thou trembling stands before the Throne, Under Gods wrath, guilts loade dost grone, feares, with thy faults made eaven. 13 When thy tormenting conscience torne, Thou guiltie stands that Iudge beforne Whose Image did thy soule adorne, who did infuse thy breath. Who pittying thee to sin forlorne, Left heauens, was of an earthling borne, Liu'de loth'd, dyde with contempt and corne emptyed the Cup of wrath. 14 Witnesse, earth trembling at his paines, Dayes beame, which all in clouds detaines, The silver Moone, which pale remaines, for horrour of the sight. Witnesse his hands, with bleeding veines, Of this great All which holds the raines, His side pierc't through to purge thy staines, polluted sinfull wight.
15 Where shall thou then safe shelter finde Soule, than the sightlesse Mole more blinde, When with those straits extreame confynd faint, pale, confusde thou stands? By doome, which cannot bee declinde, Adjudgde for euer to bee pinde, Where day nere dawnde, Sunne neuer shinde mongst the infernall bands. 16 Where teares no truce, playnts find no plac On either hand in desp'rate cace, Behinde thee, who thy pathes did trace, attend thy woefull lote, Before thee flamms, Earths frame deface Aboue, an angrie Judges face, Below, Thee gaping to embrace, Hells sulphure-smoking throat. 17 Thy feares, shall bee with cryes encrest Of damned Soules, with anguish prest With greife, with horrour vnexprest, of due deserved ire. The fyre-brands of a conscious brest, Shall of thy terrours not bee least, While worms, which on thy conscience feas thy easlesse paine conspire.
18 But when (most like a thunder dart) That separating doome, Mat. 25.41. Depart, Pronounc'd, shall pierce thy panting heart, with a most fearefull knell. Which shall thee from Gods presence part, Exposde to torments, that impart Nor end of time, nor ease of smart, while headlongs hurld in hell. 19 Their shalt thou dive in depthes profound, Still sinke but never meete a ground, In waves still wrestling to bee drownd, deluded still by death; Crying, where comfort none is found, Pynde, where no pittie rage doth bound, Thy Cup, with floods of vengeance crownde of the Almighties wrath. 20 Bathde in a bottomlesse abisse, Paine still encressing, ne're remisse, Where Scorpions sting, where serpents hisse, wormes, neuer satiate, gnaw. Rackt, thinking what thou was, now is, Deprivde for aye from hope of blisse, For toyes, eternall joy didst misse, nor crub't by love, nor aw.
21 No Torment doth it selfe extend Heere,Paine of sense. all the members to offend, Which vniversall griefe doth send, doth every part entrinch: There paines, which reasons reach transcend On soule and body both descend, No joynt, nerve, muscle, without end but sev'rall plagues doe pinch. 22 Lascivious Eye, with objects light Which earst did entertaine thy sight, Weepe, there exylde in endlesse night lockt vp in horride shads. Nyce Eare, whose Organ earst did spight, All sounds, whence flowde no fals delight There, horrour ever and affright thy curious sense vpbraids. 23 Smell, earst with rare pefumes acquent, Still interchangde to please thy sent, For incense, sulphure (there) doth vent, smoake for thy odoures sweet. Taste, vnto which to breed content, Robt were the Earth, Sea, Firmament, Mongst soules, which penurie torment There, famine Thee doth meete.
24 Vile wormeling, Thou whose tender pride, The weakest Sunshine, scarce couldst byde, There, plungde in this impetuous tyde, must feele the force of fire. Where damned soules on every syde, Howling and roaring still abyde, Which finde no shelter them to hyde from this eternall ire. 25 There, the Ambitious, who in skies Did (late) on wax-joynde winges arise, Of base contempt is made the pryse, the Proudling pestred downe. There Dives, who did earst despise Of famisht soules, the piercing cries, Shall one cold drop of water pryse aboue a Monarches crowne. 26 Loe, there the vile licentious Goate Whom lawlesse lust did arst besotte, Enchainde in the embracements hotte of furious raging flames. There, to the drunkards parched throate, Justice, doth scrotching drought allote In floods of fire, which judgde to floate still vaine refreshment claimes.
27 On Covetous, on cruell wight, Shall equall weight of vengeance light, With byting vsurie, with spight, the poore ones who did presse. So to the remnant that did fight, 'gainst heauens decrees, their conscience light, Gods wrath shall bee proportionde right, by measure, more or lesse. 28 Soule, which vnpittied ever playnes, Heere, suffring for thy sins soule staynes Flammes, lashing whips, rackes, fyrie chaynes tormenting outward sense. Of all most terrible remaines, Losse of Gods face,Paine of losse. while thou sustains. O hell of hell! O paine of paines! still to bee banisht thence. 29 But when thou hast as many yeares Those tortures felt, as shyne in sphears Lights, fixt and straying, eyes haue teares or waves the azure Plaine, No nearer are their end those feares, Ever beginning, which thou beares, No change abates, no date outweares, thy euer pinching paine.
30 O dying life! O living death; O stinging fyre, blowne by Gods breath; O boyling lake, no ground which hath, destroying nought it burnes! O overflowing flood of wrath, Which damned soules are drencht beneath, O pit profound, O woefull path; whence, Entrer ne're returnes. 31 Sweet Rom. 5.10. Reconciler, Prince of peace, Who pittying Mans most wretched cace, Didst hellish agonies embrace in soule, in bodie shame, Let mee in those extreames finde grace, Illightned by thy glorious face, Rankt mongst thy Saints, the elect race whose wayes thou didst proclaime. 32 O! let me safe protection plead Unto my soule, which full of dread, Hanges ouer Hell, by lifes fraile threed conservde but by thy might, That when, heauens, whence it did proceed, Its separation have decreed, With gen. 8.8. Noahs Doue, Thou mayst it lead there whence it first tooke flight.
33 Oh, how it longes, on winges to rise, (Secure from sins contagious dyes) Endenizde citizen of skies with Thee, for aye to rest. Oh, how it doth the Jayle despise, In fleshes fetters, it whch tyes, And lets it, to enjoy the pryse, with which thy Saints are blest. 34 For Thee I thirst, O living spring, Pure source of life, who guides faiths wing, By flight, to reach the hyest thing, to compasse things most hard. When shalt Thou mee from danger bring To Port of peace, my God, my King, Blest giver, and the gifted thing? rewarder, and reward? 35 When shall J from exile set free My native home, my country see? When one immortall Pineons flie, that holy Citie reach? Whose streetes pure gold, gold buildings bee Apoc. 19 Walls, stones most precious beautifie, Ports solide Pearles, Guests neuer die, whose peace, no paines empeach.
36 Eternall spring, (shrill Winter gone,) This Climate constant makes alone, Nor flamming heate, nor frozen Zone distemper heere doe breed. From Lambes sweet breath, on glories throne Enstalde, are balmie odours throwne, Time hath no turnes, heere change is none, no seasons doe succeed. 37 Pale envy, emulation, spight, Nor death, nor danger heere affright, Heere hopes nor feares, nor false delight, in sublunarie toyes.Apoc. 21.23. No Lampe dartes foorth alternat light The Lambes sweet face here shines ay bright, Which of the Saints doth blesse the sight who doe in him rejoyse. 38 Heere simple beautie scorneth Arte, Rose-cheeked youth, old ages dart, Joyes perpetuitie impart, no warre disturbs this peace. O this Gods Palace royall arte Preparde in these,1. Pet. 1.20. with all desart For all that vpright are in heart, ere light did paynt heavens face.
39 Thou, by whose pow're the spheares are rol Earths hanging Orbe, who dost vphold, Great Architect, King vncontrold, Lord of this Universe, Estalde heere on a Throne of gold, Dost diamantine scepter hold, Givest Lawes to earth, hence dost behold how wights below converse. 40 If heere, such eye-enchaunting sights, Amazing beauties, choise delights, This Mansion low, of dying wights Earths brittle Orbe adorne, What wonders then, what glorious lights, Must beautifie those reachlesse hights, Thy blest aboade, which dayes, which nig vicissitude doth scorne? 41 If these such admiration breed, What Thou, who didst heauens Curtain sprea Earth stayde midst aire, that it doth neede its weight nought to sustaine. Who full of Majestie and dread, Of intellectuall pow'rs dost plead Attendance, on thy face which feede, O ever blessed traine!
42 Archangels, Angels, clothde with might, Thrones, Cherubs, Seraphins of light, Princes and Powers all shining bright, Dominions, vertues pure. With beames that sparkle from the sight, nflamde, which flie no other flight But satiat rest, rapt with delight, which doth for aye endure. 43 O sweet societie! how blest They, who these orders haue encreast, From labour free, in peace who rest surpassing humane sense? Where blesse, where glory doth invest Apostles, Martyres, and the rest Of holy Saints, with tortures prest, to death, in Trueths defence. 44 The Patriarchs, Prophets, Lights divine, (Cleare starres on earth) bright suns here shine Heere all the elect hoast, deathes line which yet haue ouerpast. Incorp'rat to their Head, incline One way, Joyes common all combine, This band no discord can vntwine, loue doth eternall last.
45 1. Cor. 4.6.Of glorie 'mongst these bands elect, Degrees there are, but no defect, Dan. 1.3.Full vessells all, none can expect more, than the lest containes. Mans heart no pleasure can project, But greater doth from hence reflect, One cause, in all workes one effect, of measure none complaines. 49 O Joyes! my drossie sprite, which wing Upwards, aboue the spheares to spring, (Times Father) where thy praises ring, which Saints, which Angels raise: Apoc. 9..Where all around Thee in a ring Heau'ns hoasts, high Allelujahs sing, O heavenly consort! Blessed King, blest people, Thee who praise. 47 No woefull earth-confined wight, With Owlish eyes can view this light: The weake horizon of Mans sight, farre, farre which doth outreach, This vnexpressible delight, Doth reasons dazelde eye benight, What J cannot conceiue aright, Lord, let experience teach.
48 Giue mee, that in some measure small (While fleshes bands my sprite enthrall) may, a farre, a glance let fall, at these contentments poynt, These termlesse Joyes which (one day) shall In honny, turne Saints bitter gall, From guilt, when flamms shall purge this Ball this Engine hudge disjoynt, 49 When the Arch-angels voice shall raise The graues pale guests,1 Cor. 15 50. the World amaze, Around all burning in a blaze,1. Thes. 4 16. suffring for mans offence. What Joyes, then, sleeping Saints shall seaze How much this long-longde sight them please This sight, deaths fetters which shall ease, all passed cares, compense? 50 O what a happie houre! how deare, How glorious shall this day appeare To thee my Soule, when fred from feare, grimme death, thou darst outface? When (thy redemption drawing neare) Lifes toyles shall trophees to Thee reare,luke. 21.28. Which cankring Tyme shall ne're outweare, nor foes despight deace.
51 Though tyrants, haue by doome vnjust In furious flammes thy carcasse thrust, Not digning It, to earth to trust with honour of a graue, No Atome of thy scattered dust, But see this solemne Meeting must, Purgde from corruption, from rust of sinne did It depraue. 52 Thy shape renewde, more glorious made Than when it entred deathes darke shade, Raisde by his viuifying aide, Deaths powres who did controule. With flesh adornde, which ne're shall fade, Nor rotte in earthes cold bosome laide, But liue for aye the Mansion glade, of a Triumphing soule. 53 No beautie, nature brought'to light Did ravish most amazed sight, Which, as farre short, from day as night, from This, shall not bee found, Which shall adorne each new-borne wigh Co-partner of this hid delight, The lame shall leape, proportionde right, say 35 6.the dumb, Gods praises sound.
54 Caught vp,1 Thes. 4 17. 1. Cor. 6.. when on immortall wings To aire, this stage which ouerhings, To meete thy Head, the Saints who brings, to judge the damned traine. (Saints, earst accounted abject things, Objects of scorne, weake vnderlings, On thrones enstalde, now sceptred Kings Eternally who reigne)Apoc. 10, 55 What bands enclustred thee around, Shall make the Heauens with hymnes rebound, That Thou a straggling sheepe art found, their numbers to encrease?Luk. 15.7. f they did such applauses sound At thy conversion, how profound Shall be their Ioyes, to see thee crownd, with them to acquiesse? 56 As pansiue Pilgrime, sore distrest, Wearie and weake, with famine prest, Whom feare of Robbers doth infest, straying alone, in need. If Hee, while dreaming least of rest, Should in an instant, bee addrest, Where, hee might live, for ever blest, how should his Joyes exceed?
57 Even so my soule (now on the way) Too easily seduc't astray, When Thou shalt find this solide stay, this Center of repose. How shall the pleasures of this day, Adorning Thee, with rich array, Thy suffred labours all allay, afflictions all compose. 58 What boundlesse Ocean of delight Shall quench all paines, all passed plight, Endured wrongs, digested spight, of tyrannizing pride? Mat. 14 31.By Angels, Messengers of light, When brought in thy Redeemers sight, Set free, from deathes eternall night adjudg't, in blesse to byde. 59 Mat. 25.34.35.36.When large Memorials shall record The meanest good, thou didst afforde, To poore, to sicke: when deed, nor word shall want the owne rewarde: 1 Ioh. .1The Judge, thy Advocate, thy Lord: Who now absolves, Thee, first restorde: O bond! O double-twisted cord! O vndeservde regard.
60 But O! when Thou casts backe thine eyes, Thy voyage dangerous espyes Foes ambushments, laide to surprise, thy wayes when thou dost vieu, The traines set foorth Thee to entise, Base pleasures, which Thou didst despise, What boundlesse joyes shall thence arise? what Solace sweet ensue? 61 What strange applauses thence shall spring? When Saints doe shout, when Angels sing? When Heauens hie vaults, loud Eccho's ring, of that Absolving voyce?Mat. 25 34. Come Yee, whose faith did vpwards spring Contempt who on the World did fling, Blest of that great Sky-ruling King. Enter in endlesse Ioyes. 62 O Joyes, with these as farre vn-even To Man which to conceiue are given, As loftiest of the Planets seven earths Center doth transcend.Gen. 3 24. (By wit, who prease to pry in heauen, Backe by a Cherubin is driven) Mans Reason is a vssell riven, can litle comprehend.
63 O Joyes, as much bedazling sight, As day's bright Beam, the weakest light, Aboue small Gnats, as Eagles flight amidst the clouds ensphearde, Ioyes, as farre passing all delight, Yet euer heard by humane wight, As ghastly screiches of Owles, which fright, with Larks sweet laves comparde. 64 These boundlesse Joyes,1 Cor. 13 12. this endlese peace, In this, claims principally place, To see God clearely, face to face, Him,1. Ioh. 3.2. as Hee is, to view. (Not heere, as doth fraile Adams race, Who through a glasse this sight embrace, And steps of things created trace, to reach these pleasures trew.) 65 With Judgement pure, to know, as knowne, These Persons three, in essence One, God varying in names alone, Father, Sonne, holy Ghost. To know, why Man to lewdnesse prone (Angels o'repast) God did repone, In state of grace, why mercy showne To Some, while damnde are Most.
66 Which Joyes, on all the Saints elect, On soules and bodies both reflect, By ravishing the Intellect, the Memory and will. Which all the Senses doe affect With pleasures farre aboue defect, Who can the rich contents detect, those blessed Bands which fill? 67 How more perspectiue, pure and free, (Sequestred from mortalitie) The Understanding facultie, how prompter it perceiues: How more sublime the Object bee, The Union inward, and more nie: Joyes, of a more supreme degrie, the Intellect conceaues. 68 Here charg'd with chains of flesh and bloode, Wee apprehend by Organs roode, The drossie mindes of Earths weake broode, imaginde knowledge swells: There, bathing in a boundlesse floode Of blesse, we shall, (as sprites which stoode) Know, (vnpust vp) our Soueraigne good▪ In him, all creatures els.
69 What object can, in greatnesse, hight, In glorie, majestie, in might, This paralell, whence all delight, all pleasure, only springs? With rayes of vncreared light Which cherish, not offend the sight, Who shines most blest, for ever bright, eternall King of Kings. 70 What Union, can so strict bee found, So firme, successionlesse, profound, Mans deepest speculation, drownd is in this vast abisse. This gulfe, this Ocean without ground, The ravisht minde doth wholly bound, Jt drencht heerein, with glorie crownd bathes in a Sea of blesse. 71 If charming sounds, ensnaring sights, In mindes of wonder-strucken wights Doe moue, such violent delights as passe the bounds of speach, The Joyes then midst these reachlesse hights, Ay bright with euer-burning lights, Must farre transcend the loftiest flights, wits most profound can reach.
72 The fluide Joyes, which here entise, From things corruptible arise, No Union, but externall, ties the sense and object fraile: How should wee then these pleasures prise, Which ever laste aboue the skies? This Union strict, all change defies, this bonde can neuer faile. 73 What superexellent degrees Of Ioy, the Jntellect shall seaze? When Jt, with cleare, vnsyled eyes the speces, natures, strength, Of beastes, of birds, of stones, of trees, Of hearbes, the hid proprieties, Th'essentiall differences sees of Creatures all at length? 74 Of Ioy, what ouerflowing spaite, Inunding this Theater great, Drench with delight shall euery state here marshalled above? Till now, euen from the Worlds first date, When Saints secure from sins deceate, Their Palmes,2 Tim. 4 8. their Crownes receiue, who late earths vtmost spight did prove.
75 Nor shall the knowledge of the paine, The torments which the damn'd sustain, The cryms which earst their soules did staine, impare these joyes divine: These blacke Characters show most plaine Gods justice, their deserved bane, The brightnesse of the blessed traine oppode, more cleare doth shine. 76 Their Vengeance, shall the Just rejoyse, (Heavens blesse comparde with hels annoyes) As earst by regal Prophets voice, divinely was fore-told. Saintes should incompassed with Joys,Psalm. 58.10. Bathe in their blood, whom death destroyes Happie, who so his life employes, mongst Saints to bee enrold. 77 Heere oft (with wonder rapt) wee find, The punishment with vertuous minde, The fault with the reward combinde, at which the lust repines. There, fault with punishment confinde Rewarde, to vertuously inclinde, Eternall justice vndeclinde, impartially assignes.
78 As these, and more joyes vnexprest, The Understanding doe invest, As in the Center of its rest, So heere, the will doth pause In peace, which cannot bee encrest, Not wrestling passions to digest; O calme tranquillitie! how blest They, whom this loadstone drawes. 79 Hence spring, such ardent flammes of loue To God, to all the Saints aboue, That not one ioy, these hoasts do proue which It, doe not delight, Hence, It, no fewer joyes doe moue, Then God, Co-partners doth approue, Joyes infinite, which ne're remoue nor weakned are by slight. 80 As soules, which horride shads enchaine, This, doe not feele their meanest paine, With mates most hated to remaine for aye, by just decreite: How happie then, this glorious traine, With these, eternally to raigne, Who mutuall love, doe entertaine, Insep'rablie vnite?
81 From thence a quiet calme Content A sympathyzing sweet concent, Satietie which vnacquent with loathing, doth arise. Man heere in earths ignoble tent, Desires vnbounded still torment, The more hee hath the more is bent things fading to comprise. 82 O soule, which life doth heere expose To inward feares, to outward foes, Deluded by deceaving show's with shads of seeming blesse, When with content, thy Cup oreflows When hopes nor vast desires thou knowes, How deare shall bee this sweet repose which aye beginning is? 83 O Peace! on which all hap depends, Mans vnderstanding, which transcends To Thee alone, our labour tends, our Pilgrimage aspires. Happie, in Thee, his life who spends, In Joy, in peace, which never ends, To present toyles, which solace sends encentring our desiros.
84 By perfect Iustice, what excesse Of Joy shall to the will accresse? Out-shining Adams righteousnesse in innocent estate? (But O! this Joy, who can expresse? Not tongues of Angels, Mans much lesse, O ravisht Soule, heere acquiesse, drencht in this Ocean great) 85 His Reason, Adams sense, and will Did serve, this God: but changeable Was this submission, now, but still All doe themselves subject To God: by bonde most durable, Fearing no fall, secure from ill, Rendring the soule most am'able to God, selfe, Saints elect, 86 O soule dejected, plungde in feare, Which stinging thoughts, minds horrors teare Thy wounded sprite, who canst not beare, with inward terrours torne. O how invaluable! how deare, Would this integritie sincere To Thee (in conscience rackt) appeare, which doth the saints adorne?
87 This innocence which doth exclude All spots, polluting, earths fraile broode, Pure, vndistainde, perfectly good, free from least sinfull thought: Saintes aye refreshing with that food Of Gods wingde messengers, which stood Confirmde in grace by purple floode, which Mans redemption wrought, 88 Nor shall lesse measure of content To Memory of Saints present How lifes small period heere was spent, encompassed with cares. From warres most pittifull event If settled, sweetest peace is spent, The soule, which earst did most lament joyes most, now fred of teares. 89 Of passed sight, the doubtsome fate The Souldier doth with joye relate. The sea-tosde wight, in dangers great, if gone, most pleasure finds. Past miseries inunding spaite, Most sweetens Saints triumphing state, Foes spoyles, which no invasion threat, lesse ravish noble Minds,
90 From passions fred, for happiest lote, Their purest parts which did bespote, Strugling, as exhalations hote in humide clouds inclosde; From slights of dartes, the World foorth shot (Entisements, which the best besotte) While these in their remembrance floar, how much are they rejoysde? 91 Revoluing in this calmest peace, How God, by his preventing grace, Our steps restrain'de, whilst we did trace the tempting paths of death, Of monstruous Sinnes in hottest chace, How, Hee in loue did vs embrace; In this to joye, Saints ne'ere shall cease, while they in blesse doe breath. 92 The long vicissitude of yeares, Of Times, the Memory endeares, Since Worlds first Age, aboue the spheares, of blest celestiall bands. Which, while this Companie admires, Cause of these changes, cleare appeares In Prouidence large booke, which beares Records of Seas, of Lands.
93 In this great Volumne, read they shall Why Angels first, first Man did fall, Why God did This, not These recall, of his eternall grace. Why Hee did Abrams seede enstall, Peculiar most of Nations all, And why to Gentiles these made thrall, were planted in their place. 94 In these great Archives, scrold is found, Why dearest Saints are trode to ground, By Tyrants pryde, to which no bound oft is below assignde. To wit, more glorious to bee crown'd As their affections did abound Joyes may proportionall redound, as cresses them confinde. 95 Nor shall the Bodie now all bright,Mat. 12 4. The fellow souldier of the spright. Bee frustrate of these Ioyes, by right of its redemption due. Of all, the Noblest sense, the Sight Impassible, not harmde by light Aboue all measure shall delight, amazde with wonders new.
96 How shall the ravisht Eye admire, When Suns past number,Mat. 13 43. doe appeare? Darkning that sparke, our hemi-spheare, which cleeres with chearefull rayes. On all hands, Nought, when farre and neare Encounters sight, but objects cleare, Blest Empyrean bands, which weare Crowns, Palmes, immortall bayes. 97 How shall this Beautie vs amaze? How on this glorie shall wee gaze? How on our bodies, which doe blaze with brightest beames of light? Our bodies which ere death did seaze, (Death which no prayers can appease) Most loathsome burthens were to these whom most they now delight. 98 What breast can bound this joyes full spaite, To see falne Angels chayrs of state, Filde with our friends, familiars late, Love long dissolvde, renewde? To see, to know (O wonder great) Saints all, all times did heere relate Since Abels blood (a long-long date) his brothers hands imbrued.Gen. 48
99 By force of flammes, which all subdue, When broght to nought, this worlds false shew Of Heauen,P t. 3.3. of earth, the fabricke new what wonders shall afford? Things,9. Rev: 2. which before wee never knew, Charming our euer-gazing view, With pleasures endlesse, perfect, true, which tongue cannot record. 100 But none of all these objects rare, Can with thy sight, O Christ, compare, Fulnesse of Joy reflecteth there on these, at thy right hand. Jn Righteonsnesse,Psal. 17.15. thy face preclare, Who viewing, satisfied are, For which'a place, Thou didst prepare before thy Throne to stand. 101 If that great Herauld of Heau'ns King, Record of Thee, sent foorth, to bring, For Joy, did in thy presence spring, an Embrion, yet vnborne. Jf yet a babe, thy sight benigne, So Simeans soule with joy did sting, That hee his Obsequies did sing, With age and weaknesse worne.
102 If Easterne Sages spar'de o paine By Pilgrims toyles, thy sght to gaine, An infant, borne, but to bee slaine, in manger, meanlie laide; What soule then can ese joyes containe Which shall arise to se Thy raigne? The glory of thy heauenlie traine, whose pompe shll never fade. 103 But O! (Mee thinks) of heavenly layes A Confort sweet my sense betrayes, By Organs of min: Eare, allayes all mind-remoding cares. Aboue time, moion, place, which raise My ravisht thoughts, to heare his praise Proclaimde, which heauens blest hosts amaze, by Notes of Angels ayres. 104 O harmony! ranscending Arte Of which, the hopes, ease present smart: Thrise happie they who beare a part in this coelestiall Quire. O blest Musitians, most expert, Whose Ditties, all delight impart, Whose hymnes exhilarate the heart and entertaine the Eare.
105 Of Ambrosie, of Nictar streames, (Heavens dainties lid in heathnish names) An endlesse feast the Lambe proclaimes to all the Saints above. The Saints refresht nore with his beames Then wordlings withvaine pleasures dreams, O how desiderable senes to Thine, this feast of Love. 106 Jf beggars vile themselve hold grac't, At Tables of great Kings to feast, With curious cates to please their taste with choise of rarest thngs: Oh! what a heavenly sweet repast Doe Saints enjoy, which ae shall last, Who at immortall Tables plac't, feast with the King of Kings. 107 Of all these Millions which frequent This Paradise of sweet content Perfumes most rare refresh the sent, from a perpetuall spring. Comforting Oyntments odours vent, Sweetning the heauens transparnt tent, Which flow from him his blood who spent His, to this blesse to bring.
108 Which, (as in smell, taste, hearing, sight) Jn feeling als enjoy delight, The Body changde, spirituall, light, apt euery way to moue, Nimble, as thought, to reach by flight, (Unwearied) heauens supremest hight The Center low, from Zenith bright, as It, the Minde doth move. 109 By Motion swift, heere, Bodies tost, If thus endangered to bee lost, The feeling sense, affected most participats most paine: What Joyes (to view this numbrous host) The Elementar regions, crost, When both vnharm'd throgh heauens may post shall then this sense sustaine? 110 If Spasmes, if Palsies, pincing throes, Of Colick paines, invade, (healths foes) These torments, Feeling, vndergoes most sensible of griefe. Now when sequestred from those woes, Which marre lifes vnsecure repose, How shall this sense, set free, rejoyse, exult, at its reliefe?
111 But euen as one (more bold than wise) A Pilgrimage doth enterpryse, O're Atlas tops, which hid in skies▪ crownde are with Winter glasse: Hudge Mountains past, while hee espyes Jmpenetrable Rockes, arise, Forc't to retire, his course applyes by smoother pathes to passe. 112 So, while aboue the Spheares J prease, Steps, not by Nature reacht, to trace, The clowds to climbe with halting pace lets infinite impeach. Those reachlesse Ioyes, this boundlesse peace Jn number, measure, weight, encrease: That scarce begunne, my Song must cease, these hights transcend my reach.
Fancies Farewell. SON 1. TOo long my Muse (ah) thou too long didst toile, An Aethiopian striving to make white: ost seede on surrowes of a fruitlesse foile, Which doth thy trauells, but with Tares acquite. ence-foorth fare-well, all counterfeit delyte, linde Dwarfling, J disclaime thy deitie, y Pen, thy Trophees never more shall write: Nor after shall thine arts enveigle mee. With sacred straines, reaching a higher key, My Thoughts aboue thy fictions farre aspire: Mounted on wings of immortalitie, feele my brest warmde with a wountlesse fire. My Muse a strange Enthusiasme inspires, And peece and peece thy flamme, in smoake expires. SON. 2. HOures mis-employ'd, evanisht as a dreame, My lapse from vertue, and recourse to Ill, I should, I would, J dare not say, I will By due repentance and remorse redeeme. Loves false delight, and beauties blazing beame Too long benighted haue my dazled Eyes, By youth mis-led, I too too much did prise Deceaving shads, toyes worthy no esteame. Plungde in the tyde of that impetuous streame, Where fynest wits haue frequent naufrage made, O heavenly Pilote, I implore thine aide, Rescue my soule, in danger most extreame: Conduct mee to thy Mercyes Port, J pray, Save Lord, Oh, let mee not bee cast away.
SONNET 3. LOoke home, my Soule, deferre not to repent, Time ever runnes: in floath, great dangers ly: Impostumde soares the patient most torment, While wounds are greene, the salve with speed apply Workes once adjourn'd, good successe seldome try, Delay's attended still with discontent: Thrise happie hee, takes time ere time slyde by And doth by fore-sight after-wit prevent. Looke on thy labours: timouslie lament, Trees are hewde down vnwholsome fruits bring foorth Thy younger yeares, youthes sweet Aprile mispent Strive to redeeme, with works of greater worth. Looke home J say, make haste: O shunne delay, Hoyse sayle, while tyde doth last: Time posts away FINIS.
