5590 99844177 8966
THE True History of the Ciuill VVarres of France, betweene the French King Henry the 4. and the Leaguers. Gathered from the yere of our Lord 1585. vntill this present October. 1591. By Antony Colynet. Romanes 13. He which resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God. Printed at London for Thomas Wood∣cock, dwelling in Paules Churchyard, at the signe of the black Beare.
REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMI∣no D. Iohanni Cantuariensi Archepiscopo, & totius Angliae primati, ac Metropolitano, domino suo colendissimo gratiam & pacem exoptat. SApienter a Sophocle scriptum est mundum esse , quod vt Paulus testa∣tur adeo luculenter  eius, nimirum & , vt nedum oculis conspici, imo & mambus facile contrectari possint. Nam cum in mi∣rifica coelorum, terrae, maris{que} pulchritudi∣ne, bonitate, ordine & motu, eius sapientiae vestigia elucescant: imprimis vero in hominum consociatione tuenda conseruanda{que} apparent. Etenim cum propter multiplices humanae mentis errores, cordis deprauationem, & voluntatis auer∣sionem, quae secuta sunt primi parentis lapsum, tanta  omnes & singulas naturae humanae facultates muaserit, vt nihil nisi labi, nescire, errare, decipi, & in exitium ruere hominum genus possit: sapientissimus ille Graecorum Socrates, apud diuinum Platonem in his quos de republica scripsit libris, intelligit & diserta indu∣ctione ab ipsa vniuersali experientia sumpta demonstrat: equos ab equis, boues a bobus, capras a capris, oues ab ouibus regi nullo modo posse; sed a praestantiori natura & humana: ita hominum genus sine diuina pręsentia nullo modo gubernari potest. Ideo bo∣nus ille rerum opifex hominum quasi tutelae procurationem susci∣piens, res humanas non modo curat, vrumetiam ea prouidentia, qua praeterita, praesentia & futura, cernit, homini salutaria consilia suppeditat, actiones fortunat, distortas cogitationes, affectibus prę∣pedita consilia & iniustos conatus damnat euertit & punit. Et vt tutius res hominum agantur ipse , clam per ciuitates obam∣bulans singula speculatur, aliorum consilia regit, aliorum vro ob∣seruat ad vindictam, immanem improborū audaciam retundit, & diabolorum furores coercet. Quam ob causam hominum coetus potestatis & obedientiae docendi & discendi iudiciorum, & mul∣torum cum multis contractuum, officijs arctius colligauit. Ner∣uos autem huius consociationis familiam, ecclesiam & regnum
esse voluit; quarum altera sua foecunditate generis humani pro∣pagationem suppeditaret, & specei conseruationem perpetuaret. Altera vero veram sapientiam, dei agnitionem, veros cultus, ac de∣nique suppellectilem omnium doctrinarum & bonarum artium tāquam in arce repositam, custodit fidem & veram innocationem, bonos mores & salutem monstrat, rationibus, commonefactioni∣bus & obiurgationibus tanquam fraeno hominum cupiditates vn∣dique diffluentes obstruit. Regnum vero autoritate & dignitate conspicuum, robore & potentia instructum tāquam in summo lo∣co positum eminet, vt quos neque paterna autoritas, neque docen∣tium diligentia, in officio retinere potest: vi & via peruulgata legū cohibeantur. Quae cum  & ordine coherent, suauissimum di∣uinae sapientiae, bonitatis iustitiae &  odorem, generi humano reddunt: Sin abrumpantur haec societatis vincula, patrum docen∣tium & legitime imperantium autoritatem labefactari & humana retro conuersa ruere & concidere necesse est. Vt autem haec mani∣festius cernerentur voluit ille sapiens rerum opifex suā ipsius ima∣ginem in ipso patrum, docentium & magistratuū vultu insculpi, & insculptam elucere. Muniuit his propugnaculis deus generis humani societatem, vt ad eum tanquam ad fontem boni in natura hominum salus referretur, vt naturae intelligentes autorem huius opificij, & colligationis hominū inter se celebrarent, colerent, in∣uocarent, ei cōfiderent, & abeo solo penderent. Verum  iste mendax & , haec vincula humanae societatis apud omnes & omniaetate dissoluere, & abrumpere conatur. Parricidijs, idolo∣mania, seditionibus, clandestinis consilijs proditionibus familiam, ecclesiam, & ciuitatem implet: In parentes qui primum legitimi imperij gradum tenēt contemptum excitat, odijs, schismate, , & haeresi, ecclesiam vndi{que} turbat, respublicas ciuitatum euer∣sionibus vastat, sanguine irrigat, caedibus contaminat, regna fundi∣tus euertit, & orbi vastitatem affert, prole impia, leuibus inge∣nijs, turbulentis ciuibus.  in hominum cordibus delet, veram religionem corrumpit, officium & obtemperationem debitam magistratibus ex ciuium animis euellit, impietate, ambitione, pra∣uis consultoribus, malorum consuetudine fraterculis, Iesuitis, & perduellibus. Harum pestium testis est, & vetus & recens historia omnium imperiorū, retumpub. & gentium. Sed imprimis floren∣tissima
Gallia, Europae decus, quae totos hos 30. annos intestinis dissidijs exarsit; & facta est immanis saeuitiae, & pontificiae trucu∣lentiae laniena, hominum luxu, ambitione & impietate perditorū domicilium, scelerum omnis generis sentina, rapinarum & homi∣num rapidorum receptaculum, malorum lerna, & teterrimi odo∣ris camarina. Cum autem in otio minime otiosus esse vellem, & magnopere cuperem carissimae patriae excidium cognoscere, cau∣sas, progressus, periodos & euentus rerum gestarum exquirere,  quaedam ad priuatum vsum annotaueram: vt tantarū ca∣lamitatum causas exquirentibus satisfacerem, vt deplorarē patriae interitum, & vt ad dei timorem me inspectione tātarum pooenarū excitarem. Tandem approbatione & iudicio amicorum maiore, diligētia rem aggressus sum, & vt plurimum ex his libris qui Gal∣lice ijsdem de rebus scripti sunt, transtuli; ex varijs regū Henrico∣rū 3. & 4. declarationibus, edictis, proscriptionibus, proclamatio∣nibus, apologijs, accusationibus, articulis, & multorū Epistolis, & id genus scriptis narrationes plurimum auxi, & perpetuam rerum explicationem consarcinaui, sperans hunc meum laborem bonis viris gratissimum futurum. Hae narrationes tot sunt conciones de ira diuina in contempto∣res euangelij, & eos qui caeca ambitione, aut praua aliqua cupidi∣tate incitati ciuitates, respublicas, regna, & imperia concutiunt le∣gitimis magistratibus obsistunt, orbis pacem turbant, humanae societatis neruos resecant. Hae narrationes poenas à lege diuina propositas, & mercedem impietati debitā, homines scelestos sub∣ijsse digito monstrant. Praesentiam vero diuinam in conseruanda, & liberanda ecclesia, fidem promissionum, timentibus dei iudicia ratam certám{que} permanere. Anglica vero & vernacula lingua rem descripsi, aspera quidem & inculta, sed qua proprietate homini pe∣regrino licuit, vt lectores etiam ineruditi iudicia diuina admirari, & timere discerent, euangelium reuerenter amplecti, & vitae noui∣tate poenas peccatis debitas, retardare & auertere, magistratibus di∣uitius constitutis, se qua decet obseruantia subijcere, reipublicae & ecclesiae pacem, non temerè ira, odio, morositate, libidine aut am∣bitione turbare, & disciplinā laxare: deni{que} mortales vt discant iu∣stitiam moniti, & nō temnere diuos. Si quid autem videatur acer∣bius dictum id nō ni veram nobilitatem & familias de republica,
Christiana benemeritas, dictum boni viri autument. Nam vt est vetus dictum , huiusmodi mycterismis sarcas∣mis & acerbioribus verbis degeneres à vera nobilitate mores im∣pietatem, hypocrisin, ambitionem, libidines, saeuitiam, & immani∣tatem sacro sanctorū regum laesam, & violatam maiestatem, à per∣duellibus, & proditoribus, sacri istius (si dijs placet) foederis taxaui. Desinant igitur malefacere malefacta ne audiāt sua. Existimo enim nullis satis atrocibus verbis rebellionis crimen, defectionem, & coniurationem in maiestatem regiam a sacri istius foederis, auto∣ribus & principibus excitatā exprimi posse. Quod si violatae ma∣iestatis crimen summum in toto genere humano malum, malis verbis tanquam proprijs epithetis ornauerim, veteres oratores De∣mosthenem, Aeschinen, & praecipue Ciceronem autores habeo, imo ipsum Christum & Apostolos, Petrum, Paulum, Iacobum & Iohannem, qui acerbis verbis impios insectantur. Quos eo consi∣lio secutus sum, vt atrocia flagitia, atrocibus verbis monstrata om∣nibus execranda proponerem. Vt enim acutis morbis, acutam cu∣rationem adhibere solent medici, ita similem in genere humano, non antè auditam defectionem, & Christianis regibus & principi∣bus seruitutem, aut exitium minitantē istius foederis coniurationē non satis odiosis verbis regni legitimi amantibus odiosam reddere conatus sum, non vt foedus istud curarē (curationē enim non pati∣tur) sed vt quantū in me esset alios a similibus malis auerterē & re∣uocarē. Calumnias vero pontificiorū, & eorm qui sunt euangelij & legitimae potestatis hostes haud moror. Mihi vero satis probe satisfactū erit, si bonis quibus placere studeo, satisfecero, & exēpla in hac narratione proposita alios cautiores efficere possint: ne in eosdem errores prolapsi easdem subeant poenas. Tuae vero sapien∣tiae huius narrationis iudicium permitto: vt quicquid hic narratū fuerit tuo iudicio stet cadátue. Quod tuis auspicijs vt testimoniū meae in te gratitudinis & obseruantiae in lucem prodeat, & vt pro tua benignitate & fauore, quo & bona & bonos omnes excipere soles, aequi bonique consulas, te magnopere oratum velim Octob. vigesimo. 1591. Tui ex animo obseruan∣tissimus. A. C.
To the Christian Reader. TVlly (the glorie of the ancient Rome) defineth the historie to be a witnesse of time, and a remembrance of things that are past; this is to say somewhat, but not enough. For it is a witnesse and record of the execution of Gods iustice in reuenging the corrupt iudgements, vncleane affections, and wicked deedes of men, and of Gods good will and fatherly goodnes in defending, deliuering, and rewarding the iust. Therefore (Christian Reader) I haue to warne thee of three things; of the vse, order, and locution of this historie: desiring thee to reade this, not onely to delight thine affection in seeing this man doo prospe∣rously and commended for his prowesse and vertue, and another dispraised ac∣cording to the desert of his actions; but specially to consider the presence of God in gouerning the one, and prospering him, in doing profitable things for the defence of a iust cause and his countrey: and the iudgement of God, which according to the threatnings of his law, doth leade the wicked to punishment: if not at all times and after all ill actions, yet most commonly and at length, alwaies doth make him swallow downe the dregges of his wrath. Feare there∣fore and keepe thy selfe within the bounds of that vocation, which the lawe of God hath prescribed thee. The greatest part of this Historie is translated out of French, which was set foorth concerning these affayres of the holy League, encreased much out of the seedes of actions, dispersed in the declarations, edicts, proscriptions, apolo∣gies, aduertisements, agreements, articles and letters written by the Kings Henry the iij. and iiij. now raigning, and other noble men acquainted with the publique affayres and estate. The latter part of the Historie, to wit, from the death of Henry the third, is a gathering of such euents as haue been published from time to time. And as for the distressing of Paris, and the horrible famine there, I haue for the most part followed the report of Pedro Corneio a Spanyard, which was then in the citie during the siege thereof, which doth report it after a more incre∣dible sort then I dare lay downe. Of such things which I doo suspect, I doo note the vncertaintie thereof by
the word of report, following therein that famous Historiographer of our time Iohn Sleyden. I haue written this Historie in forme of Annales, reducing the actions of euery seuerall yeare into a sundrie booke, saue onely the first, which is a colle∣ction of the secret practises of many yeres, to bring that state to that confusion which we see it now. The new Popish Kalender hath brought some diuersitie in the date of dayes, moneths and yeares, some following one Kalender, and some another: yet I haue reduced it to the old so farre as I could do it. Forasmuch as the rebellion of the holy League is the greatest conspiracie that euer was heard of against all Christian Kings and Princes, threatning all of bondage and subuersion, and first put in vre in the kingdome of France, as most fit to receaue the same, by reason of the dissentions long cōtinued there, wrought by the vilest men and meanes that euer were heard of, hauing at∣tempted & atchieued most haynous & outragious murthers, I haue thought good to decke the parties with titles and ornaments fit for such deedes, to wit, with sharpe words to expresse more effectually the greatnes of the offences, protesting not to touch the noble families of Christendome, whom I reuerence, but the degenerating of them, who hauing put aside the robes of true Nobili∣tie, are become slaues of all treacheries and rebellions, and haue clothed them selues with dishonour and infamie: to the end that the Christian reader may by the signification of grieuous Epithetes, comprehend the greatnes of such transgressions as doo boyle in such men, and learne to auoyde the societie of all damned congregations of Corah, Dathan and Abiram.
THE TRAGICAL HISTO∣rie of the ciuill Warres raised vp in the Realme of France. THE FIRST BOOKE. CLaude of Ʋaudemont, otherwise of Lorrayne, came into France in the time of Lewis the xii. in a manner with a wallet and a staffe, that is to say, a beggerly gentleman, in comparison of the great reuenewes which hée and his haue had afterward in France. For all his reuenewes when he came into France, was not aboue xv. M. Franks. He began to growe vnder King Francis the first, by crouching and capping and double diligence: vnder whom, after that all offices had béen bestowed, hée obtained to bée the Kings Faulkner, at the suite of other Noble men. That was an office giuen before that time to Gentlemen of small ac∣compt. Notwithstanding ye basenes of his degree in Court, he was be∣holden with a suspicious eye by King Francis, carying in his mind a cer∣taine presage of that which hath happened afterward. For when he had marked with a wise prudencie the sawcines of him and his children, hee vttered his iudgement concerning them in these words; That they will turne his children into their doublets, and his subiects into their shirts. The yeare 1515. in the absence of the Duke of Guelders, he had the charge of the Swizzers, which King Francis had hyred for his iourney to Millaine. The yeare 1523. the Lord Trimouille left him the gouernment of Burgondie. The yeare 1527. at the suite and intercession of Noble men, the King erected his Village of Guize, situated vppon the riuer Oyse in the confines of Ʋermandoyse, into a Duchie. His Children were the Dukes of Guize, Aumale, the Marquise D'albeuf, the two Massing Priests of Lorraine and Guize.
These Faulkners did so apply their busines, partly with flattering, partly with the aliance of lagrand Seneschal, which was the Paramour of King Henry the second, and the Duke D' Aumale maried her daugh∣ter, as good as the mother, but especially by the facilitie, or rather fond∣nesse of the saide Henry the second, that within fewe yeares they obtay∣ned in land and pensions one milion of Frankes, beside their Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall offices, dignities & liuings, which did amount to so much. But specially they aduaunced themselues greatly in the time of King Francis the second, by reason of their aliance with him, who had married their Néece the Quéene of Scots. In his time they disposed of all things after their owne willes. For the King sawe nothing but by their eyes, heard nothing but by their mouthes, did nothing but by their hands; so that there remained no∣thing but onely the wearing of the Crowne vpon their owne heads, and the name of King. In this great prosperitie they lacked nothing, neither will nor meanes to attaine to their intent, but that the Nobilitie of France was a perilous blocke in their way, which they could not lep ouer, for to ascende to so great and high seate of Maiestie, and in stead of a veluet cap to weare a Crowne of pure gold. In this prosperous successe it hath happened to them as the Pro∣uerbe is, Set a begger on horsebacke, and he will ride vntill he breake his necke: which the tragicall end of them hath verified. But they fearing no such bloodie euents, and intending to turne their master out of the house, and to seaze on the possession, and to lodge them∣selues therein, they vsed cunning and policie. The first steppe to reach to that which they intended to get, was a dreame in this Iulling of Fortune, vnaccustomed to them or theirs. For they in their dreame, dreamed and sawe in a vision, that they were des∣cended from Charles the great, and consequently that they had right to the Crowne, and that Capet (who had dispossessed their auncestors) (as they say) and his posteritie, which now enioy it, are but vsurpers. But considering that to enter into any action of law about such a mat∣ter, would be a dangerous course, and that a peaceable state would rather helpe them backward, than forward; and that such a fish would bee caught rather in a troublesome, than in a cleare water, the streame must needes be stirred. The occasion of the time fell out fitly to further their intent, and to trouble the state: They therefore tooke the dissension of Religion to co∣lour the same: (than the which they thought no better could be deuised) for the people was alreadie in ielousie one against another through the diuersitie of religion. Unto this opportunitie came many helping cau∣ses,
as the minoritie of the house of Ʋaloys, the ambition and atheisme of the Q. Mother, the great credite and power which the parties them∣selues had gotten alreadie afore hand in the Realme: the facilitie or ra∣ther inconstancie of Anthonie of Burbon King of Nauarre: and last of all, the headie frowardnes of the Constable, and Annas of Monmoren∣cy: which things conspiring together fitly to further their desires, they thought it was time in stead of Atheisme to put on Popish superstition, and their ambition should runne for burning zeale of Poperie. This part they tooke not for any religion which they cared for, but being the stronger and more fauourable side, by the which they might get both cre∣dite and strength. By these meanes the ciuil warres being easily stirred vp, they thought all by one meane both to weaken the Nobilitie, and to oppresse the house of Burbon; which being made away, they supposed either that they could easily subuert the house of Valoys, being all children: or els to suruiue them, and as then to make an open claime to the Crowne. The ciuill warres being by them and their meanes begun, they haue entertained them from time to time. And when through wearines or weakenes of their part they haue come to peace, they haue through trea∣cherie so manured it, that peace hath been more domageable to the pro∣fessors of the Gospell, than open warre; as it may appeare by the mur∣thers which they procured and performed at Paris, and in other Cities in France the yeare 1572. After the which murther, they also procured King Charles the ix. to imprison the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and afterward Mon∣sieur the Kings yongest brother. The King of Nauarre hauing béen kept prisoner with a garde the space of thrée yeares and more, at length in the yeare 1576. went foorth out of Paris to hunting in the Forrest of S. Germayne en faye, accompa∣nied with a great number of Catholike Gentlemen, among whom was also the Duke Espernon. When he came to the Forrest hee opened his minde vnto them that hee was not determined to returne to the Court. The Gentlemen considering his hard intertainement, and the greatnes of his person, were so farr from compelling him to returne from whence he came, that they profered to conduct him wheresoeuer he would, and so they brought him to the Towne of Alenson 45. leagues from Paris, where was a great number of them of the reformed Religion, whether also he had requested the Gentlemen to accompanie him. Shortly after his arriuing there, when the reformed Church had as∣sembled together, the said King in the face of the said congregation, con∣fessed that for feare of death he had consented to the abominations of Po∣perie, and with many teares very feruently prayed to God to forgiue
him, exhorted the Church to take heede, not to followe his frailtie, wil∣ling them not to be offended with his fall, and with an earnest inuocation of Gods most holy spirit, promised euer hereafter (by Gods grace) con∣stancie and stedfastnes in the confession of the trueth. After a long and wofull warre (the particular accidents whereof I here omit, as hastening to my purpose, and referre the reader in that re∣spect  to such treatises as are of purpose written concerning those mat∣ters) at length a peace was concluded about the 27. of Iuly 1576. which was sworne vpon by the King, by the King of Nauarre, Monsieur the Kings onely brother, the Prince of Conde, and Casimire, & other Nobles with the lifting vp of their hands. The King, to wit, Henry the 3. to shew how well pleased he was with this peace, willed and commanded, that it should bee called his peace, be∣cause he had graunted it with his owne will and proper motion. The King of Nauarre then had not onely a iust cause, but also oppor∣tunitie to complaine of diuers iniuries done vnto him, at and after the murther of Paris, and also to demaund amends for his great losses, yet he neuer mooued one word, least by any priuate commodities of his owne, the peace should haue béen hindered. By that conclusion of peace the King graunted eight Townes (be∣side them which they held before) vnto them of the reformed religion, to bee gouerned vnder his obedience by the King of Nauarre, for the space of sixe yeares. It was agreed also at the request of the reformed religion, that the King should call the States of the Realme, to confirme this peace, and to restore the ancient dignitie of that kingdome. These States were so cunningly handled, that it did almost fall to the vtter vndoing of them of the religion. For the Guizes, with the col∣lusion of the King, made such meanes as none other might be admitted to the same States, than the professed enemies of the Gospell. For they caused conuocations to bee assembled in the seuerall Prouinces, who ap∣poynted such, as were farre from peace, with secret instructions to bee presented at the saide States, without making the Townes, Cities, or Commonalties priuie to the same. They also caused infamous Libels to be printed and proposed in their seuerall conuocations, denouncing open warre vnto them of the refor∣med religion, and vnto all that would not consent to the vndoing of them. Furthermore, they deuised also the meanes to interrupt that peace, which of late concluded by their consent, and yet so politickly, that the causes should not bee founde in themselues, but in the professors of the Gospell. For they procured infinite iniuries and violences to be done vn∣to them of the Religion by their partakers, hoping that through dispaire and impatiencie they would breake the peace, and so the King would
arme the Duke of Guize against them, that in the meane time hauing the Kings power in hand, he might growe in authoritie, and the King  decrease. Immediatly after the conclusion of peace made, the Guizes perceiuing that these three noble Princes had auoyded their clawes, (for the King of Nauarre was gone into his kingdome, the Prince of Conde had auoi∣ded into Germanie, & Monsieur had bin set at libertie) without any hope to bring them againe within their reach, and that not onely they were a terror, but also would be great lets to their drifts, and that they were able to cut them out more worke, than they would be able to patch as long as they should liue, considering the name, roome, authoritie and power that they were of, both in France and with forraine Nations: To the ende that at the States appoynted they might oppresse these Princes, with the rest of the Nobilitie which would not take part with them; to ground a sure foundation vpon a strong Councell, then sent they their agent the Bishop of Paris, and the aduocate Dauid (a worse man did not liue then vpon the earth) to Rome the holy Citie, to take good aduise and spiritual counsell of their ghostly father. The Bishop of Paris and Dauid with him came to Rome, the Schoole of all murthers, treasons, poysonings and slaughters, against all the Princes and States of Christendome. There assembled all the schoole∣masters and teachers of the Sciences aboue saide, I meane the Cardi∣nalls, among whome Sir Hugh bon companion Vicar of Rome, (for so was his right name afore he was Pope) was the forman. There was great complaints framed against the King, Monsieur his brother, the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, against all the house of Burbon, and the Nobilitie of France. The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde were heretickes and relapse. The King and his brother, with a great number of the Nobili∣tie, if they were not heretickes, yet were they fauourers of heretickes, they caused heresies to grow and to take roote, by making peace with he∣retickes, to the vtter ouerthrowe of holy Church of Rome. And that it was high time that Sir Hugh (Vicar of Rome) should prouide for some speedie remedie to preuent the mischiefe. There it was shewed (to render the King and all the Princes odious) how the house of Capet had alwaies withstood the holy Church of Rome, and that they had supported in old time the Valdenses and Albigeoys, and now that either they are ioyned with the Hugonets, or els are fauourers of them. But on the contrary side, the house of Charles the great (which was wrongfully dispossessed of the Crowne) by the Papall blessing, had a spe∣ciall grace giuen them to helpe holy Church, and had left yet some lustie
buds, which are they of the house of Guize, in whom is all the hope of ho∣ly Church, to roote out the hereticks, and to restore all things. The fable of this Popish blessing heere aboue mentioned, is in the Chronicles of Rhegimon a Monke of S. Benet. In the time of Pipin father to Charles the great, Stephen Pope of Rome being a factious and turbulent man, through his ambition did trouble Italy. And when Arstulphe King of the Lombards (a nation not vsed to bee controulled by Priests) went about to chastize him, fled into France, to stirre Pipin (which a fewe yeares before had vsurped the Crowne of France by the helpe of Pope Zachary) against the sayd Ar∣stulphe. This Pope being at S. Denis nigh Paris, fell brainsicke, and in his sicknes the diuell deluded him with an entusiasme, making him to see in a vision Peter and Paule before the high Altar in their Surplesses, by the which (as he sayd) he knewe them. Then came in S. Denis with a leane face, hauing a Censor in his hand, whom Peter and Paule sent to the sayd Stephen to heale him, who charged him to hallowe the sayd Church. Pope Stephen could this vision to them which were present there, and being about to rise out of his bed to doo what he was comman∣ded, they sayd vnto him that he doated. But after he had told this follie to Pipin, the 13. of August 753. he annoynted Pipin King of France and Berte, and with his Popish blessing sanctified all the Barons & Nobles of France, binding them with an oath neuer to choose King of France but of that rase of Pipin. Thus goeth the sottish fable of the brainsicke en∣tusiasme Pope Stephen. The Guizes fayning to haue descended out of that rase by the helpe of this fable, besides the determinations, set downe concerning other States of Christendome, it was concerning Fraunce thus decreed. That the house of Capet, which was the house of Valoys and Burbon, with the rest of the principall Nobilitie, must needes be roo∣ted out, and that these lustie buds of Charles the great must haue their turne: and for to bring to passe these things, the wofull Tragedie must be thus played. The Guizes must kindle the fire. The Priests, Friers and Iesuites shall blowe it with the bellowes of ayling and sedition. The King shall sit still vntill his brother and the Burbons come to their triall. The Pope shall play the Monarcho. This Monarcho was of late yeares a franticke Italian, well knowne both in Germanie and England, who imagined that all the Kings of the earth were his vassals: so Sir Hugh Vicar of Rome, sitteth a farre off, will not drawe nigh the fire, and imagineth that all is his: wherevpon he condemneth the Ʋaloys and Burbons and the Nobilitie of France, to the slaughter.
The name of the States shall be vsed and waite vppon the Guizes to play the hangman, and when all things be in a readines, the King, all the  Princes and Nobilitie shall be cast into the fire, there to be consumed and destroyed. When all this is happily performed, there will be a newe heauen and a newe earth. For the Guizes, and Sir Hugh bon companion Vicar of Rome, and all his bands, Ganimedes and Chaplaines shall haue all, and may take their pastimes with their Curtizans, without any feare or con∣troulment of the Hugonets. Here followe the acts of this Tragedie, or the summe of the secret Counsell of Rome holden, contayning the meanes how to destroy the kingdome of France, as they were deliuered by Sir Hugh vnto his stage players. First, the house of Guize and their partakers shall procure new Com∣motions in the Realme, and intertaine warres. They shall also league the Nobilitie with their othes to persecute the Gospell, and that they shall not acknowledge any other Captaine and head of the League but onely the Duke of Guize. 2 The King shall be counselled to fit still, and to take no care for such vprores: but to let the Duke of Guize alone, for hée knoweth well how to handle the matter. 3 The King shall send his mother to Monsier her sonne, to perswade him to come to Bloys to the States. 4 In the meane time the King shall goe from Paris into a place of sure accesse, and voide of suspition, where he shall entise by fayre promises, by fayre meanes and fayre words, the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Con∣de, if it may be done; whom he shall receiue with as much entertainment and courtesie, as he may shewe them. So the King was made a foole at Rome by a sort of beggerly Friers and godles rabble. But in the meane while that the King shall shewe such fayned courtesies to his brother and the Princes of his bloud, the Guizes shall retire from the Court with to∣kens of discontented minds. 5 These things being a working, the King shall assemble the States at Bloys, and such as bee deuoted to the League shall bee sent to the seue∣rall Prouinces, to picke out such Deputies as may bee well taught and skilfull to play their parts. 6 During these stirres, the Friers and Iesuites, shall mooue vp the people to vprores, by seditious Sermons against the Hugonets. 7 The Priests in their Parish Churches shall secretly take the names of able men, and by appoynted Captaines it shall be ordered what wea∣pons be most fit for them, and in their shriuing they shall warne them to prouide such weapons.
8 The States holding shall sweare to obserue and obey whatsoeuer  shall be concluded, and shall binde themselues and their commonalties to beare the charges of the play. 9 But if Monsieur, the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and o∣thers of the house Burbon, doo not appeare, they shall bee condemned of contumacie, and as Rebels. And furthermore, all other who shall seeme to oppose themselues against the States, shall be executed if they can bée taken, and if not, rewarde to be appoynted to such as shall kill them. 10 All these things being thus compassed, the States shall be sworne to the Sea of Rome, and to obserue the Councell of Trent. 11 Request also shall be made to the King by the States, that in case any man should resist these procéedings, hee shall appoynt the Duke of Guize his Generall to pursue them by all meanes to death. 12 Yet the morrowe Masse Priests must come once more vppon the stage, and there they shall cause their Captaines to muster them of the conspiracie, and to make them readie to march when the assemblie of the States is once begun. 13 All these things being so brought to passe, the States shall picke out Minos and Rhadamanthus to enquire and iudge of the life and déeds of Monsieur, for ioyning himselfe with the Hereticks, and to make his processe, after the naturall and godly example of the King of Spayne, which sacrificed Charles of Austrich his naturall sonne a Prince, (a Prince of great hope) vnto Moloch the Idoll of the Iesuites. 14 When Monsieur is condemned, the forces secretly gathered shall march to strengthen the execution. 15 Then immediatly the conspired Souldiers shall set vpon the Hu∣gonets in all Prouinces, without any respect of persons. 16 The Duke of Guize, that great Captaine, yt great Charlamaigne with his power shall destroy all, shall take the King and his mother, ey∣ther put them in Monkeries, or els to rid them out of this world, accor∣ding to the Prouerbe, . By this wee see that the King long agoe was condemned at Rome either to be a Frier, or els to be slaine by a Frier. So all these things thus happily done, loe the Duke of Guize shall haue all, and in so doing the Crowne shall returne to the blessed stocke of Charlamaigne, and he and his successors hencefoorth shall holde the Crowne of France of the Apostolike sea, and shall abolish the preroga∣tiues of the French Church. Valete & plaudite Calliopius recensui. Now I pray you good Sir Hugh good master Vicar, seeing you haue so wel sped, let vs haue a fine Te Deum landamus, and a demure solemne Procession, and all in your Pontificalibus, such as wee had for the noble and famous victorie of the Spanyards against the Englishmen before Ca∣lis
the 29. of Iuly 1588. And after a sweete Masse of that Holy ghost which appeared to your predecessors at the Councell of Laterane, in the  visible forme of an Owle, goe againe to schoole with your Chaplaines, and let vs knowe of you what the Hugonets will dóo all that while: or els seeing you haue that power to binde and to loose, I pray you binde them hand and foote, that we may make quickly an end of them, or els e∣uery one will say (to the great slaunder of holy Church) that Sir Hugh is a great Pazzo, for not being able to performe all that he taketh vppon In Italiō a Sot. him to doo. And of all loue be good to master Francis of Lorrayne, deuise some good meanes that when the Crowne is set vpon his head, the heauines there∣of should not put him to paynes, and perhaps breake his necke. And then what would the world say, beshrew you Sir Hugh, for in following your counsell we haue lost a great Captaine and a newe King, and then be sure that you will neuer be good after. But now to speake in sadnesse, by these instructions, according to the which all the ciuill warres haue been directed euer since the yeare 1576. vntill the death of the last Duke of Guize, we may iudge what wisedome and blessings are to be expected from Sir Hugh and his Chaplaines. Whilest these things were at working in Rome, the Guizes followed diuers wayes to interrupt the peace: but now by the returne of Dauid from Rome, with these aforesaide instructions, they went to worke sub∣stantially, and by the collusion of the King, they made such meanes as none might be admitted to the States, but the professed enemies of the reformed Churches. For they caused priuate conuocations to be assem∣bled in the seuerall Prouinces, which appoynted such as were farre from peace, & were of the conspiracie of Guize, hauing their secret instructions to be presented at the States, without making priuie to their counsels any Townes, Cities or Commonalties. They spread abroad, that the Edict of peace could not bee published nor admitted in Townes and Cities, than the which nothing was more desired of all sorts of men, except onely them of the conspiracie. They caused also infamous Libels to be printed and proposed in their seuerall conuocations, being of such men, as knowing the reports to bee most false, yet were readie to make themselues to be true. As that they of the reformed religion requested the exercize of the same, not for satisfy∣ing or contenting of their consciences, but for the maintenance of factious and practizes against the King, and to fortifie themselues, that vpon op∣portunitie, they might shake off the yoke of obedience due to the King. They spread abroad also, that they of the reformed religion had sur∣prized Lachorite, and many Townes and Forts in Poytow, Xainctonge, Guyen, Languedock, and Daulphine, and that they had committed sundry
murthers and cruelties vppon the Catholikes, and therefore in the same assemblies they did denounce warre vnto them of the reformed religion,  and to all them which would not consent to their vndoing. They procured infinite number of iniuries and violences to bee done by their partakers euery where, to them of the religion, hoping through impatience, to cause them to breake the Edict of peace, so that the causes being found in them, the King arming the Duke of Guize, should en∣crease his secret enemies authoritie, and decay his owne. Notwithstanding these manifolde iniuries proffered vnto them of the religion, and the breaking of the peace, they of their part obserued the E∣dict of pacification, without molesting the Catholikes, but stoode onely vpon the defensiue. The Guizes hasting so much as euer they could, their enterprizes (by their partakers) procured many Townes and Prouinces to rebell and to breake the peace, pretending that they of the religion sought the op∣pression of the Cleargie. Besides the practizes afore mentioned, these good husbands being loth to leaue any stone vnstirred, that happily might any way further their deuised plot, did not sticke to attempt euen contrary meanes. For in like case they followed the olde tricke of Barcocab, they went about closely and vnder hand, to drawe into their League them of the reformed religion, promising them the exercize of their religion, according to the Edict of peace, and more if they would. They solicited also Iohn Casimier Prince Palsgraue to enter in league with them, promising to doo nothing against the reformed religion, and to deliuer him Townes in their gouernments for pledges. And herein if they could haue effected their desire happily, they would not haue pre∣tended so rigorous a course against them of the reformed religion, as af∣terward they did, when they perceiued that they of the reformed religion did smell, detect, and abhorred their treacherous ambition, and that they were taken forbeu cozba. If they might haue preuailed with the re∣formed, they would haue stoode vppon some plausible Common-wealth. For their intent herein was (not that they cared or regarded any religion) but to bring the King and the Princes of the bloud into hatred, and the people into a mistiking of the gouernement. And seeing their offers were reiected by the reformed, they determi∣ned to roote them out, assuring themselues generally of the Catholikes, vnder colour of zeale of Poperie which they fayned more and more. And to begin, the Q. Mother (according to the Gospell brought from Rome by Dauid, as is aboue sayd) was sent to bring Monsier her sonne to the States at Bloys, which she performed. Many fayre words were spent, many fayre promises giuen, and ma∣ny
sore threatnings were vttered, either to entice, or els to enforce the King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, to the States at Bloys. But  they refused their companie, knowing well what their meaning was. During this time, they were very busie to make Leagues and confede∣racies, and to erect euery where fraternities, which they called of the ho∣ly Ghost, by such meanes to fortifie themselues, as they pretended, a∣gainst the Heretickes, but indeede to conspire the subuersion both of the King and of the Burbons, which could not bee done (as they thought) without the rooting out of the professors of the reformed religion. The secret Councell of Rome could not bee kept so close, but that the King of Nauarre had intelligences what was passed at Rome, and there∣fore sendeth a Gentleman of his to the King, with remembrances to ad∣uertise him of the conspiracie already concluded at Rome, against him and his estate. Monsieur his brother in like manner informed him, that there were things passed at Rome, against him, his Crowne and state. Iohn Casimier Prince palatine out of Germany, sendeth in like man∣ner aduertisements vnto the King about the same matter: and besides by Praillon giueth him notice of the drifts of the Leaguers, which were to let the free holding of the States, by corrupting of the Deputies, and by letting that none of the Princes of the bloud, or any that haue cause of complayning, might appeare with free accesse. Thus the Guizes furthering their busines by all meanes (as is aboue sayd) in the Prouinces, for the making of a strong league with as many as they were able, they procured the towne of Montmarsan in Gascoyne, to rebell against the King of Nauarre: which he shortly after surprized in one night, and brought the inhabitants to their duetie without any bloud shedding. By their meanes also the Towne of Rause, in the Countie of Armi∣gnake, belonging to the King of Nauarre, as the sayd King had entered into the Towne, without any mistrust, with eightéene Gentlemen, the partakers of Guize there let the Percullis fall at his heeles, and setting vppon him one offered the Caliuer at his breast. But the sayd King ne∣uerthelesse seazed vppon a Tower with his companie, and made way to the rest of his traine to enter into the sayd Towne, not suffering any of the inhabitants to be put to death, bu onely him which had leuelled the Caliuer at his breast, and that at the earnest sute of the Magistrates of the Towne, accusing him with diuers other crimes. In Ianuary the King sendeth an Ambassador to the Prince Casimier Palatine of Rhine, named Vilaquier, to excuse his doings with lyes, sur∣mizs  and slaunders, as that they of the reformed religion had seazed vp∣pon diuers, and had committed murthers and cruelties vpon the Catho∣likes, and that they required not the exercize of the religion for any con∣science,
but for fashion sake only, and that his States will not suffer him to execute the Edict of peace. Vnto this message the Prince Casimier answered, as shewing how  the King was abused by the States, which were none other but such as were enemies of his estate, and perturbers of the peace vnder the name of the States: and lastly willeth him not to cast his Realme into a mise∣rable flame of ciuill warres for other mens pleasure. The Prince Casimier also sendeth Butrich his Ambassador to the King, to perswade him (if possible were) to entertaine the pace which  was made so solemnely, which he also willed to be called his peace. The sayd Ambassador had audience at Bloys the 23. of February. The 7. of March ensuing, the sayd Butrich Ambassador, surrendred in his Masters name, the lands, Lordships, pensions and offices which the  King had giuen him at the concluding of the peace. For as much as the Guizes had spread abroad both through France, Germany, and other coun∣tries, that the said Prince (in consideration and respect of his particular profite) was preiudiciall to the publike commoditie of his Souldiers. The parish Priests about this time tooke the names of able men; Souldiers were euery where secretly mustered, according to Sir Hugh his counsell, as is aforesaid. The Iesuits also began to take the matter in hande, to further conspiracies by rayling Sermons, who by these meaues crept so deepely into the Kings fauour, that he preferred the sawciest of them, and them who could thunder most furiously against the reformed religion, to Bishoprickes, Abbeyes, Prebends, and other fat Benefices; nourishing in his bosome from time to time the firebrands, to set him and his Realme in combustion at the first opportunitie. The Guizes seeing they could not win them of the religion to fauour their doings, but rather that their agents were taken forbeu cozba, con∣sidering also that they were not able to haue their desire vpon them, fea∣ring greatly the King of Nauarre, whose wisedome, vertue, and valour they knewe well, goe about to make him to some hatefull, and to others contemptible. Therefore the Admirall Villars, father in lawe to the Duke de Mayne, raised vp vpon him the old lye and flander reported of the Christians of the Primitiue Church, vp the Pagans, (to the end that Sathan might bee like to himselfe) to wit, that the sayd King being at Agen, in the night, the candles should be put out. That false report was spread abroad throughout France, afore that any man had heard of it in the Citie of Agen. It was also reprooued for a most false lye by many Noblemen and Ladies of both religions which were then present. Now, the conclusion or rather collusion of the States, was that they required the Edict of peace to bee reuoked, the exercize of the reformed religion inhibited, and Poperie to be set vp euery where.
The King was as desirous to graunt them, as they to require the breach of the peace: wherevpon fearefull persecutions were raised vp e∣uery  where; great cruelties effected in diuers places vpon them of the religion, and open warre denounced. And for as much as the condemnation and execution of Monsieur could not be brought to passe as yet, for many cōsiderations, it was kept close, and deferred to a fitter time. But specially for that he might be a good instrument to be occupied against the King of Nauarre, and them of the reformed religion. Therefore they thought good to make him and the Duke of Guize Generall ouer the Kings forces. Him I say, to giue the more authoritie to the actions and enterprizes with greater terror. The other was ioy∣ned in Commission to preuent what might happen, that Monsieur should not in any wise fauour the King of Nauarre, nor his partakers any whit at all. The King of Nauarre hauing such power as he could make in Guyen, prepared himselfe vppon the defensiue; and hauing a mightie power of Germaines readie to enter into France, his enemies hearts were some∣what cooled, and began to faint. On the other side, the King wanting money, nothing was done. By this expedition, & a great terror of the Germaines, hauing seazed France, the King now sheweth himselfe as desirous of peace, as he was not long before of warre, and sendeth his Mother to the King of Nauarre to treat for peace. Now old Catie must shewe some Italian iuggling, or els fare∣well Poperie. After much chopping and chaunging of words, the bar∣gaine was made. The King of Nauarre being at Nerack in Gascoyne, receiued the peace, with some restructions of the former Edict, abhorring the slaughters of the Nobilitie, and oppressions of the people. This peace being concluded at Nerack, the Guizes tooke it very grie∣uously, as vnprofitable for the aduancing of that mysterie which did lye hidden in their braine: and also for that the King went about to reforme many abuses, brought in by warre, and to restore the Nobilitie, to ease the people of diuers charges. For the Guizes would haue all these abuses to continue, that in time it might serue for an olde cloake to couer withall their treacherous drifts, as they did afterward at the rising of them in armes 1585. Diffidence and iealousies therefore did growe daylie be∣tweene the King and the Guizes. But the King to obtaine his intended purpose, thought good to pacifie them, calleth them to the Court, dooth assigue them great pensions, bestoweth great gifts and honors vppon them. Yet they hauing alwaies a hartburning, tickled with their accu∣stomed ambition, watching for the death of Monsieur, determined to ha∣sten them: forasmuch as they feared him more than the King.
In the yeare 1579. the Guizes sent Frier Claude Mathew (abusie Ie∣suite of Pontamosson in Lorrayne) to Rome, to put Sir Hugh to worke,  and to lay downe some newe direction to execute the secrt Councell of Rome, seeing that the former deuises had failed. Frir Claude from thence tooke his iourney into Spayne, to giue some ghostly counsell to Dom Philipporey despagna. Out of this voyage came the expedition of Italians and Spanyards into Ireland, vnder the lea∣ding of Captaine Saunders, which there dyed mad wandring in ye woods. From thence also came the lustie flight of Locusts the Iesuits into Eng∣land, vnder the banner of their Generall Campion, to roote out the Gos∣pell, and to plant Poperie, if it could be done. But if not, to worke some busie peece of worke to her Maiestie, that the Guizes in the meane time might work more surely in France, without hope of any help out of Eng∣land to the King, and to the King of Nauarre, or to them of the reformed religion, if they should stand in any neede. The Guizes of their part were not idle, but by sundrie practizes had renewed the ciuill warres: and by the Kings consent Monsieur his brother and the Duke de Mayne were in Commission for the conducting of the Kings Armies: which thing they did as well as they could, with as great preparations as might bée, but yet without doing any harme. But because the common report went that Monsieur should passe into England, and from thence should go take possession of the Dukedome of Braban, which was offered him by the States of the Lowe Countrey, they were content yet once againe to winke at peace, that they might be rid of him, hoping that he would ne∣uer returne into France to trouble them. Therefore in the yeare 1580. Monsieur (before he tooke his iourney) was sent to the King of Nauarre, which both met at Fleyx, a Towne in Perigord, situated vppon the riuer of Dradogne, where they concluded a peace, not much varying from the former. Which thing being done, Monsieur hasted to his iourney. Now this being done, Frier Mathew (the Guizes Pursiuant) of méere deuotion must needs post to Rome yet once againe to visite the Stewes, and to aduertize Sir Hugh what was past in France, to knowe of him how the Guizes should worke vppon this present occasion. There Sir Hugh stayed somewhat his wisedome, afore hee would giue answere, knowing not well what counsell to giue or to followe, because his Ar∣mado in Ireland, vnder the conduct of Captaine Saunders Doctor of Mi∣litarie Discipline, and his Locusts, vnder the leading of the lustie Cam∣pion, had sped but so so, and had a very hot entertainment. His brains therefore was driuen to peruss his Christerosse, so that in this dumpe Sir Hugh must take counsell of Dom Philipporey despagna. Therefore ma∣ster Frier must trudge ouer the world. Haue with you master Frier into
Spayne to eate a peny worth of Raphams. Vpon this hard mischances of fortune, Sir Hugh thought good that Dom Philippo should play Xer∣xes,  and whilest he is a preparing the inuincible Arinado, meanes should bee made to doo away both Monsieur and the Prince of Orenge, that by the death of the one, the Low Countreys should be left headlesse & vnable to resist the petie Duke of Parma; and by the others death, the drists of the Guizes might be easily executed in France. The procuring of ye death of the Prince of Orenge was committed to the petie Duke of Parma, petie sonne to the holy man Pedro Aloisio, who for his religion, vz. his abominable and monstrous whoredomes, was hanged at the windowe of his owne house, a holy Martyr, and bastard sonne to Sir Alexander Farneso Vicar of Rome, called otherwise Paulus tertius. This Duke of Parma acquitted himselfe pretily well of his charge, as shall bee sayd hereafter. The death of Monsieur was vndertaken by the Guizes, that that if GOD himselfe would not kill him, they would doo it, which they also performed in time. Frier Mathew Iesuit (carrier of the Court of the Guizes) returning out of Spayne, fell sicke at Barbaste in Gascoyne, not for any surfet which he tooke in Spayne, except it were for eating too little. The poore Pardo∣ner there was so sicke, that he would haue eaten any kinde of meate if he could haue had it. But his good Masters did so diet him, that according to his profession he afflicted his bodie with fasting out of measure, to pull downe his courage, least when hee should come into the Stewes to giue ghostly counsell to the Curtizans, he should doo any thing to the discre∣dite of holy Chrch▪ and to the slaundring of the holy order of Iesuits: for such fasting as he vsed in that iourney would doo greater miracles in keeping a Frier cha, than all the weeping which the Iesuites doo vse can doo. The King sending his brother into Brabant, determined to appoynt him a Counsell. But the Kings Counsell being in a manner all Lea∣guers, appoynted him two manner of men, one to accompanie him, and the other to counsell him. They therefore prouided that such counsell should be giuen him, as either should altogether nousell him in all filthie life, or els should worke such meanes as might dishonor him, or put him in danger of his life. Another companie was appoynted him of vertu∣ous Noble men of both religions, onely to accompanie him to counte∣nance the matter, but not to counsell him. Monsieur therefore in this equipage of men of so sundrie colours and  qualities, taketh his iourney first into England, and from thence into Bra∣bant the yeare 1582. there to bee inuested of that Dukedome of the holy Empyre, which was duely and sumptuously performed. Whilest Monsieur soiorneth in the Low Countrey, the partakers of
the Guizes, thinking ye time long, were very importunate to set the Duke  forward about the busines which he knewe, considering the good oppor∣tunitie of the absence of Monsieur. For if he should returne (sayd they) and finde all things peaceable, it would bee hard for them to worke any thing; for as much as Monsieur had knowledge of their drifts, who assu∣redly would seeke to ouerthrowe all, and being in France of such power, would goe nigh to doo it. To these and like perswasions the Duke of Guize was wont to answere, that hee will enterprize nothing openly, whilest the King had any brother; but if he could see one day the last of the house of Valoys to sit vpō the Throne, he promised them with a round oath to set his hand to worke so surely, that if he did not carrie away the whole, yet he hoped to haue a good part of the cake. In the meane time the Guizes began to sell the most part of their offices, and to gather great summes of money, making their reckoning shortly to haue all and to dis∣pose of all. But thinking the time long, that neither sicknes, nor the fortune of warre had shortned the life of Monsieur, which greatly they desired, they determined to do that which God would not do, and to exe∣cute Sir Hughs spirituall counsell. There was one Salcedo a Spanyard, which before had escaped the gibbet of Roan, for coyning false coyne, with his false gold and siluer wrought by Alchimie, fled into Spayne, and from thence into Lorrayne, where the Guizes hiered him for sixe thousand Crownes (which they payed him at Nancie in Lorrayne) to murther Monsieur. This Salcedo therefore hauing his money and his lesson without the booke, went into France, proffered his seruice to Monsieur afore he went into the Lowe Countrey, and at the recouerie of Cambray shewed some token of dexte∣ritie, and in the Low Countrey did all that could be to creepe into grea∣ter fauour with Monsieur. But withall entered in familiaritie and com∣munication with the yongest sonne of Egmond, for which cause the sayd Egmond began to be suspected both of Monsieur and the Prince of O∣renge: who being examined by the sayd Prince about Salcedos familia∣ritie, answered that their communications were about Alchimie. The Prince with a certaine presagious minde replied, that he feared that a more dangerous Alchimie would ensue of their familiaritie: admonished the sayd Egmond to call to remembrance the dealing of the King of Spayne with his father. The Prince of Orenge and Monsieur departed from Antwerpe to Bridges in Flanders, where they arriued the 17. day of Februarie. Now, this conspiracie deuised at Rome, confirmed in Spayne, brought from thence by Frier Mathewe the Pardoner, set in readines to Nancie in Lorrayne, the Duke of Parma aduertized thereof, thought good with one dayes worke to dispatch these two noble Princes: He thought good
to bring somewhat of his owne, least the Leaguers onely should haue the  glorie of this murther: therefore to Salcedo he ioyned two companions, knowing that a string twisted is not so easily broken. These two fellowes were Francisco Baza an Italian, of the band of Fernando Gonzago (which was in the Campe of the petie Duke of Parma) and a Wallon. During the time these two Princes were in Bridges, Salcedo aduanced himselfe so neere Monsieur, that vpon suspition he was apprehended: then stayed there in the Court without the sayd Italian and the Wallon tary∣ing for Salcedo. This Italian expecting with great desire when Salcedo should come foorth, asked of another whether Salcedo were within still. Answere was made that he was, being asked the question whether hee knewe Salcedo. When the Courtier was gone in againe, the Italian en∣tring in feare would haue fled: but being suddenly layd hold on, was exa∣mined, and confessed the whole conspiracie. Salcedo which would not know the Italian before, now when he was accused by Baza, sayd that the sayd Baza was a muletier and a lyer. But Baza answered, he would shewe be∣fore Salcedo his face such proofes of this matter, that his declaratiōs should be found true. The malcontent Wallon fled away. The 24. of Iuly the young Egmond being brought to the Court to Monsieur, & perceiuing how Salcedo had accused him, reuealed all what∣soeuer  Salcedo had opened vnto him. Vpon which confession Egmond was committed prisoner to the Magistrate of the towne. The 28. Francisco Baza the Italian was examined vppon the Racke,  who confessed and reuealed horrible things. The 30. this desperat Italian with a knife which he had craftily gotten,  first strooke himselfe in the bellie nigh the nauell, and after in the breast on the left side, and so killed himselfe. And immediatly after, by the Magi∣strate of the Citie, was condemned for a murtherer and a Traytor. The Wallon malcontent named Nicholas Hugo, alias de la borde, be∣ing afterward taken and examined, confessed the conspiracie. The King vnderstanding what was done, purposed and attempted, sent two of his Counsell into the Lowe Countrey to Bridges, to bring the said Salcedo into France, tooke the paynes in his owne person to examine him, and hauing by the said Salcedo his owne confession knowne what was in∣tended at Nancie, attempted at Bridges, caused the sayd Salcedo to be con∣demned of treason by the Court of Parliament of Paris, and by their sen∣tence the sayd Spanyard Salcedo was drawne and torne with foure Hor∣ses. There were also some prisoners at Paris about that matter. About the same time, or not long after, one Monsieur de Muy being wounded at the siege of Fere, the Duke of Guize went out of Paris in post to be his ghostly father, and to giue him some good ghostly counsell, not to tell tales out of the schoole, nor to discouer holy mysteries.
The Archdeacon of Toul in Lorreyne, named des Rosiers, had written a booke of genealogies of the Lorreyns, bringing them out of the belly of the  house of Eroy, to the defacing and disalowing the possession of the crowne by the Valoys. About the same time the King sendeth the president Brulard to make his processe, and by him was condemned of high treason: but af∣terward by intercession made, was quited by recanting and condemning his booke before the Kinges counsaile. The Guyzes being thus disappointed of their driftes with the losse of 6. thousand crownes, faint not for all yt, but follow on their course: for they must néeds to see an end of Monsieur whom they thinke to be such a blocke in their way, as they cannot ouerlape without stumbling dangerously. There was a holy woman in Paris, by name Madam sainte Geneuieue, who was so holy, that both the King Henry the third, and Monsieur his brother, would often times goe a pilgrimage to her with much Romish deuotion, but with litle honesty, she must do the feat for the aduauncing of the holie League, and vpholding of the holy Church. The Guyzes therefore to spéede well, must offer a candell to that Saint of Paris, to bée good to them, and to doe for them that which God would not doe, at their earnest prayers to repaire to Monsieur, which was thenat Chasteautierry, vpon the riuer of Marne in Brie: and that she should haue with her boxes of Concerues. This blessed Virgin therefore tooke her iourney to Monsieur ward with her holy boxes with her: shée was the more welcome to Monsieur, because he had not séene her of a long time: he being otherwise somewhat pensiu, for missing of his purpose in the low Countrey, and for the losse of his cre∣dit, which he left behinde him at Antwerpe, yet for the recreating of him selfe with his olde acquaintance, they must banquet together, and haue a good merry day once ere they depart. Shée came forth with her holy boxes, where holy dregges of Rome had béene, out of the which she gaue him a bole so hard of digestion, that it did him no good: for it did lie so heauie vp∣on his heart, that he neuer left vomitting of blood as long as there remai∣ned life in him, and in like maner as his brother Charles the ninth did be∣fore him: he died the 10. day of Iuly, on the which day his father Henry the second died 24. yeares before. As soone as the King was certifyed of the death of his brother, he sen∣deth the Duke de Espernon to the King of Nauarre, to aduertise him that he held him for his sonne and true heire of the Crowne in France, in case he doth decease without issue. But to come to the matter: now here is a blessed daies worke for the Guyzes and holy Church. Vp master Frier, and get you to Rome the holy Citie once againe, to Sir Hugh, to shew him what good lucke wée haue, and that all thinges do happen as wée would haue them: but that
we haue néede of his ghostly counsaile. Whilest Frier Mathew (carier of the Guyzes) goeth to do his message as well as he could, they of the Guyze with their partakers do dispearse themselues into all partes of the Realme, to allure Townes and Cities, but especially them that were Malecontentes, to their deuotion: after the which progresse of theirs with importunacy, they do procure the King to call the assembly of the states of the realme at Bloys, to the which they had altogether laboured their fauorers, and such as did desire nothing more then the decay of the King, and increasing of the Guyzes. In the same assembly, that the King might haue the blame himselfe of the breaking of the peace, it was requested. First, that the edict of pacification should be reuoked, and the exercise of the reformed religion forbidden. Secondly, that the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and all the nobilitie professing the same religion, should be exiled out of the realme, & all others of the same profession should be enforced either to abiure, or els to depart forthwith out of the Realme. Thirdly, that the 8. townes which were giuen them for 6. yeares, should be put into the kinges handes, alleaging that the time was expired. The king being desirous to entertaine his subiectes in peace, knowing well the frutes of ciuil warre, dissolued the states, promising shortly to as∣semble the best, wisest, and most experienced of his realme, to haue their aduise for the reformation of all thinges. About the same time of the states beeing at Bloys, the king of Nauarre sendeth new aduertisementes to the king, about the intent and open prac∣tises of the league, willing him to haue some care of himselfe, and sheweth him the present danger that he stood in. After the returne of Frier Mathew from Rome, the Bariesuits in the latter end of September held a certaine Synode or Clandestine conuen∣ticle in Paris, in the which the said Frier Mathew as president, did rule the rost, hauing receaued direction of Sir Hugh vicar of Rome, where accor∣ding to the said directions, they lay downe the methode to stirre vp the coles, to raise vp seditions and rebellious in all partes, but especially to increase the hatred of all men against them of the religion, but namely a∣gainst the king of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, and for that end they forged an infamous libell, as more amply shalbe shewed. The king according to his promise made to the States at Bloys, in the latter end of the yeare 1584. called (at Saint Germayn in Faye) his chée∣fest and best learned Senators of all his Parliamentes, there to shew him the best and readiest meanes to ease the people, and to restore the realme to some good state. On the other side, the king of Nauarre, considering that the time ap∣pointed
to surrender the 8. townes committed to his custody, was expired,  and that the rage of his enemies was rather increased then diminished, and that their meanes, their factions and their furie was now greater then euer it had béene, and that imminent daungers were at hand: assembled a méeting of the Nobilitie, which professed the reformed religion at Mon∣taulban, a strong City in Quercye, where Monsieur Belieure (one of the kinges counsaile) was present to prouide for their common affaires. And whereas the king of Nauarre his enemies had spread abroad, both by false rumors and libels, that immediatly after the death of Monsieur, he  was returned to the Catholike religion, and was gone to Masse: the said king of Nauarre therefore to satisfy all men against that false rumor, and slaunder, protested openly that he knew the truth to be on his side, and that by Gods assistance he would stand to the profession and defence of the re∣formed religion, vnto the end, and that hée would acknowledge none other fortune but onely that. There by the common aduise of all that assembly, it was thought good, that considering the great daungers which seeme to threaten them of the reformed Religion, and generally all France, a supplication should bee presented to the king, that of his méere fauour & clemencie be would con∣tinue the kéeping of the said Townes to the king of Nauarre for certaine yeares more. Vpon this conclusion the Lord Laual, with other deputies, were sent to the King at the assembly which was at Saint Germain, and shewing the cause of their comming to the king, and complaining of diuers iuiuries daily done to them of the reformed religion, by the leaguers: the 11. of De∣cember  the king granted them the keping of the said townes for 2. yeares longer, charging them that for iniuries done to them, they should not séeke to reuenge their owne cause, for breaking of the peace. But that they would shew their gréefes to the King of Nauarre, who thereupon should make meanes to him for amendes. Whilest all these thinges were working on euery side, the king of Na∣uarre, séeing that neither so many aduertisementes from euery part of France geuen to the king, neither that which hée himselfe saw, namely the partialities, societies, fraternities, leagues, confederacies, and preparati∣ons of the house of Guyze, did any whit moue or warne the king to looke to himselfe and to his affaires (which thing he might easily haue done in time.) The said king of Nauarre had sent the Lord de Segur Pardillan su∣perintendent of his house to the Quéene of England, the king of Dēmarke, the Princes electors, the Lands-graue of Hessen, and to other States of Germany for thrée causes: first to compound the controuersies about cer∣taine articles of religion not as yet agréed vpon in the reformed Churches, yt the enemies of the commō cause might not distoine them by that occasiō.
Secondly, to renue the ancient friendship and aliaunce in that sort, as it had véene of old. Thirdly, to dispose a summe of money in Germany, in such order that therby he might there prouide succour, if he were assaulted by his enemies. The said Lord Perdillane returned home to the king of Nauarre in De∣cember 1584. when the king did hold his counsaile at Saint Germayn. The end of the first Booke. THE SECOND BOOKE. NOw when the Guyzes do draw néere their time, to bring forth that monster of treason which they had conceaued: they haue many secret conferen∣ces with yt Duke of Parma, pety sonne to Peter Aloyse Pharnese the Popes bastard, hanged at his windowes by his owne subiectes for his exe∣crable life. Also with Bernardine Mendoze, & Giouan Bardachino the king of Spaine his Cori∣ero: the Bishop of Cominges, bastard sonne to the Lord Lansake, playing Dromo betweene them. For a Stage play can not haue good grace to make the people laugh, except there be a popish Priest to play the Deuils part. All this whispering among them was about a great summe of money, which the king of Spaine should lay out for to beginne the play: and least the sayd king of Spaine should be cosened of his money, the Duke of Guyze to deliuer him the dukedome of Britayn, yt Cityes of Bourdeaux, and Marseilles: and for the performance thereof, he should send some of his children to the Duke of Sauoy in hostages. Therefore now the Guyze is as full of Spanish pistolets, as a Dogge is full of Fleas (as the Prouerbe is, when wee will signify great aboun∣dance of thinges). He geueth great summes of this Spanish liberality to his partakers, but specially to discontented persons. He profereth also of this Spanish money to many, which neither require it, neither would haue of it. But all men did excéedingly wonder whence should come this plenty, séeing that it was well knowen, that he was déepely indebted. Now when all thinges séemed to be in a readines, to begin the trage∣die, the Fryers of the society of Bariese the sorcerer, named by cutting short Iesuits, do play the prologue: for they steppe vp into Pulpits euery
where, whom they haue turned to trompets and drommes of the Deuill,  to blow and sound the alarme of sedition and rebellion. There they do shew the decay of popery, which they call the Catholike faith: they do vrge the miseries of euery degrée to procéede from the Hu∣gonoets and their fauorers (meaning and in a maner openly declaring the king.) They do propound ye great dangers which did hang ouer the heads of the Catholikes. There they did tell, how that there was a certaine confederacie of the Hugonoets with the heretikes of Germany, England, Denmarke, and Swisserland, to oppresse the Catholike Church. It is said before that in September last, there was holden a certayne conuenticle of conspirators against Christendom in Paris by the Bariesu∣its, commonly called the Iesuits, where they forged a certaine infamous li∣bell, to serue them for a firebrand of the sedition. There they say and lye all at once, that the 14. day of December 1584, ther was concluded at Magdebourge in Saxonie, that the kings of Nauarre and Denmarke, the Queene of England, the Princes of Germany, the Princes Palsgraue, and Orenge, the Landsgraue of Hessen, they or their Embassadors should appeare at Basill the next moneth of May following. Where is to be noted the impudencie of these lying Fryers. For the Princes Palsgraue and Orenge were dead, the one a whole yeare before, the other they had procured to be murthered in Holland by one of their owne Iesuits 6. moneths before. But these two Princes they should raise vp by the Boriesu their master, whom these Coniurers founde in their Pam∣phlets to appeare at Basill. They affirmed also in the said infamous libels, that the King of Na∣uarre should haue taken armes the 18. of Aprill, the yeare 1585. which in déede was the time appointed for the League to rise vp. They affirmed also, that the king of Nauarre had promised in the as∣semblie of Montaulban, that in case he should suruiue the king, and that hée might attayne to the Crowne, he would roote out of France all Popish re∣ligion, and depriue them of the said religion of all state, dignity and auto∣rity. They said also that the ministers had perswaded the king of Nauarre to reuenge the murther of Paris, and that it was concluded, that out of eue∣ry towne and citie 3. of the chéefest Burgeses should be deliuered to re∣quite the said murther. They did reade these forged lyes in their Pulpits, where they omitted no point of Monkish railing rhetoricke in their sermons, to stirre vp the people to sedition and warre against them of the reformed religion. They crye out, they rage and fume, saying that now the time is come, that ho∣ly Church (for by this word they meane, the pride, pompe, and voluptu∣ous
life of Bishops, Cardinals, Monkes, Fryers, and Priestes) do craue their helpe, or neuer. They do exhort the people both in their Sermons,  and prinate confetence, and in their shriuing of the people, to ioyne with the Leaguers, made them great promises of heauenly rewardes, they ex∣tolled the noble buds of Charlemaigne, meaning the Guyzes, which haue vndertaken the defence of holy Church against the force and attemptes of heretikes, and fauorers of them. They preached also their valure, their wisedome, their woundes and noble feats for the defence of the realme, and holy Church. They shewed how easie it would be to roote out the he∣retikes out of all France, hauing such Captaines to manage the warres. About the beginning of this yeare 1585. there was a Bachiler, or ra∣ther a lodger of diuinitie in Sorboune, which dyed a holy Martir in this wise (let good men iudge.) This Diuine had holden in disputation pub∣likely in the Colledge of Sorboune this Theologall proposition, ful of Ie∣suitical diuinity, which he dedicated to the Abbot of Cluny, bastard sonne to the Cardinall of Lorreine: that was, to wit, That it was lawfull for a∣ny man priuate or otherwise, to depose or kill any King or Prince, which were wicked, euill men, or heretikes. The king hearing of this new and strange kinde of Diuinitie aryued now of late into the land, was greatly offended, and intended to call this Bachiler to accompt: but he was preuented by these meanes, For they which had made him so speake with Pistolets of Spaine, hired a good fellow likewise with Pistolets, which slew this diuine with all his diuinity in the court of the Colledge: which act done, fled & auoided, least he who had set both of them to worke for Pistolets should be disclosed. Thus the Prologue being so well played, and the hartes of the behol∣ders so prepared: the Duke of Guyze also with his Pistolets hauing drawen the Malcontes to helpe to playe the rest: and the principall Au∣thors themselues almost readie to come forth. There rested one practise more to be set downe before the entrance, which was as followeth. Betwéene the riuers of Charante, Botonne, and the townes of Niort, Fonteney, and Ralmond, cituated vppon the Ocean sea, lyeth a Countrey called Annix, pertaining to the gouernement of Rochel: the Riuer Seure comming downe from Niort, afore it falleth into the sea, méeting with an other riuer running from Fontency, deuideth it selfe into many channels, which do make diuers Ilandes, commonly called the Ilandes of Ma∣ran, by the name of the chiefe towne there called Portmaran. At euery ac∣cesse into those Ilandes, there are fortes builded vpon the channels of the sayd riuer. The third day of February the Minister of Maran being at Rochel,  was aduertised by the letters of a friend, that there was greater and more cruell preparation of warre against the reformed religion, than euer had
béen afore time: and also that there were drifts to seaze vpon the Iles of  Maran, the Castle and other Forts, if it were not looked to. For the Gui∣zes intending shortly to bring to light their intents heretofore hidden in the darknes of their brayne, and aforehand to seaze vpon as many places of importance as they could; determined by all meanes to seaze vpon Ro∣chel, which had béen alwayes a great eye-sore to them. But knowing well that Rochel could not bee surprized, they hoped to bring to passe by warre that which could not bee done by treason nor surprize, and therefore they concluded to take these Ilands afore hand, out of the which they supposed greatly to molest, and in the end to blocke in the sayd towne of Rochel. The Guizes had purposed to raise their insurrection the 18. of Aprill. But the spirit of ambition did so disquiet them, that without taking any rest they thought a day to be a yere; which impatient abiding caused them to abridge their time, and to anticipate from the 18. of Aprill to the 4. of March. Therefore now the Guizes Leaguers (for so shall they be called hereaf∣ter) with their leagued came foorth vppon the stage the 4. day of March, which had béen a fatall day to that house to worke mischiefe. For 25. yeres Francis Duke of Guize, father vnto this last, vpon the same day commit∣ted the cruell murther of Vassie, which was the breach of the Edict of Ia∣nuary, and the ground of all the ciuill warres which haue followed. The Leaguer and leagued (I say) came foorth galloping in troupes in euery part of France, but specially in Normandie, Picardie, Brie, Champaigne, and about Paris. They seaze vpon Townes, Cities and Fortresses, vpon the Kings money, and vpon euery thing which might doo them good. They surprized Compeigne, Guyssons, Chalons, Toul, Meziers, Montreul, Peron∣ne, and diuers other places in diuers Prouinces. The King on the other side desirous to keepe his realme in peace, with the good aduise of his Senators, assembled at S. Germaine, for a begin∣ning to ease the people, had remitted seuen hundred thousand Frankes, discharging also diuers offices, which were greatly chargeable, and hin∣derfull to the people, and intended to doo a great deale more hereafter, gi∣uing himself wholly to restore his realme in his former flourishing estate. But hearing of this sudden taking of armour, at the first was greatly a∣mazed thereat; yet afterward did beare it with great patience, to see what end these newe tumults and attempts would come to. The 15. day of March the Leaguers being in armour, and dooing all parts of hostilitie vpon the Kings subiects, supposing that all France not  onely would tremble at the sound of their Trompets, but so would take their part, were fouly disappoynted. For in some places they were laughed to scorne; in some other were resisted; and by some were well beaten for a beginning.
And among all others which missed of their purpose, Monsieur des Ro∣ches, according to the determination of the Leaguers, (as is aforesayd)  sent to Maran a certaine friend of his named Gareune (who heretofore  in the former warres had commanded there vnder the said Monsieur des Roches) to seaze vpon the Castle, with the helpe of fiue Souldiers disgui∣sed in Marchants apparell, whom he had brought with him, hoping there also to haue the helpe of certaine Papists of the Towne, but specially of him who had the Castle in kéeping named Piguard, a Popish souldier, which in times past had béen in garrison there, and had married a wife in the Towne. But the watchfull diligence of them of the Religion there dwelling was such, that they discouered him the same night, and chased him away with his Marchants. About the latter ende of March, the King perceiuing the drifts of the  Leaguers to procéed to great outrages, and that his long suffering might greatly further their desperatnes, the 28. of March writeth to his officers euery where, certifying them that the Armes were not taken by his com∣mandement, forbiddeth all men to take any Armes hereafter, commandeth them who haue alreadie taken to lay them downe, chargeth his officers to lay hand on them which doo refuse so to doo, and to procéede against them by order of lawe as against rebels, if they can be apprehended, and willeth the Gouernours of Townes and Prouinces to set vpon them as vpon Traytors. The King also armed the Dukes Ioyeuse and Espernon, with authoritie and power to set vpon the Leaguers, who defeated their companies in di∣uers places. The Marshall Byron also was appoynted with certayne hors∣men to ride in the countrey about Paris, and to set vpon as many as could be found. Marshall Matignon gouernour of Bourdeaux, putteth out of the Castle Trompet the Lord Vailhac, Gouernour of the sayd Castle, for being one of the Leaguers, and for hauing intelligences with the King of Spayne. These beginnings of the Leaguers being as yet doubtfull, not so well frequented, nor so lucky as they hoped it would haue béen, nor yet so well repressed and preuented as the King might haue done, if he had had good counsell, or might haue followed his owne. These beginnings (I say) be∣ing but wauering, & such as might procure them a great fall, they thought that it was high time to bestirre themselues about their busines, and to ioyne policie with such small power as they had, least that in galloping o∣uer hastily, they should fall and breake their neckes. For considering that to wrap the Realme of lustines into new troubles, against the Kings will, without rendering a probable reason, would procure to them & their house more hatred, than they were able to sustain, they labour to doo two things, to wit; to deriue the hatred vpon them whom they had determined to de∣stroy,
and then to seeke to draw the king in processe of time to their faction, as at length they did, as it shall appeare hereafter. To couer therfore their ambitious rebellion vnder some colour of right,  they hid their shame vnder a Cardinals hat; for they bring i vpon ye stage the Cardinall of Bourbon, as the author of this Tragedie, whereon they make him play Getas part. Oh regem me esse opportuit. A man of great yeares, to contend with his Nephew the King of Nauarre, about the Ar∣mor of Achillis afore his death. And for because the Cardinalls hat would not warrant this clayme and rebellion, they goe about to shadowe it with some colour of pietie and iustice (which indeede were trodden vnder foote by themselues, and by the warres and tumults which they had kindled, fo∣stered and intertayned fiue and twentie yeares together, to bring to passe these their now manifest intents) they set foorth a declaration contayning plausible causes among men of all degrees, of their taking of Armes, bea∣ring date the 31. of March. Where note how the Guizes haue hid their treason vnder ye Cardinals name, and the Cardinall taketh the cloake of religion and iustice; so they abusing that olde Noble man as a Geta or slaue, doo make him speake in such sort as followeth. But doo not thinke (gentle Reader) that I speake vnreuerently of that noble Prince, issued out of such an ancient and noble rase, but to shewe the vnaduised facilitie of that man, who suffered himselfe to be so abused, as to become a slaue and a Geta vnto the ambition of other men, and by the same meane hath set his Countrey, (in the which hée did beare so many honors) his naturall and lawfull Prince, his house, his kindred and fami∣lie so honorable, ancient and famous, in a miserable combustion and daun∣ger to be rooted out, for a vayne imagination to become a King. But to re∣turne to the purpose. First, they make him require the abolishing of the reformed religion, and that the stablishing of the Catholike religion may not bee interrupted hereafter, whatsoeuer alteration may happen in the succession of the Crowne, they all of them (I meane the Leaguers) naming themselues falsly (only except the Cardinall Bourbon) Princes of the blood, doo require that a Catholike successor may be nominated, which to bee the Cardinall himselfe, because he had (as they supposed) but few yeres to liue, and there∣fore was not like to stand long in their way. Secondly, they doo require that the K. of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and their heires may bee declared incapable to succeede to the Crowne▪ in case the King should dye without issue, alleaging that they are heretickes and relaps. And note, that for the rest of the Princes of Bourbon, to wit, the Cardinall Vendosme, the Earles, Princes, and Countie of Soyssons, they doo exclude them from the succession of the Crowne, because they are
sonnes of an hereticke, or otherwise contemptuously passe them ouer, as not able to buckle with them. The house of Monpensier is beyond the x.  degree of aguation. The King himselfe cannot liue long, for they will pro∣uide for that: therfore the conclusion is easily to be inferred. The Crowne is fallen in the laps of the Péeres of France, they must procéede to election of a newe King. And who should bee elected (I pray you) but Master Francis of Lorreyne? Thirdly, they do quarrell with the king for fauouring the Duke Esper∣non: as though the king may not fauour, but whom the Leaguers shall appoint him. The cause they do pretend is, that Espernon is a fauorer of heretikes, that is to say: he is too faithfull to the king for their turne. Fourthly, they do alleage, that the Clergie, Nobilitie, and Commons are charged with intollerable bondage and exactions, whom they would re∣store to their old dignity and liberty. The king had geuen the gouernment of Prouance to Monsieur the great Pryor, who had published the edict of peace according to the kinges  commaundement, and caused it to bee precisely obserued in his gouern∣ment of Prouance. But the Leaguers had drawen to their conspiracie a great number of that Countrey with Spanish pistolets, and specially a∣mong others, two noble men, to wit, Monsieur de Saultes and Vines. These two applyed the market for the League in Prouance with Spa∣nish Pistolets, and woon on their side the Consul of Marseilles named Da∣rius, and a Captaine of the towne named Boniface. The 9. day of Aprill these two heads of sedition came in the euening to the doore of one Boniface, brother to this Captayne aforenamed, who was the kings receauer in yt countrey, with fained letters from Mōsieur great Prior, which was at Aix the head towne in Prouance. The said Boniface the kinges receauer came to the dore, his owne wife carrying the Candel before him, who was immediatly slaine by the said Captayne his owne brother, the Consull Darius and their company at his owne doore, and in his wiues presence. This exploit done, the Parricide himself with few of his owne company, went vp to ransake the house, and rifled all that was there to their lyking. From thence with a company of seditious people armed, they went to the houses of them of the reformed religion, whom they lead with great violence, and a great number of prisoners into the tower of Saint Iohn, & afterward made great hauocke of theyr goods. The 10. day they tooke 4. of them more, & manly, one named Chiousse, and the other Antony Lambalent: which they cruelly murthered: and af∣ter  that their bodyes had béen drawen through the stréetes, at length they were cast downe ouer the walles into the towne ditch, before the face of them who were detained prisoners in Saint Iohns tower, intending to
dispatch the rest in like sort the morow, or shortly after. The 11. day the seditious seaze vpon ye fort of Nostre Dame de la garde, and wrote letters to Monsieur Vines, praying him to come in all hast,  with some fortes to take the towne to the vse and kéeping of the League, promising him their assistance. The Duke of Neuers a man of his owne Countrey, to wit, an Italian did then lurke in Auignon, and had procured 4. Galleyes of the Duke of Florence to be in readines in the hauen, vnder the colour to goe to a mary∣age into Italy: at the first newes to haue hasted out of Auignon, and with his companie ioyning to Monsieur of Vines, to haue made that towne sure for the kyng of Spaine according to their agreement, when they cose∣ned him of his Pistolets, or else to some pety Duke of Italy. There was a certayne man in the City of great wealth, credit & power, named Boukier: for feare of this man many of the chiefest citizens, by reason of some particular displeasures, standing in great distrust of him, & supposing that now he would take occasion to be reuenged of them, fledde into the Abbey of Saint Victor. But Boukier, considering the daunger that the towne stoode in, and the common perill of them all, sent to them that had fled into the said Abbey, aduertysing them that the time did not require to call to remembrance priuat iniuries, assured them of his good∣will and safety of his part, and required their assistance in kéeping the said towne in the kinges obedience, and to looke to the common preseruati∣on of themselues. These fearfull Citizens being so reconcyled, and encouraged by this waighty occasion, and ioyning together, went to know of the said Consul Darius, & Captaine Boniface, by what authority they did that which they had done. And when they answered to haue done it by the commaunde∣ment of the grand Prior, and could shew nothing for it, they were appre∣hended: and the same day letters were dispatched to the grand Prior be∣ing then at Aix, to aduertize him of the intended and attempted treason, and what had passed there. The 12. day the graund Prior came from Aix to Marseilles with  2. hundred horses, and a Chamber of the Parliament of Prouance, who do hold their court there. The 13. Day, the said Chamber (after due examination of the fact, and  euident knowledge and proofes of the offences there committed) pronoun∣ced sentence of death against the said 2. heads of the treason, to Darius & Boniface, which out of hand were executed. Also they set at libertie them of there formed religion, with commaundement on both sides to kepe the kinges edict, and so by these meanes the towne was deliuered from dan∣ger of changing of mastery, the people from death, and vndoing, and the tumult ceased. This spéedy execution did greatly weaken and preuent the
monopols of the League in the countrie of Prouance. About the 15. day the Leaguers hasting to seaze vpon as many townes and houldes as they could in all France, to make their part strong, as  well by force as faction, but speciaily in Belgik, where they could do more then in any part of France, there they committed great cruelties in many places, where hauing the vpper hand, they were withstoode: namely in the towne of Chastilion vppon the riuer Marne in the countrey of Brie, they murthered as well the Catholikes as the Hugonets, because they made re∣sistance against them. About the 20. day the Leaguers did present their association, which  they had set forth in writing to many Noblemen and Gentlemen, vnder the name of the King, requiring them to allow of it, and subscribe to it. But contrary to their expectation, many refused so to do: and diuers who had allowed it, considering more déeply in the matter, & perceiuing their intentes, abiured and forsooke it, with protestations set forth in writing, & printed, wherein they do open the secret thoughtes of the Leaguers, and Leagued. First, they do protest that they do acknowledge none other faith then that, in the which they haue béen baptized, which then they did promise to beléeue and defend, and to that promise they do stand still. Secondly, they do refuse and condemne all manner of associations, vnder what soeuer color, which binde them to obay any other then their Soueraygne. Thirdly, they do shew the League to bee nothing else, but the circum∣uention of the king, the confusion of the State, a dangerous alteration of y• Realme, the bringing of a new Prince of a strange blood: and finally cary∣eth with it selfe a proscription, hauocke, and bondage of all good men in all degrées. About the 22. of Aprill, the King of Nauarre in silence beholding the  rage of this League, and their declaration published, in the which they had made him the obiect of their insurrection, sent the Lordes Clairuant, and Chassincourt with letters to the King, in the which he complaineth of the iniuries of the Leaguers proffered vnto him in their declaration, re∣quiring iustice to be done for the sayd iniuries done vnto him. He offereth also his seruice & power to the King, for to represse the traiterous intentes and attempts of the said Leaguers. About the 30. of Aprill the King willeth the said Lordes Clairuant & Chassincourt to giue this gentle answere to the King of Nauarre from  him. That he doth hold the sayd King of Nauarre as his sonne, and heire of his crowne: willeth him also to arme himselfe with patience, & to cause the edict of peace to be obserued by them of the reformed Religion. Fur∣thermore, that hee acknowledgeth the driftes of the Leaguers, aswell a∣gainst
his own person, as against the said King of Nauarre, but hopeth that  he shal be able himselfe alone to represse their furies, and to punish them wel for their desertes. The second day of May the King by edict and proclamation doth con∣demnethe  Leaguers and Leagued, guilty of high treason, commaundeth his edict of pacification to be proclaimed a new in all partes of the realme, charging all men vpon paine of death to obay and kéepe it inuiolably. At the same time also the King answered to euery point of their decla∣ration of the said Leaguers, whereof the summe followeth. First, the King protesteth of his Catholike Religion, and calleth to witnes his actions, victories, daungers, and labours taken for the same. Secondly, he sheweth that the peace was made, and approoued by the counsell of the Cardinall (in whose name they do séeme to autorize their  rebellion) and of the rest of the Leaguers, not to fauour heretikes (as hee tearmes them) but to restore the decayed state of the realme, to assault them of the reformed religion in conuenient time with greater forces. Thirdly, he declareth how he hath fauored the Cleargie, in giuing them liberty to call prouinciall counsels, and to refrme such abuses, as the ci∣uill warres had brought in, how he hath also preferred the woorthiest sort to the best Ecclesiasticall liuinges, and hath restored to their liuinges them who were dispossessed thereofby the former ciuill warres. Fourthly, that the Leaguers haue no cause to complaine for the geuing of offices. For his predecessors and he after them, haue bestowed vpon the Guyzes the best sort, and most honorable dignities, and that in great num∣ber, when the Princes of his blood haue béen neglected. Fiftly, that it is to force nature, and tyme to compell him by violence of armes to appoint a successor, hée being aliue in strength, health, and flo∣wer of his age, and not out of hope to haue issue. Last of all, he complayneth that this new commotion is very vnfit and out of season, considering that he was now earnestly bent and occupyed to restore the Nobilitie to their ancient honor and dignity, and the people to their due liberty. But by this leauie of armes they haue stopped his god∣ly procéedinges, and haue taken the way to oppresse and root out the Clear∣gy, nobility and people. About the same time also the King sent Ambassadors into forreine coun∣tryes, and commaunded his ordinary Ambassadors in the courtes of for∣reine Princes, to geue them knowledge of the wicked intentes, and tray∣terous attemptes of the Leaguers. The Leaguers in a short space had scattered abroad the Pistolets of Spaine, and about the beginning of Iune they began also to take money;  and therefore thought good to supply the want of Pistolets with French crownes, which is somewhat purer gold: for they exacted in diuers places
great and excessiue summes of money vpon the townes and cities, which  they had either seduced to their faion, or otherwise surprised. As by one we may gather the rest. Bourge being a small towne in Xainctonge situa∣ted vpon the fall of the riuer Dordonne, into Garomne, a towne leagued and extreamly addicted to the Leaguers, was by them raunsomed to ten thou∣sand crownes, and afterward the inhabitantes so cruelly intreated, that in leaping by night ouer the walles, were enforced to steale away for feare of worse, supposing them selues to haue sped well in escaping with their liues. About the same time the Lord Saint Luke, gouernor of Browage, sent a certayne Captayn into the Iles of Maran, vnder colour to buy Oates for his prouision, to see whether hee could worke some surprizing of the Castell. But the Captayne was so roughly shouldered and coursed, that he was glad to retire with his whole skinne. And after that (least the Pa∣pistes should put some into the Castell) euery night 6. or 7. of the refor∣med religion with Caliuers, conuayed themselues priuily in the darke of the night into the gate of the Castell vntill day. The Papistes vnder∣standing this, and also hearing the threatnings ofthem of the Religion, to wit, that if they should bee driuen away, they would burne the Papistes houses afore their departing, more for feare then for loue, were content to admit 4▪ of them of the Religion into the Cast. I, whom they did choose from among them that were altogether vnskilfull in warre. But after∣ward the Foriners (which are all for the most part of the religion) desired to bee admitted into the keeping of the said Castell, and at length it was agreed, that a greater number of them of the Religion should be admitted to the keeping of the said Castell: but alwayes notwithstanding the grea∣ter number was of Catholikes, yet it was so kept vntill the 20. of Iuly next following. About the 5. day of Iune, the King sent the Lordes Claimant, and Chassincourt to the King of Nauarre, willing him to do nothing against  the edict of peace: and that his pleasure was, the sayd edict to remayne irreuocable. About the same time the Leaguers perceiuing the iudgements of the King and of his Courts of Parliament pronounced agaynst them, the exe∣cutions done vppon the persons of diuers their partakers, the declarati∣ons and detections of many Gentlemen by their writinges, their forme cruelty vpon the Kinges subiectes, & misdemeanors toward their Prince, might procure the hatred not onely of the people, but also of their owne fauorers, did set forth an Apologye, such as it was, to wash away their traiterous blemishes and spots, in the which they do labour to make men beleeue that they are honest men, and good Subiectes, and that they seeke nothing but the preseruation and defence of the Romish Reli∣gion
agaynst the heretikes, as they tearme them. First, they say that they can not be attaynted, nor touched of treason, without condemning many Noble men with them, and that the former  Kinges wisedome and sufficiency of the Cadinall of Bourbon, were such as could haue perceaued their driftes, if they had béen tending to any such thing. Secondly, they do disalow the déedes of Rosier, for drawing theyr ge∣nealogy from Charles the great. Thirdly, they reckon their kindred, and aliaunce with the house of Bourbon. Fourthly, sua quae narrant facinora? quae ostentant vnlnera? Fifthly, they do all that they do, least that France should bee reduced to that extremity that England is now in. Last of all, they counsaile the King to ioyne with them, because (say they) they are armed with God his owne hand. Now let the Reader consider, what necessary conclusion may be in∣ferred out of the reasons aboue rehearsed. The 9. day of Iune from Chalons a towne in Champagne situated vpon the riuer Marne, the Leaguers sent a supplication to the King, in the  which they shew their last resolution, to be that they will make him con∣descend to these articles folowing, whether he will or not. First, that according to the supplication presented by the states, assem∣bled at Bloys the yeare before, to wit, 1584. representing the whole realme: he will forbid the exercise of the reformed religion, throughout the whole realme. Secondly, that all men be compelled to professe the popish religion, and that such as haue heretofore professed the reformed religion, may bee enforced to abiure the same: and in case they will not, to be exiled out of the realme for euer. Thirdly, that all heretikes (for so they tearme them which will not con∣sent to their treasons, or idolatrous superstition) bee declared vncapable of any office, dignity or publike charge. Fourthly, they require the townes geuen to them of the reformed reli∣gion, to be taken out of their handes. Fifthly, that the King shall geue ouer the protection of Geneua, against the Duke of Sauoye. Last of all, that the King shall sweare before his court of Parliament of Paris: the contents of this their request reduced into the forme of an edict, to be perpetually, and inuiolably obserued: and likewise shall cause all the Princes, Peeres, officers of the Crowne, Senators, Gouernors & Ma∣gistrates, to sweare to obserue and defend the sayd edict. To be short, they aduertized the King that they haue refused all man∣ner
of conference, except it bee vpon these conditions, and in case he will not do this, they will make him do it whether he will or not. But for the right vnderstanding of this supplication, the Reader must  marke, that it is not Religion which they care for: for their driftes are onely to spoile the King of all authoritie and power, that they may at length robbe him of his royall estate: therefore these thinges following are to be obserued. There were there in France thrée sorts of men, who (as the Leaguers thought) would marre all the playe, to wit, the Princes, Nobilitie, and People. Of the first, they feared greatly the forces, the valour, authori∣tie and fidelitie, knowing very well that they were able both in power and credite, to minister them play long enough to weary them, and by their va∣lour able to encounter with them euery where, and that through their fide∣litie, they would neuer forsake the King in his néede, although that other∣wise they were deuided in religion: considering also that they haue the chie∣fest interest to the Crowne. As for the Nobilitie, they considered that they were of thrée sorts, Lea∣guers, Catholikes, and Protestants. The Nobles and the Commons which doo professe the reformed religion, they knewe by long experience to bee so skilfull and experienced in warre, as thereby to bee inuincible, and that by all their fayre promises proffered vnto them, they could not bee re∣mooued from their alleagance to their soueraigne King and Prince, whom God had ordayned ouer them. By this their supplication therefore, coue∣red with the hypocriticall cloake of Catholikisme, they would fayne to bée rid of the Princes and Nobilitie reformed, or els to deuide them a sunder, that the more easily they might make them giue roume, or els roote them out. As for the common people reformed, they suppose that they being scattered into diuers popish Prouinces, could bee so vsed, as that they might not flocke together, but euery man in an imminent danger would bee carefull how to saue himselfe in some place of safe exile. That is the cause that they crye out in their supplication, banishment and exile. As for the Catholikes both Noble and Common, they are in hope that superstition it selfe would win them on their side. But if the riddance of them of the reformed religion out of the Realme might not bee throughly done, yet the King and the Catholikes being bound with an oth to execute their demaunds, would at the pleasure of the Leaguers nourish an immor∣tall warre: by the which the King should consume his subiects, and the sub∣iects their King with mutuall blowes, vntill the roume being either made voyde or weakened, & they hauing that thorne (which so sore prickt them) out of theyr foote, might vprightly (without any halting) eyther set them∣selues in place, or els easily shoulder him out who had right to it.
The 10. of the sayd moneth, the King of Nauarre being at Bergerack, a great Towne in Perigord, situated vpon the riuer of Dordonne, answereth  vnto ye first declaration of ye Leaguers which he sent to the King, beseech∣ing him to reade the said answer, and also to shew him ye fauour, as to com∣maund the same to bee read openly in the Parliament. Wherein first hée protesteth, that hee holdeth the true Christian Catholike and Apostolike religion contayned in the sacred word of God, both of the olde and newe Testaments, and also doth embrace the symbols or abridgements of the Christian doctrine: And that he is ready to bestowe life and goods in the defence of the same. Abhorreth & holdeth accursed any kind of doctrine, di∣uers or contrary to the same words. Secondly, he sheweth that he was bred, borne, and brought vp in the same religion, which they call heresie, and that he neuer learned, nor knew any other, and that he beléeueth in his heart to righteousnesse, and confes∣seth with his mouth to saluation, that the same doctrine which he doth pro∣fesse is the infallible trueth of God; yet he refuseth not to be taught better, if better they can teach him out of Gods word in a generall or nationall Councell duely assembled. Thirdly, in that which he doth in repurging and sweeping away the errors and abuses brought in by long continuance of time, therein he fol∣loweth the examples of many Kings and Princes, of many godly & lear∣ned men, who for these fiue hundred yeares haue desired and attempted the same. Fourthly, whereas his enemies doo charge him to be a persecutor of the Catholike religion, he will bee iudged by all men voyde of passion, who hath greater cause to complayne in that behalfe, he or his enemies. Last of all, after a long consideration of the miseries which fall vpon the heads of men of all degrees, and the oppression of the poore people, which infallibly will followe these attempts of the Leaguers, he doth wish (see∣ing the enemies haue made him partie) the quarrell which they haue to him might bee ended with a Combat. And debasing himselfe from that high degree of a King, in the which God hath placed him, for an abridge∣ment of all miseries, the sparing of Christian bloud, for the ease and quiet∣nes of the poore people, doth proffer to his enemies to trie the matter by a Combat, betwéene him and the Duke of Guize, or two to two, ten to ten, or more to more in like proportion. It is reported how the Duke of Guize after the fight of this challenge, being vrged to accept it, excused his cowardize by the example of his fa∣ther, which in like case excused himselfe vpon the inequalitie of the persons. To wit, that it was not lawfull for him to accept that challenge at the hands of one of the Princes, as being after the royall house in degree a∣boue all the rest of the Nobilitie.
But rather and more truely may it bee sayde, that he (who being not a Prince, did reckon and write his name among the Princes, or rather pre∣ferred himselfe before the Princes of the royall bloud) did refuse this prof∣fer,  not of any dutifull affection as he pretended, (whereof hee had broken before the bonds of lawe) but rather vpon base cowardize, for lacke of for∣titude and courage, as euer caring not what he spent of other mens bloud, so that he might spare his owne. These things passing to and fro, many exploytes of hostilitie were done and executed on euery side, rather to the losse than the aduauntage of the Leaguers, being crossed euery way by the true subiects of the King. Wherevpon, considering that the worlde frowned vpon them, so that if they had not the King on their side to salue the sore, they were like to haue a great fall: therefore they must followe some other course. Hetherto the Guizes haue couered themselues vnder the Cardinals hat, hauing deriued all the hatred (so farre as they might) vpon that old man, whom they greatly abused. Now, when the Cardinals hat would not serue the turne, they doo put in practise the other part of their dilemma, as the Cardinall or the King must couer vs, or els we fall: but the Cardinall cannot, ergo the King must. And that the King may doo it, we must set A∣chitophel to work: therfore let him come vpon the stageto play his part. The Kings Counsellers were eyther seruants to the Guizes, or els alied or otherwise deuoted vnto him, except the Dukes Espernon and Ioyeuse, whereof the last afterward was woon to the Leaguers side; Espernon re∣mayned alwayes more faithfull to the King, than the King to himselfe. For the which cause (by the meanes of a Curtizan in Paris, named Sainte Beufue) they hyred Villeroy (one of the Kings Secretaries) to haue mur∣thered him, so to haue béen eased of that heauy burthen. These Counsel∣lers must play Achitophels part, they must helpe vp with the packe by the meanes which followe. They in the middest of these broyles, did of purpose attenuate the grow∣ing and forces of the League, as a thing weake of it selfe rather to bee de∣spised than regarded, as not able to continue long, but that it would decay of it selfe, and that some certayne inconsiderate zeale of the Catholike Re∣ligion had made them somewhat passionate: and for to make him more secure on yt side, they deriued his thoughts from the Leaguers with a but. But if he would once shewe a token of displeasure towards them of the reformed religion, or would onely fayne to intend warre against them, the Leaguers of themselues would fall downe vpon their knees before him, therefore it were better to let them alone, for as much as they would bee ready to be with him whensoeuer he would employ them. Also that it were better for him to warre against them of the reformed religion in Poytow, Guien, Gascoyne, Languedocke, and Daulphine, than a∣gainst
them of his owne religion. For although the Protestants were dutifull and obedient enough, yet were it better to haue them for enemies, being the weaker side, than the Leaguers and Catholikes which were the  stronger part of his Realme. Beside, that if he should deuide the Catho∣likes with an vnseazonable issention, they all would become a scorne and the pray of hereticks their common enemies. The King carried away by this counsell, and otherwise inclining to at∣tempt against them of the reformed religion, ordayne the Lord Ioyeuse his Generall for Languedock. Espernon for Prouance, and he in his owne person would assault Poytow. Therfore the 18. day of Iune, partly for hatred which he bare to ye refor∣med  religion, partly already inclining to the League, partly not knowing what he did, for ye great dangers that he saw himself compassed in, by the perswasions of such Counsellers as had blindfolded him, according to the saying, Si non sua sponte insanit: instiga. For being in the Citie of Paris, he taketh order how to victuall his Armie in Poytow, for the which thing he appoynted certayne Townes in Poytow & Xainctonge, to wit, Chatelerault, S. Merxent, Niort, Fonteney, Towars, Engolesme, Xainctes, and Coignack, there to haue alwaies in store a certayne quantitie of Corne, Dates and Wine, as in store houses, which order he sendeth to the sayd Townes to be put in execution. The King being thus deluded by his Counsell, and busying himselfe about these matters of warre agaynst them of the reformed religion (whe∣ther it were in earnest or by dissimulation, God knoweth, but at length it turned to earnest) he giueth leaue and time to the Leaguers to grow grea∣ter in strength and number, and forgoeth the occasions and opportunitie to prouide for necessary remedies agaynst them. These Counsellers at length when they saw time, came once more vpon the stage. And on a sudden they terrified the King agayne (as of a thing happened beside their expectation) with the great strength of the League, shewing what great danger might insue, if he should seeme to saile against that violent tempest. Considering that the resolution of restoring the Ca∣tholike religion, and of the suppressing the reformed, had possessed gene∣rally the mindes of the people. So that if he should seeme to withstand the zeale of the Leaguers (for their treason was with them zeale of the po∣pish religion) he would be commōly thought to be a fauourer of heretikes, and thereby an vniuersall rebellion of his subiects might ensue, to the vt∣ter vndoing of him and his estate. Therefore, that as a good Pilot he must obey the weather, and seeke for some reconciliation, and make peace with them as much to his aduantage, as the necessitie of the affayres may suffer him. And that in such an extreame case hée must holde with the strongest side.
These and many other considerations propounded vnto him, which had lost his authoritie (and that by them which wholly ruled him) through a iust iudgement of God (for despising the voyce of him, and for persecuting  him by whom he raigned, and from whom he had receiued all royall au∣thoritie and soueraigne maiestie) he began to wauer and hearken to some spéeches of vnion. Thus the King (through Gods iust iudgement, and the pernicious per∣swasions of his vnfaithfull Counsell) bewitched, doth determine to make peace with enemies as good cheape as he may: and for that thing he must seeke out some good chapman skilfull and practised in olde Italian trickes. Therefore he thought that his Mother was most fit, as most skilfull in such markets. This accursed woman, as she had alwaies an ambitious and busie soule, so she had also a double mind, by the which she studied to haue great thanks for doing no good, and to kéepe her selfe in authoritie, and in the possession of the gouernment, thought it should cost her the subuersion of her owne house and children, and the vtter desolation of the Realme. For the which cause she thought to kéepe the King alwaies busied & hampered in trouble, vexation and daunger, that she might alwaies haue thankes for her bad seruice. The King as a naturall sonne put her alwaies in great trust, iudging of her naturalnes and loue towards him, as he did iudge of his towards her. The Leaguers on the other side were assured that she would doo no∣thing for the Kings aduauntage and ease, for feare she should bee no more employed. Therefore she was well liked on both sides. Up then old Medea, you must shewe yet once againe some of your olde Italian trickes. Old Catie must bee the market woman, she shall make the bargayne. But for as much as two eyes doo see more than one, she shall haue some counsellers appoynted her in that negotiation, such as would not suffer her to doo any good vnto the King and the Realme, if she had béen willing so to doo; for they were al the Kings enemies, addicted to the Lea∣guers, and such as would haue taught Italian trickes the busest head of all Florence, yea such as would haue sent the great Prophet of Italy Ma∣chiuell, with all his diuellish Prophecies, to his Christcrosse. Now we will leaue the Q Mother with her counsell to doo their mar∣ket as well as they can, whilest wee discourse of some other matters inci∣dent to the cause and the time. About the beginning of Iuly, the King of Nauarre hearing of the  Kings wauering, and what was like to passe betwéene the sayd King and the League, writeth a letter to him from Nerat the 10. day of Iuly, in the which hee repeateth the Kings procéedings against the Leaguers, as the condemnation, proscription and execution of some of their partakers; hée
aduiseth the King that if hee make peace with the Leaguers, hee armeth rebells agaynst himselfe, his state and Crowne: he doth lament the mise∣rable  state of him and of his Realme; comforteth himselfe in his integri∣tie and innocencie; referreth all things to Gods diuine prouidence, repo∣seth himselfe in the Lord, and trusteth in God that he will assist him in his iust defence. But this good counsell of the King of Nauarre will not serue his turne; the King must followe the streame, and will bee shortly promo∣ted to a higher degrée. For he shall be one of the fellowes of the League who shall pay for all, and haue least to doo in it. It is sayd before, how the Papists and they of the reformed religion consented ioyntly to keepe the Castle of Marans. Now, about the begin∣ning of Iuly, the Lord S. Hermin had gathered together some thrée hun∣dred men of the Leagued in Poytow, to bring them to the Lord S. Luke into Browage (as he sayd): but indéede it was to seaze vpon the Castle of Marans and other Forts in the Iles. The sayd S. Hermines with them would haue passed through Marans: but they of the religion withstood his passage, and began to fortifie the Fort called Alowete, so that hée was enforced to take his iourney through Maillezais and Ronde, and in that iourney shortly after they were discomfited and slaine by them of S. Ihan d' Angely. The night following, the comming of S. Hermin nigh Marans, there was a great alarum in the Towne, and the Papists which were in the Castle to the number of fiue and twentie, supposing that S. Hermin and his companie had entered the Towne, began to reioyce, sing and daunce at the sound of a bag-pipe, which they caused to play the most part of that night, threatning them of the religion who were but foure in number. But these foure standing on their warde, charged them not to make any innouation with them of the League; so that not onely they kept the Pa∣pists in feare, but also at length (with a certayne amazement of them) cau∣sed their pag-pipe to cease. About the same time, the Prince of Conde vnderstanding how things were like to passe betwéene the King and the Leaguers, departed from Rochel to repayre to the King of Nauarre, and leaueth the Lord Rohan in Poytow, to ouerlooke and withstand the attempts of the Leaguers there. The sayd Lord. Rohan about yt 12. of Iuly, departed from Rochel with foure score horses, and rode to Marauns, to assure those Ilandes. The  Papistes had already seazed the fort called Brune where through the sayd Lord should passe: but their hartes so fayled them, that they durst not re∣sist him. Entring therfore without any resistance into the towne of Ma∣rans, hee called the inhabitantes of both religions, and told them, that hee had determined to place a gentleman within the Castell to kéepe the same in obedience to the King, vnder the gouernement of the King of Nauarre,
gouernour of Guyen for the sayd King, which thing if they would refuse, hee would burne all their houses into ashes. And therefore bid them out of hand to chuse a gentleman of his company, such as they would them∣selues,  there to commaund, to the which thing, some with a good will, and some vnwillingly, but yet all obayed. There was a certaine Notary, who had professed the reformed religion after a sort: hee the day before the Lord Rohan his comming, hauing in∣telligence thereof, went to the Papistes from house to house, warning them to stand to their defence agaynst the sayd Lord Rohan, and to enter into the Castle first, to let the said Lord Rohan from the entring. By whose perswasions, a great number of Papistes, and of the most skilfull in warre with their Notary seazed on the Castell. But foure Gentlemen of the re∣formed religion, hauing gotten the tower of the gate, which commaunded ouer the court of the sayd castell, did threaten to shoote against all such, as would presume to let the said Lord Rohan enter in, or any other whom hee would place there. So the Papistes with their Notary began to speake fayre, and to open the gate to the Lord Sowsaye of Beauregard, whom the inhabitantes had required there to commaund: he entred therein with the Lord Mortaygne his brother the 15. day of Iuly: and hauing receaued the oath of the inha∣bitants to be faythfull vnto the King, vnder the authority of the King, of  Nauarre, gouernor for the King in Guyene departed, and left his brother the Lord Mortaygne there as his lieftenant. Whilest these small quarrelinges did so passe at Marans, we haue left the Q. Mother with her Counsellers, to make the bargayne, and to sell to the Leaguers the crowne of France, the Kings authority and honor, for as litle as they may afoord it, that is, gratis, and for iust nothing. The affayres were handled with such faithfulnes, that these Counsel∣lers as soone as they came out of their chamber, went into another to sit in counsell by them selues, to aduertise the Leaguers day by day of all which they had gone about, and with the Q. Mother: also, what was the dispo∣sition from time to time, to aduise the Leaguers what they should request, and how farre they should yeeld: at length, after long changing and chop∣ping of wordes, saeuis inter se conuenit vrsis. Certaine Articles are conclu∣ded  at Chalons in Champaygne the twelfth day of Iuly, which do consist of thrée principall pointes. First, that the King shall make an edict, in the which hee shall graunt them all that they requested at Bloys the last yeare to wit 1584. in the as∣sembly of the states there. Also, all whatsoeuer they demaunded by their declaration, bearing date the last day of March: and all what was required of them in their last re∣solution, dated the tenth day of Iune at Chalons: and that is as much as
they would for this tyme. Secondly, that leuying of armes, all actions of hostility committed  since by them, or by their partakers, or by the townes and cities of their association shall bee allowed, and declared good, lawfull, and done for the Kinges seruice, for the defence of holy Church, and aduauncing of Gods glory. Hereby the actions of hostility are comprehended, the murthers, spoils, robberies, ransackinges, riflinges of publike or priuat thinges, all rapes, whoredoms, & villanyes committed by them of the League, which all the King must thinke, and publish by his authority, to bee done for his seruice, and the defence of the Popish Church. Here is a King but bad∣ly serued. Also that all iudiciall proceedinges, iudgementes, proscriptions, con∣demnations, and executions passed agaynst them of the League, shall bee reuoked and declared voyde, wrongfull and vniust. Thirdly, before his owne face, they enforced him to deuide his king∣dome among them: and of a King of France (for to please the League) he hath made himselfe one of the thrée kinges of Colen. Now followeth the good bargayne, which they when the King had sent to make his market, had agreed on: whether it be to the kings aduantage and honor, let euery man iudge. Here is an other point of the Leaguers good seruice to theyr King. First, the Cardinall of Bourbon, the new king of the Friers must bee prouided for, and let him be sure that he shall haue the least part. For be∣sides the places belonging to his Bishopricke of Roan, he shall haue the old castell of Deepe, which no body else will haue. The Duke moreouer shall haue the gouernement of Britaine, and two of the strongest places that he shall name in that Prouince, with the admi∣ralty of the same. The Duke of Guyze shall haue the citadel of Mets, because his go∣uernment of Champaigne hath no places good inough for him. The Duke de Mayn in his gouernment of Burgondie shall haue the ca∣stell of Dyjon, or the citadell of Chalons vpon Sawne. The Cardinall of Guyze shall haue Rhemes, and the countrie about so much as he will. The Duke Aumall shall haue the holdes of his gouernment of Pi∣cardie. Wee see how the great masters be indifferently well prouided for: now theyr seruantes and partakes must haue part of the kinges spoyle, or else they will frowne and tell tales. First, the Lord Antragues shall haue Orleance. The Lord D'ho shall haue Can and Constances in base Normndy.
The Lord Brissacke shall haue the gouernement of Anjou. The Lord Saultes shal haue the gouernment of Prouance in the absence  of the graund Pryor. The Lord Chastre shall haue the gouernment of Bourges. The Lord Vailhac shall haue the Castell trompet in Bourdeaux. Mandelot (Q. Mothers Scullion) shall haue Lyons, and the Citadel there. I pray you masters hold your handes, you be well if you could consider it: vse him no worse then his granfather Francis the first prophecied of you: lethim haue his doublet and his bréech to couer his shame. But how chaunce that in your partition you haue forgotten your selues? Is Poytow, Xainctonge, Engomoys, Limosin, Perigord. Quercye, Rowarges, Viuarets, Auvergne, Gascoyn, Languedocke, & Daulphine nothing woorth with you? Be not these countries worth the hauing. If you be such great Captaines as you would seeme to bee, there you may haue occasion to make proofe of your valiantnes, if your stomacke serueth you: but you will say, it would cost blowes, and that you loue not. Here gentle Reader, consider the course which these lustie buddes of Charlemayne do follow, they will roote the heretikes (as they say) out of France, they will exile them, and ridde the realme of France of them: yet they seaze vpon the kinges Cities and Dominions, and do enforce him to deuide his kingdome among them: but specially they assure themselues of those prouinces, townes, cities and holdes, as had not in a maner one of the reformed religion left among them: but they either had béen mur∣thered, or else so vexed and disquieted by the continuall dangers, which e∣uery day compassed them, that they had retyred most into those prouinces in France, which were safer from the violence of the Leaguers, or into forreine Countries. So they warre agaynst the heretikes by subduing the Catholikes to their deuotion. They warre against the heretikes, where none were to make them resistance: and dare not looke on the prouinces where the heretikes (as they tearme them) were in great number. But to the matter. Although the vniust and inconstant dealinges of the house of Valoys, had empayred greatly their honor and renowne: and that this king by his own actions, at the massacre of Saint Bartholemy had great∣ly stayned his garments with a spot that would neuer be washed: yet did hee alwayes retayne the authority and reputation of a Soueraygne Prince: vntill that for hatred of the Gospell hee suffered the ambition of the house of Guyze to encroch too much vpon his royall authority and prero∣gatiue, vnder colour of Catholike zeale. Thus hee weakened his royall authority, by following the counsell of Italians, thrusted into his seruice by the cunning of the Guyzes for that intent. These Italian scholema∣sters did endeuour alwaies to rule him by the preceptes of Machiauell the
Italian prophet: so that after he came to the Crowne, the Guyzes with their adherents interrupted diuers times the peace made with them of the religion, made continuall monopols and secret practises and associations  with his subiects, to the great empayring of his royall authoritie (as is a∣fore sayd) and still vnder colour of Popish deuotion, so that at length ha∣uing by the means abouesayd seduced the harts of the Priestes & Monks, of many of the Nobillity and people, hauing specially woon his Senators and Counsellers, and robbed him of the good will and loue of his subiects, in the end by this market they haue made themselues equall to him, they haue set their seat as high as his: so that now the king is nothing which they are not, except onely that as yet they do not take vpon them the name of king, but suffer him for a while to enioy the same. So that the king now hauing not onely lost part of his Princelike strength, which consisted in his townes cities and holds, but also part of his authority, which lyeth in commaunding alone as a soueraygne, is be∣come a fellow of the League. If you demaund why? the question is soone answered, because he set himselfe agaynst him, of whom he had receaued all power and authority, Hee which had giuen him, tooke it agayne for his vnthankfulnesse. But now let vs returne to the League. These articles called, the holy League being concluded to the kinges great disaduantage and dishonor, the edict must be made thereafter, which was published the 18. day of Iu∣ly, and is commonly called the edict of vnion: wherein the king doth all  that it pleaseth the Leaguers, to commaund him to do, as a good obedi∣ent fellow of that holy association. Fyrst, hee forbiddeth the exercise of the reformed religion throughout all his Dominions, commaunding the ministers of the Gospell to depart the realme out of hand. Secondly, he commandeth all men to professe the popish religion, and that the professors of the Gospell without any respect of persons, either shall beleeue poperie, or else within sixe moneths shall depart out of the Realme: with licence in the meane time to sell their goods to their owne vses. Thirdly, that as many as haue been infected with heresie (for so hee cal∣leth the Gospell of trueth) or are knowne to fauour it, shall bee incapable to be are any office within the Realme. Fourthly, he dooth dissolue the bipartit and tripartit chambers of iudge∣ments, which were ordayned for the indifferent ministration of iustice, in respect of religion. Fifthly, that the townes graunted to the keeping of the King of Na∣uarre, at Saint Germane the yeare 1584. shall bee surrendred into the Kings hands.
Sixtly, that all whatsoeuer offensiue actions haue been committed by the Leaguers, their adherents, Townes, Cities, or comunalties of their  association, shall be hereafter iudged, as lawfull, good and acceptable seruice to the King: done for the defence of the holy Catholik Romain Religion. And that all declarations, proclamations, iudgements, prescriptions, con∣demnations and executions, whatsoeuer against the Leaguers, or any of them for the said offences pronounced, shall be voyd, as vniustly & wrong∣fully pronounced against them. Where note gentle reader, that the King is come to that bondage, that hee is perswaded to alowe and approue all the murthers, exactions, spoy∣lings, excorsions, treasons, rapes whoredomes blasphemies, and sacriled∣ges, as done for his seruice, the defence of the Church, and aduauncing of Gods honour. Will not the Lord reuenge this pusilanimitie, in such a great Magistrate; with some notable example of his iustice, according vn∣to his threatnings: woe be to you which call euill good. Last of all, he commaundeth all manner of officers, and the Nobilitie, to sweare the obseruation of the said edict, which he caused to be published and sworne in the Parliament of Paris: hee himselfe sitting in iudgement the 18. day of Iuly. The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, vnderstanding the con∣clusion and publication of the edict of Iuly, appointed a certaine meeting with the Duke of Monmorency, at Saint Paule de cadioulx in the Pro∣uince of Albigerys, to take aduise together what were to bee done in those extremities. They therefore the tenth of August, concluded a certaine protestation:  in the which shewing what the intents, driftes and demeanours of the Lea∣guers haue been: also what the Kings iudgement was of them, not long since, what meanes the King of Nauarre hath sought, and what hee hath proffered for the preseruation of the state. What his behauiour had been euer since the League did rise, how hee hath kept himselfe quiet, and vnarmed, to the extreame danger of his per∣son when he had great occasions to doo great exploites. At last, they protest that they are not the cause of al those miseries, which are like to ensue out of those troubles, and seeing that no reason will take place, committing their innocencie and equitie of their cause vnto God, doo resolue vpon the defensiue. This resolution being made, the King of Nauarre returned to Nerak, the Prince of Conde to Rochel, and Monmorency to Languedock, to view the attempts, and expect the euents of this new and strange vnion. This vnion being concluded, the King considering that in some manner hee had been enforced to breake the edict of peace, and that it was not the proclayming onely, which would cause the edict of vnion to be obeyed, but
that a certaine cauell warre would ensue, and that there must be some s∣newes to holde it. Therefore hee turneth all his thoughts to make some preparation for the warre: for the which cause the 11. of August he calleth  to the bowre, which is the Kings house, the first and second presidents of his Parliament of Paris, the Prouost of Paris, the Deane of our Ladies Church, and prayed the Cardinall of Guize to be present. Who all being come in his presence, hee made vnto them a short declaration of his will: wherein he sheweth himselfe glad, that at the instant request of his good and faithfull subiects, he hath reuoked the edict of purification, and yet cannot beleeue, that at this time it will bee easier to execute this last resolution, then the former. Yet being incoraged and assisted with so many and so good men of all degrees, he conceaueth some good hope which makes him enter into these actions. And first, to come to that which is expected of all men, he dooth intend to haue three mightie armies, the one for Guyen, the o∣ther by himselfe, the third vpon the borders of Germanie, to let the passage of strangers, which will amount to foure hundred thousands crownes a moneth. Secondly, that hee dooth not meane to vndoo himselfe alone, but seeing that he hath admitted other mens counsell against his owne, in breaking the edict of peace, they must help him in maintaining of the warre. Thirdly, for that the first president of Parliament was one of the chie∣fest, who procured the peace to be broaken, neither he nor his felowes may looke to be paied of their stipends during the warre. Fourthly, for that the people of Paris had shewed so great reioysing at the breaking of the peace, he commaundeth the Prouost of the Marchants to leuie vpon the inhabitants of the saide Citie, the summe of two hundred thousand crownes, for the charges of the warre. Fiftly, the King beholding the Cardinall of Guize, somewhat with a stearne countenance, he let him vnderstand, that forasmuch as the heads of the Cleargie had chiefely cast him into this warre, for his part he is content to beare the charges the first moneth, but that the rest should be maintained at the costs of the cleargie, and for that hee would neuer expect the Popes license. When the King had staied in silence to heare what they would say, they began to finde the matter strange. Then the King with a token of indig∣nation cried out, it had been better (said hee) then to haue beleeued mee: I feare me, that when we goe about to put away the preaching, we will ha∣zard the Masse. I were better then to make peace: and I know not whe∣ther they will accept it when wee will proffer it: so the meeting was ended. The Priests being well stoared (be like) prouided within few daies vo∣luntarilie (yet more willing to haue paied nothing) one milion of frankes for their portion.
Whilest these things were a dooing, the King had sent three Noble men to the King of Nauarre, to wit the Lords Leuoncourt, Poigny and the president Barlart, to trie their cunning, whether they might induce the said  King of Nauarre, to ioyne with him both in forces and religion. These Lords came to the King of Nauarre after his returne from S. Paul de Ca∣dioulx to Nerak, greeting him in the Kings name: declared to him, how the King did hold him as his sonne and heire of the crowne, in case he should decease without issue. And after they shewed the causes which moued the King to ioyne with the League, which was the diuision of the Catholiks, which would redound greatly to the preiudice of his estate, and the vnquietnes of his Realme. Thirdly, that for the loue hee bare to him, hee wisheth him reunited to the Catholick faith, both for the good of his soule, and also that hee might the more easily, by the meanes of the Catholicks be established in the king∣dome, which otherwise would be hard for him to bring to passe. Fourthly, they goe about to perswade him to cause the exercise of the reformed religion to cease, during the tearme of sixe moneths perfixed. Fiftly, they required him in the Kings name, to surrender the townes which he did hold for the King. The King of Nauarre with like courtesies answereth to the first, that if it had been his Maiesties pleasure to haue vsed his seruice in the suppres∣sing of the Leaguers, he would haue shewed a proofe of his duetifull obedi∣ence towards him. To the second he answered, that from his cradle, he hath been brought vp in the reformed religion, in the which hee neuer knew any errour, and yet hath, and dooth proffer himselfe to bee taught by the word of God, in a lawfull councell. To the third demaund hee answered, that the reformed religion, was established by a solemne edict, confirmed by an oath, and that it was not in his power to let the exercise of the same: & therefore purposed to deale in that matter. To the fourth hee answered, that considering the mallice of his ene∣mies towardes him he hath more neede to require others, then to surren∣der those. These Ambassadors also mooued the King of Nauarre, that if he would conferre with the Q. Mother, she would aduance as farre as Champaigne in Toureyne. The King of Nauarre answered, that he would goe as farre as Bergerake in Perigord. Whilest these things passed to and fro, many Nobles, Gentlemen, and others of both religions, euen of the Kings companies, retired from the Court home, and among others the Prince Monpensier. But the raging of the League, and persecutions which encreased daily, caused Henry de
la tour, Vicount Turenne to assemble some Forces in Limosine & Peri∣gord, to whom many Captaynes repayred out of the Countreyes about Limosine and Perigord and Quercye, as the Lord Meriake with his regi∣ment.  The selfe same causes enforced many Noble men and Gentlemen about Paris, Niuernoys, and all the countries betweene Seyne and Loyre, many also out of Bourbonnoys and Berry, being at the South side of Loyre, accompanyed with many men of sundrye qualities and degrees, to forsake their houses and take armes and the field, and to repayre to these Prouin∣ces, that were of sure accesse vnto them. These companies assygned the rendes vous in Berry, intending thence to ioyne to the king of Nauarre in Gascoyne. They were all Gentlemen & Hargebusiers on Horsebacke, be∣tweene two or three hundred. The men of Marke in these companies were the Lord of Pueilles, Fort, Laborde, Landes, Tauennes, and others. These companies of France marching toward Gascoyne, ioyned with the Vicount Turenne about the end of August, who within a litle space of time did en∣crease to the number of fiue or sixe thousand men. About the same time another company of Noble men and Gentlemen likewise retyred out of their houses, accompanyed with great troupes of souldiers, and gaue the rendes vous in Berry, among them these were the chiefest of name: the Lords D'ouant, Roysdulie, Sauiere, Campoys, and diuers others which ioyned with the Prince of Conde being then at Pons in Xainctonge. The Lord Montgomery with his company went as farre as to the king of Nauarre into Gascoyn: his brother the Lord of Orges went to the Prince of Conde. Other companies out of Brie, Champaigne, Ʋermandoys, and other countries there bordering retyred to Sedan, the capitall towne of the principality of Boillon. Out of Burgondy, and the countries about, retyred to Geneua, and into the signory of Berna. The professers of the reformed religion out of Normandy, low Britayn, and Picardie, passed ouer into England for their safety. Good Christian Reader I beseech thee to stay here a while, and learne both to feare and tremble at the dreadfull iudgementes of God, and also his mercie toward his Church, shewed at this time: which when I do con∣sider, it putteth me in remembrance of the like euent, which did happen a litle while afore the siege and destructions of Hierusalem, by Vespasian and Titus his sonne. That citie, which here on earth had borne the Image of the true heauenly Hierusalem, hauing most wilfully resisted the sonne of God, & stopped their eares at his voyce. When it had fulfilled the measure of her iniquity, and that God would make it a wonder, a hissyng and nod∣ding of the head vnto all Nations of the world for her obstinacie and vn∣thankefulnes: a litle before the siege, there was at midnight heard a voice
in the Temple thus, Migremns hinc: at the rumor thereof all men were greatly amazed, musing what should be signifyed by that warning. The Saints which were there, tooke that to be the voyce of God (who accor∣ding  to the threatninges of the law of the Prophets, and of Christ against that City, would powre downe his wrath vpon that sinfull City) directed vnto them, commaunding them to depart, and to geue place vnto hys wrath. So the Church that was there remoued to the City Pella, which was beyond Iordan, in the ancient inheritance of the Rubenites, where it was preserued, and out of a place of safety, did behold the mighty stormes of Gods tempestes, which fel vpon that so noble and famous a City, which by Strabo was thought to be the greatest and fayrest of all the East. Euen as Abraham long before did behold the subuersion of Sodom: so when the Lord had determined to powre the stormes of his anger vpon those Nati∣ons which are betweene the Loyre and the English Seas, for their offen∣ces lyke vnto them of Hierusalem: first hee taketh his Church, which was scattered among those Nations, Townes, and Cities, and bringeth most of them beyond Loyre, some into England, some to Sedan, some to Geneua, some to Suisserland, some to Germany, least the presence of them who do call vpon his name should hinder the execution of his wrath vpon his enemies, for the publication of the edict of vnion, commonly called the edict of Iuly, although that in another forme, was as it were the voyce of God heard out of the Temple, Migremus hinc. For those nations lying on the North side of Loyre, who had conspired to destroy the Gospell of Christ, haue drawen the warre from the Prouinces which doe professe the Gospell, vpon their owne heads. For not onely haue they felt all the former oppressions and outrages of the Leaguers, but also by this edict, all the burthen of this last ciuill warre raysed vp by the Leaguers hath fallen, vpon them, beside the horrible murthers and seditions, which they haue committed among themselues by the euill Angels, which the Lord in his wrath hath sent a∣mong them: which also do continue still with greater calamities then euer before, and is like to continue vntill that those wicked Nations, polluted with idolatrie, blood of the sayntes, and whoredome, be vtterly rooted out, that God may be auenged of his enemies: giuing in the meane tyme a li∣tle rest vnto the reformed churches beyond Loyre, and to make them thank∣ful for his great mercyes, who hath rewarded his enemies with euil, which they had imagined agaynst his people without a cause. So the Lord doth turne all thinges to good vnto his Sayntes. Now the Leaguers are masters of all (for the king had deliuered his royall authority vnto them, and deuided his kingdome among them, re∣seruing vnto himselfe the name of a King) haue all the Countrey at theyr deuotion, and do replenish all France with armes, violence and boastings. Now they wil play S. George, they wil kil the Deuil, eyther on horseback
or a foote, they will worke miracles, or else the Deuill shall fayle them. And for to begin these miracles, the Duke Mercure, brother in law to  the King, and by the last partition of the kingdome, a pety King of Bri∣tayne,  was perswaded by his Counsell, that now the publishing of the edict of vnion had of it selfe killed all the Hugonets in Poytow, and that easily hee might tame all the Countrey, and that bing in the field, not one Hugo∣net durst lift vp his head: therefore supposing there to haue to fight with dead men, and making himselfe sure of the conquest, to make proofe of his valure, the 23 of August passed Loyre, at Nantes out of Britayn in Poytow, with two thousand men, entending to roue and ransake all, and hauing  sacked many popish Churches, spoyled the Abbeys at Saint Florent, and Plainpied, by Saumure, & like an horrible tempest did march forward, spa∣ring neither holy nor prophane thinges, making hauocke of all thinges vntill he came as farre as Fontenay. The Prince of Conde, turned from Saint Paul Decadewalx to Saynt Ihan D' Angelye, hauing assembled some friends, as wel out of Xainctonge, Poytow, as other parts, within few dayes saw himselfe to haue a lusty com∣pany as well of gentlemen as Harquebusiers on horsebacke, and with that force expecting the rest, tooke his iourney with as much diligence as hee could to meete with the sayd Mercure. The Prince arriued at Chandeuier, a towne not farre from Niort, vn∣derstoode  that the sayd Mercure was about Fontenay, where he determi∣ned to giue him battaile. Mercure hearing that the Prince approched, with his companies, so ready and willing to fight, was amazed, conside∣ring that it fell out contrary to the counsell giuen him before: and that now be must fight with men aliue. This increased his feare so much the more, for that hee had not so soone heard of the Princes comming, but that pre∣sently hee was certifyed that the said Prince was in battell array. Where∣upon he resolued to retyre home: but being hardly pressed by the sayd prince he was fayne to retire to Fontenay. And because the gouernor of the towne knowing not well how thinges had passed betweene the King and the Leaguers, would not suffer him nor his to enter the towne (yet otherwise shewing him such fauors as he might:) therfore he with his troups betook themselues to the Suburbe of Fontenay called the Loges. The Prince desirous to see his enemy face to face, aduanced toward the  Suburbe in battaile aray, to prooue whether he might prouoke the enemy to skirmish. But the Duke would none of that play. But after the Prince had kept the Duke besieged in the Loges for certaine dayes, the said Duke fearing, eyther at length to be forced, or else that the Prince would cut his way in his returne to Nantes, by night secretly did steale away, and with the mayne galop, amaze and many alarms which he gaue to himself (feare making him to imagine thinges which were not) recouered to Nantes
without any bayte, the fourth day of September, leauing behinde him his companies with great disorder, and discontented mindes, some of his  troupes with decestation of his euill leading, cursed the houre that euer they knew him. Some of the Princes companies pursued the disaray, and setting vpon the carriage tooke it, and many prisoners with it. Thus hap∣pily succeded the beginnings of the vnion, and the miracles of these great Captaines, whose heat was some what cooled, and their hornes beaten in with this blow. About the 5. day of September, the Prince returning from Fonteney,  passed through Mele, where the Countrey of Rochefocault, which not long before had repayred to him, left him againe taking his iourney to his own house. And for as much, as the plague was very sore at S. Iohn D'Ange∣lye, the Prince tooke his way to Iarnak vpon Charante, where the Lorde Lauaughion, and other Gentlemen, left him to retyre to their houses. Whilst these Princes soiorned at Iarank, the Lord Laual a yong No∣ble man, in a little bodie, hauing a minde endued with notable godlines & vertue, with a ripe wit and couragious heart, which did make him no lesse beloued and honorable vnto all honest vertuous, and peaceable men, then feared of all wicked and perturbers of the state of France. This Lord ac∣companied with his three brethren, the Lords Rieulx, Taulay, and Saulye,  the 8. of September departed from his house of Ʋitre in Batangue, with a 150. Rutters, and 300. Harquebusiers on horseback, and with that compa∣nie passed ouer Loyre, partly a forde, and partly with boates, at Manues, three Leagues about Nantes, by the help of the Lord Chargroys, who was afterward his Lieutenant. From thence he tooke his iourney through Poy∣tow, to S. Iohn D'Angelye: where he entred not, because of the pestilence which was there, but passing through Tailborge, went to the Prince at Marennes, when the said Prince besieged Browage, about the 12. of Sep∣tember. About the 9. of September, from Iarnak, the Lord Saint Gelays, with the Lord D'Aubigny, and some other Gentlemen tooke their iourney to∣ward Mele, for some great affaires. There they had knowledge, that cer∣taine companies of the League were comming to compasse them about: which thing being found true, the Lord S. Gelays Marshal of the Princes campe, sendeth all night to the Lord Charboniere, who was two leagues of with his companie: hee sendeth also to certaine Gentlemen there a∣bouts, who were of the religion: which with great diligence came toward him all night, and at the breake of the day, ioyned with the said Lord Saint Gelays. The Leagued companies were conducted by Captaine Saint Katari∣ne, and others who perceauing themselues on a suddaine, and beside their expectation compassed about, without any further a doo required parley
with the Lord Saint Gelays: who after few words yeelded, and promised to forsake the League, and to cause their fellowes to doo the like: and also that they would neuer carrie armes against them of the reformed religion:  which agreement they quicklie sealed and performed. Many of these com∣panies went to the Prince, being then at Pons: they which would not, were sent away without weapons. And this is the second miracle which the Leaguers did in Poytow. About the same time, the Lord Saint Mesmes, Ranques and Orges, went toward Tonnecharante, at whose approaching the Lord Saint Luke, who was then at Soubize, with nigh two hundred Souldiours, with great terrour departed: and burning the bridge and gate of Soubize retired to Browage, leauing most of all his garisons at the bourg of Moses. These Lords mought haue pursued & taken the Lord Saint Luke, but delaying the time, from Friday to Sunday, they lost the occasion. The 13. day, these Lords tooke the tower of Foncras, vpon Charante, which did holde for the League. About the same time, the Prince of Con∣de,  least he should keepe his companies idle, with the Lord of Rohan and o∣thers with him from Pons, withall their companies tooke their way to∣ward the Iles of Xainctonge, for to recouer Sonbiez and the castell Augle, which the Lord S. Luke had fortified with Garisons of the League, and also to sease vpon the salt of the Iles, whereof great summes of money might be made. And for to bring to passe these things more easilie, to haue munition and meanes of artilerie and other necessarie things: in the meane whiles the Prince with a certaine number of horsemen, tooke his iourney to Rochell: notwithstanding the plague was very great there, where hee obtained of the Citie, both munition, ships, and power of men to conduct all to Brow∣age, Oleren, and other places there abouts. About the same time these Lords Douault, Boysdaliz, Sanuere Campos, with many other Gentlemen, ha∣uing giuen the rendes vous in Berry (as is aforesaid) repayred to the Prince, then being at Pons in Xainctonge. About the 15. of September the Lords Saint Mesmes, Ranques, and Orges, after the taking of the Tower of Foncras vpon Charante, pursued  the Garison which had fled from Soubieze, and had stayed at the bourg of Moses (as is said) betweene Soubieze and Browage, and followed them to a place called Graund Garison, right against Browage on the north side of the riuer: where after they had skirmished a while in the sight of the towne, and of the Lord Saint Luk, who was on the other side of the water, on the key of Browage, and being reduced there at the low water, and hardly set on by them of the religion: through dispayre of rescue, cast themselues in∣to the oose, where the most part were slaine: others that could not get out were drowned when the tide came.
The Lord Saint Luk was in great agonie, to sée the best of all his Ga∣risons so cast away, without any remedie to saue one of them: certaine shot  of ordinance was discharged, but it was all in vaine. Among other prisoners were the Captaines Luchet Meanbourg and Sauage, with some other whom the Lord Orges sent home without any ransome, to the great discontentation of the Prince, because they were they who did most seruice, in the defending of Browage, against the saide Prince. About the same time the Lord Clermont enterprised to passe ouer Loy∣re, with few with him, among whome was one Captaine Rochemorte, for to assemble them who could not dwell in their houses, by reason of the pub∣lication of the edict of vnion. About the 16. of September, the prince hauing done his busines in Ro∣chel,  assembled his forces at Saint Gennes, and so marched toward the siege of Browage, and from thence to Saint Iust. Here is to be noted, that in that part of Xainctonge, lying betweene the riuer of Browage and Garem∣me, commonly called Almert: there be foure townes, to wit Saint Iust, distant a mile and a halfe from Marennes, Hyers betweene Marennes and Browage, whereof this last lieth vpon the mouth of the riuer, hauing a ha∣uen very safe for ships, to come to the salins to be laden with salt. This towne of Browage began to be builded about the yeare 1550. but increased and fructified to a great and strong towne, during the ciuill warres, to mo∣lest Rochel, and hath changed the first name into Iacopolis. The Papists haue held in it, alwaies since the beginning of the ciuill warres a strong Garison. This towne the Lorde Saint Luke kept for the League: it is distant from Marennes somewhat lesse then two miles, from Hyers lesse then a mile, it is strong in situation, because it lieth in the salins, and by reason of that, there is but one way to come to it. Betweene Marennes and Hyers, there is a little creeke to passe ouer, which cannot bee passed on foote but at lowe water, which is called le passe d'hiers. The Lord of Saint Luk had fortified the same with a barricado, intending there to shut vp the passage to Hyers, and consequently to Brow∣age: there he placed three hundred shot, & a few horses, he himselfe staying at Hyers, about halfe a mile distant from Browage, to let the approaching of the Prince. The 19. of September, the Prince being at Saint Just, a mile and a halfe from Marennes, set all things in order, for the siege of the said Brow∣age, and about three a clock being low water, hee marched toward Ma∣rennes, commanded his gardes and other Gentlemen, who marched a foote, to set vpon the barricado, which was made at the passe d'hiers, where they found some resistance, there was wounded Bargnobet, Captaine of his garde, another Gentleman slaine.
In the meane time the Lorde Boulay, commaunded to charge of another side, from Saint Iust tooke his way through the Salins, a way not vsed to trauaile through at all, and with his band of armed men: with a  maine force, set vpon the towne of Hiers: Saint Luk had him vpon his top sooner then he had discouered him, and considering that he was feeble, and that if hee should lose that force which was with him, hee should lose the strength and defence of Browage, retyred in hast. They which were at the passe d'hiers, seeing their Captaine to flee, followed him, accompanied with terrour and dread. They were pursued nigh to the gates of Browage, though they were defensed with shot of Ordinance from the townes, a∣gainst them that pursued. So that within an houre and a halfe, both the passe and towne D'hiere came into the Princes power: the Prince lodged at Marinnes, distant from Hyers about a mile. These easie and prosperous successes and beginnings, made the Prince to consider more touching the siege of that towne of Browage, considering also that there was not within great power of men, neither had they great stoare of victuals, candell, fresh water, neither medicins for them that were hurt. The 20. of September, there was continuall skirmishes before the  towne, in the which some of the Princes side were hurt, many of the besie∣ged slaine, one of the Captaines which the Lord Orges had sent home be∣fore, a man much esteemed by the Lorde Saint Luk, because of his va∣lour. The same day was taken the Tower of Mornake, where the Lord of S. Luke had put garrison, which was besieged by certayne Companyes whom the Prince had sent thether. The garrison withstood for certayne dayes: but being without hope of helpe and in danger to be forced, yéelded themselues by composition. There was taken the Captayne Iohn Peter, who was in great fauour with the Lord S. Luke. About that time arriued to the Prince at Marans, the Lord Lauall with his thrée brethren and all his forces. The 22. of September, the Lord Trimouille (who long before had en∣tred  in communication with the Prince, to ioyne with him in this iust de∣fence agaynst the League) came to Marennes with a great number of Gentlemen. The Prince receaued these Noble men with great courtesie and reioysing. There was a great contentation thereof in all them of the reformed religion, for the good hope which they had conceaued of that yong Lord that he would embrace the religion, as he did shortly after, ha∣uing obtayned great reputation among all men for his valour and mode∣stie. The same day arriued to the Prince certayne ships of warre from Ro∣chel, so that by these meanes the sea and the riuer of Browage were shut vp:
which thing doubled the feare of the besieged. The Prince seeing his en∣terprise to succéede better than he had hoped, began to enterprise further, and determined to presse the besieged néerer, knowing that there was not  within aboue foure hundred Souldiers, whereof some were wounded, and therefore not able to doo any seruice: they which were taken reported also, that there was great scarcitie of victuals and fresh water; small quantitie of wine, and that corrupt; some corne, but not great store; because think∣ing not vpon any siege, they had not prouided afore hand. The Lords S. Gelayse and Boysduly were lodged in the house called Blanchardier, out of the Towne of Hyers, there appoynted by the Prince to prouide for necessaries and inunition. They did what they could, but not what they would: wherevpon the Souldiers seeing that they were like to stay there some time at that siege, began to mutinie, and to aske mo∣ney to buy victuals, which were brought there to sell out of the Countrey, and for lacke of money began to steale away, vntill that a certayne summe of money was gotten out of the Ilands, and some Gentlemen also did lend some: by which meanes the Prince mustered, and the Souldiers ta∣king pay tooke also courage, skirmishing daily in the Marsh out of the Towne. It is sayd before how the Lord S. Mesmes, Ranques, and Orges, tooke S. Ihan d'Angely and Soubize, and discomfited the Popish garison in their flight right agaynst Browage. From thence the sayd Lords with their com∣panies passed in certayne ships of Rochel into the Iland of Oleron. About the 24. of September, the Lord Ranques (who was best to com∣maund there) tooke vppon the Coasts of the sayd Iland the master of the field of the Lord Matignon gouernour of Bourdeaux, named Beaumont, accompanied with a certayne Captayne of Browage named Thiebert: there was in that shippe as well Gentlemen as other Souldiers, to the number of 22. they came from the Lord Matignon then resident at Bour∣deaux, about the succour for Browage. They were in a ship of warre, and were set on by thrée little shippes of the sayd Lord Ranques, who enforced them to flée, and at length they cast themselues into the Sea to recouer the Iland of Oleron, and so seazed vpon a house to defend themselues. But be∣ing pursued and compassed about by the sayd Lord Ranques, at length they yéelded themselues. This Captaine Thiebert twas accompted a busie fel∣lowe and factious, who also had traffique with the Spanyard for the League, they were most part brought to Rochel to be safely kept. The 25. the Prince began to fortifie a house a little aboue the Waren  in the high way from Hyers to Browage. Wee haue sayd how about the 15. of September the Lord Clermont departed from the Prince at Pons, and passed the riuer Loyre at a place cal∣led Rosiers, thence passing through a place la clousiere des montils, to the in∣tent
to passe vnknowne, did fayne himselfe to be Secretary to the King of Nauarre: frō thence he taketh his way to Bange, where Rochemort depar∣ted from him. The sayd Rochemort taketh his way to Beaufort, which is  situated betwéene Angers and the riuer Loyre, where he was borne, and soiorned there to see his brother and other friends, and also to gather as many men as he could in that countrey. Beaufort is a little Towne betwéene Loyre and Angers, which is com∣maunded by a Castle of a reasonable strength, which did hold for the king, and was in the kéeping of Captayne Broke. Rochemort arriued thether, and visiting his friends, who were the chie∣fest of the Towne, and among them also Captayne Broke, by their spée∣ches he vnderstood the state of Angers, and the particularities there about the Castle. There was a Captayne named Halot, who had the kéeping of the sayd Castle of Angers, whilest the Lord Bussy of Amboyse liued, which had the gouernment of the Countrey, Citie and Castle, during the life of Monsieur the Kings brother. But after the death of the sayd Bussy, the Lord Brissack had the gouernment, and had put out of the Castle the sayd Halot, whereof by all meanes he sought to bee reuenged, and to surprize the Castle. And to bring this thing to passe, he acquainted himselfe with Captayne Fresne, who had commanded ouer a companie of Brissack at the beginning of the League. This Brissack was one of the chiefest of the League, and discharged the sayd Fresne (after the edict of vnion was pub∣lished) in Iuly before: for the which thing Fresne was greatly offended with Brissack. These two Captaynes consented together to enterprize vpon the Ca∣stell, and repayred to Beaufort to Captayne Broke to haue of him some company of men, where they met with Rochemort: and after certayne spéeches, opened vnto him their enterprize; who promised to furnish them with certayn men. Rochemort aduertized the Lord Clermont, praying him to send him men, which shortly after sent him foure stout Souldiers. This their counsell was wonderfully disguised, as also the euēts fel out to be straunge and tragicall: for Halot (as he sayd) would recouer the Ca∣stell for the King, of whom (sayd he) he had letters to that effect, to recouer the sayd Castle out of the hands of Brissack, who was of the League, as is afore sayd: but indéede he respected himselfe, thinking thereby to get the Kings, or the King of Nauarre his fauour. Captayne Fresne was desi∣rous to be reuenged of Brissack at any price whatsoeuer. These two were sure to haue men for the most part Papists. Rochemort was in good hope that if he could get in the Castle, he would finde the meanes to make it fall into the hands of the King of Nauarre. Halot & Fresne doo promise them∣selues, that if Rochemort being the weakest and an Hugonet, should at∣tempt to innouate any thing, they could easily dispatch him: so that vnder
the hope of one drift, euery man had his meaning vnknowne one to ano∣ther. The enterprize is concluded, the day appoynted. The 26. of Sep∣tember some doo repayre at the time prefixed to the Suburbe of Pressigny;  some to the Suburbe called Lisses. Captayne Fresne vsed to enter into the Castle easily, as well acquainted with the Souldiers of the garde. The day therefore prefixed, hee goeth to see Captayne Greeke his friend, who then commaunded in the Castle with ten or twelue Souldiers. The sayd Captayne Greeke biddeth Fresne to dinner: Fresne excused himselfe that he had company, with whom he had promised to dine that day. Captaine Greeke presseth him and prayeth him to bring his company with him. Fresne had afore hand woon some of the gard, whom he had made priuie to the enterprize; he prayeth them of the second garde to let in them of his company, whom he assured to be of his acquaintance: but some of the soul∣diers mistrusting, went about to shut the gate: Rochemort and his com∣panie withstoode them, and taking weapons in hand did kill some of the garde. Captaine Fresne went vp into the Captaines chamber, who hea∣ring the fray would haue gone foorth; but being encountred by the sayd Fresne was slaine. Captaine Halot seeing the tumult, in stead to enter into the Castle, ran into the Towne, and vpon the rumour of the surprizing of the Castle, bid∣deth the Citizens not to stirre, for he had (saith he) caused the Castle to be taken for the King: but incontinently he was taken prisoner by the Citi∣zens. Fresne and Rochemort being masters of the Castell, the alarme was very hot in the towne: notice was giuen euery where in great dilligence. Rochemort forgetteth not to send to the Lord Clermont, to certify him, what was passed, desiring him to send greater forces, & also to send word to the Prince. Whilest these newes flye euery where, diuers euents happened, which deceaued both them and others. They of the towne greeued to haue that thorne in their heeles: sleep not, but take armes, beset the Castel, and with∣in a whyle haue succour of the Nobilitie of the countrey. In the euening the inhabitantes would fayne haue parley with Fresne, and vsed the means of Halot, for to draw him forth of the Castell, hauing placed in the darke of the night nigh the bridge 30. or 40. souldiers with Caliuers, either for to take him, or else to seaze vpon the drawing bridge, when he should come forth. Fresne vpon this parley going forth, and being yet vpon the bridge, one of ye souldiers hasting to shoot, Fresne would haue returned in, but Roche∣mort with his company seeing the perill, did draw the bridge. Fresne not able to recouer the drawing, held fast at the chayns: they without, cut off his handes: so hee fell into the ditch, which was very deepe, and cut in a
rocke: his Cloke was left hanging on the draw bridge. There was a redde Deere in the ditch, which tore him with his hornes. They of the Towne by the licence of them of the Castell tooke him vp with a coard: But the coard breaking, hee fell downe agayne, and at length was taken  vp and buryed in a Chappell nigh the Castell. Captayne Halot within few dayes after by the towne was condemned and executed. These two being dead, Rochemort a Hugonet remayned master of the Castell, whereof hee geueth notice to the Lord Clermont, who immedi∣atly dispatched a messenger to the Prince being at the siege of Browage. The inhabitants, who could haue borne it with some contentation (be∣cause they knew Fresne to be a Papist, and that hee sayd, he held it for the king) after his death asked Rochemort, for whom he kept the castel. When he had answered, that it was for the king of Nauarre, they were greatly mooued, and immediatly began to make Trenches both to force the said castel and also to let succour from cōming in. Companyes do arriue from euery where. The Lord Bocage is sent by the king with commaunde∣ment to defend the trenches without enterprising any thing, but onely to besiege the castell vntill the Lord Ioyeuse his comming, who shortly after came thither with the Lord Chastres. In meane time Rochemort and his companions rifled the chestes and treasures of Brissak, and other which had conueyed their goods into that fort. There was a great Bootie in plate and Iewels. Neither could it be knowen what he had done with the greate horne of Unicorne which was kept there of old. Certayne dayes being spent about the 29. of September in an after noone Rochemort leaning vpon one of the windowes of the Castell, and there slumbering, receaued two pellets of a gunne shot, whereof the one cut his throat, and the other his tongue, and so dyed shortly after without speaking: so by his death the castel was left without a guyd. There were 9. Papistes, and 5. of the reformed Religion within which could neuer agree, but were still in disorder and confusion: which caused that after the comming of the Lord Ioyeuse, they within began to demaund parley, which continued for certayne dayes. Whilest these thinges so passed at Angers, the Lord Clermont not kno∣wing the death of Rochemort, who was the ground of his drift, had assem∣bled in Normandie, and in the countrey of Perche, about sixe hundred men, and sendeth a messenger to the Prince at the siege of Browage, to aduer∣ize him how the affayres do goe. The 3. of October, newes were brought vnto the Prince by expressed messenger, of the taking of the Castell, and how the inhabitants had tren∣ched and besieged it with the forces of Brissak, and of the countrey of. Suy, and after by the Lord Bocage sent by the King. This newes caused the
Prince to leaue his footemen before Browage, and hee with his horsemen and certaine number of Harquebusiers on horseback, to passe ouer the riuer Loyre, to succour them who were within the castell, and kept the same for  the King of Nauarre, being thereto encouraged by the appearance of the great aduauntage, which seemed to consist in it, for the aduauncing of the affaires of them of the reformed religion, considering also that Brissack who by the partition of the League, had obtained the gouernement of Aniow, s is afore saide, was one of the busiest Leaguers: he waighed wel the dan∣gers which might ensue, as to draw al the Kings forces vpon himself, and the difficulties of repassing the riuer Loyre: he considered also that the rem∣nant of his armie lest at Browage, might bee discomfited by the Marshall Matignon & Bellegarde gouernour of Xainctonge, who might ioyne their forces together. But on the other side hee hoped, that being strengthened by receauing the companies of the Lord Clermont, which hee had gathered (as is afore said) to the number of sixe hundred, he would be able to fight against whom soeuer. Also that by that new supplie of the Lord Clermont, and by the fauour of some Castles which fauored him vpon the Loyre, he might passe well e∣nough, and so returne with greater forces to the siege of Browage. God had determined, that no consideration nor counsell might disswade this Prince from this iourney, to the end that he might shew in the begin∣ning of this perilous warre, how mightie his arme is in the preseruing of his children, and how able hee is to weaken and dissipate the strength and arrogancie of his enemies, who fret and fume, take counsell and conspire together against his anoynted sonne. That by this example all the children of God may learne, not alwaies (euen in a good cause) to promise them∣selues victorie, but to assure themselues that God will defend the iust cause alwaies, and preserue them that call on his name, whether they bee few or many. The same day ariued from Rochel before Browage sixe pieces of batte∣rie, conducted by Mounser Personne, who followed the shippes of warre, which few daies before had ariued as is afore said. About the 6. of October, there was a great stur in the campe before Browage by reason of the Princes departing to Angers. For in his absence  there was no way to assure the Ilands, nor the remnant of the armie, which remayned there at that siege. For the inhabitantes saw a manifest danger to themselues, which thing made many of them resolue to giue o∣uer all, and to repayre to Rochell, whereby the souldiers (there appoynted to remayne) were greatly discouraged. At length the Lord Saint Mes∣mes gouernour of Saint Jhan. D'Angelye an aged man, famous, and of a long continued experience, a man of great authority and welbeloued of the
countrey, was requested to take the gouernement of the companies, ap∣pointed to continue the siege: which thing after many wise declarations of the dangerous euents which he did foresee, might happen both to them that  went, and also to them that remained at the siege, yet hee did accept the charge, with the great contentation of all men. Monser Personne, was made gouernour of the Nauie: the Lord Ranques remained gouernour of Oleron: Captaine Belon was appoynted to gather them of the Ilands, and to commaund ouer them. The chiefest regiments which remayned for t continue that siege, were the companies of the Lord Orges, Saint Seue∣rin, and Boysrond, with whome were many voluntarie Souldiers, beside them of the Ilands, and two hundred Harquebusiers, sent by the towne of Rochel. On the 7. of October, some captaines shewed themselues vnwilling to remaine, considering the euents and inconueniences, which might befall in  the absence of the Prince: so that the affaires were in greater trouble, and the mindes in greater perplexitie, then before. But the Prince remedied all these things, as well as hee could, to strengthen the siege: and sent to the Uicount Turene, who was in perigord with great forces, praying him to draw neere, to fauour that siege. But hee could not doo it, hauing some occasions in hand, and waiting for the comming of the King of Nauarre, out of Gascoyne, as it shall appeare hereafter. About the same time, the Senate of Paris, hauing considered vpon the Popes excommunication, giueth answer to the King, in the which they grieuously condemne the Leaguers, doo blame the King, for hauing bro∣ken the edict of peace, doo shew it to be impossible to bring to passe their en∣terprises, doo reprooue the Pope, for vsurping vpon Princes authorities, and the liberties of the Crowne of France, doo condemne the excomunica∣tion worthy to be burned, counsell the King to pursue them: who haue pro∣cured the same, and to execute iustice vpon them, as vpon traitors. About the same time, the King lead by his counsell, who for the most part weare of the League, and seruants to the Guyzes, by them was borne in hand, that they of the reformed religion had to great aduauntage, by the edict of Iulie: and that many, both of the religion and Catholikes, had flocked together to the King of Nauarre. Therefore, he setteth foorth a de∣claration of the edict of Iuie, by the which hee dooth admonish them, that haue borne armes against the League, of whatsoeuer religion they bee: ei∣ther to lay them downe, or else to be taken for Rebells, and their goods to be sould for the maintaining of the warre. Hee commaundeth them of the religion, which haue not borne armes, to doo with their goods what they will, and to depart the Realme within 15. dayes after the publication of the said declaration, charging his officers to make diligent enquirie for the performing of the premises: by the said declaration hee giueth libertie to
women and children, according to the former edict. It is sayd before, how the Prince (notwithstanding all counsell and ad∣uise to the contrarie) determined to passe the riuer of Loyre, all difficulties  therfore set aside, the eight of October the Prince departed out of his camp with his companies to Taillebourg, appointing the rendes vous, at a place nigh S. Ihan d'Angely. His forces did consist of the companies of the Lord Rohan, who were aboue sixe score braue Gentlemen, the companies of the Lords Nemours, & Laual, who had much nobilitie with him. There were also the companies of the Lords Trimouille, and Boulay, & his own compa∣nie, which in number and nobilitie passed all others. The Harquebusiers on horseback were they of his garde; the Regiments of the Lord Aubigny, Ousches, Campoyse, Touche, & Flesche, & others, with many Gentlemen of Xainctonge, and Poytow, who were sent for by the Prince, and put them∣selues vnder Noble men, as they would themselues. The whole of his forces came to the number of eight hundred horsemen, and betweene one thousand or twelue hundred Harquebusiers on horsebacke. There was a great deale more carriage, than was expedient for a voyage to bee done with celeritie and diligence. The 9. day the Prince being at Taillebourg, the Artillerie which was sent from Rochel to the stege of Browage, arriued in the riuer Charante,  to be brought againe to Rochel by Captaine Bordeaulx. For the Prince at his departing from Marans, had taken order to retire the Artillerie, to a∣uoyd what might ensue, not intending to occupie it at Browage, but onely to keepe the Towne blocked vntill his returne, which hee hoped to bee shortly. The same same day the Prince from Taillebourg went to lodge to Ville∣neufue la contesse, where he vnderstood that the Ladie Trimouille was at S. Stephen, about a league from thence, where he went to salute her: and af∣ter many spéeches about his marriage with her daughter, the sayd Ladie vsed many perswasions, to make her sonne (the Lord Trimouille) to breake his resolution, in the which she sawe him to embarke himselfe on the side of the king of Nauarre, threatning him of her accurse, if he procéeded further. But the sayd yong Lord shewed her, with much submission and obeisance, that if she would weigh the reasons, which mooued him so to doo, grounded vpon iustice and honour; and on the contrary side, the vniust cause of the League, he was assured that she would turne her cursing into blessing: so that he remayned resolute both to followe that part, and also not to forsake the Prince in that voyage. The tenth day of October all the companies tooke their way toward Niort, Baesuiere, Argenton, Viers and Tence. There the Lord S. Gelayes Marshall of the Princes campe, with the companie of the Lord Boulay, with a certaine number of Harquebusiers on horsebacke, departed to goe
before to get the bancke of Loyre: and following the side of the riuer vp∣warde, to search some occasion to passe the riuer, eyther by surprizing of boates or milles, met with a certaine companie of Gentlemen of the  League, very well appoynted with armour and horses, going to the suc∣cour of Angers, whom they tooke, and all their carriage. The 11. day the Lord Aubigny and Bouet tooke the strong Abbey of  S. Maure vpon the riuer of Loyre, where was a garrison of the League. There they did no violence to the Monkes, but licensed them to depart whether they would. They tooke the Prior and sent him to the Prince at S. Gemes, who courteously entertayned him in his owne house, and safely sent him to Angers. The 14. day Captaine Flesche being of that countrey, had aduaunced, and began to passe at the towne of Rosiers: for there were no companies of the enemies on all that coast. For as much as it was thought incredible, that without any other intelligences the Hugonets durst passe so great a riuer, in a manner in the sight of two great townes, to wit, Sanre aboue where they had retyred all the boates thereabouts, and Angers beneath, where they had forces both of footmen and horsemen greater than any the Prince had: so that many seeing such silence, suspected yt there was some lying in waite. And as for the Lord Clermont, whom we haue sayd to haue left the Prince at Pons to passe ouer Loyre, to gather the forces of them of the reformed religion, scattered in those popish countreys, there was no more newes of him, than if he had not béen in the world: and indeed then he was aboue thirtie leagues from them. But Captaine Flesche had sea∣zed vppon three boates laden with wine: which after he had caused to bée landed vpon the water side, he prepared them to carrie the armie ouer. The 15. of October he passed first, and lodged at Rosiers, and after him  passed the Lord Aubiguy with his Regiment: that day the Prince arriued at S. Gemes with his troupes, which lodged in the villages about. The same day also arriued the Lords Saint Gelayse, and Boulay, to the Prince: they had been scouring the wast of the riuer. For the right vnderstanding of this voyage, the situation and places of the countrey is to be noted. In all this discourse, we will make mention of three riuers, the Loyre, Lolion, and Loir. On the South side of Loyre there bee two townes, Samur and Pont de sell: betwéene these two townes there be foure other litle townes, the Abbey of Planpierd, S. Gemes, the Abbey of S. Maure, and S. Ma∣thurine. On the North side of the riuer, Loyre right against S. Gemes is the towne Rosiers, and betwéene these two townes in the riuer is an Iland: in this place passed ouer the Prince and his armie. The next riuer on the North side of Loyre is Lolion, a little riuer, but very déepe, and running slowly; it washeth part of Ʋandomoys and Anjou, and falleth into the ri∣uer of Loyre at Pont de sel. On the North side of the riuer Lolion in the
middle way betweene the sayd riuer and Angers, is situated the towne of Beaufort. The third riuer is Loire, falling from the countrey of Beause through Vandomoys & Anjou, receauing 2. other riuers comming from the countrey called Perche, which are Sarthre, and Huyne, and a little aboue Angers do fall into the riuer Loyre, and somewhat beneath Angers: these three riuers in one are receaued into the riuer Mayne, and so altogether in one about 2. miles beneath Angers, & 3. miles beneath Pont de Sell, do run into Loyre. Vpon this riuer of Loyre are situated these townes following, Flesche, Lude, Lauerdine, Chastean de Loyre, Ʋendosme & Chasteaudine. Betwéene Chasteaudine, and Reisgencye, which lyeth vpon Loyre, betweene Orleance, and Bloys, is the Towne Forest of Morchesuoyr: in that Forest was the army of the Prince scattered (and as it were) became inuisible, as shall be shewed in the discourse following. The 16. of October, the whole army began to passe ouer with great discommodity. For from Saint Gemes they had but three meane boats,  wherwith they passed into the Iland which lyeth in the midle of the riuer. On the other side of the Iland to passe to the towne of Rosiers, they had but two boats, and few Ferry-men, who were Papistes, they did the woorst they could, and ready at euery hand to steale away. These discommodi∣ties caused great confusion at the passage, which was encreased with a great number of cariages which followed the Campe. At this passage, euery man did presage the euill successe which after∣ward ensued. For although there was no want of corage, yet one might perceaue a certayne sadnes vnaccustomed, which caused many to say, let vs goe and dye: for euery man was resolued to vanquish or to dye. But the Lord disposed otherwise: for a more merulous deliuerance hath not béen seene in our dayes. For neither did they vanquish, neither dyed, but euery one dranke a reasonable draught of the cuppe of bitternes. At this passage did arise great diuersity of opinions among the heads: for none of the Captaynes thought good, that the Prince should passe ouer for the care which they had of his safety, & their reasons were, that it was most like, that the enemie would not withstand their passage, but would winke at it, that afterwardes they might bring all their forces together to stop their returne, thinking it an easy thing with many to ouercome few. For they had already newes that Ioyeuse hasted to Angers, with all his forces, which were about three hundred Horses, twelue hundred of Suissers, and some regiments of Frenchmen. They alleaged also, that there was nothing sure at Angers, and that it was to be feared, that it would be sur∣rendered before they could aryue thither, so that their passing ouer stood vpon no reason, but vpon an vncertaynty to venture such an army with all the state of their defeuce. There was also newes brought to them (though
false) that Brissake had seazed vpon Beaufort, a towne betweene the riuer Lotion, and Angers, whither the Prince thought to haue gone to lodge that day. The 17 of October, notwithstanding the reasons aforesayd,  the Prince passed ouer at the town Rosiers with some noble men and Cap∣taynes, where he took about thirty gentlemen of the company of the Lord Boulaye, who was already passed, and certayne Harquebusiers with him, commaunding them to lye in ambush in a wood nigh Beaufort, and com∣maunded the Lord Valiere, who was among the said gentlemen, to make semblance towardes the gates of Beaufort, and to draw them who should issue out into the aduantage of them which lay in ambush in the wood. But when they came to Beaufort, there they found none but the inhabitantes who did profer their Towne to the Prince, and assured that there came no man except the County Carauas, to whom they denyed entrance. Upon this report the Prince determined to passe the rest of his army, grounded vpon many reasons: but especially vpon the newes which he had receaued of yt Lord Clermont, whom he had heard to be about Angers, with sixe or seauen hundred men: who was not willing notwithstanding that the Prince should enclose himselfe in that sleeue. All this while the Lord Rohan with his company made a road toward Saumur, and the Lord Laual downe the riuer toward Angers, for he passed last of all. The Prince also sendeth a trompet vnder the colour of certayne prison∣ners, to know of Angers what hee might. But they of Angers would not suffer him to goe further then the Suburbs, who reported onely that they which kept the Trenches were resolued to stand to their defence man∣fully. Few dayes the Prince Monpensier had gone to Angers to profer his seruice: but within few dayes he went away discontented, because they of the citie had preferred the Lord Bocage before him: which thing caused some to thinke, that the sayd Prince Monpensier would ioyne with the Prince of Conde, considering that this warre was agaynst the League: and for the same cause the Lord Auantignie was sent to him from the Prince: but all was in vayne. The 18. the rest of the companies passed all ouer Loyre with leasure, but with much discommodity, by reason of the great continuall rayne. The Prince left Captaine Serpent with a stronge garrison at the Ab∣bey of Saint Maure, to fortify the passage, and to fauour their repassing at their returne. The 19. they departed from Rosiers, to passe the riuer Lotion, which ly∣eth betweene Loyre, and the towne Beaufort, a riuer narrow, but very déep,  then specially, which for the great aboundant rayne, was ouer the bankes. There the passage was more troublesome then at Loyre, because the coun∣trey
all about is coppses and Marishes daungerous for the horsemen. They of Beaufort being so mened to open the gates to the Prince, did it without any delay, and taking away their Gard, receaued such as were  placed in their stead. Thether the Prince arryued the same day at eue∣ning with his army, and left the Lord Laual for the safety of theyr passage of Lotion, who came to the Prince the next day after. The same day about noone, the Lord Clermont came to the Prince at Beaufort with thirty horses: his horsemen were about nine hundred, & lod∣ged in the villages betwéene Beaufort and Angers. The twentéeth day being the Lordes day, they soiorned at Beaufort, and the night following they began to march toward Angers, and appoyn∣ted  the rendes vous at a certayne place within a league of Angers. The Lord Ioyeuse vnderstanding the Prince of Conde to bee at hand, (fearing least hee might enterprize vpon the Castell, by the helpe of those few men, being onely 16. in all) by reason that he thought them to bee of the religion, or otherwise to fauour the Prince, and that thence he might molest the League, and hold the whole countrey in subiection, he thought that it were not good to delay the regayning of the sayd Castel: but to re∣couer it at any price whatsoeuer. Therefore he conditioned with them who were within, that the Papistes which were there nine in number, might there remayne, if they thought it good. They of the religion 7. in number should be safely conducted to yt Princes camp, and that they should not bee searched. Also that they might carry away what they would. Furthermore, that at their going away out of the Castell, they of the League should all retyre away. Last of all, that euery one should haue one thousand crownes in money, and a good Horse, with a pardon from the king, and security, that they should neuer be called to any accompt, all these Promises were faythful∣ly kept to them. At their comming foorth they deuided amongest their friendes the mo∣uable goods of Brissak, as Plate, Aras, and other such thinges as they could not cary, and loded themselues with the best iewels, as much as they could carry away. The 21. of October, the Princes companies began to march from the campe, where the rendes vous was giuen through a narrow way, toward the place of execution, nigh the Suburbes. There by the forrunners were three souldiours taken, not supposing the enemie to haue been so nigh: who reported that the Trenches were very strong, and would be stoutely defended. They also tooke certaine peasants; who reported Rochemort to be dead, and the castell to be surrendered for a great somme of money: but they were not belieued. The same day the Prince sent certaine Harquebusiers to Pontdesel
which is a towne situated vpon the fall of Lolion into Loyre, where is a bridge to passeouer the riuer, where they of Angers had put a strong gari∣son, to keepe the bridge. At the discouering of the approache of the Princes power, both the towne, and also the castell gaue a hot alarum, and sounded the Toxin in all the parish Churches of the Citie, and also at the high church, called Saint Maurice. This was a maruelous thing, that in so great and populous a Citie, wherein were more men of warre strangers, then the Prince had in all his armie, yet no sallie out was made, no more then if there had beene no man; considering also that the place where the Prince was in battell aray, did fauour greatly them of the towne: for there was but a broad way where the horsemen onely stoode, and on both sides were vineyards and copses. In that broad way, were set in battell aray all the Harquebusiers: where the Minister of the church, L. Blanchardiere pronounced a forme of praier before the army. And vpon this preparation, were receaued certaine newes of the rendering of the Castel the day before: which thing made all men be∣leeue it, because that at the ariuing of the armie, there was no taken from thence (notwithstāding the alarum, & pieces of shot giuē out.) Others that were against that opinion alleaged, that it was no maruaile if they did not discharge the canon out of the Castell, because they were so few, that they were not able to remoue it. They added also, that the fire which they of the towne had set to an house, betweene the armie and the Castell, which continued all the day by the smoake, was to let them of the Castell, to see the troupes which came to succour them. Vpon these coniectures, the cap∣taines (according to the commandements receaued) set vpon the subburbs of Passiguie, and Magdalen, and forced the same, euen to the Bariados, which they of the towne had made out of the gates, within the subburbes, which were forsaken. There the Captaine Flesche was wounded with a shot, who dyed within few dayes after; he had protested before, that either he would dye, or else he would enter the Trenches, passing not for death, seeing that it was in, and for his countrey: both hapened vnto him. Hee was borne at a towne named Flesche, situated vpon the Riuer Loyre, flow∣ing from Vendosme, to Angers, a gentleman borne of good parentage. All that day passed away in skirmishes, for the armie of the Prince had also trenched themselues, in the subburb of Pressiguy. The horsemen were al that day in battel aray, vntil nigh at the end of the subburbs, while the Har∣quebusiers wonne by little and little, the Trenches of the enemie, pear∣cing the houses, to aduaunce to the gate. That day, the Prince sendeth his Troumpet into a medow, vnder the Castell, in the sight of them that were within, to giue them token with the sound of the Troumpet: but seeing no token out of the Castell, they began
to suspect in deede, that the Castell was surrendered. At euening it was thought good to retyre, and that the Souldiours should giue ouer their  Trenches in the subburb and houses which they had gotten, for feare that they within the towne in the aduauntage of the night, should issue vpon them, being many against few, the towne being able to bring forth foure thousand strangers onely, beside the forces of the towne, with the aduaun∣tage of their ordinance. The Lordes Trimouille, Boulay, and Auantignie, with their companies, were appointed to make the retire, which was no further then the houses next to the subburb of Pressigny. The horsemen lod∣ged that night in the nearest parishes about the Prince with his company, and the Lord Rohan dis lodge at the Pont of Sorges, not without great con∣fusion, by reason that there was but few lodgings. In the night, they of the towne issued foorth, ouerthrew and burned the Trenches and Barrica∣does, which were made the day before, and lodged within certaine houses in the subburb, euen in the hospitall of the leapers, so that they could not bee displaced thence the nextday. The 22. about eight a clock, the Lords Trimouille, Auantigny & Saint Gelayse, with their companies resorted to the crosse way, nigh the place of execution, where all companies were commaunded to appeare. Then they of the towne shewed a countenance, as though they would haue issued foorth, and certaine demilances appeared within the subburb of Pressigny. There was a great alarum, which hasted the companies from their lod∣gings, to put themselues in battell aray, where they did the day before. Then were the footemen commaunded to set on the subburbs, but they went not to it with that courage as they had done the day before: for many had not refreshed themselues: some the day before had lost their horses, when they left them to fight at the Trenches: some did steale away and returned to Beaufort. The Captaines were discontented, that they had been enfor∣ced to giue ouer the aduantage, which they had the day before within the subburbs: which they could not recouer without great losses. The armie was scattered here and there, the high waies were couered with bagage, ca∣riage, charets, horses, mules, seruants, which wandered al night, not know∣ing whether to retire. To be short, all things went farre otherwise then the day before, yet they recouered within the subburb as much as they could, not without hazard and difficultie. The Prince arryued from Pont Forges, and got him within the Sub∣urbe of Pressigni, where he perceaued the countenance and courage of his men chaunged and amazed: but on the contrary, them of the towne to haue taken hart. Then euery one alleaging what might haue happened to them in the Castel: some obstinately affirmed, that they had shot in the night: other sayd the contrary. The Prince assembled the Nobles and Captaynes at the crosse way,
nigh the place of execution (saue them which were assaulting yt Suburbs) on horsebacke, their helmets on: they consulted whether they should set on  the Trenches, yea or us. Some perswaded to giue the attempt, saying that it would be a shame, to haue come so farre and so nigh execution with∣out blowes giuing, and that they could doo no lesse then to see the e∣nemie in the face, and seeing that they woulde not come foorth, they should goe to finde them out: they said further, that they of the Castell could not see their succour, if they presented not themselues at the Trenches. Others reasoned to the contrarie, and among others, the Lord Rohan withstoode strongly that aduise, aleaging many euident reasons. And first, that it was too plaine, that they of the Castel had yeelded to the enemie, ha∣uing not giuen one token to th contrarie, that it was no reason to say, that they had no knowledge of their comming, considering so many signes giuen them for the space well neere of two daies. Secondly, that it were a rashenes to hazard so great and braue forces, and such a notable companie of Nobilitie, to so imminent danger vpon vn∣certainties, and that they were to be reserued to a better opportunitie. For the enemie was as strong within as they were without, and that it was as easie to take the citie as the Trenches so well fortified, and that there was no hope of any to shew them any fauour: much lesse out of the castel which was already surrendered, or else dissembled with them, to intrap them and to cast them away headlong. Thirdly, they ought to consider that they were in a strange land, in the enemies countrey, inclosed betweene two daungerous riuers which they must repasse, in a countrey couered with woods, enemie to the horsemen, whereof consisted all their forces. Finally, that there was no doubt, but that the King on the one side, and the League on the other were not idle, but did their endeuour to gather their forces on euery side, to seaze vpon the passages, and fortifie the banck of Loyre, to stop their repassing. That the forces of Angers were on their backes, which were equall in strength to them, and all the countrey was fauourable to the enemie. Therefore they concluded to retyre, and that de∣lay might bring them great hurt: and that the Lord Laual, who was at Beaufort to make the rereward, should goe backe to repasse the Loyre. The greatest part followed this aduise. It gréeued greatly the Prince to retyre, and (as hee sayd to the Lord Clermont) to vnbit. But ouercome with reason, he concluded that the Lord Trimouille, Auantigny, and Boulay, should retyre the Harquebusiers from the suburbs, so that about two of the clocke in the afternoone they marched toward Beaufort. In retyring, they first met with ye Lord Laual with two hundred gentle∣men
galloping toward Angers, who being aduertized of the retyre, went neuerthelesse forward to the Prince. In the retyring there was confusion  at Beaufort, for it was two houres within night afore they arriued there, & many had but a short supper. The same day the companie of Captayne Fresche (whom we haue sayd to haue béen killed at the assault giuen in the suburbe of Pressigny the day before) guided by his Lieftenant, was sent to get boates for the repassing of Lotion. The 22. day the Prince with all the troupes soiourned at Beaufort, to take aduise how to repasse Loyre. There the Lord Plessis gete was appoyn∣ted to search out boates and men to conduct them, to auoyde the disorder which they had the first passing, and to that intent money was deliuered him. The same day the Lord Campoyse was sent with his company of light horsemen, to seaze vpon certayne houses vpon the banck of Loyre, right a∣gaynst the Abbey of S. Maure. The same day, whilest the Prince with the Nobles soiourned at Beau∣fort, came to the Lord Clermont the foure men which he had sent to Roche∣mort, who were entered into the Castle of Angers, and there remayned vntill the day of the rendring thereof, conducted by the Lord Suze: There they shewed to the armie what was passed in the Castle of Angers: one of them shewed a Crosse (which he had for his part) made of pure gold, ha∣uing two and thirtie great Diamonds, and a great Saphir which made the head of the Crucifixe: the ladder and all other things accustomed to be paynted in the passion (as they call it) was all of Diamonds, no lesse artifi∣cially, than costly wrought: he was proffered for the same fifteene hundred Crownes. The 24. of October, whilest the Prince with many Noble men soiour∣ned at Beaufort, to pacifie a quarrell risen among certayne Gentlemen, the Lord Laual in the afternoone passed ouer Loyre, his mē of armes and light horses, to defend S. Maure, and to fauour the passage of the rest. This day soiourning at Beaufort, was the cause of the disorder which followed after, and many marueiling at so long abode there, foresaw what would ensue, knowing that Ioyeuse had set certayne boates in a readines with small peeces at Saumur, to let them downe the riuer to stop the pas∣sage. If they had passed that day and night, all things had gone well and safe: but God had otherwise determined. The same day the Lords Ioyeuse, and Chastre, went vp the riuer Loyre on the South side of the sayd riuer from Angers to Saumur with 150. horses. The Lord Laual being passed ouer, and vnderstanding that the sayd Lords had passed on that coast toward Saumur, early in the morning made a roade toward Saumur, and tooke the Mules and rich carriage of Ioyeuse. The Lords Trimouille and Boyseuly passed the Lotion, & encamped them∣selues
in a Common vpon the bancke of Loyre, whilest the Prince and the rest passed Lotion. There was at that passage of Lotion aboue fiue hundred  horses, and two boates onely: for that cause the confusion was so great, that one being ouerladen sunke, though without any losse of men, because it was nigh the bancke. The same day about nine of the clocke in the morning, was heard on a sudden a peale of Ordinance, with some small shot, which put the Armie in great rumour. Some sayd that it was at Angers, in token of ioye for the rendring of the Castle. But within a while after were seene two great boates furnished with Ordinance and men of warre, who cast anker a little beneath the Abbey of S. Maure, in the place where the passage ouer was appoynted to be, and immediatly began to shoote on both sides of the riuer, both agaynst them who had passed, and agaynst them that were about to passe. The newes of the sayd boates were brought to the Prince incontinent∣ly, with amplification of the impossibilitie to repasse: and it was indeede so, for lacke of two field péeces to haue shot from the banke agaynst the boates, which by these meanes could haue béen easily sunke: but they had carried none, although they had once determined so to doo. These newes so amazed the whole Armie, as though a stroake of a Thunderboult had smitten them from heauen, and that so much the more, because the enemies forces did flocke together from euery side. The army then was scattered in sundry places, without hope to bee a∣ble to succour one another: for the Lord Laual had passed ouer the Riuer the day before, and the Lord Borlay had ventured to passe that day at S. Mathurin, not without great danger, yet without losse. The one part of the armie was betweene the Loyre, and the Lotion, an vnfit place for horse∣men, by reason of woods and marishes. The troupes of the Lord Cler∣mont, with the rest of the armie and carriage, were yet at Beaufort, bee∣tweene Angers and Lotion: so that if the enemy in such disaduantage had charged them, it would haue gone hard with them: but the enemy had no good spials. The Lord Auantigny in that disorder hauing passed Lotion, retyred to the Lord Campoyse, who had seazed on some houses right against ye Abbey Saint Maure, and had made a baricado vpon the banke. In the meane time they sent the Lord Chesue to the Prince, who caused the Prince to passe his army backe ouer Lotion, to make a ready resolution to passe in fighting, or else to take his way at aduenture ouer the countrey of Beause. For if he should make any delay, without doubt hee should be discomfited, hauing the enemy within a litle league both aboue and beneath, who reen∣forced themselues euery howre, and that there were other armed Boats discouered, which followed the former. Therefore to take readily aduise,
and to informe them thereof, and that if neede be the Lord Laual might repasse to them although not without danger. The Prince vnderstanding these newes, assembled all the heads and  Captaynes in the wood, which is on the banke of Lorion, nigh the place of the passage: where they reasoned more then two howres, what was expe∣dient to be done in this extremity. Some gaue counsell to take their way toward Beause, and to get to the Loyre aboue Orleans, for that they had for∣ces sufficient ynough to passe all hazardes, and to fight if neede were. Others were agaynst that, and alleaged, that the army was weake by passing ouer of the forces of the Lords Laual, and Burlay, and therefore did aduise to descend into Britayne, where ships might bee had out of Rochel, & so it were easy to passe beneath Nantes: and by these meanes to saue their men with the losse of their horses. In this diuersity of opinions they could conclude nothing: but seeing the night approched, they returned to Beaufort, their to take resolution of their affayres. There was a Noble man, one Lord D'ouault, an old warrier, who not long afore the passage ouer Loyre, put him self willingly in the company of the Lord Laual. This Noble man vnderstanding that the Prince could not repasse, and that he was determined to take his way ouer the countrey of Beause, which could not bee done without great hazard, did Ieaue the Lord Laual his company (who was about to retyre from the banke of Loyre to Poytow) & did venture to repasse Loyre, notwithstāding the great danger, protesting that he would die with the Prince if occasion should re∣quire it: and so with great danger repassing the riuer, ouertooke the Prince at Beaufort. The resolution to repasse the Lorion, caused the Prince and the Lordes who were with him to resolue themselues agaynst whom so euer. Not∣withstanding euery one did looke vpon his fellow, as commonly is done in such ineuitable dangers, where is seene no remedy. Some sayd, saltem olim si meminisse iuuaret: others sayd, vnasalus victis nullam sperare salu∣tem. Few thought, that these blowes came from Heauen for the punish∣ment of their vices: and specially for swearing and blaspheming, which were not punished in that armie, where were many of the League, who induced others to their wickednes and licentious life. All that day there was a great disorder for them that had passed to repasse agayne ouer Lorion, hauing but one boate which could not receaue aboue ten horses at once, and that caused the disorder, for that euery one would bee first and no man last. This was to bee noted in the Prince, that he chaunged not his counte∣nance, but as hee did at the passage of Loyre: so now he answered to them yt represented him the danger, saying, we will fight. And because the con∣fusion
encreased at the passage of Lorion, sending sufficient number of horsemen to euery place, where the enemy might come vppon them, hee lyghted of his horse, and caused men, horses, and cariage to passe: and when  it was more then one hower in the night hee passed himselfe: notwith∣standing many remayned all night in the marshes, who passed the next day following in the morning. The night following the 25. day of October, it was concluded by the Prince & Nobles with him, to take ouer ye countrey, which lyeth betwene the Lorion, and Loiz, which is a Riuer comming from Vendosme to An∣gers, to the end to recouer Beause, and so to passe Loyre at Bogeancye, Bloys, or Sancerre: or if the worst came, with long iourneyes to attayne to the head of Loyre, with resolution to fight agaynst whomsoeuer. All that night there was hot skirmishing betweene them that came down from Samur in the boats, and the garrison, which the Prince had left at the Abbay of Saynt Maure, vnder Captayne Serpant, where was also the Lord Laual and Boulay, who as is afore sayd, had repassed the Loyre. The Lord Auantigny, who remayned all that night in the house called Menetriere, not farre from the banke of Loyre to make the retyre, passed the Lorion, with all the residue very early, & arryued at Beaufort with the Prince about eight a clocke in the morning, the 26. and the same day was the passage of Saint Mathurine beneath Saynt Maure, stopped with boats, furnished with ordinance and garrison. The 26. the Lords Laual and Boulay, with the garrison which was at Saint Maur, vnderstanding that the Prince was returned beyond Lorion, with determination to crosse ouer the countrey of Beause, and that the pas∣sage of Saynt Mathurine was stopped, thought necessarye to retyre into Xainctonge, with all diligence, and with such forces as they had, to oppose themselues against the attemptes of ye enemies which might ryse there, to assemble the nobility and other souldiers which were left there, & also to af∣sist the troupes which were left at the siege of Browage, and to make the places sure in Poytow and Xainctonge: and in very deede, God did worke al the sayd euentes, by their presence there. The King aduertised what was passed at Angers, putteth foorth his forces out of all partes, to set vpon the Prince. It is sayd before, how the King intended to make ciuill warre in Guy∣enne, & first of all to beginne in Poitow & Xainctonge, as being next neigh∣bours to him of all the Prouinces which do professe the Gaspell: for the which cause he had ordayned aforehand prouisions of corue, and wine to be set vp in certayne townes and cities: & among others the Duke de Mayne was appoynted, to that warre, not as one who was thought fit for that charge, but for the causes which do follow. As the Guyzes, to wit, the Dukes, Guyze, Mame & Cardinal, bretheren &
Aumale cosin vnto them, did consent in these three points, to wit in alte∣ring the state by transporting the crowne from the true owners, and haires into their familie, in killing, degrading, or at least disinheriting the house  of Bourbon, and destroying the auncient nobilitie whom they knew, would resist their atempts, and beare vnpacientlie their vsurped tiranny. The Priests were the fire brands to kindle this ambitious rage, and by their money to aduaunce the same. So they all did prouide to bring this treason to effect, that of all things the kings forces should not fall into any other hands then in to their own, or of their partakers: but specially that none of the Princes of the bloud should by any meanes be armed with the guiding of the Kings power. Wee see then how they all did agree, to vndoe the King with his owne forces. But herein they did vary, for euery one had particular fetches and drifts, which did swim in their braynes, whereby they went about to aduaunce their particular affaires, by the Kings forces: for the Duke of Guize did determine to stay nigh the Kings person, and not to goe farre from Paris and Belgike, where he had gotten great fauours and many partakers, there expecting either fit oportunitie to strike the blowe which he had long afore hand purposed, or else at the least, hee bearing the sway about the Kinges person and counsell, might both spy and preuent the Kings driftes and po∣licie, if he should seeme to wauer neuer so little, and keepe of the Princes of the bloud and Nobilitie, from entring into fauour with the King, whereby they might disapoint his driftes. He also imagined, that whatsoeuer might happen, Paris and the Bel∣gike being at his deuotion, either were able to defend him againstthe Kings attempts, or else if the King might be cut off by any misfortune, the saide citie and countrey would be able to lift him vp into that roome, whereon he did so greatly desire to sit; euen against the consent of the rest of the realme, and against his owne brother the Duke De Maine, whose emulation hee not onely alwaies suspected and desired to preuent, but also endeuored to send him farre from the said King, citie and countrey: beside that, he knew to be a fit instrument, by skilfull entising and policie to seduce their great and populous cities of Poytiers, Limoges, Perigueux, Bourdeaulx, & others where he should come, regarding not at whose deuotion those cities might bee, so that they were not in the power and fidelitie of the King, or of the King of Nauarre, that by so much they might be weakened. The Duke De Mayne being appointed for Guienne, not to subdue it, but to haue the Kings forces, in the hands and at the deuotion of the League, and farre from him, if at a pinch he should haue neede of them, was very vn∣willing to depart from Paris to his iourney: aleaging alwaies some ex∣cuse. The causes of his vnwillingnes were loue, ambition, and feare, the
obiects of these affections were Masters Saint Beusue, and other Courte∣sans in the towne of Paris, where he walowed himselfe in filthie pleasures  and whoredome, as the Boare in the myre: his owne brother whome hee would haue preuented, what occasion might haue happened by keeping Paris ouer his head: for he was acquainted with the intents and driftes of the League, as one of the chiefest of them yet vncertaine of the euents, and what in his absence being so farre from Paris, might happen vnto the King: he would faine haue kept Paris still in possession, so that if either nature or violence should bereaue the King of his life, e might haue that capitall, mightie, rich, and factious citie in his owne possession, by whose helpe hee supposed to ataine to his long wished desires, and become his eldest bro∣thers master. The third cause was feare, and the obiect thereof, the King of Nauarre, for knowing that the said King of Nauarre was priuie to their driftes, not onely by his deepe and princelike prudencie, many euident tokens: and their own too manifest attempts, but speciallie by their inticing him, and them of the reformed Religion, to their conspiracie and faction, knowing him also to be a Prince most faithfull to the state, Crowne and Realme of France, a Prince of great valour, and implacable to traitors: thus hauing a conscience (which is more then a thousand witnesses guiltie) feare made him continually to enter into such apprehensions, that he thought certain∣ly to goe into Guienne, was to goe to a most assured death. Thus these two bretheren aspiring both to the crowne, yet did varie in thoughts, as the auncient saying is, . For the Duke De Mayne would faine to keepe the possession of Paris, and there∣fore maketh many excuses, hauing not sometime money enough, another time hauing to weake forces, sometime aleaging health, sometime the vn∣seasonable weather. The Duke of Guize was greatly desirous to haue him out of Paris, supposing that there his shadowe did infect the citie: and therefore to take away all excuse, least he should aleage his forces, not to be sufficient to march with the King of Nauarre, he caused the King to adde vnto him the regiments of Swissers. So the Duke De Mayne hauing eight thousand Swissers, twelue regiment of French footemen, twelue hundred horsemen French: Forces sufficient for a good Captaine to subdue the whole countrey, receaued eight and twentie thousand Crownes, which the treasorer of the Cleargie deliuered him: and shortlie after eyght and twentie thousand more, and not long after his departing sent him foure and fiftie thousand more. Yet the King could by no meanes perswade him to take his iourney (for the Kings commaundements he regarded not) vntill the newes came to the King, that the Prince of Conde had passed Loyre out of Poytow into Anjou, so that at length with great importunacie, being per∣swaded by his brother, that in the absence of the Prince (being as if it were
inclosed in) he might easily subdue all that countrey, and that it was neede with his armie all by one voyage to goe to the other side of Loyre, to let the  repassing of the Prince, if he should atempt it, about the 23. of October, weeping and wayling as a child, he went out of Paris, assured of stripes, if he should come within the reach of the said King of Nauarre. And wher, as at his departing, he had opened his timerousnes to euiuently, he thought good to couer it with the cloake of vanitie for want of a better, in breathing bloud, slaughter, and fire, in words and bragges: which at length were tur∣ned into a blast of colde winde, yet fully resolued not to come within the reach of the King of Nauarre, for feare of the Bastonado, or Strapado, or some such like thing: being in good hope in the meane time, that in walking and taking his pleasures in Guyenne at the Priestes costs, he might make his part strong with seducing the forenamed Cities and other, from the Kings obedience, to his deuotion: but he was as far deceaued in that, as in escaping the Bastonado. But now to returne to our purpose, the Duke Ioyeuse was at the back of the Prince of Conde, the Duke De Mayne passing through Orleans, o∣uer the riuer of Loyre was at his right hand, and as farre as Bloyse, stopped all the passages, least the saide Prince might passe ouer. The King had sent Biron with forces into Beause, which marched right against his face, least hee should escape that way, on the left hand the way to the sea through Britaine and Normandie, was long difficulte and dangerous, by reason of many townes and Garisons therein placed. The Prince being thus compassed about with al these forces of enemies was in lesse daunger, because that they knew not what, and how things passed in his armie, and supposing the same to be farre closer and stronger then it was in deede, did greatlie feare to aboard it: whereby he and all his Captaines had opportunitie to beguile them, and to steale away from them. Now, to knowe well the rest of this voyage, vntill the dissolution of the armie, it is necessarie to know the situation of the country. There is on the north side of Lorion, a riuer called Loire, washing the townes of Cha∣steau dune, Vendosme, Chasteaudeloy, Lude, Flesche, and Luche, which mée∣ting with the riuer Sartre at Angers, falleth into Loyre, beneath Pont de sel. The Prince at his departing from Beaufort, folowed this riuer almost as far as Chasteau dune. The 26. of October, the Princes armie dislodged from Beaufort, inten∣ding to lodge at the towne of Luche in Anjou, belonging to the Lord Cler∣mong, there purposing to passe ouer ye sayd Loyre vpon the bridge, into the countrey which lyeth betweene the sayd riuer Loyre and Sartre, called Vau∣deloyre: but the riuer was so ouerflowen, (as though the foure Elements had set themselues agaynst that army) that it did couer halfe of the sayd
bridge: and the Lord Clermont (which is Lord of the place) sounding the  foord himselfe, thought it were not passable: whereupon they determined that day to goe to Lude. There happened vnto them other things which increased greatly the amaze. For newes came that the Duke Ioyeuse, with greater forces than theirs, pursued with great hast after them, and that not long after the de∣parting of the Prince, he had seazed vpon Beaufort. On the other side, the countrey (which before trembled for feare of them) began to rise vpon them: for they of the Flesche the selfesame day issued out, and intercepted some souldiers and carriage. That day according to the determination they lod∣ged at Lude. The 27. of October they would haue passed ouer Loyre vpon the bridge of Lude, but it was so highly ouerflowen, that although it was easie to passe the bridge, yet at the further side of the said bridge there was another great riuer, which they must néedes passe ouer by a foord, for there was but a little boate which would scarse carrie three men without daunger. The horsemen passed and set themselues in battell aray, vntill all had pas∣sed: there a great many gaue ouer their carriage, & they which had friends in the countrey gaue them their stuffe. That day from Lude they sent the Lords Boysduly, and Aubiguy, towards Boysgency, Mere, and S. Die, to finde some passage, and that the morrowe after they should all méete at Orges, or the Chappell S. Martine. Whilest they stayed in that playne in battell aray, for the safe passage of all the companies, there happened a thing which would haue wrapped a superstitious soule into sundrie and fearefull thoughts: for not farre thence beyond them was a Hare started by the enemies, betwéene the Loyre and Lotion, with a great crye after, which gaue them the alarum, and all prepared themselues to receaue the enemie couragiously: but at length the Hare was seene with more than two hundred horses with fewe dogges. That poore Hare passed and repas∣sed among the horses feete with many stripes, and yet was not taken, but saued her self though she was pursued more than halfe a mile. Some tooke this for an euill, and some a good presage; saying, that if God had care to preserue that poore feeble and fearefull beast, much more would hee haue care of that little flocke amazed: which howsoeuer it was hollowed and pursued by all the forces of France, notwithstanding would escape safe and sound, in receiuing but feare without great hurt: which thing also hap∣pened. From Lude they at length arriued at Prillay two houres in the night: this is a great towne belonging to the Prince County, the Prince of Conde his yonger brother. At their comming thither, there was such a confusion and presse in the streates, that they could neither goe forward nor back∣ward for the space of an houre, not the Prince himself, vntil that the doores
of some houses broaken gaue some roome. The 29. day they marched through Vandeloyre, and at night came to  S. Arnol, and the villages about not farre from Lauerdine, but the sayd S. Arnol was a poore little village, where was small store of lodgings; so that the further they went, the néerer they approached to their miseries. There also newes came that the enemies followed after them as coura∣giously and with such hast, as they went about to goe from them with great iourneys. The Lords Espernon and Byron, and most of the Nobili∣tie of the Court, were at Bonaual in Beause to méete with this terrified ar∣mie. The Duke de Mayn on the other side with a great armie, was on the other side of the riuer of Loyre neere Bloys, to cut them off by the way, if by chaunce they should repasse. The Townes betwéene Bloys and Orleans were all be set with strong garrisons. The Lord Chastre had sent into So∣loigne to kéepe the riuer of Loyre, and to retire the boates and milles into the townes. The Commons were set to watch, readie to rise vpon them at the first sound of the Toxine. The companies of the Prince were as wearie, as their enemies were lustie, and as men may bee wearie with courses and watches, so horses much more with galloping night and day without resting. The meanes to passe betweene Bloys and Amboyse fayled them: all these things being knowne of all, made them to haue little hope of their affayres. Yet there is no doubt that if the enemie had appeared, the necessitie had much increased their courage. But it seemed that by a singular prouidence of God, the e∣nemies stood in such feare of these companies, that he would haue them defeated through wearines, that it might appeare to be Gods owne hand, and his proper work to scatter them, and that his enemies should not haue the praise, nor triumph ouer them. For afterward it was confessed by the enemies which were in the armie of Ioyeuse and the League, that this handfull of men, wearied, scattered, amazed, and alreadie ouercome, was to all those troopes (who would haue swallowed them vp) such a terrour, that if they had offered to set vpon them, they might happely haue found them easie to bee dealt withall. For the enemies were perswaded that the Prince would neuer haue enterprized such a iourney, vnlesse he had béen able to beate downe all that had come before him. All that night in the which they lodged at S. Arnol, there was great reasoning among them of the Counsell, what was expedient to bee done. The Lord Rohan (with many Gentlemen of his company) sayd, that the further they should goe that way, the déeper they should sinke in daunger; that the best part of their forces had passed ouer Loyre with the Lord La∣ual, and that the armie did slide away daily: they that had friends in Van∣domoys, Beause, Mayne & Perche, did steale away; the enemie being fresh and strong did approach on them on euery side; and that the further they
went vpward, the néerer they did drawe to their misfortune. Let him carrie his head to Paris who would (said he) for I will carrie mine into Britaine,  and fight with him that will let me. So vppon these spéeches (seeing not the contrary reasons of any force) tooke his leaue from the Prince, & his ior∣ney toward Britaine, whether he came through many difficulties and dan∣gers, and in time (notwithstanding the endeuour of the Duke Mercure) with safetie he passed the riuer of Loyre beneath Nants, and repayred to Rochel, with great ioy and contentation of all men for his safe returne. This separation was as a second thunderboult from heauen vpon this armie, which is no more to bee called an armie, but a small companie: for there was no more but the companies of the Prince, and of the Lord Tri∣mouille, whereof some had forsaken him, There were also left some com∣panies of the Harquebusiers on horseback of the Lord Clermont, of whom many had alreadie retired to their houses: then they began to looke euery one vppon his fellowe, shrugging with their shoulders, euery one did be∣leeue that if there were any safetie, it must miraculously come from hea∣uen, and many which before in matters of prayer and conscience had giuen themselues to great licentiousnes, began to enter into consideration, and to reforme themselues. The Prince remayning so with these few companyes, had a number of carryage, wherewith he was so hampered that he could not rid himselfe of it. He sent the Lord Saint Gelays, with some gentlemen of Poytow, to the number of 30. horses to ryde toward Vendosme, and some where to take lo∣ginges commodious for the companies which followed. But in the way they heard newes, that the Lord Lauerdine with some number of men had entred into Ʋendosme, to cut that way from the Prince: and that the night before some Souldiers of the company of the Lord Clermont tooke pri∣sonners some of the company of the Lord Benhare gouernor of Vendosme, who brought some store of armor to theyr master. The 30. of October, the rest of the companies arryued at Saint Anne, nigh Vendosme, where they thought to haue departed logings, but for the pouerty of the place they stayed not there. In this wandering through the countrey of Beause, some of the compa∣ny of Captayne Bonet, tooke the Lord Rosins, who comming from Paris with a Pasport from the King (which he shewed them, not supposing they had béen of the religion) was going to the King of Nauarre. This Lord had foure notable great horses. The Dragons (for so were called the Har∣quebuziers on horsebacke) weary of their tyred horses, chaunged with the great horses of the fayd Lord Rosins, and with great ioy carryed him away with them. But he being knowen by the Lord Saint Gelays, hee caused them to restore him his horses, and to take their tyred horses agayne. The sayd Lord Rosins, was conducted to the Prince, and shewed him the
rage wherewith his enemies prepared themselues to compasse him about: and besides, hee told him many thinges sufficient to make him take some  resolution. But it was nothing to the aduertisements sent him from diuers places, as that he was inclosed on euery side, and that shortly he should haue the e∣nemy to come vpon him with forces farre vnequall to his: and that it was high time to handle his affayres wisely without delaying, till to¦morrow. On the other side, he was aduertyzed that the meanes to repasse Loyre toward Bloys, were cut off, by reason that the enemies nigh at hand had preuented it. The Prince arryuing at the towne of Salowme, a league beyond Saynt Anne, gathered his counsell, and all reasons wayghed on e∣uery side, he was earnestly requested by all them that were present, to pro∣uide for the safety of his person: the which being conducted in a safe place, the rest by Gods helpe would in time find out some way of deliuerance. The reasons whereby hee was perswaded to take some resolution, were these. First, that his retire would be more honorable to him, and more shame∣ful to the enemy, then to hazard (as if it were through dispayre) vpon a bat∣tell, whereof the issue could not bee but very perilous both to his person, & to the whole estate of the reformed religion. Secondly, that in such extremity and disfauour, there was gotten ho∣nor ynough, by a singular grace of God, to haue auoyded the rage of so great forces of his enemies, who did hold him as if hee were enclosed and compassed round about: and to snatch from them the glory which they had promised to themselues already of his death, before that euer they durst looke him in the face: and that the valoure of noble courage was shewed as well in auoyding an euident danger, as in the exploits of battell. Thirdly, that the passages were not so closed vp, but that there was meanes to escape to some safe place. It was hard to make him condiscend to these reasons, yet at length conuicted by the way of intreaty and neces∣sity, hee concluded to retire. But afore he would depart, that night with his constancye accustomed, hee tooke order for the parting of his companies, euen of his owne house∣hold. The Lord Saynt Gelayes with some of the companies, and part of his Gards should goe toward Loyre, to ioyne with the Lords Aubiguy, and Brisduly, who were gone to search passage towardes Loyre: and such of his houshould seruantes as would not, or could not follow the Lord Saynt Gelays, he directed them to retyre to some friendes of his in the countrey. Furthermore, that the Lord Clermont should retyre some where with his companies. This being done, about 11. of the clocke at night he departed with a smal company, with the Lords Trimouille, and
Auantigny, and other gentlemen with few of his chiefest houshold seruants. The waies which he tooke, the courses which he ranne, the dangers which  hee passed through to get to the Ilandes of Gernsey, lying in the narrow Seas betweene England & France, what courtesies and Princelike inter∣taynment he receaued of that great Elizabeth Queene of England, & how with a great number of Nobility and ships of war he returned to Rochel: also with great reioycing of all men he was receaued by them of Rochell, is the argument of an other booke, which the tyme shall produce. But here be three thinges worthy to be noted. First, how God doth lay heauy crosses vpon his children, and do compasse them with ineuitable dan∣gers (after mans wisedom) both to make them see with the eye how weak∣ly man is stayed, which trusteth in the arme of flesh, and worldly power. Secondly, to make them vnderstand, how nigh he is vnto them that re∣pose themselues in him, and how safe that man is, who resteth vnder the shadow of his wings, by an assured trust and confidence in his promises. Thirdly, to shew how many wayes hee hath to deliuer his children out of those dangers, which in mans reason cannot bee auoyded: as this was to that end to make them tast how sweete his deliuerances bee, to warne them thereby to amend their liues, and to walke more circumspectly in his wayes, and to bee more watchfull in the inuocation of his name, and thanksgiuing. Of all ancient histories, this hath a similitude and liknes of the returning of the Greeks from Persia, brought into their countrey by that noble Phi∣losopher and Captayne Xenophon, reported by himselfe in expedition, Ci∣ri minoris. But to returne to the matter. By this tyme, are the Lords Laual, Boulay, Rohan, the Prince of Con∣de, the Lords Trimouille and Auantigny, by Gods special fauour deliue∣red, and brought (as if it were) by the hand into certayne places of safety. Now there remayned the Lordes Saint Gelayse, Clermont, and others with them, left in the clawes of the Lyon and a pray to the enemy, to trye the selfe same presence of God, and to be led by ye hands of his Angel out of all danger into a hauen of safety. The head being gone, the rest within a while vanished away as dust blowen in the ayre, & that which is maruei∣lous, without the losse of any one man of account, or any other that euer could be knowen, euery one had his life for spoyle: which hath made ridicu∣lous the lying pamphlets spread. boad in Paris, of the terrible & dreadful ouerthrow of the Prince of Conde. But this short discourse doth represent all thinges passed in that army. For the discipation of that armye is not to be attributed, neyther to the King, neither to the Duke Ioyeuse, much lesse to the Duke de Mayne, or to any ather of that side. For none of them al approched nigh to the Prince of Conde, since his departure from Lude, not by fiue or sixe leages, ney∣ther
did they euer draw Swoord agaynst him. Wheras that night resolution was taken, that ye day folowing, the Lord  Saint Gelays should take his iourney toward Meare, a towne vpon the ri∣uer of Loyre, betweene Boysgencie and Bloys: in so dooing, he disappoynted greatly the enemies, and gaue great aduauntage to the Prince to auoyde their hands, for the scape of the enemies was his person, more then all the rest: for they cared not for any thing else, so that they might haue him dead or a liue; so eagerly were they bent against him. But the companies be∣ing deuided, some tooke their iourney toward Orleans, others toward Nor∣mandie, some toward the Mayne, by which meanes the enemies knew not which of them the Prince was in, and so the chiefest power of the enemie was in doubt still, which way to take to folow after him: and in the meane while, he and his little companie did slide into Briayn, and from thence ouer the sea into England. The Lorde S. Gelays (to saue the remnant of the armie) exposed him∣selfe as a pray to the enemie that could catch him, notwithstanding with∣out the losse of any one man: but he escaped with his companie which was with him, with incredible labours and losse of the carriage and stuffe. That night therefore, about twelue a clock, one houre after the depar∣ting of the Prince, with the gardes of the said Prince, who were about threeshore Harquebusiers, he tooke his way to Vilelnisant, where the rest of the companies were lodged, to take their iourney to the Chapell Saint Martin, and from thence dislodging together, came to the saide Chapel one houre afore day. There were about 500. horses of all sorts, but not a∣boue 200. fit to fight, and yet of them, who might haue fought, many should haue been faine to fight on foote, for their horses were readie to fall vpon their noses, and the men but a little more worth. The 31. of October, they ariued at the Chapell Saint Martin verie ea∣silie, and because they needed to baite their horses, and refresh themselues, the inhabitants saw their doores broken afore they were called vp. In that vilage the Lord Saint Gelaise learned, that the euening before there were two men on horseback, which saide, that if there should ariue any men of warre, they should not stay there, but passe further to Orges. And as the day began to appeare, the Lorde Saint Gelaise receaued letters from the Lord Aubigny, wherein hee willed them to take the direct way to Ralsy, where he should meete him. And when they came thether, the said Lorde Aubigny reported that there were no boates, nor any hope to repasse Loyre: for there was 800. Swartrutters of the League, who had lodged at Saint Die, a walled towne, three Leagues aboue Bloys, vpon the high way to Orleans, where they thought to haue found passage. There were also all along the riuer at Mir de Nonain, Saint Laurence, & other vilages about the riuer, three or foure regiments of footemen: seeming therefore to them
an vnpossible thing to passe Loyre that way: the Lord Saint Gelays con∣sulted with the Lorde Tiffardiere and others, who concluded to goe  to Orges, and to some vilages thereabouts, with commaundement to so∣iourne there, not aboue an houre and a halfe. There was in the Castell of Orges, an olde Gentleman Papist, who hearing that the Lord Saint Gelaies was in that companie, desired to see him, and to speake with him, and knowing that his companie was wearie and weake, and weather beaten, asked him whether he went, and what he meant to doo with his companie, and swearing with a great oath, told him that hee was vndone, and that if hee had three times as many men as hee had, within an houre (if he soiorned there) he and his would bee cut in pie∣ces. This Gentleman was very stout, because of the Kings & the Leaguers forces, which hee knew to bee thereabout: hee shewed him that there was great companies, as well on the side of the riuer, as on the side of Beause, not distant from him aboue halfe a League nigh the Forrest of Marche∣noyre, with this intent to charge that remnant of the armie, which was with him: how all the commons had the watch word, and looked to haue some warning to begin. There was no hope to escape being few (and they wearie and weatherbeaten) without any hope of succour. The Lord Boysduly met nigh Talsy two Gentlemen papists of his ac∣quaintance, who shewed him the selfesame daungers abouesayd: and yet more, that neither hee, neither they who were with him were farre from spoyle. The Lord Boysduly perceiuing, that a Gentleman called la Mot, (in whom he had much confidence) knew very well the amaze of that com∣panie, after assurance of amitie for himselfe, and the Lord S. Gelays, hée certified them that they were in a worser case than they knew: and that the Prince perceiuing that hee had so great forces agaynst him, had dissolued his armie, and that his person was alreadie in place of safetie, and almost all his armie: and that there remayned no more but that which hee sawe with the Lord Saint Gelays, who at all aduenture had vndertaken to saue the rest. La Mot then offered him friendship, & his houses for to retire with such of his friends as hee would, but his house was distant from thence eight leagues: which his courtesie the Lord Boysduly accepted. In these terrors, all the troupe (being on horsebacke) marched at large in a plaine field, not farre from the Castle Orges of one side, and neere the Forrest of Marchenoire on the other side: no man knewe which way to turne himselfe too, nor what to followe; for a present daunger was on eue∣ry side. The Lord S. Gelays, and other Captaynes with him, were long before they could conclude of their way. The enemies did approach and held that small companie in sight: of which being aduertized, they marched
within the Forrest of Marchenoire: and being somewhat entered within the sayd Forrest, in the high way to Chasteaudune, the Lord S. Gelays shewed them the ineuitable danger whereunto they were fallen: he shewed  them that the enemie was to be beguiled, and for that intent it was expe∣dient and necessarie to deuide themselues into small companyes, and to followe diuers waies: and that the Lord would conduct the parts aswell as the whole, wheresoeuer it should please him. The Lord Aubigny vndertooke to conduct one troupe one way, Cap∣taine Ryeux went another way: some tooke the way to Orleans; others drawed towards Paris. A Genleman Papist which was with the Lord la Mot, tooke with him the Lord Tifardiere, and the other Gentlemen of Poytow, to whom he shewed great courtesies. The Lords S. Gelays, Boysduly, Campoys, Chesmi, and others, to the number of ten or twelue, went vnder the assurance of the Lord Mot, the way to Chasteaudune in Beausse. As it was a straunge thing to see the dissipation of that armie without blowes, bloudshed, or losse of any man by the fight of the enemie: so it was a pitifull sight to see the separation of the Souldiers from their Captaines; of the seruants from their masters: the seruants did cast away the things which they had gréedily gathered, to saue themselues vppon their horses. The waies were full of good stuffe, armes, baskets, males, apparell, and other things of value: euery one did cast away the things which they had taken from others more willingly, than when they tooke it. God did then require an accompt of many disor∣dered persons, in whose hands Manna did rot, which they had greedily gathered: And it is to be confessed, that God testified from heauen, that he will haue his worke aduanced by other meanes than by such armes: for a great companie of this armie were not accompanied with pietie and Chri∣stian modestie. On the other side, God tooke away all matter of boasting and glorying from the enemies: for it was a straunge thing, that conside∣ring the small distance of places, where these companies of the enemie were, the great multitude of lustie, fresh, and well furnished companies which they had, the Countreys and Townes thrée or foure score leagues round about all fauourable to them, hauing compassed the others round a∣bout, yet not one after this separation appeared to fight, nor to assault these vanquished few men, as he which durst not come nigh the skinne of a dead Lyon. The Lord Saint Gelays, with them of his companie, had scarse gone a League in Beause, when he discouered three cornets of Launcers of Itali∣ans, and Albanoyces, who were from Chasteaudune marched in good or∣der, and came trotting forward at the end of the Forrest, where the separa∣tion was made. The Lord Mot (who lead the Lord Saint Gelais and his companie) did feare, and felt himselfe in great daunger (as he saide) with
such companie of Hugonets after him: and faining to discouer, he forsooke his guests, and got to a village farre before them. The Lord S. Gelays and his companie, beléeued certainly that those troupes came vpon them, and thought themselues as good as dead. But behold, the eyes of these armed men were so blinded by the power of him which blinded Bilham the sonne of Beor, and Elimas the Sorcerer, that without perceiuing him, or any of his companie, they passed by within the distance of fiftie paces from them: there was onely a barne of a Farme betwixt them, and the Lord S. Gelays stood still in the high way before the barne. It was a wonder that this companie was so carried away inuisible out of sight of that multitude, as if it were in a clowde: and that none of the enemies went through the high way, whereby they might haue béen discouered. These companies of Italians and Albaneses went into a vil∣lage not farre of, where they perceiued some horses and Harquebusiers: they set vpon the house where the Lord Aubigny was, with others, who neuerthelesse tooke their horses & saued themselues without any domage. These horsemen found much spoile by the way without any man to claime it. The Lord S. Gelays riding along in the champiane countrie of Beausse toward Chartres, with the Lord Mot, without kéeping any high way, the night being rainie and darke, began to enter in suspition of the sayd Mot, being a Papist. So the Lord Mot returned backe with this opinion, that the Lord S. Gelays with his companie, would goe to Cheuroles toward Orleans: but he tooke his iourney to Ianuile lying betwéene Chartres and Orleans: and there crossing the high way from Paris to Orleans, passed through many companies of armed men, who were lodged in Beausse, and so recouered vpon him the Forrest of Orleans▪ The returning backe of the Lord Mot (as is aboue sayd) was to play a popish tricke with the Lord Saint Gelays: for perceiuing that he was not strong enough, he went in the night to gather companie to haue set vppon them at Cheuroles, and so to haue taken them prisoners to his aduantage, as he did not dissemble afterward to speake openly. So that his professing of amitie, was an allurement to drawe them into his snare: for afterward he followed them as farre as Ianuile with thirtie horses in a companie. The first day of Nouember, with much payne all the day long ranging and galloping through the Forrest, at length they got the banck of Loyre, not farre from the towne of Guyen, about midnight. The Lord Mot for his paynes had many horses, but specially one, for the which was refused foure hundred Crownes. And seeing himselfe dis∣appoynted of his intent, afterward he could not dissemble to say, that he ho∣ped to haue had fiftéene thousand Crownes of raunsome for the Lord S. Gelays onely, which was the cause (sayd he) that he left the following of other Hugonets, whereby he might haue made himselfe rich.
The Lord Boysduly was in hope to haue passed the riuer, by fauour of some friends which he had in that countrey: but hee was disappoynted of his hope: which thing put them in dispayre both of repassing, and of their  liues also: for the riuer was beset with companies of armed men euery where; for at Seuilly was a great garrison, which Antragues (gouernour of Orleans) had sent thether. All the boates either were retired to the townes, or to the other side of the riuer, and the selfesame day commandement was giuen to all Water-men and Fishers, vppon payne of death either to sinke their boates, or to let them downe to Seuilly. The Lord Chastre (gouer∣nour of Berry) had commaunded to doo the like at Sancerre. The Prouost of Borbonnoys and Berry, with companies of Souldiers, did gallop along the riuer seeking some Hugonets stragling. The horses of this small number could go no more but a soft pace, and did fall downe for wearines: all things seemed contrary to them, so that in that dispayre they determi∣ned to haue followed the way of Gien, or Briare, townes situated vpon the bankes of Loyre aboue Orleans, where doubtles they had béen all slaine or taken; for all was full of men of warre going downe the riuer to Orleans. But on a sudden a little boye comming, conducted them to a towne called Omiroer, they went into an Iune where they sayd they would baite, saying that they went toward the Lord Antragues, and that they pursued some Hugonets who had passed ouer the water. A peasant vpon these words, (desirous that they should doo some good exployt that way) being there sayd, There was yesterday a litle boat beyond the water, which to morrow must goe downe to Seuilly: there it is yet, (this was about midnight) if it could be had you might passe quickly. They enquiring how to come by it, it was found very hard, the riuer was broade, the owner of the boate was in bed, the winde was great, and to call him were in vaine. But there was yesterday (sayd the peasant) a quarter of a league off a boate mill, which draweth a little boate; if you could get that you might (said he) two or thrée of you passe ouer to get the great boate. Without further delay they for∣sooke the baite, the peasant was their guide, the small boate was at land, wherewith fewe passed to the mill, which was farre in the water. The Miller was surprized, who at the first resisted; for he should bee hanged (sayd he) if hee ayded them: at length hee passed ouer fiue of them in his small boate, with their swords and pistols in hand, thinking they should be resisted: for it was sayd that some Souldiers were on the other side to keepe the boate. They tooke the boate and the boatman, who withstood them much; for it might cost him his life (as he sayd): notwithstanding being enforced, he went to fetch the rest of the companie which stayed on the other side. This passage so vnlooked for, reuiued both men and horses, for neither of them were any more wearie: so that without any staying, they rode two leagues ouerthwart the fields in Soleigne, where they found
a Farme, wherein they soiourned the rest of that night. The 2. of Nouember they aduaunced toward Bourges, and separated  themselues, euery one retiring where he thought good. The Lorde Saint Gelais soiourned for a while in Berry, and after passing the riuers Creuse, Vienne, Cher and Cline, ariued at Saint Ihan D' Angely, and Rochel, about the same time that the Prince returned out of England, where hee met the said Prince, with the Lords Rohan, Clermont, Laual, Boulay, & other No∣bles and Captaines, without the losse of one man. Considering how these noble men (but especially the small companie of the Lord Saint Ge∣lays) were pursued through Beause, ye Forrest of Orleans, along the riuer of Loyre, it is a wonder how they did escape without leauing a hare behinde, for the hare at Lude was neuer so hardly hunted, as this small companie was. Here we haue to marke well the worke of God in this Historie of deli∣uerance: first, how the Lord set his Angell betweene his Children and his enemies, so that the companies of Chasteaudune passed hard by them, in∣tending to charge them, and yet being within 50. paces, they could neither see nor heare them, but as if they had been couered with a cloude, were pas∣sed ouer. Secondly, heere is to bee considered, that the Lorde turned those things (by the which they had prouoked God to anger) to their good. For while the greedie enemies were a gathering the stuffe which was cast a∣way, this little weake and red companie had time to slide off the hand of that enemie, which is most insolent, filthie, craftie, and prophane, as is the Italian. Thirdly, how the Lord did delude the dissimulation of the Lord la Mot, who vnder colour of amity, would haue snared them, either to the slaughter, or otherwise to their vndooing. Fourthly, how when they were cleane gone out of hope of their liues, and that it was time the Lord should pull them out of the deepe mire with his owne hand, he sendeth a boy, or rather an Angell, I meane a messen∣ger to direct them, where the meanes of their deliuerance should be shewed vnto them. Last of all, the Lord did vse the verie malice of the enemie, to wit, of the poyson which he did beare to them of the religion, to be the meane and the guide how to passe the riuer, and to deliuer them out of so many ineuitable daungers, and intollerabe labours, to bring them to a place of safetie and rest. This is also a marueilous thing, that the other Souldiours and com∣panies scattered, as dust blowne in the ayre, repassed the riuer Loyre, vpon the bridges of Orleans, Bloys, Amboyse, Tours, Saumur, and others, euen with their armour, making any excuse to serue their turne, as they would
themselues, when the said briges were narowly kept. Now hauing set the Prince his Nobles, and all his scattered armie in safetie, who wil returne back againe, and see what course the Lords Laual  and Boulay tooke. It is saide before, how that the 24. of October, the Lord Laual was sent by the Prince to repasse the riuer Loyre, which thing hee did very easilie without daunger or let, and how the morrow after the passage ouer was stopped by the boates which came downe from Saumur. The 25. of October, the Lord Boulay also and his companie passed at Saint Maturine beneath Saint Maures Abbey, but that passage also was stopped the next day after with boates, which descended thether. The 26. day, Captaine Serpent skirmished all the day long, as hee had done all night before, out of the Abbey Saint Maure with the enemies, who were in the boates. The Papists of high and low Poytow, vnderstanding how the Prince of Conde was compassed on euery side beyond Loyre, and supposing that hee was alreadie made sure, enterprised to doo the like of the Lord Laual, and these few companies which were with him. Whereupon Captaine Ser∣pent, seeing that the Prince did not repasse, and that the enemie was armed vpon the riuer, being out of hope of his returne that way, dislodged out of S. Maure Abbey, where the enemie soone after lodged, and ioyned him∣selfe with the Lord Laual the 17. day. The Lord Laual notwithstanding, yt day earlie in the morning, marched toward the passage, for to vnderstand newes of the Prince, but considering the impossibilitie of repassing, and foreseeing that he would take ouer the Countrey, and that if he should stay there any time, he was like to be hemmed in by the troupes of high and lowe Poytow, which hasted to set vpon him: hee therefore with Captaine Serpent tooke his iourney to Saint Ihan D' Angely. The same day the Lord Boulay (seeing as much as is aforesaid) folowed after the L. Laual, and ouertooke him two Leagues from the riuer. These two companies ioyned together, made about 150. horse, and about 300. Harquebusiers on horseback, for many of their companies had not passed, and some had retired where they thought to bee in securitie. They marched with reasonable iourneys, passing aboue Niort to Saint Ihan D' Angely without any re∣sistance. The 29. of October, they came to Saint Massure about Niort, where they found the bridge which they must needes passe ouer broaken: for the raine was so great and continuall, that it had made little small brookes great riuers, and hauing none other way to passe, there they made a bridge with cartes, and other such things as were at hand. The 30. of October, the Lord Laual lodged at Fors, and his companies in the vilages thereabouts.
The 31. of October in the morning, parting thence as they tooke their horses to goe on their iourney, there apeared vnto them some Launcieres of  the enemie, conducted (as it was afterward knowne) by Captaine Mercer Albanese, who issued out of Niort. The Lord Laual marched alway in bat∣tell aray, the way to Saint Jhan, onely hee sent some to view him, which thing Captaine Mercure perceauing, retired without bickering. The second day of Nouember the Lord Laual aryued at Saynt Ihan where yt company of the Lord Boulay retyred euery one where he thought  good. A thing happened worthy of remembrance, the pestilence being very hot in Saynt Ihan D'Angelye, when the Lord Laual arryued there, yet af∣terward there dyed not so much as one of his companyes, nor of the inha∣bitantes of the towne. As all thinges are gouerned by the prouidence of God, disposing of the counselles and actions of men after his owne will: so he turned all thinges to the benefite of his children, and the preseruation of his Church. For the Prince, as is aboue sayd, hauing sent the said Lord Laual to passe to Loyre before, to fauour the passage of the rest of the army, delaying his owne re∣turne, and in the meane time the riuer being beset by the enemy, so it fell out, that the sayd Lordes Laual, and Bowlay, could not repasse to the Prince agayne. This great good therefore the Lord did draw out of this disiunction of the army. First, here appeareth euidently the gracious loue & fauour, which God beareth to his children. For the power of man which was so great, the ran∣cor and hatred so hot, the stomacke so eger, the enemy spread so thicke eue∣ry where round about, lying in wayt for them, and making their full ac∣count to haue them as in a net, yet could they not take away one hayre of their heads, whom God had taken vnder his protection. Secondly, the same Lord was disioyned from the Prince by a certayne counsell of God, to confirme the townes and strong places in Poytow, and Xainctonge, and to let them from reuolting to the enemy, to resemble the companies scattered and beaten, with the breaking of that army, to hold the enemy in awe: so that in such great dismay and feare of all the coun∣trey, the enemy durst enterprize but very litle, or nothing at all. For euen the Duke de Mayne with his strong and puissant army passing nigh the gates of Saynt Ihan D'Angelye durst neuer stay there: although he knew well that the towne was not well prouided, and his army being for Guy∣enne, there hee might haue begun to do some more honorable exployt by winning Saynt Ihan, then by Castilon. By the which euents it appea∣reth, that the presence of the sayd Lord, and other of his company did greatly bridle the rage of the enemy there. Now hauing placed the Prince, his Nobles, and all his scattered army
in safety and rest from the great dangers and labours which they sustayned during the moneth of October, we will returne backe to see what in the  meane time is done at the siege of Browage, and tell you the true report thereof The tenth day of October the Lord Saint Mesmes, who was left there to continue the siege by the appoyntment of the Prince, receaued intelli∣gence how that the gouernor of Xainctes, Coignak, Engolesme, and other forces of the countrey, did flocke together to set vppon them who were at Hyers, where they continued the siege of Browage: and supposing himselfe not strong ynough, to resist suchforces as he expected, specially for lacke of horsemen, forsooke Hyers, & with all his regiments lodged at Marennes. Which thing amazed greatly the Countrey: hee sent also the Lord la Hay at Saynt Iust to aduauncethe retyre. The same day about foure a clocke in the euening aryuing at Saynt Just the Lord Saynt Disan, and Captayne Bordeaux, with their compa∣nies of footmen: who seeing the inhabitantes of the countrey runne away and knowing what had happened, went to Hiers, and they there arryued about midnight, where they found many souldiers of Saynt Luke, who issued out of Browage, had set the fire on some houses, and were busie in rifling, and ransacking the others: they were so heauily charged by the Souldiers of Saint Disan, and Bordeaux, that they were all eyther slaine or taken prisonners. The Lord Saynt Mesmes aduertized what had passed at Hyers, and of the new supply come to him, returned with the companies to Hyers, and continued the siege twenty dayes longer, during the which tyme were ge∣uen many skirmishes, and many on both sides slayne and taken. But at length the sayd Lord Saynt Mesmes knowing that the Prince had pas∣sed Loyre, and looking not for any succour, and that many reportes going abroad of his ill successe, and that many Souldiours did dayly depart and other waxed faynte, & that aduertisementes came of the succor, which the gouernours of the abouesayd Townes would geue to Browage, and that they intended to enclose him and his companies, in the Iles (as it had béen an easy thing to do) with the aduise of his Captaynes, determined to raise the siege. Hee sent also to the Lord Ranques, who was left to commaund in the Ile of Oleron, to aduertize him, that hee was pressed to retyre, willing him to repayre to him, that they might retyre in a stronge company to pre∣uent further milfortune. So the 2. day of Nouember, he rhysed the siege, and tooke his iourney towards Charuaut. At the passage whereof was great disorder, which caused that at a place called Loupin, part of the car∣riage was taken by the enemyes, and many Souldiers lead away prison∣ners, the residue retyred some to Rochel, & some to Saint Ihan D'angelye.
The Lord Ranques, notwithstanding remayned in Oleron with the Nauall army vntill the tenth of Nouember: during the which time hee sent  to Rochell to haue succour, as wel for yt safety of the Nauy, as of the Iland. But when hee could obtayne nothing, the inhabitantes also supposing that all had béen lost (for the discomfiture of the Prince was bruted wich great amplifications by the Lord Saint Luke) shewed vnto Ranques that theyr custome was to giue place to the stranger, which caused the sayd Lord to determine vpon the retyring of his fleete. This also made him the more willing, because he had discouered one Countie, and a Franciscane Fryer, who had béen alwaies during the siege hidden in the Iland, who were sent to the Lord Saynt Luke, to practize with him agaynst the sayd Lord Ranques, whom when he would haue pu∣nished, they of the Iland withstood him, so that fearing the worst he rety∣red to Rochel not without danger of his life. We haue shewed how the Dragon had sped floods of waters to drown that vertuous and godly Prince, his Nobles, and his litle company, and how they fledde into the wildernes, where God had prepared vnto them a place of safe refuge and rest for a time, and how the army before Browage is brought to Saint Ihan D'Angelye and Rochel. Now while these scat∣tered companies are at rest, and preparing agayne to meet together, wee will see what exployts were done in diuers places of the Realme. It is sayd, how the Lord Saint Mesmes (at the departing of the Prince of Conde) had the charge of the siege of Browage. Now the Lord Matignon who cōmaunded for the King in Guyenne, vnderstanding that Saint Luke was hardly pressed, and that the Prince taking his iourney to Angers, had left a small company to continue the siege of Browage, determined to oppresse them: and about the latter end of October from Bourde∣aux tooke eight hundred horsemen, foure thousand footmen, with foure double Canons, and arryued in Xainctonge about the third of Nouember: which vnderstanding that they of Hiers had raysed vp the siege, and had re∣retyred to Rochell, and S. Ihan D'Angelye soiorned neuertheles in Xain∣ctonge, seeking and watching the opportunity to do some peece of seruice, making ordinary courses toward S. Ihan A' Angely and Tailkebourg. The Lord Laual about the eight of Nouember, aduertized that the Lord Matignon was in the field (not farre from the town) with all his horsemen and some footemen, issued out of S. Ihan about two leagues from the towne: he encountered the sayd Matignon: they saw one another so nigh, that the Lord Chargoys (who did leade the light horses of the sayd Lord Laual)▪ was about to charge the enemy, when hee was warned, that hee should haue to do with all the forces of the enemy, which were sixe tymes as many as all that the Lord Laual had. That inequality of forces caused him to draw backe towards Saint Ihan with all his companyes in such an
order, as the enemy durst neuer set on him, though he pursued him within a quarter of a league of the towne. It is sayd before, how that the Prince in his iourney to Angers, passing through Taillebourg (which is a towne situated vpon the fall of the Riuer Botonne into Charante) left there in the Castell much plate and iewels, with some peeces of Artillery, and much stufe and carriage of the Lordes, who accompanied him in his iourney. That Castel is strong by situation, and on diuers sides inaccessible situated vpon a rocke, compassed with the towne, otherwise not strong. The houses for the most part are builded at the foote of the rocke. The said Castell is fortifyed with platformes by nature, and do commaund on euery syde as well ouer the Towne as ouer the fieldes. Charante of one side doth wash the foot of that rocke. There is a fayre and commodious bridge to passe ouer the riuer. All these circum∣stances, with the disfauour of the time, gaue Matygnon great desire to pos∣sesse that place. Yet the speciall commaundement which hee had from the King to seaze vpon the Mother and the Daughter, vrged him the more to attempt vppon that Castell, that so he might stop the mariage begun. It happened about the thirtéenth of Nouember, that the Lord Matyg∣non was commaunded to retyre toward Garonne, to méete the Counsels of the Vicount Turenne, who with six thousand Souldiers was in Limosin, and had taken the City of Triles: or for some other occasiō, hauing conclu∣ded with the Duke de Maine to meete with all their forces in Agenoys, to stop the passages of Garonne to the King of Nauarre. But afore his departure out of Xainctonge, he tooke order for to surprise the sayd Castell: for hee placed in the Towne the Captayne Beaumont, with foure companyes of souldiers, vnder colour of keeping of the bridge, he promised to the sayd Ladie Trimouille all fauour and safety, but it was without any effect. For they that were left there did first worke all subtill meanes which they could deuise to get the possession of the Castell: and when trust would not preuaile, they turned to force. For they planted a Barricado before the gate, and there placed a strong Gard, blocked the entreyes into the sayd Castell, supposing by these meanes to feare the sai Lady, and so to enforce her to yeeld her selfe and the place, considering that there was but few men within to assist her. The enemies not dissembling any longer, shot with their Péeces continually agaynst them that were within the Castell: and to do it more safely on theyr part, lodged them∣selues in the neerest houses to the Castell, which they pearced, and made them to serue for trenches. They within the Castell resisted this force with shot of ordinance, & did rowle great heauy stones vpon the howses, to beate them downe. The skirmishes did dure fiue dayes. The lady Trimouille in that necessity found meanes to aduertize of this
force done to her: the Lord Laual, who was at Saynt Ihan, and prayed him to send her succour. The inuention by the subtilty of the said ladie was, that shee fayned to driue out of the Castell certayne pages of the Prince,  which the Lord Fredericke his chamberlayne had there with him. They gaue aduertifement to the lord Lauall what had passed at Tilleburge, also of the meanes how to enter into the Castell. The 20. day at night, captaine Pickard came out of Xainctes, with 120. with him into the towne for succour. The 21. the Lord Laual with the Lords Saint Mesmes, gouernour of Saint Jhan and Bonlay, and others determined to rescue the said Lady, and taking about one hundred armed men, and foure hundred Harquebusiers, after dinner tooke their iourney toward Tailebourg, and about twenty men of armes did alight downe on the side of the waren, and entred into the ditch, which is betweene the towne and the Castell, (folowed with a cer∣taine number of shot) and furiously charged the enemie in diuers places. In the beginning, the enemies defended themselues stoutely, as well out of the houses as out of the Trenches, which they had planted at the gate of the Castell. They of the Castell (perceauing that succour was come to them) leaueled their artilerie, partlie against the Trenches, partly against the houses, among whom, the house of one Bordet was cleane beatē down. The diuers charges began to amaze the enemies, which without long re∣sistance, began to looke how to saue themselues, and their liues by flight or otherwise. There were found dead ofye enemies side, about 4. score men, of our side onely sixe: many were taken, the other were put to flight, wherof the night couered the shame, ye marshes & the riuer saued many: the woūded and prisoners were courteously intreated, many were sent away without ransome, and especially the Captaine Beau Mont, and Roke and others, which were of commaundement, during the skirmish within the towne, the Lord Laual remained without the towne in battaile aray, vpon the high way to Xainctes, and from thence discouered some of the enemies, who were issued out of the gates of Tailebourg, with their colours, and sought to saue themselues. The said Lord commaunded his brother, the Lorde Ryeulx to charge them: who with twelue horses set on them, whereof ma∣ny were killed, some wounded, and some taken with foure ensignes. The enemies being thus beaten, the Lady Trimouil gratified the said Lord Laual with the other Noble men, who had accompanied him, for the assistance giuen her in such a conuenient time. And although that before, she would not suffer any further forces then she had to enter into the castell, yet she admitted them in now: and so they aduised before their departure, of the meanes how to preuent like inconueniences, and that it was better, that this place should be kept by them of the reformed religion, to the which the said Lady had no great fantasie. Notwithstanding, Captaiee Bousier
Leutenant of the Princes gardes, with certaine Harquebusiers was a∣poynted to keepe the said Castell, and afterward there was ioyned to him  the Lord Boulay. It is saide before, how the King vnderstanding of the Princes going to Angers, with much adoo sent the Duke De Mayne out of Paris for Guyenne, with a mightie armie, that all with one voyage hee migh helpe to inclose vp the Prince, and also in his absence to inuade Poytow and Xainctonge prouinces of Guienne, for which he was apoynted. Who ta∣king his iourney from Bloys (after the Princes armie was dessolued at Sa∣lonne) to Poitiers, vnder the colour of the lying in of his Wife, soiorned there three weekes, to seduce that great and populous Citie to his faction, and at length when he could not obtaine his purpose, by diuers expresse commaundements from the King, hee departed about the fifteenth of No∣uember. And boasting, that within three moneths, hee would roote all the Hugonets out of Guyenne and Gascoyne, hauing that mightie armie as we haue saide before: in his way, he tooke by surrender Lusignen and Me∣le, and passing by Saint Ihan, hee sent a few horsemen beyond the bridge Saint Iulion, in the sight of the towne, intending by that small number, to draw the Lord Laual to fight, who (he thought) would haue issued out and pursued those forerunners: he thought also, that the said Lord Laual would haue passed the bridge Saint Iulion, and to haue taken him in ambushes with the whole companie of his horsemen, who did lie in a wood and a dingle on the other side of the bridge, which the said Lorde Laual could not haue repassed without hazard there to haue been discomfited. The Lord Laual discouering the light horses issued out of the towne, but not after the minde of the Duke. For hauing put a good garde vpon the bridge, he sent a few light horses onely to view the enemie, and ordered the rest of his men of armes, and Harquebusiers in battell aray, vpon the banke of the riuer, in the view of the enemie, which seeing that he ventured not rashlie, retyred without attempting any thing. About the 28. the Duke De Mayne with his armie lodged about the towne of Saint Ihan. The Lord Chassegay, ensigne bearer of the Lord Laual, accompanied with the Lord Orges, and fiue and twenty horses more with him, issued out to skirmish with the armie of the Duke. They met nigh Varezes a little towne not farre distant, twentie Launciers of the e∣nemie, folowed at hand, by two hundered men of warre, French, and Jtali∣ans. The saide Chassegay was charged with these troupes, and pursued to the bridge, where hee stayed in the face of the enemie, to fauour the re∣traite of his men, but there he was beaten downe, and taken prisoner with some others: they which saued themselues, gaue the alarum in the towne, the forces whereof issued out, but the enemie had retired. About the latter end of December, the Duke méeting with the Marshal
Matignon about Coignake, at length parted a sunder, and the sayd Ma∣tignon went to Bourdeaux: but the Duke being rid of the companie of Matignon, who would bée but a let vnto him to bring to passe his intents,  tooke his iourney to sport himselfe through Perigord, Limosin, Quercy, and Agennoys, at the charges of the Priests, and expences of the holy Rood, ha∣uing a great deale of money, euen so much as the Sacraficers could spare, to recreate himselfe, when hée should finde himselfe wearie of winning of Cities and strong Holds in those countreys. It is sayd before, how that after the publication of the Edict in Iuly, the Vicount Turenne had assembled some forces, partly out of his owne land in Limosin and Perigord, and partly many Noble men and Captaines of the countreys about had repayred vnto him. For the persecutions had inforced many, as well Gentlemen as others, to forsake their houses to take armes, and to repayre to such Prouinces as were of sure accesse vnto them. This was the cause that Noble men and Gentlemen from about Paris, Gastinoys, Niuernoys, countries betwéene the riuers of Loyre and Seyne, (which purposed to repayre to the King of Nauarre) ioyned them∣selues with the Lord Turenne, who within a short space grew to the num∣ber of sixe thousand. With this power the Vicount Turenne kept the field in Limosin & Pe∣rigord: and about the time that the Prince departed from Browage to his iourney to Angers, letters came vnto him from the Prince, by the which he willed him to drawe néere Browage to fauour the siege thereof. Vppon the receipt of these letters, the Lord Turenne called his counsell together, to knowe what was to be done. There was then reasoned among them of the necessitie of his presence at that siege. On the other side, aduertise∣ment was giuen that the armie of the League (vnder the conduct of the Duke de Mayne) was drawing nigh toward Guyenne, (although it was not yet scarse out of Paris) and that the same was beaten with diuers dis∣seases, (and among others the Swissers) which made them conclude, that occasion might be giuen to worke some good exployt vpon that armie; and if not discomfited, yet greatly it might be molested. Agayne, he had recea∣ued letters of the King of Nauarre, who aduertized him, that he was at the poynt to depart out of Bearne to Bergerake ward in Perigord, and ther∣fore warned him to be in a readines, that (if néede should be) he might ioyne with his Maiestie. So that considering all these waightie occasions, hée could not succour the siegr of Browage, staying for the Duke de Mayne, and expecting the King of Nauarre his comming. He had many good oc∣casions to enterprize vpon certaine Townes in Limosin, as vpon the Citie of Trile, Brune la galiarde, and others in those quarters. Trile is a Citie in Limosin, a Bishops seate, situated in a valley, compassed about with high hilles, which doo commaund the Towne: It hath thrée fayre Suburbs a∣bout
it, and there is a little riuer named Ʋestere, which washing the walls passeth by the Suburb, which is greater than the citie. Therein is a Frie∣rie  of the Franciscans, which is inclosed about with a strong wall, and for that cause the inhabitants had retyred and committed their goods to the Friers keeping: which thing fell out very ill for them. The high suburbe is like the first in greatnes: the third is lesser than the other twaine. The 8. day of Nouember the Lord Choupes, with a great number of Gentlemen and Souldiers, set on the lowe Suburbe. The Lord Turenne (who commaunded ouer the Harquebusiers which came out of France) staying at the Franciscans house, which is situated at the ende of the Sub∣urbe, set the gate on a fire, and vppon occasion entered further euen to the Trenches, which they of the Towne had made: and after long skirmish∣ing and killing of some of both parts, wonne the same. The high Suburbe at the same time, by other companies (as they were appoynted) was also assaulted, which they of the Suburbe did resist at the Trenches: but at length enforced, did retyre within the Towne. They of the Towne being besieged all round about, defended themselues vpon the walls (without issuing out at all) for the space of sixe daies. The 13. day of Nouember were applied two péeces at the gate, which made some way to enter in: but they of the Towne did their endeuour to defend the breach; which being not assaultable, the assault was giuen ouer. The siege continuing, many of the Towne were slaine: which caused the rest (fearing to bee forced) not to refuse the perswasions of Amaury, who counselled them to capitulate. Hostages being giuen of both sides, the Kings Lieutenant (with some of the chiefest Citizens) came foorth to the Lord Turenne, who was lodged at the gray Friers; the agréement was long debated, and at length concluded. The 16. day of Nouember, they of the Towne consented to redéeme the Towne, and the ransaking of their houses, with a certaine summe of money. Furthermore, it was agréed that a Captaine stranger, with such as were left of his companie (for most of them had béen slaine) should goe foorth out of their Towne, and they should receiue Captaine Amaury. This Captaine Amaury was he of all the armie whom they feared most, and yet did they requested to haue him, whom they receaued for their go∣uernour: and there he remayned in that charge vntill the comming of the Duke de Mayne. About the 10. of December (considering that the place was not suffi∣cient to resist such an armie) he gaue ouer the Towne into the hands of the Citizens, and within fewe dayes after was slaine, as followeth. Within a while after the taking of this Citie, the Lord Turenne retired his compa∣nies in garrisons in places of greater importance. The 25. of December, Amaury was aduertized that the Lord Sacra∣more
of Birague, (this is that Sacramore whom after the Duke de Mayne killed in his anger with his owne hand) one of the Leaguers, was not farr  from Turenne with a companie of Harquebusiers, to lay in ambush: and as he aduaunced himselfe, one of his owne Souldiers (too hastie to shoote) with his péece hit him by misfortune and killed him, and after they retyred to Turenne. The Duke de Mayne sporting himselfe, made good théere at ye Priests costs, (but it was no matter, for holy Roode did pay for all) and doth con∣quer Kingdomes in Perigord and Limosin: and about the 27. of Decem∣ber tooke Montignake le conte, an olde Towne and ruinous Castle belong∣ing to the King of Nauarre. He tooke also Beaulieu, such a Fort as no man (which hath any skill in warlike affayres) would make any accompt of. And ten daies after, the inhabitants (who were al of the reformed religion) redeemed their Towne with one thousand Crownes, which were payed to Antefort. About the 17. of December the Duke de Mayne recouered Trile, which the Lord Turenne had caused Amaury to surrender into the hands of the inhabitants about ten daies before, because that place was not defensable. The D. de Mayne at length perceiuing yt his practises against the Cities and Townes of Limosin & Perigord would not frame, determined to passe the riuer Dordonne at Souliake into Quercy, leauing behind him Monfort, a strong place, and many other Townes and Holds, because hee could not carrie them away with him. It is sayd before, how that the King of Nauarre in August last, went into Languedock to S. Paul de Cadeioux, where he met with the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Monmorency, to aduertise them of their defence. The sayd King remayned afterward in Bearne, in great silence and quiet∣nes, viewing how farre all this league and vnion would proceede, expec∣ting the producing of some lamentable euents, and (as if it were out of his watch) would become of the thrée great armies prepared for Guyenne, Languedock and Daulphine: and (being hidden vnder the wing of the most high) mused what would bee the end of the fierie threatnings and bragges of his enemies, bearing patiently their insolencie, euen to the danger of his owne person. It is also sayd, how that the Leaguers had procured an excommunica∣tion from Frier Sixtus vicar of Rome, against the King of Nauarre, & the Prince of Conde, therewithall (and with the sedicious inuaighing of the Iesuits and Friers) to make them odious vnto the people, whose liues they could not touch, neither by violence, nor by any haynous act. It is sayd also, how the Senat of Paris gaue their iudgement (by the way of ad∣monition) to the King against the sayd excommunication, the Pope him∣selfe, and the procurers of the same.
The sixt day of Nouember, the King of Nauarre answereth to the said excommunication of that beggerly Frier Sixtus, and caused the same an∣swere to bee set and fixed vpon the corners of the streates in Rome, where  publique writings are wont to be set. First, he doth hold the sayd excommunication false, wrongfull, & voyd, and doth appeale from him as no Iudge, vnto the Senat of the Péeres of France, whereof he is the first. Secondly, whereas the sayd franticke Sixtus dooth lay heresie to his charge, and presumptuously calleth him hereticke, the sayd King in one word doth answere, that he maliciously and most impudently (with reue∣tence of his goose cap be it spoken) doth lye. Thirdly, the sayd King doth charge the beggerly Frier Sixtus to be an hereticke himselfe, and doth proffer to prooue him so in a generall Counsell lawfully assembled. Fourthly, he doth declare him Antichrist, and as vnto such a one he doth denounce a perpetuall and irreconciliable warre, vntill that the miurie done to the house of France be satisfied. Fiftly, he assureth himselfe in God, that (as he hath assisted his prede∣cessors, and made them able to chastize such sawcie companions, as he is, when they haue forgotten their duetie, and passed the bounds of their vo∣cation, confounding the ecclesiasticall power with the ciuill): So he tru∣steth in God, that being nothing inferiour vnto them, God will make him able to reuenge the iniurie offered to the King, Crowne, State, and Par∣liaments of France. Last of all, hee dooth implore all Christian Kings and Potentates, all States, alied and confederated with the Crowne of France, to assist him, to represse the raging tyrannie and damnable vsurpation of the sayd Frier Sixtus, and of all Leaguers, and conspirators agaynst the Crowne of France. So much also doth protest Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde. This answere of the King of Nauarre being fixed (as is sayd in the or∣dinary places of Rome, where such writinges are wont to be set) did not moue Frier Sixtus to repentance: but as being , did cast him into feare so deeply, that he sendeth not long after a Coriero to the Duke  is one that putteth me together by the cares, & then run∣neth his way. Momorencye to excuse the matter, and to remoue the fault from himselfe, and to lay it vpon the Leaguers, who (as he sayth) had deceitfully induced him to do what hee had done, praying him to smooth the matter with the King of Nauarre, and to pacify his displeasure. About the 11. of Nouember, the King sendeth forth an iniunction to all his officers, to seaze vpon the persons and goods of al them that haue born armes with the Prince of Conde: who after the breaking of the army at Saloune, had returned to theyr houses, or returned to their friends: and to proceede agaynst them according to the edict of Iulye, and the declarati∣on
thereof vearing date the 6. of October. Also, that such as will be reduced to Popery, he is willing to pardon &  to giue them his patents for the same, conditionally that they shal be with∣out armes and horse: and also, that they shall put in good suretyes to persist in the profession of Popery. The 19. of Nouember, the Shauelinges, Cardinals, and Bishops, made a long exhortation to the King by Sir Emare Henekin Bishop of Saynt Bryen, a citye in Britayne. In the same long and tedious oration, Sir Henekin first did shew him the duty of Kinges toward the holy Church, to wit, to magnify it to the vttermost of his power. Marke this Christian Reader, that by the name of Church, he meaneth Note. the shauelings; and by the duty of Kings toward the Church, he (although in other wordes) goeth about to perswade the King to yeeld himselfe pri∣soner to their willes and affections: and to make it short, to let them haue what they would haue, and to approoue whatsoeuer they would doe. Secondly, he teacheth the King that it is the holy Ghost, who hath in∣spired him to make the edict of vnion. To make the edict of vnion, was to replenish his kingdome with bloud, Note. murther, and desolation, and to yeeld his authority into the handes of trai∣terous conspiratours of the League: this is a worke of inspiration of the holy ghost, by Sir Henekyn his diuinity. Well sayd Sir Henekyn, goe too, this is good stuffe. Thirdly, hee blameth the King, that heretofore he hath not shewed cru∣elty ynough agaynst them of the reformed, but hath suffered them to haue the liberty of theyr religion, by his edictes of peace: but now he trusteth, (that hauing reuoked the edict of peace) he would play Pyrgopolynices in Plautus. Here Sir Henekyn sheweth whose sonne hee is, breathing nothing Note. but murther, and whose scholler, to wit, Antichrist of Rome, which is the trompeter of all mischieues in Christendome. Fourthly, after breach of the edict of peace, Henekyn hopeth that the King will play the man, and that all thinges shall goe well. Here Sir Henekyn dooth suppose, that all thinges shall goe well, Note. when the King hath throwen himselfe, his Nobility, his Kingdome, and Subiectes into a heape of miseryes, and hath opened the dore to desolati∣on and desperation most miserable: this is to haue a new heauen and earth to Sir Henekyn. Fifthly, he assureth the King, that he shall haue power ynough to breake the forces of the Heretikes. Here Sir Henekyn knowing not, that there is neither counsell, Note. nor power against God, to resist his will, warranteth the King (like a good diuine) that he shall performe what Sir Henekyn wisheth.
Sixtly, hee willeth the King to vse such discipline among his Souldi∣ers, as that the Priestes be not molested by them. Here Sir Henekyn, foreseeing what euilles the breach of the edict of peace would breede, is well content that other men perish, so that hee Note. and his fellowes may liue in all pleasures and voluptuousnes, without a∣ny molestation. Sir Henekyn is a good, reasonable, and kindly fellow. Seuenthly, hee willeth the King to publish the counsell of Trente, and to reforme the Priestes, and to cause them to be good and vertuous. The King hath resigned into the handes of the Leaguers a great part of his roiall authority. Now Sir Henekyn will haue him to publish Note. the counsell of Trente, that is, to resigne the rest of his royall authority to Fryer Sixtus. I thinke that his minde is in plaine tearmes, the King to become a begging Frier: and to goe to Fryer Sixtus to haue a dispensa∣tion to forsake his wife, and to enter into a Fryery. But if the king would follow good counsell, he should keepe himselfe as he is. For the eight point, he praieth the king to geue ouer the preferring and placing of Abbots and Bishops to their liuings, but to referre that to the Priestes themselues, to the Chapters of Canons, and Monkes: and to leaue the disposition of Bishoprickes and Abbeyes to their elections and discretions. Here Sir Henekyn is very carefull for the king: he willeth him to for∣beare to swallow such big morsels, as Bishopricks and Abbeyes, for the Note. daunger which may ensue, which is choaking: but to leaue such fat mor∣sels to them that haue throats big ynough to swallow down whole Stée∣ples. The king hath resigned part of his royall authority to the Leaguers: now to do well he shall resigne another part to Frier Syxtus, and the third to the Priestes: and then let him walke carelesse. Ninthly, he prayeth the king, to take some good order, that the Priests may be honoured, renerenced, and capped: and that their iurisdiction may be restored to them, and not interrupted hereafter. Dixi. Here is the fourth part of the kinges authority, which Sir Hene∣kyn Note. would fayne to wrest out of his hand, that the Priestes may execute an infernall tyranny, ouer the soules and bodies of men. And to conclude his chattering, hee doth promise to the king great bles∣singes here vppon earth, and afterward the kingdome of heauen, so that he will roote out, and destroy them, whom hee calleth heretikes. Note here, that Sir Henekyn doth call them heretikes, who doth distroy their vngodly lewd liues, and filthy pleasures, as dronkennes, glottony, whoredome, and worse then that. Also he would haue the King to roote out, that is, to kill all whom these ghostly fathers shall appoint him.
Last of all, to play the Turke, to make hauock of all things, to fill the earth with bloud, is the way to ascend vp to Heauen, quoth Sir Hene∣kin: well said sir Henekin, by Saint Mary, you haue said as well as euer  I heard any of your occupation. About the 30. of Nouember, the King of Nauarre being at Bergerak, and vnderstanding that his paiencie had kindled the rage of his enemies, and his moderatenes had increased the insolencie of the Leaguers, and that after the dispearsing of the Princes armie, the crueltie of the edict of vnion, and declaration thereof, the 7. of October was euery where execu∣ted, with proscriptions, murthers, losses of goods, dignities and honours, dooth make an edict throughout his gouernement of Guienne, to be execu∣ted: wherein hee sheweth, that whereas his silent patience and moderate∣nes had serued nothing, but to increase the outragious excesses and cruel∣ties of the seditions and rebells, he is inforced to folow the course and order folowing. First, that all the goods, lands, rents, fruites, debts, actions, and ac∣counts of all the inhabitants of those townes and places, where the edict of Iulie, and declaration thereof hath been published and executed, and also of all Gentlemen or others, bearing armes with the Leaguers, and their par∣takers: also of all Ecclesiasticall persons wheresoeuer, who are contrarie vnto his part, and of all whatsoeuer, who are contributaries vnto his ene∣mies, within the Gouernement of Guienne, to bee seazed vpon, stayed and put in the hands of his commissioners, to bee sould or farmed to him that will giue most. Secondly, forbiddeth all manner of persons, who are indebted vnto such, to pay them or their assignes or partakers, any debt, but commaun∣deth them to repayre vnto his Lieutenants generall, or officers of his re∣ceites, to declare and reueale al debts vpon paine of death, and to pay foure¦fold: that the said goods may be employed to the vse of warre, & al graines and fruites to be put in such places for store houses, as shall be appoynted by his officers. Thirdly, he commaundeth the like to be executed vpon them, who shall refuse to pay the contributions, or the worke men at the fortifications, and also, that shal refuse to be contributaries in the deuiding of their fruites, for the prouision of stoare houses, which shall be conueniently made, for the su∣staining of the warre. Fourthly, the like intertainement to be done vnto the aboue said, as the enemies shall intreate them of the reformed religion, or Catholicks who haue ioyned themselues to him in that iust cause, and necessarie defence, charging all officers, both to publish and execute the same edict without delay. About the 25. of December, the King as a man that studied nothing
else, but onely how to vexe, molest, trouble, torment, and vtterly (euen with the losse of his realme and estate) to roote out them of the reformed religi∣on,  setteth forth an order of persecution, which he commaundeth to be pub∣lished at euerie court, and in euery market, wherein to help the memorie of persecutors: he commaundeth then to haue books deuided in fiue chapters. The first of them, that hauing borne armes, haue retired back, and meant to be conuerted to poperie. The second of them, who haue or doo beare armes. The third of them, that according to the edict, haue departed out of the realme. The fourth of them, that haue not departed out of their houses, but are returned to poperie. The fift of them, that haue remained in their houses, and doo persist in the reformed religion, which he calleth heresie. All the penaltie came to this, that they shall bee persecuted all to death, except they will abiure, and all their goods seazed vpon, and imployed to the vse of warre. Furthermore, he dooth promise a certaine forme of abiuration to bee sent into the countrey, and willeth the Bishops to appoint in townes of their di∣oces, their vickars generals, to receaue their abiuration, and to giue them absolution. About the same time, one Sir William Ruse, Bishop of Angers did set foorth in his dioces, vnto al Priests, a forme of abiuration, which the said Priests should enforce vpon them, that had professed the true religion, and had obeyed, or would obey the Kings edict. Wherein first, hee dooth pro∣pound vnto them the Nicen simbole. Secondly, they shall allowe all the traditions of the Apostles, and of the holy Mother Church of Rome. By the traditions of the Apostles and holy Church, hee vnderstandeth Note. all the intusiasmes, and dronken dreames, all the sottish and heathenish de∣vises of the phantasticall frantick, & dronken Popes, Cardinalls, Bishops, Monkes and Friers, which wee must needes to holde for articles of the faith: because sir William hath said so. Thirdly, they shall beleeue, that there is seauen Sacraments. And why shall we not beleeue seauen thousand, as well as seauen, see∣ing Note. that the seauen thousand, are as well proued by the worde of God, as the seauen. Fourthly, that all rites and ceremonies, vsed in the ministration of the said seauen sacraments, are good. Al the crossings, charmings, duckings, kissings, howlings, chauntings, Note. mumblings, iuglings, coniurings, blowings, slomberings, gaddings, tur∣nings, moppings, &c. Are either articles of faith, or else as good as the ar∣ticles of our beliefe.
Fiftly, they shall beleeue, that in the transubsantiation, the bread and  Wine are chaunged into the bodie, bloud, soule, and deitie of Christ. Sir William Ruze, either is an asse, who knoweth not what he saith, or else a false Prophet, which leadeth men to a strange God: for such a para∣doxe Note. was yet neuer heard in Christs Church, that the Bread and Wine was changed into Christs deitie. Sixtly, he saith, that wee must beleeue the Masse, to be a sacrifice propi∣ciatorie for the sinnes of the quick and the dead. What proofes hath Sir William Ruze, to shew out of Gods word, that the Masse is a propiciatorie sacrifice for sinne, more then the sacrifices of Note. the heathens? Last of all, the fire of purgatorie: the hauing and worshipping of their Images, the adoring of Reliques and praying vnto them: and also that the counsell of Trent is to be receaued, as good Catholick, and an article of the faith of the Church of Rome. All these things are articles of faith, which they that will goe to the di∣uell must needes beleeue; but cleane contrarie vnto the faith of the true Note. Catholick and Apostolick Church. The persecutions, imprisonments, sea∣zing of goods, and abiurations, had begun and went forward in diuers pla∣ces, but especiallie in such as were addicted to the League long before, and had receaued the last edict set forth by the King. And among other places, there is a towne in Poytow, called Niort, great and rich, where the faires and martes of the countrey beyond Loyre are kept. This towne had béen seduced of long time, and of all townes in France most earnestly adicted to the League: there of all places, and in the townes there abouts, they began most cruelly to persecute the Church, which was assembled at Saint Ge∣lays, in the which persecution, many bowed downe the knee to Baall. Therefore, about the 20. of December, Lewis Blachiere, Pastor of that Church, hauing retired to Rochel, and vnderstanding the fall of many in that heate of persecution, writeth a letter to raise them that are fallen, and to binde that which was broken. In the which, first hee sheweth the vse of persecution, that is, to discerne the true Disciples of Christ, from false bretheren and hypocrits, who yeeld and turne after euery winde of doctrine. Secondly, hee dooth terrifie them that are fallen, by the threatnings of Christ against them, that shall denie him before men. Thirdly, he detecteth the subtiltie of the enemie, in the forme of his ab∣iuration, in that he hath made a doore of golde, to enter into a priuy or dongeon full of filth, stinking and poysoned ayre, placing in the beginning the Nicen simbole, afterward patcheth to it all the filthie abominations of Antichrist. Fourthly, hee sheweth to them that are fallen, the gate of mercie to re∣maine
alwaies open to them which seeke the right meanes to enter in, and that repentance is neuer too late. Last of all, them who doo stand, he doth encourage to preferre the con∣fession of the son of God, wherein doth consist eternall life before this pre∣sent life, or the commodities and pleasures thereof. Thus wee will make an end of this second Booke of this Tragicall Historie, raised vp in the Kingdome of France, by the Leaguers. The end of the second Booke. THE THIRD BOOKE. IT is shewed in the former Booke, how the Lea∣guers, after hauing long vnder hand, practi∣sed the supplanting of the house of Ʋaloys, at length did burst out into a manifest rebellion. I haue shewed what pretence, coulour, and buckler they tooke, to wit, religion, iustice, & the Cardi∣nall of Bourbon. Thou hast seene gentle reader, how the King tooke them for enemies, rebels and traitors, and some of their partakers were condemned and executed for such. Also, by what meanes, practises, and wicked counsell, the King was drawne to ioyne friendship and armour, and to deuide his kingdome with them whome hee a little before, had declared rebels and traitors. What edicts, declarations, iniunctions, the King afterward set out in fauour of them, against the reformed religion. The atemptes of Merceur, in the Lowe Poytow, the exploytes done by the Prince of Conde in Xainctonge, Poytow, and his voyage beyond Loyre, to Angers, and the successe of that voyage: the exployces done by the Vi∣count Turenne; the comming of the Duke De Mayne, with his armie, and all his conquest in Perigord, and Limosin. Now will we begin the third Booke with the beginning of Ianuarie. The first day of Ianuarie, the King of Nauarre being at Montoban, a  citie in Quercie, wrote letters vnto all the states of France, and first of all vnto the sacrificing Priests, commonlie called the Cleargie, in the which he protesteth, first of his moderatenes which he hath vsed toward all men, e∣uen
in the middle of warre, and that hee hath often times remitted sundrie and great iniuries done to him, in respect of the publick peace. Secondly, he complaineth of them, that they doo assist with their power and meanes them, who making their ambition, a zeale to holy Church, and the reuenging of their priuat discontentments with a publick warre, haue set the whole realme in a miserable cumbustion. Thirdly, hee letteth them vnderstand, that he feareth neither their mo∣ney, their names, nor the armes of his enemies, but pittyeth the state of the poore people, who doth suffer all the oppressions and miseries which will ensue these enterprizes of his enemies. Fourthly, he threatneth them, that they who should be the vpholders of peace, and the support of the poore people, shall answere before God, for all the bloodshed, confusions, vices, and miseryes which the warre caryeth with it, for entertayning with their meanes, and norishing with their goods, this vniust and damnable warre, with the disorders which insue thereof. Fiftly, hee protesteth that hee hath proffered himselfe to be tryed by a conference and distentation in a free counsel, but they haue preferred war, fire and sword before these good, lawdable, and ordinary meanes of confe∣rence, which is most worthy of man. Last of all, he sheweth them that this warre is most vnworthy of Chri∣stians, but specially of such as do pretend to bee teachers and Doctors of the Gospell, and committing his innocency and iust cause to God, war∣neth them, that the dangers of warre are common as well to them as to him and his: so maketh an end with them. Vnto the Nobility hee rehearseth the summe of all thinges passed euer since the raising vp of the League. First, how that in the middest of peace, these sturres are bred and borne. Secondly, he reciteth with what patience he hath borne all the iniuries proffered vnto him by the Leaguers, who haue made him the subiect and scope of their warre. Thirdly, he putteth them in remembrance of all the Kings actions be∣fore the edict of vnion, how the King declared them rebels, and perswaded them, as such in all his courtes of Parliament. And how they, to wit, the Nobility, haue béen armed agaynst the Leaguers, and that all these acti∣ons of the king did proceed out of a good and sound iudgement & free wil, without any compulsion. He willeth them to remember also, how on a sudden all these thinges haue béen chaunged, and the kinges will not chaunge, but partly enforced, and partly by the craft of the enemies, with ill counsell induced to contra∣ry actions. Fourthly, he complayneth of the iniuries done to them of the reformed
religion, who heretofore had béene suffered with liberty of the free exercise of the same, without any offence by them geuen, and armed by the kinges  authority against the Leaguers, now to be condemned in respect of their religion, as guilty of capitol cryme. Fiftly, hee declareth how for the auoyding the calamities incident to warre to satisfy vnto the Leaguers, he hath debased himselfe so farre vnder his degree, as to proffer to the heads of the League, the combat to be per∣formed by himself in person, or by more, number to number, as by the ad∣uersary it should bee accepted. Sixtly, he letteth them vnderstand, that hee feareth not their armes, whereof he hath had the experience so long time, whereby he knoweth well what they are able to do. Last of all, hee cannot but lament their bloud which they haue, and do spill against him, for whose seruice they should haue reserued it in stoare. But specially this doth greeue him, that in the lot of the battell he may not discerne them whom in mind hee discerneth from his enemies. Vnto the third estate he writeth to the same purpose, as he hath done to the Nobility, and besides sheweth vnto them first the horrible miseries which they haue sustained by the ciuill warre, and what confusions are like to ensue of these troubles. He sheweth also how the end of all the former wars hath béene a peace. Secondly, whereas they (meaning the Leaguers) do pretend to ease the people of taxes and charges, hee aduertyzeth them, that by this warre the taxes, impost, and subsidies must needs to double, and that their rysing in armes hath done already terrible hauocke and wast. He warneth them also to consider how that the reformation of impost, taxes & subsidies, they haue turned to their priuat commodity, hauing done nothing, but enforce the king to deuide his realme among them, and to weaken his authority, without making mention not one word of the easing of the people. Hee writeth the same effect to the inhabitantes of Paris: but surdis narrat fa∣bulam. The contempt of the Gospel, the innocent blood of the Saintes which they haue spilled like water must be better reuenged. The wrath of God must walke now beyond Loyre, to execute his iudgements vpon these nations, that lye betweene the low countrey and Loyre, because they haue not repented at the former scourges, but haue hardened their hartes, and haue blasphemed the God who liueth for euermore. The dispersing of the Princes armie, and declaration of the edict of v∣nion dated the seauenth day of October, did cast a marueilous amaze and dread vppon all them of the religion generally: but specially vppon them who were left through the Popish countreys in France, hoping for a bet∣ter time. There were also many of the contrary religion, who being louers of
the State, and wishing well to the house of Bourbon, and to the right of the cause, began to wauer and to alter their minds according to the vnablenes  of fortune, and the nature of the euents. There followed after in December, the bloudie procéedings of Ruze Bishop of Angers, and the Kings Iniunction to his officers to execute his edict, with the allowing of ye abiuration penned by rauening Ruze. These things made a great dissipation in the families of them of the religion. For by these meanes the rage of the Papists encreased agaynst the reformed re∣ligion, and emboldened to attempt any violence and iniurie agaynst them. For the enemies supposing that the Prince had béen lost, (for it was very long time afore it was knowne what was become of him) they iudged also that the faith and hope of them of the reformed religion had béen buried with him. The inconstancie of many of them who had remayned in France, after the declaration of the edict of Iuly, did appeare. For many estéemed more the commodities of their houses, and the pleasures of their countrey, than the quietnes of their consciences, and the keeping of those good precepts which they had learned in the schoole of Christ, which is rather to dye vn∣der the Crosse, than to liue in committing Idolatrie. The Papists on the contrary side, forgat no meanes to throwe downe them that stoode on slipperie places: for beside the rigour of the edict which had abridged the time of anoydance to fifteene daies, with dreadful threat∣nings, the Iesuites, Friers, Massing and parish Priests, and other fire∣brands of the Romish route, thundered agaynst them, whom they tearmed hereticks in their bloudie and sedicious sermons. And if they could not dis∣swade them from their religion, then they stirred vp the people to murther them, or els pursued them before the Magistrates, who were eagerly set a∣gainst them, being for the most part of the League. They who had béen of the religion, or had béen suspected to haue fauou∣red the same, persecuted them who remayned constant, thereby to terrifie that they had neuer béen of them. Their friends on the other side had no small power to trie the constan∣cie of those simple soules, who before had fastened too much the acker of their safetie in the forces of man. There were also which did great pleasure to their friends and kindred, in obtayning to them prorogation of time to giue order to their affayres, and after to retyre some where. Many remayning constant in the trueth, estéeming more their faith to God, than worldly goods, (foreseeing also a more stormie tempest than that which was past, would ensue) without any further bargaining left al, and retyred some to the principalitie of Sedan; some into Germany; great number to Geneua; great multitudes to Saint Ihan d'Angely, Rochel, and
England. It was a lamentable thing to see the wofull vanishments and dissipation of so many families, without any succour or comfort. They which were touched with a greater zeale, would not leaue their children behinde them, in daunger to bee throwne into the myre of Idola∣trie, which they detested, esteeming of the conscience of their children as of their owne, knowing that they should answere before God for the same. This caused many of them to carrie their children vppon their shoulders, for lacke of other meanes. God shewed in such a stormie tempest, that he hath hauens of safetie al∣waies in store for them who (being tossed and tormoyled vnder the heaui∣nes of the Crosse) doo cast (as children vpon their fathers) their eyes vpon him. For this is a wonderfull worke of GOD, that for the space of thrée whole yeares the pestilence had so afflicted Rochel, that there was no part free of the same. Saint Ihan d'Angely also (when this persecution waxed so violent) was so beaten with it, that the towne was almost destitute of inhabitants and Souldiers. Notwithstanding, neither the Gouernour, the Lord S. Mesmes, nor the Ministers, would at any time forsake the remai∣nant of that Church which was there. All the fields about were full of Tents and Cabbins replenished with men infected of the plague: the vil∣lages all round about were in the same case. The faithfull exiled out of their owne countreys and houses, flowing from euery side of France, & flying from the contagious pestilence of their soules, estéemed lesse than nothing the plague: and sicknesse of the bodie (rather than should cast away their soules in denying the sonne of God) was to bée wished for of them. But God (according to his trueth) kept to them both the one and the other: for euen then the pestilence vanished a∣way from all those places, as if God had commanded the sicknesse to make roome for them who were exiled for his name: for after that there was no more sicknesse seene. In this auoydance there was a number murthered, but specially in those Prouinces where the gouenours were most passionate and addicted to the League, by whose permission the common people tooke much libertie to commit cruell murthers vpon them of the religion. They who had not the meanes to recouer some place of refuge, and continued in the purenes of religion, and escaped the slaughter, did lye sousing in prisons and donge∣ons, where they sustayned many combats, looking euery day when they should be had away to death. Many of them who forsooke the confession of the trueth went to Masse, and so were sent to their houses agayne: but (by a certaine iudgement of God) they for the most part dyed euery where through sorrowe, or by the pestilence. Some of them who had charge in the Church, died of notable kindnes
of death. For some going into the Countrey about theyr businesse, fell of their horses, and brake their neckes, and some dyed otherwise, verifying  the saying of Christ: he which will saue his life shall loose it. It is sayd, how the Duke de Mayne powred his fuy vppon the olde walles of the vilages of Montigne le Conte, & Beaulrien, and how he tooke Trile, which no man will keepe. In the latter end of Ianuary, the sayd Duke drawing into the furthest part of Perigord, set vppon Gaignak, a poore little vilage belonging to the Vicount Turenne, a place voyde of all fortifications, saue that at the endes of the streetes, there remayned yet few old walles, which did shew that there had béen a gate: the inhabitants being poore husbandmen, first sustayned an assault, supposing to haue to doo with companyes of robbers, for so they tooke them. But at length being not able to withstand such a multitude, they fledde another way, and saued themselues, except onely foure, who either for age or woundes could not auoyd: them this great Duke caused to be hanged, to powre his gall vpon those poore simple countrey men. Thus this great Emperour, weary to conquer vilages in Perigord, and seeing that his practises agaynst the great and populous Cities of Limo∣ges and Perigueux, would not frame, he turned short Southward towards Quercy: and passing ouer the riuer Dordonne at Soilak, left at his left hand the townes of the vicount Turenne, Saynt Cere, and Turenne in Perigord, and coasted Figeak, Cadenak, and Cayak in Quercye, whom hee knew to bee well furnished with garrisons. Hee coasted also the houses of the Vi∣count Gourdine, and Montfort, a strong place vpon Dordonne, which hee sent to view. This Duke soiorned long in Quercy, sent commaundement to the mar∣chantes of Tholouze, and Bourdeaux, and others which do trafike vppon Garonne, that vppon payne of death they should not agree with the townes which did hold for the king of Nauarre, and situated vppon that riuer, did stoppe the commerce thereof, promising that shortly hee would set all that riuer at liberty, yea that he would. Whilest hee soiorned so long in high Quercye, rouing and wasting the countrey, the Bishop of Cahors, the Lords Saynt Sulpice and Combu∣rat did instantly require him, that he would assault those places aboue said, which being holdē by them of the religion, did dayly annoy & molest them. which thing when the Duke could not be perswaded to do. The Bishop blessing him with his Episcopall benediction: and the two sayd Lordes with hot tearmes, licensed him to depart out of their countrie in the de∣uils name. Besides eating, drinking, spoyling and whoring he did no good there, saue that he licensed some Gentlemen of the countrey for money, to haue the exercise of the reformed religion in their houses, so that thence they would not make warre: and to colour his cowardlines, hee excuseth
himselfe vnto the Bishop, and other Lords aboue saide, that hee would goe to open the riuer of Garonne, and to put the commerce vpon that riuer at  libertie. Thus this secōd Hannibal, coasting the riuer of Lot at his left hand, and Dordonne at his right hand, (for he would haue that riuer of Lot as a wall betweene him and mount Auban) entring in Agenoys, there issued out certain companies out of Montsanquine vpon the taile of his armie, which did slay in one conflict two hundred Harquebusiers of his, and discomfited the companie of Captaine Guerche. At length he came with his Ianissaries to the fall of the riuer of Lot in∣to Garonne, where is situated an olde Towne called Tunnings, consisting of lowe and high Towne and Castle. That place (about the insurrection of the League) certaine Ruffians of Agen had seazed vppon, where they did greatly molest the countrey. The King of Nauarre in August after, pas∣sing by, sent Captayne Lestele to take that towne: which thing he did at the first approach, and did cast downe those lthie ruffians with their har∣lots out of the windowe into the ditch, and kept the sayd towne vnto the Dukes comming, which then was giuen ouer, and that small garrison that was there retyred to the other side of Gharonne, to Caumont and Cle∣rake to reserue themselues to a better opportunitie. The Duke de Mayne tooke valiantly the sayd towne of Tunnings, which no man kept agaynst him. And hauing done this valiant exploit, he doth coast the riuer Garonne descending toward Bourdeaux. In that way he sent a Coriero to the king, promising him that he will doo him such notable seruice, as neuer no man did, for in great sadues hee will take the King of Nauarre dead or aliue, if he did not resolue himselfe to depart out of the Realme: and if hée can take him he will send him his head in a Charger, as Herode did S. Iohn Baptist. As this great Duke went downe the riuer, the forerunners met with thirtie scattered and vnarmed poore lads, which belonged to the garrison of Chaumont: they were sent to cause the prouision (contributed by the coun∣trey) to be brought to the sayd towne of Chaumont. These poore lads were killed by these stout warriors: which notable victorie was afterward pub∣lished in Paris, by the title of the notable ouerthrowe of the garrison of Chaumont and Nerake, by the Duke de Mayn. The next exployt done by this victorious Captaine, was at Castets. This is a little towne and a Castle belonging to the Lord Fabas, which place the Marshall Matignon had besieged before the space of ten dayes before the Dukes comming, and had made a sufficient breach. The Duke de Mayne to defraude the sayd Lord Matignon of that little honour, compounded secretly with the sayd Lord Fabas, thus: That the Lord Fa∣bas first should haue twelue thousand Crownes for the losse of the house
and of the goods which were in it, and so should surrender the same Castle to the Duke de Mayne to be rased, which was performed: so Castets was  wonne with an assault of money, the Lord Matignon was defrauded, and the Duke de Mayne had the glorie: and if it pleaseth him he shall be called Castensis of Castets, as Scipio Carthaginensis of the winning of Carthage. The next place was Meylan, an olde ruinous Towne, wherein was Captaine Melune with a small garrison, who considering the weaknes of the place gaue it ouer, supposing that it was more profitable to let ye Duke de Mayne to haue that place for a while, than to defend it. There the Duke with all his armie tooke great paynes to beate downe old ruinous walles, which no man did defend, least it should be sayd that he had done nothing. From the rasing of the walles of Meylan, he went to Saint Bazeile, a  towne situated vpon the riuer of Garonne, hauing like ruinous old and de∣cayed walles and forts, as the aforesaid townes had. There were fewe of the religion in garrison, who after hauing sustayned certayne shot of ordi∣nance and assaults, they considering that it was not a place to obstinate themselues therein, compounded to their great aduantage. Amorith did neuer so reioyce at the winning of Constantinople, as this Duke did for Saint Bazeile. By & by the Lord Saisseual (the Dukes Curiero) was sent to the King in post with hast hast hast, to aduertize him of these great con∣quests, and to fetch money to conquer more. This dispatch done, he marched with this armie to Monsegne: This is an old Towne decayed in Bayadoys, where the exercize of the reformed religion had béen appoynted to bee had by the edict of peace so chosen, not for the strength thereof, but for because it was thought most commodious for the whole countrey there to assemble. This towne was kept by fewe of the religion: These fewe made so little account of that armie, and of the Captaine thereof, that after they had caused him to bestowe two thousand and some hundred shot of ordinance, with certayne weekes of siege, and certayne assaults which were deare vnto the enemie, they yéelded them∣selues with conditions very honorable, but pernicious to them. For the Souldiers comming foorth with their armes agaynst faith and promise, were slaine for the most part of them in the middest of that cowardly army; part of them notwithstanding saued themselues and retyred to Cha∣stilion, where afterward they had their penyworth of the enemie for that treacherie, and the death of their fellowes. The towne was giuen to the spoyle, but there was nothing found but the bare walles. When he had done these conquests and exploytes vpon the riuer of Ga∣ronne, he went to rest himselfe at Bourdeaux, for the space of two moneths, to wit, Aprill and May, and part of Iune, as though he had wonne Car∣thage: where he practised the citizns to the League, and when he was wea∣rie of his conspiring, allured by the pleasantnes of the place, and felicitie of
the Countrey, he putteth off the person of a Captaine, and played the Poet, in writing such riming verses as he could, of his loue. And while this  great Captaine was thus occupied, they of the religion fortified Meylan, and many other townes vpon the same riuer of Garonne, and made them stronger and better furnished then euer heretofore they had been: so that the traffick of that riuer, betweene Bourdeaux & Thoulouse, was stopped more straightly then euer it had been before. Whereupon, many who had com∣merce vpon that riuer, being greatly decayed, and some hauing broken their credit, and other which were in danger to doo the like, did agree with them of the religion for the opening of the traffick, blessing with many bit∣ter curses, the League, the Captaine, and the armie, which had bragged and promised much, and done nothing, but onely prouoked them of the reli∣gion, and wasted the countrey. The Duke de Mayne, hauing recreated himselfe so long, was vrged by the King (who expected dayly to heare miracles wrought by this captaine and his armie) to lead the same out of that citie to doo some exploite, more moued by the earnest sute of the Lady de Mayne his wife, which had a sto∣mack to them of Chastilion, at length hee determined to besiege the saide Towne. Chastilion is a little town vpon Dordonne, three Leagues aboue Libor∣ne, and three Leagues beneath Saint oy, hauing Montrauell on the one side, about a League, and Gensak another towne on the other side, so much distant: of this towne the Duke was Lorde, it was almost forsaken of the inhabitants. Therein the King of Nauarre had placed the Baron Salini∣ak, with a small Garison, not to obstinate himselfe therein, but to minister some play to that armie, that weary with doing nothing, at length it might be reduced to nothing. Captaine Alen & Coronnean, with some other gen∣tlemen and others, had folowed of their owne motion the said Baron: there they were in all, to the number of nine hundred Souldiers. About the 18. of Iune, at the first approache of the enemie, they issued out with such courage, that their sallie cost the liues of a great number  of their enemies. They within the towne had made a barticado at the ende of a suburb, which they defended ten daies against all that armie, and all the shot of their Ordinance. But at length, being inforced to retire into the towne, out of the which, they issuing oftentimes, gaue many fearefull a∣larums and hot skirmishes vnto the enemie, with the losse of the liues of many. During this siege of Chastilion, the Lorde Saissiual returned from the King, and brought letters of credit, of thirtie thousand Crownes, but no man was willing to buie so deare a piece of paper. Yet the Duke gaue not them ouer so, hoping that the priests would haue him in their memento at Masse, and would blesse him yet with some more money: but to satisfie his
wiues stomack, he would venture that little remuant of credit of his which rested: wherefore hee caused many great rampiers of earth to bee made, as though he had to besiege Ierusalem. The siege continued seauen weekes,  in the which space, the Vicount Turenne with a few (notwithstanding that great armie) victualed the Towne, and fortified Montrauil, a towne situ∣ated vpon a hil, and Gensak on the other side, each of them distant from Cha∣stilian a little League. On another side, Captaine Beutune, a man of great valour went forth out of Saint Foy, to attempt vpon that armie, and in the conflict, the said Beutune, and the Lord Maligny, a valiant young Gentleman, Sonne to the Lorde Beauuoyr, with two Souldiours more were slaine, and the Lord Piles hurt. On the side of the Leaguers, were slaine three men of armes, Charles of Birague and Grimaldie, were taken prisoners & Monardy was wounded. During this long siege, the plague waxed so hot within the towne, that of nine hundred there remained but two hundred a liue, whereof many were infected, other were wounded, their Chirurgions were dead, medicines to heale with, powder and shot fayled them: there was left but two old women, which serued them in steade of Chirurgions and cookes. So that God disposed of those inuincible hearts that were almost destitute of force & meanes of defence, after the dischar∣ging of sixe thousand shot of ordinance, & seauen weekes of siege, at length hauing lost but sixe skore persons onely by the lot of warre, and among them, but sixe Gentlemen onely, Chastilion was surrendered by compo∣sition. In the surrendring, they that were whole did escape away, they that were sick, were sent forth. The Duke to please his wiues minde, would  neuer consent that the inhabitantes should bee comprehended in the capitulation, because they were his tenants, yet at the instant request of the Vicount of Aubeterre, they were promised to receaue no hurt, but notwith∣standing (contrarie to promise) most of them, who were found in the towne were executed: the spoyle of the towne was giuen to the Souldiours, but there they found nothing but few raggs infected with pestilence. The Lorde Salignak, Captaine Alen and Coronnean, with thirteene Gentlemen more were taken prisoners, and sent to the Castells of Bourdeaux and Blaye, to be safelie kept, whence not long after, they were deliuered by exchange for Popish Gentlemen, who were prisoners at Ber∣gerark, Saint Foy and Rochel. The follie, cwardlines, leaud and vo∣luptuous life of this conquerour, his traiterous intent, which was, that vn∣der colour of conducting the Kings armie, sought nothing but to make himself strong against the King, by seducing his people vnder colour of the Catholick religion, being spied of the most part of the captains, but especi∣ally by the Swissers, and Colonell of the French footemen: also the small gaine which they haue had, for the space of a whole yeare, and the little ser∣uice
which they had done to their Kings intollerable charges, and the small reputation which they had gotten, by seruing vnder such a Captaine, cau∣sed  many to disband themselues: some for lack of paie refused to be any lon∣ger imployed. In Aprill last, while the Duke was wallowing in filth in the citie of Bourdeaux, the Duke of Guize vpon aduertisement of his bro∣ther, who greatly feared the Vicount Turenne which watcht for him vnder euerie hedge, came to Paris, to shew the King that if his brother (the Duke de Mayne) were not assisted, it were impossible for him to withstand the forces of the hereticks in Guienne, which did ioyne to the Vicount Turenne out of euerie prouince of the realme, to oppresse his brother: he prayed ther∣fore his Maiestie to prouide some speedie remedie, which might not be done otherwise than by diuerting their forces, he shewed also, how that might be done by sending diuers armies into diuers countries, and so set vpon them on euerie side. This policie being approued, now they began to please themselues in their owne conceites: whereupon the Marshall Byron was appoynted to leade an armie into Xainctonge: the Marshall Ioyeuse was appointed for Languedock, the Lord Ioyeuse his sonne for Auuergne, the Duke of Es∣pernon for Prouance. The Lord Chastre should haue a nauy in a readines on the coast of Bri∣tayne, so that at the Leagues commaundement like mad men they ran to it by land and by water. The brute of these new armies being noysed a∣broad, made the Captaynes of the Duke de Mayne his army to be lesse willing to remayne in his seruice, and more willing to serue others, vnder whose conduct they hoped to speed better, and do seruice with more credit. These new armies a preparing were as the rockes, vppon the which this Sardanapalus army was cast and broken to pieces. The souldiers there∣fore first, and then the Captaynes began to slyde away, after they had the spoyle of Chastilion, which was iust nothing but the plague, and such as continued with him were imployed yet once more as you shall heare. There is a litle towne in the way to Chastilion, to the City Perigueux, named Puynormand, in the which there is an old Castell belonging to the king of Nauarre, wherein the sayd King had put a Captayne of the Ca∣tholike religion, named Captayne Roux, not to make warre, but to kéepe the Castell as his house. The inhabitantes (except a few) were all of the popish religion: The person himselfe did neuer depart from thence, kno∣wing well, that for the number of them of the Religion hee needed not to feare. The inhabitantes brought dayly victuals, and the artificers of the sayd towne necessary wares to the Dukes armie, at the sieg of Chastilion, Into the sayd Castell the Countrey had sent their goods to bee safely kept. The sayd Captayne Roux had in the Castell a prisoner named Cussel,
who had confessed, that the Lord Lansake had hyred him to kill the Mar∣shall Matignon: which Cussel, during the abode of the Duke de Mayne  in Bourdeaux, the sayd Lord Matygnon had determined to put to death for some offences: but at the request of the Duke de Mayne, his life was spared, and he set at liberty: such a one by the meanes of the Lord Lansake the Duke had procured to murther the Marshall Matignon, that he being made out of the way, his faction in the city of Bourdeaux might haue sur∣prized the same with the castels. The Duke de Mayne to be reuenged of Captaine Roux, for giuing no∣tice to the sayd Matygnon of the enterprise confessed by Cussell, layd the siege before the said town and castell, which within few daies was ren∣dered with these conditions, that the Souldiers should goe forth safe, with their liues & goods, & that the goods of the inhabitāts should be preserued. There went foorth sixteene Souldiers, and foure countrey men, for the most part all catholikes: the castell contrary to promise beyng ransac∣ked, was set on fire and burned. The Duke de Mayne being at the siege of Puynormand, sent Saisseual to the king, to aduertise him of his great conquest of Chastilion, but special∣ly to haue money, and within few dayes after he followed his messenger to do his message him selfe. From Puynormand, the rest of that armye fel to pieces, and within a while became inuisible. That army I say, that had boasted within sixe moneths to roote out of Guyenne & Oastroyn, all them of the reformed religion, or else to force them to a perpetuall exile, without hauing any more liberty, not so much as to turne their forces toward their countrey. This valiant warryer had bestowed a whole yeare, and wasted a mil∣lion of Franks, which the Priests had contributed toward that warre: he hath for his money the villages of Montignak, Beaulieu, Triles, Castets, which he bought with the Priestes money, Saint Bezile, Montsegure, Chastilion, Puynormand, which immediatly came agayne into the hands of them of the reformed religion, and were fortifyed stronger then euer they had béen. Now, if this great Dukes Chaplens will haue more warre & conquestes at his handes, they must pay for it, or else let them goe against the heretikes themselues, for he will goe home. Thus endeth the tragicall comedie of this Captaine. In October the cheefest of the reformed religion in the Iles of Maran, perceauing the disorder which was in the gard of the castel of Portmaran,  and knowing that the Prince before his iourney to Angers, had determined to put in a Gouernor, with a certayne number of Souldiers, and that there were many which made sute for that gouernment, aduised to de∣maunde of the Prince some gentlemen of the gouernment of Rochel, who had meanes to defende them without oppressing eyther the one part or o∣ther:
which thing being granted vnto them, they demaunded the Lord Es∣sars of Montalambert, a valiant and expert Captaine, who had giuen a  notable proofe of his valour & experience at the siege of Saint Jhan D'an∣gelie, in the yeare 1569. and also at Rochel 1572. and 1573. The sayd Lord Essars accepted it vnder the authority of the Prince, with 20. Soul∣diours appoynted him, whom hee vndertooke to pay with his owne hand, vppon the payment of a Sous for euery pound of marchandize which should passe through Marans, and vpon promise to receaue one thousand crownes for the fortifications of the Castell, as he should thinke good: and into that gouernment he entred in October. But within few dayes after, the sayd Lord of Essars began to vary with the inhabitants, who were of the religion for the most part. For the sayd Lord hauing found the castell wholly vnfurnished of all houshold and ne∣cessary commodities, required that they would furnish it both for him and his souldiers, and also that in case the sayd castell should be besieged, they would repayre to it for the defence of the same, and also willed them to bring in their moueables. Then answered the sayd Lord Essars, that with moueables euery one had furnished what they could, and that the best of their goods were trans∣ported to Rochel. As for to retyre within the Castell, they thought it not expedient, for if the enemie should besiege it, and beate it, they knew well by experience, that it was not defensible. They answered aso, that they would not put in any more of their goods, but such as they passed not greatly to lose: & as for the fortifications, the Prince afore his departing, was content to quit them for one thousand crownes, considering their vnablenes, wher∣of his receauer had alreadie receaued part. This answer the L. Essars did greatly mislyke, which misliking continued vntil the Princes returne out of England to Rochel, who being aduertized thereof, sendeth the L. Resseus, and an other, to be fully informed of all ye matter. And finally to preuent al inconueniences which might ensue thereof, vnfit for the tyme & place of so great importance, thought good that the L. of Essars should surrender yt go∣uernment into the hands of the L. Iarry nigh the sands of Ollonne, who en∣tered therein as gouernor the x. of Aprill 1586. & there remayned almost two yeares: who was enforced with ye L. Boysduly to surrēder it to Lauer∣dine the 25. of March 1586. as it shall appeare more playnly hereafter. It is sayd before, how the Prince of Conde (after the dissolution of his army at Solonne in Vendomoys) through great daungers and difficultyes, repayred to the Iland of Gernesey, and from thence into England, where he was receaued in most princelyke sort of that gracious great Elizabeth Queene of England. During his soiorne there, many noblemen and gentlemen passed ouer the sea into England, to accompany him home agayne, among whom was
the Lord Clermont. The Queene of England (after innumerable courte∣sies  and princelike intertaynment) sent him home with a nauy: certayne ships also departed out of Rochel to meet the sayd Prince, among whom was the Lord Plessis Gettey, who conducted two shippes, being then go∣uernour of the Ile of Rhe for the king of Nauarre. The sayd Prince arriued at Rochel with that trayne the 3. of January, about eight a clocke in the night. This returne home, was no lesse won∣derfull  then ioyfull to all the Lords, who had gathered them selues, and re∣tyred to Rochel, and Saynt Ihan D' angely, and to the inhabitantes of the townes and countrey, who shewed great reioysing euery where, as hauing (by the speciall gift of God) receaued this noble Prince, of whose health and preseruation they had béen a long tyme doubtfull. The Prince being returned home so happely, soiorned not long at Ro∣chel, but within fewe dayes tooke his iourney to S. Ihan, to prouide for the necessarie affayres, and to muster the companies which were or could bee gathered. Fewe dayes before the Lord Laual was gone foorth out of Saint Ihan, with some companies to besiege the Castle of Tours: but they which were within stayed not the ordinance which was comming from Saint Jhan, but yéelded themselues without any delay. The sayd Castle was rendered into the hand of the Lord Caze, to whom it did belong. At that time, to wit, after the comming of the Prince to Saint Ihan, the Lords, Captaines and companies, began to order themselues vnder the sayd Prince in forme of an armie, where with about the 17. of January he began to besiege the Castle of Dampierre, pertayning to the Marshall of Bets, nigh the towne of S. Ihan, situated vpon the riuer Botonne, within the which was a popish garrison: which through their insolencie and ordi∣narie roades vpon them of the religion, did drawe this storme vppon their heads. The sayd Castle being battered for certaine dayes, was surrendred about the 24. of Ianuary. There was found within that Castle great quantitie of corne and mooue∣able goods, which the people of the countrey round about had carried in. It was hard to let the Souldiers from the pillage, considering that they had so long suffered insinite miseries after the breaking of the armie in Vendo∣moys: for they which had reassembled themselues in Poytow, had kept them∣selues within the fauour of the townes of S. Ihan, and others, which were holden by them of the religion. The companies of the Prince (after the taking of Dampierre) were de∣uided into three parts, which went into thrée seuerall coasts of the coun∣trey. The first was the Lord S. Gelays, who followed the riuer Botonne, and tooke the townes thereupon situated, as Arnay, Mondeis, and Chi∣zay.
The Lord Ranques (with the fourth part of the companies) went to∣ward Niort, and enterprized vppon the Castle of Sassoy, and tooke it from  the hands of certaine Albaneses, whom the Lord Malicorne (gouernour of Niort) had put there in garrison. That castle by situation is very strong: the garrison did great iniuries to them of the religion about Rochel, Saint Jhan, Marans, other places and high wayes, by their ordinarie courses. The Lord Ranques knowing the nature of the place, searched out the meanes to obtayne it: he accompanied him with nine or ten gentlemen and certaine resolute Souldiers, to the number of two and twentie: he carried through the marish a little boate on a cart, wherewith he went through a channell which watereth the garden of the Castle. To this garden doth answer a gate of the sayd Castle, through the which he thought to surprise the sayd Castle. Notwithstanding, the day before the taking of the same, the garrison hauing intelligences of the purpose of the sayd Lord Ran∣ques, by one of the reformed religion, who entertayned himselfe with them of the garrison; they stopped that gate with brick, dung, and other things which were at hand, and doubled their gards, and so thought to haue well prouided the surprizing of the sayd place. Notwithstanding their thoughts beguiled them: for the sayd Lord Ranques following his enterprize, ap∣plied a petaird against that gate which issued out into the garden: the sayd péece opened the gate and brake their rampier, and gaue the alarum to the garison: whereof part ranne to the great gate, other were surprised with∣in the Castell and slayne, other leapt ouer the walles. They who had re∣tyred to the great gate, yeelded themselues with promise of their liues: which thing was also performed. The place was by the sayd Lord Ran∣ques put in the keeping of Captayne Faueran and Vaunean, who within a while after being sommoned by Captayne Merceur to render the same, and for not so doing, being threatned of the Canon, put the sayd place in the hand of Malicorne gouernor of Niort. About the beginning of Aprill, the Lord Saynt Luke enterprised vpon the Ile of Oleron, where were certayne companies of the religion com∣maunded  by the Lord Aubigny, and Captayne Luuaille his Lieutenant. For to bring to passe his enterprise, bearing impaciently that neighbour∣hood, conuayed certayne companies into that Iland: & among these, was the regiment of Tierceline, consisting of foure hundred harquebuziers, fif∣ty Muskets, and two hundred pikes, resolute Souldiers. The Prince aduertyzed, how this regiment of Tiercelyne had passed into that Iland, the Fryday before Easter, being the first of Aprill, he tooke his way to Marennes, nigh Browage, where he thought that the sayd Ti∣erceline was returned, and went all night to surprise him more easily: but finding them not, hee returned to Taillebourge, with the Lords Laual, and Boulay, and other Lords and Captaines who had accompanyed him.
The 3. of Aprill being Easter day, the said Prince had aduertisement, that the saide Treceline, with his regiment, had repassed from Oleron, to Marennes, for to returne to Xainctes: vpon these intelligences, the saide  Prince departed, intending to stop their passage in a place, not farre from Xainctes. At his ariuing, there issued out of the towne about 16. or 20. men of armes, with a certaine number of Harquebusiers, who were char∣ged by the Lord Chargroys, which conducted the forrunners of the Lorde Laual, he passed them so hardly, that they could not retire within the reach of their Harquebusiers, afore one of the enemies remayned on the place, and many were hurt. After this skirmish, the Prince seeing that Treceline remoued not that day (for that it was Easter day, or otherwise) retyred for the second time to Taillebourg, without dooing any thing else. Treceline was aduertised, that his returne was spied, but hee made no account of it, trusting in the force of his regiment, and resolued (as hee saide) to fight against whome soeuer would let his way, as well in the field as in a strong place. So the fourth day of April, being Easter monday, departing out of Ma∣rennes, he tooke his iourney toward Xainctes, marching in good order with countenance of men resolute to fight, whereof the Prince being admoni∣shed, about two a clock in the after noone speedilie tooke his horse, accom∣panied with the Lorde Trimouille, his brother in law, the Lords Bowlay and Auantigny, to the number of 30. horses, & so many Harquebusiers of his garde, and some other who could bee found at hand: with that small number, he went the ready way to Xainctes, where he found the enemie in the selfe same place, where he had stayed for him the day before, which was not much more than one thousand paces from the suburbe: he found them too farre passed toward the towne, and were couered with hedges and dit∣ches, yet he set vpon the rereware of them, whereat the first he laied on the ground about 30. or 40. of the enemies: the rest put themselues in bat∣tell aray, being fauored with the hedges and high way. In the first onset, the horse of the Lord Trimouille, (who did lead the aduenturers) was bea∣ten downe with the shot of a musket, and he also vnder, who was in no lesse danger then the Lord Batardiere, which being strooke with an Harquebush shot in the shoulder, was slaine in that place: the Lord Chanterelles also was wounded, and dyed shortly after, with Captaine Trauarre who being wounded on the head, died also shortly after: the Lord Auantigny was hurt in the hand and in the knee. The Lord Laual, who with great speede was gone to fetch his companie (which was at Port d' Anneaulx, and scattering∣ly lodged) approaching to the lane of this skirmish, yet timely enough, gal∣loping with 35. horses of his, by the commaundement of the Prince, set vpon them on the side of the hedges, ayming stil to the Colonells Ensigne, for there was no more, which was compassed and couered with a squadron
of Pikes, whom he discomfited: after he had spent all their shot, he fought hand to hand with him who carried the Ensigne, which at length hee gaue  ouer to him, thinking to saue himselfe with slight. The Ensigne taken, the Souldiours were quicklie put in disorder and discomfited, although that they had been often supported, & vpholden by them of the citie. There remained vpon the place about three skore; many were wounded, Cap∣taine Peschays was taken, Tiercelin himselfe was hurt in the arme. The Lord Laual had three bretheren, whereof the Lord Taulay, a little before died of sicknes at Saint Ihan: the Lord Sailly, his third brother in that skirmish was hurt in the head, whereof he died: the morrow after, the Lord Rieulx his other brother, also was wounded in the belly with a pike, whereof hee dyed the sixte day of the same moneth. The Lord Char∣groys, Lieutenant of the Lord Laual, was hurt with shot in the knee: the Lord Monsche likewise in the Legge: fewe Souldiours of the Princes garde were hurt, and few slaine. During this skirmish, the Prince hauing gathered his companie toge∣ther, set on a fresh vpon such of the enemies as flocked together againe: but especiallie vpon the horsemen of the enemie, who made shew to aduance themselues. The night interrupted the fight, and gaue occasion to the Prince to retire, who carried away the spoyle and armour of that regi∣ment, with the Colonels Ensigne: the Victorie was fayre, but bloudy, by reason of the death of the Lords aboue said. The Lord Rieulx spake to the very last breath, and rendered a notable testimonie to all them that were present, of his faith and generositie, and of his good nurture which hee had learned in the schoole of godlines, so that it may be saide of him, that he dy∣ed a true Christian Knight. The Prince conceaued a marueilous griefe for the death of these two Lords, but especially the Lord Laual their brother, who conceaued such sor∣row thereby, that he fell sick and dyed eyght dayes after, to wit, the 11. of Aprill he was opened, and there was sound an apostume in his head, full of yellow stinking water: so in few dayes died these foure Lords and bro∣thers, to the great griefe and heauines of all good men: they were buried in the Temple, which is in the Castell Taillebourg. Now we haue to speake of the King of Nauarre, who did nothing all this time, but onely in great silence, viewed whereto this voyage of his enemies would come. For first perceiuing that the Leaguers had a spe∣ciall quarrell to him, because they knew him to be in their way, and a spe∣ciall stoppe of all their trayterous intents; they feared greatly his pru∣dent counsell and wisedome. He made his complaynt to the King, aun∣swered to the articles of the declaration of his enemies, exhorted the King to take heede of them, proffred him his seruice, prayed him to let him alone with them, for if it pleased his Maiestie to giue him leaue, hee
doubted not, but with his owne power hee would so chastice them, that they should be an example to their posteritie. The King by letters and messengers, exhorted and willed him to quiet himselfe, to see his Edict of pacification to be obserued in his go∣uernement, shewed him that their cause is but one, that hee seeth the in∣tents of the sayd Leaguers well enough, and trusteth that GOD shall make him able to represse their madnes, protested that he had care of the said K. of Nauarre, as of his own selfe, and held him as a deere brother, the true & rightfull heire of his Crown, in case he should die without issue. It is said also, how the King notwithstanding this, was driuen to ioyne with them whom he had condemned before, and to alowe and iustifie their treasons, was enforced through the pernitious counsell of his mother; and not only enforced, but induced to take condition and lawes at their handes, to assist and arme his enemies whom he had so declared and iud∣ged few dayes before, euen traytors against his person, state, Crowne, and life, against them I say whome hee had protested to bee his faithfull subiects, good brothers, and cosins, & had receiued vnder his protection. It is said also how the King of Nauarre before had forewarned the King to beware of such association, shewing him the euil which would surely ensue, and at length certifieth the King that hee had admitted a higher power, a master and controuler ouer himselfe, and that hee had weakned himselfe, and strengthened his enemies. Howe hee went to Saint Ihan de Cadeioux into Languedock, there to aduise of his affaires, and his friends, with the Prince of Conde, the Duke Monmorencie, and other Nobles, where they concluded vpon the defensiue. The King of Nauarre returned into Gascoyne, kept himselfe in silence, abiding all the iniuries that might be possible, the preparations, brag∣gings, boastings, & attempts of his enemies, euen to the great imminent danger of his person, before that he would take armes in hande. Frō Gas∣coyne he went to Bergerak, in Perigrod, as a time of peace, where hauing soiourned for a time, he tooke his iourney to Montauban, knowing very well that the armie conducted by the Duke de Maine was against him, and already in Perigord, rauaging, pilling, spoyling, and wasting all that they came by. From thence he returned into Gascoyne againe aboute the latter end of Ianuarie. 1586. And whereas he knew well, that if he had ioyned all his forces with the power of the Prince, and the Vicount Turenne, hee had been able to stop the way of the Duke de Maine, that he had not walked so long at his pleasure as he did. But that wise, prudent, and moderate Prince per∣ceiuing by the attempts of that armie, the qualities of the leader, and the disorder that was among them; but specially hauing Gods fauour on his side: And seeing yt Gods curse and wrath was powred on his enemies side,
he neuer thought it meete to trouble himselfe nor his friends about that accursed companie, and villaynos rabble of rakehells, knowing that  God himselfe would dissipate them, & clothe them wt dishonour as with a garment; he knew wel also that they did no more but to weaken their fac∣tion, in spending in vaine the large liberalitie, and intollerable expences of the Priests and Monks, who entertayned the said armie. At length the King of Nauarre determined to passe the riuer of Ga∣ronne, to repaire into Poytow, to visit the places of his gouernement a∣bout  the riuer of Loyre, and being returned from Montauban into Gas∣coyne, the Marshal Matignon had besieged Castets, a Castel situated vpon the riuer Garonne, pertayning to the Lord Fabas, about the moneth of Fe∣bruarie. The King of Nauarre, hauing knowledge thereof, accompanied with two or three hundred horses, and eighteene hundred Harquebusiers, did raise the siege, and dined in the saide Castle that day, in witnes that he ac∣complished his purpose for that time. The K. of Nauarre from thence sent al his companies to garisons, and tooke his way to Bearne, to see the Ladie his sister, and to take order for all necessarie things, concerning the securitie and preseruation of the townes and countrey. That being done, he tooke his iourney to Nerak, and passing through Eause, (which is his) prouided for the safety of the same in good time (for otherwise it was in danger to be lost) and for that purpose there hee so∣iourned 2. daies. There newes was brought vnto him, that the Duke de Mayne hasted to let his passage ouer the riuer Garonne: for all that hee tooke his waye to Nerak, where he soiourned a whole day more to take order for the safe∣tie of the towne. Thereunto more aduisement was giuen him, that the sayd Duke de Mayn was at Villeneufue d' Agenoys intending to stop his passage ouer the riuer Garonne. There was in apparance occasiō enough, to cause the sayd King to aduance and hasten extraordinarylie his voyage, but notwithstanding, despising all the indeuours of the sayd Duke, hee would change nothing of his purpose: but to the contrary, hauing done at Nerak all his affayres with leasure, departed not thence vntill that it was alreadie farre in the day. From Nerak he tooke his iourney to Barbase, and continued as though he would goe to Castelialoux. Many did carefully muse the day before what way he would take, vncertaine whether it would be through Cau∣mont, or Saint Bazile, or through the Mas de verdune, but they coulde know nothing at all vntill they came within two leagues of Castlialoux: For then being in the middle of the heath, he declared the way and order which would be kept in his passing ouer the riuer, hee seperated the men
of warre who accompanyed him: he kept with him about 20. gentlemen well horsed and 10. Souldiers for his garde, with whom he went toward Cammont. He appointed the Lord Roque for the conducting of the rest,  which were two or 3. hundred horses, among whom there was but 15. or 16. wel armed and horsed, and about 15. Harquebusiers of his gard: hee commaunded the said Lord Roque to passe at Saint Bazile, which thing he did without any let, although the marshall Matignon was but at 3. leagues from thence. The King being ariued at Cammont, although he knew the Duke de Mayne to be within 2. leagues frō that place: notwith∣standing there he dined with as much leasure, as any man could doe in the greatest and most assured peace; and after dinner passed the riuer without any let or hindrance of his men. The King of Nauarre came the morrow after to Saynt Foy, which is a towne vppon Dordonne. The Lord Roque also with all them which had followed him, aryued there about two houres after. His Maiesty so∣iorned there, and at Bergerak a whole moneth. These bee two townes si∣tuated vppon Dordonne: Bergerak is great and rich: Saynt Foy is lesser a great deale, yet very riche, because of the traffike vpon the sayd riuer: S. Foy is beneath Bergerak three leagus: Chastilion beneath Saint Foy three leagues, and aboue Liborne, a great, strong, and rich towne about three leagus of. Bergerak and Saynt Foy receaued the Gospel aboue fifty years ago by the man of God Edmond Lauoy, who suffered at Bourdeaux for the testimony of Christ. These two townes haue alwayes euer since persisted in the confession of the Gospell. in these 2. towns the King of Nauarre remayned (as is aboue sayd) a whole moneth, expressely to see the counte∣nance of his enemies. All that while his enemies were within 3. leagues of him, hee went dayly to hunting, and none of his enemyes that euer durst shew their faces: which thing did shew euidently, that de Mayne had so litle corage in him, that hee durst not let him to take his pleasures when he was willing so to do, much lesse to execute his enterprises, and proued for wayghty and necessary affayres. It is sayd before, how that by the aduise of de Mayne, Guyze came to Pa∣ris, to require helpe for his brother. For as a conscience guylty of gree∣uous crimes is alwayes timorous, and suspecteth all things: so the woorm of the conscience gnawed these men, and feared them so, that hee appre∣hended Gods iustice: and supposed that all them of the reformed religion in France (out of hand) would oppresse the Duke de Mayne his Brother. Therefore hee perswaded the king to diuert theyr forces, and to assault them in all quarters of the Realme. Whereupon dyuers armies were pre∣pared for diuers countries, and namely the Marshall Biron was appoin∣ted for Guyenne. The Leaguers vnderstanding that the King of Nauarre had passed Ga∣ronne,
did greatly hast the voyage of the sayd Marshall Biron. The inha∣bitantes of Niort hauing sold themselues to the Leaguers to worke ini∣quity,  made great sute to haue that expedition performed out of hand, to the end, that the townes and countries of Marans, Annix, Rochel, and other partes of Xainctonge and Poytow, might bee spoyled and wasted before the ariuing of the king of Nauarre into that countrey, whom they knew (by his valour and wisedome) was able to disappoint al their attempts. The king of Nauarre vnderstanding of these new preparations, and knowing, yea seeing with his eies that the most miserable vilages of Guy∣enne were good ynough to occupy that army, and that the tyme of the in∣fallible  dissipation was at hand, hauing prouided for the principall places sufficiently, and vnderstanding of the readines of the army, which was to be lead by the Marshal Biron, the said king of Nauarre would rather shew a proofe of his valour and courage in opposing himselfe to that valiant, old, and experienced Captayne, then to seeme to striue with that effeminate, and slauish army. Therefore departing from Saynt Foy in the end of Aprill, and passing through Perigord, Engomoys, Poytow, & Landimoys, went to visit the pla∣ces of his gouernement vpon the riuer of Loyre. Whilest the army for Guyenne is a preparing, and the king of Nauarre maketh his progresse into Poytow, and the townes vpon Loyre, the King vnderstanding, that in the execution of the edict of October, and of the declaration thereof, giuen in December last, touching the sea∣zing on the goods of them of the religion: and others, which did beare arms against the League, many creditors & others which pretended right in the goods, made claime to thē, so that the officers could haue no gayne there∣of to the kings vse and aduantage. Therefore the king about the 26. of A∣prill setteth forth an edict, that the sayd goods shall be seazed and sould, or geuen to farme to the kinges vse, and that after such as did pretend any tytle to the same goods, hauing prooued theyr right, they then to bee sa∣tisfied vppon the fruits of the yeares following. And for asmuch as some were returned home from the countries, where  they had repyred, according to the edict of Iuly last past, the King the thirtéenth of May, sent commaundement to all his officers, that such per∣sonnes bee apprehended, and their processe made and executed: also that theyr goods mouable and immouable bee seazed vpon to the kinges vse, for the charges of the holy warre. During the preparations of this warre, the Pirats of Browage with theyr courses did greatly hinder the traffike vpon the Sea, which caused them of Rochel to barre their hauen, in sinking old ships in the mouth of the riuer, replenished with great stones for to make them sinke in the bottome of the water. For the performance of this, the Rochellers prepared a nauy of twen∣ty
ships well furnished, three Galiots, with other small vessels to the num¦ber of 35. or 40. in all. Ouer this army commaunded the Lord Saynt Gelays, assisted with Captayne Gardeleau: and a number also of Gentle∣men  and Captaynes, aswell strangers as inhabitants of Rochel. The Lord Saynt Luke vppon the aduertizement which he receaued of this enterprize, with all diligence prepared himselfe, and would haue stayed all the Galleyes which he had before receaued from Bourdeaux, but few remayned there: notwithstanding hee made a Fort vpon the banke nigh the place where they would barre the sayd hauen: which thing profi∣ted him a little, for in the keeping of the same hee lost a great number of men. Whilest this was a dooing at Browage, the King of Nauarre returned from Poytow, and fro the Coast of Loyre, and entered into Rochel the last day of May (being the Lords day) with a marueilous reioy sing of al men, which receaued much comfort of his presence there: for the sayd King had alwayes no lesse vertuously than happely opposed himselfe to all the at∣tempts and endeuours of all the armies of the enemies, which had béen sent against them. The same day the sayd King of Nauarre embarked himselfe, to goe to visit the Nauie which was before Browage, where he soiorned some dayes. In the meane while there had arriued certayne shippes to the Lord S. Luke gouernour of Browage, who with them went about to let that enter∣prize; but all was in vayne: so that without any great losse, all the ships appoynted for that exployt, were brought in and suke in the mouth of the Hauen, according to the deliberation taken. So the chanell by these means was barred in such a sort, as the Hauen hath béen in a manner rendered vn∣profitable. Notwithstanding that, the Lord S. Luke hath bestowed much labour to open it, and at the charges of the inhabitants of the Ilands, he hath drawne out foure or fiue vessels. Yet is that Hauen alwayes suspec∣ted vnto ships, and they néede to set markes to the ships that will enter in, least they take hurt. This being done, the Nauie returned to Rochel, without any losse, ex∣cept of one Captayne named Mercur, and fewe Souldiers which were taken in the skirmishes that were made at the Fort aboue mentioned. About the fourth of Iune, the King being returned to Rochel with this Nauie, and vnderstanding that the Marshall Byron with this armie ap∣proached,  and that Lusignen, Mele and Chizay (Townes not defensible) had yéelded themselues, tooke his iourney to Marans, to consider the pla∣ces whether théy were able to make head against that armie. The armie lead by the Marshall Byron did consist of twelue hundred horsemen, and foure thousand footemen with a conuenient furniture. This armie was very small; the cause was, that the King (at the commaunde∣ment
of the Leaguers) had deuided his forces into sundrie armies for sun∣drie Prouinces, to diuert the forces of them of the religion from the Duke  de Mayne, as is afore said. The King of Nauarre hauing well viewed the Forts of the Iles of Maran, concluded to defend the places agaynst that armie, The 7. day of Iune came two sorts of deputies appoynted to require of the King of Nauarre two contrary things: namely, the putie of Ro∣chel required his Maiestie that hee would cause the Castle of Maran to bée rased, for the reasons which they then alleaged. On the other side, the Gentlemen of Annix required him not to doo so, for as much as the Pa∣pists would take occasion to doo the like to their houses. The King of Na∣uarre answered to them both, that thereupon he would take aduise. Whilest these things were a dooing, the King of Nauarre had aduertise∣ment that the Duke de Mayne distressed Chastilion: whereupon he as∣sembled as great a companie of horsemen as he could, and with the Prince determined to rescue that place: which he could not bring to passe, by rea∣son of the aduancing of Byron and his armie. For the armie of Byron was alreadie aduanced to Niort, and hauing no néerer place than Maran to as∣sault, made his reckoning not to besiege it, but onely to fright the inhabi∣tants and about fiftie souldiers, which he knewe to be lodged in the forts: and in the greater of the sayd forts there was not aboue nine or ten Soul∣diers; the sayd forts being very ill furnished, which made him beléeue that such a small companie would not withstand him, but surrender the sayd forts. The feare indéede was great among many, whereof some of them had alreadie retyred to Rochel. But the Lord Iarry (gouernour of the place) and his Souldiers (with some of the inhabitants) tooke courage: many did despayre of the succour of the King of Nauarre, whom they thought to haue passed into Gascoyne. They resolued notwithstanding to hold against that armie. And on the monday the 7. of Iune at night, they sent messen∣gers to Rochel, to demaund succour both of men and munition of warre, and of certaine péeces. They of Rochel answered, that they could not con∣ueniently spare men; as for munition and peeces they would willingly let them haue, so that they might haue securitie to be payed the price that it cost them. This refusall of men did so feare the inhabitants, that euen that night many did retyre, and carried away the rest of their goods. But on the Wednesday morning about foure of the clocke arriued from the King of Nauarre two Gentlemen, to wit, the Lord Fouqueroles, and Valiere, whom he had sent in great diligence: they calling the gouernour, the Minister of the place, and some of the inhabitants, assured them that the King of Nauarre was comming in great diligence for to succour them,
and that he would arriue euen the same day: and after they had rested a while, the sayd Lords went to view the Holds and entrings into the I∣lands, and so likewise the day following. The 12. day of Iune, the King of Nauarre came with fewe in compa∣nie, but his troupes followed him apace. The 13. 14. and 15. dayes of that moneth, there entered braue compa∣nies of Souldiers, as they of the Lords Puelles, Granuile, Drakuille and S. Foy, Normands. There entered also Barache, the regiment of Sorlus, the Lord of Neufuy, vnder fiue Ensignes, for the most part Perigordins and Limosins, yet very well trained in Military Discipline. All these com∣panies were placed in the forts by the King of Nauarre, namely, the Lord Puelles was in the Bastile, Drakuille in Beauregard, Barache at Barnay, Granuile with Saint Foy, were put in the Brune, and Repentne on the way to Rochel: Captaine Plaune with his companie of Poytiuines, was placed at Poyneuf, Captaine Saint Ihan at Clousie, Captaine Treille in Brault: there was a company of Rochellers, few in number, but men reso∣lute vnder Captaine Mot, they were put to keepe the entrey of the mill in the Marsh. The Lord Iarrie gouernour of Mans, vndertooke to keepe the Forts Paulee, Allowete, and Botsblauk, with his companie, and some of the inha∣bitants. The King of Nauarre commaunded all to obey the Lord Fon∣quereles, who shewed a marueilous care and diligence in the same siege. The 10. day of Iulie, the Marshall Byron with a companie of horses,  came himselfe to view the Bastile, but approaching a little too nigh, he was saluted out of some small forts, which the Lorde Puelles had placed vpon the high way; hee had his thumb and some other fingers taken off with a shot; the same shot did greatly (as it was reported) hurt a Gentleman, who was by him. All that weeke, the enemie did none other thing, but aduaunced him∣selfe toward the Bastile, set his gabions nigh the farme of Angle, there to place three pieces to batter the fort of Bastile. In the mean time, the King of Nauarre did shew a wonderful diligence, as wel in fortifying the Iland, as in bringing companies to make head to the enemie at euerie comming in, and also in prouiding of victuals and munition of warre, as well out of Rochel, as out of the Ile of Rhe, and out of Lusson, whence hee brought great stoare of corne, meale and wine. He had a great ship out of the Ile of Rhe, well furnished, hauing two great pieces before, to defend the Fort Paulce, he had also seauen great pieces caried from Rochel, which were de∣uided in the Forts, to wit, one in the Brune, two in the Bastile, one at Beau∣regarde, two at Paulce, and two remained at the Castell. The 22. of Iuly, was seene that the enemie passed through the Marshes of Beauregard, and comming foorth out of a little Iland named Cigogne,
began to set vp a fort in the middle of the Marshes, distant from the firme land about fiue hundred paces, on the other side, our men made a trench and  a rampier of earth vpon the end of the Marsh, of the length of fiue hundred paces, flanking the same with little Forts and Bastions. On the other side the enemie set vp foure other forts, somewhat more aduaunced than the first, and from them did shoote ouer the reeds at all aduenture, without doo∣ing any hurt, sauing that the third day after they hurt a Souldiour on the foote, as he went downe to the Trenches. The next day after, they kil∣led another as he was playing at cardes vpon the side of the Trenches, the which being reported by the Minister, and admonished to goe to publique praiers, which were appoynted to be made at the Fort of the Lord Drakuil∣le, he regarded it not, so that as the minister returned from praiers, the said Souldier was shot through with a musket, and presentlie departed, before that the Minister had any time to admonish and comfort him. The same day, the enemie with great diligence set vp a great fort, within sixe score paces of our trenches, it was made with great pieces of timber, fagots and earth, and hogsheads filled with earth, which were disposed by seauen, set one against another; that fort might be of 30. foot square, and 15. in heigt, and for to bring all the stuffe from the Iland Cagogne, they caused the wa∣ter of the Marishes to rise aboue a foote in heigt, by the meanes of ope∣ning the sluses and mills, about Fontenay and Niort. This thing our men did helpe also, for because of the great heate, they feared that the water would drie too fast, and so giue too easie accesse to the enemie through the Marsh, for they stopped the sluces below nigh the sea, therefore the water course being opened aboue, and stopped beneath, did rise in a short space. By this meanes the enemie had opportunitie to bring a very great Culue∣rine, with other small pieces, wherewith they began to shoote vppon our men, & vpon the house of Beauregard the last day of Iuly, about two a clock, without dooing any hurt to any man. This battering, notwithstanding did amaze a great many, because they neuer thought that they would haue brought such pieces; for it was bruted, and euen the Papists had giuen out, that the enemie would raise the siege: but by this it appeared, that he meant in good earnest. For all the great diligence and care of the King of Nauarre, in proui∣ding for victuals, there was so many mouthes who liued of the stoare, that they who did best seruice, oftentimes dined worst. For during the space of eight or ten dayes, they had not in a day but one or two loaues of Barley bread; for other corne was not ripe as yet in that countrey, which caused that scarsitie. There were yet two discommodities which vrged them greatly; the one was an extreame heate, which continued ten weekes and more: the other  that in he night▪ especially the Gnats were so impor∣tunate, that many were stung with them, euen with bloud drawing in the
face and other partes of the bodie which were vncouered, so that the stoc∣kens of linnen cloth, could not defend them from such molestaions. Some dayes before, the King of Nauarre had taken order, that one of  the Galiots of Rochel came within the hauen of Marans, with a long Culuerine, bearing the armes of Britayne, which in the former warres, the Rochelers had taken out of the Castell of Marans, which afterward was called Chassebiron. That euening it was had out of the Galiot, and carri∣ed with horses & men halfe the way to Beauregard, but there it was ouer∣throwne, and one of the wheeles broaken: from thence it was drawne vpon rowles, and being placed against the fort of the enemie, in such sort as it could not bee indomaged, did them good seruice. For the 2. of August, a∣bout sixe a clock in the morning, the enemie brought downe the water from  Niort, a double Cannon vpon two boates, and with them began to shoote against the Fort Paulee. There they did no other hurt, but shooting with∣in a short piece of yron, they did breake it about a foote, and the pieces stroake off the arme of the Gunner, and did hurt two Souldious; they hurt also a Souldiour of the Ship, who did shew great endeuour to shoote at the enemie, with a number of Harquebuses and Muskets. And below the fort Paulee, the Lord Iarry with his harquebusiers, but specially with the long fowling pieces of the inhabitantes of Maran, who did incessantly shoote vpon the boates, and also into the coppes nigh the ri∣uer, did so molest the enemy, that about nine a clocke they were enforced to forsake their boats, and theyr double Canon, which remayned in the midle of the Riuer, vntill that hauing tyed the beats with coardes, they drew them away vp the riuer, and did no other thing therewith: for al∣though they might haue endomaged the fort by a long battering, yet had it béen impossible vnto them to approach to it to seaze vpon, considering that the riuer was staked thicke, and the shot fell vppon them as thicke, if they discouered themselues neuer so litle, so they were not suffered to appeare within their reache. While they drew theyr boats, there was a rash fellow to occupy our harquebuziers, which did discouer himselfe armed a great while in the sight of our men, playing with his two hand sword: and al∣though they shot an infinit number of pellets at him, yet was he not hit but of two, and was very litle hurt, as it was afterward reported. The third of August there was a great alarum geuen at the trenches of Beauregard, for the enemy made a countenance to aduance forward vpon vs. At midnight wee set vpon the towers of the castell with great lanterns of light, because that the enemie had great fires in all their watches, and a mighty fire vpon the vaultes of S. Ihan of Lauersay nigh the lodging of the Marshall Biron, half a league off from Bastile. At that tyme was there meanes made for the agreement betweene the king of Nauarre, and the
Marshall Biron generall af the Popish army, which was concluded vpon the fifth day of the same August. So that the night following the enemy  began to draw pieces out of their fort: and at the breaking of the day put fire to it, which there continued the space of sixe moneths, hauing caught vnder the earth to those great pieces of timber, wherewith it was made e∣uen from the very foundation. The composition was very honorable, and to the great aduantage of the king of Nauarre: for it was first agreed, that the Marshall Biron should lead away his army beyond the riuer, without attempting vppon Tonnay Charante, a place very weake, which hee di hold for the king of Nauarre. Secondly, that Marans should remayne free for the traffike. Thirdly, that the king of Nauarre should haue a Gentleman of his in the castel, with certayne number of souldiers to hold the inhabitantes of both religions in the same liberty which they had before the warre. This agreement they of Fontenay and Niort would not hold, and neuer ceased to make warre vntill that they were well punished: for wicked robbers did continually issue out of Fontenay, Maillezayes & Niort, hauing for their Captayne a certayne Masse Priest, named Sir Merye, parish Priest of Ronde, who did dayly robbe Marchants and trauellers of their goods, and often times of their liues, vntill they were reduced vnder the handes of the king of Nauarre. The seuenth of the same moneth, the king of Nauarre came from Ro∣chel, when it was very late, entered the Iles of Maran, by the fort Brune, and from thence to the Bastile, viewed all the fortes and trenches on that side: and about ten in the night did suppe at the signe of the Moone. The eight day hee deuided his companies, sending some into Poytow, other into Annis to refresh themselues, whilest the L. Byron lead his ar∣my into Xainctonge: so that armie began to bee broken agaynst Reeds and Rushes of Marans, doing afterward nothing: but within a while after by litle and litle it was scattered and reduced to nothing. The Papistes spake diuersly according to their passion, as though this armie had not done what they might haue done. But the truth is, that the king of Nauarre had prouided such a good order within the Iland, and that there was such a number of men of valour, that the Lord Biron could not do otherwise then he did, except he would haue thrust his mē to the slaugh∣ter without endomaging much his enemy. Secondly, the marishes which at that tyme were wont to bee drye, were yet full of water euen a foot high, for the causes aboue recited. Thirdly, the men of warre haue made fortes at euery entrance into the Iland, furnished with good and resolued men: for they were about one hundred of braue and  gentlemen, making about two hundred good horses, ale to oppose themselues agaynst the enemy, if he had attempted
to enter. Also the enemyes had to goe aboue fifteene hundred paces in the Marsh, not aboue fiue in a ranke, all discouered to our men who were in the forts. Fourthly, the Marish was full of steppes, which the Cattell made in winter: so that if the horsemen had waded, the one foote had soonke very deepe, and the other would haue stayed vppon the firme ground, with a great number of Galthrops, which were cast in diuers places. Such was the state of Maran, when the composition was made. The king of Na∣uarre left the Lord Iarry gouernor there as before, with charge to warre a∣gaynst no man if they should not warre agaynst him. The Lord Nemours (whom the King had sent thither to commaund o∣uer the men of armes) stayed not there long: for hee was commaunded by the king of Nauarre to retyre in Poytow, and after went to Bruant. Few dayes after the distributing of the companies out of Marans, cap∣tayne Lommeau discouered the money of the tributes & Impost of Poytow, conducted toward Loyre by certayne Albaneses: and some gentlemen with Popish souldiers of the countrey, whom they set vpon: but they saued them selues in a Priory. Not farre from thence he compassed them immediatly with certayne companies. The king of Nauarre being aduertised thereof at Rochel, departed spee∣dily, and caused the great Culuerine of Marans to bee brought before the Priory, which was strong without canon: they within yeelded themselues by composition, which was, that they should goe away safe, leauing behind them six thousand crownes, which was the charge of their conuoy. As the king of Nauarre vsed a wonderfull diligence in going thether, so was his diligence no lesse in retyring thence, and commaunded all the companyes to do the like, knowing well that ye enemie (which was yet at Morye, and about Fontenay with his armie) would not faile to set on him; which thing did happen. But the sayd king of Nauarre had already repas∣sed the fort of Brault, which thing all his companies did not, for many re∣maining at Lusson to refresh themselues, and to fare French-like, were charged and put to flight, some were slaine, some taken prisoners, most of them saued them selues, leauing behind them their stuffe and baggage, and among them captayne Lommeau. It is sayd before, that by the aduise of the Duke of Guyze, diuers ar∣mies were appoynted for diuers prouinces, and namely the Duke Ioyeuse for Languedock, where he entering with a power tooke the Cities of Lo∣deue and Saint Ponce: hée tooke also Montesquion: but Marueiolx hee tooke by treason. In all these places he committed incredible cruelties, and such as it were needfull to find out new wordes to describe them. But as God is a iust reuenger of wronges, so did he not suffer these crueltyes long vnpunished, but shewed tokens that his iustice is neither fayned nor idle,
nor his hand shortned in punishing such insolent Tyrants: For after di∣uers and manifold excesses and iniuries done in the countrey, he besieged the mas Saint Puelles, the weakest, most miserable, and least defensible of  all the places of Loragoys: there was he so shamefully beaten & put back, that after they had slaine him thirty Captaines, and fiue hundred Har∣quebusieres, they scattered his regiments, and so leauing his credit be∣hinde him cracked among men of valour, was faine to returne home as well as he could, well chastized, to tell newes of his good speede to his Master. Shortly after, the Nobilitie of Languedock aduised better by the proud and insolent outragiousnes of the man and of his companies, and taught by the execution of Gods iustice vpon that rabble of sauage robbers, assembled the states of that prouince, at Castelnawdarry, where they con∣cluded neuer to meddle anie more with the leaguers, neither to proceede any more by the way of warre and vyolence agaynst them of the Reli∣gion. It is sayd before how the Duke d'Espernon was appointed for Daulphine and Prouance, and the sonne of Ioyeuse for Auuergne. The Lord Es∣pernon therefore entring into Daulphine with his power, had better suc∣cesse: for first he tooke Valance, Tallard, and Guileslie from the league, and reduced them to the Kings obedience. He tooke also many townes from them of the Religion, as Sorges and others: hee was more moderate and voyde of crueltie and sauagenes, yet at length seeing that as he had taken one place he left andther, and that warre was an endlesse thing there, and that with long toyle of warre, and lack of money, his army was scattered, (as at length it went inuisible) leauing his brother the Lord Valete there with such forces as he had left, to doe what he were able: so he went to the King againe (and not without cause) considering he was one of his most faithfullest about his person. The young Ioyeuse in Auuergne walked at liberty, tooke his pleasures, spent the Kings money francklie, and when that was done, for lacke of more, returnd from whence he came as wise as when he went out. Thus we see that within the compasse of a yeare, 6. armies haue beene sent (with great preparation of all necessarie things) into seuerall pro∣uinces, to warre against heauen and earth, and to oppose themselues a∣gainst all that is good and godly, and how they are all fallen to pieces, as though they had been smitten downe by the hand of the God of armies, as the Lapithes and Centaures are reported by the Poets. During these lamentable tempests, the which did so tosse France with these sixe armyes in diuers prouinces: The Princes and certaine  cities in Germanie moued with compassiō, pittying the miserable subuer∣sion and ransaking of France their next neighbours: sent an Ambassage
to the King, to perswade him (if it were possible) to extinguish that cō∣bustion raised by the league, & by peace to restore the state of his Realme  to some good stay. The Ambassadours were sent by the Princes Electors of Saxony, Pa∣latine and Brandenbourg, and by other Princes of the sacred empire as the Noble Princes Ioachim Frederick, Marquesse of Brandenbourg, and ad∣ministrator of Magdebourg, Iuly of Brundswik, and Lunebourg, William Lewis, and George Landgraues of Hessen, brethren: Ioachim earnest Prince of Chatten, with the foure principal imperial cities, Strasbourg, Vl∣mes, Mersebourg, and Frnckefort, with the ambassadours of Vtten and Is∣senbourg, they al came, except they of Vtten & Issenbourg, which vpon cer∣taine vrgent affayres went back (deliuering their cōmissions to their fel∣lowes) to Saint Germain in Laye, & had audience the tenth of October. First, they offer the commendations and seruices of their Princes and commonwealths vnto him. Secondly, they recite how they had beene aduertized, euen by the let∣ters of Mandolet, gouernour of Lyons for the King, that his Maiesties intention had been to preserue the edict of pacification, stablished vpon the faith of the Maiestie of a Prince. Thirdly, that they vnderstand that hee had beene enforced, contrary to his godly intention, to reuoke the said edict of peace, and by way of armes to persecute his most faithfull subiects, euen the chiefest of the Princes of his blood, which thing they would hardly haue beleeued, if it had not beene made knowne by his owne letters sent vnto some of the said Prin∣ces, by the Lord Schemberg, hearing dae the 22. of October. 1585. Fourthly, protesting of the good affection of their Princes and com∣mon wealths toward his Maiestie, they doo in their names in most hum∣ble wise beseech him, that considering into what pitifull state France had beene reduced by the former warres, and the good benefites which haue ensued the last peace: he wil not be induced by the perswasiōs of the Pope, to bring in againe blood shed, hatred of the Crowne of France, losse of so many Princes, Lords, and Nobilitie, and of so many his faythfull sub∣iects, which haue done to hm and his predecessors so many notable serui∣ces; which thing vndoubtedly will ensue, (if not worse) if he do not de∣fend the edict of peace, considering that by his owne declaration he confes, seth, that the reformed Religion will not be rooted out by the sworde. Fiftly, wheras he had shewed by his declaration, that the edict of peace was made by ripe deliberation and counsell, and published with all solē∣nities requisite thereunto, and that the sayd edict was sworn by his bro∣ther of happy memory, Duke of Alançon, by the Princes and Lordes, in lifting vp their handes to heauen, and that hee himselfe would haue that peace to be called his peace, which he made (as he said) voluntarily, with∣out
any compulsion, & for that would haue it kept inuiolable, there was no reason why the benefites of that peace should bee cut off, by raysing warre  at the Popes pleasure. Last of all, they doo shewe that there will ensue of the reuoking of this edict of peace, a most certaine and assured subuersion of the state and Crowne of France. And by the way of conclusion, they beseech his Maiestie, that conside∣ring the reasons by them shewed, & taking some pitie of his poore Realme, it may please him to reiect the perswasions of the Pope and Leaguers, and to preserue the edict of peace: offering vnto him in the names of their Princes and Commonwealths, that if there bee any meanes in them that may further a good peace, and restablish his estate, his Maiestie shall vnder∣stand how they are affectionate to procure all things which pertaine to his honour and greatnes: and if it pleaseth him, they will employ all their faithfull seruice in the assuring of his dignitie and royall Crowne, and to the benefite of all Christendome, but specially to suppresse this warre, whereunto (in their iudgement) he had béen enforced. Hauing made an ende of their ambassage, they deliuered him their in∣structions both in Dutch and . The King giueth answere the 11. of October, but such an answere as he seemed rather to be offended with them for their duetie and good will of their Princes & Commonwealths, than to be mooued to any moderate counsell. It is sayd before, that in Aprill of this yere 1586. the King made great preparation of warre in prouiding fiue armies all at once: at which time also they made a motion for peace vnto the King of Nauarre. By this it was an easie thing to iudge, that they who disposed themselues to warre so furiously, could not bee brought to condescend to any moderate counsell or reasonable peace. But whilest al these armies were readie, and marching to doo some great exployts, and to inuade the Prouinces (whereunto they of the reformed re∣ligion had retyred and were strong) the Q Mother also marched toward Guienne, in hope to obtayne a greater victorie in assaulting the King of Nauarre with a parley, than al those armies with force. For she tooke with her out of the stoare of Italian trickes, temptation, disuniting and weake∣ning. For first she will trie the tricke of Sathan in the 4. of Mathew, when he tempting Christ proffered him all the kingdomes of the earth: So shée thought to win this godly and noble Prince, in shewing him, that if he would forsake the Sonne of God, he should be declared the right heire of the Crowne, in case the King should decease without issue: otherwise it would be impossible to him to attayne vnto that Crowne, considering the great strength of the Catholikes, and how eagerly they are bent agaynst the reformed religion. If she heareth the same answere of him, which Sathan heard of Christ,
then will she take the second weapon of her warre in hand, which is Disu∣niting: for if the sayd King will not consent (vpon the proffer of peace) to abolish the exercize of the reformed religion, then she will render him odi∣ous  with infamous Libels throughout France, both to them of the refor∣med religion, and also to the Catholikes; for both were desitous of peace: so she imagineth, that by these meanes she might disunite them from the King of Nauarre, laying to his charge, that it rested but in him that France was not at rest. If this would not serue neither, then she thought sure that the third would doo the feate; which was to abuse the true intentions of the sayd King of Nauarre, that holding him long about the hope of peace, and whi∣lest he should labour about it, he might be surprized by some poynt of Ita∣lian valour: and if not, his partakers would bee so weakened in the Pro∣uinces, with these armies, that either he would not be able hereafter to de∣fend himselfe, or withstand his enemies: or els that hee would bee inforced by this weakning, to accept at their hands a most disaduantagious peace. And to begin withall, she sendeth to the Lords Monpensier and Mon∣morency, willing them to dispose the heart of the sayd King to peace (as she sayd): which thing was diuersly taken. For the Leaguers feared the authoritie of the Prince Monpensier, mistrusting that by these meanes the Queene vnawares would vnite him to the head of his house. They of the religion feared his facilitie, that he was made a meane for peace, least hée should ioyne himselfe to the King of Nauarre in this quarrell and warre, (raised by the Leaguers) to destroy the house of Bourbon: so that by one thing both parts tooke occasion to distrust this message. Assoone as the negotiation of peace began, the practizes of the Leaguers began also to interrupt the peace, which they greatly feared. For after the message of these two Lords, the Abbot of Gadaigne was sent to the King of Nauarre, (for no Tragedie can be wel played without a Priest) who be∣ing wel entertayned at Rochel by the sayd King, euery man began to hope well of that thing which was so greatly desired. But when the Q. Mother came to Cheuonceau, a towne lying vpon the riuer Chere, which falleth in Loyre beneath Tours, all this hope vanished a∣way like a lightming. For then the hatred and deceitfull meaning of the Q. Mother was discouered, which had lien hid vnder those courteous messa∣ges. For the Abbot of Gadaigne was sent to Browage, there to play Sy∣mons part (if he could): but his going thether was much suspected of the Rochelers. The victualling also of Browage was taken for a stoare house against their Towne. There was a Gentleman named la Roche the lesser, who went many voyages betwéene the King of Nauarre and the Q. Mother, to agree of the place, and other meanes of the interuiew. The Q. by little and little
did draw nere to Xainctonge: the King of Nauarre would haue aduaunced as farre as Champaigne in Tourene, so that the Marshall Byron, who had passed Loyre, to assault Poytow, would retire beyond Loyre, and that  thing he required for his securitie. The Queene would, that he should trust in her; the King willed her to trust in him; she aleaged her good will, he aleaged his fidelitie & innocencie, who did neuer breake his word toward any person. Shee did lay to his charge, that he was the cause that the parley could not be brought to passe. He answered, that it did stay but in her, that France was not in quietnes, & that he was ready to see her, so that it were in a sure place, and that his way might be sure. Whilest these thing passed so betweene thē, by messengers, some coun∣selled the King of Nauarre to help Chastilion, which was then besieged by the Duke d'Mayne: others willed him not to take heede to her deceitefull words, and to expect the same courtesies which he had receaued heretofore at their hands. It is saide before, how that among those fiue armies which were prepa∣ted in Aprill and May, the commaunder Chastre was appoynted to furnish a Nauie in Britain, well prouided. And in August, as they were taking  order for the place and manner of the interuiew, this Nauy on a suddaine came before Rochel, which thing was the cause, that all was on the point to bee broken. The King of Nauarre complained to the King by the Lorde Riaulx, beseeching his Maiestie to call back that armie, shewing that hee could not leaue a towne of such importance as that was, in that state, with∣out seeking for the quietnes and safety thereof. The armie notwithstanding remoued not thence, as long as they had any prouision of victuals, whatso∣euer meanes the King of Nauarre made for it: but at length in the moneth of Nouember, the famine made them hoyse vp sailes, and not the Kinges commaundement. The selfe same day that the Nauie tooke vp ancker, Captaine Arman was taken with letters of the Queene, to the commaunder Chastre, by the  which hee was commaunded not to depart, or else not to goe farre from Rochel: these letters fell into the hands of the King of Nauarre. Hee not∣withstanding ouercomming with patience all these occasions, which hee might take to refuse the parely, he offered to see the Queene, vpon the con∣ditions aboue said, requiring that in the meane time, there should no act of hostilitie be done of either sides. The Queene required a truce to be taken, and published. The King of Nauarre answered, that he could not consent thereunto, for as much as hee had promised to his partakers, to enter into no agreement of peace, without their aduise and consent: shee found (to her thinking) that answer very strange. Thus like the Carthagenians, who wept when they should pay
tribute to the Romans, but were not moued at all, when they yéelded them∣selues tributaries to them. For when the King of Nauarre, answered to the Kings messengers, that he would stay yet sixe moneths for the Kings succour, afore hee would employ his friends, and that he would first be demaunded of peace, before he would resolue himselfe to warre. Now, when shee findes that hee hath giuen his word▪ she weepeth: it had been better to haue wept when the e∣dicts were broken, the innocent iudged guiltie, the obedient rebels, and the iust malefactors. After much a doo, the Q. Mother graunted certaine pasports, which the King of Nauarre demanded for to aduertise his friends what he was in hand to doo. At the selfe same time, shee caused the truce to be proclaymed, which almost mard all, for the King of Nauarre suspec∣ted, that vnder colour of that truce, shee would stay the leauie of the Ger∣manes. Thereupon the King of Nauarre shewed vnto her, that this truce had a  respect vnto a common securitie, and that it should haue been done by the common aduise, so he caused the publishing to be called in, yet was it secret∣ly printed, and sent into Germanie. As they were about to conclude the saide truce, certaine of the compa∣nies of the Lord Neufuy were charged, which did greatly offend the King of Nauarre. Thus this negotiation of peace going forward by messen∣gers to and fro, the Duke d'Mayne in the meane while (supposing that the Q. Mothers absence from the Court, might bee a good helpe to doo some good exploit) hasted his iourney from Puynormand, where his army partly weary and ashamed to obey such a cowardly Captaine, partly for want of money was scattered, euery man repairing where hee thought to speede best: the Duke de Mayne (I say) came to Paris, where hee and the rest of that house began to make new broyles. But to returne to the matter, at length after many voyages to and fro, la Roche brought an order, both for the place and manner of the interuiew, and also of the truce graunted of both parts. For the accomplishment thereof, therefore the King of Nauarre came to larnak, a towne situated vpon the riuer Charante betweene Coignak and Engolesme the 11. of De∣cember, so the 13. day he want to Saint Brice with a good companie. At the first meeting there were many complaintes of both sides: the Queene reproached him of his disobedience, & passing ouer the former acti∣ons, she stayed vpon the present calamities which doo afflict Fraunce; she let∣teth him vnderstand, that the King was enforced to make peace with the League to saue his estate, and that without that remedie, all was lost. Secondly, that the pretence of religion ought to be taken away, to take away the warre out of the realme.
The King of Nauarre on the other side answered to the first complai∣ning, that he had none other way been damnicted or endaungered, but by  obaying the King: for the League was waxed strong, because he remained so long feeble, and that hee had hazarded his life to keepe his faith. Furthermore, reducing all the present calamities to the head spring, hee imputed all the miseries, wherewith the realme is afflicted, to the peace made by the League: hee shewed also that the King was rather deceaued with ill counsell, then forced to doo that which he did. Thirdly, he shewed that the preseruation of the Kings estate, depended of the intertaining of his edicts, and that they were his edicts in deede, which he had voluntarily sworne. Also, that they were edicts of peace, which chased away warre, and not they which (for to satisfy certaine seditious persons raised in some prouince) replenished the realme with sedition. Madam (said he) you cannot accuse me, but of too much fidelitie: I doo not complaine of your faith, but of your age, which dooing wrong to your memorie, hath made you to forget what you had promised me: This was the end of the first interuiew. The summe of the principall articles of this truce, was, that it shoulde indure vnto the sixt of Ianuarie, that shee might aduertise the King what was done, and that the saide truce, if the King dooth not agree to it, shall be prolonged fifteene dayes, for euerie one to retire, or else to take further aduise. Secondly, to auoyde the disorders, the impostes, subtilties, and other payments, shall not be gathered by neither side, and that within the first of Ianuarie next comming, fifteene thousand crownes shall bee deliuered or leauied vpon the places, which they of the religion holde for the maintai∣ning of the Garisons of the reformed religion. Thirdly, that the Protestants shall cease to leauie the tenths, goods and rents of Priestes, where they haue heretofore leauied them: and as for the goods of the Catholicks, seazed on by them of the reformed religion, they shall not meddle neither of the one side, nor of the other. Fourthly, the men of warre of both sides, shall make no roades, oppres∣sions, nor any act of hostilitie, during the saide truce. Last of all, the Q. Mother shall graunt passeports to the King of Na∣uarre, his seruants, friends, alleyed and partakers through the realme, and out of the realme, to aduertise them of that which he is about, and also that he may send to the King, to let him knowe what endeuour the saide King of Nauarre hath vsed, to bring all things to a good peace. This was con∣cluded at Tours, the 19. of December: in this truce were comprehended Poytow, Xainctonge, Engomoys, Lodumoyes, Mirebaloys. The Vicount Turenne was sent to Coignak, a Towne vpon the riuer
Charante, betweene Xainctes and Iaruk, to agree vpon the particularities of the truce with the Q. Mother. There the Q. hauing agreed to these articles, & some other depending of these, gaue him to vnderstand, that for to haue peace the king of Na∣uarre must needes cause the exercise of the reformed religion to cease in the townes which he did hold: and gaue him a speciall charge to declare to the sayd King of Nauarre, that this was the kinges will. The King of Nauarre being in the way to come to see her, was met by the sayd Vicount, who declared vnto his Maiesty, what he was encharged by the Q. Mother to shew him. Whereupon the king was about to turne backe, but supposing tha shee had sayd so by the aduise of the Counsell, hee determined neuerthelesse to see her, and to satisfy his mind in answe∣ring her. When he had kissed her handes with a sad countenaunce, she asked him whether the Vicount Turenne had spoken with him, and assured him that it was the kinges resolution. The king of Nauarre answered, that hee mused much, that shee would take so great paynes to tll him that whereof his eares were already wea∣ry to heare, and that she being so wise went about to resolue a difficulty by the selfe same difficulty. Also that she proposed to him that thing which he could not, would not, nor ought to do. For first, if he should forget himselfe so much, as to goe about to do that which shee required of him, yet were hee not able to reduce all them of the religion, nor to cause them to leaue the exercise of the same. Secondly, he himselfe would not, for then should hee greatly hurt his conscience and honor: and for the one hee hath God onely for iudge. His honor he should greatly empayre, doing iniury to himselfe, when he should seeme to yeeld more to the armes of his enemies, then to the commaunde∣ment of his Lord and King. Thirdly, he answered that he ought so doe: for if he should seeme to al∣low of that which was proposed to him, he should seeme to allow the colour which the Leaguers haue pretended: in whose pretences doth consist the strength of their armes, and in the strength of their armes the decay and vndoing of the state. And although he knew well, that in so doing he should approach neere the fauors of ye king, yet should he geue thē opportunity to take from him both the right which to him appertayneth, and to bereaue the king of the faythfullest friend and seruant hee had. But they will not haue such men as I am aboue the king (sayd he) for thereby they should be miserable, he should be better serued, and all his subiects better gouerned. To this answere the Queene replyed nothing, but went about to make
himselfe feele the discommodities which hee suffered by meanes of that re∣ligion which hee professed. I beare them willingly (said hee) when you haue layed them vpon me (as it seemeth) to ease your selfe. Atlength she reproached him, that he did not in Rochel what he would. Yes Madam (said he) for I will nothing but what I should. The Duke of Neuers tooke the word, that he could not set an impost in Rochel. True (sayd he) for wee haue no Italians among vs. After these speaches shee opened vnto him agayne a generall truce for a yeare, on that condition, that there should bee no exercise of the reformed religion within the realme, and within that time the states should be called. He answered, that if they of yt religion should so lightly geue ouer their holdes, that the League would bee stronger, the king weaker, and the states more vnprofitable. Also, that it were impossible to cease the religion in France, except it were by a counsell duly assembled. So he taking his leaue of the Queene, she oftē tymes repeated the same speeches which she had with the Vicount Turenne, & willed him to let the nobility which folowed him vnderstand of it: which thing themorow after he did with great griefe, fearing to cause some alteration in theyr mindes. After that, hee sent two noble men of the mildest spirites in all his troupes, to wit, the Lords Mauguyon & Force, to witnes vnto her what sorrow euery one of them had conceaued, to see things reduced to such an extreame resolution: and also to knowe whether they had any other thing to hope of the power which the king had giuen her. The Queene seeing, that all was vpon the poynt to be broken, said, that shouee wld send the Lord Ramboullet to the king to know his last deter∣mination. She after told the Prince Monpensier, that all which she had sayd to the Vicount Turenne, was but by the way of discourse, dissembling to haue had such speeches in playne tearmes to the king of Nauarre, and willed the sayd Prince to let the king of Nauarre vnderstand, that shee had a great desire to see him agayne, and also prayed him to make meanes of some prorogation of truce, which thinge the sayd Prince shewed to the king of Nauarre when hee went to take his leaue from him. These double dealings of the Queene was diuersly spoken, for some thought (to content the League) she would not open the meanes topeace. Others thought, that her Counsell being Leaguers, fed her with new hope, grounded vpon the afflicted affayres of the religion, promising her at length to obtaine a peace to the kinges contentation: so they lead her clos∣ly to entertaine a warre profitable for the League.
The Lord Rambouillet returned from the court, brought the oth, which the king had sworne in the solemnities of the order of the holy ghost, neuer to consent to the exercise of the reformed religion: at whose returne the  Q. Mother was very important to haue a third parley with the king of Nauarre, geuing forth that the returne of the Lord Rambouillet should be agreeable to him: to the which thing hee was very vnwilling to condes∣cend, supposing the hope which he had conceaued of that interuiew would be if not lost, yet farre wide out of the way. They of his side discouraged him, fearing that he would not only conti∣nue the speaches which shee had vttered before, and also to reiterate often times the truce, hauing aduertizements that the truce was sent into Ger∣many and Suisserland. Others aduised him, that she held him in hand about a treatie of peace, in the meane time to prepare warre against him. That shee proposed him of  hard conditions, to induce him to breake off: and by that meane to make him hatefull to all France, as the onely hinderer of the peace thereof. Some others gaue him notice, that she solicited the next townes and ci∣ties to execute the kinges last edict: and that fayning to seeke the common benefit of the state, she did much hurt in particular to the state of Rochel. Vppon this earnest sute of the Q Mother, in Februarie the Leaguers tooke by force the Towne of Ʋouans, and fayre Montau, the which being places of no importance, caused men to suspect some treachery. The K. of Nauarre also thought that hee might not expect yt they would giue him any good thing, which tooke so great pains to take away so litle from him: notwithstanding the Queene did so presse him, that hee graunted the third interview, either to make the world know and see, that the fault was not in him if they did not obtayne peace: or else that he perswaded himselfe that the Queene would not take so much paines to bring him ill newes. Shee therefore tooke her iourney to Fontenay. The 20. of February the king of Nauarre came to Marans, accompa∣nied with many noble men and company of Rochelers about threehundred men, guyded by the Lord Gargoleau and other Captaynes, hauing the Colonels ensigne of Rochel: his comming thether was to parley with the Q. Mother, which was already at Fontenay. But for because the in∣teruiew was to be made first in the Ile Ellen, and after for her ease at the Fort Veluyre, the Lordes Biron and Sarisack, with many other came to the king of Nauarre to agree of the place. As the will to see one another did encrease; so the mistrust did growe in their counsels. For the Q. Mother (or rather some of hers) did feare to goe to the place where the Rochelers were stronger. And for as much as it was reported that the Ensigne Colonell was at the foord Ʋeluyre, they made as though they did feare to approach, considering also that the Ro∣chelers
had set vp strong Barriers for the safetie of the King of Nauarre. These things she pretended to bee the causes that she would not come the∣ther.  But in very deede she and hers sawe not there the commoditie how to execute that which they pretended to doo. The King of Nauarre did feare the entrances and turnings of these Marishes: for the naturall situation of that countrey is such, that a man may doo a feate without great ha∣zard. Whilest these going too and fro were betwéene them, the League tooke the alarum by these actions of the Q. but partly to let the peace which they did greatly feare, and partly (seeing some occasion) to execute their intended purpose, did conspire against the Kings person. The Q. Mother perceiuing that she could not execute that for which she was sent, (for no doubt she neuer entended to make any peace, but to com∣mit some treacherie vpon the King of Nauarre his person) and (by the iust iudgement of God) that which she had deuised against that vertuous and innocent Prince, she heard that it was practized vpon her sonne. She de∣parted from Fontenay to Nyort, intending thus to take her iourney to Pa∣ris, where she thought her presence to be needfull. But before her depar∣ting out of the countrey, she would faine to doo somewhat, least it should be sayd she had done nothing. Therefore she sent to the King of Nauarre, that he would send to her the Vicount Turenne; to whome she offered li∣bertie to talke withall. To the which thing he consented easily. The Q. shewed that she would treate with him, being informed of his prudence. The King of Nauarre consented to that thing, being sure of his fidelitie. All sorts of men déemed (that because he was knowne to loue the blessed state and quietnes of the Realme) he was indéede a fit instrument, if the counsell of the Q. would haue vsed him vnto that purpose. The Vicount Turenne for that purpose came to Fontenay, and hauing certified the Q. that he was there to receaue his commandements, she pro∣posed vnto him to make a generall truce, and that the affayres were such as there could be no talke of a peace as yet: for the which proposition hée answered. That the King of Nauarre would easily consent to that, and that hee would alwayes allow the name of truce, so that it would produce the e∣uents of a good peace. But that hitherto they had so stopped their cares to his requests, that he had beene enforced to imploy his friends to that ende hee might bee heard, and that hee coulde make neither peace, nor generall truce without their aduise and consent, for hee was elected protector of a part, forsaken by the King, which consisted of many particular persons who had beene particularly iniuryed, to whome no satisfaction could be made without hearing their complaintes: that if it please her to graunt the requisite pasportes, and a reasonable time to call
them together, that it should be done with all speed. And for to bring this thing to passe, he thought good to make a particlar truce for the Prouin∣ces of Poytow & Xainctonge for two moneths, during the which the King  of Nauarre might prouide and aduise vpon the means how to make the peace, for the treatie whereof, the deputies of the Prouinces might come together. The Queene thought that truce very ill, and commanded her counsell to shew the reasons. One of them answered, that it were prciudiciable to the King, for as much as during that time of truce, the King of Nauarre would haue meanes to bring the strangers into the Realme. Also that the Catholiks would become idle, and accustome themselues to rest: also that they of the league, would take that truce for a shadow of peace, of the which fearing the bodie, they would make a second insur∣rection. To those reasons the Vicount of Turenne answered, that the place of the entring of the straungers, had no correspondence with the high and low Poytow, and that the treatie of peace, did rather stay, than further the leauie of them. He answered also to the second reason, which hee said to be common to both parts, and that they of the reformed Religion would abuse rest sooner, than the Catholikes, because they were lesse vsed to it. As for the insurrection of the league, he would say nothing to it, be∣cause he knew not not what they might doo. But this hee knewe that the Duke of Guyze had but a small power: The Duke de Mayne had broken his armie, and that of small rubbell there was neuer great buildinges made. But for because he had spoken hitherto without charge, being come only to heare, the Queene thought good that hee should returne to the King of Nauarre, to bee particularly instructed of his pleasure. Comming then to the King of Nauarre, hee found him well assured of the leauie of Germaines, by a man which came the selfesame day. The same day the Vicount Turenne returned to the Queene speedily, & foūd her at Niort, determined to take her iourney to Paris: he was heard, and made an ample discourse of ye prosperous state of the K. of Nauarre. First, that he had sustayned the burthen of fiue armies, which haue ser∣ued for nothing els, but to shew that he was still in readines, for the try∣all of the forces of his enemies: contrarywise that they were deceaued both in forces and credit, & that they had reasons to the conspiracies and seditions of a towne not able to warre in the fielde. Also that they could hope for no more succor of the spantard, who was so occupyed to defend himselfe, that he could not doe so much as to dreame
to assault others: that if the King of Nauarre had lost some weake villa∣ges, he had fortified strong holdes. And whereas hee had beene hitherto  vpon the defensiue: now he hath power to make his enemies to take his part. That he hath a mightie armie of strangers, whom the necessitie of his affayres did neuer procure him to call to his succour. That hee neuer thought to imploy their seruice to make warre, but rather to make a good peace. Furthermore, that notwithstanding he hath receaued extreame iniu∣ries, yet it neuer came in his minde to vse that to bee reuenged of them, whome he knew to be seruants of this Crowne. The Lord of Neuers assured him whether the King of Nauarre had not bound himselfe to the preiudice of his crowne. The Vicount continuing his discourse, beseeched the Queene in most  humble wise, to beleeue that he was neither rash, nor a lyar, and that hee would say nothing but what he knew certainly to be true; and that if hee knew otherwise, he would neuer disguise the truth, but that he certainly knew that the King of Nauarre had done nothing with the strangers which be not for the good and quietnes of the state, and to restore to the King and his faithfull seruants their authoritie. And to that ende Madame (saide hee) that you may iudge of his in∣tent, he protesteth that whensoeuer your Maiesties pleasure is to vse his forces, he will euer turne his face that way, whither the commoditie of the Realme and your comandement shall call him. The King of Nauarre (said he) continuing his discourses, hath alwaies beleeued that the King hauing taken warre in hand being the weaker, will neuer be able to restore peace before he be stronger. And then shall he be stronger indeed, when the Princes of his blood shall haue his forces in hand, to restore the obedience which is due to him. This is the last remedie Madame (said he) which I could wish to bee otherwise. And I doo tell you this particularly as seruant to your Ma∣iestie, and not as a Hugonet, to whome (it may be) it were more sure to expect an armie, than a Negotiation, and a battell, than an edict. Be∣leeue not Madame, that damage of the State is sought by the friendes thereof; it is more profitable and honourable to consent voluntarily to a peace, and to choose by time with a good will the meanes thereof, then to take the same enforced by necessitie. The Queene said, that they should then stay the armie of strangers, and did much braule about the forme of pasportes. Then the Vicount replied, Madam, if yee bee so vnwilling to giue vs good wordes, we are not come to that passe to expect good effects, for the which we should stay the longer if we should stay for the meanes whereby, to enforce you thereunto. Madam, the time is no more that we will assure
our selues vpon a single promise, seeing that the edicts haue fayled vs. The Queene did so giue eare to these reasons, that shee seemed to haue her minde occupied more vpon the aduertisements which were giuen her  on euery side: for they set before her face the apparance of a great rebelli∣on, and the King was ill prouided of companie. The Duke d'Mayne was in Paris, practising against the Kings person: the Duke of Guize was about to put himselfe into Paris also. They made her see in their ad∣uertisements, the occasions which the heads of the League had to giue the last blow of dispaire, they did shew her that the hope which the Leaguers had of England was dead with the Quéene of Scottes, and that the deuotion of the Cleargy did coole as fast as the ambition of the League did heate. They shewed her how the sixe armies alreadie were spent and consumed without dooing any thing, that they of the reformed religion were growne strong, so that there was no more hope for them to build out of the ruines of them, whereby it appeared euidently in what daunger of them the King stoode. All these things being set before her eyes, made her to take her iourney in haste from Niort to Paris, fearing least these seditious persons, who had left nothing more to enterprise, would execute their mischieuous intents vpon the Kings person: therefore at the same time, the mistrust did greatly encrease at the Court, where there were diuers factions, for the King mistrusted the Leaguers, and the Leaguers the King, and among the Leaguers, one mistrusted another. Euery one going about, vnder the colour of defending the Romish religion, to lay downe the foundation of their greatnes by rebellion, murther, and particide: which sturring of rebel∣lion, caused also that this generall truce which was in hand was not brought to effect. It is saide before, that the 13. day of December 1586. the Q▪ Mother  required of the King of Nauarre, that a truce for a whole yeare might bee taken, which the King of Nauarre graunted, so that it might be by the con∣sent and aduice of his friends, seruants, and confederats, and such as had e∣lected him for their protector and defender, whome the King had forsaken by his edicts, ploclaiming warre against them, and also to certifie the Ger∣mans thereof, which were his friends and alyed: whereupon shee agreed to giue passeports, that with safety of the messengers, they might be aduer∣tised thereof. Vpon this promise of passeports the 29. of December, the King of Na∣uarre to omit nothing, which might shew the desire hee had to pacifie the miserable troubles of the realme: and for to dispose as well them of the re∣ligion, as his friends, confederates, and seruants, he sent forth notable gen∣tlemen into diuers countreyes, as well of the realme as out of the realme, with letters of credit, and ample memories to informe them of all that had passed in the interuiew betweene him and the Q. Mother, to that end that
nothing should be disguised and falsified to them, as it had chaunced often times in the former ciuil dissensions, by them who doo watch nothing more  then to disunite the heartes vnted to so good a worke, as is the quarrell de∣bated so many yeares against the Romish League, enemie to al quietnes: these were the contents of these letters of credit. The King of Nauarre sent to them, to whom he directed his letters, this Gentleman N. carrier of the said letters to visit them, and to let them vn∣derstand the state of the common affaires, and how all things had passed at the meeting of him and the Q. Mother: hee praieth them to beleeue the messenger, as well about the particularities of the meeting, as about all those things which he had to tell them from him: he praieth them also to be of good courage, and not to bee wearie, because of the good hope which hee hath of the blessed issue of so many labours: and for his part he will omit no point of his duetie, touching the preseruation of the common cause. As touching the memories, the write inclosed in the letters, contained the summe of them. The King of Nauarre protector of the reformed Churches in France, supposing that to bee the charge of his duety, after so many stormes passed, to visit and to confirme the remnant of the dissipation: hath sent this the Lord N. to represent vnto all them of the religion, in the Prouince N. what the estate of the common affaires is. And to this effect the saide Lord shal repaire to the Lords, Gentlemen, & other persons of meaner qualitie, who haue retired to their owne houses, or vnto other places of the said. Pro∣uince, for the rigour of the edicts (if it can be possible that he may find them) and shall certifie them, how that after so many lettes and delayes, which mistrust bringeth, hee hath seene the Q. Mother nigh Coignak: that hee hath entred into no treatie of peace, but onely hath hearkened vnto all that should be proposed to him, touching the attaining to the same, & that he hath promised to doo nothing therein, without the aduise of the Churches, kins∣men, friends, confederats and seruants. And that acknowledging the honor which the sayd Lady hath done to him, considering the labour which she had taken at that tyme of the yeare, and in that age that she is of (after many discourses which she hath made of her desire and inclination to peace) he hath consented to a truce of two mo∣neths in the prouinces of high and low Poytow, Laudonoys, Mirabaloys, Angomoys & Xainctonge, as well on this side of Charante as beyond, as al∣so in the towne and gouernement of Browage and Aluert, the countrey of Aunis, the town and gouernment of Rochel: in the meane tyme to send for the deputies, as well of the churches of France, as of the conederats out of the realme, for to intreat of the peace by theyr common aduise. But hauing sent the Lord Turenne with six men of honor with him to Coignak, for to agree vpon the conditions necessary for the entertaining
of the sayd truce. The sayd Q. mother (among other discourses) had de∣clared vnto him, that the king would suffer but one religion in the realme, to wit, his owne, which determination of the King she sad shee would  playnely shew least any man should bee deceaued therein, commaunding him to declare the same to the king of Nauarre & to his partakers. Which message the sayd Vicount reported vnto the king of Nauarre, as hee was vpon the way to goe to the place appointed for the second interuiew. The sayd Lady also had made him more particular declaration, and also com∣maunded him to make acquainted the other nobles and gentlemen which were with him, and to send her answere the morrow after. Which thing the said king of Nauarre shewing her to be impossible to graunt, after hauing supported for so many yeares the weight of armes, for the defence of the selfe same thing onely: and that if so it were indeede, that there was no neede to take so much payns as she did to loose it. She per∣sisted therein, notwithstanding, so that thereupon the sayd king of Na∣uarre tooke his leaue of her. And the selfe same day at night, the sayd king of Nauarre geuing no∣tice to the sayd Lordes which were there at Iarnak of the kinges determi∣nation: all answered with one mind and consent, that it was impossible the said determination to be obeied and performed. The morrow after by a common accord, they sent to her the Lords Montguyon and Force, to de∣sire her most humbly to declare again whether that was the last resolution of the king. For as much as they were all resolute, after hauing shed their bloud, and fought for so iust a quarrell to liue and die: yet for the defence of the same, and vpon that to finish the truce, which was to end six dayes after. Vpon that occasion shee sent the Lord Monpensier, and the Marshall Biron, to excuse her selfe, that shee had not spoken so rawly, and that her discourse about that matter was of aduise, and not of resolution: desiring that they would stay vntill the sixt day of Ianuarie next, whilest she sen∣deth the Lord Rambouillet to the king to knowe his answere: and expec∣ting the kinges answere, the truce hath béene continued according to the articles agreed vppon for that purpose. Since the K. of Nauarre returned from Rochel, whens he had likewise sent a gentleman to the king, to notifie vnto him what was passed in that interuiew, to the end that he might also know the dutie of the king of Na∣uarre therein. Which thing likewise he hath done to the churches, and to the chiefest who make profession of the religion, to let them vnderstand in what ma∣ner he hath proceeded, least the aduersaries should giue out thinges other∣wise then they are, as their manner is to doo, for to sow hatred and dissen∣tion among vs, to deuide vs by such crafty meanes.
The selfe same message hath the King of Nauarre sent to other prouin∣ces and Lords, strangers, our partakers, of whom wee do expect succour. Now therefore knowing the state of the affaires, the king of Nauarre prayeth them to giue him their aduise what is expedient to be done, great∣ly desiring in that which concerneth the honour of God, and the common quietnesse of his whole church, to proceed (as he hath done before) not in following his owne opinion, but by the common aduise and consent of all. He willeth them to know, that as partaker of the miseries, of the griefs, & vexations, which so many persons do suffer in their soules, bodies, & goods, being partaker of so many gronings and teares, of so many poore families scattered and depriued of their commodityes: he hath alwaies desired that for their deliuerance it might please God to giue vs a good peace. But perceauing the crafts and deceites of our aduersaries, and their hardnes of heart, hee hath bent himselfe to patience, finding all his paines and la∣bours whatsoeuer light and easie in the defence of so good and iust a cause: wherein hee hath felt in himselfe a wonderful great fauour and assistance of God, hauing seene that which he durst not haue thought on, and done that which he would neuer haue beleeued. Whereupon he exhorteth them that haue remained constant, expecting the goodwill and pleasure of God, to perseuer and hope shortly of a good issue. And them, which through feeblenes, or heauy burthen of euils, haue fallen to keepe their hartes to God, and that they will not suffer that fire of zeale, whereof they do feele yet the heat, to be cooled and quenched, hoping for their deliuerance, that by the meanes thereof, and the grace of God, they may reunite themselues, and ioine to that body where from they are gone. That they will assure themselues both the one and the other, that there shall neuer be peace before affaires be established as wel beyond as on this side of Loyre: and that the said king will prouide for necessarie safety in case of imminent danger for their safe retire, otherwise there should be no∣thing done. As the king of Nauarre beareth to them, and all that concerne them a singular loue and affection, that they would render vnto him the like: that Godblessing such a correspondance of good willes, we may all enioyne to his honor and glorie the fruit, which such vnity and concord would bring to the confusion of Gods enemies. Also other particularities necessarie to this Argument, the said gentle∣man N. shall shew vnto them of the Religion following what he hath seene and heard by the course of the affaires, being otherwise impossible to re∣duce them all in writing. And aboue all thinges hee shall assure them of the good firme, and con∣stant resolution of the said king of Nauarre, and of them who do assist him
to employ their liues and meanes for the glorie of God, and deliuerance of  his Church. At Rochel the 29. of December. Henry, & below, Berzeau. The end of the third Booke. THE FORVTH BOOKE. IT is sayd before, how the Duke of Guize in the apprehension, of a great fright, & in a great heate went both to complaine to the King, how all the heretickes of France had conspired to ioyne their forces together, to oppresse his brother the Duke de Mayne, almost destitute of defence: and also to giue him counsell how to let such a dangerous association of them, to wit, by diuerting their forces. And that could not be done, but by sending seuerall armies into seuerall Prouinces, where they of the religion were strong. It is also sayd, how vpon this aduise the King prouided sixe ar∣mies, whereof be sent one into Poytow, and another into Languedock, the third into Daulphine, the fourth into Auuergne, and the last was a Nauie conducted by the Commaunder la Chastre, and the sixt most daungerous was lead by his Mother agaynst the King of Nauarre, vnder the colour of parley of peace, hauing with her a legion of Italian wrenches and figges which did her no seruice. Whilest the King was left alone, and his forces scattered farre & wide from him, the Duke of Guize aduised himselfe of a dilemma, that either he might easily oppresse the King, or els at least might worke iollily the se∣duction of the people. Therfore he called his brother the Duke de Mayne, began to complayne greatly of the King, and to impute the ill successe of his brother in Guyenne to him, to wit, how his brother was forsaken, desti∣tute of men, money and munition. That this was the argument, that the Catholikes were betrayed, that the King was corrupted by counsell, and that he hated and despised them whom hee should loue and embrace: and that he had intelligences with the heretickes. And that if he would not dis∣henerite and degrade the King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, then there was no cause why the Catholikes should commit their liues to a dis∣sembling King, who had nothing in his tongue but warre, and in his hart
did seeke for peace with heretikes. And therefore they cryed out that the enemie was at hand, and stoode at the doore, and that omitting and leauing  all others, he onely was to be assaulted. This was the text whereupon the Friers, Priests and Iesuits made their chattering discourses in the pul∣pets. This was the lesson which his fauourers should repeate with great vehemencie, among men of all degrees, when they met in companie. By these false reports and trayterous slaunders, much hatred and mis∣liking of his gouernment was procured to the King. Yet considering that both he and his partakers were very néere daunger, the Q. Mother was sent out of Poytow, where she had béen parlying and brawling with the K. of Nauarre foure or fiue moneths, seeking occasion to make her Italian pipes play. She in great hast (fearing the breaking of good fellowship be∣twéene the King and the Duke of Guize) (for by such frayes she had kept her selfe alwayes in authoritie) commeth to the Court, and by the Lea∣guers who were about the Kings person, easily doo perswade him to holde with the Leaguers; and so once more the heads of the Leaguers do ob∣tayne securitie, and doo pause a while wayting for a better opportunitie. For as much as the voyage and practizes of the Q. Mother agaynst the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, in the parley and interuiew at Saint Brice, could not bring to passe the effects pretended, her returne to Paris, and the intelligences of the leauie of the Germanes, gaue matter vnto the King to enter into newe deliberations to defend the Leaguers. For without his counsell, power and countenance, they had béen reduced to that plunge, as they had neuer béen able to get out. With this newe yeare therefore 1587. we will begin this fourth booke,  which will shewe marueilous tempests and euents to haue béen brought foorth, to the small aduantage of Gods enemies, yet to the great furthe∣rance of that rebellion which hath ensued, wrought, and procured by the Leaguers. But first wee will speake and begin by the exployts of warre which had béen done, specially in Daulphine, and then wee will returne to pursuing of the great stirres and preparations of this yeare. It is said before, how the Duke Espernon appointed for Daulphine and Prouance, did there what hee could, and in displacing the Leaguers out of many townes and holdes, he did good seruie to the King, but seeing that warre in that countrey to be endlesse, committing the remnant of his forces to his brother the Lord Valete, & repayred to the King in Nouember 1586 after the siege of Sorges. After his departure out of Daulphine, the Lorde Diguieres recouered the towne of Sorges, and imployed three-moneths, to wit, Ianuarie, Februarie and March, in visiting the countrey, viewing of the places, fortifying the holdes, and repairing the ruines which the ar∣mies had made the yeare before, looking to haue a new armie vpon his back the spring folowing (which notwithstading came not to passe) by reason
that the King made all preparations which could bee possible against the Germanes, both in the heart of France, and on the way which they should come in, to receaue them with small courtesie. This thing caused, that the  Lord des Diguieres had apportunitie to doo great things this yeare 1587. in that Prouince, as foloweth. In the beginning of Aprill, the Lorde Di∣guieres tooke the Castel of Champer, two Leagues from Grenoble, at which time the Court of Parliament there opened a way to a truce, which not∣withstanding did not let the exploytes of war, for as much as in the meane time, the said Lord Diguieres brought three pieces of batterie to Nants, to batter Ʋenterol towne and Castell, but they surrendred themselues before they saw the cannon. The 7. of May, the companie of men of armes, of the Lorde Diguieres,  conducted by the Lorde Poligny his Lieutenaunt, and the companie of the Lord Rosse, a popish Gentleman, lead by himselfe, did drawe foorth to skir∣mish the Garison of Saults. There they killed sixe skore men, among whom there were twentie of commaundement, tooke sixe prisoners, and wel nigh had entred into the towne mingled with the enemies: all this was done with the losse of one man, onely of the religion. The 31. and last of May, the Castell of the Lord Menestrier, strong, and  situated vpon a rock, builded againe at the charges of the Countrey, to keepe them of the religion in bondage, was rendered by composition, and rased, after it had sustayned 14. dayes siege, by the Lord Diguieres, assisted by the Lords Brikmaut, Morges, and others. A little before that, the Pont of Coignet (surprised few dayes before by the Lorde Valete) was yeelded at the diseretion of the Lorde Diguieres. The towne of Quinsieur in Merindol was compassed about by the Lorde Gouernet, and a while after, the Lord Diguieres (assisted with the Lordes Poet, Blacons, Montbrune, Vacheres, Brikmaut the younger, and the troupes of the Prouince) there conducted three pieces of artilerie; at the a∣riuing and sight of the, the which towne was surrendred with their safetie, and the Castell at discretion. The 18. Beniuay was surrendered likewise. The 19. the townes of Pierrelongue and Esgalieres were taken. The 22. Ionquieres a towne belonging to the principalitie of Orange was compassed, and the same day taken, after it had sustained 25. voleys of Ordinance. Gygondas also was rendered at the newes of rendering of Ion∣quieres. The 23. Poet Laual was besieged, and after it had sustained one hun∣dred and fiftie shot of two field pieces, at length was surrendred the 29. of the same moneth, although that the breach was not sufficient, and that they who besieged, had set vp the ladders, and after tooke them vp with further assault.
The thirteenth day of Iuly, the Lorde Valete tooke Pierrelongue by composition, after sixe score shotte of pieces of battery. They who were  within the towne, came foorth with their armour, their stuffe and bag∣gage safe, their Ensigne open, the drumme playing, and their match fired. The eightenth day the Lord Diguieres went to Oste, a towne vnwal∣led, and bestowed the rest of the moneth in fortifiyng of that place, where∣in he imployed the Lord Vacheres, to make warre against the towne of Cerf, halfe a mile distant from that place. The Lord Chastilion hauing gathered certain forces in Languedock, to ioyne with the Suissers, who were comming into Daulphine, was ex∣pected  vpon the Rosne by all the forces of Daulphine from the 19. of Iuly. The Lord de Poet, gouernour of the towne of Montlimart, went foorth with a good parte of the forces there, to fauour his passage. The sayde Lord Chastilion and Diguieres passed ouer the Rosne the first day of Au∣gust, and soiourning long there, they gaue leasure to the Lord Valete to seaze vpon the banck of the riuer Lizere, and so letting their passage, had opportunitie to doe what hee did. Whilest the L. Chastilion soiourned in Daulphine, the said L. Valete practized a secret execution vpon the towne of Montlimart, & so began to drawe his forces thither ward: but the inhabitants mistrusting his ap∣proches, prepared themselues, which caused him to retyre back againe: yet he set such an order, that the Lord Balathye surprized the towne, but the Castel remayned still in the hands of them of the reformed Religion. The L. Valete did greatly feare, that the sayd towne would be surprized again by the Castell, and would haue prouided a greater power to put in for the keeping of the same: But the said Lord Balathye answered, that he was strong enough to defend the same towne. This was done the sixteenth of August. The seuenteenth day at 9 a clock in the morning, the Lord Chastilion and Diguieres vnderstoode of this exployt done, though they were more then twenty leagues off. The said Lord Diguieres dispatched speedely the Lords Poet, Blacons, Sales, and Sousbrochet, with their companies, they tooke also the Lord Vacheres, with some other companies. In the mean while, the gentlemē of Viuarts which doe lie right against it on the other side of the Rosne, vndestanding of this surprize, did send forces into the Castell by two Noblemen of the countrey, to wit, the Lords Mirebel and Allard. When the enemie had possessed the said towne of Montlimart three dayes, the Lord Poet with his companyes (being about three hundred men and fiftie horses) entred at night into the Castell, and proposing what was to be done, determined to set speedily on the towne, and the 19.
day about 7. a clock in the morning he assembled all his forces, which were about two hundred pikes, and one thousand Harquebusiers, issued out of  the Castell into the towne, with such fiercenes, that they forced their trenches and Barricadoes, and cut in pieces aboue two thousand men, and among others the countie of Suze, the Lords Ancone and Logieres, Teil the sonne, and Dupuy, Saint Martin, with many others, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Captaynes, and men of fame, remayned dead vpon the place. There were a great number wounded, among whom were Ancone and Saint Fereol. Many were taken prisoners among them, men of name which were these; the eldest sonne of the Countie Suze, the Baron Garde, Chemlak, gouernour of Viuarets, Straung, Teil the Father, Pracontat, the young Cossans, the young Vauterel, Balathye the Captaine of the enterprize vpon Montlimart, all Noble men. The Lord Ramfort had ariued in the towne but foure houres before, not willing to flie away shamefully, found the meanes to get into a tower of the towne, where hee defended himselfe three dayes: but at length seeing the peeces, yeelded himselfe to them of the reformed Religion: there died not many more than twenty, among whome was the Lord Tissieres: there was about sixe and twen∣ty hurte. This blow did greatly weaken the Papists in that Countrey, so that afterward they were more flexible vnto a reasonable peace, than they had beene before. This was the worke of God which vsed the valour, diligence, & good gouernement of these Noble men, but specially of the Lord Poet, chiefest gouernour of the said place. There excelled also the valiatnes of the Lord Blacons, Vacheres, Mirebel and Allart, Gentlemen of Ʋiuarets, the which being in so small number, to wit, about twelue hundred men, forced more than three thousand men of warre, furnished & lodged aduan∣tagiously within their Barricadoes, flanked and defended in front with three Cannons, to reuenge the cruelties which they had vsed, and to beat downe their pride The Lord Chastilion had procured certaine regiments of Suissers, to come out of the Lordships of Berne, to descend along the lake of Losanne, and to repaire into Daulphine, there to assist them of the Religion against the Lord Valete, and to bring that countrey, and the next prouinces a∣bout, out of the bondage of the Leaguers and Catholikes. The Lorde Chastilion came (as is saide before) into Daulphine the first day of Au∣gust, and went accompanyed with the Lordes Diguieres and Poet, to re∣ceiue them at the riuer Lizere. But the Lord Valete hauing left Balathye in Montlimart for the safe keeping thereof, went with speed ouer Lizere, to let the L. Chastilion with his cōpany, to passe ouer that riuer to ioyne
with the Swissers. The Swissers being two thousand Pikes, fiue hundred Corstets,  three hundred Harquebusiers, two hundred Musketers, and foure hun∣dred Frenchmen, gathered on the frontiers of Suisserland, being all in number three thousand and foure hundred men, drew neare to the riuer Lizere, to haue ioyned with the said Chastilion. But the Lord Valete ac∣companied with Alphonse Corse, hauing intelligences of their comming with fiue hundred Harquebusieres, and foure companies of horsemen, set vpon them, defeated them, and tooke eleuen Ensignes which hee sent to the King, and one Coronet of horsemen. This ouerthrowe was giuen the same day of the recouering of Montlimart, and in the sight of the Lords Chastilion and Diguieres, who were on the other side of the riuer, and by no meanes could passe ouer to rescue them. There were slayne about one thousand men, twelue hundred taken prisoners, and were sent to Ʋalence, to worke to the fortifications there: a greatnumber saued them selues in Daulphine. God maketh the number and armes preuaile as pleaseth him. They which were prisoners, were redeemed by exchaunge of them that were taken at Montlimart. Thus thinges passed on both sides, the Lord Chastilion at length ha∣uing intelligences of the Germans comming with his companies, tooke his iourney to meet them, whom he met in Basignye nigh Chaumōt the 22. of September next following, as shall be noted hereafter. The 31. of August, the eldest sonne of the County of Grignan, at the so∣licitation of the Lord Diguieres, tooke part with the king of Nauarre a∣gaynst the League, and seazed vppon the towne of Clausures and Monse∣gur, townes well situated in the County of Grignan, wherein the Lord Valete had put garrisons few dayes before. About the same tyme, the Lord Blacons tooke the town of Suze, which after it was ransacked, was geuen ouer because the castell could not bee taken. The first day of September, the Lord Diguieres accompanied with  the Lordes Gouernet, Brikmaut, and the yong Morges besieged Guyl∣hestre, and battered it with foure meane peeces, and two litle field péeces: so that after hauing sustayned two hundred shot, and the breach being rea∣sonable, the enemy forsooke the towne, and retyred into the castell: the which also after certayne volyes of canon shot, rendered themselues the 5. of September by composition; by the which it was agreed that the Gas∣coynes should depart and be sent away with a white staffe in their handes, and they of the countrey to remayne vpon discretion. The tenth of October the Castell of Quyras, besieged since the 25. of  September, was surrendred to the Lord Diguieres, assisted with ye Lord Brikmaut and Morges, where is a thing worthy of remembrance, that
the wayes being so high and difficult for the artillery to be caryed ouer the  mountaynes, contrary to the impossibility which wee thought to be, and the expectation of the Papistes, yet it passed ouer. They were sixe hundred Souldiers, & 15. hundred Pioniers, in drawing the same ouer the moun∣taynes but foure Leagues, in the space of 15. daies. At the same tyme the Lord Diguieres knowing that the enemy fortify∣ed a temple in the towne of Saynt Peter in the Marquisat of Saluces, sen∣deth thether ye Lord Brikmaut with his companies, who forced that place in the middle of the day the twelft of October, tooke the captaine prisoner, and cut to pieces the rest: this was the first exployt beyond the moun∣taynes. The eight of Nouember the Lords Ramefort, Espornakes, and Sig∣nak,  through intelligences which they had in Ionquieres, had seazed vpon al the towne, saue one tower onely: the newes were brought to Orange to the Lord Blacons, the which three howres after the taking thereof, appea∣red before the towne with 30. horses. This his sodaine and vnlooked for comming, did so terrify the footmen who were within the towne (calling to remembrance the entertaynment which they had at Montlimart) that they sorsooke the place, the captayne being not able to hold them, although they were in number foure hundred footmen, and sixe score horses, which were not yet entred into the towne, whom the Lord Blacons let goe with∣out any pursuing, content onely to enter into the towne for to chastize the traytors. In the moneth of Aprill, the States of the countrey, and Senate of Grenoble had some speeches of peace, as is aforesayd: but it was delayed Decemb. from tyme to tyme, the people being not willing to conclude any thing without the good will and aduise of the King of Nauarre, knowing him faythfull to the king, louer of the good, and prosperity of the realme, and that he desireth nothing more then the wealth and quietnes, as well of the State in generall, as of their prouince, as also to be a true Prince of the blood, a Prince true and faythfull in his word, hauing neuer altered his word in respect of any person, whose singular valiantnes, mildnes, and gentlenes (if there were no other thinges in him) might mooue the people to honor and acknowledge him, according to that degree which he hath in the realme of France. These were the causes which moued the States & people of Daulphine to conclude nothing without his direction. The Articles proposed in the prouinciall States of Daulphine were three. First, that protestation be made to the obedience due to the King, and to the issue male, which it shall please God to giue him. And that for lack of yssue the king of Nauarre be acknowledged as head of the Princes of the bloud, first successor of the crowne, and after him the
other Princes, according to ye primgeniture of their degree, with detesta∣on of the manifestes, and other such libels, whereby they of the League  haue gone about to alter this succession. Secondly, that the reformed religion be receaued throughout all the Prouince of Daulphine indifferently: and that they of the reformed religi∣on shall permit the Romish, and suffer the church men to enter and enioy their goods and liuinges: on both sides they do promise to acknowledge the court of Parliament of Grenoble, and to obay the Lord Maugyron: & that whatsoeuer alteration may happen to the State, the king of Na∣uarre shall imploy his authority present, and to come to the obseruation of the agreement, namely, in that which doth concerne the dignity of the court, of the Lieutenant, of the King, and of the church men. Thirdly, that in expecting a peace, in more ampie maner euery one shal keepe that which he holdeth, shortning notwithstanding the garrisons as much as shall be possible. This was concluded and agreed in the prouinciall States of Daul∣phine, with an agreement vppon their common defence about the 20. of December. Although the Lord Espernon be a most zealous and deuout Catholike, & that he did agaynst them of the reformed religion all that euer he could, yet with some moderatnes he had committed the gouernmēt of his charge to the Lord Valete his brother, which vsed the same valiantnes, with the like modesty: God did so blesse the good intents of these two noble Catho∣likes indeede, as issued out of an ancient and noble stocke, without any degenerating, that hauing well rid that Prouince of Daulphine of sediti∣ous and factions Leaguers, afterward the Catholikes and reformed haue fallen to a good and peaceable composition, by the which they haue enter∣tayned themselues in amity, and kept their countrey from ransacking, and subuersion. So wee see now these two great and large prouinces Languedock, and Daulphine, the one through ye sauage cruelty of Ioyeuse, the other through the faithfull seruice and modesty of the Lords Espernon and Valete, bre∣theren, to be set in good peaceable state. It is sayd how the king of Nauarre had certaine meetings and parleys with the Q. Mother, and how the last parly appoynted, was interrupted by the conspiracies of the Leaguers, seeking to lay the foundation of their greatnes, vnder colour of defending the Romish religion: after the which interruption, the King of Nauarre retyred into Rochel, where he continu∣ed vntill the end of Aprill. Now let vs lay downe what the sayd King of Nauarre did from this time, to wit, the latter end of Aprill vnto the end of December, and then we will take the course of those things which haue passed in other countreys,
and by the setting downe of other men. About the ende of Aprill, the King of Nauarre departing from Rochel  with certayne péeces of ordinance, tooke Chizay by composition, and Sassay by assault, where he commaunded certaine robbers of Niort, (who had ob∣stinatly resolued to withstand him) to be hanged. From thence he went to S. Mexent, which yéelded vpon composition after they had seene the Ca∣non. From thence (fayning to goe somewhere els) departed in the euen∣ing, and in the morning earely was before Fontenay, and on a sudden (with∣out great resisting) tooke the Suburbe called Loges, and at the same instant compassed the towne on euery side, least any succour should enter in. But seeing that he had neede of more ordinance than he had, speedily departed to Rochel to haue more; which thing the Rochellers did very willingly and speedily graunt: so that within lesse than fiue dayes he returned, and began to batter Fontenay with nine péeces. The Prince also brought cer∣taine peeces from S. Jhan d' Angely, so that Captaine Rossiere, who com∣maunded there ouer the Albaneses and inhabitants, were enforced to yéeld by composition, almost at the discredition of the said King of Nauarre, who vsed them very courteously, performing inuiolably whatsoeuer hee had promised them. From Fontenay the King of Nauarre sent the Prince of Conde to Man∣lion, a little towne, with three peeces of ordinance, which notwithstanding was taken with ladders before the ordinance had played. The morrowe after, the King of Nauarre arriued thether, who had retyred to Lusson, af∣ter the taking of Fontenay, fayning to retyre to Rochel. The King perceiuing that his▪ Mother could neither execute her secret practizes, nor bestowe her Italian figges vpon the King of Nauarre, nor the Prince of Conde, immediatly after her returne to the Court, to please the Leaguers, and to entertayne their fauour, for that he was so much be∣holding to them, immediatly he determined to send a mightie armie into Guyenne, against the King of Nauarre and of them of the religion. And supposing that the Marshall Byron had gone too slowly about his matters in the last armie, he was desirous to trie what another Captaine of a hot∣ter spirit could doo. And because the Duke Ioyeuse the Kings brother in lawe was somewhat famous, not for his valour, but for incredible & mon∣strous excesses of crueltie, which he had shewed the yeare before at Lodeue, Saint Ponce and Marueiolx, and other places in Languedock: for the true description whereof, newe trmes and words had néede to bee deuised. The King (I say) supposing him a fit iustrument to execute his choler vp∣pon them of the religion, which so valiantly had heretofore resisted the in∣iuries of the Leaguers, and despised their forces, for the great wrongs proffered to his Maiestie by the Leaguers, sent him with a mightie armie to passe ouer the riuer Loyre. The King of Nauarre and the Prince of
Conde were in the low Poytow with their companies very braue and lustie, though very small in comparison of the multitude of the enemies. And as some companies of the Duke Ioyeuse had passed Loyre, and aduaunced  themselues vpon the King of Nauarre his men, the said King of Nauarre wholly discomfited a band of the enemies: which thing being done, he cau∣sed his companies to retyre, some to Saint Mexent, others into Xaincton∣ge, to employ them as occasion might serue, to the ouerthrowing of that newe mightie armie. But not long after it happened (I knowe not by  whose fault committed) that two regiments, to wit, the regiment of Char∣boniere, and of Captaine Debory, were left within the towne of Mote Saint Eloy, nigh Saint Mexent, being not assured of the Castell, but on∣ly by the promise of them who did hold it. Which afterward, seeing the e∣nemie assault the said Charboniere and Debory, did not fauour them, but tooke part against them, and that more is, deliuered two pieces of ordi∣nance to the enemie, wherewith they brake the Barricadoes of our men: so they were discomfited by the Lord Ioyeuse, Debory was taken prisoner. Charboniere was then at S. Mexent, where hee did good seruice at the siege, which the enemy shortly after laied before the saide towne. Among other examples of barbarous and sauage crueltie in diuers places, by the said Ioyeuse executed, deserueth a speciall note of infamie, that the posteri∣tie may discerne men from monsters. The Souldiours of the said Char∣boniere and Debory, (to whome vpon his faith he had promised safety of life) yet contrarie vnto the same, hauing caused them to be stripped starke naked, and so they falling vpon their knees, crying vnto God for mercie, and vnto the enemie for compassion, without any pittie or feeling of humanitie, commaunded his Souldiours to trie their strength of their armes, and the sharpens of their swords vpon those naked bodies, destitute of all defence. After that he besieged Saint Mexent, which resisted the furie of his armie, and of all his ordinance for the space of 15. dayes, and about the 22. of Iune, the towne was surrendered by composition: which the King of Nauarre did greatly mislike, because that L. Iarriete being knowne and stayed at the gate, as he went forth among the rest was brought to the Lord Ioyeuse, which committed him to the hands of the Marshall, with com∣maundement to put him to a shamefull death. This learned and godly man had faithfully and vertuously executed the ministery in that towne, and there he confirmed the doctrine which he had preached, with a most constant and Christian death, which was vnhappie to them, who without a cause put him to the same. For they themselues who executed that vniust com∣maundement, would not dissemble to say (after they had heard the earnest confession of his faith and praiers which he made in the end of his life) that certainely God would reuenge the death of so good and godly a man, in
whome there was found no cause of such punishment, and in deede the Duke Ioyeuse and his armie did not suruiue him long. After the taking of Saint Mexent, the Lorde Ioyeuse came to Niort, with shew to sease vppon Marans, as well to cut the way into Poytow, to the King of Nauarre, as to shut him vp into Rochel, and by these meanes to besiege Fontenay with lesse danger, which as yet was but slenderly forti∣fied: also to sease vpon Talmound, hauing al the rest to his deuotion; which thing seemed to him easilie to performe. For although the King of Nauarre fayned that he would defend Maran against that armie, as he did the yeare before against the Marshall Byron, at the selfesame season, yet notwithstanding hee had not determined so to doo, as also it was a thing impossible to defend it, for the Marishes and dit∣ches and channels were so dried vp, and the earth so hardened, that the foot∣men could easilie goe thorough euery where: there was some more dis∣commoditie for horsemen, by reason of the steps, but yet it was accessible euery where. In the meane time, the King of Nauarre sent in the regiment of Cap∣taine Preau, with some other companies, who shewed great diligence in fortifying the holdes of Bastile, Brune, Poyneuf, and Clowsie: as for the Fort Brault, the King made it in forme of Sheeres on the side of the land, and had determined to defend that onely and the Castell. The others were only to holde the enemie in hand, and in the meane time that this resolution might be stayed, the heads hauing commaundement to retire into the towne, and not harden themselues obstinately in the defence of the said Fortes. After that the Castell was furnished with necessaries, Captaine Preau should re∣tyre to Fontenay, the Lord Iarry with a number of Souldiours should re∣tyre into the Castell, when he should be enforced to forsake the towne, and there to abide the force of the enemie for eyght dayes: which thing he could doo well enough. In the which space, the King of Nauarre and the Prince hauing assembled their forces, woulde haue giuen so many crosses to the Duke Ioyeuse, that perhappes he should not haue needed to take the paine to goe to dye at Coutras: notwithstanding, for these considerations or other, the Duke Ioyeuse set not on Marans, but at the request of the Lord Saint Luke and others, going out of Niort through the countrey of Aunix, and the towne Sorgeres, went to batter Tonnay Charante, which he tooke by com∣position: and there vnderstanding that the companie of the Lorde Puelles was at Croixchapeau, halfe the way betweene Tonney Charante and Ro∣chel, he went with the choyse of his armie, to set vpon them at the breaking of the day. This companie commaunded by some officer (for the Lord Puelles was then at Rochel) did most couragiously defend themselues: but the place was such, as the enemie had meanes to enclose them on euery side, and to get
to the top of the houses through the back side, and to driue them out by set∣ting the houses on fire: great part of them was slaine in the fight; other yel∣ded  themselues vpon promise of the safetie of their liues; other hid them∣selues in the caues. They were almost all killed against the faith giuen to them, with like sauagenes, and barbarous crueltie, as the Souldiours of Debory and Charboniere were at the Mote Saint Eloy. This done, the Lord Ioyeuse returned to Tonney Charante (vnderstan∣ding that the King of Nauarre was gone out of Rochel to set vpon him) and thence to Niort. At the same time, they which were at Marans did looke to be set on, but he vnderstanding that some companies of the Prince  had taken Tonney Charante, vpon the Garison which hee had left there, in hast returned thether with his Ordinance, tooke it againe, being kept only by a sergiant of a band, who with 15. Souldiours onely, had obstinatly vn∣dertaken the defence thereof. In the selfe same place he was aduertised of the euill watch, and of the small company which was at the Abbey of Maillezay, a very strong place, thether he went with speede, and the Lorde Malicorne gouernour of Poy∣tow with him, he compassed it so, that it was not possible to put in new for∣ces, so that the fourth day after it was surrendered by composition. After the taking of Maillezay, it was thought that the Duke Ioyeuse would set on Marans, but hee durst not, fearing the King of Nauarre and the Prince, who were in the field seeking occasion. Some dayes after Ioyesue made a shew to set vpon Talmound, but the Lord Saint Stephen hauing seazed vpon it first, caused him to haue no great affection thereto. So as his armie decayed dayly, being infected with the Pestilence: the King of Nauarres on the other side waxed strong. The Lord Ioyeuse hauing stayed in Poytow somewhat lesser then three moneths, about the 15. day of August he rode in poste to Paris to the Duke of Guize, as well to informe him of his noble actes, and what Kingdomes hee had conquered in winning few villages in Poytow, as to minister texts vnto the Fryers and Iesuits to preach vpon vnto the sottish people of Pa∣ris: to wit, the notable slaughters which hee had committed vpon the here∣ticks in Poytow, he was receaued with exceeding ioye of the Parisions, he left his companies with the Lorde Lauerdine, who conducted them after him all by ease. But the King of Nauarre who slept not, went forth out of Rochel vpon the newes of the retiring of the saide Ioyeuse, with a marueilous celeritie, and passing through Marans with some horsemen, pursued the remnant of that armie so liuely, (and that with few men) that he discomfited three companies of men of warre, conducted by the Marquis Renel, tooke their Ensignes, and many of them, with a great number of Gentlemen. This being done, he pursued after Lauerdine, which conducted the foot∣men
with two culuerines, but with the fauour of passages ouer the riuers, saued himself in the Haye in Tourenne, where the king of Nauarre besieged  him: but hauing neither Ordinance nor footemen, forsooke him and went to Monsoreau vpon the riuer of Loyre in Tourenne, where he made a Fort vpon the riuer, and there he staied 15. daies to expect the companies which were brought to him out of France, by the County Soissons. Whilest these thinges were passing thus in Poytow, the king about the 23. of Iune vnderstood that the army of Germans, both great and strong was in readines to take their iourney into France: whereupon the King determined to prepare not onely to defend himselfe, but also to inuade the enemie. Therefore he sendeth his commissioners into all Prouinces, to assemble all his Nobilitie, with all their forces, and them to deuide into three seuerall armies, wherof the rendes vous of the one vnder the conduct of the Duke of Guyze, comprehending the Nobilitie and others who were knowen notorious leaguers, was giuen the 20. of Iuly in the towne of Chaumont in Bassignye. The second armie vnder the conduct of the K. himselfe, was of the Nobilitie, in the which hee had most trust, out of Pi∣cardy, France, Normandie, Britayne, and other Prouinces betweene Seyne and Loyre. The rendes vous was appoynted at Saint Florentine in Bour∣gony, between the cities of Troyes and Auxer, the first day of August. The third vnder the conduct of the L. Ioyeuse, was of the Nobilitie of ye coū∣tries beyond Loyre, and the rendes vous was assigned at Gien. The Duke of Guize with his armie of conspirators and Leaguers should stop the passage to the Germanes, vpon the borders of Lorreyne, & specially should hinder them frō taking their way through Champaigne, on the north side of the riuer of Seyne. The King of Nauarre about the beginning of Iune, vnderstanding that his armie of Germanes was in readines to departe out of Germanie to come to his succour, sent Ambassadonrs to the King, humbly to in∣treate him to take some pitie of his kingdome and poore subiects, both to shew him some wayes of peace, and also because that heretofore the saide King had acknowledged the heads of the League to be his enemies, and to haue raysed all these vprores, not so much against the house of Bourbon, as against his owne person: he requested the King to vse his, and the Germane forces against the common enemie of the Realme. But the King hauing many disloyall seruants, both about his person and in his counsell, who were greatly addicted to the league, they disloyally betray∣ed him, making him beleeue that if he should accept the King of Nauarre his offers, and so change his mind, it were the nearest way to rayse an v∣niuersal rebelliou of all his subiects against him, and that this Ambassage of the King of Nauarre did proceed, not from loue and duetie, but frō feare and dread▪ who saw his manifest ouerthrowe at hand, by these three great and mightie armies which he was setting in a readines. The Duke of
Guyze with his conspirators, aduertized by his special friends (which hee had alwayes about the Kings person, & who were priuie to al his secrets)  of this Ambassage and proffers made by the King of Nauarre, was not a little amazed, fearing that the King now was better aduised, hauing a fit opportunity to reuenge himselfe vpon the pride, arrogancie, & iniuries proffred him by them, considering that they were not able to withstand so great a power, and that they might be vndone ere euer they should per∣ceaue it, vseth two shifts to auoide the tempest hee sawe comming: First writeth a letter full of flattering prayers, protestations, and feare: for he with an humble stile, endeuoureth to make the king beleeue that he had been gentle and tractable, neuer refusing the means of a good peace. Thē he prayeth the King to thinke no hurt in that which they had done, as not proceeding from any malice, but rather frō zeale of the Catholike Religi∣on, and inflaming him to oppose himselfe and all his forces against the Germanes, the auncient enemies of the Realme, promiseth him for that purpose, a strong ayde and succour against them. Last of all, hee fayned himselfe, his partakers, and all the Catholikes, to stand in great feare of a successour vnknowen, and like to be much inferiour vnto him, and an e∣nemie of the Catholike Religion, and that if hee would resolue his sub∣iects in that matter, doo assure him that all things would prosper and succeede after his owne wishing. The King with his armie of Catholikes should stay for them in Berry, and keepe their passages ouer the Loyre, but should suffer them to goe for∣ward betweene the riuers of Sene & Loyre, that at length when they had gone forward in that sliue betweene the said two riuers, the Catholikes on the one side, and the Leaguers on the other side, following after them, either should enforce them through difficulties to retyre homeward, the selfe same way that they came, or else by some occasion or surprize should oppresse them. The Duke Ioyeuse with his armie should goe to get the aduantage betweene the K. of Nauarre and the Germanes. Upon this occasion the Duke Ioyeuse (as is sayd) repayred to Paris, there to haue his instructions, & to receaue the Kings commandements. According to this orer the Duke Mercure, (almost then king of Bri∣taine) taked out of Britaine as many Leaguers as he could, and being sent vnto the Duke of Guyze vnder the conduct of the Lord Hautboys, they miscaried by the way: for about the beginning of September they were met and slayne by the King of Nauarre, being then at Monsorean. During which time of the soiourning of the King of Nauarre at Mō∣soreau, the Duke Mercure tooke his iourney out of Britaine to ioyne with the armie of the Duke Ioyeuse his brother in law, who hauing encrea∣sed his armie with a new supplie of men of armes, artillery and inunicion, stayed at Tours, to march against the King of Nauarre. The Vicount Turenne hauing intelligence thereof, set vpon him and tooke his rich car∣riage
nigh Saumur: and shortly after the sayd King of Nauarre hauing receaued the County of Soyssons with his French companies, returned to Xainctonge, and so went to Rochel, where after he had remayned some  dayes, at length he departed thence the tenth of October: there he tooke some peeces of artillery, and going through Taillebourg, repayred to Pons, where hauing assembled and mustered all his forces, determined to passe into Gascoyne, partly to gather more forces in going, partly to ioyne with his army of Germans (which were already farre entred into Bourgundy) passing through the Prouinces, which were fauourable to him. For to execute this determination, it was needfull for him to passe the riuers Droune and Lisle, which were the nearest, with resolution to fight with Ioyeuse if neede were. The Duke Ioyeuse, had aduaunced already to Saint Mexent, when the king of Nauarre departed out of Rochel, and knowing the intent of the said King of Nauarre, thought to cut his way: and with great iourneys passing through Poytow & Engomoys, came to Barbesieulx, & so to Roche∣chalays in Perigord, with commaundement (as he sayd) not to spare the ex∣tremity of the battayle, if other meanes would not serue: concluding, that by the ouerthrow of the king of Nauarre (which hee made sure in his con∣ceit) the army of the Germans would not bee able to continue. The chiefest aduantage in this exployt, was to passe ouer the sayd ri∣uers, for it seemed that hee who first might goe ouer these two Riuers, would haue great aduantage vpon the other; for the which cause the king of Nauarre vsing that prouidence and accustomed diligence, which doth render him admirable, accompanied with the Princes of Conde and Soys∣sons, the Lords Trimouille and Turenne, and others, taketh his way to passe the riuer Droune, and lodged at Archiak and Montlieu, and other places thereabout. The Marshall Matygnon had geuen counsell to the sayd Ioyeuse, to seaze vpon Coutras, a towne and castell situated somewhat aboue the mee∣ting of the sayd riuers Lisle, and Droune, a place of importance. Both the King of Nauarre and Ioyeuse did striue to get that towne, the one did striue to passe ouer the riuer Droune, the other to stop the passage thereof. The Lord Ioyeuse caused his light horses to aduaunce to the place, who arryued there one hower sooner then he could haue done himselfe. But as they were taking theyr lodginges, there they found the companyes of the king of Nauarre, which came thither also, to whom the enemy gaue place quickly, as beyng the weaker. The king of Nauarre therfore passed his forces ouer the foord of Droune, but the Duke Ioyeuse hauing great desire to do some great exployt: and considering that the king of Nauarre was inclosed betweene two great
riuers, he promised himselfe an assured victory of him, as not able to auoyd any way. Therefore he giueth the rendes vous the morrow morning after beyng the 20. of October, to a certayne place betweene Rochechalays, and  Coutras. The day being come, he tooke his place for the battayle, with as much aduantage as he could choose within halfe a league of Coutras. Here is the place, the persons, the causes, and euentes to be consideres. The place is in the very edge of Xainctonge, where he had committed hor∣rible and sauage cruelties, and other excesses against them of the reformed religion, which haue no names in any language. The persons were Lea∣guers for the most, Atheistes walking among them, vnder colour of zeale of popish religion, men besides polluted for the most part with the bloud of the Saynts which they had spilled like water vpon the earth, and other abominations which follow treasons, Idolatry, & Atheisme: they were more in number without comparison better armed and furnished with all necessaryes. The causes were, that after they had for these foure yeares refused all reasonable offers of the king of Nauarre, they hated him without a cause, they did draw theyr tongues and swords agaynst the God of heauen, and his Gospell with a Ciclopicall rage. Therefore Adrasta did stay them in that place, swolen with pride, arrogancie, contumelie, vaine hope and con∣fidence in the arme of flesh, which could not deliuer them. There they do prooue the force of the God of Battels, and drinke a harty draught, or ra∣ther a carowse of the Dregges of Gods wrath and iustice, least that theyr abominable crueltyes should be knowen further. And also, that the saincts, as it were out of the middest of those prouinces, which do embrace the Gos∣pel, might see that the Lord is the iust reuenger of such abominations, and defender of the iust cause. And that they may learne to feare him, and in him onely to trust and repose themselues. Here therefore Adrastia doth stay them to answere vnto Gods iudgement. Now let vs come to the euents. The King of Nauarre early in the morning being first aduertyzed of this preparation, was not mooued at it; no more was hee vpon the second warning. But at the third tyme he she∣wed no lesser desire to fight, then the enemy to whom twise before he had proffered the occasions. He taketh horse, rydeth forth out of Coutras to méet ye enemy, commaun∣deth the Lord Clermont master of his Ordinaunce, in all hast to passe o∣uer the canon (for he could not do it the day before:) he putteth his army in battayle array, placeth his artillery in the forefront so commodiously, that all peeces did seruice without harming any man of his owne, & great∣ly did endomage the enemy. At length hauing encouraged his souldiers to the battayle (whom he found full of desire and readines) caused prayers
to be made from company to company. About 9. a clocke in the morning the artillery began to play on both  sides: the ordinance of the king of Nauarre was so commodiously placed, that it did wonderfully annoy the men of Armes, which the Lord Ioyeuse had at his right hand, and the regimentes which did flanke those men of armes. Many being beaten downe with it, some of the heads tooke re∣solution rather to goe to the charge, then to die so miserably without any fight. The Harquebuziers in like maner began to ioyne, and there was no man on both sides who shewed not to haue a great desire to do well. The Ordinance of Ioyeuse did let flye certayne shot towards the com∣pany of the Prince of Conde, but without any effect, saue a horse whereon a page did ride, which was slayne. The cause of this small effect, was a litle rising of the ground, which did let the free aspect and ayming of the Ordinance, so that many shot did light vpon the ground. About nine a clocke the light horsemen of the Lord Ioyeuse, to the num∣ber of foure hundred horses, conducted by the Lord Lauerdine, and captain Mercure, set on the horsemen of the king of Nauarre: but after some fight, began to wauer and to make roome. The rest of the horsemen of the king of Nauarre consisted of 4. Squa∣drons, distant the one from the other in this wise. The Squadrons of the King of Nauarre, and of the Prince of Conde were distant about a hundred and fifty paces. The Squadron of the Prince of Soissons, at the left hand of the king of Nauarre about three score paces. The Squadron of yt Vicount Turenne, distant so much from the Prince of Conde at his right hand. The Lord Lauerdine charged the Vicount Turenne, but without any endomaging of him. These three squadrons (where stoode the Princes of the blood standing fast) did behold all this fight, vntill the Lord Ioyeuse followed with his mayne force of horsemen; and hauing both on the right hand and the left two great hedges of horsemen, aduanced to giue the generall onset. Then these three Princes marching euery one at the forefront of his squadron close, first went a soft pace, then began to gallop, last, the watch word being giuen with a loosed bridle, set on so liuely (euery one seuerally by himself according to his course) vpon that multitude, that incontinently the companies were mingled, and came to handiblowes. The speares which were in great number in the armie of Ioyeuse, did but small seruice, for they ioyned néerer. It is a wonderfull thing, that in a moment such a furious troupe as was that of the Lord Ioyeuse, armed & furnished to the aduantage, flanked both on the right hand and the left with two great battaillions of footmen,
was ouerthrowne and vanquished, by a troupe which had neither in num∣ber, nor in furniture, nor in armes, nor in situation of the battell any ad∣uantage at all. God (who gouerneth all things, and holdeth in his hands  the balance of victories and ouerthrowes) made then courage to preuayle against multitude; the iust cause, against iniurie; and the lawfull defence, against bragging, and the great preparation of warre. And as the men of armes were quickly ouerthrowne, trodden vnder foote, and put to flight; so in as little space were the footmen discomfited, being set on by the regiment of the King of Nauarre, where commaunded as Masters of the Campe, Castelnaw, Parabiere, Salignake, and others. And at the left hand of the King of Nauarre, Charboniere, Preau, Orges, and others, who all euery man right forward (following the occasion of the victorie) cut in péeces all that made any resistance, and put to flight the rest which were on the side of copses at the right hand, as on the side of the ri∣uer Droune at the left hand. And as a little before nine a clocke these two armies came to hands, the quarrell was so soone decided, that at ten a clock there was found not one onely man of the enemies which stood to his de∣fence, nor that was in sight, but such as were laied dead vpon the ground, or taken prisoners, or in flight. The place where the battell was fought, remayned so couered with men of armes, horses and armours, but special∣ly of Launces matted so thicke that they stopt the way. There remayned the Lord Ioyeuse, and also his brother, with a great number and notablest Lords. The King of Nauarre, the Princes of Conde and Soissons, with the rest of the armie pursued the victorie. There were taken many notable Gentle∣men, and among others the Lord Belegarde gouernour of Xainctonge, the Lords S. Luke, and Montigny of Berry, who commaunded ouer a compa∣nie of horsemen: hee was noted in ioyning of the battell to haue pearced further then any of the companie; for hee entered euen to the side of the gardes of the King of Nauarre, which were at his right hand, and there by them beaten downe was taken by some of the sayd gardes. God gaue this notable victorie to the King of Nauarre, and in that ior∣ney did shine the valour wherewith hee hath indued him in all the speciall graces which may decke a noble and vertuous Prince, and great Captain, not onely for the counsell, resolution, diligence, and wise gouernment, but also in the execution of armes. For doing the office of a Captaine & Soul∣dier, he pressed so farre as to take the enemie by the coller. The Prince of Conde also shewed himselfe valiant; for he had his horse slaine vnder him; the Prince of Soissons also tooke prisoners with his owne hand. The horse of the Vicount Turenne was also slaine. God made these Princes strong in this dayes worke, according to the order of their prehe∣minence, by them to doo the execution which pleased him: so that euery
one in his owne person did some honorable exployt in this victorie. This victorie was the more honorable vnto the sayd King of Nauarre, that it was not bloudie to him. For so great number being slaine on the side of the  enemies, he lost a very small number of either horsemen or footmen of his own. And among that small number, there was not found one of marke or commandement. On the other side, all the chiefest were slaine, wounded or taken, except Lauerdine, who saued himselfe with much a doo. Captayne Mercure while they were in battaile, ran to Contras to seaze vpon the king of Nauarre his baggage, supposing that the Duke Ioyeuse had gotten the victorie. But when he heard the crye of victorie for the King of Na∣uarre, he went out in hast, and following the bancke of the riuer Droune to∣ward Rochechalays, saued himselfe by flight and shame. The victorie was pursued three houres and more, in the which pursuing were slaine and taken a great number: the ordinance was carried away, and the baggage lost. After the returne from pursuing of the enemie, thankes were giuen to GOD vpon the place of the battell, the wounded were taken vp, the dead buried, the campe of the enemie burned vp. But that which filled the measure of the King of Nauarre his vertue and honour, was, that hee shewed himselfe no lesse courteous and gentle toward the prisoners and wounded, than hee had shewed himselfe valiant in the fight. Let them who haue tried him by experience, giue the testimo∣ny thereof, who also haue acknowledged by effect, ye good affection which he beareth to good French men, discerning by a wise prudence all good men, from the conspiring and traiterous Leaguers, enemies of the state. He commaunded the wounded to be diligently dressed and attended: he sent a∣way almost all the prisoners without any raunsome: he gratified many of the chiefest, & to some he rendered their Ensignes, namely, vnto the Lord Montigny. If he could haue guided the lot of armes in the battell, many were left there vpon the place to whom he would haue willingly forgiuen. For there was seene in him in this prosperous successe not one token of in∣solencie or passion, which is commonly the mother of crueltie. Here foloweth the names of the most notable men, who dyed in this bat∣tell. The Lord Ioyeuse general of the ar∣my, and Saint Suuer his brother. Bressay. Roussay. County of Suze. County Ganelo. County Aubjyou. Fumel. Neufuy in Perigord the elder. Rochefort. Gurat. Saint Fort. Vaulx, Lieutenant of Bellegard. The Ensigne bearer of the Lorde Montigny. Tierceline, master of the Campe. Chesner. Valade.
Baculard. Champel the younger. Pluuiault. Brangerie. Al these were lords, hauing charg in  ye army, wt many other men of Mark. These folowing were taken prisoners and wounded. Bellegard taken, wounded, and after∣ward dyed. Saint Luke. The Marquis of Prennes. County Monsoreau. Sansak. Cipiere. Saultray. Montigny. Villecomblin. Chasteaurenauld. Maumont. Parriere. Chasteauuieulx. Chastelou. Auuerdiere. All these were men of commaunde∣ment. Beside these were a number of Gentlemen, Captaines, and other men of name, part of them slaine, part taken. The body of Ioyeuse was embau∣med and brought to Paris. God in that day and place, rained from Heauen his fearefull iudgements, and made them of France, who loue the bloud of ciuill warres, to knowe, that in the end the losse is common, and that such pestilence destroyeth the authors thereof. The King being at Gien vpon Loyre, aboue Orleans, with his armie, to withstand the Germans at the passage of Loyre, receaued newes, that the two armies had met, and it was first reported, that it was but a little skir∣mish, where the King of Nauarre was put to the worst. But the trueth could not be hidden long, for at length it was knowne to all men, that the King of Nauarre had obtayned the notablest victory, which was yet in all the ciuill warres of France, for the defence of the religion, with an irrecu∣perable losse of them, who would haue it rooted out. The Court kept a great mourning thereof, which qualified well the great ioy that they had for the ouerthrow of the Germanes, which they had promised to thēselues. After this victorie the King of Nauarre folowed his purposed iourney into Gascoyne, for the causes afore said: he brought with him the best part of all the companies, hee was accompanied with the Prince of Soissons. The Prince of Conde repayred into Xainctonge, for to assemble moreouer al that he might, and to be at the appoynted rendes vous, when they should take their iourney toward the armie of the Germains vpon the riuer of Lisle, and afterward willing to goe further for to haste with great diligence his way, he left the bodie of his forces with the Vicount Turenne, who loosing nei∣ther time nor occasion, tooke many places vpon the said riuer, and in the rountrey round about, which hee reduced vnder the power of the King of Nauarre. Here foloweth the names of the places taken by force, or composition af∣ter
the battell of Coutras. The house and mill of Auber demont nigh Coutras was rendered by composition: there were garisons placed. The Mill of Penot beaten downe. The Mill of Cause taken, and the fortifications destroyed. The Castell and Mill of Saint Seuerine, forsaken by night of them who did holde it. Captaine Roux commaunded there for the King of Nauarre. The new Mill giuen ouer, and burned to the very foundations, with all the moueable goods and victuals which were within, whereby many men were vndone, hauing lost their euidences. The Mill of Coy put vnder the protection of the King of Nauarre, with the condition to make no warre there. The Uicount Miles answe∣red for it. The Mill of Meneplet did the like vpon the same condition: so did the mill of Ʋauclere. The house of Captaine Fay. The Abbey of Vauclere. The Church of Saint Laurens. The towne and Abbey of Guistre▪ taken by force, and a Garison put there. Saint Denis was forsaken, and a Garison put therein. Lapalays taken by assault, after threeskore and fiue shot of Ordinance, there were about 31. persons killed, and 32. hanged for the great outrages and violences committed therein, and many other reasons which were found worthy of Iustice, the strong holde, the Church and the towne wholy consumed with fire, with all the fruites and goods which were within, for that it was a very den of theeues and robbers. The Castell of Vigneron rendered by composition, and a Garison put therein. The towne and Church of Puisiguin sustained the siege a day and a halfe, & was rendered to diseretion: there were some executed iudicially, for the great iniuries and complaints laide against them. The Lord Semens who was wont to be one of the pillers of the League in that countrie, brought the rest there abouts, to the seruice of the King of Nauarre, and did shew himselfe more adicted to the said King of Nauarre, then he did euer to the contrarie side. The fort and towne of Lussak forsaken, after they had stayed for the can∣non. It was vtterly destroyed. Montague abandoned by night, ransaked and destroyed. The house of Mondesier rendered, and after put in the hands of the Uicount Myels, who gaue his word for it. Monpaun forsaken by night, and the wales de∣stroyed,
no liuing soule left dwelling in. They did fortifie it againe. The 4. of December, the strong hold and towne of Sorzack was ren∣dered by composition, after sixe dayes of siege: the cannon could not ariue  sooner, by reason of the foule weather and foule waies. The Castell of Greenholds, one of the strongest places of all the coun∣trey was surprised, and Garisons put therein. The house of the Lord Oulmes giuen ouer. The Castle Franckes forsaken, the fortresses were rased. The Castell of Mussidan a strong hold, with the towne, were put in the protection of Salignak, who answered that they shoulde make no warre thence. The houses of Herbasses, Gaudilak, and Mazeroles were put in the pro∣tection of the King, with the house of the Lorde Brouillet, with the house of Viuant, and the noble house and auncient Castell of Marsilak. The Castell of Saint Pardoux, which was belonging to the Lorde of Neufuy, was put into the hands of his brother, the Lord Foillons. The 10. day of December, the armie departed from Sorzak, to goe to besege the towne of S. Astier, and Bishops Castell, distant two Leagues from Perigeulx. These Leaguers about the Kings person, did cast forth their forcering perfumes, to wit, if his Maiestie should accept the King of Nauarre his offers, first he should put the holy Catholick Romane faith in daunger to be wholy subuerted in few yeares, and at length he should be by the Hereticks supplanted, deposed and displaced. Secondly, that there would ensue an vniuersall rebellion of the Catho∣licks, so that the hereticks themselues, if they would▪ (which thing they woulde neuer (carrying alwaies in remembrance the iniuries and mas∣sacars by him committed vppon them) bee able to keepe him in the posses∣sion of his estate. Thirdly, that the holy father, and all other Catholick potentates of Christendome, would take it in very ill part, and would bend their forces against him, so that Iupiter himselfe woulde not bee able to defende him. Last of all, that it would dot be honorable for him so to doo: for it would be thought, that after the fresh losse at Coutras, feare had compelled him to yeeld to dishonorable conditions, and to receaue law of his subiects, and so against the honorable actes of his auncestors, hee should seeme to haue ioy∣ned himselfe, though not in opinion, yet in societie with the hereticks, and so thought not to haue forsaken, yet to haue been himselfe against the Ca∣tholick religion. Furthermore, the heathens did neuer giue so much credit to the oracles of Apollo, as this besotted King (whome God had endued with good
partes, if hee would haue vsed them with libertie) did attribute vnto his mother, being vnto him as Ʋates fatidica, and a shee Priest of Apollo, a  snare, confusion and shame. Shee therefore at the request of the Masters of the League, sendeth her Oracle, ex aurcatripode, that by no meanes the King should accept the offers of the King of Nauarre. Fearing that if the King had receaued the offers aboue saide, hauing the Princes of the bloud about him, to helpe by their counsell and wisdome the establishing of the decayed state, shee should haue been turned out of gouernement, and de Ponte Deiecta, commaunded to sit at home to mumble her beades. So this great King, yet once more traiterouslie was be witched, and by the a∣bouesaid counsellers and Mother, was sold to his owne ruine, and wofull fall. The King of Nauarre, after the victory obtayned at Coutras, became not insolent of the victory, but mooued with compassion for the miseries which afflicted France, submitted himselfe, and searching out the means to pacify the troubles, sent Ambassadors to the king thē being on the South side the riuer Loyre in Berry, to require him yet most earnestly and humbly to consider the pitifull state of his realme, and to pity and remedy the ma∣nifold oppressions of his people. And although they might haue conside∣red his good successe for the space of three yeares in beholding so great for∣ces and strong armies prepared and sent agaynst him, partly to haue vani∣shed away as dust blowen by the wind, and partly ouerthrowen by the sin∣gular assistance of the mighty God of battels, yet doth proffer with many humble prayers and submission, not onely peace to his disaduantage, but also his forces with the army of the Germans, if it pleaseth him to vse thē, to take reuengement of the iniuries, & so often reiterated rebellions of the League. But the Duke of Guyze, head of the League, hearing of this message, & seeing himselfe, his practises, hope, and all that euer he had with his fel∣lows, followers, and companions to be in a dreadfull precipice, like to be thrown down into a miserable headlong downfall, taketh order by pollicy to deuise some meanes to auoyd the danger, that is, to worke by all means possible to let the accomplishing of this ambassage. And that this thing may be brought to passe, the king is to be enchaunted with that kind of sor∣cery which in old tyme was called , which is a eluding of mans reason, as to make a man thinke to see that which he seeth not. Two sorts of witches are to bee employed, to wit, the Leaguers of his counsell, as Villeroy, Rets, and others, but specially his mother, whose deuillish and factions craftines was admired of him, as a most perfect wisdome. These persons must vphold the League, or else all wil be spilled. It is said before how the King with all the forces he could make, gaue his last indeuour to oppresse the King of Nauarre, and with him them of
the Religion, for the which purpose he et vp three great mightie armies, the one to abide vpon the passages of out of Germanie into Lorreyne,  there to stoppe the entring the sayd Germanes into France. The second, the king himselfe should haue about him in his owne per∣son, to let the passage ouer Loyre, least the sayd Germanes should ioyne with the King of Nauarre. The third was conducted by the Lord Ioyeuse into Guienne, where we shewed the same to haue beene buried in perpetuall infamie at the battel of Coutras. Now remayneth to speak of the other two, what they did, and what be∣came of them. The King had in deede gathered mighty armies, but he had no mo∣ney to maintain them, for the Priests would haue no more warre so costly as they had two yeares before: the Parisiens would heare no more these words, da mihi, affer mihi: The Kings money either was intercepted by the way in diuers chances, or else his Taliages, Tributs, or subsidies were not payed, either by some for lack of good wil, or else by some for lack of money. Therefore in the latter end of August hauing foure thousand Swissers at Estampes, and eight thousand more entring already into France, with foure thousand Rutters, which were euery day expected, he must needes prouide money for them. For these shameles Mercenaries (who sell themselues to dye at other mens commaundement, neuer con∣sidering the iustice of the cause) will make no warre longer than they are fed with money. Considering the great charge which he through euil coū∣sell had drawen vpon his armes; he gathered a great summe of mony vp∣on the Courts of his Parlaments, wherewith he payed those Souldiers. But whilest the K. was so busie to fight against the God of battells, & his Sonne whome he had anoynted vpon his holy hill Sion; and polld his iudges and Magistrates, that they might recouer money with aduan∣tage by peruerting indgement. Beholde a preamble of that rebellion which followed against him in Paris the moneth of Maie next ensuing. There was a certaine Masse Priest, Parson of Saint Seuerine, at the lower ende of Saint Iames streate, named Preuost, who preached most seditiously against the King and certain other Lords, who were his faith∣full seruaunts, without any respect of persons, degree, or dignitie. This Priest being threatned to be had before the King, a certaine notarie made a great assembly, both of armes and men for to defend the Priest. The King being aduertized of this misemeanour, commanded one of the porters of his chamber, accompanied with two Archers of his garde, to goe to the sayd Notary, to bid him come to speak with the King. They which were assembled in the Notaries house, seeing the sayde company to enter into the house, set vpon them with great violence, and enforced
them to saue their liues by flight rying arme, arme, and so put al the side of the Vniuersitie in such a wonderfull commotion, that there was no∣thing else to be hoped, but a tragicall euent, and afterwarde vntill the 8.  day of the sayd moneth, the whole Citie was in an vprore, keeping watch al night at the corners of the streates. Now to returne to the course of the history: The King hauing three great mighty armyes, and no money to entertaine them, turned himelfe to the olde shifts, brough into France by the Cardinall of Lorreyne, and paltring Italians, who came with the Q. Mother, and gouernd King Henry the second (father to this King) at their pleasure, when they were disposed to make him a slaue to their passions. For the ninth of Septem∣ber the King went to Parliament, for to establish fifteene Edicts, among the which there were three notable: the first was of the establishing 27. Secretaries: The second was to choose the sixt chamber of enquests, con∣sisting of twenty counsellers, and two presidents. The third was the cre∣ation of the Masters of accounts, with two presidents: out of the which e∣states, he made his reckoning to pluck two Millions of golde. Where thou mayest see (gentle Reader) in what miserable state France was then, from the highest to the lowest. The Leaguers secretly agaynst the king: They openly made warre agaynst God, distroyed his subiectes to bring to passe his owne subuersion, and to hide the treasons of his enemies, re∣fusing to harken vnto any motion of peace proffered him by the king of Nauarre, or to any good counsels: and for to maintayne this his enter∣prises, iustice must be peruerted by plurality of offices, which is one of the principallest pillers of kingdoms: by the which magistracy is vpholden & mans society entertayned. As concerning the armies which were in hand, that which should bee lead by the king himselfe consisted of foure score and eight companyes of men of armes, and ten thousand footmen, twelue thousand Swissers, 4. thousand Rutters, he caryed twelue double Canons, and two thousand Pioners, and about the 1. of September the companies began to repayre to Montereau faut Yoynne, with commaundement to stay there abouts, & about Sens in Bourgony, vntill his comming, and then to repayre all to S. Florentine there to be mustered. The king sent to Marshal Biron to Montereau, to view the place where they should campe: for the king had determined to campe alwayes: and for that cause all the Lords had prouided tentes. He tooke for his counsel, the Lords Villeroy, and Bruslard, secretaries, the Dukes Espernon, Dan∣uile, Retes, and the Marshals Biron and Aumont. The Prince Soyssons was with the king of Nauarre, and the Prince County, was in Normādy, Mayne & Aniow, to gather as many companies as he could, to ioyne with the Germans, knowing well, that these great ar∣mies
were specially prouided to destroy the house of Bourbon, vnder the colour of defending the popish religion. The Duke d'Aumaule was ap∣poynted Colonel of the Swissers: this armie went not further Eastward  then Sens, from thence turning South and West ward, and crossing the Countrey of Auxeroy, and Gastinoys, passed Loyre into Berry, after the de∣terminatiun of the Germanes was knowne. As for the third armies, thus is it: the Duke of Guize & Lorreyne, at the beginning of September were at Nancy, there they had between 20. and 25000. men, among them were many horsemen, there they receaued 400. Launces of the Duke of Parma, all olde Souldiers, 2000. footemen Ita∣lians, and betweene sixe or seauen hundred light horses, they made no great account of the Italians: the sonne of the Lord Antragues, gouernour of Or∣leans, about the 15. of September brought vnto the Duke of Guize, beside horsemen, about 700. footemen, when a little before, all the companies of the Leaguers of Britayn, sent vnto him by the Duke Mercure, vnder the conduct of the Lord Hault Boys, were discomfited by the King of Nauarre nigh Monsoreau, vpon Loyre, as is before reported. The army of Germans for ye king of Nauarre when it departed out of Germany, was of fiue thousand Rutters, fiue thousand Launceknights, armed with corsets and launces, sixteene thousand Swissers, foure thou∣sand harquebusiers on horsebacke, and about thre hundred horses of French men. But after they had passed the mountayne of Sauerne, the further it went forward, the more it did encrease: for the Lord Mouy brought two thousand Harquebusiers French men on horsbacke. The L. Villeneufue Cormon one thousandand, the Lord Lours one thousand. The Lord Chastilion the 22. of September brought to it fifteene hun∣dered Harquebusiers, & about 200. horses, so that the totall summe myght amount to 34. or 35. thousand, besides the companies which the Prince County brought afterward. They had 16. pieces of ordinance, to wit, foure great culuerines, eight field pieces, and three peeces which were taken from Salabrine. The Lieutenant of the King of Nauarre was the Prince Bullion, assis∣ted with a counsel, consisting of these which follow: the Lordes Guitri, O∣neaulx, Cleruan, Beauuoys la Nocle, Vezins, Digoyne, Louet, Ram∣boillet, Laube, Cheuorles, Huguery, and Beauuieu. This army was the terror of the one side, and the hope of the other, and yet both were disappointed of their expectation. For God shewed to the one part, that he hath means ynough to chastife whom, and when he plea∣seth: to the other part hee shewed, that they are not safe who do trust in man, and make their force the arme of flesh. Beside these three mighty armies, and the armies of the king of Nauarre and Ioyeuse, whereof it is spoken before: The Lords Mommorency and
Diguieres had the fifth in Daulphine agaynst the Lord Valete, beside the armes and assembled forces scattered elswhere. Such was the state of miserable France, which had great cause to grone  vnder the heauy burthen of so many, so great and mighty armies. This tempest was very blacke and thicke, and at length thereout issued dread∣full thunder clappes. But now we haue to speake of these three armyes conioyntly, to wit, of the Leaguers, lead by the Guyzes: of the Catholikes, conducted by the king himselfe: and of the Germans, guided chiefly by the Duke of Boillon. Here we haue to consider the iudgementes of God, which were powred vpon these armies. First, ye Leaguers by the K. forces did work ye K. vndoo∣ing, yt by his fall they might be lifted vp on high. The king in pretending ye defence of the Catholike religion, which no man did oppugne by violence, but the Leaguers, went about to root the Gospell of Christ out of France. The Germans for the most part were mercenaries, who regarded not the right of the cause, neither came to serue him, who procured them, but did in mynd swallow downe the spoyle of France. And some among them who were lead with an vpright mind, yet being mingled with prophane and ir∣religious men, and trusting in the outward apparance of that army, tur∣ned theyr confidence from God to the arme of flesh: therefore all were dis∣appointed of theyr intents, for neyther of them all had any benefit by this great warre, but blowes, slaughters and calamityes. About the latter ende of August, after this great armie, had passed the mountaine of Zauerne, and began to enter into Lorreyne, the Dukes eldest sonne, with certaine regiments approached so nigh them at Salabrine, that 3. of his companies were discomfited, and six Ensignes sent to Strasbourg, and proceeding further they tooke Blasmond. The said army drawing neere to Nancy, about the beginning of Sep∣tember, certayne seruantes going about to forrage with their cartes, were set on by certayne companies which issued out of Nancy: & when they had seazed vppon some cartes, were pursued and beaten into the very gates of Nancy. This army of Germans being about Nancy, there was a counsell hol∣den, to wit, agaynst whom they should first turne theyr armes. The French men were of that aduile, to make warre in Lorreyne, and that it was the pleasure of the king of Nauarre, that they who had of lusti∣nes kindled that miserable warre in France, might first of all feele the hea∣uy burthen of the same: but specially the Duke of Lorreyne, who was one of the heads of the League. The Germans in taking a certaine summe of money, which the Duke of Lorreyne proffered them, were at length content to passe by as neigh∣bours and friends: yet notwithstanding they concluded warre, & did there
many acts of hostilitie, such as warre doth commonly drawe after it. This armie being yet newe and lustie, did neglect a notable occasion to oppresse the enemie at the bridge S. Vincent: vpon what occasion that op∣portunitie  was neglected, it is vncertaine. But it is confessed of all men, that if they had come to hands that day, they had seene the end (by the iudg∣ment of men) of that warre assoone as the beginning. Thus some exployts of warre being done there, the scarcitie of victualls beginning to growe, they determined to goe foorth out of Lorreyne. But vpon the determination of the way which they should followe, there was great difficultie found. For the Germans desired to passe toward Sedan, from whence they might hope of many good commodities, and if néede should be they might haue a newe supply of forces out of Germany: which thing could not bee, if they enclosed themselues among so many riuers which are on the South side of Seyne. Some French men on the contrary, sayd, that they should turne right to the riuer of Loyre, for to ioyne with the King of Nauarre. The Lord Boillon desired greatly that they would approach to Sedan, as they had (as he sayd) promised him, and that in hope of it he had made great preparations of powder and artillerie, which hee had made of pur∣pose. Considering also that he had to prouide for the securitie of his places, which might incurre some daunger if they were not prouided for. All rea∣sons debated and weighed on both sides, the course to the riuer of Loyre was concluded. Whilest these things so passed in Lorreyne, the Lord Chastilion the 22. of September came to the armie with his troupes: he had much adoo to passe, and was as if it were enclosed in the towne of Gresille, but was res∣cued by the Countie de la Mark, yonger brother to the Duke of Boillon. The armie drawing néere to Chaumont in Bassigny, there it was put in de∣liberation to execute a certaine enterprize which the Lord Chastilion had in hand; but it could not be done. The armie came to Chasteauuilaine, where they soiorned some dayes: and in the meane while they tooke a Gentleman named Viliers, comming from Rome: his iourney to Rome was to solicite the Pope to helpe his master with money, to make warre against them of the reformed religion, and also to pray the Pope (Frier Sixtus) to name the King head of the League, assuring him that it would greatly mooue him to warre, and roote out them of the religion, whom he named heretickes. The answere which the Pope made him (as it appeared by his words) was, that they should liue in peace with their neighbours, and that hee could not furnish them with money, being not willing to make warre against any man, who desi∣red peace among all men. The sayd gentleman carried a letter very ill written, which he sayd to be the hand of the Duchesse of Lorreyne, mother of the Duke, contayning
thus much. I am very glad to vnderstand the state of your affayres, and I aduise you to goe forward, for neuer a fayrer occasion was offered you to put the Scepter in your hand, and the Crowne vpon your head. This let∣ter  gaue occasion to them of the Counsell, to agree that this Gentleman should be kept carefully, and brought to the King of Nauarre. The armie soiourning at Chasteauuilaine, the King with his great ar∣mie stayed about Montereau faut Yonne and Sens: but vnderstanding the determination of the Germans, retyred with his armie into Berry beyond Loyre, there to stop the passing ouer to the King of Nauarre, and to giue them freer accesse betwéene the two riuers of Seyne and Loyre, where hée thought either to weary them, or by ioyning his with the armie of the Lea∣guers, at the tayle of them easily he might oppresse them. During this so∣iourne, the Baron Oneau brought the artillerie before the Abbey of Cler∣uaulx, which compounded to giue a certaine summe of money, and some quantitie of wine and meale: notwithstanding, that capitulation did not hold, because the sayd Lord Oneau had not taken hostages for the perfor∣mance of the sayd conditions, contenting himselfe with the faith of the Captaine which was within: but as the armie marched forward he kept not promise. The armie departing from Chasteauuilaine, made foure dayes iourney to the riuer Seyne, where they arriued about the 2. of October, and passed ouer the sayd riuer aboue Chastilion vpon Seyne, without enterprizing vp∣pon the towne, because the Lord of Guize had put into it the Lord Chastre with a certaine number of horsemen and footmen, which made a sallie. The Lord Chastilion was commaunded to make the rereward with three companies of light horsemen, and seauen Cornets of Rutters, and three hundred Harquebusiers. The Colonel Berbistroph was a little more toward the riuer to fauour the Lord Chastilion: which thing the Lord Chastre seeing, he made hast with his horsemen (being fauoured with certaine harquebusiers which hee had set in a coppes) to charge Berpistroph, who incontinently aduertized the Lord Chastilion, to the end he might cut off the returne of those horse∣men of the Lord Chastre: which thing he did. The seauen Cornets which were with the Lord Chastilion, followed him with a shewe of good will to fight: but cōming not in time, the Lord Chastilion (with the Frenchmen) began to charge the harquebusiers of the garde of the Lord Chastre, who were all cut to péeces, and the horsemen followed vnto the gates of the towne. One of the Rutters on a sudden forsaking his band, killed a French Launce with the shot of a pistoll. From thence they went to lodge at Leyne, where they soiourned two dayes. The Germans complayned much of their lodgings. The Mar∣shalls could not denie but that they had oftentimes ill lodgings: but the
fault was in the deare yeare, as they among the principall Rutters could testifie, who in the yeares before in their former voyages, had béen well  lodged in the selfe same lodgings where they were now. In the same place dyed of sicknesse the Countie de la Mark, yonger brother to the Duke of Boillon, who had hetherto alwayes conducted the auauntgard about the third of October. From Leyne they remooued to Ansi le frank, & to Taulay, where newes came that the Duke de Mayne was in a Castle not farre off. The Baron of Oneau, who was lodged nigh the said Castle, wrote about it to the said Lord Chastilion, with a declaration of the good will which the Rutters had to assault him, if they would send them some number of footmen. And if the Duke of Guize would haue approached to the right hand of the said Lord Chastilion, they would come to his succour assoone as néede were. There was then a fayre occasion (as it seemed) to enforce the Duke of Guize to battell: notwithstanding, there was found some difficulties. For some of the countrey sayd that the Castle was strong: others, that it was a wood land fit for the harquebusiers of the Duke of Guize, and disaduan∣tagious for the horsemen of the armie, and that it would bee hard in cam∣ping there to get victuals, and therefore they stayed not there. From Ansi the armie tooke course to the riuer of Yonne, and came to it the second day after. About the fift of October the sayd armie passed the riuer at Mally la vile, where also arriued the Lord Longa from the King of Nauarre, and willed them in the name of the sayd King to direct the ar∣mie toward the head of the riuer Loyre, where he determined to receiue it. Many (notwithstanding) thought that the Germans would hardly take that way, supposing that if they should take yt course, many of the Swis∣sers would disband themselues, drawing so nigh their countrey, conside∣ring also that with much adoo the artillerie would passe through the Ni∣uernoys, partly by reason of the foule wayes, and partly for the great scar∣citie of victuals which would be found in Niuernoys and Moruant. Vpon this incertitude, the armie marched forward, the resolution of that matter being referred to the incident occasions. This thing mooued the Germans to complaine, and to require another gouernment to be vsed in marching. The forme of marching which they desired, was in forme of a triangle, so that the Rutters should make one wing: the other wing toward the side of the enemie should be of the Frenchmen, and the middle should be the gard of the artillerie and the Swissers, which notwithstanding was not so re∣solued: then also began the discommodities to encrease in the armie. Thus the matters passing in that armie doubtfully, and without any resolution vppon any expedient counsell, at length they determined to trye the passage at Charite, and for this purpose were chosen both horsemen and footmen: but the enterprise being delayed off one day for want of some
commoditie, the King had leisure to send thether men of armes, who arri∣ued there at the same instant when the armie did approach, which gaue oc∣casion to retyre without doing any thing. The Lord Chastilion, with the Marshall of the Campe of Rutters, and the Colonell Boke, with two thousand horses, drewe néere to Cosnes, partly to fauour them who were gone to seeke passage at Charite (if neede were) partly to seeke occasion to see the enemie. There they missed the Duke Espernon but a little, who had passed the riuer at Neufuy. The same night the sayd Lord Espernon set vpon the Campe of the footmen, but did very little preuaile, and after that returned to Cosnes, car∣rying away with him the Captayne Bonourier sore wounded. In the meane while the King with his armie was on the other side of the riuer to oppose himselfe to the passage: so that the day being come, the two armies could see one another. At euening al the army arriued at the riuer side, & that night the K. made great trenches at the foord of Neufuy, & fortifyed the same with a garrison of Harquebuziers and Musketters: and for to fauour them, caused 3. great boats well furnished with ordinance to bee brought. The riuer of Loyre was to be passed at foordin many places vntil that time, and there was yet in some places foordes, yet had they no meanes to passe, because the kings armie kept the bancke of the riuer euery where. If that army had marched somewhat speedily, it might haue passed well ynough in preuenting the kinges armie which came out of Paris somewhat late: for the king reposed himselfe vppon the assurance of the Duke of Guyze, who assured the said king to stop the passage of that army, which thing he could not performe, and had not béen done, if the king had not opposed himselfe to them at the banke of the riuer. The morrow after, the Lord Boyllon came to sit in counsell at Neufuy. There the Lords Oneau and Huguerie made many complayntes in the name of the Germans, by reasons of the safetyes and exemptions which were giuen as wel to ye popish gentlemen as to them of the religion, in fa∣uour therof they receaued into their houses ye goods of the vilages where ye army was lodged: and that was true indeede, and therefore required that there might be no more geuen to any man, or else that they might be taxed to pay money for the army. They requested also that they would take or∣der for the paimēt of the Rutters for a moneth, which was promised them: and for lacke of the sayd pay, they would goe no further, adding many difficulties concerning the passage of Loyre: beside that the winter did draw neere, and that there was but two moneths to keepe the field. They were requested patiently to stay a while vntill they might aduertize the king of Nauarre to know his pleasure. That in the meane tyme they would goe to soiorne in Beausse, where was great quantity of corne, and of
fodder for the hores, so that the armies might there easily berefreshed. As for the pay, it was impossible to the French men at that present tyme to  furnish so much money, and that drawing into Beausse and Ʋandomoys, there some money might be had. The Germans were contented with that, so that speedily they would send to the K. of Nauarre with promise to stay vntil they might heare from him. They quartered themselues the next day, and all the army was lodged vpon the lands of the Lord Chastilion, who offered it willingly, to shew example to others to preferre the publike commodities before the parti∣cular. The Lord Boillon lodged at Chastilion with other noble men, to aduise vpon the affaires of that armie. Some dayes before, Tilman colonell of the regiment of Bearne, depar∣ted through sicknes. Bouschet his Lieutenant wrote a letter to the Lord Cleruaut in the name of all the Swissers, that they had determined to let the king vnderstand the causes wherfore they were come into France, and to that effect would send Ambassadours to the king. That resolution sée∣med to many very dangerous: they sent to him neuerthelesse. The towne of Bleneau vpon Loyne aboue the towne of Chastilion had re∣sisted the Baron Oneau: for which cause they forced them, and vpon that occasion the army soiorned 2. dayes about Chastilion. In the meane time newes came that the Duke of Guyze did approach with his forces, and was to lodge about Chasteau-renard, distant from Chastilion three small leagues. The Lord Chastilion then opened them the meanes which he had, there∣in to enclose the sayd Duke of Guyze: but many difficultyes were aleaged, which did hinder his enterprise: Notwithstanding, the sayd Lord Chasti∣lion went on horsebacke with twenty horsemen in company euen to the gates of Chasteau-renard, and there hauing taken some of that place, lear∣ned that Guyze was gone thence about one houre before, for to ioyne with his brother the Duke de Mayne, and that he had lodged in the towne with three hundred horses onely, and before his going away, had put garrisons in the Castell. The said Lord Chastilion brought with him about 25. Harquebusters on horsebacke, whom he sent to the Lord Boillon: by them he learned (as is aforesaid) that the Duke of Guyze was gone to ioyne with his brother, & that all their Bands were so scattered here and there in the Vilages about. Some gaue counsell to turne the faces of the army agaynst the Duke of Guyze and his brother; that it was an easy thing to force him to battayle, afore that hee should approach neerer to the Kinges army, or to Montar∣gis to fauour one an other: notwithstanding some were of a contrary opini∣on:
and that it could not be done, but the Lord of Guyze would haue know∣ledge thereof, and then would hee retyre into some sure and safe places,  which thing being done, their returning backe would bring great discom∣modities to the army: which by these meanes would be combered betwéen the riuers Yonne on the East, Loyne on the West, and Seyne on the North; ouer whom they could not find passages when néede should require it: and that if they should do no exployt, they should repasse that way which they came, where they should finde all thinges eaten vp: which thing would en∣crease the discomodities, and the complaintes of the strangers: this opi∣nion preuayled, and therefore nothing was enterprized. They went to lodge about Montargis, leauing the riuer of Loyne at their right hand for to get the way to Beausse. They lodged at Landon and Ʋimory, and other Townes there abouts. This way is moorish, broken, foule, and full of quakmiers, where the wa∣gons of the Germans and Frenchmen did so sinke, that the Rutters were fayne there to lodge. The 27. of October, the Lords of Guyze, Mayne, Elleufe, Aumall, Barre, the young Ianuile, and the brother of the Lord Mercure, with other heads of the League and their forces, which were about fifteene hundred horses, and fiue thousand Harquebusiers went to lodge at Montargis, and thereabouts on the East side of the riuer Loyne, which running betweene both, let the Germans to goe to them of the League: but on the con∣trary, gaue this aduantage to the Leaguers to passe to yt armies side when they would, because they had the foordes and bridges at theyr deuotion. This aduantage, with the fauour of the Towne of Montargis, and of the Countrie, gaue them occasion to enterprise to set vpon Vimory, where the Baron Oneau was lodged, with seuen Cornets of Rutters, that place be∣ing not distant from Montargis aboue a League and a halfe. The Enemies arriued at Vimory in the end of Supper about seuen a clocke at night. The Rutters (the alarum being giuen) do repaire to their Cornets with great speede: and whilest the enemyes were busie in the streetes to robbe, the Baron Oneau did oftentimes charge as well their horsemen as their footmen: the first onset was vpon the Duke de Mayne, who with a good companie of horsemen made head to the Rutters. At this onset the Rutters did so play the men, that many notable gentlemen were left dead vpon the place, as well of the companies of the Guyze, as of his brother de Mayne. The Cornet of the Duke de Mayne, with the gentleman that carry∣ed it, Rowray of Burgondy was taken. There were two other Cornets ta∣ken, whereof one was of the Lord Bordesiere. The Duke de Mayne re∣ceaued two shot of Pistoll within his armor, whereof hee was so amazed, that hee came not to himselfe vntil the morrow after about eight a clocke.
There is no doubt but the League would haue had much adoe, if it had not been for a great rayne, darkenes and thunder, which on a sudden came and  parted the fight. The League lost there aboue fortye gentlemen notable a∣mong them, among whom was the Marques d'Arques, eldest son to the Lord Listenay, and the Lord Cigoigne, sonne to the Duches de Mayne, and others were sore wounded. The Rutters lost aboue fifty men, about one hundred seruing men, & three hundred wagon horses: they lost three Cornets of their seruantes, wherein were painted the Starre, the Horse-comb, and the Sponge. The Baron Oneau receaued a blow with a sword vpon the forehead, but he was shortly after whole. The Lord Chastilion was lodged three leagues from that place, who vnderstanding of the alarum, went on horsebacke, as also others in other places, where the rumor came. The sayd Lord Chastilion went into the Uillage where hee found some of the enemies wandering, whom he tooke there: he noted a great number of dead men, but more Frenchmen then Germans. The morrow after the Guyze sent to aske for the dead, which were aboue two hundred in number, he sent also to know of the Rutters whether they would be content to exchaunge their Cornets and prisoners. They an∣swered, that as for the prisoners, they would aduise vpon that matter but for the Cornets they would send them to the king. That day the Baron Oneau, who had kept possession of their lodgings, sending all night for the regiment of Lance-knights, went to present him selfe in battell aray before Montargis, where hee was more then an hower to draw the enemies to battell: but no man appeared, and therefore hee retyred. The same day the artillery in going forward, came within a league of Montargis, where it was in no small danger, being so nigh the enemy, with a small company: the which after the Lord Chastilion had found in that case, hee accompanyed the same vntill two howers within night: and not able to goe further, they vnstalled it to send the horses to baite in the next Uillages. The said Lord Chastilion left fifty Harquebusiers on horsebacke to keepe all night. The Lord Chastilion arryued at his lodging, learned by a Trompet which had béene in the kinges camp, the ouerthrow of the Duke Ioyeuse, and of the prosperous successe of the king of Nauarre in the battel at Cou∣tras, whereof all the court made a great mourning. The 30. of October there was a great mutiny of the Rutters, partly for the losse which they had at Vimory, and partly because they were denied to enter into Chasteaulandon, which was appointed for their lodging. The Baron Oneau had much adoo to pacify them: but when the Lord Chastiliō
was come, he was requested by the sayd Baron Oneau to besiege that Ca∣stell, for the which hee sent his footmen, and in the meane time he went to  view the place. During which exployt, the Duke of Boillon, accompanied with many other Lords, came to the Rutters vpon their mutinie. There they sayd that they would not passe further, and that they were lead to the slaughter, that they were lodged at the face of the enemie, without any Frenchmen to garde them. They alleaged that it was reported the King of Nauarre to bee dead in the ouerthrowing of Ioyeuse, that they had lost part of their baggage, that their seruants demanded their wages, and threatned to for∣sake them if they had no money. To be short, they sayd they had no means to followe, and therefore required to haue leaue. The Swissers did helpe much to appease that mutinie, shewing the a∣liance which they had entred into nigh Chasteauuilaine, promising each o∣ther neuer to part asunder vntill the warre were ended. This mutinie was pacified vpon promise of the Frenchmen, which was to make among them selues a summe of money, to horse them which were spoyled at Vimory. When the Counsell had made an ende of their sitting, there came a yong man names Pau, saying, that he had to speake with the Lord Cler∣uaut, to whom he had heretofore brought letters from the King of Na∣uarre: this yong man had alreadie come three or foure times in the army, saying, that he would bring to them his regiment which he had in the ar∣mie of Guize, that hee had not assembled it for any other end then for the King of Nauarre his seruice, and that in taking his part he would doo him, beside some peece of notable seruice in seazing vpon some place, and that he had good meanes in Bourgondy, but the armie had not fauoured him. That now they might take Montargis, as hee had informed them, when they camped at Chastilion. That he had his companie in the Castle, which the Lord of Guize had put in for his safetie when he lodged there: but now when the armie marched, the Duke of Guize went aside of them still on the other side of the riuer Loyne, and that he pressed him with his company to come to méete him, and that he could not disobey any longer: therefore let them speedily take aduise. After some speeches had on both sides, the Lord Chastilion answered him, that all that came from the Duke of Guize was suspected to him. Notwithstanding, that if hee would doo as they would shewe him, they would send thether. Pau answered, that there he was to doo all that they should commaund him. The matter being reasoned, they determined to send the Lord Cleruaut with two hundred harquebuziers and two Cornets of Rutters to execute that enterprise. When they came to the place, the Lords Cleruaut & Cha∣stilion, and others of the companie, called Pau vnto them, and after they
had sent to visite the Castle, they put fiftie harquebusiers vpon the gate: and as they were about to enter in, one of the companie of the Lord Cha∣stilion  warned him that there was treason: vpon which occasion he rety∣red speedily his men: which thing the enemies seeing, and that they were discouered, they played their parts, and did blowe vp the gate and bridge through which our men should haue entered. In returning from this en∣terprise, they who had auoyded such daunger (for to haue beleeued a tray∣tor of the League) gaue hartie thankes vnto God. Whilest these things did so passe at Montargis, the Lord Boillon, with the rest of the Counsell, had arriued at Chasteaulandon, and sent the ordinance, hauing considered where it should bee placed: but because there were neither Swissers nor Launce-knights to garde it, the charge was committed to the Lord Cha∣stilion, after his returne from Montargis, who began the batterie about two of the clocke. Then the heads of the armie arriued, and in the euening they shewed countenance to giue the assault. They within rendered them∣selues with their liues safe. For to keepe the lodgings to the Rutters, and to auoyde confusion, the Lord Chastilion would not suffer any companies to enter in, but sent in some gentlemen to keepe it for the Rutters, and sent to the Baron Oneau to come very early; which thing he did not. And because the Lord Chasti∣lion had to doo with Germans, Swissers and Frenchmen, he could not kéepe them from spoyling the Castle: but notwithstansting, what could be had in money from the Souldiers, it was giuen to the Baron Oneau for the Rutters. There was much spoyle in that quarter, for the Rutters put fire in euery village where they had lodged. From thence they went to lodge along the riuer which goeth to Estem∣pes.  Whilest they were there, Bouschet and others, who were sent to the King by the Swissers, returned to the armie about the beginning of No∣uember. Their answer was, that the King had commanded them to speake to the Duke of Neuers, who had shewed them the wrong that they did to their ancient aliance which they had with the King, so to beare armes a∣gainst him; he shewed them the danger wherein they put their Common∣wealth to be troubled, by the occasion which they had giuen him to remem∣ber their enterprize: but that they might easily remedie it, by retyring themselues from so many discommodities and necessities whereunto they were reduced. Also, that if they would determine to retyre home, he would make meanes to the King in their behalfe to giue them money, with all the securitie which they might aske. Also, that after hee had so spoken to them, the sayd Lord of Neuers brought them to the King, who shewed them a very angrie countenance, reproouing them very sharply for the of∣fence done against their aliance and their othes, so to arme themselues a∣gainst him. That it was he which was King of France, that he did weare
the crowne vpon his head, that hee was not a spirit, that it was hee him∣selfe who ventured both his person and all his meanes against them who had imployed their forces: he thought that they had béene circumuented  vnder a false pretence, but now when they saw it they could not pretend any ignorance: hee assured them also that hee would see them pursued by the way of iustice before theyr Lords. To these things they are reported to haue answered, that they had borne these armes to support the crowne of France, and to oppose themselues to the wicked practises of the Leaguers, whom his Maiestie heretofore both by words of mouth, and also by his edicts had declared his enemies. And that beeing euery way dulye informed of the truth of this matter, they could do no lesse, then to satisfy the iust request of the King of Nauarre first Prince of the bloud, who was most faythfull vnto him, for to accom∣panie him in such a iust quarell. They said also, that they added all which they thought might haue serued for that purpose. Notwithstanding whether they were amazed at the word of the King, whether they were already wonne by money, at their returne they chaun∣ged the mindes of their felowes, who then openly began to mutiny, and to aske two or three moneths wages, or else to haue leaue to depart. The Baron Oneau, with all the Colonels, emploied them selues very faithfully, shewing them what wrong they did to themselues, and to their nation, to picke quarrels for to separat themselues from them, and the Frenchmen, which they could not do with a good conscience. The morrow after the Duke Boyllon, with the Baron Oneau, and o∣ther Lords ofthe Counsel, went to the quarter of the Swissers, to see how to remedy that disorder. The matter was pleaded with many wordes, but at that time there was nothing done. The Colonels and Captaines determined to send once more to the king, to haue pasportes to send to the king of Nauarre, to know to know of him whether he did beare armes a∣gainst the crown of France: and that if he should deny it, they would serue him for money: if to the contrary, they would take their leaue from him, with entreatie to be content with that which is past. This answer was receaued as wordes, for they themselues were suffi∣ciently enformed of the good and right affection of the king of Nauarre to∣wardes the king, his crowne, and estate: and though they had not knowen it, yet was it not time now to enquire thereof. This answere also was not regarded, but that they made this quarrell, mooued from some where else. The alleaged also their necessityes, and that without money they would not passe further. As these thinges passed in the army, they of Estempes made a sally by night vpon the Swissers, but without any notable effect. At the same time the enemyes gaue an onset vpon the footmen: but by
reason they were succored by the Lord Chastilion, they did but a litle hurt, saue that they tooke prisoner the Lord Cormon, who was incontiuently brought to the Duke Espernon: they vsed him to bring to passe that where∣by  the army was afterward disbanded. The 15. of Nouember the army remoued toward Chartres, and there was put in question whether they should proceed further or returne backe: it was agreed that they should make one dayes march yet further, to fa∣uour the comming of the Prince County, of whom they had newes by the Lord Essars, who had seene him in returning from the king of Nauarre. The next lodging was within two litle Leagues of Chartres: the Duke Espernon with the kinges aduangard was at Bonauall, which was the on∣ly passage which rested for the armie to passe, if they would haue gone fur∣ther along the riuer of Loyre: from thence departed the Lord Chastilion by the common consent of all to goe to receaue the Prince County, who came the 20. of Nouember to Prunay, where all the Nobles came to meets him. There they represented vnto him all the great discommodities which they suffered. For the king was on the one side vpon the border of Loyre, the Leaguers were on the right hand of them, and if the army would turne backe, they mustrepasse the way they came, and fighting with the Duke of Guyze on the one side, they should haue the kings army at their héeles. All reasons wayghed, it was concluded to returne backe as speedily as might bee, and with great iourueyes to recouer the head spring of Loyre. Some of the Germans thought good at midnight next folowing to de∣part, and proposed it in the Counsell by Huguery: but on the one side the way was not yetresolued: on the other side they had no tyme to aduertize the whole army: and also it was not thought honorable to depart in the night, as though they had béen carryed away with terror. The departing therefore was deferred vntill the 24. of Nouember, and that it should bee by day. Whilest these thinges were a dooing, the messengers of the Swissers returned, and gaue to vnderstand, that at this third time they had found some alteration in the discourse hee had with them, and that the king had commaunded them to repayre to the Duke Espernon: so that it seemed by theyr discourse, that they were ashamed that euer they were entered into any negotiation with the King: so there was some hope to stay them. To the same end Huguerie was sent to the Baron Oneau, to propose that it was necessary for the contentation of the Germans, to trye by all meanes to stay the Swissers: it was alleaged for a principall reason, that the same huge body going away, would cary with them some compa∣nies of Rutters, who might moue the others, and render them more vnwil∣ling
to do that which they were requested. The matter being proposed in the counsell, some thought theyr depar∣ture to be not greatly hurtfull, bringing these reasons to verify their opini∣on:  first, that it was a bodie so heauy and so vnwealdye to remooue, that by this action the enemy might driue the whole armie into some disaduanta∣gious streight. For without that heauie trou they might more easily get the height of the riuer Loyre, which was the onely sure way which the army could take. The other on the contrary shewed, that such separation could not be done with out great alteration in the rest of the armie, and that if it were not let, it would bee the beginning of a dissipation, which was like to haue an euill end, and that the Germans would do the like at the least occasion, and that with the Swissers they were able to beat the kings power: which thing they could not do without their aide. The K. of Nauarre had shewed what should be done in such extremity, to wit, to turne their faces toward the Duke of Guyze, to enforce him to fight, or else to enclose him in what soeuer place he were: which thing did not seeme very hard, considering that he had no good towne to make his retrait vnto. That the Swissers would not refuse to fight against the League, and vnto all these thinges aboue said, would helpe much the prosperous victo∣ry which God had giuen to the king of Nauarre: but the Swissers could not be kept, hauing so far dealt with the king. They vpon the resolution to depart, required their Rowles to be sea∣led, to that end that the bodies being asunder, the affections might remaine ioyned together: and that in so doing, they would be sworne to promise to bring to the king of Nauarre two or three regiments of Swissers at the time and tearme prefixed. The counsell stood vpon a letter which the Baron of Oneau had writ∣ten, by the which he warned them, that if they gaue assurance of pay to the Swissers, who contrary to their duty did forsake the seruice of their ma∣ster, they should put no difference betweene the good seruitors and the bad. The day for the army to depart, which was appointed the 24. being come, the Duke of Guyze either of his owne motion, or else by intelligen∣ces, marched all Night, and put certaine Harquebuziers into a Castell, which was at Aulneau, where certayne countreymen had repaired, and had agreed with the Rutters to furnish them with all that they needed. The gardes of the Baron Oneau, who was lodged at Aulneau, a little towne enclosed, did not perceaue the said Harquebusiers. The Duke of Guize with the rest of his troups, stayed till the day brea∣king, when the wagons of the Rutters began to goe forth, and the gardes were taken vp for to depart: that hower seemed vnto him most fit to sur∣prize
the sayd Rutters, whom otherwise he durst not assault. Hauing geuen the watchword, they entered into the gates, which they found open, and  without any resistance, because that euery one was in his lodging, ready to take horse. The Harquebuziers of the enemies going along the stréets, set on the first lodgings. The Rutters vppon the alarum, tooke horse, and found the gate seazed vpon, and the streetes hampered with their wagons, so that they could ne∣uer ioyne together to take the field. The Baron Oneau with sixe or seauen, being the first at the gate, pear∣ced through them which came in. The gate was quickly shut. They of the Rutters which had got on horsebacke, ran about the walles to finde a way to get out: and when they found none, standing on the horse saddle, leaped vp the wall, and so threwe themselues into the ditch, where some saued the Colonels Cornet, and fiue others: but all the Gentlemen of all these Cornets were for the most part taken, or slaine. The Baron Oneau with the rest of the Rutters, stayed within halfe a league of the Towne. The Swissers repayred thether in battell aray, where also came the Lord Chastilion. There it was propounded to send for the rest of the armie and ordinance, and presently to compasse ye towne, where they might finde some yet busie about the ransacking; but there was no order to hearken vnto that: so the Duke Boillon & all the Coun∣sell concluded vpon their departing. The Lords Cleruant and Chastilion were sent to the Rutters to comfort them about their losse, and to cause them to followe the way. But the morrowe after the Colonels were moo∣ued to mutinie, saying, that they would goe to the Swissers, and so with them into Germanie, and cause their wagons to turne that way. These newes were brought to the Prince Countie and the Duke Boillon. Not∣withstanding, an houre after the Baron Oneau sent for the Lords Cler∣uant and Chastilion, to returne to them, and that he had so wrought with them that they would come to the rendes vous. There it was shewed them that it would not bee honourable to them to retyre so vpon a sudden losse, and that there was no safetie for them, if they would followe their deter∣mination, but that it was farre better to remaine with the Frenchmen, with whom they were able to fight against whomsoeuer, and that the way which they would followe, was the néerest for them to returne into Ger∣many. Vpon these perswasions they agreed to followe the next day to the ren∣des vout, where they sayd they would see the Frenchmen, and that there they would entreate of all things. A certaine man, a friend of the Lord Chastilion, had sent word vnto him from the Kings armie that he had waightie things to tell him. The sayd Lord Chastilion had shewed the letter to the Lord Boillon and the rest of
the Counsell, which willed him to send thether some faithfull friend: which thing he did. The messenger who was sent, returned with the Lord Cor∣mon,  (whom wee haue sayd before to haue been taken prisoner by the ene∣mie) bringing offers from the King, that he would giue safe returne to the Frenchmen to repayre into Germany, or els to their houses, with many reasons which were alleaged, which could not bee presently answered, be∣cause the armie marched on. There was some aparance of danger, least the armie should be pursued by the King and the Leaguers ioyned together, which was the cause that it was propounded to the Rutters to burne their wagons, and to set as many as they could on horsebacke, promising that the Frenchmen should doo the like. At the rendes vous it was shewed to the Rutters, that within twentie daies they should be brought into the presence of the King of Na∣uarre, or els they should be set in place of safetie. That the Prince County, the Lords Boillon, or Chastilion, or other such as they would choose, should answer them for the summe which was due to them. And in case the King of Nauarre would not content them all, assoone as they should come vnto the sayd Lord King of Nauarre, they would yéeld themselues their priso∣ners: this was an agreement by words, which should haue béen put down in writing, and afterward sealed on both parts, with assurance and pro∣mise giuen by them, that they would repayre to the King of Nauarre. The rendes vous on the next day was at Landon, foure leagues from Montargis, an vnfit place, by reason of a bridge which is in the middle of the Towne, where was great confusion in going ouer. The Lord Chasti∣lion was commaunded to goe to trye the passage at Gien: but many incon∣ueniences let that enterprise, although he had gone part of the way. In the meane time the enemie aduaunced in such sorte, that the forerunners did charge the Launce-knights, and vnarmed about one thousand or twelue hundred, did hurt a great many, tooke the artilterie and munition. About 25. horsemen did all that. The Launce-knights did retyre in good order toward Buissiere, as also the wagon men with their horses, and other such stuffe as they could saue. The Lord Chastilion went also to the sayd Buissiere, who did incontinent∣ly sende to the horsemen on euery side, for to take aduise what was to bee done; for they were like to haue the enemie very shortly on their backes: but the companies went to the rendes vous, which was appoynted at Bou∣uy. The Lord Chastilion hauing stood in battell aray at Buissiere, to receiue the Launce-knights who did passe in order, made the retraite, hauing not with him aboue three score armed men, and sixe score harquebusiers on horsebacke at the most. The same long soiorning which the Lord Chastilion made at Buissiere, gaue time to the enemie to followe him; so that in marching the high way
to Bouuy, the enemy appeared marching along the parke: at whose disco∣uering  hee put his companie in battell aray foure and foure, by reason of the narrownes of the place. The Lords Morinault and S. Albine did leade the forerunners, who discouering that the enemie was of more then two hundred horses, sent word to the Lord Chastilion, who strengthened them of ten men of armes which were with the Lord Byramont, and willed them to march a small pace after the companies. But a little after they were so pressed, that they turned their faces against the enemie with sword in hand, who then staied, and after in that manner followed the Lord Chastilion more than three leagues. The said Lord Chastilion geuing to vnderstand to the Prince County, that the enemy was at hand: the Duke Boyllon went backe to the said Lord Chastilion, with 2. hundred horses: and going backe to a litle brooke which they had left behind, thought good to stay there for the enemie: but the Lord Monluet (who alwaies had remained behind) gaue to vnderstand to the Lord Chastilion, that he doubted somewhat: and for to know better what it might be, they went toward the enemies, and at the discouering of them, began to speake either to stay them, or else to make them come nea∣rer, but at length the enemy began to retire: vpon which occasion the Lord Monluet and Chastilion pressed them so farre, that they pursued, beating them beyond the Brooke, where they left dead of the enemie seuen or eight vpon the place. The Lord Chastilion pursuing the disorder of the enemie, was aduerti∣zed by the Lord Boillon, that the Rutters were more then fiue leagues be∣fore with the rest of the Frenchmen, & that the companies which he pursu∣ed was the whole power of the enemie, where were the Lords Espernon, Nemours, and Mercure, & that necessity required to march forward with∣out any further delay: which thing staied the Lord Chastilion, who in re∣turning passed by a little wood, where he spied about foure score Harquebu∣ziers of the enemie, who hid themselues in the said Wood, whom the said Lord Chastilion made countenance to charge, that in the meane time hee hee might retire his forerunners, whom the said Harquebuziers made their rekoning to surprize in theyr returne: but they came againe without any damage. The truth is, that there was in all those troupes but onely the Dukes Espernon, Nemours, and Mercure, who were greatly amazed when their forerunners so fearefully did cast themselues in their armes. That same day they went to lodge fiue leagues from thence, and the next day they began to enter into Moruaut, which is a wood land, and so thicke, that with much adoo they could not goe aboue two and two. They appointed the rendes vous for the chiefe of the army, to heare what
commission the Lord Cormon had brought: which was, that the King would geue such surety vnto the Germans as they would, to retire into Germany, and to the French men Papists (who would liue Popishlie in  their houses) safetie with their goods. Others of the religion which would retire out of France, might enioy their goods, so that they would beare no armes against him: requiring furthermore in token of their obedience and good intentes, by the which they had declared to haue borne armes onely for his seruice, that all the French men should surrender him their Cornets and Colours. All these thinges being debated on both sides, it was aduised not to dispise these offers, but for the sureties and ensignes to take further ad∣uise. The reasons which induced them, were the great amazednes wherein the whole armie was, and to that feare there was such negligence ioyned, that there was no more meanes to keepe any order, neither among the Germans nor Frenchmen. Many French gentlemen had and did dayly resort home: there was no assurance that any great number would stay a∣ny longer. There was no resolution to fight against the enemy: the wayes were full of stuffe and armes, as well of Germans as Frenchmen, the Horses were weary, they had to make long iourneys to goe farre from the enemy: when they came, they found no guide to lead them the way to the Vilages, so that they trauelled some time one or two leagues after they were arriued at the rendes vous for to take their lodginges. The most part of them remayned either in the woods, or else in the first houses which they met: men without bread; horses without fodder: many horses were tyred for lacke of shooing. There was foure daies iourney to goe through woods. The Harquebuziers and footmen did diminish on both sides: all the re∣gimēt of the Lord Villeneufue had disanded themselues not passing thrée daies before, because the master of theyr campe was prisoner: there was al∣most no men left in the regiment of the Lord Mouy. They whom the Lord Chastilion had brought out of Languedock, for lacke of horses could not follow, or else for to follow in so long iourneyes were inforced to cast away their armors: most of them had no powder, nor meanes to recouer any. Their Peeces were either broken or vnprofita∣ble for lacke of workemen to mend them. There remayned not aboue two hundred Harquebuziers. They which rested of Launce-knights, being about two thousand, were vnarmed: all these reasons made them conclude, that it was better to saue the men to do seruice another time, then to loose them and geue the praise to the enemy, to haue wholly destroyed that army. Vpon these deliberations, they dispatched to the king the L. Cormon:
In the meane while the army went forward, followed still by the Lord Espernon, accompanied with seuen or eight hundred horsemen, and with  as many Harquebusiers as he could put on horsebacke, and was then with in a league of the army. The Armie marched fiue daies iourney vnto the towne of Lancy in Masconoys, where the rendes vous was geuen. The Rutters and French∣men assembled themselues the 6. day of December. The Lords Cormon, Lisle, and Moriuault came from the Lord Espernon: there the heads and the troupes being assembled, conferred together of the things which were to be entreated. The king fearing greatly that the remnant of that army should escape into Viuarets and Languedock, & so into Gascoyne to the king of Nauarre. Therefore they inuented surmises to increase the terror and impossibility, to diuert them (if it were possible) from going that way, which they saw was the easyest and safest to escape the danger into the which they did cast themselues, and to cause them to accept of disauantagious offers. The Lord Lisle Moriuault (being sent by the Duke Espernō) opened a rowle, in the which was read how many companies of armed men and regimentes of footmen were in the forrest countrey to stop the way to the armie, if they should take their iourney to Viuarets: he reported also how Mandelot was enforced to retire his armie, by reason of the great Snowes which were fallen there, so that there was no meanes for them to passe: this thing discoraged the army greatly. Vpon this deliberation appointed to determine what was to bee done: the Lord Chastilion shewed that the hardest & most dangerous part of the Forrest was past alreadie, that within foure daies they could bee in a place of safetye, and shewed them to the eye the mountains of Viuarets, where within 24. howers they might haue the Lord Chebault with fifteene hun∣dred Harquebusiers: that he knew well the meanes of Mandelot, how that he could not gather such companies as could be able to stop their way: he warned them to take heed of rumors which were spread abroad by the ene∣mie to terrify them: offered vpon his life to conduct the companies into Ʋiuarets without danger. The meanes which he proposed, were to deuide the army into two partes, to put one halfe of the Rutters and Frenchmen in the vaungard, with as much of the stuffe as was necessary, & that which they could not spare, and to cut off all the rest, but specially all the tired horses which serued for nothing but for lets. The other halfe of the armie should march after, and that they should resolue themselues to fight against whomsoeuer would oppose them∣selues in their way, either afore or behind. And that in so doing he trusted by Gods power, that they might ouercome all impediments which might be proffered: considering that God had plucked the armie, as if it were by
the hand, out of more and farre greater daungers, then they which remay∣ned behinde. Thereunto he added, that the Lord Espernon was left a long dayes iourney behinde the armie, Guize thrée dayes iourney, the King  was beyond the riuer Loyre, and that before the armie there was nothing which might doo hurt. He shewed furthermore, that there was no cause to accept the disaduantagious and vnhonest conditions which were offered, vnworthie to bee accepted of them who professed the true Christian refor∣med religion. On the other side, he shewed the small assurance which they might haue of the Kings proffers, and the impossibilitie to returne home in safetie the way which they determined to take. For first, the King did offer safetie to retyre wheresoeuer they would, with assurance of enioying their goods, as well to them who would re∣payre to their houses and liue according to the Romish religion, as to o∣thers who would retyre out of France, to liue in freedome of conscience without bearing of armes. He did offer also safetie to the straungers, to re∣payre to their countrey with their Cornets and Ensignes, requiring one∣ly the Colours of the Frenchmen. But now he altereth these conditions, and will giue no suretie to returne home, nor libertie to enioy their goods, but onely to them who will liue after the Popish manner, or would pro∣mise neuer to beare armes, except by his expresse commandement: and be∣side asked all the Cornets and Colours indifferently as well of the Ger∣mans as Frenchmen. This alteration made him thinke that there was some false dealing e∣uen in the armie it selfe, which gaue occasion to the King to reuoke his for∣mer proffers, and to offer harder: considering that it was not vnknowne that the Lord Espernon hath not at this present time fiue hundred horses, and not so many harquebusiers on horsebacke: so that if he would stay for them which be had on foote, he would neuer ouertake the armie going for∣ward. But if he should come with them which he had, he would be still the weaker, and himselfe as wearie, as the armie in danger still to be well bea∣ten: hauing no reason that hee should doo so now, seeing that hee durst not doo it when he had greater forces néerer the armie, and in a countrie fauou∣rable to him euery way. He concluded therefore, that there was nothing so sure for the armie as to passe the Loyre. He shewed also, that it was impossible to returne into Germany safely: for to goe thether they ought to passe the riuer Saosne, and that still vpon bridges, because it cannot bee passed by foor any where. He shewed that the bridges and boates were in the power of the Duke de Mayne, and that if the Saosne might be passed, yet must they go through the enemies lands, so that they must needes commit themselues into the Leaguers mercie, whose crueltie he knewe the King himselfe were not able to stay. Many Germans and others shewed that they approoued well this aduise as the
surest way. But this is to be confessed, that God would not vse the means of this armie, and that he would wholly scatter it. For although they sawe  and approoued the most expedient reasons, yet they could not follow them. Others thought, that they who would returne into Languedock, would haue others to followe them for to assure their way. Others alleaged the impossibilitie by reason of the Snowes: others, the barrennes of yt coun∣trey, where they should finde foode neither for men nor horses. The Rut∣ters thought vppon the losse of their horses, when they should passe the downefalls of the mountaynes of Viuarets, where the countrey men alone were able to resist them: so that easily they were withdrawne from that voiage. For then the common sort of them without their Colonels flocked together, to heare what the Lord Lisle mariualt would say, who (perswa∣ded to diminish somewhat of the conditions) proposed vnto them, or els to carrie away their Cornets, and sweare neuer to returne into France, except it were for the Kings seruice, or the Emperour: or els to surrender their Cornets and to goe with libertie, and to returne when they would. Upon this proposition, the Lord Chastilion breaking through ye preace, shewed that the Lord Lisle mariuault had no authoritie nor writ to treate with them, nor that could binde the King to entertaine that which he pro∣posed: he shewed also, how in all that there was no securitie, and that the Kings offer was as good as nothing, in offering to men of warre & Soul∣diers conditions shamefull and vnreasonable, and such as could not bee ac∣cepted, without forcing both their religion and honour. But the tumult encreasing (as is commonly seene in such diuersitie of opinions) the Ger∣mans concluded to accept one of the two proffers, and that same day at euening they would shew which of them. Upon this resolution, the Prince County with his white Cornet separated himselfe, and went to lodge at a Castle not farre off. They made some proffers to the Lord Chastilion, to disswade him from his returne into Languedock, amplifying the great daungers which did attend him, if hee should hazard that voyage. Not∣withstanding, he went to the Lord Boillon, and (hauing made a discourse of the dangers whereinto he did cast his life and state vpon the feare which he conceaued) shewed him ow this delay of resolution would giue leasure to the enemie to stop his passage: and taking his leaue from him, tooke his way to his troupes which stayed for him. This being done, there came 25. or 30. Rutters after him to call him, saying, that they had somewhat to say to him. Then hee began to mistrust them, as that they would arest him: and being in the middle of them, vnderstood that they talked among themselues, that they had no securitie for their payment, & that the French men should giue them assurance. There some of the princiallest of them sayd vnto him twise in the eare, my Lord goe your way, fearing the muti∣nie of the common Souldiers. The Lord Chastilion then speaking to the
companie of the Rutters, it is reason said he, that you should haue securi∣tie of your paiment, and for my part I am ready to bind my selfe, & to de what you will. But said he, I must haue the Lord Boillon, whom I goe  to fetch to you. And vpon these words urned bridle, and making roome tooke the ga∣lop to the forefront of his troupes, the which (with sword in hand) tooke their way with a soft pace about two miles, and thence got easily to S. Laurence where was the rendes vous. The said L. Chastilion (through great daungers) with his company arriued the 11. of December at a Castell in Viuarets, called Retortou, where was a garrison of them of the Religion, the fift day after his separa∣tion from the army. The Lord Chastilion so retired from that armie, the Rutters and others who remayned among them, concluded the capitulation with the Lorde Espernon, as appeareth by the articles which were brought to the King▪ and afterward by his commaundement sent into the Prouinces and go∣uernments of his realme, whereof the tenor followeth. Articles and capitulations, concluded by the Lord Espernon, with the Lords, heads, and guides of the armie of strangers, Baron Oneau, Col∣nels, Captaines, Writmasters, Lords, and Knights, &c. The Frenchmen who are in the armie, shall render their Cornets into the hands of the Lorde Espernon, to bee sent vnto his Maiestie, to whome the King giueth libertie to enioy their goods in safetie in their houses, so that they obey the Kings edicts. They also shal make promise to him, sig∣ned and sealed with their hands, neuer to beare armes, except it bee for his seruice, and by his expresse commaundement, except it be out of the realme. They of his said subiects, who will retire out of the realme without obey∣ing his edicts, and yet will make the said promise, the King doth graunt them libertie to inioy their goods, and securitie to returne with the stran∣gers out of the realme: but they who will promise nothing at all, they shal only haue safety to retire out of the realme with the strangers, without in∣ioying any of their goods. And for as much as some of the Captaines may make doubtes to surrender their Ensignes, the King will that such shall not at all enioy the benefit contained in these Articles. As for the strangers, the King dooth graunt them passeport vnto the Frontiers of his estate, on that side where they are now nearest, vpon con∣dition that the said Colonels, Captaines, & Writmasters, shall promise to the King, neuer to carrie armes in France against the King, being thether called by his subiects, without his expresse commaundement: and shall lap vp their Ensignes, in returning to their Countrey. Also they shal not take, nor carrie away any prisoners of the Kings sub∣iects, without his expresse licence, neither shall commit any act of hostilitie
in his realme, in which dooing, the King shall prouide them necessarie things for the performing of the premises the 8. of December. This was the end of this armie, by the which God did euidently shew to his children, that it is hee onely, vpon whome they ought to cast their eyes in their afflictions, & that other meanes are altogether vnprofitable, except that he will further them, neither will he further them, except they be well vsed, with an vpright minde and intent. This separation of the army tooke away from the enemies of Gods people, all occasion to swell of the victorie, which they may not attribute to their valour, who durst neuer looke them in the face, and in skirmishes the enemy had alwaies the worst, except at Aulneau onely, where through their negligence they were surprised. Now Christian Reader, consider well the vse of this dissolution of the Army. The King prepared great power to oppose himselfe to it, vsed great pollicy to drawe it into that straight whereinto they wilfully did cast themselues, for not following the good counsell of the K. of Nauarre, who would haue them to passe aboue the head of Loyre. But as men desti∣tute of vnderstanding, heedily went into a manifest mishap, and knew not wherefore, as to close vp themselues betweene so many riuers, whose pas∣sages they knew well to be holden by the enemyes. And as the king vsed great pollicie in snaring them that way, so he tooke great care & labour to disunite them, that without blowes he might throw them downe: and at length beeing by themselues weakned, sent them a∣way to the slaughter, vnder the shadow of a pasport. If the King had béen so long at schole with Salomon as he was with his mother (the onely fu∣rie that hath beene these many ages) hee could haue learned that it was an vnseemly thing for a king to speake a lie. But marke the fruit that he receaued thereby, all this redounded to his vndooing: for of euill can no good bee done by man. The Duke of Guyze as he had turned all his actions heretofore to his viscredit, so did he this: for he caused certaine horses which he had taken of the Rutters at the skir∣mish at Vimory in Gastinois, & at the surprize at Aulneau, to be lead some into one City, and some into another, almost through all France, by his horsecorsers and riders with this song, Saul hath killed a thousand, and Dauid ten thousands, as it shall be shewed in his place: So he made the world beleeue that he had been the onely instrument, by the which that ar∣mie had receaued all the harme which they receaued. And whereas the Kinges onely pollicy had vndone that army, yet made he the world beléeue by his horsecorsers, whom he sent to walke the said. Dutch horses, whom bee vsed for sowers of false rumors, that not onely the king had willingly let them to escape, but also had geuen them the meanes to retire, some into Germany, and some into Languedock, and from thence to the king of Na∣uarre,
so that the pulpits of Fryers and Iesuits in Paris and other cities, did sound nothing else but of these newes, extolling the valour, wisedome, and glory of the Duke of Guyze, with procuring to him much popular  authority and good will, and making the King hatefull among the Ca∣tholikes, for glosing and dissembling with them, and fauouring the he∣retikes, to that end, that when oportunity should be offered, the sayd Duke of Guyze might easily bring to passe his enterprizes, and the king should not be able to let him. Now let vs know what became of the fragments of this armie. First, the promise was not obserued to them, for a great number of thē were slaine, robbed and spoyled in dyuers places. The Duke of Lor∣reynes eldest sonne, called Marthuis de Pont, accompanyed with the forces of the League, set on them in diuers places, and enuaded the county of Montbeliard, where hee committed horrible cruelties, putting all to the sword, with execrable whoredoms and abominations. Many dyed in the way, many dyed when they came in place of safety, euen of the cheefest noble men. The Lords Boillon, Cleruaut, and Vau, with many other noble men re∣tyred to Geneua, where after so many labours and greeues they dyed in the Lord. The like happened to the Swissers, whose Colonels and Captayns (who were the authors of the first parley and capitulation with the king) were punished by their seignories, so that few either of the Germans or Swissers returned home, or escaped vnpunished. It is said before, how that France in this yeare was groaning vnder the burthen of seuen great armies, besides many particular assemblies: wher∣of it is said how Ioyeuse and his armie was made sure at Coutras, and their reduced carkasses were left in perpetuall infamy, not for their death, but for the causes of it. The Germans haue made shipwracke vppon the Rockes of Lancy in Mosconoys the eight of December, and after. The kinges armie was broken against the banke of Loyre, and from thence scattered euery man home. The Leaguers are excluded out of Daulphine, where the Catholikes and they of the reformed religion (after much bloodshed) at length agreed to liue like good fellow cityzens vnder the lawful gouernment of theyr king: and so the yeare is ended, and Christ raigneth for euermore. The end of the fourth Booke.
THE FIFT BOOKE. THis yeare is notable; not so much by reason that it was holden by the Mathematicians to bee fa∣tall  to the world, as by reason of the great and tragicall euents, which happened to many great and Noble personages. For this yeare dyed the Duke of Boillon, and other Nobles at Geneua: The Prince of Conde at Saint Ihan d'Angelye: The Duke of Guyze and some of his partakers: The inuincible armado of Spaine intending to haue inuaded England, was beaten both by God and man: And last of al, the famous enterprize atchieued by the French King Henry the third, with the famous victories of the Church of God in the principality of Boillon, against the conspirators and enemies of mankind of the League. It is said before, how after the capitulation of the King, with the army of Germanes, at Lancy in Masconoys, the Duke of Boillon, the Lordes Cleruaut, Vau, and others, retired to Geneua, where these three especi∣ally dyed. Not long after their aryuing there, the Prince of Boillon fell sick, & the 27. of December (feeling in himselfe his end to be at hand, & that he had to passe to a most blessed life, carefull for the state of the Church of God) gathered in his Soueraigne principalitie of Boillon, disposed of his af∣fayres as followeth. He made his soule heire generally of all his goods holden, as well in Soueraigntie as otherwise: the Lady Charlote de la mark his sister, vpon condition yt she shal neither alter nor innouate any thing in the state, nor in Religiō, the which there she shal maintaine as it is established. Also that she shall not marrie without the aduise of the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and the Prince Monpensier her▪ Uncle, vpon paine of forfeiting the right of those Soueraignties, from the which (in case she should otherwise doe) he vtterly excludeth her. And in case the said Lady of Boillon should decease without heires, the Prince of Monpensier her Uncle is substitute as next to inherit: and after him the Prince Dombees his sonne, conditionally that they shal change nothing in the state nor Re∣ligion, vpon paine of the like forfeiture: And in case the said princes should make there any innouation, he doth substitute the King of Nauarre, and
in like case the Prince of Conde, in case the first should fayle in the perfor∣mance of the premises. The said Lord Boillon made executor of his Testament, and the Lord la Noue: the which done, the first of Ianuarie he was deliuered out of this mortall lie, to enter into the full enioying of the societie of God, being the day of his natiuitie and the 25. of his age. This was a Prince of great auncient and famous nobilitie, issued by the father side out of the stock of that renowmed Argonante Godfrey of Boil∣lon, who was crowned King of Ierusalem, a noble and vertuous man, his Mother was one of the most vertuous women of our age, daughter vnto the Prince Monpensier, and sister vnto this Prince, now at this yeare li∣uing: her vertue, godlines, and constancie in the confession of the true doc∣trine, shall be in an euerlasting remembrance. For shee being very often∣times requested by her Father (a great & deuout Catholick) to forsake the Gospell, and to returne to poperie, at length she agreed vnto him, with this condition, that if the popish Doctors could bring better proofes for their re∣ligion, then the ministers of the reformed would for hers, shee would fulfill his will. Whereupon a disputation being obteyned at the hands of King Charles the ninth, and the matter being reasoned betweene two Doctors of Sorbonne, and two Ministers of the Gospell, for many dayes in her pre∣sence, her owne husband sitting as moderator, it fel out, that in stead of that which her Father looked that she should haue been conuerted to popery, she was confirmed in the trueth: by whose singular wisdome and speciall care, afterward the Churches of the Soueraigntie of Boillon were refor∣med. This Principalitie of Boillon is a small countrey, holden in soueraigntie, yet commonly vnder the protection of the Crowne of France, between the riuers Mose and Moselle, a part of the auncient Nation, called Eburones, hauing on the East side Lorreyne and Ardenues, on the West Henault, on the North Liege, on the South Baroys and Champaigne: it hath two strong places, Sedan and Iamets, and many other strong holdes and Castels, the Countrey is Woody, Moorish, and strong, lying altogether vpon the banck of the riuer Mense. This Countrey since it had imbraced the Gospell, and become the Garden of Eden, hath been the place of refuge for them of the reformed religion of the Nations, which doo lie betweene the riuers of Marne, Seyne, Mosselle, and Saosne, a place most fit to retire vnto, in time of persecution. There were two bretheren, the Duke of Boillon, and the Countie de la Mark, two Noble young men of great vertue, valour, and godlines, who had from their cradle, as if it were sucked the true religion and vertue, with the milke of their vertuous and godly Mother: They ventured all that they had, liues, goods, and state, for the defence of the Crowne of France
and true religion, and opposed themselues against the conspiracies of the Leaguers, not as Merceuaries, but moued with a true zeale and loue to∣ward  both. These two noble men were called out of this life, vnto that which neuer decayeth, and to inioy the inheritance of the Saincts in light, whose names shall be in the euerlasting remembrance of the righteous. The one, to wit, the Countie de la Mark, dyed at Lancye, about the beginning of October, as is said before: but the eldest, to wit, the Prince Boillō at Geneua, the first of Ianuarie, as is said. It is said before, how the Duke of Guize set vpon the Rutters at Vimo∣ry, where many were slaine and taken on both sides, and the Duke of Guize tooke also about three hundred wagon horses, and in like manner tooke some more in the surprise, which he did enterprise vpon them at Aul∣neau in Beausse. This man being possessed with a legion of vncleane spi∣rits, named Ambition, this vncleane spirit did so torment him, that it made him to thinke an houre a day, a day a yeare, and a yeare an olde mans age, so he longed to see the royall familie rooted out, and the crowne of France to fall to his lot: hee aduised therefore himselfe of this point of policie, to make his name ring ouer all France, his victories sung out, and to store vp the loue and admiration of the people toward him, and to procure hatred and enie to the King. He deuyded these horses and armour which hee had taken from the Rutters at Vimory and Aulneau, into sundrie companies of horsecorsers and riders, transported with affection, and factious malcon∣tents and vnquiet, to make a progresse through the realme into those Pro∣uinces, whereunto they durst venture, and into those Townes and Cities, specially which were fauorable to him. There these horsecorsers carried (as if it were in a triumph) through the cities the Germaines spoyles, hor∣ses, weapons, and all other aray. And when the people were flocked toge∣ther in great troupes, to see these new showes, there were the Orators ready among them. The number of the dead, horses and Ensignes ta∣ken, were increased by the figure of multiplication, one killed a hundred, and a hundred ten thousand, as Pyrgopolinices in Plautus: the manner of the fight was made very difficult, and dangerous for the conquerours. They shewed also, how not one of the Guizes Souldiers were found wan∣ting: to be short, vanitas vanitatis. Then they applied their showes, how that the Duke of Guize had at∣chiued himselfe all the difficulties of the warre, and either slaine or taken the chosen and valiant Captaines and Souliers thereof, and if hee had been assisted by the King, he would haue gotten such a victory, as neuer the like had been heard of in France. For hee knew the meanes how to haue made such a slaughter of them, as not one had been left to tell the newes in Germanie: all the realme might haue inioyed the commodities of such a
victorie. But the King he retyred beyond Loyre, as though he had beene vnwilling or afeard of them, for he would or durst neuer shew his face, or draw his sword against them, and for to shew some outward countenance,  or for shame when the enemie were alreadie vanquished, and that the Duke of Guize had left the small remnant, who were but pages and scullions, so hurt, wearie, and sick, that they could not flie, trusting that they would haue been dispatched by the King, they were followed so slackly, that not onely he gaue them leasure to escape without running, but also helped them to ouercome so many distresses wherunto they were driuē by the said Duke of Guyze, & also vnder colour of a counterfeit yeelding and submission, he granted vnto them their liues, horses and furniture, and to some of them their goods, and by these meanes they came all to their iourneys end, and safely arryued to the King of Nauarre. Now the conclusion of these infamous reports, was left to euery man to inferre, that eyther there was not in the King such princelike vertues as should be in him, or else that hee was a fauourer of heretikes, and a dissembler with the Catholikes. Then what should wee doe with such a King: Let vs haue another. And whome should we haue, but him that hath done such exployts, and deliuered France from so manie daun∣gers and terrors. By these deuises, hatred and contempt was no lesse procured against the King, as, gloria in excelsis, prayse, loue, fauour, and authoritie to the Duke of Guyze. The Iesuites and Friers on the other side tooke these lyings and slaun∣derous reportes for a theme to discourse vpon in the pulpits, he that was of a timorous minde cryed, that the King was a betrayer of the Catho∣likes, he was become either a close and desembling heretike, or a fauou∣rer of heretikes, and that it was to be feared ere long hee would forsake the catholicisme, and ouerthrow the Catholike Religion in France: O∣thers which had a more warlike stomack, discoursed vpon the other com∣mon place, that the K. had a timorous mind, durst not look few (Pages and Scullions halfe vanquished) in the face, and that was the cause that many attempts vpon the heretikes had come to small effect, because the warres were not pursued by men neither of courage nor wisedome. But the Duke of Guize, that noble branch of Charlemaigne, the deliuerer of France, the onely protector of the holy Church, was the onely man to whome they owe their religion, their liues and goods, the onely hope of the Realme. Thus the frogges that rose vp out of the bottomelesse pit, did dayly in their pulpits crie croake, croake, croake. There was great hope that the sundry lamentable euents which did beate the one and the other part in France by the scourge of warre, and execution of armours as well in the losse of the battell at Coutras, in the
death of notable men, as in the oppression and hauock which the armies did cary with them, would haue asswaged the rage and passion which ca∣ried  away many, would haue stayed the persecutions against them of the reformed Religion, and would haue made a way to some reasonable a∣greement: but the Leaguers and other enemies (without any remorse of conscience, & without feeling of their owne priuate or publike griues) so much the more made hast to worke the vtter subuersion of the sayde re∣ligion, oppressing with greater crueltie the professors thereof than they did before. Sathan therefore (the captaine of murtherers of the Saints) deuided his forces, one part to assault the remnaunt of the Church left in the popish prouinces of France, and the Churches of the principalitie of Boillon, which we will in order recite. As after the breaking of the armie of the prince of Conde in Vandomoys, in the yeare of our Lord 1585. they thought that with the same Prince al their hope had been gone; which thing made them increase their crueltie: euen so did they after the dissipation of the armie of the Germanes, supposing that they should shortly see the end thereof. The authors of these persecutions, were the King, the Leaguers, the Bishops, the Iesuytes, the Fryers, the Monkes, the parish Priests and Magistrates. In these assaults appeared the cowardlines of a great many of them who had professed the true religion, who looking more on the euents and present dangers, than to the end of such skirmishes (where we ought to shew a proofe of our fayth, and with pacience to expect an happyend) for feare were caried away to vnlawfull things against their conscience. But the Lord (as at all other times) left not his truth without wit∣nesses: for many in diuers parts of the Realme being cruelly persecuted, shewed their constancie in maintaining their faith and religion, where∣upon it seemeth me, not to be out of purpose to make mention of the con∣stancie which God gaue to a man of base condition, in defending of his re∣ligion, who in this respect shewed the way to many, which in the sight of the worlde had greater meanes to doe it than he had. There was in the towne of Marchenoyre in Beausse a poore man borne in Boysgencye vpon Loyre, named Francis Tixier: (as if wee shoulde saie weauer) this man by his occupation was a maker of packsaddles, who (by reason of his family) had not departed out of the Realme according to the Kings Edicts, neither had obeyed the Kinges commandement in conforming himselfe to the Popish religion, but had alwayes constantly remained in the profession of the true religion, praying dayly in his house, & often times ioyning himselfe secretly to others to the same effect, and to sing Psalms, as it is vsed among thē who do professe ye reformed religion. He visited also them who were sicke, and strengthened them: and if any
were which stoode in neede, by the meane of some small collections which was made among them secretly, hee helped them, as he was wont to doo  when the reformed Church did assemble at Orges, in the which he did beare the office of an Elder. God blessed that zeale in time so hard and difficult: for some of the vil∣lages thereabous, by the meane of that small exercise, without feare of the persecution, forsaking the Romish Church, ioyned themselues to the pure religion. But this course was not continued long: for by the watches and searches of them, who in the former assaults & alarumes could get nothing vpon this man, he was at length discouered and complained off to the Ma∣gistrate. So that the King passing through Marchenoyre, the accusers addressed themselues to one of his Aulmoners, and instructed him of cer∣taine accusations against that poore man, to wit, that hee had not obeyed the Kings edict, but on the contrarie did perseuer in his heresie and dogma∣tize: so they kindled the Aulmoner in such a sort, that they agreed altoge∣ther to put a complaint to the King: they made also a booke of others of the religion, which they caused the sayd Aulmoner to present to the King. For his custome belike was so to bestowe the Kings almes. The King commaunded that they should bee apprehended: Tixier as the most hatefull, was first taken, and with great solemnitie brought be∣fore the King, who was desirous to see him, for he was informed that hée was a Minister. The King himselfe examined him (when he had appea∣red) with great assurance. When the King had asked him whether he was an Hugonet, and wherefore he had not gone out of the Realme being one, (as he did confesse) and whether he would goe to Masse once or twise, and so to escape from punishment. The poore man answered, that he had not the meanes to auoyde, and that he would not goe to Masse, nor alter his religion which he knewe to be the trueth. When the King perceiued his constancie, he sent him to Bloys, with let∣ters to his Iudges, there commaunding them straightly to make his pro∣cesse, according to the rigour of his edicts. There in the Kings presence he was greatly reuiled by the Lords, Courtiers and Clawbackes. Being carried to Bloys, there he was assaulted by three manner of ene∣mies, the Iudges, his friends, and the rest of prisoners. First the Iudges had him in hand, and after they had gone about to withdrawe him from his religion to Poperie, with such bald reasons as they could affoord, he made them a plaine answere, that he knewe the true Catholike and Apostolike Church, and that hee was one of the fellowe citizens of the same; but for the Romish Church he neither knewe it, nor cared to knowe. When these great Deuines had spent all their reasons euen to the bottome, they began to drawe out their threatnings to hang him, and to giue him opprobrious words. The poore man despising their reasons and the dregges thereof,
made them a flat answere, that as he had liued in that religion, which they call heresie, so was he readie to dye for it, if so it were Gods will. And after many examinations all about on thing, to wit, whether hee would goe to masse, one asked him of whom he held his religion, and who had taught him: he answered, that hee held it of God who had taught him by his holy spirit. Vpon this answere, one Saint Seuerine an Italian replyed: my frend, thine holy spirit will hang thee, if thou come not to thy selfe. The Lord reproue the spirit of blasphemy. This was the miserable state of that realme then, that the most vile, saucy & blasphemous Atheistes, were raysed vp by the Q. Mother to high and honorable dignities. Saynt Paul had learned the Pharisaisme at the feete of Guualiel: but this lewd Italian had learned Atheisme at the Popes feete in Italy, and is welcome in France by them of his religion to teach Atheisme, and to shew the way to the Frenchmen how to blaspheme a l'Italiane. Many other such like trifling talke they had with the pore man, more fit for gatherers of old shooes and ragges vppon the dunghil of Bloys, then for magistrates. The Prisoners did greatly afflict him with their continuall brabling, and brawling with him, with few popish vnreasonable reasons, which they tooke out of certayne Sermons of popish Frierly Doctors, which they had among them, and not onely did daily complaine vppon him to the ma∣gistrate, but also were some time ready to set vppon him to murher him, and the more hee was feruent in prayers, the more they did moiest and vexe him. The third sort of enemies who did assault him, were they which profes∣sed friendship, who oftentimes came to aduertize him in the prison, that the Iudges had concluded to condemne him to die: and that it were high time to looke about, perswading him to auoid the danger, to goe to Masse once or twise, and after he could make some shift to get him out of the way: but he refused all that counsell. So he made his will, fully determined to die, which hee sent to his wife: yet the Iudges must haue a fling more to trye what he would do, or other∣wise resolue to condemne him, & made him sit vpon the stoole, whereupon they that are condemned of capitall crimes are vsed to sit when they do re∣ceaue sentence of condemnation. But behold, on a sudden they changed their mynds, and sent him againe into prison. The King had written, and set his owne hand to a letter com∣maunding them to make his Processe with all igour of the lawe. The Iudges were cruell Papists and Leaguers: the Italian was an Atheist, contemner of all religions, but a notorious & blynd enemy of the trueth. The opportunity of the time might haue encouraged them to vse all extre∣mity.
But the Lord (to the comfort of his children) did put a ring in their Nostrels, and after a long imprisonment, the eight of Aprill they pro∣nounced sentence agaynst the sayd Tyxier, by the which they banished him  out of the realme for euer, and commaunded him vpon paine of death with∣in two moneths to auoyde: his goods were forfaited to the King. Which sentence was signifyed vnto him the same day by the secretary of the same Court of Bloys. It is sayd, how the two noble Princes of Boillon, and his brother the County de la Mark, dyed, the one in the Moneth of October at Lany, and the other in Geneua in Ianuary. The death of this noble Prince being published abroad, the Leaguers tooke it for a presage of their good successe, and occasion to encrease their power. As for to enterprize any thing against Guyenne, or the king of Nauarre, the bad successe of de Mayne, and the death of Ioyeuse at Coutras, did not counsell them. There was as little hope in other Prouinces, where they of the reformed were strong in armes and fortes, as in Languedock, and Daulphine, where now of late an assotiation vpon the defensiue was made betweene the Catholikes and them of the Religion. To attempt the old plat agaynst the kings person, the time was not yet come. On the other side, they did greatly feare the tempest which did threaten them on the side of Germany, by reason of the fires which they had kindled in the County of Montpeliard, and the execrable outrages by them there committed, where (as is aforesayd) they charged the Rutters in them re∣tyring homeward. This feare caused the Duke of Lorreyne to send to the king for succour, for they thought that it would be greatly for their aduantage, if the King in defending them on that side, might haue procured the hatred of the Ger∣mans, and with all consumed his forces in defending and iustifying theyr vilanies: and so all by one meanes should spoyle himselfe of the amity of his neighbours, and of his owne forces, in being after more easy to be op∣pressed by them. Therefore among so many difficultyes, nothing seemed vnto them more commodious to bestow and exercize their forces, and by little and lit∣tle to encrease their power, then to inuade the said principallity of Boillon, supposing that to be of an easy executiō (considering the opportunity prof∣fered it selfe) thereby preparing the way by easy thinges to harder and more difficult matters. The oportunity seemed vnto them very fit, to wit, the death of the two bretheren, the amaze which fell vpon the subiectes in the territory of Se∣dan and Iamets. The weakenes of the yong Princesse fatherles, in tears
and mourning, by reason of the death of her two brethren, a mayd euen vn∣der age, destitute of men, armour and Captaines, and as if it were disday∣ned  of the world, forsaken of her friends, not through vnfaithfulnes, but being themselues hampered and busied in the selfesame daungers that shée was in. Other friends of the contrary profession durst not shewe her any fauou∣rable looke, for feare to be heretikes, or fauourers of heresie, and so to pro∣uoke agaynst themselues the bloodie power of the League. And that which is more, she being accounted an hereticke for professing of the trueth, and therefore accursed by the Pope, proscript by the League, and as it were dead to the world, by the articles of Nancy, whereof it shall be spoken here∣after at large. And to that ende they might the better both to inuade that yong Prin∣cesse and resist the Germans, whom they feared, by reason of the villanies wherewith they had prouoked them, as is aboue sayd, they had succour of the Duke of Parma, Italians, Spanyards, Wallons, Legeoys & Ger∣mans, vnder the conduct of the Baron of Sarexenbourg, to the number of ten thousand men in all. All these occasions, opportunities, causes & for∣ces, mooued the Duke of Lorreyne to lay the siege before the Towne of Iamets, next of the principalitie, which lyeth nigh the borders of Lorreyne, about the 20. of Ianuary. In the meane while, the Princesse caused the inhabitants to sweare fide∣litie to her, and gaue the gouernment of her affayres vnto the Lord Nue∣uile, vntill she might vnderstand of the Prince Monpensier her vncle, ap∣poynted Warde, and of the Lord la Noue, executor of the Will of her bro∣ther, but specially of the King of Nauarre, whose counsel she desired great∣ly to followe. The companie which she had were the Princesse her selfe, the Princesse Bourbon, and the Lord Laual, a young child the heire of the Lord Laual, who dyed at Taillebourg the yeare 1586. in Aprill, as is aforesayd. The forces were the inhabitants of the countrey, and a certaine num∣ber of Frenchmen exiled out of their countrey, by reason of the persecution of the League. The Duke of Boillon being dead, the King of Nauarre was certified thereof from Geneua, and also from Sedan an expresse messenger was sent to the sayd King, to let him vnderstand the state and necessitie of the af∣fayres. The King of Nauarre vnderstanding the state of Sedan, the iniuries and violences of the League, sent thether the Lord Reaulx, and from thence to the King, to put him in mind of the protection which he did owe to the sayd Princesse, and of the seruices done by her predecessors to the Crowne of France: but specially to shewe him the importance of the places which the
Leaguers did intend to inuade, to make much for the safetie of Mets. She sent also to her vncle the Prince Monpensier, who promised her all assistance to his power. The Dukes of Sweibrook sent her word, that they would doo what lay in them to diuert those forces from her. The King not greatly regarding the suit and protection of the sayd La∣die, for hatred of the reformed religion, sent backe againe the Lord Reaulx to the Duke of Lorreyne, where he taried so long that all things were bur∣ned and spoyled before he returned to Sedan. And at his returne he deliue∣red a commission from the King, to be receaued as Lieutenant generall for the King, and protector of the Princesse: and that after being receaued when they had giuen their oth, then he would declare what order should be taken. They made answere, that it was a newe thing, and that the soueraigne Lords of Sedan had neuer receaued such charges, and therefore they could not accept them, considering that they had giuen their oth vnto the Prince Monpensier her vncle and Warden, to doo her lawfull and faithful seruice, and to keepe the places against all men, vnder the protection of his Maie∣stie: who would (as he hoped) bée contented with the assurance which the Prince Monpensier would giue him. About the same time, the Lord Nueuile gouernour of Mezieres, came to Ioram nigh Sedan, seeking by fayre promises of friendship to haue that Lieutenantship: and propounding certaine captious articles, was so an∣swered, that if he had come into Sedan, there was not of his kinne enough for halfe the women of Sedan: for euen they who mooued the matter first stood in some danger. The Prince Monpensier sent diuers times to visite and assist her, and went to the Court to obtayne the continuance of her protection. But no∣thing was obtayned; for the King sought nothing els, but to put in such as he thought would fulfill his desire to oppresse and scatter the Church, and to haue in his possession that Princesse, to nousse her vp in Poperie, that there might not be any hope left hereafter to restore the Church. Whilest the Duke of Lorreyne besieged Iamets, the Duke of Guize sent to Sedan to proffer them great friendship, and to preserue them in all libertie of conscience and religion, if so that there might a mariage be made betwéene the Princesse and his sonne. The Duke of Lorreyne vsing all manner of hostilitie and villanies that could be possible, made suite to haue the sayd Princesse in marriage for his sonne the Lord Vaudimount, both with flattering words, & also by thun∣dring of the double Canon. The weaknes of this Princesse caused the enemy to be very secure and carelesse, which encouraged them which were besieged at Iamets, dayly to
make sturdy and stout sallies vppon the enemies, geuing them no aduan∣tage, not so much as to approach to place their peeces, and compelled them to trench themselues in the Vilages, where they were charged by them  within the towne dayly: and this continued vntill the beginning of Aprill next following. During these two Moneths of February and March, and the continu∣ance of the siege of Iamets, the Lord Resne, with certayne troupes of Ita∣lians, Germans, Wallons, Legeoys, and Lorreins, to the number of 7. or 8. hundred horses, with certayne regiments of footmen, did scowre the countrey about Sedan, where they fired all thinges: so that in all the prin∣cipality of Boillon there remained in a maner but ashes and calamity, be∣sides Sedan and Iamets. Their outrages and cruelties were such that the like were neuer heard of. For all maner of whoredome, rauishments, violences and woorse, were committed by those infernall helhowndes, villaines, and sauage robbers: besides, they put all women, maidens, and children to raunsome as many as they could take: such violences they continued vntill the latter end of March, thereby to terrify this yong and desolat Princesse. Whilest the Leaguers (as fire brands blowne out of hell, subiect vn∣to no law, gouernment, nor power, do proffer iniuries vnto all maner of persons, without any respect, about the beginning of February, while they tryed by al means possible, both by faire words & open violēce, to seaze both vpon the person and state of the Princesse of Boillon: the chiefest of them assembled at Nancy in Lorreine, where they continued in counsell vntil the middest of Februarie, in the which assembly they concluded many articles against the Kings person and state, also they tooke order to continue the ei∣uill warres, which they had kindled, and that still vnder the olour of po∣pish religion, they might win by little and little, and so make themselues way to the state, by the vndooing of whome soeuer. And for as much as they were out of hope to preuaile against them of the reformed religion in Guyenne, or other where, they aduised themselues by policie, to giue the King no rest, by hampring him into new troubles, in proposing to him vnreasonable requests, and still vnder colour of Ca∣tholickisme. For there they framed articles which haue three principal finall causes, to destroy the King, the nobilitie, and to saue themselues. The first is, either to shorten the Kings life by some lot of warre, or else at the least to weaken him, and make him odious to the Church-men. The second is, to kindle and entertaine the warre immortall, that the nobilitie may be destroyed by mutuall blowes and woundes. Thirdly, to saue themselues from blowes and charges, and to keepe themselues in authoritie, vntill the opportunitie which they watched for
should proffer it self: these things are euidently seen in ye articles following. But here first before wee come to these articles, marke well (Christian Reader) the turkish hearts, who contemning all that is named God and  Iustice, they haue extinguished in themselues all humanitie and reuerence of superioritie. For contrarie vnto all humanitie, they went about to ra∣ush away that noble Princesse, issued of noble race, left desolate, father∣lesse, brotherlesse, and friendlesse, and also to lay hand vpon her state. Now haue they despised the superioritie ordayned of God, when they desperatly and imperiously dare giue lawe to their Soueraigne, euen such law as is altogether vnreasonable, contrarie to the duetie of subiects. But now let vs come to the articles. First, they say the King shall be requested to ioyne himselfe more open∣ly to the League, and shall put away from him, and out of his strong holdes, and out of all states and offices of any waight, such as shall bee na∣med vnto him. Here first they will haue the King, to take vpon him all the shame, disho∣nour, and hatred of their detestable actions and iniuries, which they doo in∣tend Note to proffer to all manner of men, vnder the name of the League, which they will the King to take vpon him in these words, that they wil haue him to ioyne with the League. Secondly, whereas they seeke to displace from about him such as they would, their intent is to depriue him of his authoritie, forces, and faithfull friends, to put him vnderward, that he may raigne at their discretion, and no longer then it shall please them. The second article is, that the King shall cause the counsell of Trent to be published, authorised, and receaued in his dominions, onely the executi∣on to be stayed for a time, concerning the reuoking of certaine exemptions and priuiledges of some Chapters, Abbeys, and other Churches from their Bishops. This article they doo set foorth to bee the seede of immortall warres, knowing well that it cannot be published without the sound of the trumpet Note and double Canon. The third article is, that the King shall establish the holy inquisition of Spayne, at the least in good townes, which is the onely way to roote out hereticks, and suspected, so that the officers of the said Inquisition be stran∣gers, or at the least be not borne in the places, where they may haue neither kindred, friends, nor alyaunce. This is the meanes to execute the decrees of the counsell, which in the former article they haue giuen to the kingdome of France for a law▪ that by Note that law all the inhabitants of the realme, who shall be to the Inquisitors, either hereticks, or suspected: for who will not be suspected if it pleaseth master Frier the Inquisitour.
Secondly, the inquisitors must needes be either Lorreines or Spani∣ards, two nations delighting in the blood of Frenchmen, as the Wolfe  in the blood of Lambs, or else they may not haue any kindred, say they: that is, that neither blood, duetie of nature, nor friendship, may let thē from euill doing, and from subuerting the french nation. The summe of this article is, that the french nation may bee destroyed without mercy or compassion. The fourth article is, that the King shal grant licence vnto the church∣men, to redeeme at any time the Church goods, and landes which they haue sould, of whatsoeuer quality the said goods and lands be, or they that haue bought them. And that the King shall compell the beneficed men to make such a redemption within a certaine time that shall be prefixed to them, according to the abilitie that they shall be found to bee of, by them that shall be appoynted to see the state of their reuenewes and lands. The Leaguers haue made the churchmen to blowe the Trompet of Note ciuill warres, vpon that condition that they should not fight themselues, but pay money to them that would fight for them, and so haue made them sell their church landes. Now they will enforce the poore Priests to buy againe their church lands, that they may sell them againe when the Leaguers haue neede of them. The fift article is, that the King shall put into the handes of some of them, certaine places of importance which shall bee named to him: In the which it shall be lawfull for them to build Fortresses, and put in men of warre, as they shall think good, and all at the charges of the townes, cities and countreys: the like also they shall doe in the places which they hold at the time of the making of these articles. The leaguers doo thinke that the King had too great a portion in the Note last deuision of his kingdome which they made with him in Iuly 1585. and that the King was too strong for them yet. Therefore by this article they doo call him to a new deuision, wherein they goe about to doo three things. First they would haue more strong places, and such as they themselues shall appoynt. It is to be thought that they will not make choyse of the worst. For if the King should put them to their choyse, I dare affirme that they would choose Paris, Calis, Anious, Reymes, Bologne, Newhauen, Caen, Roan, Orleans, Tours, Naunts, Poytiers, Bourdeaulx, Limoges, Peri∣geulx, Tholouse, Bayone, Narboune, Marseilles, Lyons, Dijous, Auxone, Langaes, Seus, Mets, and other such which they doe meane by places of importance. Secondly, they would haue the King this to doe for them, as to suffer them quietly to build citadels, and therein to put garrisons, which they gently call fortes, and men of warre to keepe out the King, if at any time
he should change his mind and call for his owne. The third is, that the king and his poore subiectes shall beare the char∣ges of fortifiyng and keeping these places from his obedience, that thence  they may easily oppresse him when they shall spie time, and tyramze his subiects. The sixt article is, that the King shall giue pay to men ofwarre, to be maintained in Lorreyn vpon the borders of Germany, to let the entrie of the Note. strangers their Neighbours, and for that ende shall cause out of hand the goods of herelikes, and others which be associat with them to be sould. The cause of this article was feare of the vengeance which their consci∣ence represented continually before their eies, for the great enormityes, iniuries, & execrable abominations by them committed in the County of Noubeliard: for they perceauing their weaknes in strength and wealth a∣gainst that hot, vindicatiue and mighty nation of Germany, would haue the King to defend them, and so doing, iustify their vilanous actions, and thereby to begger himselfe, and procure the hatred of that Nation, which had beene alwayes at amity with the Crowne of France. Secondly, whereas they require the goods of heretikes, and their as∣sociats (by the which they do vnderstād the Princes of the bloud, the Duke Mommorency, Noble men) and other qualities of men, which shall please them to be sold. I maruell when they will go into Guienne and other Prouinces to pluck sheaue with them, it will be hard for them to get y• sheaue out of their hand: yet the king must do all this to iustify the murthers, whoredomes, Sodo∣miryes, and other abominations committed agaynst the frendes and ali∣ed of the Realme of France. The seuenth article is, that al they who haue beene heretikes, or holden for hereikes, euer since the yeare 1560. of what degree soeuer, may bee taxed to the third or fourth part of their goods. A research must be made of the space of 28. years past, and all liberty ge∣uen Note. so oft, by the Kings & proclaymed by their edicts must néeds be made cōyne. Euen they who were reunited by the last edit of July 1585. made at their owne discretion, must be called to account: and this is to make the warre immortall, vntill they attaine to the marke they shoot at, if they do not catch a fall by the way. The eight article is, that the Catholikes shall pay the tenth part of their reuenues euery yeare. And that commissioners be appointed to make the sallies and taxes, as well of ecclesiasticall, as lay persons: others not∣withstanding then officers of the Soueraygne courts, that all things may be executed more speedily and with lesse charges. In this article, first the Leaguers spare neither friendes nor foes, but Note. that they are somewhat more fauourable to the Catholikes then to the he∣retiks.
For whereas they were promised at the first rysing of the league to be eased of all impost: now three years after they are taxed to pay ye 10. part of all their goods, vntil they be discharged of all taxes and impost. And if  they should complaine of it, no doubt they should heare the answere of the Wolfe to the Crane: goe thy way, thou maist be glad that thou hast not lost all. Secondly, they will not put in trust about their tirannous deuises none of the kinges faithfull officers and seruants whom they suspect, but such Commissioners as be of theyr owne making, of their owne qualities, and such as will say to all their dooings Amen. The ninth article is, that the friendes of heretikes which are of their as∣sociate, shall be enforced by all meanes possible to buy their goods, in aba∣ting vnto them the fifth part of the value: and when they shall be sold to o∣thers, vpon their refusing, they shall not be receaued afterward to haue any action to recouer them. Here be two thinges full of wrong and Turkish oppression. First, that any man should be compelled to buy other mens goods, stan∣deth Note. vppon no reason. Secondly, that the ancient law of aguation, grounded vpon the ciuill law of the Romanes, and vsed in the Realme aboue one thousand yeares (by the which the next of kindred might recouer the land of his kinsman a∣lienated, in repaying the money within a certayine time) should be altered by new men, who within a mans age had no more to do in the realme then they haue this day in Turkie: that law I say, that the Kinges of France neuer sought to alter, neither had been able to do it if they would. The tenth article is, that the first summes of money that shall be made of that sale, shall be bestowed to pay the most needfull debts of the heads of the League, and the ouerplus shall bee put in the handes of such as shall be named, with condition that they shall not be emploied otherwise. In this Article wee may obserue two prety shameles tokens: for first, these beggerly Lords, issued out of the cauerns of the beggerly mountains Note. of Lorreine, do imitate the beggerly Friers in their Sermons, who do ex∣hort their good Dames to geue to their couent: so these Lordes being 12. in number (hauing spent their goods, and other mens also, partly in practi∣sing conspiracies against the state, partly in riots, whoredoms, and excesse) now put vs in remembrace to fell our landes and goods at what price so∣euer, for to pay their debts, for these good lawes which they send vs out of their vilage of Nancy. Secondly, order is taken that the ouerplus of the sale of our goods and landes be put in store in such hands as they shall appoint for them, least they should lacke to finish their course which they haue begun. But what
shal we do when ye is done? for all wilbe but a gnat in an Elephants mouth: wee must begin to sell againe, and for lack of goods and lands to sell, wee  must sel our own bodies to be slaues in the Galleys, least these men should lack money. The tenth article is, that the life of any prisoner of the enemie, meaning the hereticks, as they tearme them, be not spared, except he wil abiure, and put in good sureties to liue Catholickly, in paying presently the iust value of his goods, if they haue not been sold alreadie. And in case they haue béen sold, he shall renounce all right which he may pretend hereafter, and shall binde himselfe to serue three yeares and more in any seruice that he shall be imployed, without receauing any wages or paye. This is the law wherewith Mahomet the false Prophet did strengthen his tirannie and superstition, for thus hee speaketh , Note. if any man shall speake against Corran, either the sword or bondage. The only difference is, that Mahomets lawe is somewhat more fauourable, in as much as it is but onely against the speakers against his religion, but not against them who shall be taken in warre. But this dooth violate the lawe of Nations, and right of suppleants, which alwaies haue been kept inuiolable: and the violating thereof had been alwaies accounted among all Nations, worthie to be reuenged with fire and sword. By this lawe of Nancy they will make this Nation so fa∣mous in the praise of humanitie, more sauage than the very barbarous Na∣tions. Secondly, life here is redeemed onely with abiuration and violating of conscience, which is more than the Turke, or any other Nation on the earth dooth practise. At last followeth bondage, which must indure as long as it shall please the Lords and Senators of Nancy. This is the nature of this monstrous lawe borne at Nancy. The effects of this strange new law were to roote out the Frenh Na∣tion. For it maketh the Catholicks without any hope of remission, to murther the Hugonets contraius gentium & supplicum: and it inforceth the Hugonets, lege talionis, to destroy the Catholicks for the violating of the right of Nations and Suppliants. And thus we shall be well recompen∣sed for the selling of our goods & lands. These articles be such, as if a Lord should offer them to his slaues, it were lawfull for them to vse all meanes possible against him. But these new Gods on earth dare present so vniust, so vnreasonable, so vnreuerent conditions and lawes vnto one of the grea∣test Monarkies in the World: but what is it that these shameles men dare not presume for aduauntage? These articles agreed vpon by these wise Senatours and Law-giuers in Nancy, the Metropolitan vilage of Lorreyne, were brought to the King
to be approued by him: but there was some delay in the approbation. And as for such as made for the suppressing of the reformed religion, hee did ac∣cord  with them, but to the rest he could not by any meanes condesend, kno∣wing with a good iudgement, that they tooke religion for no other pre∣tence but to couer their ambition, and by these meanes to weaken his au∣thoritie, and to rid him out of the way, by whatsoeuer meanes, and also all them whom they knew, were able and willing to hold plea for the Crowne against them: which thing caused that these articles of Nancy, but special∣ly such as touched the Kings strong places and holdes to bee deliuered to them, could not be approued by the King. It is saide in the first booke, how the Guyzes making all hast that they might to vsurp the Crowne, thought good to rid out of the way Monsieur the Kings only brother, and how at Nancy, the shop of al the treacheries in these perilous dayes, they hired one Salcedo a Spaniard to haue dispat∣ched him one way or another, and for to bring that to passe, they deliuered him for an earnest at the beginning 6000. Crownes. Now in like man∣ner these Senators of Nancy doo propound in their counsell to search out, and how to take away the impediments which may let them to come spee∣dilie to their intended purpose: it was found speciallie to bee the King, and the Princes of the bloud, but among them chiefely the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde. Therefore they must bee made away by one meanes or another: and whereas warre and violence were neither the sa∣fest nor the surest way, they concluded that poyson must bee tried. But to bring this to an happie end, they must haue the helpe of the Q. Mother, she must be one instrument to commit parricides: for it is to be thought, that if she would not spare her owne Sonne Charles the 9. she would not spare them whome she neuer loued: for she neuer cared what shee did, so that shee might not doo good, she is therefore easily won, to doo that which she great∣ly desired. Poysoners are hired, they haue their drougges and instructions with them: some are sent to minister their Phisick to the King of Nauarre, if by any meanes they could. But howsoeuer it be, either that they which were hired to poyson the King of Nauarre did altar their mindes, or had not the meanes to execute so vilanous an act, so it is, that his death was bruted in Lorreyne, and at the Court about the same time that the Prince of Conde dyed. But it hath pleased the Lord to haue deliuered him from their snares, to punish them in time, according to the measure of the treacheries and in∣numerable enormities by them committed. As touching the Prince of Conde, they had their mindes vpon him, for at length, the diuel furthering their treacheries, procured some of his owne houshold seruants to bee wonne to take the matter in hand, and among o∣thers, one Brillant and a Page (vpon whome he had bestowed great bene∣fits)
to giue him poyson the third day of March at supper, he fell sick of a great paine of the stomack, about an howre an a halfe after supper: that  paine was followed incontinentlie with great vomiting, comming at sun∣drie times with continuation of the said paine, and with a great thirst: hee was assisted by Nicolas Poget, his master Chirurgion. At the same houre was called Master Bonauenture de Medicis, Doctor of Phisick: which considering the accidents, did helpe the vomitings following therein, the motions of nature. The sicknes notwithstanding continued all the night, hauing inuaded the inferiour bellie with swelling and hardnes of the same, with such difficultie to take breath, that he could not lie in his bed, but was faine to sit still in a chayre. The morrow after were called to counsell Lewis Bontempts, and Ihan Pallet, Doctors of Phisick, who altogether did indeuour to helpe his Excellencie with all diligence and fidelitie, by all the meanes which they iudged fit, according to the accurrant accidents. The fift day of March, and second of his disease, about three a clock in the after noone, all things went from worse to worse, so that there came a suffocation of all the famolties of nature, in the which he rendered his soule to God, halfe an houre after. In the death of this Prince, God did shoote an arrow of his wrath a∣gainst the vngratefulnes & peruersitie of this world, but speciallie against France, in plucking this Noble Prince out of so many labours, into the so∣cietie of the inheritance of his Saints in light. Henry Bourbon, Prince of Conde, Sonne vnto Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, whose famous name shall bee in the euerlasting remem∣brance of the righteous, was borne and brought vp in the Church of God, whose preseruation was as deare vnto him as his owne life, God had en∣dued him with noble vertues, he was faithfull vnto God, duetifull in the true worship of God, true vnto his King, louer of his Countrey, and of the libertie and honour of this realme, enemie vnto the perturbers of the peace of the same, and of them all whome he knew to be coniurators against the King and state. His generositie und valour, with the greatnes of courage had been shewed in many noble exploytes, done by him, but speciallie in ouercomming many assaults, labors, perils, and miseries, during these mi∣serable ciuill warres: to be short, God hath plucked him in all the course of his life, out of many daungers. His death was the more to be lamented, because it was vyolent, and in the flower of his age, which happened the fift day of March 1588. at S. Jhan d' Angely in Xainctonge, to the great griefe of all men, among whome from age to age, the remembrance of him shall be honorable. For the death of this Prince was hurtfull to all France, but gainfull onely to him, who chaunged a vaine and paynfull life into one onely true and stedfast life, im∣mortall,
quiet and euerlastingly blessed, in the assurance of the which hée died in our Lord Iesus Christ. This sudden and vnlooked for accident, gaue occasion to the sayd Doc∣tors, Phisitions and Chirurgions, to thinke that this sicknesse came tho∣rowe some extraordinary and vyolent cause. For the sayd Phisitions gaue out vnder their hand and seale, as follow∣eth. After his departing about two houres, there began to issue out of his mouth and nostrels a froth thicke and white, which gathered by little and little to the bignesse of ones fist, and out of the same place a little after did issue yealowish water in great aboundance. On the Lords day being the sixt of March, by the commandement of his Counsell, we Phisitions and Chirurgions haue beside called Peter Mesnard, & Focault Chotard, both Masters Chirurgions of S. Ihan d' Angely, to make the anatomie of his bodie, and to search altogether the causes of a death so sudden. And first wee haue found all the body blewish and leadie, the bellie in a strange manner swolne, stretched and hard. In the opening of the body, we found in the lower bellie all the parts thereof with the inwards, blew∣ish and blacke, and the hollownesse of his bodie full of yealowish waters. After searching diligently the stomack, we haue also found it blewish, and in the right and vpward part of the same an inch or thereabout vnder the Orifice of the sayd stomacke, we haue found a round hole eaten through, and through that hole had fallen the waters and liquours which we found within the capacitie of the inferiour bellie. Then hauing diligently taken vp, viewed, cut and emptied the sayd stomack, we haue seene euidently the whole bodie of the sayd stomacke as well without as within, specially on the right side blacke, burned, vlcered and gangrened in diuers places, but notably about the hole aboue sayd. So that wee cannot iudge that it could bee done otherwise, then by a notable quantitie of burning, vlcering, and caustick poyson, which had left euident markes of his passing in the Oeso∣phage. The liuer also in the place ioyning to the sayd hole, was found al∣tered and burned; the rest of the substance of the sayd liuer blewish, as also the lights. There was no part of ye bodie of his Excellencie which was not of a very good constitution and very healthfull, if the vyolent poyson had not corrupted ye parts aboue sayd. All the premises are according to trueth: and for the certitude of the same, wee haue sealed this report with our hands andseales at S. Ihan d' Angely the 6. day of March. 1588. Medicis. Bontemps. Pallet. Poget. Mesnard. Chotard.
About the same time the King of Nauarre came out of Gascoyne, who being aduertized of his death, commaunded that such as were suspected of  that villanous fact should be pursued. Whereupon a page suspected, saued himselfe by flight: many more were apprehended. The processe was made vnto many, with all the solemnities requisite thereunto: whereof within a while after, the condemnation of one Brillaut ensued: the page also was condemned vpon centumacie, & executed in Picture. Brillaut was drawne vpon a hurdle through all the streates of S. Jhan, and in the chiefest place of the sayd towne was torne in peeces with foure horses. Now we see how the Leaguers when they haue not been able to destroy the Princes by valour, haue vsed treacherous procéedings. For first, ha∣uing treacherously shortned the life of the Duke of Alençon by poyson, as it is saide in the first booke, and seduced the Cardinall of Bourbon, making him dreame of a kingdome in his old doting age, and to oppose himselfe to two Kings, to wit, the King, and the King of Nauarre, and to all the house of Bourbons, out of which God had made him that honour as to haue is∣sued one of the chiefest, as is sayd in the second booke. They also haue con∣demned the King of Nauarre to dye by their Italian figges, and there up∣pon proclaymed his death (which they had promised to themselues) both in Lorreyne and in the Court, and in Townes and Cities of their fauou∣rers: but God hath disappoynted them of their murtherous purpose. At length (by the long suffering of God) to plague France, they haue preuay∣led agaynst that good godly, vertuous, & famous Prince of Conde, and that vpon such a day as hath béen fatall to the house of Guize to work mischief, murther and rebellion. The death of this noble Prince amazed all men in Xainctonge, knowing that God had some heauie iudgements to execute vppon France, and that GOD had taken that noble Prince, least he should see euill dayes, as the Prophet Esay saith. It is sayd before, how the Lord Lauerdine (who was master of the Campe) saued himselfe by flight out of the slaughter of Coutras, & betooke himselfe to the towne of Niort, to the Lord Malicorne his vncle, where hée soiourned as his Lieutenant. Here (Christian Reader) wee haue to obserue, that although the King and the Leaguers hated in wardly one another, and in outward appearance did deepely dissemble their affections; yet wee doo see, that as Herode and Pilate did excercise priuie hatred betweene them, and at length in persecu∣ting Christ did well agree as friends: so in men of like degrées and in like actions the like affections are boyling in their hearts. For the rumour of the death of the King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, (which the Lea∣guers (hauing set some secret price vppon their heads) had promised vnto themselues) did cause the King and the Leaguers in outward apparance
to be great friends, and to promise vnto themselues an vtter rooting out of them of the religion, and a sure subduing of all things beyond the riuer of Loyre. With speede therefore they sent eight or nine regiments conducted  by the Lord Courbe, to the Lord Lauerdine, Lieutenant of his vncle the Lord Malicorne at Niort in Poytow, who with al the forces which he could gather both in the lowe and high Poytow, the 16. day of March about two a clocke after midnight, descended into Marans by boates through the marishes of Beauregard, and with fiue hundred footmen seazed vppon the house and farme of the sayd Beauregard, hauing found no resistance, but onely of two of the inhabitants of Marans, with a little boate who were gone to discouer the Iland Cicoigne: these two discharging their peeces vpon the enemies, retyred to the trenches of Beauregard, there they found but fiue or sixe Souldiers, as well of the inhabitants as others, who also discharged certaine shot vpon the enemie, who notwithstanding aduanced and came to land. The cause why the Lord Lauerdine subdued these I∣lands so easily, was, first the certayne newes of the death of the Prince of Conde, and the rumours bruted abroade touching the supposed death of the King of Nauarre; which thing caused great amaze and discouraging a∣mong all men. Secondly, the ill order and prouidence of the gouernour: for if he, his troups and inhabitants had done their duetie, Lauerdine had not entered that Iland at that price, or els had been chased out to his disho∣nour and losse. The Lord Iarry had béen aduertized three dayes before of the enterprize of Lauerdine, and might haue put into the Ilands forces sufficient to resist the enemie: for the companies of the Lord Trimouille conducted by the Lord Boysduly, returning from Cotaudiere were very nigh him, to wit, at S. Radagond, Champaigne, and Puyreneau, who desi∣red nothing more then to enter into Marans. But the gouernour and the inhabitants fearing the preace of Souldiers (which was excessiue indeede) would not admit them, but sent to Rochel the Captaine Plaute, Lieute∣nant of the Gouernour, to request them of Rochel to send them about fiftie Souldiers, whom they would entertayne, vntill they might see what the enemie would doo: which thing they of Rochel could not doo for that time. Notwithstanding this refuse, and that the gouernour was well aduer∣tized, that he had not sufficient forces to let ye enemie to take land, yet the companies of the Lord Boysduly passing through the Brault, were sent further as farre as Esuand, through foule wayes ouerthwart the Mar∣shes, whereas they should haue been stayed, to be vsed as the necessitie had required. They sent notwithstanding the same day at euening to the said Boysduly: but arriuing not before ten or eleuen a clock in the night, was the cause that succour could not come in time, although that the diligence of the sayd Boysduly and his companies was wonderfull; for without any
leasure to lodge, and without any respect of the indignitie proffered him and his troupes the day before, they departed presently, and repayred to  the fort Brune one houre and a hale before the enemie tooke lande at Beauregard. But whilest the gouernour and the inhabitants made some difficultie to let in all his troupes, (being not willing to receaue aboue 50. or 60.) the enemie on the other side entred at Beauregard (as is sayd) so that the entrie into Brune was not opened to the sayd Boysduly, nor his troups, afore that the enemy had already gotten the farme house of Beau∣regarde. There had beene meanes to driue back the enemie, if speedely the troups (who were entred at Brune about three a clock after midnight) had gone to meete the enemie, as some did giue their aduise to doe. For the L. Lauerdine was not yet well accompanyed, and it had beene an easie thing to cut the way to the rest of his troupes which came in small boates. But because the Souldiers were marueilously wearie, they tooke incontinent∣ly their lodgings: the Captaines also did not think good to assault the e∣nemie by night, before they had discouered him. By this delay, the Lord Lauerdine receiued his footmen with leasure, to the number of fiue hundred, without any horsemen, whome hee set in battell array in Beauregard, and placed about foure score of them in the Farme house of Lommeau. The day being come, to wit, the 16. of March, the Lords Boysduly and Iarry, and others Captaines, to number of three hundred footemen, and about three score hrsemen, went to seeke out the e∣nemie, who put his men in battell array, in fauour of the Farme house of Beauregard, and durst not aduance vpon our men, fearing our horsemen, although they were twise stronger in footmen. Our men on the other side durst not charge them, hauing such aduantage as they had, but for that time were content to chase them, who were put in the Farme house of Lommeau, who retyred to their fellowes in good order, as men resolute. Our men on the other side, retyred to the towne, where euery one refre∣shed himselfe, intending to charge the enemie in the euening, but there was noted in our men much confusion, but small resolution. The same day about three a clock in the after noone arriued from Ro∣chel the Lord Noyse, with twentie braue souldiers, vnder the conduct of Captaine Ozanneau: it is certaine that it these souldiers had arriued the day before, and had been placed at Beauregard, with some more for∣ces which might haue been geuen them, part of the inhabitants, & part of the souldiers of the gouernour, the L. Lauerdine had not put foot on land so easily as he did. For although the Lord Lauerdine had gotten much (as is said) yet he had beene enforced to retire, if it had not beene for the trea∣thery committed in the forte of Bastile, which commanded the captayne Ensigne of the gouernour and some others, who were so frighted by a countrie man, sent vnto them by the way of aduertizement from Perrerio
with threatnings, that if they did suffer themseues to be besieged, they would be hanged as others were at Cotaudiere: that there upon they stat∣ed not for the enemie, but abandoned their fort, their armour and muniti∣on,  and saued themselues in the Marshes. The Lord Lauerdine hauing intelligence of this fact, immediatly sent for his horsemen, who were three long leagues off: they arriued about 5. a clock in the morning: he put all his men in battell array, and marched toward the towne of Marans. The Lords Boysduly and the gouernour, with other gentlemen and souldiers, prepared themselues to goe to seeke the enemie, whome about six a clock they discouered with his horsemen, which made them conclude that without doubt the Bastile was in their power: for it was vnpossible that their horsemen had entred any other way. Notwithstanding, they which were in the towne, went foorth to re∣ceiue the enemie to the farthest houses of the high towne, where they fought a skirmish, in the which the Lord Boysduly, Noyse, and some o∣thers who followed them, with some of▪ Rochell, did what they could: but at length being charged with horsemen of the enemie, were forced to giue place, and to retyre into the Castell speedily, so that the enemie seazed vpon the high towne, and thereupon afterward became master of all the rest. All the Gentlemen with their horses and Souldiers, and some of the inhabitants retyred into the Castell, to the number of three or foure hun∣dred. Within that place there was no prouision of victualls, saue some small store of meale, which the Souldiers in retyring therein could carry away with them. There was neither shouels, mattocks, picaxes, nor any other tooles, to remoue the earth if neede should be: there was small prouision for horses, and no good store of powder. Notwithstanding, the Lord Boysduly, with the gouernour and other Gentlemen, determined to hold out for certaine dayes, hoping to haue some succour either by the comming of the king of Nauarre (who was not yet returned out of Gascoyne) or else by them of Rochell, or if the worst should fal out, yet they would make some honourable composition. With this resolution they prepared to keepe the court of the Castel, which was in a manner trenched, and the dungeon hauing one piece which was little or nothing worth to them. There they were incontinently besieged by the enemie, who seazed vpon all the conuenient places round about the Castell, and did commaund the court of the sayd Castell: they trenched themselues where it was con∣uenient for them. They who were besieged in the Castell did likewise their endeuor▪ so that without any losse of men they killed many of the enemies. The Lord
Iarry Gouernour was hurt in the foot, which made his person afterward vnprofitable. But the enemy pressed them within so narrowly, that there could no  meanes be deuysed to vnderstand any thing during the siege. The 18. of March the King of Nauarre hasting before his company, which followed him contrary to the opinion of many, came to Rochel with the Prince of Soyssons, and some other noble men in good deliberation to succour Marans. Afore his arryuing to Rochel, the inhabitantes thereof had sent a good number of Harquebuziers, vnder the conduct of Captaine Gargoleau, and others, for to enter into Marans: but they vnderstoode by the way, that the enemy possessed the Iland with the chiefest fortes, and had besieged the Castell: for which cause they returned to Rochel. The Citizens of Ro∣chel also had sent two shippes with the barke of Captayne Courtault, and certayne Culuerings, vnder the conduct of Captayne Boysseau, and o∣ther Souldiours and Captaynes. They entered into the riuer boldly, sea∣zed vppon the forts of Brault and Clousie, in the sight of the enemy whom they preuented. The King of Nauarre informed of all thinges passed at Marans, the 19. day very early tooke his iourney to Charon, and from thence to the said fortes, where he put men and munition a occasion serued. He caused also the shippes whereon the Culuerings were to approach the town of Ma∣rans: the Culuerings did beat the houses of the Towne called the boats houses. The enemy hauing seazed vppon the whole towne, and trenched him∣selfe in the market house, seeing the preparing of the Shippes, presented himself to withstand the landing of them that came from Rochel, and with two field Péeces compelled the ships to descend lower: there were flayne some Souldiers of Rochel. The King of Nauarre gaue all the signes that could be possible (as by the sounding of Trompets, spyals, or other meanes) to let them who were besieged vnderstand of his comming. One of his spyals was hanged: but they within could not perceaue any thing, saue onely of the comming of the Ships, whom they supposed to haue béene the Rochellers only, but he could not conceaue any hope to be able to succour them. The enemie in the meane while increased his forces, which repay∣red into the Iland out of euery side. Hee had also meanes to make fortes and trenches in diuers entringes of the Iland, to stop the succour which might come to them within the Castell, and in the meane time pressed them hard. The King of Nauarre on the other side receaued some for∣ces, as well them which had followed him out of Gascoyne, as other who repayred vnto him out of Poytow, and Xainctonge. All these com∣panyes
together were fayre; and disposed to do well: & although the forces of the enemy were no lesser, notwithstanding he determined to enter into  the Iland. But hee found in the place (which he thought to be most easie) which before hee had viewed himselfe, that the enemy had so entrenched himselfe there, that it was impossible to force them without great losse of men; considering yt the most part of the way to come to the sayd trenches, the Souldiers should haue waded in the water to the wast, & the horses to the saddle. The enemy also had set some Peeces vppon the bancke of the marsh, by the which they might greatly haue endamaged them that would haue gone about to passe: they had broken also some bridges to make the entring difficult. All these discommodityes considered, the King of Nauarre chose rather to saue his men to a better opportunity, thē so dangerously to hazard them, without any helpe to them that were within the Castell, who might saue themselues some other way: so he tooke his forces from Clousy, and gaue it ouer. Hee kept onely the fort of Brault, the passage into the low Poytow, which notwithstanding two or three dayes after came in the power of the enemie. The enemy waxed stronger and stronger dayly, because the castell refu∣sed parley, and harkened to nothing but to defend themselues, seeing no Ordinance. At length the Lord Lauerdine had three Pieces brought from Niort, which he set against the castell the 24. of March. The first battery was a∣gaynst a rownd tower, which maketh one of the corners of the Castell to∣ward the towne: and with shot did so enlarge a window which was garni∣shed with a Lattice of Iron, that he enforced the Rochellers to forsake it: they shot also agaynst the tower of the gate, and in other places here and there without hurting any man, although that place be very ill for the shot of Ordinance. They which commaunded in the Castell, and many Souldyers lacked no courage (although they wanted many thinges necessary to assist them∣selues in defence of a naughty place) but as the affections are diuers, speci∣ally in a company confused, as that was within the Castell: so one gaue counsell one way, another another way: at length they came to that issue, that they would surrender the place, but vpon such tearms and conditions as should not be dishonorable vnto them. The reasons of this resolution were, that they had promised, and so sent word to Rochel that they might hold eight dayes and no longer without succour. The tearme was expired, they had no more bread but for two dayes, and yet was not there ynough for all. Many of their horses were dead for hunger, which did infect them with the stinke: there happened also
that some horses for lacke of fodder had eaten the tayles one of an other, euen to the bones. They had no salus to dresse them which were woun∣ded, they had no tooles to fortify them selues, hauing among them all but  one shouell and a matock. The dungeon beeing very little, the fall of the walles did quell them, and that which was woorst of all, they heard no newes of the King of Nauarre, but onely what Lauerdine told them, who made them beleeue that he was still in Gascoyne: and although they belee∣ued not the wordes of the enemy, yet did they see nothing to perswade them to the contrary. The enemy on the other side fearing to be forced by the king of Nauarre, offered them honest and good suretyes for the performance of the offers, so that they did choose rather to take him in that mood (seeing that they must yeeld) then to expect greater extremity which might ender the conditi∣ons harder, hauing done already that which good souldiers & men of war might do: therefore they yeelded vp the castell vpon these conditions. That there should goe forth all gentlemen, Souldiers, and inhabitantes, with their armor, horses and stuffe, and should be safely conducted whither they would, which was faithfully kept by the Lord Lauerdine, in the taile: notwithstanding, some souldiers were spoiled of their good, but few. The Iland of Marans being so reduced into the hand of the Leaguers, the Lord Cluseaulx, otherwise called Blanchard, obtayned the gouern∣ment of that place, which he kept about two moneths. About the same time that these things did so passe in the Iles of Maran, to wit, the 25. of March, not farre from thence, to wit, in Britayne, vppon the North side of Loyre, as at Naunts, and other places thereabouts happe∣ned an earthquake, as a presage of such commotions as haue happened, & do continue there still: which was testifyed by Lewis Viuant doctor of Phisike in the vniuersity of Naunts to Duke Mercure, gouernour of Bri∣tayne, as followeth. These are to let your Lordship vnderstād, yt on Fryday being the 25. of March about 11. a clocke in the morning, the weather being calme, the wind at Southwest, at the time of the celebration of the high Masse, was heard throughout all the citty a great noyse, roaring and groonting with a great shaking and quaking of the earth for that small time that it did con∣tinue, so that the people which were in Churches, with great multitudes were afard of that sudden noyse, except some which thought it to haue béen carte loaden & drawen through the streets. Other doubted it had béen the Myne of the gate Sauuetour that had kindled: they which were in hou∣ses, thought that the fire had suddenly caught the Chymnies, hearing such noyse as when a Chimney is fyred. This noyse and earthquake not onely was in the Citty and Suburbs, but also at Nozay, Eucenis, Oudon, Mau∣ues, Calquefou, S. Erbline, S. Stephen, Boys, la Hay, the low Goulene, and
high Goulene, chiefely where the Countrey people were so amazed in those quarters, that they forsooke both the Masse and the Priestes that saide it: the riuer also was seene bubling at the same time. This token dooth presage many calamities, and a wonderfull alteration in this estate: this earthquake doth admonish vs to search the right know∣ledge of our offences, as also of late we haue been warned by fiery men, which haue been seene by the watermen about Tours and Saumur to fight in the ayre. Thus farre Doctor Viuaut to Duke Merceur. It is saide before how the Duke of Lorreyne both besieged Iamets, and also asked the Duchesse of Boillon in marriage for his Sonne the Lorde Vaudimount: the Duke of Guize did the like for his. This Noble Prin∣cesse abhorred their aliaunce, partly for their false religion, or rather athe∣isme, which was couered with zeale of popish religion, as with a Maske, partly for their treacherous intents, which shee knew they had against the Crowne of France. Yet these petty Lords of Lorreyn, must needs haue her whether she will or not: but her they may not haue before they take Sedan, the chiefest towne of her principalitie, which they had terrified all this mo∣neth of March, by the barbarous inuasions of the Lord Rosne. It is saide also, how the besieged in Iamets haue kept off the enemies, and had caused to trench themselues in villages thereabouts, where they were dayly as∣saulted by them of Iamets. Now in the latter end of March, the armie be∣fore Iamets was greatly increased inforces, so that all things being readie, Iamets is pressed and besieged more narrowly then before, and after many skirmishes betweene them, the arillerie is placed for the battery. There remained to them of Jamets for hope of succour, (after mans iudge∣ment) the towne of Sedan, in the which vnder the auhority of the Duchesse commaunded the Lord Nieuile, a Gentleman famous in counsell, valour, and experience: he had within Sedan a small number of Gentlemen and good Souldiours. The army which was before Iamets, desirous to cut off all hope of succour from Sedan, sent part of their horsemen, Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniards, with a number of Harquebusiers about Sedan, to spoyle and to seaze vpon all places and high wais, by which they of Se∣dan might come to succour Iamets, and among others they tooke Vaude∣lincourt, Balan and other places. Their courses were raging, and their rage spared nothing: the contempt which they had of so weake an enemie, made them (as the manner is) both insolent, secure, and careles of their safetie, which was the cause, that diuers times, and in diuers places they were char∣ged by them of Sedan, who issuing out fiercely, made great slaughter of them, as the time and small meanes which they had suffered them: so that they were shamefully driuen out of their villages of Vaudelincourt and Balan. But to preuent such inconueniences, the Lorde Rosne and other Cap∣taines,
who conducted the turkish troupes of the League, determined to lodge hereafter more closely, then they had done before: and for that cause, the fourth day of Aprill, the greatest part of the horsenien and footemen  which were on the east side of Mense went to Bemily, situated on the west side of the sayd riuer, where the L. Rosne lodged, and the rest of his com∣panies lodged at Aucourt, Haracourt, and Raucourt, leauing on the east side of Mense, the Baron of Saraxenbourg, with foure companies of horse∣men, to wit, his owne, and the Lord Anthony Vize a frenchman, a great friend of the Duke of Guyze: the third was the company of the Lord Til∣ly, a Lorreyne, and the fourth was conducted by Captaine Carlo an Itali∣an. These companies placed themselues within the towne of Douzie, belonging to the principalitie of Sedan. That towne they determined to fortifie, by reason of the situation which is good, being situated vpon the riuer named Chize, flowing from Iuoy, and within a quarter of a league beneath Douzie falleth in the riuer Mense, which cānot be passed by foord in winter: the sayd Douzie lyeth directly from Sedan to Iamets, so that hauing Douzie, they be masters of the way from Sedan to Iamets. Nigh vnto the village of Douzie beyond the bridge at the ends of the meades, at a place called Marie, were two companies of horsemen lodged, commanded by Ihan and Thomas Albaneses, there they were set to suc∣cour Douzie, for by the meanes of the bridge lying betweene them and the towne, in a moment they could recouer the towne. The companies which had passed the riuer Mense, vnder the conduct of the Lorde Rosne, were gone to besiege Raucourt, appertayning to the Soueraignety of Se∣dan. They besieged it when it was altogether vnprouided of all necessary things, for which cause the Lord Nieuile determined by the aduise of the cousell to furnish it with all necessary things, as well with prouision of victuals as munition of warre, and by the way to charge three companies of light horsemen, which were lodged in Haracourt, and to that ende hee departed out of Sedan about eight a clock in the euening the tenth day of Aprill, accompanyed with foure score horses and foure hundred Har∣quebusiers: but there fellout such a terrible tempest and violent rayne, that they were enforced to retire, saue onely they victualed Raucourt. The twelfth das of April, the Lord Nieuile aduertized of the diligence which the Baron of Saraxenbourg vsed in fortifiyng Douzie, he considered that the longer he should delay to charge him, the greater the difficulty would be, and that the sooner the better, without giuing hun leaue to fortifie himselfe in that place, which did so presse Sedan, and tooke from him the meanes to succour Iamets: he therefore called the counsel, and pro∣pounded them two enterprizes which bee would willingly attempt, the e was to goe to Haracourt, the other to Douzie: whither it was con∣cluded that they should martch the same night. They departed about ten
a clock at night, with foure hundered Harquebusiers, and fourescore and twelue horses, commauuded by the Lorde Arsoune, and Falayses. It was  also ordered that the footemen should goe three diuers waies, to wit, that the Captaines Dorys and Parramentier, with one hundred Hrquebusi∣ers, should goe to get the bridge of Douzy, vpon the riuer Chize, to stop the sally of them who were within the towne, and by the same meanes to let the companies of the light horsemen, who were at Mary, distant onely from Douzie the shot of an Harquebush (betweene that place and the towne, no∣thing being but the meades and the riuer) least they shoulde goe into the towne to succour their fellowes. Captain Cheuerdery, Lieutenant to the Lord Caulmont, should assault the lodging of the Lord Saraxenbourg, with 50. Harquebusiers: the Cap∣taines Framond and Massart, with their troup should charge vpon the trenches, through the which, the horsemen should issue foorth. The rest of the footemen commaunded by Captaine Villepoys Seriant Maior, should stay with the horsemen, for to helpe where neede should bee, and to fauour our horsemen when they should ioyne with the enemie. The thirteenth day, about three a clock in the morning, the troupes of Sedan did charge Douize, and they who had the charge to sease the bridge, came so fitly, without finding any great resistance, that quickly they were masters of the bridge. But it was not so at the barritados, whom the Captaine Framond and Massart did charge, for there our men were violently resisted by the Bar∣ron of Saraxenbourg himselfe and the Lord Anthony Vize, & Dom Ihan Romeroa Spanyard, who made a salley with fiue and twentie or thirtie horsemen, who notwithstanding were receaued so coragiously by our foot∣men, who had charged the Barricado, that being beaten back, they were faine to retire within their trenches so confusedly, that our footemen in beating them before, entred with them, and seazed vpon the barricado. In this skirmish were slaine many notable Captaines and men of warre, a∣mong whome were Anthony Vize and his Lieutenant, the rest of their horsemen, that then for haste and terrour could not get on horseback, would haue auoyded by the bridge, which was seazed on before, but they found it stopped, & were so rudely seton by our footemen, that the most of them were slane, some taken prisoners, a great number cast themselues into the riuer and were drowned, the Baron and few with him, by the goodnes of their horses, auoyded the danger, and most of them in their doublets, and without bootes, the way to Iuoy. The fight hauing indured one houre, the rest of the enemies retired in∣to a Fort, which they had made within the village, and there stayed for the canon. The Lord Nieuile by hap had caused two meane pieces to be brought with his troupes, wherewith they shot two volleys against that
Fort: that disligent exployte so amazed them within the Fort, that with∣out any bargening, they rendered themselues at the discretion of the Du∣chesse, with promise of their liues. The agreement made, the Captaines  Carlo & Maruile rendred their Ensignes to the Lord Nieuile, who being entred into the Fort, found therein about two hundred able men, as well borsemen as footemen, whome he caused to be brought forth, and bee lead captines to Sedan. The chiefe men of them were the Captaines Carlo, Maruile, & their Lieutenant and Ensignes, Captaine Romero a Spany∣ard, who commaunded ouer a companie of horsemen. There were also a number of Gentlemen of the companie of the Baron, and many light hor∣ses Italians: there were found more then seauen score slaine vpon the place in that flight, besides them who were drowned and hurt. There were taken more then two hundred horses, among whome were found twentie or fiue and twentie of the fairest in all the armie, and many of them had cost the Baron one thousand crownes a piece: hee esteemed the losse which hee had sustained in that charge, in horses, plate, money, and mony worth, at more then thirtie thousand Crownes. Of our men it is most true, there dyed but onely two, the one was a Souldiour of the companies▪ and the other a Citizens Sonne of Sedan, named the Febure, there were some hurt▪ but verie few. The enemies did holde a strong house, named Lamcourt, situated be∣tweene Douzie and Sedan, which the Lord Rosne had battered with nine and twentie shot of Ordinance. The Lord Nieuile in returning to Sedan, caused his artillerie to take that way: that house was kept by fiue & twenty Souldiours, who when they had seen the canon, yeelded themselues vpon the same conditions that they of Douzy had done. The companies which were beyond Mense, commaunded by the Lord Rosne, tooke such fright by the ouerthrowe of them of Douzy, that they could neuer clawe it off after: for the night following, they repassed the riuer Menze with great alarum, and retired with the rest of the armie before Jamets, so that there remained not one of them vpon the Land of Sedan. This was the light of eliue∣rance, which God reserued to this fatherles and comfortles Princesse, and the confirmation of his promise that hee raised vp himselfe for the poore, which is afflicted without a cause, and that hee will pull downe with shame and confusion the high lookes of the haughtie. The Papists, in whome there was some sparke of reason and iustice, did holde infallibly, that some horrible vengeance did hang ouer the head of that armie full of villany and bloud. The Duchesse of Boillon hauing receaued the newes of that vnlooked or victorie, accompanied with other Ladies of calling, who were exiled for the testimonie of the truth, and soiourned at Sedan, went to the gate called Mesuil, to giue thankes to the Gentlemen and Captaines, for the nota∣ble
seruice which they had done to her, and to gratifie the Souldiours in al that she could. The Lord Nieuile presented her two Ensignes, & two Cornets which they had gotten, which she receaued thankfully, & incontinently the whole companie with the people went to the temple, where thankes were giuen to God for this happie successe: this was about noone. This ouerthrowe did not quench the fire, but rather did kindle the vio∣lence of the army which was before Iamets, so that they doubled their rage, labour and battery, which they had continued from the ninth day of Aprill, and neuer ceased to thunder, vntill the sixteenth day of the same moneth,  which time they were willing to giue an assault, and they doubled the bat∣tery more furiously then euer before, in the which for the space of fiue dayes they had employed the greatest pieces they had, which did carrie 45. or 48. or 50. bullets. As they without prepared themselues to giue the assault, so they within prepared all things necessarie, with courage to receaue them: it was not possible to doo more valiantly, then botl, Captaine and Soul∣diours did; the more worthie praise, that in the middest of armes (which they acknowledged of themselues but vncertaine and weake) they put their whole hope and confidence of their preseruation onely in God, the vp∣holder of the oppressed, and the defender of their iust quarell. Such hope did not deceaue them, for the enemies hauing done their batterie, to the number of twelue volleys of Ordinance, the same day in a moment they closed themselues in battell aray, and headlong set as wel on the breach, as on the curtine toward the tower, called the Cat, where they planted a great number of ladders, with a full assurance to carry the towne away by one way or other: but they were so couragiously receaued, that after a long fight they were so beaten, driuen backe, and ouerthrowen, that the Towne ditch remayned full of a great number of dead & wounded: few were taken prisoners by them of the towne, for they did driue them before, still beating them vnto their trenches, so that no man was able to repasse the heate and furie of the Souldiers following the victory: one halfe of theyr army was there wholly destroyed. Of them of the towne were not aboue sixe slaine, and eight hurt: a thing very strange and yet most true. God for to magnify his power in taking vengeance vpon tyrantes and haughty persons, oftentimes doth ouercome as well with a small as with a great number: and so was that the onely vertue and force of his arme, to whom the victorious gaue the glory: for af∣ter the retire from the fight they gaue publikly thankes to the diuine good∣nes of God, who so mightily had deliuered them. Afterward, that proud sinke of filthy slaues did nothing worthy to bee reported, but grew alwayes lesser and lesser: they attempted afterwards some stratagems, but without any effect, which caused them to conclude
not to hazard further, but to preserue the rest in certaine Block howses, which they made about the town vppon the high wayes, supposing by that means to compell them in tyme through hunger to yeeld. It is sayd before, how the Duke of Guyze sent his horse coursers and ri∣ders, with his Oratours to bring in triumph, and to shew the horses, ar∣mor and spoyle of the Rutters, taken from them at Ʋimorye and Aulnea, by Montargis and Chartres, not onely with amplifications of his victoryes and great valiantnes, but also with deprauing and debasing the Kinges dooings, with calumnies, lies, false reportes and slanders, into such Pro∣uinces and Citties, where these sycophants did venture to goe: for such were the graces and ornaments of their rhetorike, wherewith these Ora∣tours did beautify their demonstratiue orations. It is sayd also how the King of Nauarre, after the prosperous iourney at Coutras, sent Ambassadors to the King to search the meanes of peace, & offered him his and the Germans forces to be reuenged of the Leaguers, his secret enemies. Also, how by what pollicy the good hope of this Am∣bassage was preuented and made of none effect by the Leaguers, seeking to nourish dissention and warre in the Realme. Furthermore, it is sayd, how after the dissipation of the Germans, the King retyring to Paris, and hearing of the proceeding of the Duke of Guzye against his person and honour: and what great discredit he had pro∣cured him among his subiects, too late hee saw his error, in hauing reiec∣ted the proffers of the King of Nauarre, and neglected opportunity of re∣uengement, which he doth purpose to dilay, and referre it to another time, supposing this to bee his best course; first to repayre the fault committed: For seeing the communalty addicted altogether and affectionated to the Duke of Guyze, hee determined to doo some thing plausible to the Com∣mons, to recouer their good wils and affections. In the twelfth Chapter of the Actes, there it is shewed how a King killed Iames, seeing that it pleased well the people (to get their loue to the vttermost) tooke Peter also, intending to kill him like wise: so this King (with dutiful reuerence of the soueraigne power be it spoken, in comparing the counsels and actions, not the persons) determined to recouer the loue of his subiects by the slaughter of the King of Nauarre, Nobility and peo∣ple, which follow the example of Peter, and imbrace the same forme of doc∣trine which he hath deliuered. Hee concludeth therefore to make warre a∣gaynst them of the reformed religion. The King therefore passing the latter end of Winter in the meditating of these enterprizes, in repairing and renuing his forces, an expedition was published abroad agaynst them of the reformed religion, whereunto the K. in his owne person would go the next Sommer. The Iesuits fearing least the colde of the Winter and the sweetnes of
the spring next following, would both coole and quallify that heat and bit∣ternes, which did so boyle in the Kings minde, importunatly by their out∣cryes and tumultuous Sermons did presse him forward, their Pulpites  ringing of nothing else but fire, fire, burne, burne, kill, kill, the heretikes: to sharpen and flesh him to goe about his businesse more eagerly. They dai∣ly assured him, and shewed him certayne argumentes of Gods wrath a¦gainst the heretikes (as they tearmed them) promised him an assured vic∣tory, and blessed issue, descanting specially vpon the fatall yeare 1588. so much spoken of by the Astronomers. Yet for all these hellish Frogges crying croak, croake: the King made no great hast to his voiage in Poytow, either doubting of some new rebellion of the Leaguers, or else mistrusting the euents. But whilest the thinges abouesayd do so passe in the Soueraignty of Sedan, the king hauing opportunity geuen him, by the death of the Prince of Conde, and the good successe of Lauardine in subduing so speedily the Iles of Marans (which he thought to be a good beginning to bring vnder his obedience the rest of Poytow and Xainctonge, and at length to force Ro∣chel) began earnestly to resolue himselfe vppon his expedition of Guyenne, and thought good to vse some speede and celerity in inuading Poytow and Xainctonge, as the neerest of them which did embrace the Gospell. There∣fore he prepareth all things, and deuyseth all the means possible to destroy the King of Nauarre, to take the Ile of Rhe, to Blocke in Rochel, to get the towns of Talmond, Ganach, and Fontenay: and gyrdeth about his loynes to goe in his owne person to that voyage: there to fill the measure of his prayses and victories, hoping thereby to winne agayne the harts of his lost subiectes. On the other side, the master of the league perceiuing himselfe to haue crept deepely into the hearts of the people, and to haue dislodged the K. from thence, forgetteth the heretikes, and the defence of the holy Church, which he had heretofore pretended, and beginneth to discouer the hared against the King, which had lyen hidden in his brest a long time, cryeth out that the warres so often times mooued against the king of Nauarre, had vanished away without profit, the onely fault is the kings intelligen∣ces with the heretikes, but the supporter of the king of Nauarre being once dispatched, with lesse labour shall he be ouerthrowne: hee dreameth that Germanie and England are so angry with the king of Nauarre for the dis∣sipation of the Germane armie, that he can hope for no more ayde nor suc∣cour from thence. As for the K. he is weary of warre, his good Souldiers are spent & worne out, the residue weary of the tediousnes of this war, or else for want and neede doe onely desire quietnes and peace. Hee doth en∣holden and incourage himself vpon the fauours which he had at the court, of the chiefest about the kings person, & concludeth that the king may ea∣sily
be oppressed, and the king of Nauarre cannot defend himelfe long: and in the meane time he determined to try what miracles the slubber∣sawce  figges of Italy can doe as is afore sayd. Of all the armies which were prepared the yeare before against the K. of Nauarre, remayned none but onely the Leaguers companyes: such as were together were occupied at the siege of Iamets, and in wasting the te∣ritory of Sedan, who in token that there they had been, they left their ac∣cursed carkasses for gage for the most part, The masters of the League hauing receiued the foyle before Iamets, and at Douzie, in the principalitie of Boillon (as is afore said) considering that their counsells succeeded not, their forces were greatly diminished, and that they had opened diuers wayes, at diuers times, but nowe specially their intents too euidently: and considering also that a small hole in such a dangerons conspiracie, would in a little space turne to a great breach, (which bloweth abroad the counsels, weakneth the authority, & mollifi∣eth the courages) tooke aduise to remedie speedily those daungers which might ensue thereof: for their goods, their honours, and liues stoode thereon. They knew also that their counsells and treasons had peareed in∣into the kings closet, who might dissemble, but neuer forget it. First therefore in hasting the execution of their conspiracy, necessitie compelled them to put feare aside, and respect of all authoritie vnder foote. Secondly, that in such extremiie, none but a violent remedy would serue. Thirdly, that the execution could not much increase the punishment of such a dangerous conspiracie. Last of all, Fortune would helpe their valiaunt courages, and that high enterprizes could not be brought to passe, but by diligent exploytes. These are the reasons which made them haste the execution of their en∣terprize. The meanes to exempt their purpose, was to seaze vpon Paris, the chefest towne in the realme, and there (with the helpe of their partakers) to kill, or take the King therein, and by the selfe same meanes to destroy the Pinces of the blood (as many as should come within their reach) and all other the Kings faithfull seruants and officers of the Crowne, with all others as should oppose themselues to their purpose. As for the prince of Conde, they had dispatched him out of the way by their paltry pills. The Cardinall of Bourbon was the Tree, vnder whose shadowe they did worke all their conspiracies. The King of Nauarre they made no account of, assuring themselues of his life by one meane or other.
To bring this proiect to a perfect, wished, and blessed end, they needed two things; to streng then themselues, and to weaken the King. Their forces were diminished greatly by reason of the Bastinados which they receiued at a maidens handes at Iamets and Douzie, in the te∣ritory of Boillon, yet was it easie with a short warning, to repaire them sufficiently. Therefore the Duke of Guyze sent into those countries and Prouinces, which fauoured him, to warue his partakers to bee in Paris with horse, armour and furniture at the beginning of May, and there to attend vpō his Mastership, for he had a mistical may-game to play, wher∣in he had neede of their seruice. For the weakning of the king, they vsed this Dilemma, we will so work that the king will send his fores into Picardy, whereby he will weaken the safety of his owne person, and so shall he be easier to be surprized. (or hee will not send) If he send and recall them to Paris, to preuent the danger which we will prepare him; then will it be a good occasion to the factious citizens to pick a quarrell, and to make an vprore against him, and so by o∣pen violence of many against few, he may easily well be dispatched. If the King send not his forces from about him into Picardie, it may be wrested out of his hand, and in course of time the next Prouinces will fol∣lowe, and yet will wee so prouide that in Paris he shall be able scarse to de∣fend himselfe. Now let vs consider how they executed euery part of this dilemma. The Duke d' Aumale, with all theresidue of the forces which suruiued their companions at Iamets and Douzie, with other complices of ye Guize, who were in the countrey of Pycardie, were sent into the sayd countrey of Picardie to make warre, not against the Hugonets, for there were men to oppose themselues agaynst the Leaguers, but agaynst the hereticks of the Romish Church, who will remayne faithfull to their King: they there∣fore most furiously did warre against the Kings Cities, Townes & Forts; all was reduced from the Kings obedience saue Calis and Boloigne, which was besieged & greatly distressed. They in Boloigne were worse hereticks then Rochel, although they did worship our Ladie, with all the Saints and the Saints of heauen, and some diuels also among them with greater de∣uotion then euer they did worship God. The like did he in Normandy, and in all those countreys, the Catholikes without changing of their olde su∣perstition were on a sudden become heretickes: the King by many degrées worse then an hereticke. The King of Nauarre had béen of good religion, if he would haue cast his lot among them, and haue had a common purse with them, and gone with them to shed innocent bloud. About the beginuing of May (by the secret aduertisements of the Duke  of Guize) there repayred into the Citie of Paris out of diuers parts of the Realme, Gentlemen, and of all qualities, beside men light headed, rash,
malcontents, and desirous of nouelties, aboue 15. thousand. Besides this great number of strangers in Paris, most part of the citizens, and an infi∣nite multitude of sottish and rash people desirous of nouelties, who had  most villanously conspired the kings destruction, and to that intent secret∣ly had giuen the hand of association, and oath of obedience to Guize, great master of the League in France. This accursed multitude was greatly in∣couraged by the straungers, who altogether would haue made a mightie armie, and had béen able to match with the Turke both in number and qualities. All these were swimming in that citie as in a large and wide sea, being not perceaued nor knowne but by their partakers. On the other side, the King liued in securitie voyde of any suspition of treachery of the people of Paris, who made his right hand of thē, as whom he had alwaies cherished & loued as himself, and more regarded in a man∣ner then all the rest of his kingdome. But as counsells which doo drawe after such haughtie euents cannot long bee kept close, but doo take winde; so the déepe prouidence of the ma∣sters of the League could not take so good order, (being not able to execute any thing alone) but distrust began to rise in the hearts of many men who were faithfull to the King: so that after diuers mutterings, sundrie aduer∣tisements were giuen to the King, that there was some great matter in hand against his person and estate. And although they could not tell him expressedly that which happened afterward; yet experienced of long time in the anatomie of the hearts and counsels of them of Guize, began to mi∣strust the matter, & determined to remedie it by all gracious waies groun∣ded vpon reason. The King in the latter end of Aprill, hearing of the commotions of the Duke Aumale in Picardie and Normandy, sendeth the Duke Espernon into Normandy with part of his forces, and some part into Picardie, there to defend his authoritie. The Duke of Guize hearing how he was expected in Paris, both by the mutinous citizens and straungers, who vpon aduertisements giuen them, had flocked thether out of diuers parts of the Realme: and vnderstanding that the King had sent his forces into Picardie and Normandy, resolued himselfe to goe to Paris with a small companie for to auoyd suspition, yet assured to finde there (as in a little world) a number of partakers, proui∣ded of all necessarie things, and in readines sufficient to surprise a great King. The King informed of this deliberation of Guize to come to Paris, and desirous (as is sayd before) to preuent all their attempts by gracious waies, about the eight day of May sent the Lord Belieure to the said Duke whom he met at Soyssons, to informe him of his will, that his comming to Paris would not bee agreeable to his Maiestie; willing him in the Kings
name for that time not to come to Paris; and beside, the king commaunded the sayd Belieure, that in (case the sayd Duke would néedes continue his  purpose of comming thether) plaine termes he should tell him, that it was against his Maiesties will, and that in so doing he held him as a Traytour and author of all the troubles and diuisions of the Realme, and therefore iustly to deserue his displeasure. The Lord Belieure gaue notice of all the Kings will and intent vnto the sayd Duke, as he was charged to doo. The Duke subtilly gaue him a doubtfull answere, not declaring whether he would goe or not: but as the water being stopped waxeth stronger and more violent; so the prohibiting of him encreased his heate; and ambition by nature impatient, and made him thinke that the delay was an irreuocable losse. So that at one instant after the departing of Belieure out of Soyssons, the Guize tooke horse and his way to Paris, and followed the sayd Lord Belieure so nigh, that the one arriued the Monday about nine a clocke, and the Duke likewise arriued at Paris the same day about twelue a clock, ac∣companied with eight gentlemen, hauing in all not aboue fifteene or six∣teene horses that could be seene: and being there arriued, he lighed at the lodging of the Q Mother, at the penitent Sisters, the 9. of May. The King being aduertised of the Dukes comming to Paris, tooke great discontentation therof, & conceaued a great displeasure against the said Be∣lieure, as though he had not faithfully deliuered his commandement, and in the same tearmes as he was charged, to the Duke of Guize. This solitarie comming of the Duke of Guize encreased the suspitions and mistrust, making euery man that knewe him and his pompe, thinke that such extraordinarie comming had some mysterie, which ere it were long should be reuealed. For if it had been simple and without fraude, a cooling of the partakers had ensued (as commonly they who doo obey doo frame their actions, according to the manners of them which doo com∣mand) so that such a tumult had not insued it as did. A little while after the arriuing of the Duke of Guize, the Q. Mother caused her selfe to bee carried to the Loure to speake with the King. The Guize with a small companie to see too, followed the Q. Mother on foote: and it is to be noted, that by the way the Lord of Guize going through the streates of Paris with the Q. Mother, the people flocked in great compa∣nies to bid him welcome, and among others, a gentlewoman standing vp∣pon a bulke, plucking her maske downe, saluted him with these words, Good Prince seeing thou art come we be safe. The Q. Mother and the Guize arriued at the Loure together, entered into the kings chamber, who then sat nigh his bed, and did not stirre out of his place for the comming of the sayd Duke, who saluted the King with a fayre and humble countenance, making a courtesie almost his knee to the
ground. Fewe would haue iudged by this interuiew, that there had been so dangerous vlcers in their hearts: the King greatly displeased at his com∣ming,  shewed neither to his mother, nor to the saide Duke, any other wel∣come, but asked him thus: Cosin, wherefore are you come: He answered, that it was to purge himselfe of the calumnies and slaunders that hee was charged of, as though he were guiltie of the crime of treason. In making this answer, he seemed very much moued, and pale, as though he had feared that the King euen then would take punishment of that contempt, where∣with he had despised his commaundement. The King relyed, that he had sent him an expresse commaundement, that he should not come for that time. The Duke made answer, that it was not told him in such sort, as that hee had occasion to feare that his comming should bee so disagreeable to him. The King then turning his speach to the Lord Belieure, asked him whether he had not commaun∣ded him to make him vnderstand his intention. When Belieure would haue recounted, in what sort hee performed his message, the Duke of Guize interrupted him, and said to the King, speaking by Belieure, that he had tolde him more. Vpon this, the Q. Mother beginning to talke with the King a side, the Duke of Guize drew nere to the Queene, raging and talked together with her, during the parley of the Q Mother with the King. The Guize a little after went away, being neither accompanied nor followed by any of the Kings seruants. The King being aduertized a new, how Paris was full of armed men, replenished with faction and madnes, and that there had resorted, and howerly did resort a number of strangers of all qualities, and that the Duke of Guize was the adamant stone, which did draw the yrn of that commotion, began to double his mistrust, & thought it was high time to take order to assure his affayres, and prouide both for the safety of his person, and the state of the Citie. And first to assure his forces about his person, sent for two thousand and fiue hundred Suis∣sers which were in Picardy, for the companies of his guardes, and some regiments which were extraordinarily ordayned by him, for two compa∣nies of Suissrs, to fortifie his gardes, and three companies of French∣men. The tenth day he commaunded the Escheuins, that is the Aldermen, and chiefest men of the Citie, to make search through the Citie in all hou∣ses, of all such men as were to be found, without any lawfull busines: they dissembled the matter, as though they had good liking thereof. He caused also notice thereof to be giuen to the Duke of Guize, who had no great liking of it, but tooke it for a token which hasted him to doo his feate: this order was taken, but not executed vntill the morrow after. The same day, the Master of the League, that is the Duke of Guize,
came to Loure, accompanied with thirtie or fortie horses, and accompanied the King in his walking to the artilleries, and there conferred together  verie friendly about the warre of Guienne against the King of Nauarre. The 11. day, the search being a making through the Citie by the chie∣fest of the Magistrates, and certaine Knights of the order of the Holy Ghost, commonly called the Kings order, to countenance the matter, gaue great occasion of mistrust: whereupon the King caused the search to cease. The 12. day very early, the Suissers and the French companies, be∣ing 12. Ensignes of footemen, entred into Paris through the gate Saint Honore, the King and his nobles being there on horseback to receaue them. At the arriuing of them, the Parisians gaue themselues the ala∣rum, and faigned great feare, as though the great Turke had entred the Citie with an hundred thousand men, euery man ran into his house, shut vp their doores and windowes many cried that they were lost, vndone, and would be all murthered. It had been an easie thing for the King if he had had an euill intent against them (as afterward they made themselues be∣leeue) to haue let the attempt, which they did that same day, in raising and trenching themselues against their King. But the King was accu∣stomed to vse patiencie and long delayes, euen in the middest of mi∣strust. The Kings forces being entred the Citie, were by his commandement vnder the conduct of the Lord Byron, distributed into diuers plares of the Citie, not to enterprise or to offend any man, but there to holde fast, least that any mutinie should rise in the Citie, as all things seemed apparant∣ly to bée disposed by the comming of the Duke of Guize. Part of those forces were appoynted to be about the King, to fortifie his gardes: and another part was placed at Saint Ihan de Greue, before the common house of the Citie, vnder the conduct of Marshall Haumont, the Prouost of Marchants, and other of the chiefest of the Citie, who knew the Kings intent. Likewise, part of the saide forces were set vpon the little bridge, vnder the commaundement of the Lorde Tinteuille. There were also also some of them placed at the new market, vnder the conduct of the Lorde Dampieore, some were also at Saint Innocent, and many other places. This diuision of the Kings forces was well made, for that end to the which it was done, but it was not vniuersall, nor in some speciall places, where the necessitie did specially require. For in the place Maubert was no body placed. And that place was of such importance, that being seazed vpon, it might be the meanes to recouer all the others: but yet if it had béene prouided with one hundred Pikes, and thirtie Harquebusiers, they had béen sufficient to let them for a time, who would stirre. The Lord
Byron was warned of it, and himselfe was not ignorant of it, but for lack of men, hée prouided not to it: beside, that these words were not looked to. The Duke of Guize, considering that his treacherous intents were al∣ready too manifest, kéepeth his bedd that morning, to dissemble the matter more kindely, and supposing that all this preparation was for him, whilest the King should make his processe, he thought to preuent the worst: there∣fore by secret messengers he sent to his partakers to flock together, to seaze vpon as many places as they could, to strengthen and to Barricado them∣selues, afore the watch woord be giuen, and that he may sweare that it was not his doing, he was a sléepe still. About eight a clock in the morning, behold the Escheuins, whether they were terrified by threatnings, or accessaries to the rebellion, in a mo∣ment of one side they began to vanish away, and to descend from the vni∣uersity: on the other side, the people flocking together, seazed vppon the place Maubert, & Barricados were planted within ten paces of the Suis∣sers, who might easily haue let it, and immediatly they began euery where to trench themselues with Barricados, from thirtie to thirtie paces, the chaynes also immediatly were drawne: their Barricados were well flan∣ked, and well furnished with men to defend them, so that it was no more time to goe through Paris any where without watch word, passeport, or particular billes from the Captaines, or Colonels of the wardes. The Duke of Guize vnderstanding that the Kings forces were seue∣red a sunder, and disposed in certaine places, knowing his partakers to bée stronger, and more in number without comparison, trenched with Barrica∣dos, hard by the Kings Garisons, set in diuers places (as is before saide) euen with thirtie paces one from the other, and perceauing that all this while a sléep, he had inclosed vp the Kings forces on euery side: how much more can he doo, awaking out of his bed, if he would bestirre himselfe about his busines: now séeing that it resteth no more, but to charge and to dis∣patch the Kings forces, that destitute of all succour, more easily he may be had out of the Loure dead or a liue, resteth therefore but the watch word to begin the may game. All things being in a readines, two sorts of men are appoynted, the one to giue the watch word, the other to giue the first blowe. The watch word was giuen by interposed persons, who went about the Citie, reporting that the King would establish new Garisons in the Citie, and executt one hundred of the chiefest inhabitants, and many other noble men at the sug∣gestion of the Duke Espernon, who had intelligences with the King of Nauarre. Others were interposed among the Kings French Souldiers, who did bid the inhabitants to lay cleane sheetes in their beds, for the same night
they would lye in their houses. On a suddaine therefore the fire was set to the myne, in a moment Paris was fired into an horrible and confused  commotion, and as if there had been question to run vpon the enemy, euery man doth prepare himselfe to set vpon the Kings gardes, and the rest of his forces. The others (who were appoynted to beginne the fray) were Brissak, Boysdauphin, Chamoyes, and other partakers of Guyze, who at the watch∣word geuen, began to charge the Swissers, whereof some were killed, some vnarmed: the like was done to the other companies of Frenchmen, many were slaine, and all vnarmed. The Duke of Guyze wayting a sleepe for this beginning, started vp (as he sayd) out of his sleepe, ranne to the fray, shewed a double dilligence, did endeuor to shew outwardly to the world, that hee enterprised nothing, and that he was vtterly ignorant of all these thinges: and to that end hee might haue witnes, he caused the slaughter which was made of the Swis∣sers to sease, caused the armes to bee rendred to the Kinges companies, who had béen vnarmed: but after such a maner as did shew how much greater regard they of Paris had of him then of the King, and what intel∣ligences hee had with them, whereof hee did shew himselfe not discon∣tented. In that commotion some would haue killed the Marshal Biron, and the Lord Belieure, which thing this King of the may game misliked, & would not suffer. Such occasions did content him greatly, for by such actions he confirmed himselfe in the trust and confidence which he had in that people: he would also haue them whom he saued from the slaughter, to beleeue that he had no small part in France: & besides that he bound them to him in as much as their liues were woorth. To be short, no man was in danger of ye rage of the people, who either was with him, or was commended by him. The Duke of Guyze, after the vnarming of the Kinges companes set themselues as prisoners vntill the euening, and within a little whyle af∣ter these thinges were done, they made their approches by litle and little, to the Loure where the king was. The King being aduertized of all which was a dooing, did not shew himself mooued therwith at all. But the 2. Quéenes were greatly amazed, specially the Q Mother, which all the dinner tyme did nothing else but weepe, with great aboundance of tears. And immediatly after dinner she tooke her coach to goe to the house of Guyze, where the sayd Lord of Guyze had retyred, after hauing taken prisoners the Kings forces, to do her best endeuor to passify the commotion, but it was without any effect: for they who heretofore had in admiration her deuilish craftines, as a diuine wise∣dome, did now when they had the vpper hand account it a deceitfull Itali∣an dissimulation. So that old Caye is no more regarded then she deser∣ued.
For shee her selfe with much adoo could passe through the streates so thicke trenched with Barricados, that shee was enforced to forsake her Coach and be carryed in a chayre: and euery varlet would presume to bid  her stay, what will you haue? whether goe you? and opening the way on∣ly for her chayre, did bid her goe her way. As the seditious made all thinges in a readines to besiege the King in the Loure the next day, the Duke of Guyze went out of his house to pur∣chase to himselfe some good will of the Master, by shewing some curtesy to the seruantes, and came to the place where the Kinges forces were stayed and vnarmed, in the euening caused theyr armes to be rendered them. He sent one Saint Paul (who had growen from a latrey to be a great man, and greatly fauored by the Duke of Guyze) to go before the Kings gards, leading them as captiues in a tryumph, and commaunded them to be tur∣ned out of Saint Anthonies gate, and to shift for themselues. The night following, the Rebels besieged the Loure, where the King was, set their Barricados nigh the gace, stopped the issues, skirmished with them that came foorth: and yet all thinges are so disguised, that to besiege the King and kill him in his owne house, to execute it dilligently, and that without sparing the life of any man, at the commaundement of Guyze, is to obay the King, to defend the King and the countrey, to fight for liberty, to expose valiantly their liues for their tempels, their altars, theyr wiues and children. The morrow after, as the tumult increased, the King had aduertise∣ment from two seuerall places (the first by one who was familiar, and houshold seruant to the Lord of Guyze: the second by a gentleman of good calling) that the sayd Guyze, and they of Paris his partakers, had determi∣ned to bring foorth the night following fifteene or sixteene thousand men by the new gate, and other gates of that side of the Citty, to besiege him without, there to stop all passage, and to force him in his house. The King receaued confirmation of the same determination by one of his faithfull seruants, a man of honor and vnderstanding, who labored much to cause one of his seruantes to step to the Loure for that purpose, who could not haue brought it to passe if it had not béene by the helpe of one of the Captaynes of the wardes of the City, who conducted the messenger to the Loure. The King did step asyde to receaue this message by the mouth of him which brought it: which when hee vnderstood, iudged the mischiefe and daunger to be greater then hee had thought, and began to be amazed (see∣ing that which hee would neuer haue expected of the Parisiens) without shewing any token of dismay. He was also aduised at the same instant, to get him out of Paris, though he should goe foorth alone, if not he would be vndone, and that when his
person should be without, he might find many seruāts & faithfull subiects. The K. did not refuse that counsell, for he saw the danger to encrease euery moment, and yet he made no great shew to follow it. But on ye con∣trary  encreasing the assurance of his countenance, did seeme to promise shortly to remedy it. He sent the Q. Mother to the Duke of Guyze once again: shee with much a doe, hauing accesse to him, exhorted him to bring of his owne so much as he could to pacifie that commotion, prayed him very instantly to come to the king with great protestation of assurance, that he would bee well pleased thereof, protesting of his good will and confidence which he reposed in him. The King delayed his departing out of Paris, meditating reuenge∣ment vpon the head of this rebellion, and had sent his mother to the ende to haue drawen him within his reach, supposing that the head being off, the members would coole and waxe weake. The Q. Mother hauing done all that euer she could with her Italian Rethorick, could not perswade the Duke of Guyze, hauing learned by te simplicitie of them of the reformed Religion, and by the tragedies which through his counsell he had caused the King to play vpon them of the re∣ligion, how little credit was to be giuen to Kings faith, and to her fayre promises, but shewed himselfe very cold in that matter, and contemptious towards her person: for he feared that he should not be able to execute his enterprize within the Loure so well as without, mistrusting to be preuen∣ted, if he had entred therein. The Q Mother seing that he was not moued by her wordes, sendeth his answere to the king, by the secretary Pinart. The King being aduertized of the hardnes of the Duke, & out of hope to execute his will vpon him. To preuent a farther mischiefe which hee saw to be at hand, commaunded his companies to retire, and determined to goe out of Paris, and to take his farwell of the Loure, at the perswasi∣ons of many officers of the Crowne, who gaue him counsell to giue place to that desperate conspiracie, and to retyre into a place of safety: he sent his household to the place called the Tuilleries, and leauing the Q. Mo∣ther there in the Loure, went foorth out of Paris on that side which was most sure for him, to wit, through newgate with a walking staffe in his hand, as though he went (according to his custome) to walke to the Tuilleries with as ioyful countenance, as in the most ioyful day that could shine vnto him. When he was out of the gate, he turned his face toward that citie, ca∣sting foorth certaine speaches of indignation, with protestation against their ingratefulnes, treachery, and treason. When he came to the Tuil∣leries, he tooke his horse with them of his trayne, who had meanes to get
horses, they who had none either stayed behinde, or else followed him on foote. Many great Lordes went after him on foote, vntill they had the meanes to get horses. Many great Lordes and gentlemen of the Kinges  side went out of Paris in great haste, some without bootes, some destitute of all things, euerie one vnder the shadowe of some friend, such as they met withall in the middle of the confused prease. The King that night, went to Trappes, and lodged in the house of Dan∣uile, brother to Mommorency, and alyed to the Duke d'Espernon. The flight of such a great King, so vngratefully dealt with all, by them whome he had so greatly fauored, was lamentable. The Duke of Guize hauing remoued the Kings power from him, partly by killing, and partly by sending others another cleane contrary way from the King, supposing that the said King had beene still in the Loure, and knowing that there rested nothing more to doo, but to haue his person for a gage of the Crowne, determined to besiege the Loure, and to bring out of hand the Artilery before the gate. But vnderstanding that he was issued out, and gone already a great way of, hee remayned Master of Paris, séeing that the Master and the seruants had yeelded him the lod∣ging. Hetherto wee haue conducted the King to Trappes, and his forces are sent packing, and the Duke maketh merrie in Paris, in hope likewise to be Master of all the rest. The Duke and his partakers, perceauing how the King had giuen the slip, and auoyded their bloudie hands, doo scratch their heads, and see their error: for although the ouerthrow was great, yet the victorie was not full, the enterprise not well executed, and the King being not taken, the issue thereof was doubtfull and full of perplexitie. For their consciences doo re∣present before their eyes, the perfidious rebellion which they had com∣mitted, as to haue not onely dispossessed him of his house, of whome they holde all that euer they had, but also to haue sought to murther him whom God had consecrated, to represent before their eyes, the image of his So∣ueraigne iustice, to destroy their Prince, who had loued them so tenderlie; their benefactor, who had cherished them as a Father his owne naturall Children. They accurse their negligent folly, in that they had not beene more watchfull to attend vpon his person: feare seazed their hearts, when considering the greatnes of their offence, doo also knowe, that yet hee will haue meanes inough to bring their dooings to iudgement, and to take re∣uengement of them, according to the haynousnes of their offence. To be short, they are very sory, not for that which they had done, but for that they haue not done worse. But the Duke of Guize considering well that the stincking fame of his villanous fact would flee abroade vnto the eares of forraine Princes, who
will thinke themselues interesed in this iniurie, and that they will not for∣sake such a mightie Prince in his distresse, hee thought good that the exe∣cution done this day, might be reported vnto Princes, neighbours, and  friends of the Crowne, in such a manner, that whatsoeuer was therein, most odious and damnable, might bee either concealed or else coloured. Therefore among others, he forgot no courtesie, and honest offers to the Lord Ambassodor of England, to whome he sent the Lord Brissak, accompa∣nied with some others, to offer him a protection, and to pray him not to bee dismayed, and not to remoue thence, with assurance of safetie. The Am∣bassador answered, that if he had been as a priuat men in Paris, hee would haue gone to prostrate himselfe at the feete of the Duke of Guize, for to giue him most heartie thankes for his courtesies and honest proffers, but being there nigh the King, for the Queene of England his Mistresse, who had aliunce and couenant of amitie with him, he could not, nor would not take any protection, but of the King onely. The Lord Brissak shewed him, that the Lord of Guize was not come to Paris, to enterprize any thing against the King or his seruice, but that hee hath resolued himselfe vpon the defensiue, and that there was a great con∣spiracie against him, and the Citie of Paris, and how the towne house, and other places were ful of gibets, whereon the King had determined to hang a great number of the Citie and others. The Lord of Guyze prayed him to aduertize his Mistresse of all these things, to the end the worlde might be informed of the trueth▪ The Ambassador answered, that he could easilie beleeue that he saide as he thought, but that hauty and hard enterprises, oftentimes doo remayne incommunicable, and closely shut vp in the hearts of them who doo enter∣prise them, which also when they thinke good, doo produce them forth with such colour, as they iudge most fit for their aduantage. And that he would say freely, that whatsoeuer had passed in Paris, would bee iudged very strange and wicked, by all the Princes of Christendome, who were inte∣ressed in it, and that no colours, were they neuer so fayre, could make it to seeme good, being the simple duety of a subiect, to remaine in the iust obe∣dience of his Soueraigne. And that if there were so many gibets prepared, it would bee beleeued more easily, when the Lorde of Guyze shoulde bring them in sight. And graunt that so it were, yet is it a hatefull thing, and intollerable, that a subiect would let by force the iustice which his Soueraigne will execute with strong hand. He promised him, that willingly he would aduertise the Queene his Mistresse, of all that which he tould him, but to serue him as an interpreter of all the conceites of the Duke of Guyze, and of them of his part, it was no matter belonging to his charge. The Queene his Mi∣stresse being wiser then hee to beleeue, and iudge what would please her
Maiestie vpon that which he would write vnto her. The Lord Brissake seeing that neither by fayre offers, words, nor pray∣ers, the Lord Ambassadour could be mooued to allowe their actions, ended  his speaches with threatnings, saying, that the people of Paris had a quar∣rell to him, by reason of the crueltie which the Quéene of England had shewed to the Quéene of Scots. To this word of crueltie the Ambassadour answered. I arest you vpon this word of crueltie, my Lord: no man euer named a iustice well qualified, crueltie. Moreouer, I beléeue not that the people of Paris haue any quarrell to mée, as you say: for vpon what occa∣sion? seeing that I am here a publike person who neuer molested any be∣die. Haue you any armour? (sayd the Lord Brissake) If you did aske it me (sayd the Lord Ambassadour) as as of him who hath béen sometime friend and familiar of the Lord Cosse your vncle, it may be I would tell you; but being that which I am, I will not tell you. You shalbe searched here (sayd Brissake) ere it belong: for it is thought here is armour, and it is to be feared you will be forced. I haue two gates in this house (sayd the Ambassadour) I will shut and defend them as long as I may, that it may appeare to the world, that vniuftly in my person they haue violated the right of Nations. To that Brissak replied; but tell me in good friendship I pray you, haue you any armour? The Ambassadour answered, seeing you aske me as a friend, I will tell you as a friend: If I were ere as a priuate man, I would haue armour; but being here as Ambassadour, I haue none other armour then the right and faith publike. I pray you (sayd Brissak) keepe your doores shut vp. I ought not to doo it (sayd the Lord Ambassour) for the house of an Ambassadour ought to be open to all goers and commers, considering that I am not in France to dwell in Paris onely, but to bee nigh the King wheresoeuer he be. We haue recited (in as good order as such a deformed confusion could be reduced vnto) those things which passed in Paris in that damnable com∣motion. Now the King being at Trappes, considering the treacherie of that house which he had fauoured and honoured more without comparison then the houses of his owne bloud, the person also whom hee had loued and vnited to himself more then any other, the sauagednes of his subiects and familiar houshold seruants; representing to himselfe the rage of the people, whom he had alwaies tendered almost more then all the residue of his Realme, the ingratitude of that Citie which had béen alwaies his delights, and to the which he had neuer denied any thing that he could do for the peace, pre∣seruation, ease, riches and greatnes of the same, calling to minde the tu∣muits, rage and violence attempted and executed against him their bene∣factor;
reasoning with himselfe how that they were Catholikes, of his owne religion, and that they had béen his right hand in persecuting them of the reformed religion, how they were his fellowes & followers in com∣mitting  the most vile and sauage murther that euer was heard of in the world. Calling to remembrance the long and daily warning geuen him by the King of Nauarre, the Princes of the bloud, noble men, and gentlemen of all degrees, and of many forreine Princes of the Guyzes intent against him, his crowne, and state. Pondering in his mind the token which his eies had seene, his eares had heard, and all despised and contemned, and withall in stéed of looking to his security against such practizes, he had from tyme to time hardned his hart agaynst Christ, and to shed innocent blood, and vnder the colour of defending the Catholike religion, had countenanced, strengthened, and armed his enemies agaynst himselfe, whereby he hath receaued that foile, shame and confusion this day. Euery man may iudge in what distresse of minde this great King passed all that night full of iust indignation of sor∣row, which although in outward apparance it might be kept close, yet in∣wardly inhart it could not be dissembled. The selfe same day of the tumult in Paris, the Duke de Mayne attemp∣ted vppon Lyons; but he was put backe by the inhabitantes. About the same time also the inhabitantes of Orleans, Anious, Bourges, Abeuille, and in other places did expell the Kings garrisons and officers, with the Citizens who did hold with the King, whom they did call poli∣tickes, and many of them were taken prisoners. The thirteenth day the King went to the Citty of Chartres, where ma∣ny of his faythfull seruantes resorted to him, and also his gardes, which had escaped the slaughter of Paris. The Duke of Guyze (though very sory, that so foolishly hee had missed to take the King in the Loure, as he made his ful reckoning the day before) followed the victory as well as hee could; and first beginneth to play the good husband in Paris, to further the affayres to the premeditate intent. First, he brought to his house aboue seuen hundered thousand crownes of that which was none of his, which there hee layed for an earnest of the whole. The same daye also hee tooke the Kinges Arseuall at the Bastile, and sealed vp the Kings treasury, and in hope shortly to make all his owne: in the meane time hee will carry the key. When the Duke of Guyze had so played the good husband: now hee will trie in a small matter how hee can play the Kings part in great and waighty matters. For suspecting the Prouost of Marchantes, named Per∣reuse, & the Escheuins, to be politickes, and fauourers of the King, assem∣bled
the state of the citty, and there in his presence, the said Prouost and Escheuins were deposed, and by his commaundement one Chapel, a most treacherous and seditious man, was elected Prouost, and one Rowland  Compan, with other factious and mutinous companions, all deuoted to the Duke of Guyze were elected Escheuins. Immediatly after these thinges done in Paris, the fame there flyeth a∣broad from towne to towne: reports are spread abroad, not as before, that Cities are surprized, that the people rise in armes, that muster is taken: but the king was besieged in the Loure, and in great daunger to be slaine by the Duke of Guyze: hee is fled from Paris, the Duke is in possession of the sayd Citty. It was incredible to many, some made but a ush at it, good men were greatly mooued as it, for seeing that such a treason would draw after it many calamities. But the Leaguers lifted vp their heads, thes stoutnes and high courage of the Duke of Guyze was in the mouthes of them of his faction: but spe∣cially the Priestes, Monkes, and Iesuits did in their Pulpits extoll him to heauen: and vpon the newes of this exploit done in Paris, by the aduer∣tizements which the Duke of Guyze gaue euery where, but specially by the preaching of the Friers and Iesuits, the partakers make them selues ready to battaile. A sudden feare came vpon the Duke of Guiz, and them of Paris his partakers: for after the Kings departure from Paris, they considering their error, and that now they are further to execute their enterprize vpō his person than euer they were: the guiltines of their consciences doe re∣present to them the reuengement, and the King making already (as they see in their fearfull vision) an agreement of peace with the King of Na∣uarre, and calling him with his forces to his ayde to chastize them accor∣ding to their deserts: Therefore they sent presently to their partakers to arme themselues: The Fryers and Iesuites sound the allarum euery where, their seditious and impudent tongues seruing them for trompets, and their pulpits for a drumme, and giue the rendes vous at Paris, about the person of the Duke of Guyze. When the Duke had so played the good husband, and had no more to take, and had played the king in altring the state of the citie, and seazing vpon the kinges arseuall and treasurie, and had shewed himselfe a good prouident Captaine, yet considering that in a little while the king was like to wax stronger than the Leaguers, specially if he should ioyne him∣selfe to the king of Nauarre, whose name they not onely hated, but also feared extreamly: in the meane while they goe about both to strengthen themselues, and to amend their error as well as they can, espetially three maner of wayes; by letters, by spyalls, and seeking the way of re∣consiliation.
As for the letters, the Duke himselfe playeth the secretary, to shewe how pretily he can skill of that occupation when it pleaseth him. And for  that the part of a good Orator is to delight, he hath a speciall care of that, and supposeth that vanitie is the chiefest thing whereby to delight the Reader, therefore to atchieue this part of eloquence happily, he plucketh quilles out of one of Polypus wings, wherewith hee maketh him three pennes, and with the one he writeth to the gouernour of Orleans, of whom he had alwayes asmuch assured himselfe, as of the inhabitants. Therein he sheweth in plaine tearmes, that he doth not repent of his former acti∣ons, but reioyceth in them, and willth him to warne his friends to come to him speedily with horses and armour, without baggage, and sheweth the facility thereof, saying, that the wayes (as he supposeth) are free. Secondly, he boasted to haue defeated the Swissers, and cut to peeces the Kings guardes. Thirdly, he braggeth that he was ready to haue besieged the King in the Loure, making his reckoning to haue either taken him, or slain him there. But seeing that the king had beguiled him in flying away by stealth, hee referreth that matter till an other time. Last of all, he sheweth that he hath determined to seaze all that which the king hath in Paris, vntill he be called to accounts. The copie of this letter was sent the 14. day of May to the Gentlemen of the League in the Bayliwikes of Orleans and Bloys, who immediatly tooke their horses to repayre to Boysgency, where the gouernour had giuen the rendes vous. But the 15. day they receiued a contrary aduertisement by a letter which the sayd gouernour sent them, contayning as followeth. Our great Duke could not execute his enterprise, the K. hauing retyred to Chartres: wherefore I coūsell you to retyre into your houses as softly as you may, making no semblance to haue seen any thing. If you doo not think your selues safe, come hether: I pray you let this letter serue for the Lord Villecombline, and Cigognes of Marchenoyre, and haue me excused if I doo not write to you seuerally; it is not that I am proude, foolish or drunk, but I am so glad that I knowe not what to doo. With the selfe same pen he wrote also a letter to the Lord Bossempiere, in the which he boasteth of his exployt done at Paris. First, how he hath discomfited the Kings forces of Swissers & French men, who were bestowed in certaine places of the Citie, and after how the sayd companies are beholding to him by sauing their liues, armours and goods. Secondly, he reioyceth of the great good will, obedience and reuerence of the persons shewed vnto him in that commotion. Thirdly, he complaineth how he hath béen assaulted by the practises of the heretickes.
Fourthly, he acknowledgeth to haue béen preserued by the brauerie and valiantnes of them of Paris, of whom he assureth himselfe for euer. Fiftly, he maketh a comparison betwéene the King and himselfe in these words: The King gathereth forces and we also; the King is at Chartres, and we in Paris. Sixtly, he boasteth how he hath changed the state of the Citie. And last of all, sheweth that euery where the Townes and Cities about doo send to acknowledge him. Also, praieth the sayd Bossempiere to come to see him, where he shall finde him very lustie with forces, courage, friends, and mo∣ney enough to make merrie withall. To those kinde of people whom he durst trust, hee wrote in plaine tearmes with a plaine pen what his minde and intent was. But writing vnto some friends in whom he thought that there was some french heart and nature, and therefore could not trust them so farre as to commit the thoughts of his hart vnto thē in plaine tearmes, he taketh another pen which could disguise the matter, by the which he go∣eth about so to colour his actions, as to make them beléeue that they are all iust and lawfull. First, hee deriueth the occasion of all the things which had happened from him and his ambition, vpon the Duke Espernon, whom indéede he knewe to bee one of the faithfullest seruants to the King of all his Catho∣likes, whom hee would faine haue to be put out of countenance, supposing that if he were not, he might doo with the King what he would, and rid him easily out of the way. Therefore hee blameth the Duke Espernon to haue searched out the meanes to let the Dukes iourney into Guienne, agaynst the King of Na∣uarre, whether he fained himselfe to haue béen desirous to goe and to haue had that charge. Secondly, to bring these things to passe, he chargeth him to haue gone into Picardie and Normandie, with part of the Kings forces, to picke qua∣rells, to refresh olde inormities, thereby to diuert the kings power from Guienne. Thirdly, he accuseth the said Espernon, that to that intent he would haue deriued the warre against the Duke of Guize, and the rest of the League, by reporting and perswading the King, that the sayd Duke intended to make a slaughter of the Kings friends in the Citie of Paris, and there ey∣ther to kill, or to take the King prisoner, and to ransacke the Citie, to make money to warre against whom he should thinke good. Fourthly, he accuseth the king of rashnesse, for beléeuing those reports, and for that thereupon he encreased his forces in Paris, and for his stealing away out of Paris. Fiftly, hee sheweth how thinges passed in that commotion, so that hee washeth still his hands, and is in no fault, and the King and Espernon bée
the procurers of all that hath passed of late in Paris: and that if it had not béen for his wisedome and care, the King had béen vndone, and the state in  extreame danger. Last of all, hee hopeth that the King will be a good boy, and if not, hee will make him a boy indeede. With the selfe same pen he writeth to the Townes and Cities of his confederacie, and supposing them to be of diuers dispositions, to so many as may by his actions enter into his thoughts, to them he saith nothing of that which hath passed in Paris, leauing the report thereof to such as were his trustie friends in the sayd Cities, thereby to colour his actions with lyes and surmises. Therefore he specially without naming him, imputeth all these vprores which haue béen in Paris to the King of Nauarre, who for to diuert the warre from himselfe, hath sent (saith he) diuers expresse gen∣tlemen, and also hath laboured to the same purpose them who were at his deuotion about the King, who haue gone about to perswade the King to warre against the Leaguers. Secondly, he exhorteth them at the example of Paris, to suffer no man∣ner of garrisons to be put into their Townes and Cities. Thirdly, he prayeth them that they will ioyne their meanes and willes with him and the Citty of Paris. The inhabitants of Paris borrowed the same penne of the Duke of Guyze, to write with the selfe same stile as hee had done therewith. And namely, they do charge the Duke Espernon as a secret friend to the King of Nauarre, to haue procured the King first to bring forces and ac∣customed garrisons within the Cittie of Paris: by which occasion, the mu∣tiny and commotion had ensued. Then to haue perswaded the King in these tumults to suspect the inhabitants of the sayd City, and at length to haue counselled him to flee from Paris. Secondly, they stirre vp the Cities and Towns of their confederacie, to make like vprores agaynst the King and his forces, as they haue done, warning them, that now the time is come that they ought to liue and dye together, to bring to passe their intents. Thus the Duke of Guyze with his Parisiens, hauing dispatched those thinges which they thought necessary either to strengthen or excuse their actions. Now he taketh in hand the third pen to write to the King, where∣with he powreth out the words of a faithfull seruant, and in disguising his enterprize goeth about to deceaue him, & to lul him asleep: but to do it with good grace in his exordium hee doth chafe & braule first, for feare the King should haue that aduantage ouer him as to begin with him. And although this his last action did openly shew the intentes of al his former dealings, he must dissemble and make the words of seruice & obedience sound high∣ly. There he doth lament, and almost fall a weeping (Crocodils lacrymis)
for his estate, that by reason of the slaunders of his aduersaries, he hath béen rendered suspect to the King of the cryme of high treason. Secondly, to make his innocency appeare, he sheweth how he came to  him with a small company to iustify his actions. Thirdly, he blameth the King that he would harken to his enemies, who caused him to put extraordinary forces in Paris, and to dispose them into the cheefest places of the sayd Citty, and that he would be mooued by their perswasions to make such an exemplary execution of so many noble men and cittizens, whose names hee doth omit in silence. Fourthly, he sayeth, that when the commotion began, hee was altoge∣ther vnarmed and fast a sleepe in his house. Fiftly, that his great paines which hee tooke in contayning the people from murther, doth declare him that his intent was neuer to stir that Cit∣ty to sedition. Sixtly, the care which he had to saue them of his officers, who had not well deserued of him, doth manifestly prooue that he neuer intended any thing agaynst his seruantes. Last of all, the sauing of the liues of his Swissers, Captaines, and Souldiers doth plainly shew, that hee neuer feared any thing so much as to displease him. These be the pennes where with he doth so vary his skill, and doth write so contrary thinges, not to delight (as the art of Rhetorike teacheth) but by the one to confesse the truth, with the other to colour his actions, dissem∣ble and lye; and by the third to diuert the crime of those things which haue happened from himselfe and his partakers, and to charge the King of Na∣uarre, and the Duke Espernon, namely, as the workers and practisers of all the misdemeanours that haue fallen out in that commotion. On the other side, the King about the 17. of May being at Chartres, sent letters vnto the gouernours of the prouinces of his Realme, to geue them notice according to the trueth of things which had happened at Paris. But namely hee wrote letters vnto the Lord Boiseguine, gouernour for his ma∣iesty in the citty of Poytiers, and knight of the order of the holy Ghost: wher∣in he sheweth briefly the summe of the matter, of so sudden (and contrary to his will) comming of the Duke of Guyze, of his owne intent in placing new garisons within Paris, what had there hapened by the secret practi∣sing of the Duke of Guyze, of the causes of his retire to Chartres, praying him to giue notice of all these thinges to the Lords, Gentlemen, and all o∣ther of credit in Poytow and thereabout. He writeth also to the same effect vnto the people and inhabitants of his realme for to diuert them from rebellion, to the which they might be solli∣cited by the Duke of Guyze, and his partakers, and by the example of the Citty of Paris.
Whilest these things are so handled on both sides, euery one iustifiyng his cause: The Leaguers seeing themselues farther to execute their in∣tent vpon the kings person than euer before; do seaze vpon as many towns  and holdes as they can: and about the 25. and 26. of May, the Cardinall and the Duke of Guyze went out of Paris, and seazed vpon Meaulx and Chasteautiery in Brye. The king seazed vpon Corbeil and Meloune, and other holdes and pla∣ces vpon the riuer of Seyne, right against Brie, and vpon the high wayes to Paris: but the Duke of Guize hauing made sure Meaulx & Chasteautiery (as is said) about the 27. of May returned to Paris, and considering how the holding of Corbiel and Meloune, was very grieuous to Paris; do in hast prepare all things for the siege of Meloune, and doth his best indeuour to force it: but seeing that it was too hot for him, and that it would not be re∣couered being so strongly fortified by the king, gaue it ouer. Whilest these things aboue said were a doing, there appeared within Paris spanish captaines, euery day more than other, & out of diuers parts men did ioyne with them. Some (who were faythfull to the king and of some credit among the people) went through the streetes to perswade the inhabitance to open their shops, and to doe as they haue done before. Other who were of the league, did cry with a lowd voice, shut vp your shops, and take armes: if you will not, be ransaked, your wiues rauished, and lose your traffick. Many of the inhabitants went foorth out of Paris, and retired some whither else: they who could not doo it, desired greatly the Kings returne. In the meane time, that on euery side they make their parts strong, and that the parties were like to come to handy blowes. The Leaguers con∣sidering their strength to be weak, if the king should take the matter at the worst, sent three manners of spials. First, they sent of their owne fac∣tion vnder the colour of seruice, to view the kings countenaunce, and to giue intelligences thereof from time to time. Secondly, the Capuchins were sent thither in procession, that vnder the colour of hypocriticall holynes, they might see what weather was at Chartres, and to try if the kings minde was any thing altred toward the Friery, Monkerie, and popish superstition, and inclining in any wise to ye heretikes, as they tearmed thē. The Capuchins are a sect of hypocrites, differing from the Franciscan Friers, nothing but in haire, and forme of their cowle. Their garments are of colour like the robes of the sweepe chimnies here in England, and their cowle is made after the maner of a suger loafe, likeso many melancholike Deuills spewed out of hell, to make the worlde laugh. Last of all, another sorte of spialls were sent, wiser & of greater counte∣nance, than the other 2. sorts, who would sound better, & make a more per∣fect
anotomy of the kings heart, to wit, certaine picked out of the court of Parliament, and among others, namely the Lord Dauron, master of the  requests, to excuse that which had bene committed in that tumult, and to endeuour to pacifie that indignation, which iustly hee had conceiued a∣gainst Guyze and the inhabitants of Paris. To whome he shewed himself very casie to be entreated, as it may appeare by his speaches vttered to them as followeth. The Queene my mother hath geuen me to vnderstand, that you were all assembled and will repayre to me, whereof I am well pleased, being assured that you would not offend in such force, being the first company of my Realme. I haue promised to my selfe of you alwayes all faith∣fulnes and obedience, such as you haue shewed heretofore to my prede∣cessors (Kings) as vnto your lawfull and naturall Princes: And I know that if it had beene in your power to let thinges there passed, that you woulde haue done it. I am sory for that which hath happened to the city of Paris: notwithstanding I am not the first to whome such misfortune hath happenned: And the more I am displeased, that the spare of these foureteene yeares that I haue beene king, I haue alwayes honoured it with my abode, shewing all gentlenes and goodnes to the inhabitants, and they haue alwayes found me a good king, gratifiyng them in all that euer I could: I know that in such a Citie as that is there be good and bad: when they shall make their submissiō, & will acknowledge themselues, I will be readie to receiue and imbrace them, as a good father his children, and as a good King his subiects. Your dutie is to labour in the matter, for therein consisteth the preseruation of the Citie, of your selues, your wiues, and your familyes. Furthermore, continue in your charges as you haue accustomed: the Queene my mother shall certifie you from time to time of my will. In the after noone, the King sent for them againe, and vsed these spea∣ches following. I haue sent for you, (before you goe hence) to let you vnderstand, be∣sides that which I tould you this morning, that I was aduertised of cer∣taine reportes giuen out, that I would haue put Garisons in the Citie of Paris. I doo greatly use that euer such a thing came in their mindes, I knowe that Garisons are set either to vndoo a Citie, or for the mistrust of the inhabitants. They ought not to thinke that I would destroy a Citie, to the which I haue shewed so many tokens and witnesse of my good will, which I haue so much benefited by my long abiding therein, for to haue re∣mayned there more then ten of my predecessors before me had done: which thing hath brought to the inhabitantes, euen to the simplest sort of artiffi∣cers, all the commodities which there doo appeare this day, whereby ten or twelue other Cities might haue been made rich. And when my officers
or Marchants haue had neede of me, I haue done them good: and I may say that I haue shewed my selfe a good King towards them. And there∣fore  it was farre from me, to conceaue any diffidence of them, whome I haue so dearely loued, and of whome I ought to assure my selfe: for the friendship which I haue witnessed vnto them, was enough to take away that opinion from them, that I should bee willing to giue them Garisons, neither can it (in trueth) bee said, that any man of my gardes or Garisons, hath put his foote in any house, or taken from any man a loafe of bread, or any thing else, but contrariwise haue at my prouision been furnished of all needful things: neither should they haue stayed there aboue foure and twen∣tie houres, but the morrow after, without lying in any other place, should haue been appointed to their charge, as if they had been in the campe. I intended to haue made exactly a search of many strangers, who were with∣in my Citie of Paris, and desirous to offend no man: I sent euen to the Lord of Guize, and other Lords, to that end they should giue me a booke of the names of their houshold seruants, and to cause the residue to auoyde. Whereof I was aduertised, that there was a great number, no lesse then fifteene thousand men, which thing I did for the preseruation of the Citie, and safetie of my subiects. This is the cause that I will haue them to ac∣knowledge their fault, with sorrow and displeasure. I knowe well, that they are made beleeue, that hauing offended me in such a sort as they haue done, mine indignation is irreconsiliable. I will you to let them knowe, that I haue not that humor nor will to vndoo them: and that as God, as whose Image I am here vpon the earth (though vnworthie) desireth not the death of a sinner, so doo I not desire their vndooing. I will alwaies prooue the peaceable way, and when they shall shew their duetie, and con∣fesse their fault, and testifie in deede, the sorrow which they haue of their offence, I will receaue, and imbrace them as my subiects, in shewing my selfe as a father toward his children. I will haue them to acknowledge me as their King and Master: if they doo it not, but delay the matter, in draw∣ing my hand, as I may doo, I will make them feele their offence, so that the marke thereof shall remaine for euer. For being the first and principal∣lest Citie, honored with the first and suprem court of my Kingdome, and other courtes, priuiledges, honors, and vniuersitie, I can (as you know) reuoake and remoue thence, all my courtes and vniuersitie, which would turne to their great displeasure: for these things ceasing, all other commo∣dities and traffick will diminish, as it fellout in the yeare 1579. during the great plague, by reason of my absence, and ceasing of the Parliament, a great number of my officers, being retyred thence, young Children were seene that yeare to play at the nine pinnes in the streates. I knowe that there is a great number of good men in my Citie of Paris, and that of foure parts, three are of that number who are very sory of that which hath hap∣pened.
Let them therefore so deale, that I may be content, let them not inforce me to shew them what I may doo, more to doo that which I am a∣ble, and will not. You knowe that patiency prouoked, doo turne into fu∣rie,  and you knowe also, what a King offended may do, if I list to employe all my power and meanes to bee reuenged. And although I bee not of a vindicatiue spirit, yet I would that they should know that I haue courage as much as any of my predecessors. I haue not yet, since the time that I came to the Crowne, by the death of my brother, vsed any rigour toward any man, yet will not I, that they should abuse my clemency; I am not an vsurper; I am a lawfull King by succession, and of a race which hath al∣waies commaunded with clemencie. It is a tale to speake of religion, they must take another way: there is not a Prince in this world, more Catho∣licke, which desireth more the rooting out of heresie then I; my actions and my life haue giuen sufficient witnes in that behalfe to my people: I would that it had cost me an arme, that the last heretick were in picture in this chamber. Goe home to your charges and bee of good courage, you ought not to feare any thing while you haue mee on your side, I will you to let them vnderstand all that I haue tolde you. During these practises of the Leaguers, and their running to an fro, to amend their errour, to fortifie themselues, to make a way to reconsiliation, they stoope to the Q Mother, who was left at the Loure, there they cap and crouch vnto her, they kisse her hands, and giue her sugred words, excusing the matter, that they meant no hurt, but were put in some feare by the kings forces, being lodged and placed in Garison before their doores, they were all the Kings most obedient and faithfull seruants, they require no∣thing else, but that a Catholick successe be nominated, an immortall warre denounced against the hereticks: vpon that condition they are ready to bee sacrificed at his feete, that she would be a meane to pacifie his anger and displeasure; she had been hetherto the onely vpholder of the state against the hereticks, now she may shew a notable proofe of her great wisdome, and do great seruice to the holy Church. By these and such like perswasions, she was easily wonne to bee a me∣diator yet once for them to the King. The Q. Mother was as deeply fallen into the crime of treason as they, saue onely in one degree: for they had conspired the kings death, and vsur∣ping of his kingdome. Shee was not desirous of the kinges death, nor that his kingdome should be taken from him, but she was glad and sought all meanes to keepe him wrapped in troubles during her life, though it should cost him at length his life and state, that shee might alwayes wrest the rule and gouernment out of his hand, by throwing him headlong from time to tyme into troubles and dangers. This accursed woman therefore seeth here an occasion proffered her to
nourish still her ambitious humor, & to bind both the king and his enemies vnto her by the meanes of reconciliation. She from tyme to time sendeth  vnto the king, maketh him beleeue that there is not so much fault in the Leaguers, as it outwardly seemeth to bee: they tooke armors to defend themselues, standing in some feare and mistrust of his forces disposed in the streetes at their dores, and that it was rather a fray which happened by the prouoking of some vnaduised persons, then any intent of rebellion, and that the people once mooued ranne somewhat rashly and inordinatly (as the maner is in such a case) shee warneth him to take heede, not to kindle a new ciuill warre farre more dangerous then the former, with the here∣tikes, stronger in forces, wealth, and partakers: & if all the power of the realme had not béene able to extinguish the former, it would bee an endles worke to bring this to an end: which could not bee done without the sub∣uerting, or at least the renting of the kingdome, that in tyme he may well be reuenged of the iniuries of some, of whom hee feeleth himselfe greeued. It is best to dissemble and winke for a time, then by a precipitation of coun∣sell to hazard life and state. By this Cup, which shee borrowed of Circe her countrey woman, she transformed the king from a man (hauing a Ly∣ons hart) into a sheepe, cast him in a sound and vnsensiblenes: whereby af∣ter he could not feele the good counsels of his faithful subiects, who proffe∣red him their help to reuenge such notorious and publike contumelies, vn∣till that at length necessity enforced him to do it. The rumor of such a notable treason, attempted and performed by the Leaguers, in expelling the king of such an ancient race out of his imperial Citty, spread abroad, there repayred vnto the king two maner of people, to offer him their help in the reuengement of such an iniury, to wit, some Lea∣guers, which (seeing that the Lorreins had proceeded so far as to attempt agaynst his person and state) now do change their minde, do pitty their Prince so much abused vnder colour of Catholicisme. The Catholikes both noble, ecclesiasticall and commons, the better & sounder part of them come in post to the King, exclaiming against the Guyzes, and against their presumption, requiring the K. to take punishment equall to the greatnes of the offence, do counsell him to let alone the King of Nauarre and all the heretikes, who neuer enterprised such a thing, and to turne his forces a∣gaynst such notorious offenders. They prayed him to ouergoe his greefe, they proffer him their seruice, their liues, goods, and meanes for the per∣formance thereof. The King despiseth not their good counsell and affection toward him, but being bewitched by the sorcering of his mother, as is abouesaid, an∣swereth them quietly, that he wanted neither courage nor force to reuenge his priuat iniuries, sayth, that he will not kindle a new ciuill warre in his realme, thanketh them, and sendeth them home, intending already re∣consiliation
with the Leaguers. It is sayd before how the Leaguers and the Parisiens leagued with them, perceauing that the missing of the King might turne to their shame and vndooing, tryed to iustify their actions by letters,  solicited other townes and citties to the like rebellion, fortifyed themselues, seazed vppon as many holdes as they could surprize: and in the meane time searched and viewed the Kinges mynd by their secret spi∣als, sounded his mind a farre of by the hipocriticall Capuchins, whether these vngratefull actions had any thing mooued him to disoaine poperie, and to seeme to encline to them of the reformed religion: but specially by them of the court of Parliament, whom they sent to him to know his dis∣position to peace, and how he digested the contumelious iniuries. It is sayd also, that in the meane time by the means of his mother, they extinguished that Nemesis, which is in great Princes, and turned it into pusillanimity: and how bee shewed some tokens of that basenes of hart in his speeches with them of his court of Parliament. Now the Leaguers perceiuing by all these meanes, that the Kinges heat was cooled, & more inclined vnto impunitie, which he calleth clemen∣cie, then vnto punishment and reuenge: Before they enter into treaty of peace, they goe about to temper him somewhat better yet, by a forme of petition: and to giue some authority to the same, they borrow both the per∣son, and the name of the Cardinall of Bourbon, whose authority from the beginning they had made a couering of their negotiation and conspira∣cies. This Cardinall being one of the first Princes of the blood, was not ignorant long time before, of all these cōmotions, & of the old hatred which they of the house of Guyze haue borne to the Princes, friends, and ser∣uants, of the house of Bourbon, and that in seeking the decay and fal of thē they procured also his own: But through a certaine vnhappines, he had suffered himselfe to be possessed and handled by them of the contrary part, and following their counsels, they had made alwaies a buckler of him, considering his qualitie and degree, which he hath in that realme, as well among the Princes, as among the priests. So that many of them to serue their turne did not feare, to affirme that he was the eldest of the house of Bourbon, and that if neede were, hee was capable of the succession to the Crowne. This man therefore serued much to their faction: him they thrust forward for the negotiation and aduauncing of their affayres, according to the occasions. So that hauing determined to send a supplication to the King, to as∣swage his displeasure, while they aduise vpon other wayes, to entangle and entrap him yet once more. They prepose the said Cardinall his name in the said petition, that the greatnes of his name (onely of that faction of all the house of Bourbon) may serue as a vayle to the affections, of them
who were more watchfull in handling of their affaires, thē the said Cardi∣nall was in the gouerning of his owne. They doo present this supplicati∣on, in the name of the Cardinall of Bourbon, and of the Masters of the  League, who would faine becalled Princesse, and in the name of the Citie of Paris, and of the other Cities of their confederacie. In this supplicati∣on they make a low coursie and al contemptious capping, with an humble submission and protestation of their good willes, with a proffer of their ser∣uice, and of all that they haue, for the defence of his estate, and of the Catho∣lick religion, so that the Duke of Guize may haue the leading of his forces and managing of their affaires. Secondly, they charge the Duke Espernon and his brother, the Lord Valette, to be fauourers of the hereticks, to haue betrayed ye kings forces, in hindering all good exploytes, to bee done against the hereticks, and the King of Nauarre. To haue fauored the armie of the Germanes in their retiring home, to haue beene the cause by his counsell of the vprore happe∣ned of late at Paris. To haue wasted the Kinges treasure, to be the author of all the disorde which is in the gouernement. Thirdly, they purge themselues of any priuat inimitie, or affection to∣wards him in this accusation, and for proofe of the foresaid offences, doo re∣ferre themselues to the testimonie of the Queene Mother, and of the offi∣cers of his Crowne, if it pleaseth him to examine them vppon the saide crimes, and giue them licence to speake their mindes with libertie. Fourthly, they demand of him instantly with prayer to put the sayd Es∣pernon and Valette his brother, and their adherents, from his person and fauour, and to discharge them from all charges and gouernements which they haue in the Realme, & that the king will prouide them of some small charges, of no importance at all. They also doe assure the King, that in so doing, he shall greatly please the people, in deliuering them as they say from that feare, which they haue conceaued of the power of the said Espernon. These lets being taken away, they require him to make warre in Guienne, in his owne person, to whome they doe promise their ready will, courage and assistance, against the heretikes, and in the meane time to appoynt his mother to gouerne Paris. Fiftly, they require that the Duke de Maine may haue an armie to goe into Daulphine, against them of the Religion, they tell him that hee may make a great booty of the spoyle of Espernon & his brother, to main∣taine the warre, and that hee will abolish all new subsidies and charges layd vpon the people. Sixtly, they doe require that he will name a successor Catholick, fea∣ring it greatly to fall into the hands of them of the reformed Religion. Seuenthly, they of Paris (as partakers in this request) doo faine and glose with the king, and pray him most humbly to beleeue them, that all
which had happened of late at Paris, was not that they thought to do him any harme, and that it was done by their Magistrates, and that onely they doubted least the authors of the counsel (in bringing extraordinary forces  into the Citie) would haue abused his authoritie in oppressing them They fayne themselues very sory, that hee went foorth of their Citie in displeasure and mistrust, praying him to giue them leaue to liue in rest vnder his obedience. Last of all, they require that the Lord d'Ho be discharged hereafter, of his charge which he had to commaund in the Citie, and that he will allow the deposing of the Prouost and Escheuins, and approue the new election which they haue made of others, and that hereafter it be lawfull for the Citizens to choose their owne officers. Also when it shall please him to returne into the Citie, hee will not bring within twelue leagues thereof, any other forces beside his ordi∣nary guards. This supplication was presented to him the eight and twē∣tith of May. The King hauing receiued this suplication, answereth it the nine and twentith of May at Chartres, wherein first hee rehearseth the zeale which he hath to the Catholick religion, the great and dangerous warrs which he had done, the great charges which hee hath beene at for the same, the famous victories obtained by him against them of the reformed religion: and how he hath pacified the troubles raysed by the Leaguers, and vnited the Catholicks, which were by the Leaguers deuided. Secondly, he sheweth himselfe willing to put vp all iniuries, passed a∣gainst him in Paris, when the inhabitants shall behaue themselues hereaf∣ter, as it becommeth them to doe, and in so doing hee proffereth them to preserue them in their liberties, as his predecessors haue doone before him. Thirdly, hee wisheth nothing more than that all the popish Princes, Lords, and subiects may be reunited againe to warre against the King of Nauarre. Fourthly, he greatly desireth the reformation of his Realme in al his partes: and for because it is a publike contagion, he supposeth that it can not be well done, without the assembly of the States, which he intendeth to assemble in the towne of Bloys the fifteeneth of August, where he pro∣miseth to satisfie them in warranting them from falling into the handes of the king of Nauarre or any other hereick. As touching the complaints against the Duke Espernon he promiseth to them iustice therein. It is sayd before, how the King after the retyre of the Germans retur∣ning to Paris, intending to make a voyage to Guienne agaynst the King of Nauarre with all his forces, and in his proper person had prepared the way to doo great exployts, by sending forces vnto Lauerdine Lieutenant
of Niort, immediatly after the death of the Prince of Conde, and how the sayd Lord Lauerdine with those forces seazed vpon the Iles of Marans,  and tooke all the Forts within the Iland. Which exployts being done, the Lord Cluseaulx, otherwise called Blanchard, obtayned the gouernment of the sayd Iland, where hee determined to settle himselfe: and after many extorsions, ransackings and robberies, done (during and after the siege of Marans) to them of the reformed religion, who had abandoned all things to saue themselues at Rochel; he promised to himselfe to fortifie and kéepe well the sayd places, in hope shortly after to occupie the whole gouerne∣ment of Aunis, and to plague the inhabitants of Rochel. Therefore he lod∣ged there his regiment, which consisted of ten Ensignes, whom he deuided in the Forts of the Iland: and to make warre out right, he ordained the Lord Tremblay to bee in garrison there with a companie of fourtie light horses. He caused great store of white Corslets and newe Pikes to be brought thether out of Paris, to arme his garrisons there. He sendeth Commissio∣ners to the Parishes round about, euen to them which lye next to Rochel, to haue a number of Pyoners, to gather Subsidies and Tallages, and to bring them to Marans. He prepared a number of Barkes and boates for to hold the Sea, and to seaze vppon the Ile of Rhe, by the intelligences which he had with the Lord S. Luke of Browage. He caused the Corne and Wine to be taken vp through the Farmes of the gouernment of Rochel, and tooke many prisoners. To be short, speak∣ing very bigge, he omitted no poynt of hostilitie, hoping to make there a second Browage, and a Blockhouse to famish Rochel. The King of Nauarre did beare with him: and hauing spied his coun∣sell, during the space of two moneths and a halfe, the sayd King hauing on a sudden assembled certaine companies of footmen and horsemen, & made all things readie, the 24. of Iune entered the Iland at Charron nigh to Marans ouer the bridges, which he had caused to bee made in diuers pla∣ces. In this Iland were holden by the enemie the Forts of Charron and Brault, wherein were foure score Souldiers harquebusiers, commaunded by Captaine Chautery, hee besieged the Fort of Brault, as the néerest of greater importance and more defendable by the enemie, whose losse drew after it the losse of Charron. He drewe by the channell of Seure two shippes set in readines to batter it: but at night it was surrendered, their liues safe: notwithstanding, of courtesie he granted both to the Captaine and Soul∣diers their swords: & immediatly they of Charron surrendered themselues likewise, being in number twentie of the best Souldiers of the Regi∣ment. The 25. day he caused a bridge to be made vpon the channell of Brune,
approaching still to the Ile of Marans, and went himselfe to view the fort Clouzie, and a certaine house fortified by the enemie, called the house of Clouzie, nigh the méetings of two channels which doo wash the sayd house  on both sides. These two Forts doo lye vpon a deepe channell, which they must needes passe ouer to enter into Marans, distant one from the other a∣bout sixe score paces, and beyond the sayd channell betweene the two forts a newe fort was builded, for to let the casting of the bridge, if any should be made. This newe fort was in the sight of the two forts, to wit, the fort of Clouzie, and the house of Clouzie, whereof is spoken of before. All things well viewed, the sayd King concluded to attempt vpon these fortes: the rest of the day passed away in shooting certaine volleys of Or∣dinance vppon those fortes out of the shippes, and in certaine light skirmi∣shes. In the euening the sayd King caused the shippes to goe downe the water to the Iland Charron, to take from the enemy the suspicion of the thing which hee determined to do the day following. The 26. day being the Lords day, about three a clock, hee came with few of his men before Clouzie, made his bridges sure, aduauncing forward, his Gabions prepared the bridge to bee cast betweene the two forts, sear∣ched the places where they might enter into Marans, causeth his shippes to approach into that place, where they were the day before, putting his regimentes in battaile aray, placing them in the same order that they should march, and also his footmen to sustayne the enemy at the entring of the Iland, and to serue for such occasions as might ryse, he being himselfe in person the formost to see with the eie what should be needeful to be done. The morning passed away in such exercises, and in the meane while the enemy did what he could to keepe him off. At 11. a clock, prayers and singing of Psalmes vnto God being ended throughout all his regimentes and troupes of horsemen, after hee had ap∣poynted euery man what they should doo, hee began to force the passage, kept by a companie of the regiment of the Lord Cluseaulx, and with the company of light horses of the Lord Tremblay, flanked on ye one side with the fort Clouzie, and on the other side by the house Clousie, which was (as is aforesayd) fortified and in front defended by the third fort, and a trench in the middle. Vpon the right hand of the house of Clousy marched the master of the Campe Preaulx, who had slyded with his troupes into the reedes, to passe ouer the channell in a place knowen, and yet not without danger and the Captayne Ferrand with him: hee tooke also with him the Captaines Lo∣meau and Nede into the same reedes. A little behind was the Baron Salignak with his regiment to geue the scalado to the sayd house. Right against the house of Clouzie, foure captaines with their Souldiers
thosen out of the regiment of the Lord Granuile, did aduaunce the Gabi∣ons vppon the banke of the channell, and behind their Gabions were in  battell aray the companyes of Rochel at the right hand of the sayd Gabi∣ons, right agaynst the meeting of the two channels: the saide Lord Gran∣uile with thirty armed men did push forward the said bridge, they were couered from the gunshot of the fort Clousy by the Captaine Valley of Ro∣chel with a great number of targets of proofe, and behinde them (who did push the bridge) marched the rest of the regiment with the troupes of Rhe, conducted by captayne Planch. At the lift hand going toward Clousy (to occupy the enemy) all along the channell marched the new and old gardes of the King of Nauarre, conduc∣ted by the Captaynes Porte and Vignoles, and the Harquebuziers on horseback of the Lord Peujas, who were al lighted of their horse with Cap∣taine Limalle. The horsemen were behind the footmen, the troupe of the Lord Peu∣jas behind the regiment of the Lord Granuile, and the companies of Rhe, which followed the bridge. The mayne forces of the King of Nauarre, commaunded by the Prince of Soissons, were a hundred paces and more behind, but a litle more aduaun∣ced vppon the lift hand. The enemyes seeing the Kinges forces in that aray, and that they had bowed theyr knees on the ground to make their prayers to God afore they went to the battell, and calling to remembrance the prayers which were made at Coutras, did fall into such a feare, as they began to crye, they pray, they will beat vs as they did at Coutras: and beginning to wauer, on a sud∣den fled away in great disorder. Here is to be noted, that had it not béen for the fault committed through hastines in casting the bridge in a place where the chanell was forked, whereas it should haue béene cast below the méeting of two channels, they had béen followed with such violence, that they had béen cut to peeces afore they could haue come to Marans. It is not to bee forgotten, that the King of Nauarre at the same houre caused the regiments of his gardes of Charbonieres, and Soubran, conduc∣ted by the Lord Mignonuile, Marshall of the campe, to take paines for to wade ouerthwart the Marishes in the water to the knee, more then a League, and defeated a part of the enemie, whome they met in their re∣tyring. The Fort of Clousy, seeing the disaray of their fellowes, rendered imme∣diatly: at discretion therein were fourescore men commaunded by Cap∣taine Serre, who were all saued; the enemies partly made their retire in great haste to Marans, and partly fled another way. In the towne where it was thought that some resistance would haue
been made, was such a maze, that there was found no body. Many of the forces of the King of Nauarre, not staying for the setting on of the bridge, both a foote and horseback, cast themselues in the wa∣ter. The Lord Cluseaulx, who did dine at Marans whilest the King of Na∣uarre did force the passage, hearing of the flight of his men, as well with them which had remained within the towne, as with them who had retired from the garde of the passage, with the Lord Tremblay, few of the compa∣ny fled into the Castell, because there was no other way nor place to flee to. The first which entred into Marans were the gardes of the King of Nauarre, followed at hand with the rest of the armie, as fast as they could passe ouer at Clousy. At the same instant, the enemies were besieged in the Castell, the quar∣ters parted to euerie regiment, and at euening euerie one was lodged vp∣on the Castell ditch. The King of Nauarre followed them at hand with his maine forces, and lodged that same night at Marans. The same day were summoned all these forts following, fortified with Garisons of the enemie. The Fort Boysneuf, where commaunded the Lieutenant of Captaine Serre, with thirtie men with him, who yeelded. Also the Fort Brune, wherein were threescore men, commaunded by Cap∣taine Camart, who yeelded also: The Fort Allowette, holden with twen∣tie men, commaunded by the Lieutenant of Captaine Roque, all yeelded with their liues safe. There rested in all the Iland that day, being the sixe and twentie of Iune, to recouer from the hand of the enemie, but the Ca∣stell, the Forts Bastile and Paulee, situated vpon the other entries into the Iland. The prudence of the K. of Nauarre is not to be forgotten, that before he assaulted the Iland, hee placed the Lord Trimouille, with all his light horsemen, and the companies of the Lord Orges, Plassak, and Aram∣bure, within the town of Saint Ihan of Liuersay, in the high way from Ni∣ort, to Marans, that the enemie might not receaue succour through the Bastile. The Lord Trimouille had made a Fort in two dayes, betweene Saint Ihan of Liuersay and Bastile, to cut from them which were therein, all meanes to escape away, and hope of succour. The monday on the seauen and twentie of Iune, the Captaine and Souldiours of the said Bastile, séeing that all the meanes to auoyde, were cut off from them, did yéeld, and went foorth with like conditions as their fellowes had done the day before, being in number fourescore and ten, com∣maunded by Captaine Chapel. The eight and twenty, the King of Nauarre, with two canons, and two Culuerines, began to approach, and in the middest of the day, put them in place of batterie. The Lorde Clermont there did commaund: that night
there were certaine motions of Parley. The nine and twentie, about three a clock in the morning, when the be∣sieged saw that the King of Nauarre went to worke in good earnest, they  demaunded to Parley, and in the name of all the rest, came forth Captaine Riuiere, to require conditions of the King of Nauarre. At length the com∣position was concluded, that the Captaines and Gentlemen should goe forth with their horses and corselets, & the souldiours with their swords, that the rest of their armour should remaine within the Castell. The ma∣ster of the campe, the Lord Tremblay, the Captaines Maron and Toure should remaine in the hands of the King of Nauarre, to deliuer him the colours, to wit, eyght Ensignes (for two companies had none) and the Cornet. The agréement was carefully kept, the King himselfe conducted them part of the way, they were not iniuried so much as one word, although the Lord Cluseaulx had great enemies. The same day, Captaine Roque rendered the Fort Paulee, with the same conditions, that the Castell was yeelded vp: the Lord Lauerdine sen∣ding word that he could not rescue them, for because the Lord Boulay was lodged on that side. The King of Nauarre kept Cluseaulx prisoner, who was brought with great solemnitie into Rochel, where he was kept prisoner a long time, ha∣uing lisence (notwithstanding) to goe where he would, vnder custodie of certaine Souldiours: he was better vsed then many did expect: at length he was deliuered, and among other, vpon this condition, neuer more to ioyne himselfe to the League. The King of Nauarre also sendeth all the armour which there was ta∣ken, in great stoare, with the colours to Rochel there were taken also: ma∣ny faire horses. So in the space of foure dayes, he recouered all the Iles and Forts of Maran, & did rid all that quarter of the filthie sinke of the Leaguers, where he did shew no lesse courtesie to his enemies, then valour and diligence in the repressing of them. It is said before, how that after the accursed and execrable rebellion, and insolencie of the Leaguers in Paris, they perceauing the foule and dan∣gerous errour which they had committed, in missing of the Kings person, and that hee was now safe enough from falling into their hands againe, which might redound to their vtter vndooing, they sent three manner of spyalls to him, to view his countenance, to sound the thoughts of his heart, by the way of sorrowing and excusing the desperat fact attempted a∣gainst his sacred person in Paris. It is saide also, how they sent a suppli∣cation vnto him, therein faining a submission full of snares, and vnreasona∣ble demaundes.
It is sayd also, how vppon the rumor spread abroad throughout all the realme, his faithfull seruantes of all callinges and degrees moued with an∣ger  and compassion repayred vnto him, most humbly prayed him not to put vp such publike iniury, proffered him their seruice, goods, and liues for the reuengement of such an outragious offence. Now agayne many of the Kinges subiects of all qualityes and degrées do repaire a fresh vnto the King, most instantly to require him not to suf∣fer such a damnable treason of the Guyzes and their confederats let go vnpunished, but that punishment be executed vpon such offenders in such sort as is fit for the greeuousnes of the offence: they do promise him againe all aide and succour, if hee will resolue himselfe to seeke the meanes of re∣uenge, and let the heretikes alone for a time. The King whom Gods iustice did vrge and pursue for the hardnes of his hart, in so obstinating himselfe against the Gospell and other offences,  which do issue out of that spring, seemed to be touched with the readines of his good Subiectes, but not to any purpose moued to follow their good counsell, but thanketh euery one as though hee had no neede at all of their counsell and ayde. The Leaguers now vnderstanding by their spials the pusillanimity of the King, and his inclination to some composition and peace with them, though disaduantagious, by his slender and fearfull answere to their vn∣reasonable demaunds in their supplication, do now conceaue a good hope, not onely to amend the former fault, but also to make themselues a way more plaine and easier then euer they had before, to performe shortly their enterprises. And as they haue had recourse alwaies to the Q. Mother, by whose meanes they haue found a present remedy in all faultes committed, and offences geuen to the King: but now yt at their request she had besotted him by her sorceries, shee must make an end of her good worke begunne. This accursed woman hath béen the dishonor of womankinde, the subuer∣sion of the whole kingdome, the slaughter of the nobility, the butcher of the commons, and the vndooing of her owne children. The Leaguers then hauing such an intercessor, who vnder colour of a motherly counsell, will bring them neerer to execute their rage vppon the Kinges person, and to vsurpe his estate, do send this old Medea to make a negotiation for them, as much to their aduantage as shee can. Therefore that they may strip the King cleane out of authority, they do thrust in their demaundes, the articles concluded at Nancy spoken of before. She must vrge the Kinges consent to these articles following: for which intent shee went to Nemours, a towne in Gastinois. In these demaunds they woulde faine make the Kinge beleeue, howe all that they doo is for the preseruation of the popish religion, and that they desyre greatly a reunion of the Catholiks, whereof he should be the head.
First, they doe demaund that all generally shall promise and sweare, to imploy their persons, goods, and meanes, for the conseruation and de∣fence,  of the king, of his estate and authoritie, and of the children which it shall please God to send him, and that against all manner of men. By this demaund they lull the king asleepe. They shall sweare also the rooting out of heresie, and doe require pro∣uision to be taken, that no heretike Prince, or suspected of heresie, or fa∣uourer of heretikes, may enioy the Crowne, whatsoeuer right he may pretend thereunto: and that this may be confirmed by an oath of all men. Also that the king shall sweare to defend the Leaguers (who doo call themselues Princes) against the heretikes and their fauourers. By this artcile they will exclude (if they may) all the Princes of the house of Bourbon, whome they will easily finde either heretikes, or fauou∣rers Note. of heretikes. Secondly, they demaund, that it may please him to sweare to the ob∣seruation of those demaunds, and that hee will permit in their custodie the townes and Cities which are graunted them, during six yeares: and that in all other townes which shall ioyne themselues to the Leaguers, nothing be innouated, and that they may not be punished for any offence or rebellion committed. Furthermore, they doe demaund that if during the six yeares, there should happen any vocation of gouernours and Captaines, in the saide townes and Cities, that then the Leaguers may name such as they think good, and that the king shall stablish such at their request. This is to dispossesse the king of his holds, towns and cities, and ther∣in to place such as shall bee at their deuotion, whome they may trust. Note. Thirdly, they doe require the publishing of the councell of Trent, and the obseruing of the same, and that the King shall forsake his aliance which he hath with princes and nations, heretickes, and that hee shall giue ouer the protection of certaine townes knowen to bee the receptacle of heretikes. By these they meane, the Germanes, the kings of Denmarke and Scot∣land, Note. the Queene of England, the cantons of Swissers, the townes of Ge∣neua, Sedan, and Iamets. that of one side he might be destitute of friends to defend him against his enemies, and that the one of these Cities might be the more easily subdued by the Duke of Sauoy, and the other two by the Duke of Lorreine. Last of al, that the goods and lands of the heretikes be solde, and to im∣ploy the mony to make warre against the heretikes, but specially to main∣taine one armie in Poytow, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Guyze, and the other in Daulphine conducted by his brother the Duke de Maine. The king knew very wel (except he had been talpacoecior) yt these articles
were against the dutie of faithfull subiects: and that of the princes men∣tioned in the said articles, there was but one, to wit, the Cardinall of Bourbon, & that all the others being strangers, did handle him cunningly at  will, vnder faire colours, and made him their mouth to speake for them. He knew very well, that all that which they say in their articles, of the pre∣seruation o his person, crowne and estate, were but wordes, and a coue∣ring of their trayterous drifts: he perceiued well, that the desire which they pretended to haue of the ease and preseruation of Cities, was but a flattering bayte, on the one side to alienate them from his obedience, and on the other side, to make them affected, & ready to the execution of their enterprizes. As for the nomination of gouernours and captains in the sayd townes, which they would haue to be reformed to them, to place therein such as they would think good; he vnderstoode well, that in plaine tearmes they meant to abridg yt small store of authoritie which they had left him, and to make him their inferiour: He saw well enough, that the degraduatiō, and disheriting of the lawfull Princes from the succession of the crowne, vn∣der the colour of heresie, or fauouring of heretikes, was but a meane to put the Crowne vpon their owne heads. Also, that to breake the aliances which he had with the forraine Prin∣ces and nations whome they called heretikes, was a thing no lesse vniust, than pernitious to his estate, whome by such means, they wrapped into a heape of newe troubles, and that such a demaund was arrogantly to com∣mand their King and Soueraigne. To be short, the king knew very well, that in all these things they sought but the easier way to their greatnes, and the means to debase his authoritie, and to hasten the fall of his estate. Yet as a man bereft of wit, destitute of wisdome and courage, and bewitched with the perniti∣ous and poysoned counsells of Circe, his execrable and accursed mother, without considering any thing the greatnes of the offence of the leaguers, and the innocencie of the party condemned, he graunted the Edict of re∣union, patched by the hammering and tinkering of his mother & the Lea∣guers, in the towne of Nemours, where they had assembled themselues, bearing date the one and twentith of Iuly. This Edict was made according to the former demaunds and articles of Nancy, spoken of before. Here it may bee asked, how the King knowing the secret thoughts and drifs of the Guizes and other Leaguers, by long experience and obserua∣tion of their behauiours, by the admonitions giuen him by men of all de∣grees both strangers and subiects, by their attempts and actions so often times atchieued, by their vniust, pernicious, vnreasonable, vnseemely and irreuerent demaunds so oftentimes proposed, and his faithfull subiects
vrging him with earnest prayers to seeke the remedying and reuenge of these iniuries: why did he not hearken vnto them, and pursued them with strong hand, if they had refused to answer to his iustice; which thing to doo  at length he was enforced to do: There is no doubt but he had a will and purpose to be reuenged of them: but being a scholler of the villanous and prophane Atheist the Italian Machiauell, whose philosophie he had hard∣ly studied by the counsell of his godles mother, and of some villanous scul∣lions Italians which were about her, hee supposed that he could be reuen∣ged better by craftinesse and surprising of them, then by force. He watched for the occasions how to handle them in such wise as he handled them of the reformed religion at S. Bartholomew, and so with one banquet to haue rid his hands of his enemies, and recouered his authoritie, state and quiet∣nes. And so refusing the lawfull meanes by the which God giueth salua∣tion vnto Kings, his owne counsell turned to his owne shame, confusion and dishonour. Doo ye therefore that which is righteous, ye Kings and Iudges of the earth, and kisse the sonne least ye perish out of the way. The king therefore hoping to bestowe a S. Bartholmews breakfast vpon them, was content to take any thing at their hands. This agréement concluded, caused an excéeding great ioy to all the conspirators, who thought it to bée no small cunning of theirs thus easily to haue auoided the deserued punish∣ment of their mutinie and rebellion: for which cause they of their confede∣racie doo carrie their heads higher then euer they did, their courage dooth double, and heate kindle against them of the reformed religion without comparison farre more then before. Thereupon two mightie Armies are appoynted to be sent, the one into Guienne, the other into Daulphine, compounded of the Kings & Leaguers forces, dreadfull and terrible not only to the reformed Churches of France, but also to the Nations round about. The Duke of Sauoy (one of the con∣spiracie of the League) mustered a mightie Armie that should inuade the Marquizat of Saluces, to enter into Daulphine, to ioyne his forces with the League. The Townes and Cities great and small, according to the edict of reunion, doo shewe themselues readie and willing to bestow gold, siluer, goods, fauours, armours and liues to further the affaires of the Leaguers. All these things were much, but they were nothing to the great prepara∣tion of warre, and the inuincible Armado which was not onely in a readi∣nes, but also sayling forward to the execution of this conspiracie agaynst the Church of God, they goe to worke by land and by water. For this nauall Armie builded in Spayne, was thought sufficient to conquer many Realmes: the shippes were of incomparable bignes, in number so many that they couered the seas. The most excellent Carpenters, cunning men, and finest workemen of all Europe, had spent their wits and seuen or eight yeares in the building and preparing of the sayd Armie: The Artillerie,
powder, pellets, munitions, tacklings, and other necessarie things, for so dreadfull an army, was a heape of things incredible to beléeue. All Italy, Venice, Sicil, Sardinia, Malta, and other Ilands, subiect or con∣federated to the King of Spayne, had brought to it their counsell, their mo∣ney, their shippes, their Captaines, their armour, their pylots, and all that euer they could deuise: so that Xerxes did neuer so much against Grecia, as this Armado determined to doo to England and to France, in passing by. As for France, the Spanyard made his account, to bee alreadie vanqui∣shed and subdued vnder his power, hauing already these mightie armies a∣boue said, and the conspiracie of the League on his side. As for England, they thought they should haue a little to doo in conquering it, as they had indéede, though they had much a doo on the narrow Seas, nigh the coast of England. On the other side, the Duke of Parma had a mighty army in the Lowe Countrey, wherewith at the same time, to inuade the Countreys of Ho∣land and Zeland, and others where they haue the exercise of the reformed religion, so that they had alreadie swallowed in one morsell, by imaginati∣on all France, England, Scotland, Zeland, and Holand: and for to make this great morsell goe downe easilie without choaking, there was in the mid∣dest of France two armies, and about France the Duke of Sauoy on the South, the Nauall army of Spayne on the West, and Parma on the North side. The enemies of God made their full account, that there was no more hope to outstand or ouerwaigh such heauie forces. They therefore brea∣thing fire, bloud, and murther, doo not onely determine to reduce al that re∣mained of the reformed religion to fire and ashes, and to make hauock and waste of all things, but also doo promise themselues a beginning of an assu∣red rest hereafter, and infallible victories, and that this exployt being done, and this great morsel swallowed, Germany, Denmark, Suisserland, and Ge∣neua, other places would follow, or else for feare of like handling would be reduced to the holy Church. After this famous victory of the Leaguers was knowne through the realme, how they had conquered the Kings heart and courage, the edict of the 21. of Iuly proclaymed and sworne in euery towne and Citie, where the crier durst venture; Sathan, the chiefest master and worker of all this game, stirred vp false Prophets in euery place, to wit, the legions of Iesu∣ites, Friers, Monks, & Priests: these false Prophets an euery where, a vi∣sion, a vision, I haue séen a visiō; they bring into their pulpets, which haue serued them this long for trumpets and drommes, to kindle sedition, re∣bellion and murther; they vtter the vision of their owne hearts, bring forth diuers Prognostications and Prophesies, for to animate these fiery cou∣rages
of the Leaguers and Catholicks, reunited together; they doo handle so their visions, that they do promise an infallible good, and prosperous suc∣cesse. But specially they (by their spirits of diuination) shew their great  learning in vttering loades of wisdome vpon the predictions of the olde Mathematicians, concerning the yeare 1588. which they had long before accounted fatall to the world, both the Prophets and the people doo easily perswade themselues, that the things will befall, which they greatly de∣sired. The feare of these thunderclaps was great euery where, the forces in number and furniture were inequall: therefore in France, many not consi∣dering that God may defend his people, as well with few as with many, and that hée hath Legions of Angels to fight at his commaundement, for the defence of his Elect, yéelded to the time, and reuolted, made their abiu∣ration, and followed the world. The Duke of Guize was the Northen Star, by the which, all this Nauigation was guided, so that it was perceaued, that neither all this preparation and stoare, neither the Prophesies and visions of the rauing Prophets, could assure the happy successe, except the Duke of Guize might be in court, nigh the Kings elbow. Therefore the Q. Mother she must be set to worke, she with other Leaguers, which were about the Kings per∣son, tell what a great wise man the Duke of Guize was, and that hée could not bée well without such a counseller, hauing such great waightie things in hand. The King thought it was a dangerous thing to haue such a guest so nigh him, yet supposing that it would be the néerest way to surprise him, and that at some occasion he might rid his hands of that peri∣lous burthen, consented thereto. All caueats and prouisions which the prouidence of man could deuise for his safetie, being prouided and made sure, he purposeth to depart out of Paris to goe to the court. He tooke in his companie the Q. Mother, and raigning wt a great traine of the inhabitants of Paris: the Lords Byron and Neuers, who had béen alwaies with the King (the one as a faithfull seruant to the King, the o∣ther as a secret fauourer of the League) went to meete the said Duke. At his comming to the Kings presence, what welcomes, what complai∣nings, what excuses, what praiers, what promises, what gréetings, and what dissimulations there was betweene them, to wit, the King & Guize, euery man of iudgement may consider. The Duke of Guize caused his table of great master of France, to be e∣stablished, and good and assured meanes for the maintenance thereof; he ob∣tained also a patent of great Master of men of war in France (which is a iminiiue title of Constable) for an earnest, and in hope shortlie to haue all.
And whereas in the request presented to the King, it was demaunded that he should be the Kings Generall of that armie, which should bee sent into Guienne. Now he dooth recant, and vpon the push doth refuse to take  that charge, but willeth another to be appoynted, and that for two causes: he would rather venture another mans skin then his owne, knowing well that hee could neuer repasse Loyre without a broaken skin, which thing he loued not: the second cause was, that he would not go farre from the King, and from Paris there to be at hand, vpon all occasions to take opportunitie to execute his enterprise. In his roome therefore the Duke of Neuers is appoynted to conduct the armie into Guienne against the King of Nauarre, he maketh his excuse (fea∣ring the whip as the other did) of his indisposition, and offereth to maine∣taine one hundred Gentlemen, so that he might be excused, which charge, notwithstanding at length he accepted. The wisest sort feared in general, that this wound could not be closed vp and healed, without some fowle scarre remayning, or that hee who had once presumed to beat his Prince out of his imperiall citty, should not want audacity to attempt further matters. All these vprores being now pacifyed, and all these great preparations vrged with great courage, they of the reformed religion all ready proscript, all things threatning death and desolation by land and by water, a parlia∣ment of the States is appointed by the King to be holden at Bloys the 15. day of August next following, there to determine vpon the affaires of the land according to the said edict of reunion, and not otherwise, and about the reformation of the State: but specially for the disheneriting of the Princes of the bloud, that they should not succeede to the Crowne. In this Par∣liament the King and the Duke of Guyze had diuers and contrary mea∣nings, and neither of them both did intend to do the thinges aboue sayde, touching the affaires of the land, and reformation of the State. But the Kings purpose was, that now (hauing recouered as he thought part of his authority) hee might bridle his domesticall enemy, to wit, the Duke of Guyze, whose practises and attempts had béen so euidently shew∣ed to the eie of all men, agaynst his person and estate, and there either to haue had him condemned and executed by the full assembly of the states, or else by surprising to haue dispatched him out of the way, as hee at length performed. The Dukes meaning was, either to exclude the King from all go∣uernment, or else to haue condemned him by the authority of all the states, or if opportunity might serue, to do him away by some violence, and after to haue tryed how to bring his intent to passe. Euery one of them therfore hauing his contrary thoughts in his mind, yet they in common do prepare all things for this assembly of the Parlia∣ment,
they make the ouerthrow of the King of Nauarre, and the rasing of the Blockhouse of Rochel (as they tearme it) very easy. While they keepe this great adoo, and replenish the world with cruell threatnings, and are in hand both by land and by water, to aduance the treasons of the Leaguers, which cannot be done without the rooting out of the true Religion. Therefore it is assaulted on the South syde by the Dukes of Sauoy and Mayne, with two mighty armies on the West, by the omnipotent Armado; on the North, by all the forces of ye low Countryes; in the middle of France, by the Duke of Neuers with a mighty army: be∣hold, God who holdeth the stearne of the whole world doth produce euents all contrary vnto those which men had promised to themselues. For in the meane time God doth execute his dreadfull iudgements a∣gainst the inuincible (as they did call them) but in deed barbarous and sa∣uage nation of Spaniards, partly beating them out of the narrow Seas with a notable slaughter and shame of them, by that nation which they had so deadly hated for the Gospell, and so arrogantly despised: and partly God sent his messengers, the wind, storme and tempest, with the rocks in their waies, that by shipwracke, thirst, famin, and pestilence, and other calami∣ties of the Sea, they might be drowned in an euerlasting obliuion, lyke Pharao, his horses and horsemen. In August the Kings writtes are sent into all prouinces and citties to  send speedily their Deputies, so that they were catholikes, Romans, and not otherwise, and in the meane time doth fortify himself: but not mistrus∣ting the practises of the Leaguers in the Prouinces, he gaue them leaue to do all by partialities in the Prouinces in choise of the Deputies. For they gaue order that their partakers might come strong, not so much with the outward force, as with plurality of suffrages, which in all places they had secretly suborued by premises and corruptions. And so it came to passe, that there came but few to that assembly, but they which were of the Leaguers faction. Here (Christian Reader) wee may see Gods iudgements, calling this great King as it were by steps, to a miserable and shameful fall for his vn∣thankfulnes. He hath forsaken one part of his subiectes, and that the best part, though not the greatest in number, holdeth them for enemyes, and wil haue none of their counsell: and by the selfe same means hath opened a dore to weaken himselfe in his Parliament, and committed his person into the hands of them that were assembled to dispossesse him out of his kingdome, either by murther or by captiaitie, making the way plaine before his ene∣mies, to rule the matter as they would without controulement. Now we will leaue the King, with all his courtand traine, with his Leaguers, to goe (soft and fayre for feare of sweating too much) to loys, there to take order for their Processions, Massing▪ and other solemnities. And
vsed by men of that religion, and there to stay for the arriuing of the de∣puties, while we do see what things had happened in other places. While (and after) the Edict of reunion was a casting in Iuly, and the  States appoynted, all meanes were sought out to vndoe the King of Na∣uarre, and with him them of the Religion. The sayd king of Nauarre of his part did make himselfe ready vppon the defensiue, grounded vpon all his reasons, propounded often times by his declarations, and vpon the grieues and iniuries proffered vnto him, and vnto them of the religion. It is said before how the Lord Colombieres had brought certaine com∣panies out of Normandy vnto the King of Nauarre, and in Iune before had seazed vpon the towne of Montagne. This was a towne belonging to the Prince of Conde, which had beene miserablie defaced in the former ciuill warres. The wall and the castell being one of the strongest places in all that countrey, had beene beaten downe. But the ruine of the towne was not so great, but within few dayes it was reasonablie repayred, and made defensible, by the said Lord Colombieres, and other Captaynes with him. The companies of the said Lord Colombieres out of that towne made dayly long roades and courses toward Nantes, and against other places holden by the papists, whereby dayly they greatly molested them. After the Edict of reunion, Duke Mercure, gouernour of Britaine, and others of the countrie who did holde with the League, but specially they of Nants, who could not away with such neighbours, gathered cer∣taine regiments of the Leaguers, to make certaine roades into the lowe Poytow, as well to let the enterprizes of the king of Nauarre there, as to prepare the way to that armie which should folow shortly after, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, but specially intending to lay the siege before Montagne, to gett that place out of the hand of them of the reli∣gion. The Duke Mercure therefore with as great forces as hee was able to make, went in person to lay siege before the said Montagne, abou the eight of August, and lodged the regiment of Gersay at Saint George. And sending from thence to view the towne, a hot skirmish was begonne against them of the towne, in the presence of the sayd Mercure, who stood in battle aray with two hundred horses on the side of Barrillery, so called, because there they make barrels, tubbes, and such like stuffe. They within the towne at the discouering of the enemie, issued so fu∣riously, and did so beat them back, that many men and horses remained slaine vpō the place, among whom were some of the guards of Mercure, who seing that it was so hard for him to lodge his men of war in ye suburb of Saint Jamets, as he had determined to doe, sent them againe to their
lodgings at Saint George. As for himselfe, in the euening hee retyred to Elison, hauing sent downe the riuer Loyre from Nantes, three double can∣nons  to pont Rosseau, which is a towne situated on the fall of the riuer Se∣uie into Loyre. The King of Nauarre aduertized of Mercures inuasion into Poytow, gathered such forces as he could, and vpon some other occasions also, de∣parted out of Rochel the ninth of August, accompanied with a hundred horses onely, and the harquebusiers of his gardes: and taking his iorney toward Loyre, went that day to lodge at Lusson. The Duke Mercure being lodged at Clisson, the tenth day of August vnderstoode that the King of Nauarre was gone foorth out of Rochel, and vpon the shadow of his owne feare he perswaded himself that it is to raise vp the siege of Montagne; so that hauing represented vnto himselfe the ac∣customed diligence of the King of Nauarre in his exployts of warre, he i∣magineth to see him alreadie: whereupon he determined to retyre before he had planted his siege, and returned to Nantes the 11. of August, two daies before the comming of the King of Nauarre: he left the regiment of Gersay to make the retyre, and lodged the 12. day at Mounieres, a towne situated vpon the riuer Seure. The King of Nauarre at his departure from Lusson, went to lodge at Bourneueau, where the Lord Boulay with his companie of armed men well appoynted, and a companie of harquebusiers on horseback, comman∣ded by Captaine Nede ioyned to him. From Bourneueau the King went to lodge at Essars, where he was ad∣uertised that the Duke Mercure was departed and retyred to Nantes, and that the regiment of Gersay was lodged at Mounieres. These newes did cause him to dislodge the day following very earely, least he should lose the occasion to ouertake that regimēt: he went through the Towne of Montagne with much toyle, and there tooke the garrison commanded by Luzerne eldest sonne to the Lord Colombieres, and with extreame diligence in a little space of time came to the riuer Seure, which he passed ouer speedily on foord: there he found that the regiment was parted from Mounieres, purposing to retyre to Pilmil Suburbe of Nantes. The garrison of Montagne being forerunners to the sayd King, follo∣wed with diligence, and ouertooke them in a way hollowe and couered, ve∣ry aduantagious for the enemie, by reason of three little houses wherein they had put men to flancke them. There the skirmish did continue about halfe an houre, vntill the sayd King of Nauarre had arriued with all his companies, at whose comming the enemie was discouraged, begā to faint and flée away in disaray, and there was wholly ouerthrowne. The King of Nauarre tooke to mercie as many as were taken prisoners to the number of foure hundred and fiftie, and suffered none to be killed but
such as were slaine in the battell: The master of the Camp Gersay, saued himselfe by flight, by the meanes of a fayre Ienet of Spayne, yet hurt with  a shot. There were eight Ensignes taken, great number of carts & hor∣ses of carriage: the onset was giuen within two leagues of Pilmil suburbe of Nantes. The King (after giuing of thankes vpon that place where the skirmish was fought, for that prosperous successe and victorie) made a light dinner vnder a tree, and after retyred to his lodging at S. Georges, where hee so∣iourned the whole day following, for the long daies iourney which he had made the day before: notwithstanding, that day hee went a hawking for Partridges, and in the euening viewed the towne of Montagne, to take order for the fortifications and garrisons of the sayd towne, and purposed to haue layed the siege to the towne Clisson not farre thence. The King being yet at S. George, was strengthened with foure regi∣ments of footmen, to wit, of Charbonieres, Sallignak, Preau, and the regi∣ment of his gardes, commanded by the Lord Querine: there also he recea∣ued the light horsemen of the Lord Trimouille, who had discomfited the regiment of Lestele, and taken foure Ensignes, which they presented vnto the sayd King. The selfe same day being aduertized of the daunger wherein the Duke Espernon stood within the Towne of Engolesme, besieged there within the Castell by a conspiracie of the Leaguers, caused him to giue ouer his en∣terprise vpon Clisson, & the day following being the 15. of August, departed from Saint George, purposing to make toward Engolesme, to succor the saide Lorde Espernon: but hearing by the way, how the tumult there was pacified, went not so far as that place. It is saide before, how that the Leaguers in their request presented vn∣to the King, made a great complaint against the Duke Espernon, char∣ging him to haue intelligences with the King of Nauarre, and them of the religion, to haue been the cause that their armies had heretofore small suc∣cesse, and that if he should grow to greater authoritie, it were danger that in time he would deliuer the places of his gouernement to the King of Na∣uarre; that he is the onely cause, that the politick state is so corrupt, and out of frame, and therefore the King must needes put him from about his per∣son and fauour. This Lord Espernon of the auncient house of Valette, grew in great fa∣uour with the King, through his faithfull seruice, a man altogether sold to popery, yet a louer of the Kings person, crowne and state, a louer of the realme and peace of the same, a hater of conspirators and perturbers of the quietnes of the King and his subiects, who neuer could bee drawne to the conspiracies of the Leaguers, neither by faire promises nor other meanes whatsoeuer, which thing was the cause that the Leaguers hated him, as
the onely man about the Kings person, who did hinder the execution f their enterprises: that man therefore must not be about the King, nor be ad∣mitted  into the assembly of the states. The King to giue place to their hatred for a time, and to auoyde the in∣conueniences, which through ye malice of his enemies, might befall to such a trustie seruant, determined to send him out of their sight, and where hee thought that they should be least able to practise against him. And giuing him a very great power and commission in a most ample manner, to com∣maund in the Prouinces of Aniou, Toureyne, Poytow, Engomoyes, & Xainc∣tonge, commaunded him to depart the Court, about the same time that the edict of reunion was made by the Leaguers: who hauing soiourned a while in the Tower of Loches, situated in Toureyne, vpon the riuer Vndre, which falleth into Loyre, betwéene Tours and Samure, to fortifie and assure the said place to the Kings obedience, against the practises of certaine Gentlemen of the League, made against that place. From thence he tooke his iourney to Engolesme; where he vnderstoode that many enterprises were a working by the League against the Kings seruice. There commaunded the Lorde Tageus his kinseman, vnder the charge of the Lord Valette his brother. The saide Lorde Espernon arriuing at Engolesme, accompanied with a great number of the nobilitie, was honorably receaued by the Maior and Aldermen of the Citie, by the officers of iustice & policie, with great num∣bers of people, who went to meete him at the gates of the Citie; hee was likewise receaued by the Bishop and his Priests, at the doore of Saint Pe∣ters Church, where they sung solemnly, a great te Deum laudamus, in the worship of him. Not long after, the said Lord Espernon called together the Bishop and his Priestes, the Maior and the Escheuins, the Kings officers and other chiefe Citizens, to giue them notice of the occasions of his comming, which was first to preserue them all in the Catholicke Romane religion, for the which, and for the Kings seruice he would willingly aduenture his life against all manner of men. Exhorting them to aduise what was re∣quisit for their conseruation, and that they would propound the same vnto him. All answered with one consent, that they would dye vnder his authority in the same resolution, and for to testify their willes the better, they would haue his authority from the King, printed, read, and published (as the man∣ner is) through all the towne. The said Lord hauing many companies both of horsemen and footmen, yet would he innouate nothing, not so much as to change any part of the garrison of the Citty: and to testify vnto them more apparantly of the con∣fidence, which hee had in the promises and fidelity of them, he would not
lodge in any stronger place (nor more aduantagious for his preseruation) but in the Castell, which is called the Kings house: wherein he found his Cosin the Lord Tageus lodged, as the gouernours heretofore had accusto∣med  to do. This Castell hath no strength which is any thing worth, ne∣ther in Ditches nor in any handy worke, except some great Towers of stone very olde: but otherwise very commodious for the store of cham∣bers which are therein. The said Lord had brought his Lady with him, and had also lodged the Lady Tageus there. Hee went the same day into the Citadell, wherein he commaunded the Lord Bordes, with all the nobility which accompanied him, & could euen then haue lodged there, if he had had any diffidence of the inhabitants: for the keies were presented to him by the Lord Bordes. That Fortresse was sufficient to haue bridled the inha∣bitantes, considering the strength and great store of Munitions of the said place, as well in Ordinance as in other necessary things. But specially hauing a gate to get out of the towne, whereby may be let in as many men as one would. But the sayd Lord in stéed of mistrust kept an open house, as well for the nobility of the countrey, as for the inhabitantes of the citty, without any respect of persons, whereof a great number (but specially the Maior of the town with his conspiratours) sat ordinarily at his table, with great curtesy and welcome shewed vnto them by the sayd L. Espernon. He walked familiarly with them through the citty and suburbs with a small company of his, without any other care then to conferre louingly with them about the necessary thinges for the preseruation of their Cittye. The Maior had in his possession all the keies of the Cittie, the inhabi∣tantes made their accustomed watches, and by halfes, with two compa∣nies which were vnder the commaundement of the Lord Bordes, whereof the most part were inhabitantes of the Citty. Vppon request made vnto him by the Maior and Aldermen, concerning the necessary fortifications for the safety and increasing of their Cittie, the said Lord promised to lend them to that effect such a summe of money as they should thinke good. And to aduaunce the worke, the said Lord com∣maunded the Maior, and the Lieutenant Nesmond to make the proiect, by the counsell of Captaine Ramel, son of Augustine, mayster of the Kings workes. In the meane while the said Lord caused the edict of reunion to be pub∣lished in the Cittie, and according to the same did prepare to war agaynst them of the religion, to let them from gathering subsidies and tallages, & to represse their courses: & furthermore, had made an enterprise agaynst one of their best places. And for a beginning of ye performance of these things, had commaunded his cosin the Lord Tageus to take with him all the com∣panies of his light horses, and the companyes of the Lords Sobelle, and Cadilan, with all the footmen, and troops which he had brought with him.
And besides all this, for to win the hartes of the inhabitantes, he caused euery day all sorts of publike exercises of Romish poperie to be done in all  their chiefe Idoll Temples in the Cittie. He had also promised to the gray Fryers to helpe the reedifying of their couent and temple of the same. For the warre defensiue and offensiue agaynst them of the religion, hee obmitted no meanes he had, no indsturie, nor diligence. For his pastimes, he would go euery day (without mistrust of any man) to the Tenis court, situated in one of the furthest partes of the citty. Eue∣ry morning he would get vppon his horses himselfe, to exercise them in the sight of great assembly of people, with a very small company of his men about him. It is sayd how the King (to conuay the Lord Espernon, his trusty and faythfull seruant out of the ielousies & dangers of the Leaguers) ha sent him into Guyenne, to keepe such townes there as did wauer, into his obe∣dience. The towne of Engolesme was aboue all the townes of that Countrey inclyning to the League, so disposed by many Gentlemen therabouts, who were leagued and deuoted to the Duke of Guyze. The Duke Espernon (as it is sayd) went thether to make it sure to the kings obedience. The newes comming to the towne of the determination of the saide Duke, the complices of the conspiracie of the League considering that neither to admit him, nor to exclude him was a safe way for them, con∣sidering that the King might recouer the town at all tymes by the citadel, which was kept by the L. Bordes, a faithfull seruant to his Prince, did im∣mediatly send one (who was ye Maiors brother to the court) to know by the Oracle of the Leaguers, what was to be done in such a doubtfull matter. The Duke of Guyze with his counsell, to wit, his brother, the Car∣dinall, & the Archbishop of Lyons, did sit vpon the death of the Duke of Es∣pernon, they did condemne him to die. They answered to their partakers, to admit him, and bid him welcome: but to rid him out of the way, if it can bee done by any meanes, the reuenge they neede not to feare, for they are in good hope that the master shall followe him shortly, and if not, yet they wil finde out some shift to excuse the matter, and will find him guiltie of his owne death, else they will so worke, that the King shall haue little leasure to thinke vpon the reuenge. They writ also to their complices, gentlemen of the countrey, as to Mere, Massilieres, Maque∣uile, Boucheaulx, to the Baron Tonnerak, Caze, and Fleurak. They cau∣sed also Vileroy the Kings Secretary, to write his letters to the Lord Au∣beterre, to repaire to the Maior of Engolesme with al his power, at such time as they should haue warning by the aid Maior: in the meane while they expect the Oracle of the Leaguers, the Duke Espernon is lulled a sleepe, and cast into a dangerous security, by the Maior and the rest of the conspi∣ratours,
they make him beleeue that they loue him as their owne soule: by the which dissimulation, hee vnarmeth himselfe, sendeth his forces abroad  to warre agaynst Christ. At length Souchet (long desired) commeth from the court, geueth the an∣swere that Espernon must die by all meanes possible, biddeth them to put asyde all feare of reuenge for the causes afore shewed. Now then it must be executed out of hand afore the returne of the Lord Tageus, with the Dukes forces, for then shall they not be able to put in execution yt iudge∣ment, hauing any forces about him: or else because he will goe forth to war agaynst the heretikes, according to his deliberation. The tenth day of August the Lord Espernon very early got him on hors∣backe to goe to his ordinary exercises, with few of the nobility with him. The maior with certaine of the inhabitants of the cittie were all that mor∣ning with him. The sayd Lord lighting downe of his horse, embraced the Maior, and with great curtesy asked him whether hedelighted in horses. Thence the sayd Lord returned to his lodging, and went into his closet to change his shirt, intending to goe deuoutly to Masse in the Chappell of Saint Laurence, in the church of Saynt Cibert, where his Almoner had prepared all the tooles ready to finish that misticall play: this was about 7. a clocke. The Maior on the other side with his complices (who were gone to see his riding, onely to spie what strength he had about him) went home, to put on his armour, to charge his pistoll, to take order about nine of the clock that the toxin should be rung, and to appoynt at the same time cer∣taine firebrands of sedition to goe about the streates, crying, that the Hu∣gonts had seazed vpon the Castell. The Maior also did craftily entice the Lord Bordes, gouernour of the Citadell into his house, vnder colour to discouer him a certaine enter∣prize against the king, and when hee had him in his house kept him as prisoner. Betweene eight and nine a clock, the Lord Espernon being in his closet, and knowing that the Abbot of Elbeue, and the Lord Mariuault, were in the next wardrobe, staying there to accompany him to Masse, sendeth a Page to call them to him into the Closet, which when they had done hee hewed them a place in a booke sent him from Paris, full of defamations against the honour & authoritie of the King, lamenting the vnbridled li∣cence of this age: hee prayeth them also to sit by him, to vnderstand out of his own mouth, his resolution and platforme of war against them of the religion, assoone as the Lord Tageus could returne from this exployte, whome he would leaue there for the preseruation of the Citie. Behold (Christian Reader) this noble man indued with good gifts, rai∣sed vp to high degree, sent out of the danger of his enemies, to keepe the
kings subiects in peace and iustice, vnthankfull of Gods good graces, doe meditate how to turne that power, wisdome, and graces receiued of  God, to persecute his Church: and whilest hee is laying downe his plott, God sendeth him a warning; to wit, murtherers, to execute the rage of Gods enemies vpon him. For as they concluded vpon the resolution of this warre, which he pur∣posed against the Children of God, the Abbot of Elbeu sitting next vnto the doore of the closet, heard the sound of a pistol shot within the wardrobe, and some crying, kil, kill. At this alarum the said Abbot ranne first to the doore nigh the closet, where he found the Aulmoner of ye said Duke, who had rushed in, & had shut vp the doore, and thought it had neither lock nor boult, but held the said doore with his back, very pale and frighted: The Abbot enquiring what it was, speake softly sayd the Aulmoner, there be armed men which seeke to kill my Lord. At the same instant, the said Lord Espernon, the Lord Mariuault, and the Abbot, heard two other pistolls shot in the same wardrobe, with ma∣nie voyces, crying, kill, kill, & comming to the said doore, cryed, yeeld my Lord, for you are but a dead man. The Abbot and Mariuault then counsailed the sayd Espernon, to keep within the closet where was a second doore, very narrow & hard to get in. At the same time, the Toxin began to ring in all Churches of the Citie, and they of the faction ran into the streates, crying, that the Hugonets had surprised the Castell, and willing all men to run to succour it, according to the instructions giuen by the Maior. These tokens being giuen, the people ran on euery side to their weapons, and went toward the Castel, they lodge themselues in the house next to the Castell. The Maior that morning intending to bring to an end their conspira∣cie, had perswaded them of his faction, but especially 40. or 50. of the vilest and most desperat persons of all the Citie, that his brother in law Southct came from the Court, and had brought with him an expresse commaunde∣ment from the King, both by letters and word of mouth, to seaze vpon the person of the said Lord Espernon, dead or aliue, and to assure the citie: some of them he had appoynted to run through the citie, and to giue the alarum, as is afore said: some should seaze vpon the gates of the Castell, when hee should haue entred the saide Castell; and some should goe with him to exe∣cute this murther. This vile traitor then head of the conspiracy, entred first armed into the Castell, through the great gate, hauing two men booted with him, which as he saide were Purseuants, whom he brought to speake with the Duke, and followed with ten men, going vp into the hall, and passing through it, saluted the Lord Couplieres, who sat vpon a table, and thence passing through the Lord Espernon his chamber, went as farre as the wardroabe, supposing there to finde him, and there to execute his dam∣nable
conspiracie, there he met with on Raphael Gyrolamy, a Gentleman Florentine, Rouillard and Segnencio, Secretaries, and one Sorline, the  Kings Chirurgion. The Lord Aubine, one of the Kings Magistrates in the Court of Engolesme, who was expressely come to aduertise the Lorde Espernon, that there was some practise against him in the towne, and there he stayed for his comming foorth, to doo his message. The Maior there∣fore entred as is said, first of all armed with a Corselet, into the wardrobe, with a Pistoll in his hand ready charged, and the cock downe, came to Sor∣line first, who set his hand to his sword, and did hurt the Maior a little on the head. Another man (great and strong) with a Pistoll set vpon Raphael, who immediatly taking him by the coller, cast him downe vppon the ground, and with his sword wounded him, as he did three more, as they haue confessed after, and beate them out of the chamber, crying still, my Lord is not here: but being wounded with a Pistol, he fell downe, and then they made an end of him with their swords. The others who were in the wardrobe, saued themselues as they could. Sorline running into the kit∣chen, gaue the alarum to the cookes, who ran with their broaches: but the conspirators being in the hall, and hearing the noyse in the kitchen, stopped the way out of yt kitchē into the hall. In the meane time while these things were dooing within the wardrobe by the Maior, his partakers went a∣bout (as they had receaued instructions aforehand of the Maior) to seaze vpon the great gate of the Castell, for to bring in the people, who were al∣ready in armour: but they were let by some Gentlemen, who were in the Court of the Castell, staying there for the Lorde Espernon his comming forth. The first were the Lordes Ambleuille, Beaurepayre, Sobelle, and others: in defending of the said gate, the Lord Beaurepayre was slaine with the stroake of a Halbeard, the Prouost Baretes likewise, and one of the gardes, the Lord Clauery was hurt: certaine Gentlemen entred into the said gate, afore it was shut vp, as Captaine Baron Artiges, the Countie Brune, brother in lawe to the Duke Espernon, the Lords Goas, Mirane, Coste, Emars, and others. They beleeued then that the Lord Espernon was dead, so that being a∣stonied and looked one vpon another, they knewe not what to doo, nor in whome to trust, vntill that the Lords Ambleuille, Myran, Sobelle, and E∣mars, acknowledging one another, and giuing hands with promise, to dye together, gathered as well Gentlemen as Souldiours of the garde close together, and ran to the Chamber doore of the Lord Espernon, through the which the conspiratours would haue gone forth, to seaze vpon the tower of the Castell, but they were let by the Gentlemen and gardes, who wounded the Maior through the doore, where of he fell downe, they shot also against
the residue of the conspiratours, with these threatnings, you shall dye trai∣tors. Seguencio the Secretarie, whome they detayned prisoner, reported  that at that threatning, they began to be amazed, and to say among them∣selues, we are vndone if we doo not saue our selues some where, and there∣upon carrying away the Maior, went out through a little doore of that chamber, which issued to a little paire of staires, that did lead vp to a cham∣ber, nigh the tower: but they were followed by the said Gentlemen, and at the same time, the Lord Espernon, the Abbot Elbeu, and the Lord Mari∣nault, who vnderstanding the voyce of Sobelle, went forth of the closet with Pistolls and swordes in hand. The conspirators were enforced to saue themselues in that Chamber nigh the great tower, to ye which no man could go but by a payre of staires so narrowe, that but one man alone might passe: there were none armed, neither the Lord Espernon, nor any of his were at all; which thing caused them to stay their going vp. At the same instant a maidseruant aduertised the Lord Espernon, that the Maiors brother with a number of armed men, did enter into the castle through a hole in the wall on the side of the Curtine. The sayd Lord Es∣pernon ran thether, who found alreadie the Maiors brother entred with an¦other, which both were slaine there, and a gard was put at the place. At the same time, the complices of the conspiracie, and among others the foresaid Souchet, the Maiors brother in law, who had come lately from the Court, with some other gentlemen of the countrey, seeing that they could not fire the first gate, where they found resistance (as is sayd before) ran to another gate of the Castle with fire to burne it, preparing also gis to breake it vp. But the Lord Espernon with fiftéene of his men, whom he had gathered together, ran also to the sayd gate, to defend and fortifie it with earth, stones, boords, and such like, leauing his gard to keepe the dore of the chamber where the conspirators were locked vp, the which ende∣uoured themselues to issue foorth, but notwithstanding were repulsed by the sayd gardes and the Lord Espernon himselfe, who hauing deuided his gardes vpon the entries into the Castle, went too and fro as néed required, and where hee iudged his presence necessarie; so that resorting to the fore∣sayd doore, he killed one of the sayd conspiratours with his own hand, as he went about to issue foorth. The inhabitants in the meane time did bestowe their shot freely vppon the chambers of the Castle, because they were so great and wide, and because the inhabitants had seazed vpon the next hou∣ses, and among others, vppon the house néerest to the Castle, called the Quéenes house. The diligence of the Lord Espernon, and other gentlemen which accom∣panied him was such, that within two houres they assured themselues of the Castle: so that it had béen hard for the gentlemen and others who were
within the Towne, to force it without Canon. The labour bestowed in fighting, fortifying, and breaking the staiers of the chambers, and in fiering the narrowe staiers which went vp the cham∣ber  where the conspiratours were locked vp, had béen quicke and violent. The L. Espernō desirous to make the gentlemen which were with him to drinke, there was found in al the house but foure flagons of wine, which were brought in that morning for his breakfast: there was no water at all, and very small store of bread, for the inhabitants had seazed vpon the well which was in the other court, and also the way to goe to it; which thing did greatly trouble them that were besieged, the space of two dayes and a halfe that they were inclosed therein. But the discommoditie was little in comparison of the constant resolution which they tooke, rather to dye then yéeld themselues vnto that sedicious multitude. It is sayd before, how the Maior afore hee began to execute his enter∣prise, had by false surmises entised the Lord Bordes, gouernour of the Ci∣tadell, to come to his house, making him beléeue that hee would discouer him some great practise against the King; whom when he had in his hands he kept prisoner in his house. This thing did greatly amaze the Lord Espernon that he heard not the Citadell play against the Citie: the cause was, that when the fray was be∣gun at the Castle, immediatly men appoynted by the Maior, brought the sayd Bordes before the Citadell, to cause the Lieutenant to surrender it, or els to stay him from discharging the Ordinance against the towne, which in case hee should doo it, they threatned to kill the sayd Lord Bordes. The Lieutenant desirous to saue the life of the sayd Lord Bordes, promised to doo their request, and so kept promise with them. The Lord Espernon ig∣norant of all these things, was greatly dismayed, fearing least the Citadell had béen in the hands of the conspirators, or els had fauoured them. The conspirators closed vp in the high chamber of the Castle, did affirme the same, and when they were summoned to render themselues, they answered that it was for the sayd Lord Espernon and his to yeeld, & that they should quickly see the Canon of the Citadell before the Castle. There was an other mischaunce that happened. The Ladie Espernon before the cōmotion began, was gone to Masse to the Dominican friers. Whē the alarum was giuen, she went about to go forth to get the citadel ouer her head, beleeuing that they were Hugonets that had attempted a∣gainst yt town; she was lead by ye armes by 2. gentlemen to wit, Seguency (not the secretary, but an other of that name) & Pial: she was arrested pri∣soner, and her two Gentlemen slaine by these two Catholicks, within the Church doore, not permitting the Priest to make an ende of his iuggling game. They tooke also many Gentlemen, among whom were the Lords Curee, Mesme, Blere, and Captaine Ramel, the Baron Coze, and many
others of all degrees, of the traine of the said Lord Espernon. The Lords Curee and Mesme, went about to get into the Castell, but  the people with Holbards kept them back, although they saide that they would go fight against the Hugonets, when they assaid to haue entred the Castel. The Lord Haultclerie (a man of that countrey of great estimati∣on) with much adoo saued their liues. Captaine Ramel fell into the same daunger of the people, in going a∣bout to get into the castell, by the Curtine of the towne wall, but he saued himselfe by taking the Bishops house. In the middest of all these discommodities, the Lord Espernon sendeth a Lackie to the Lord Tageus, who was at Xainctes with all his horsemen, to make haste to succour him. The Lacky was let downe the wall of the Parke ioyning to the Castell, but he was incontinently taken by the in∣habitants. Notwithstanding the Lord Tageus was aduertized of the com∣motion by two Gentlemen, who in a good houre went forth of the towne to goe on to hunting, who hearing the Toxin, did gallop vnto the gate of the Citadell, where they caused immediately all the bread and prouision which was in the subburb to be brought in, and the selfe same day at night came to Xainctes, to warne the Lord Tageus of that commotion. The people in the meane while continued in their rage, assisted and con∣ducted by diuers gentlemen of the coūtry, who were of the league, among whome was one (brought vp in the house of Guyze) Messeliere Mak∣uole, and Boucheaulx, and others, who two houres after the commotion summoned the Lord Espernon by a drumme to yeeld, and to deliuer the place into their hands, promising him and his life and baggage safe. That proffer he disdayned, and gaue them no other answere, but that he would within few houres make them change their language. They threatned also the Lady Espernon (if she would not perswade her husband to yeeld) to make her serue for a gabion, or else to stabb her. She answe∣red them, that if they would bring her before the Castell, she would per∣swade him to the contrary: and that she did hope one day to haue reason of the insolencies of the said Mere, who did proffer her such speeches. The Lord Espernon had but eight Harquebusiers of his guard, they neuer shot without killing or hurting some one or other; so that there were killed by them. 25. or thirtie persons: but this was their euill luck, that they had no powder with them but that which they found in their flasks. One of the conspirators who was shut vp in the Castel, with linnen cloth cut in length, and knotted in the endes in stead of a coarde, was let down into to the Castell ditche, and aduertized the inhabitants, howe that his felowes were ready almost to be stifled with fire, or quelled with the fall of the house, which could not bee auoyded, except they were very shortly rescued. That moued the Parents to induce the other Mayor, named
Bourgoyne, to goe to the Castell to parley. The Abbot Elbeu and the Lord Ambleuille spake with him through a  hole of the wall, and shewed him the danger wherein the towne stoode to be ransaked, at the arriuing of the succour which was at hande: That they had in holde the Maior with his conspired felowes, whme the Lord Espernon had forgiuen, and that easily he mought be moued to par∣don the people also which had beene abused. And that it they should goe further in their enterprize, and assault any more the Castell, the Lorde Espernon would stay them all. Furthermore, they offer themselues to make meanes for the people with the said Lord Espernon. They which were shut vp being no more able to endure, yeelded vnto the Lord Espernon vpon his faith, which he kept to them inuiolable. The Maior at the time of his yeelding, was gaping for life, and within a while after dyed in the castell of the wounds which he had receiued. The Lord Espernon caused his prisoners to write to them of the towne in what danger they were of their liues, if they should any more assault the Castell. Whereupon the inhabitants required the Maior Bourgoyne to returne to the Duke Espernon in the behalfe of them, that he would send the Abbot and the Lord Ambleuille to them, to intreate of peace. The Lord Ambleuille would not forsake the Duke Espernon. The Abbot preffered himselfe so that they would giue hostages. They of the towne gaue the Kings procurator, who entred into the Castell by a ladder, by the which the Abbot came downe into the towne. The Abbot at the first trenches, found Mere and Messeliere, two Gen∣tlemen, firts of the sedition: accompanyed with a multitude of people who would haue treated with him: but the Abbot would not, saying, that he would goe to treate with the seneschall in the house of the Lord Ar∣gence, who was an olde Gentleman, and of honour, who also had pro∣mised all friendship to the Lorde Espernon. Being conducted thither, all the officers and chiefe of the Citie, with much people, resorted to the place. The Abbot shewed them the enormi∣tie of their ofence, so to attempt against such an officer of the Crowne, a good Catholick and faithfull seruant to the King, that they had made themselues guilty of high treason. Hee shewed them also the Maiors treasons, whereof they had made themselues rash excutioners vnder a forged colour of the Kings comman∣dement. He spake vnto the officers, the nobility, and people, to euery one snerally, and before all shewing them their fault and their duty: and concluded that by such kind of dealing they put themselues in great hazard of the Hugonets, their common enemies. He so much affected, that they were deuided among themselues, and found in the end that the kinges of∣ficers; the cheefest of the cittie, and the most apparant of the nobility were
not at all priuie nor consenting in the beginning to the Maiors conspira∣cy, who had onely assured himselfe of forty or fifty the vple sor for the ex∣ecution  of his conspiracy: and that these at the sound of the alarum had caused all the rest to take armour in hand, vnder colour of the name of the Hugonets. The common people (induced by Mere) shewed themselues void of all capacity, of reason, and intractable. Many spéeches and reasonings passed in this conference, the people fell to mutiny agayne, and bidding the Ab∣bot to make short, proffered him like conditions as before. The Abbot cut them short, and assured them that the day following after noone, the Lord Espernon should giue them the law. The seditious Leagued Mere, whom we haue said to haue béen brought vp in the house of Guyze, the schoole of treasons and seditions, did heate the people by an assured promise, which hee made to them of an infallible suc∣cour of the Lord of Aubeterre, who as hee sayd was at hand: to whom al∣so the Lord Vileroy, the Kings secretary, had written to that effect. The Abbot departing thence, went (not without payne and danger) to visit the Lady Espernon, and commended her vnto a company of gen∣tlemen, who were assembled there, and protested reuenge agaynst them, which should proffer her iniury. That beeing done, he returned to the castel, hauing nether sene the L. Bordes, nor any other of the gentlemen which were detayned prisoners in the Towne. The morrow after beeing the twelfth day of August, the alarum was geuen in the Towne by the Drum and Toxin, and as well the gentlemen, the people, the Leagued, and others who were not of the conspiracie, were enforced to take armor to go to the breach, which they prepared and hoped to make in a weake place of the Castle wall, defended neither with any window, nor otherwise flanked. Some small opening beeing made, the people presented themselues, where they were receaued: and there was flayne the Lord Fleurak, one of the Leaguers. About three a clocke in the morning, the people heard the trompets of the light horsemen of the Lord Espernon, which made them beleeue that succou was not farre. This asswaged much their fury, and on the con∣trary encouraged much the souldiers of the Citadell (which hetherto had done nothing) so that they let flee many shot of Harquebuzes, and cer∣tayne voleyes of Canon agaynst the Cittie. The Lord Espernon ha∣uing commaunded them so to doo from the top of the high tower of the Castell. At this new thundering from the Citadell, they of the Towne began to wauer, and to draw on agayne to parley, and do desire that the Abbot would returne, and that they would harken to the propositions of the said
Lord Espernon. The Abbot calling to remembrance the danger past, maketh some diffi∣culty to goe forth agayne. But at length the Lord Espernon writeth, and  sendeth by the sayd Abbot what he wil require of them of the towne for the acknowledging of their fault. Agayne all came together about noone to the house of the Lord Argence. As they were all ready there to signe the agreement, behold a new commotion of the people, who will not compound: the reason was the ar∣ryuing into the towne of the Baron of Tonnerak, with diuers gentlemen of the League, also of captayne Caze Marshall of the lodgings of the L. Aubeterre, who do assure them, that the sayd Lord of Aubeterre will come with succour to them the next day morning, with three hundred hors∣men, and fiue hundred footmen. The Abbot by these occasions was enforced to get him to the castle a∣gayne with greater danger then at the first, by reason of the raging of this Leagued people. For they brought him by force before the Citadell, to forbid the Souldiers to discharge the ordinance agaynst the towne: which thing notwithstanding in a while after they continued to do, because that the people assaulted the castell continually vppon a vayne hope, incited by those leagued gentlemen newly come. The chiefest officers of the King, and Bourgeses of the Citty, hauing duly considered in the Bishops house, the danger wherin their citty stood, if so many strangers on euery syde should come in, ioyned themselues with the cheefest Gentlemen agaynst the rest who were stubburne. They sent agayne 2. of the chiefest Bourgeses to the Lord Espernon, to beseech him that it may please him that the Lord Tageus his kinsman newly arryued in the Suburbs with his companies, might signe and seale the agréement, to the which they added onely, that they who were detayned prisoners in the castell, should be comprised therein and set at liberty, according to the fayth which he had geuen them, promising of their part to do the like to them, whom they did detayne, and all that which had been taken in the houses should be restored. The Lord Espernon graunting vnto them their demaund, sent againe the Abbot, who went forth with them of the towne to the Lord Tageus, to make him seale the composition, which was done about foure a clocke in the euening. Within a while after the trenches were broken, the people went away, the Lady Espernon was conducted by the sayd Abbot into the castell, with all the prisoners detayned in the towne. The Lord Bordes entred the Citadell, the conspiratours, and Maiors fellowes, who were prisoners in the castell were set at liberty. Mere with his complices went forth out of the towne and retyred into
theyr houses, vnder the conduct of the Lord Maumont captayne of light horses. The dead on both sides were quietly buried, and namely the Maior, whose corps with the corps of his brother, were freely deliuered to their friends to be buried. When the agreement was concluded, it was nine and thirtie houres that neither the Lord Espernon nor any of his, had eate nor dronk. There was no more powder for the shot: he had determined the night following to issue forth vpon the enemies for to seaze vpon the well, hee also looked that night to be rescued by his men: to be short, by the singuler goodnes of God he escaped a perilous snare of the Leaguers & a marueilous great danger, for the which to auoyde, hee shewed himselfe both valiaunt and watchfull, and if he would be thankfull to God for so great deliuerance, and consider from whence, & for what cause these blowes came, he should doe the part of a right noble man. About the selfe same time that these things were done at Engolsme a∣gainst the Duke Espernon, the Lorde Autragues, gouernour of Orleans, sent to the King, to protest obedience, with excuse that the things which he had done in fauour of the League, had been for none other cause, then for zeale of the Catholick religion: but perceiuing that the chiefe Leaguers passed further then he thought, he wholly doth renounce & detest y• League, and vpon that protestation he was receaued in fauour by the King. Whilest the King, after hee had sent his writtes to the Prouinces, Townes, and Cities, to make thoyse of their deputies, men of wisdome, discretion, and louers of peace, to send with speede to the States, prepa∣ring all things to resort with a soft pace to Bloys, to the States. It is said also, how the Leaguers peruerted all things, suborned all the most vile and accursed traitors, that could be picked out in all France. It is said also, how least that execrable company might be spied or cros∣sed, they had obtained by the edict of reunion, that none of the reformed re∣ligion, or suspected to fauour the same, and that none of the Princes of the bloud shoulde bee admitted to that house, least they shoulde bee spyed when they should go about to make processe against their lawfull King, and na∣turall Prince. The King considering the shortnes of the time, reiourned his estates, vntill the beginning of October, following whatsoeuer other causes did moue him so to doo. But toward the latter end of September, he and his mother accompanied with the Duke of Guize, with all their traine, ariued at Bloys. The Princes of Monpensier, County, and Soyssons, did appeare at Bloys: and for because the Prince County had ioyned himselfe to the army of the Germanes the yeare before, his company was greatly suspected, and
many of his friends, went about to perswade him to send to the Pope for an absolution: but in that following the counsell of his best friends and ser∣uants, he did it no. The Prince of Soyssons had alreadie obtained a Bull  of the Pope, containing a pardon, for hauing followed the part of them of the religion, with a Renuoy for his absolution to the Legat of Venise, who was also at the States: hee made great difficulties in the matter, so that they of the assembly had once resolued to require the King, not to suffer the saide Prince to bee admitted, but at length it was found good to stay their sute for that time. Whilest these things aboue said do passe so diuersly in sundry places, the great and mightie armie appoynted for Daulphine, vnder the leading of the Duke d' Mayne, dooth march, and at length arriued in Liomoys, & there continued long, daring not enter far into the Prouince of Daulphine, for feare of scalding, but soiourned vpon the borders betweene Liomoys, and Daulphine, as a man that came onely to see, whether he could make the he∣reticks afraide, or not. The King arriued at Bloys with all his traine, maketh readie all the so∣lemnities fit for that assemblie, whilest the deputies and assignes of the Prouinces doo make readie their instructions, and hast to the place ap∣poynted. The King hauing more trust in his subiects, then his subiects were to be trusted of him, doth expect honest, wise, and indifferent deputies, & such as would seeke onely the good of the Common wealth. But the Duke of Guize had so laboured of long time, and so reduced the people, that there was almost no citie, towne nor prouince in all France, but the complices of the Leaguers (vnder colour of zeale of religion) preuailed, in sending such as were altogether factious and desirous of innouations, the Kings secret enemies, and most false traytors to their king and countrey, hyding al their intended treasons vnder the old gabardin of the Catholike religion. These conspirators against God, their King and their Countrey, being come at length from euery part of the realme, the second day of October  being the Lords day, the King caused a generall procession to bee made with great solemnitie from the Temple of Saint Sauiour, which is in the court of the Castle vnto the Temple, commonly called our Ladie of helpe in the Suburbe Ʋienne, on the South side of the riuer Loyre. There was in this procession great magnificencie and outward appa∣rance of deuotion, but as little godlines & loue as could be. The King, the Quéenes, the Princes and Princesses, Lords & Ladies which were at the Court, & generally all the people, as well strangers as inhabitants of that place, were at it, there they offered vnto their gods, which did stand gazing in their temples, with great store of dissimulation and hippocrisie. They carried in great pompe that Idoll, which commonly they doo call the corpus
Domini, through the streates, which were decked with tapistry, and other such things, as they are accustomed to bee done that day, which they call  corpus Christi day. In the saide procession, the King with all the States, marched in this order following. The formost of all were the Fries, Monkes, and Ab∣bots, like a swarme of Locusts: after them followed ye deputies of the third estates foure & foure. They were followed of the nobilitie, and after them marched in battaile aray, the deputies of the Clergie in long gownes, and square caps onely: next after them went the Archbishops, and Bishops with their rochets: after the Bishops, went their God, otherwise called by the Prophet, Idolum vastans, by some Corpus Domini, and by some Corpus Christi, & by some the Sacrament of the Altar. It was the same God, by whome the King with all his Lords and traine did dayly, and at euerie word sweare by. That God was arayed in pure beaten Gold, and had beene so beaten and turmoyled by the hereticks, these 27. yeares before, that he was gone so weake, that it could not goe, but was carried verie de∣murely by the Bishop of Aix in Prouance, vnder a Canapie. This Cana∣py could not goe neither, no more then their God, but was caried by foure Knights of the holy Ghost: they sung continuallie so many gaudeamus, so many salue fest a dies, and so many aleluia, and so many ora pro nobis, and so many black sanctus, that it was too bad, and that with such melodie, that a man would haue thought that all the Cuckoos of the spring, and all the Owles of winter had mett together, to try who could make the pretier noyse. The King followed that company, with the Queenes and Princes, and other Lords of the court. After they had walked their God through the streats to take ayre, and to recreate him a little, hauing beene kept so long in very straight and close prison: at length in that order they came all to the Temple of our Lady of help, where the Archbishop of Bourges iugled and charmed the Masse, plaied with his God, as the Cat with the mouse, and at length eate him vp. The Bishop of Eureulx babled out a Sermon as well as he could: And that done, haue with you to good cheare. This was such a painfull iourney to those ghostly fathers, but specially for the Bishop of Aix, to carie all the way such a heauie fardell, that S. Christopher was neuer more combred with his burthen, than this piller of the holy Church was with his. They would do nothing all that weeke, but eate, drink, sleepe, and doe worse, as these ghostly fathers can doe that well. The 9. day of Octob. the K. the Lords & deputies of ye three estats, were housed together at the Friery of ye frantick franciscā Friers. There they did eate so much raw flesh, that the canibals of ye west Indies might haue surfeted with one halfe of that which was spent there. Blood they dranke
none, hoping shortly to fill their bellies with the blood of Saintes. Such as was the beginning of this assembly, such was the end thereof,  as you shall see hereafter in the sequell. It began with heathenish super∣stition and Idolatry, it ended with heathenish murthers and disloyall re∣bellion. As this was done to confirme the vnion and correspondence which was betweene them, for performing of their enterprize: of which thing by the meanes of this vnion euery man conceaued so good hope, that nowe they made no doubt but all would goe well. This done, the K. delayed the proposition of the States to the sixteenth of October, willing in the meane time the officers of the assembly in eue∣ry order to be chosen. For the Priests in the absence of the Cardinall of Bourbon, & the Car∣dinall of Guyze, the Archbishop of Bourges was chosen president. The County Brissak and Mignade were chosen Presidents of the Nobilitie. The Prouost of Paris was for the third estate. But the headlings of the League, had greater things in their brayne than all this: for they were day and night consulting how to make an end of all their labours. The sixteenth day of October all the deputies of the States being as∣sembled in the great Hall of the Castell, appoynted to that vse, their pla∣ces taken according to their order. The King followed, and accompany∣ed with his court, maketh an Oration to the assembly, by a long & doubt∣full speach, paynted with diuers tearmes of sorrow: by the which he shew∣eth, that his minde caried a remembraunce of the iniuries receiued by the Leaguers, from time to time, by the which he cōplayneth, his authority to haue decaied, and vniustly to haue beene debased. And first proposeth the things which ought to be done in that assembly, to wit, the establishing of Popery, the rooting out of heresie, the setting of good order in the gouernement, the ease of his people, and restoring of his authority, protesting that he is their lawfull King, giuen to them of God, and that he will not be, but that which he is, neither doth he couet greater authoritie or honour in this Realme than hee ought to haue. He protesteth also of his great sorrowe which he hath felt in the mise∣ries and oppressions of his subiects, acknowledging the same to bee pro∣cured by his and their offences in generall. Also he sheweth the care which hee hath had to take away the causes of the sayd miseries, and how he hath tryed all the wayes that euer hee could duise, and following the auncient manner of the Realme (accustomed in such a case) had assembled his estates for that intent, but that he hath been interrupted alwayes by new vprores, stirred vp to hinder his good mind and purpose, and to ouerthrow his good indeuours.
And also complayneth that to bring to passe these things, and to make his labour in that behalfe taken frustrate: they haue peruerted by false,  sinister, and malitious interpretations, the sincerity of his meaning. And last of all, he complayneth of the partialities and corruption of the Deputies of prouinces, exhorting them to assist his vertuous and royall enterprises. He protesteth of his zeale to popery, and good affection to Papists, which he hath testifyed by sundry benefytes most largely bestowed vppon them, & by the victoryes and conquests which he obtained against the heretikes, being then but a child, and that now being a man hauing more experience then euer he had, he hath also more wil and courage, which hee would haue playnly shewed in his voiage to Guyen entended, to haue béen performed in his owne person if the League had not let him. After these complaints and protestations, hee giueth the charge to the assembly, that when they haue conferred wisely and aduisedly, about their instrucions, they will specially shew him the means howe to reforme and represse swearing, and blasphemies, and corruptions, in bestowing ec∣clesiasticall liuings; which he called simony, selling of offices, of iustice, which things he was about to reforme, when the League rose vp in ar∣mour. Anno 1585. He promiseth them, that hereafter he will make a better choyce of men, in prouiding them of dignities and offices. He commendeth to them the carefull prouision for the aduancement of learning, crafts, and traffick, to seeke for the meanes to cut off excesse and waste, and to pull downe the excessiue price of things. He commendeth vnto them the royall authoritie, and the ancient laws, for the preseruation of the same. As for the feare which they haue coeiued to fall hereafter, in the go∣uernement of an heretick Prince, as he hath prouided therefore already by his Edict of preunion, so hee pretendeth to make it in the next Session a fundamentall law of the Realme. He willeth them to prouide for the ease of his subiectes, for the reforma∣tion of his reuenues, tributes and treasury, so that consideration be had to the entertaining of the royall dignity and publike charges: promiseth for his part to reforme himselfe and his house, exhorteth them to goe faithfully about their businesse. And calling heauen and earth to witnes, protesteth the fayth of God and men, that the fault shall not remayne in him if the realme be not re∣formed, but in them if they do abandon their lawfull King in such an holy & laudable action. Last of all, citeth them to appeare before the righteous Iudge, who shal make open their craft, hipocrisyes, and dissimulations, and punish their
treachery and vnfaithfulnesse, in case they do not their duty in this matter. The King hauing ended his peech, the Lord keeper of the Seales be∣gan, by the Kings commaundement, to open the matter, to be intreated  of in that assembly more at large: and hauing spoken of the originall, Ordi∣nance, Power, Authority, and of the benefites thereof. First, he exhorteth the Priests to propound vnto the people the word of God, which sayth, he is liuing, full of efficacy, and more pearcing then a two edged sword: and confirme the same in their hartes by vertuous life, shewing that for lacke of dooing these things, on their parts had issued out all the corruptions and miseryes of the realme: but all these good speeches are aeren verberare, laterem lauare, oleum & operam perdere. Secondly, hee directeth his speech vnto the nobility, shewing them what their dutie was, how they should excell in all iustice, goodnes and godlines, and specially to assist the king in obeying him in the execution of iustice, tantundem efficit. He sheweth them the great & execrable swearing and blasphemyes, to be much vsed among them: willeth them to follow the ancient manner of the nobility of France, which was to sweare in the word and faith of a gen∣tleman, and that with great reuerence and circumspection: sheweth them the great mischiefs which do procéed out of duels, fraies, or priuy combats, abhorred in all ages of all good christians, and that they should shew them∣selues valiant in commaunding ouer their owne affections. Thirdly, hee spake vnto the third estate, whereof the iudges and mini∣sters of iustice did hold the first roome, and vpon which all Monarchies, soueraignties and powers are grounded and stablished. Sheweth the o∣uerthrow of the distributiue iustice done by the delayes, subtiltyes, disguy∣sing of the truth, and malicious interpretation of the law, which thinges commonly are done euery where, attributing all these faults partly vnto particular coueteousnes of the ministers of iustice, partly to their ignorance and wicked life, partly to the multiplicity of offices in the realme. He sheweth the horrible faults committed in not obseruing the lawes for the punishment of swearers, blasphemers, players, vnthrifts, vsurers, vniust purchassars, deceauers in selling, vncleane persons, & such as do resort to brothel houses, and such like vics. Willeth them to consider the mainte∣nance of royall dignity, his charges and debtes: and last of all, to bee care∣full to preserue the Catholike religion. The Priests, Nobility (for the most part) Deputies, Commissioners, and Assignes of the Prouinces appointed for that assembly, did harken to that doubtfull, yet wise and graue orations of the King, and Lord keeper, with a mery countenance, as it seemed, but with a dissembling and trea∣cherous hart. So that they, who for his vndooing and ouerthrow, were assembled and sworne, fed him with fancies.
And first the Archbishop of Bourges doth closly couer all the dissimula∣tions and traitrous thoughtes of the Priestes, with a low courtesy and  great grammarcy: and wee hartely thanke you for your great paines, in so opening the way to the assembly, prayseth his great eloquence and wise∣dome, compareth him with Vlisses, and Nestor: both he and the rest of his fellowes do shew themselues ready, not onely to kisse his foot, but also to runne into his tayle with their noses, if it please him to giue them leaue gratia sit auribus. He exhorteth him to execute his charge, which (saith he) is to persecute the heretikes, as he tearmeth them, to establish popery, and with tooth and nayle to defend the holy Mother the church: (by holy Church, hee mea∣neth the swarms of Masmonging Priestes, and the legions of the Fryery and Monkery) which thing if hee doth, he doth not onely promise him the long life of Argantonius and Nestor, but also euerlasting life: because be∣like the more bloud of the Saynts he shall spill, (for that is to efend the church) the more he shall merit to win heauen. When the Archbishop had ended his flattering Oration, the Baron of Seuecy in the name of the Nobility doth awake the King of his sleep, blow∣eth the Trompet, soundeth the alarum, crying out vppon heretikes, set vp∣pon heretikes, down with heretikes, strike, kill, murther, spoyle, roo out heretikes, restore the church, ease the people, establish the realme in the first dignity and brightnes, proffereth to the King in that respect, and in the name of the nobility, to expose all vnto the last drop of theyr bloud. This being ended, the Prouost of Paris, least he should seeme to haue nei∣ther saide nor done any thing, began in that kinde of rhetorick which hee was wont to vse among the seditious of Paris, when he sharpened them a∣gainst the King, at the last rebellion in May of the same yeare onely, alte∣ring the name of King, into the name of hereticks. So that as there was that day many good words cast away, without dooing any good, so there was many cruell, bitter and seditious words vttered in the Kings presence, to prouoke him to crueltie and slaughter, by it to lull him asleepe, to cast him into securitie, to take away from him all mistrust the more easily, and at some conuenient to oppresse him. The 18. of October, the King came into the hall with the body of the States, for the second session, where he began to say as followeth. Sirs, I haue testified vnto you, on Sonday last, the desire which I haue alwaies to see, during my raigne, all my faithfull subiects reunited in the true Catholick Romish religion, vnder that authority which it hath pleased God to giue me ouer you: and hauing to the same effect made my edict of Iuly last past, that it might be holden for a fundamental law of this realme, to binde both you and your posteritie, to the intent that now the same may be confirmed before me, as made by the common consent of you al, and that
no man may pretend ignorance of the nature and ofspring of it, and that it may haue the marke of a fundamentall law of the realme for euer; I will that this edict bee now read with a loude voyce, and bee knowne of all,  and after that, sworne vnto by all the States, to the which thing, I will sweare first of all, that my holy intent may be knowne both of God and men. The King hauing ended his speach, commaunded Ruze, one of his Se∣cretaries of estate, to reade with a loud voyce, the declaration which he had made the same day, vpon his edict of reunion. Wherein he first sheweth his great and feruent desire, which hee hath had from his youth, and the noble acts which he hath done, for the rooting out of heresie: also how he hath vsed all gentle waies, to call the hereticks to the holy Church againe. But considering that all this would not serue, but onely to make them more obstinate, he dooth declare himselfe, to haue made the edict of reunion, for an irreuocable lawe of the realme, condemning already by this his de∣claration, all such as will not sweare nor obey the same, as guiltie of high treason. This declaration being read, then followed the edict of reunion by the same Secretary, which being done, the Arshbishop of Bourges made a long exhortation to the States, vpon the solemne oath to be taken by the King, and required also to be taken by his subiects, for the obseruing of the saide edict. This faire and learned sermon, about a naughtie matter, and to couer their dissembling heart. First, did speak of the truth, and of lying, then shewed the vse of an oath, the necessitie, the forme and qualities thereof. Secondly, he speaketh of the Church, which he saith in some respect to be visible, and in some respects inuisible, and that it is gathered of diuers nations and degrees of men, without acceptation and distinction of per∣sons. He saith that it is called the Church of Rome, in none other sence, then that it imbraceth the word of God, and true doctrine, which S. Peter there taught, to the which all other Churches haue vnited themselues, by a ge∣nerall and vniuersall consent: hee saith that the triumphant and militant Church, is but one in effect. And that this Church is grounded onely vpon the stone, which is Christ, the true foundation and head corner stone there∣of, and that it hath sustained many assaultes, which haue not preuailed. He saith also, that out of that Church, there is nothing but death, and that hee who will not holde the same for his mother, cannot haue God for his Father. Out vpon the heretick, e vpon fowle hereticks, so many words concer∣ning Note.
the Church, so many heresies, or else they make great iniurie to the Hugonets, whose death they doo conspire here in this assembly, for holding  so much in a manner, as this saucie Bishop dre speake here, before one of the greatest Potentates of the world. I lictor, colliga manus, caput obnubio, quadrupedem constringito, &c. Loe, the omnipotent power that shauelings haue, they can make heresie good doctrine, and true doctrine heresie, when they list. These things being spoken by an Archbishop, are no heresie: be∣ing spoken by another man, as Theodorus Beza, or some other which they doo not fancie, there will bee picked out nineteene heresies, a quarter and a halfe. Thirdly, he sheweth what a great matter vnion is, but specially in the Church, therefore hee exhorteth them, being of one faith, lawe, and be∣liefe, vnder one Sauiour, in one and the same Church of one nation and tongue, to vnite themselues for the defence of the same holy Church. Fourthly, he preuenteth by an obiection, that whereof they may be char∣ged, saying, we (meaning the Priestes) doo not proclayme ware: no, no, (saith he) the Church dooth not thirst after bloud, but we doo desire them who are out of the way, to returne into the right way, and if they bee obsti∣nate, wee doo desire that they may be cut off, as gangrned and putrified members. See here godly Christian reader, what hipocrisie goeth about to doo: this Bishop would faine see the Kings horses to swim in the bloud of them Note. of the reformed religion, and bloweth the trompet, giueth the watch word to the onset, vnder the colour of reuniting the Catholicks, yet hee would not for all the goods in the world, that men should thinke that it were done by his approbation, consent and counsell, and therefore he saith, that the holy Church seeketh not to spill bloud, but that they that are in error may be cō∣uerted into the right way. Now my Lord, shall I bee so bould to speake one word to your Lord∣ship: what way will you follow to conuert them from their errour, as you say they are in? my Lorde Bishop will answer, that hee will first shewe them their errour, and then teach them the certitude of his doc∣trine. Then my good Lord (I pray you be not angry) why haue you denied this way to the King of Nauarre, & to the reformed Churches of France, which onely thing they haue desired? When once you haue followed that way, and haue conuerted them of errour, and taught them a better way, if they shew themselues obstat, cut them off as rotten and gangrened members in deed. But belike this is the methode which you will follow against them, you will drawe a forme of aiuration, in the first part you will make them to abiure and renounce that forme of doctrine, which they say is grounded
vpon Gods worde, the infallable rule of veritie; then you will lay downe your fantasies & traditions, flowing out of the darke illumination of your  owne brayne, and that you will make them beléeue for an vndoubted truth vpon your single asseueration, and all the reasons which you bring for the confirmation of these your fantasies, you lay downe sic volo, sic iubeo. I pray you (my good Lord) tell me whose voyces be these? But what if they will not take your sic volo, sic iubeo, for reasons which may induce them to subscribe to your abiuration, and will not suffer them∣selues to bee cut off neither, being not conuincted of error, but stand to de∣fend themselues against an vniuersall contumelie, iniurie and violence? What will you doo? My Lord Bishop hearing this newes: what, will they neither beléeue vs, neither suffer themselues to be burned for our pleasures? Now all my Lords religion is turned into madnesse; his zeale to rage; his authoritie to tyrannie, and his mildnes (that holy Church doth not couet after blood) is turned to murther. Then my Lord in his furie and in the trance of his hart he crieth: Open the Kings Arseuall, bring foorth his Ordinance, gather together his men of armes and footmen, and if néede bee the whole Realme, set vpon them, kill them, slash them, cut them, spoyle them, murther them, and worse if you can. This is not to warre (quoth my Lord) no, no, holy Church thir∣steth not after bloud. But here is good play which I doo offer you, seeing that you must néedes to warre, there is in France many legions of diuells of your haire, put on your carnall armour, (for the spirituall armour you haue lost long agoe) let your Myter serue you for an Helmet, your Rochets for Corslets, your Surplesses for shirts of male, your Crosses for pikes, your Crosier staues for Launces, your red roundaches which the Cardinalls doo weare vpon their heads, for Targets; your Holy water tassels for Clubbes; put on your Spectacles too, that you may the better aime at your enemie; call vp∣pon all the he Saints and she Saints, which the Popes haue deified with thousands of Ora pro nobis; set you all in battell aray, be fiue against one, méete the heretikes if you dare in y• plaine open field. I aduise you, though you be desperate enough, not to come within their reach, least that with ba∣stinadoes the pockes and the gowtes be wrong out of your rotten boanes against your wills. But to returne to the purpose, he exhorteth the States to vnite them∣selues, and to sweare the foresayd edict: which speaches being ended, the King tooke the word thus. Sir, you haue heard the contents of mine edict, and vnderstand the qua∣litie of the same, the greatnes and worthines of the oth which you be about now to sweare. And seeing that I perceiue your iust desires to agree with
mine, I will sweare, and doo sweare before God in a good conscience, the obseruing of this mine edict as long as God shall continue my life here,  and will, & do ordaine that it may be kept for euer, as a fundamentall law of this realme, and in witnesse of the correspondence and vniuersal consent of all the States of my Realme, you shall now sweare the obseruation of mine edict of vnion all with one voyce, you Churchmen laying your hand vpon your breast, and the rest lifting vp their hands to heauen: which thing was done with great reioysing and acclamation of all men, crying, God saue the King. Now by this, hee in his owne person and his subiects haue sworne an immortall warre in his Realme, of which thing he commaundeth an act to bee made in writing to serue for a perpetuall remembrance of the fact. The act is such as followeth. This day the 18. of October 1588. the King sitting at Bloys in the as∣semblie of his generall states of his Realme, hath sworne in his faith and word of a King, to obserue this present lawe in all that shall concerne his Maiestie. Also the Lords, Cardinalls of Bourbon, Vendosme, Princes of Soyssons and Monpensier, Cardinalls of Guize, Leuoncourt and Gundy, Dukes of Guize, Nemours, Neuers and Retes, the Lord Kéeper, and ma∣ny other Lords, aswell of his Counsell as Commissioners of the three e∣states of his Realme, haue sworne to kéepe and entertaine inuiolable the sayd lawe, as well in their proper names, as in the names of the Prouinces which haue sent them to the said assemblie of the States. This thing being done, the King testified the great desire which he had to make an end of this assemblie, and to prouide for all his subiects vppon their iust complaints and grieues: and for that end promised not to depart out of Bloys, vntill the finall end of the said estates: commanding likewise them of that assemblie, not to depart by any meanes: whereof they gaue him most humble thankes. The assemblie dismissed, the King, the Quéenes, Princes and Prin∣cesses, Cardinalls, Prelates, and other Lords, with all the deputies of the States went to the Church S. Sauiour, there to sing te Deum, where they were alwayes accompanied with a generall voyce of the people, crying, God saue the King; shewing an extreame ioy and gladnesse for their owne calamities and miseries which they had sworne. Now (good Christian Reader) consider well three things in this hi∣story, to see Gods wrath, iustice and mercy; the thing which they haue done; the miseries which haue followed; and the gracious godnes of God in vpholding the ruines and miserable fall of that kingdome. For first in this session, Gods wrath drawing them to work, to sweare, and to reioyce in their owne dreadfull destruction, they haue degraded and disherited the Princes of the most noble and ancientest family of the
world, from that inheritance and preheminence, which God, Nature, and Law had appoynted vnto them: whose auncestors haue gouerned that kingdome with iustice and equitie, aboue thirteene hundred yeares: And  now without cause, contrary to Gods ordinance, Lawe, and Nature, to plant another family vnknowen in France, within these threescore and ten yeares, & the performance of this most vniust exheredation and degradati∣on, they haue sworne to execute an oath more damnable than witchcraft, ioyning to that iniurie the persecution of the true church of God. But O thou most highest, rayse vp thy selfe, bruse them like a Potters vessell. What hath followed that execrable oath? First, the most wretched and in∣famous death of the chiefest authors of this coniuring and witchcraft. Secondly, an vniuersall rebellion against him, who sware first and mini∣stred the oath to others. I am not a Prophet, nor the sonne of a Prophet, yet thus much I dare affirme, grounded vpon the nature of Gods iustice, who sayth, that who shall do those abominations shall die the death. That peace shall neuer be restored to France, as long as there is one left aliue of that damnable and accursed company, who with that abomination haue poluted the land, either in their mind haue giuen approbation vnto that accursed execrati∣on and vntill the Lord hath washed away the polution of their execrable deede with their owne blood. Last of all, here we haue to consider the Lordes prouidence, in relee∣uing of the afflicted States and tottering kingdomes, that he whom they had sworne should not raigne ouer them, him I say the Lord hath set vp, and annoyuted him with the oyle of grace and wisedome, and said that he shall raigne ouer them, that it may appeare that his Scepter is of God. And wheras likewise they haue sworn the rooting out of Gods truth, the Lord wil make it florish vnder their noses, & vnder the authoritie of him whome they haue reiected. Here also is another thing worthy to be noted, that the Lorde in all a∣ges, for to restore peace, iudgement, iustice, and religion, in any decayed state, hath raysed vp Princes, endued with heroycall giftes and graces, called by the ancients, Nemesis, & by the Prophet Psal. 51. the principall spirit of force, constancie, iustice, wisedome, counsell, and godlines, by the which crooked things are made straight, and all things reduced to their order. For as fortitude in an hot and vnwise nature is transformed into a barbarous cruelty & rage, so the same being in a wise nature, gouerneth the victory with mercy and mildnes,  ad benficentiam. The experience teacheth vs, that if God had not giuen his principall spi∣rit to this King now there raigning, to direct the valiantnes of his cou∣rage and the prosperous successe of his victories, with clemencie and mildenes, one fourth part of France by this day had beene reduced into a miserable wildernes.
But thou O great King, issued out of Noble race, gird thy loynes with force and might, goe on still and follow the Lord, who goeth before  thee, and leadeth thee by the hand, to restore the decayed ruins, brought into that kingdome by the obstinate and vnwise counsels of the Valoys, and the accursed snares of Sycophants, whom they haue fostered and nourished in their bosoms, by the bloud of theyr subiects, and the fatnes of their people. It is said before, how immediatly after the making of ye edict of reunion,  the Duke Mercure out of Britayne, with certayne companies inuaded the low Poytow, intending to lay the siege before Montagne, and how hee was defeated and ouerthrowen by the King of Nauarre: after which ouerthrow the said K. being strengthened with new forces of the Lords Trimouille and Boulay, intended to haue rescued the Lord Espernon, who stood in great daunger in Engolesme by a conspiracy of the Leaguers: but vnder∣standing that the tumult there was pacifyed, went to Rochel, where he ap∣pointed an assembly of the reformed Churches of France, there to take ad∣uice by a generall meeting, what they had to do agaynst the cruell (and neuer heard of) conspiracie of the King and the Leaguers, who had sworne the vtter subuertion and vndooing of the King of Nauarre and refor∣med churches: hee sendeth therefore in the moneth of September his mes∣sengers into all Prouinces of France, willing them to send theyr commis∣sioners and deputies to Rochel in Nouember next. The King of Nauarre hauing done all necessary dispatches for that thing in ye latter end of September, departed from Rochel, intending to lay the siege before the castle of Beauuoyre, lying vpon the Sea in the low Poy∣tow, and passing not farre from Niort, some of his company aduaunced ve∣ry nigh, vpon them that issued out of the town, not much further then their Suburbs. The Lord Valette great prouost of France, who alwaies had fol∣lowed the King of Nauarre, and a gentleman named Peray, set vpon them and gaue them a hot skirmish, wherein the said Lord and gentleman were slaine, fighting most valiantly. The Lieutenant of the towne beeing a most seditions Leaguer, with o∣ther of his fellows, shewed themselues no lesse then insolēt in committing great indignities vpon their dead bodies, whom they caused to bee drawen through the streetes of Niort, by the common people. From thence hee tooke his iourney toward the sayd Beauuoyre, as is sayd, a Towne and Castell vppon the Sea, a place of great importance as well for the situation as for the commodities thereof, because it holdeth the Iles about in subiection: out of the which great reuenues are receaued by reason of the salt and other commodities. The King lodged his footmen in the Suburbs of Clisson. There he receaued newes, that certayne regiments of footmen of the e∣nemies had passed Loyre at Saumure: which thing caused him to dislodge
in great hast, to goe to charge them, but the enemy being aduertised ther∣of, repassd the Loyre before that he could come to them. Therefore he tooke his way toward Nantes, and in the low Goleyn with all his army. There the Lorde Trimouille presented him the Captaine Bonneueau, whom he had discomfited and taken at Doway a walled town. The sayd King went to lodge at Ʋretow, a little league from Pilmil  suburbe of Nantes, and there passed his army vpon the caulsies ouer the riuer Seure: the other part of his army passed the sayd riuer by a Foord at  Mounieres, and came to lodge at Tousche Liuosiniere. The morow after, the fourth of October, he passed before the Castell of Maschecow, which he viewed, the Marquis Belisle beeing within, did let flye a shot of Culuerine. Passing further with his companies of men of arms, his light horsmen and Harquebuziers compassed the castell of Beauuoyre, wherin was in ga∣rison a company of footmen, who at the arriuing of the King forsooke the Towne and retyred into the Castell. The Towne beeing deliuered to him, he left within the towne his Harquebusiers, and he with his troupes went to lodge at Saint Geruays, within halfe a league of Beauuoyre. There arriued vnto him the Lords Montluet and Plessis from Rochl, with a faire company of nobility. After they had embarked in the hauen of Rochel, two canons, two culuerings, gabions, and other munition of warre, which they had conducted to Saynt Gyles hauen, distant from Beauuoyre about seuen leagues. But this furniture could not arriue at Beauuoyre in fifteene dayes after the siege was begun, by reason of contrary windes, and conti∣nuall rayne, with the discommodity of the waies, the countrey beeing very moorish. The souldiers were in the water to the mid legge, with other great discommities: notwithstanding, they ceased not to make trenches vnto the very ditch, out of the which he drewe great store of water: so that the platformes being made, the Ordinance brought with much ado, being pla∣ced and leuelled, he began the 21. of October to batter, and after 30. Ca∣non shot, they who were within seeing the forces prepared against them, did choose rather to prooue the clemencie of the said King in yéelding, then to stay a greater batterie and the extremitie of an assault, which infallibly would be giuen them: therefore they would parley and yeeld. The capitu∣lation was such, that they should render their Colours, should goe foorth with armour and baggage, but their match out. They went foorth about 53. persons, and were safely conducted to the Iland Bouing, whether they sayd they would retyre. The King of Nauarre lost at that siege two Gentlemen, to wit, the Lord Drow, one of his house, and one Villebeau, Captaine of one of the companies of the Lord Salignak.
The inhabitants of the Iland Bouing had promised to the King of Na∣uarre, (who had vsed them very courteously) that they would suffer none  of the enemies to enter their Iland: which promise they kept not. The Lord of Guize (though very busie at the States at Bloys) yet cea∣sed not, but as he was very busie to supplant the King at home, so was he very diligent to prouide for the affayres of warre, and for to crosse in this siege the King of Nauarre, if he could. He sent to the Duke Mercure the regiment of S. Paule, the fayrest and most dreadfull of all the companies of the League. The 22. of October and the morrowe after the rendering of the Castle of Beauuoyre, the inhabitants of the Iland Bouing, against their promise, receiued two of the fayrest companies of the sayd regiment of S. Paule. But they had not so soone entered into the Iland, but that immediatly they tooke such dreadfull feare, that without any shame they sent a Drumme to the said king, to beseech him to giue them safe conduct to retyre into a place of safetie. They had some reason so to doo, for the feare of his sworde put them in a fearefull apprehension. For he had so prouided that they were at his mercie, hauing sent his nauall armie to a place called Collet, aboue Bourgneuf of Rhe, which was the place where of force they must needes passe by. But the accustomed clemencie of that Prince sustayned and eased the feare of these two companies, who trusted that he would be no lesse fa∣uourable to them, then hee hath accustomably béen vnto others, who did submit themselues vnto him. Whereof they themselues (among many o∣ther examples) are and ought to bee hereafter witnesses: for although hée might haue cut them in peeces, yet of his good will (leauing a marke of heroicall humanitie vnto the posteritie) he gaue them their liues & armour, with a pasport for their safe returne, so that they should retyre the selfe same day. He forgaue also the Iland men, who had falsified their faith, and had ren∣dered themselues worthie of sharpe punishment. This clemencie to them shewed did so touch them, that they haue remayned euer since most faith∣full, being otherwise most deuoted and addicted vnto poperie. The saide King being desirous to passe into the Iland to sée it, could not doo it for the contrarie windes: hee left there for gouernour the Lorde Quergroy, a Gentleman of Britayn, of great reputation, with a necessarie Garison. And vpon the aduertisements which he receaued of the great prepara∣tion, and marching of the royall army, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, who descended into Poytow, he departed thence the 24. of October with all his army, taking his way to Montagne, where hee left the regi∣ment of the Lorde Preau, ordering all necessary things for the defence of that place, which as was thought should be the first place, where to that ar∣my
would lay siege, which also hee determined to rescue in conuenient time: he deuided his garisons in the places, which he iudged necessary, and among the rest, he put Garisons in Mauleon, Ganache, Talmond, Fontenay,  and other places. That being done, he tooke his way to Rochel, to be at the assembly of all  the reformed Churches of France, which hee had called thethere for diuers and notable considerations. The deputies of all the Churches of all sorts and qualities, stayed sometime in Rochel for him, where the said King be∣ing ariued, receaued them with great contentation, and according to his naturall facility and mildenes, to the great reioysing of all men, which ho∣ped for much fruite of this assembly, for the preseruation of the realme, of the Kings authority (against whome the Leaguers, vnder colour of the States at Bloys, did worke dangerous conspiracies) and for the iust defence of them of the religion, so long time, so cruelly intreated in all partes of the realme. The said King being certified of the comming of all the deputies of this assembly, of all degrees and conditions, Lordes, Nobles, Iudges, Kinges officers, Maiors, Aldermen, and other notable men of the Prouinces, gaue an opening vnto the saide assembly, by the inuocation of the name of God, the 14. of Nouember, in the towne house of Rochel, assisted by the Lordes of Turenne, his Lieutenant general, in the prouince of Guienne. Trimouil∣le, Colonell of the light horses, and many other Lords, Barons, Vicounts, Gentlemen, and other his counselers. The same day were called all the deputies for the assembly, & the authority which euery one had of the Pro∣uinces, for whome they were sent. There was almost no Prouince in France, which had not sent their de∣puties, to wit, deputies were sent out of Gascoyn, Amignak, Albret, and other places, from beyond the riuer Garonne, out of the Prouinces of Bri∣tayne, Anjou, Tourene, Berry, Lodunoys, the Ile of France, Normandy, Or∣leans, Picardy, Champaigne, and others beyond the riuer Loyre, out of the Prouince of high and lowe Languedock, Daulphine, Rowergue, Mount∣alban, and out of the gouernement of Terrides: there were also out of the gouernement of Xainctonge, on this side Charante, out of all the Iles of Xainctonge, other deputed for Rochel, for the Prouinces of Limosin, Peri∣gord, Agenoys, for the towne of Bergerak: in particular, for the Prouinces of Poytow, and Engomoys, for the principalitie of Orenge, and many others, for the baily weekes, townes, and comunalties, with sufficient shew of their charges and commissions. The 16. day of Nouember, after publick inuocation of Gods name, the King of Nauarre accompanied, as is aboue said, represented to the whole assembly the chiefest causes of their conuocation; the great necessities which should moue euery man to oppose himselfe to the enemies, whose in∣tent
was too apparant (for they went euen against the King and the whole estate) he shewed that hee had hetherto, in so iust and godly a cause, spared  neither goods nor life, as his former actions could testifie, and that if these mischieues should growe to the worst, he for his part felt his courage to be increased of God, in the resolution which he had long agoe taken, to spend therein, euen the last drop of his bloud, and the last pennie of all his goods, and desired onely, that the world would iudge in this his resolution of his good intent, as indifferently, and truely, as himselfe sincerely had walked before God, and determined to doo hereafter. He shewed how the long continuance of war, and lisence of armes, had to his great griefe, bred and brought in many disorders, to the which hee required them, as well it might bée, to prouide both in respect of the glorie of God, of the King, of the realme, and in respect of all priuat men. Prayed them that were of that assembly, to bring with them cleane spirites, voyde of all passion, endued with the loue of the common wealth: which thing if they did, hee assured himselfe that God would blesse their counsell, and woulde make them to reape much fruite to his glory, and the deliuerance of his children. Hee represented vnto them, the good and prosperous euents, which might ensue vpon their firme and fast vnitie in a cause so iust and holy as this, that presently was in question, by establishing of all good order: towards the whichause, hee exhorted all the assembly to continue as well affected as they had done before, and to bring so much the more aboundantly, as the nouelties and late alterations, happened by the malice of the enemies, did most euidently require. Aboue all things, hee willed them to prouide for that which imported most of all, the glorie and seruice of God, the good order, policie, and Disci∣pline of the Church. And to auoyde the prouoking of Gods wrath, by swearing, blasphemies, rapes, whordomes, robberies, forbidden games, and other disorders, who had crept among many, by the vnhappines of war: the required that the lawes made, for repressing of such things, might bee straightly enioyned, commaunded and obserued by the Magistrates, without any dissimulation, support or respect of persons: commaunding al∣so the Magistrates to assist euery one in his behalfe, vppon great paines, that the Discipline of the Church may haue a due authoritie and exe∣cution. He willeth them also, that the poore may bee assisted, with certaine ordi∣nary summes of money, which should be dedicated to the same effect, accor∣ding to the forme of the books, that should be made for that intent, with the authority of certaine chiefe officers, magistrates, consuls, or commissioners appoynted for that purpose. Also that charges and offices bee giuen to men capeable, and sufficient for the due execution of the same, to the ease, & contentation of euery one:
and as for other orders, it should be ordayned as the sessions, and propositi∣ons should be made in order. All the assembly gaue most humble thankes to his Maiestie, for the care  which it pleased him to haue, as well in particular of the said Churches, as true and lawfull nurser, protector, and defender of the same, as also in re∣spect of the publick peace, welfare, and preseruation of all, with proffer of their most humble seruice, and obeissance for so good, so holy, and so lawfull puposes, protesting with a most constant resolution, to employ their per∣sons, their liues, & their goods, to fauour so good and rightfull a cause, with praier vnto God, to continue in him his blessing and fauour, for his honor and glory, for the preseruation of his Church, for the good and quietnes of the publick estate. The Sessions, propositions, resolutions, and ordinances, were after∣warde made, and continued in good order in the presence of the said king, vpon the diuers arguments which were there to be handled. And first they entreated of the glory and seruice of God, next of iustice, of a good counsell, and good ordering of the same: then afterward of the mannaging of the treasure, gifts, pasports, officers, order of warre, com∣missions, bootyes, prisoners of warre, protections, taking of townes and places, of the safety of husbandmen, and many other statutes, as eue∣ry one of the deputies of the Prouinces was seuerally charged by their re∣membrances and instructions. Many such things were there determined, vntill the dissolution of the sayde assembly, which was made (the sayd King sitting accompanied as  aboue, in the presence of all the deputies) on the Lords day being the 17. day of December, after the preaching of the worde, and inuocation of Gods name, with the vnitie, consent & voluntary approbation of al men, to the glory of God, and for the Kinges seruice, the preseruation of the Crowne and Realme, restablishment of the State, and for the defence of all faithfull Frenchmen, against all enemies leagued, mutinous, and se∣ditious persons, who directly or indirectly, would seeke the trouble and euersion of the same. Whilest these things did passe, and so contrary assemblies, did take  contrary counsells and resolutions, to worke so contrary effects, (for at Bloys counsell and deliberation was taken to destroy the K. the Crowne, the Realme, the State, the true Church of God. In Rochel they went about to saue the King, to defend the Crowne, to preserue the Realme, to vpholde the state, to maintaine the true Religion.) the Duke of Sauoy after great preparations of warre made, the Duke de Maine being as then at Liomoys, and about the borders of Daulphine, inuaded the Mar∣quiz at of Saluces, and by treason and intelligences of the Captayne, sur∣prized Carmagnole, one of the Arseuals of France: he tooke also Rauel and
Chasteaudauphin, with some other holdes. These newes brought to Bloys, did greatly trouble them who coulde  take no pleasure therein: But the Leaguers did greatly reioyce thereat. For they thought that his increase of miseries, would further their en∣terprizes, and that the sire being kindled in diuers places, that which they did blow in the middest of France, would not be either quicklie, or easily put out. This enterprize of the Duke of Sauoy, was by the practize and coun∣sell of the League, which was that the armies of these two Dukes (of Sauoy and Maine) should respectiuely fauour each other, each keeping his entent seuerall to himselfe. For the Leaguers and the Duke of Sauoy did agree in this: to wit, in hating the true religion and the professors thereof, and in making against them cruell warre, to roote them out, if they could doe it. But the particular thoughts of the partie were kept incommunicable within the heart of them, both of them reseruing to themselues, the meanes to worke their affayres, according to the opportunitie and occasi∣on. And in this respect (as it commonly falleth out among them, who doo aspire to any Soueraignetie) there was neither societie nor saith be∣tweene the Duke of Sauoy and the house of Guyze, each of them enuying his fellow in that which he wished for himselfe. The Duke of Guize with his partakers, intended to raigne and to stablish his authoritie in France, and would not admit any fellow, neither the Duke of Sauoy, nor any other. The Duke of Sauoy on the other side, thought himselfe so well descen∣ded in blood, that he might claime to haue a good part, and thought it very conuenient for himselfe to enlarge his dominions, and that being Sonne to a Daughter of France, he was nigh enough to possesse all, and would haue beene very sory to haue had any companyon, either of the house of Guyze, or any other whatsoeuer. These diuers drifts did lurke close hidden in the hearts of both parts, being holpen and aduanced mutually by the common pretence which they tooke on both sides, to wit, the rooting out of the reformed religion, which tearmed heresie, and to that end, in open words they agreed toge∣ther, did helpe and ayde each other, reseruing to the craftiest the beguy∣ling of his felow, or to the strongest to preuaile Fryer Sixtus Vicar, vnderstanding of this inuasion of the Duke of Sauoy, fearing least the King should suppose that to haue beene some of Fryer Sixtus tricks, and vpon a sodaine desire of reuengement would haue his peniworth vpon the Countie of Veuese and Auignon, which is a part of the de Mains which Saint Peter purchased with his penie, that the Fryers might liue like kings after him, to wash his hands, and to
make the world beleeue that hee saw nothing, first beganne to chide and brawle with the Duke of Sauoy, and findeth great fault in him, reprouing  him for such an enterprise. The Duke of Sauoy playing falshood in good fellowship, faineth, although  that Fryer Sixtus had no finger in that pie, goeth about to excuse the mat∣ter, and did colour this action specially with Fryer Sixtus, saying, that hee had done all thinges for the aduantage of the holy church of Rome, because he vnderstood that the K. had determined to put those places which he had taken, into the hands of the Lord des Diguiers and other heretikes: which thing would be very daungerous both to him being nigh neighbour, as al∣so in tyme very domageable to the holy church, and the county of Veues. Some of his counsellers also did greatly mislyke his enterprise, foresee∣ing that it would be in tyme as pernitious vnto him, as it had béene to his father in tymes past, for not knowing the measure of his forces. Whilest the King of Nauarre did holde the assembly of the reformed Churches at Rochel, as is aboue sayd, and that the Duke of Sauoy inuaded the Marquesdome of Saluce, the States did continue at Bloys with strange mistrust, which did spring from hower to hower among the partakers. The pretence of Religion did continually rowle among the Leaguers and Leagued. Their liues and state, sayd they, did hang on a rotten threed. In December, two great alarums and pannick terrors were raised within the castell of Bloys, who did put the whole court in armor, and made them stand vpon their guardes. The cause of the first was a quarrell, which arose betweene the pages and lakeys, who did hold with the Bour∣bons, and them which did hold with the League. The commotion and the feare was such, that the Duke of Guyze tooke the alarum, ranne into his chamber, shut vp the dore, with Cofers, and other such like things as were at hand. The second alarum was geuen by a souldier hurt, which saued himselfe in the chamber of the Duke of Guyze, into the which hee was pursued by some of the Kings guardes, who went vp with sword in hand, whereupon once agayne all the court was in an vprore. About the same time also there were great enmities and seedes of quar∣rels in the court (besyde the vlcer of ambition & desire to raigne) betwéene the Lord of Guyze and many other Lordes of the court, by reason of loue: for as the Duke of Guyze in the middest of those waighty matters which he went about to compasse, was greatly in loue with a Lady of the court: there were some Lords also who pretended the like affection to her, whe∣ther it were that they did so of purpose to pick a quarrell or otherwise, but so it was, that there passions of loue were openly perceaued. The Duke of Guyze about the middle of December, did shew himselfe a more contemner of the Kinges authority, then euer he had done before: for
there was seene after him in great security following his trayne, and lod∣ged euen in the Kings house, a great number of ruffiens and malefactors,  condemned in diuers places for diuers crymes, and executed in picture for contumacy: euen many of them which in August before had raised vp a sedition in Engolesme agaynst the Lord Espernon, they were in such se∣curity vnder his wing, that no magistrate durst say any thing to them. The said Duke also had shewed himselfe more saucy and malapert in his words and behauiour, then euer hee did before. For the King hauing intercepted many of his letters, by the which hee did shew in open tearms the vilanous intent which he had purposed in his hart, called his Nobles, willed them to sweare to him, that they would neuer consent nor practise any thing agaynst his person: he most arrogantly and contemptuously de∣nyed so to doo, euen in his presence, saying, he will not do it, and if hee did it, there was good lawes to punish him: spare him not, let him bee puni∣shed; bould and arrogant speaches were geuen dayly by him, and his par∣takers. The Duke of Guyze considering, that by these fresh iniuries the King could not be much prouoked, calling to remembrance his former attempts, and that the stroke which he had long before intended, was made knowen to the King, began to enter a great fearfull apprehension, that the King would not delay his reuenge, but will goe about to preuent him. And now considering that all his partakers had bent their eyes vppon him, and ex∣pected some great atchieuement, which should farre exceed the former at∣tempts, seeing also how the K. of Nauarre by the edict of reunion, sworne by the assembly of the States, was condemned and disherited, & that there was nothing left in the way to hinder him of his enterprise, and that hee himselfe was now vpon the last step of the stayrs, either to be King, or first commaunder vnder the name of King of France, so that nothing was wan∣ting, but either quite to dispatch him, or else to take him prisoner. Hee re∣solued himself therefore to hasten one of these two executions, least perhaps he might bee preuented, hee vndertooke himselfe to do that feat, and layed that burthen vpon his shoulder. And that such disorder might bee done or∣derly, he called the chiefest of the conspiracy to counsell. The chiefest of this counsell and conspiracy were Fryer Ladouik, car∣dinall his brother, and Fryer I. Archebishop of Lyons, with few other, to whom he shewed in what state his matters stood, and that all thinges are brought to some good effect, that nothing is obstant to obtayne the thing so long, and so greatly desired, but the person of the King: and that their counsels beeing come to light, hee was driuen to such extremity, as that ither he or the King must needes perish. Hee propounded vnto them therefore, whether the King was to bee dis∣patched out of hand, or else to bee imprisoned till all thinges were confir∣med,
and established for a new gouernment. They answere, that this matter is not to be delayed, but that the King  was to be made away, and dispatched out of hand: their reasons be these, for (say they) fetters and prisons are altogether vnprofitable, that no dun∣geon (how deepe soeuer) could be able to keep close so great and mighty a Potentate, and that so long as he should liue hee would cout alwaies for reuenge. If hee were kept in prison, it would seeme cruell and strange to the com∣mon people, and intollerable. That they of late (after the Kings fleeing from Paris) had found and learned by experience, that pitty preuaileth more then fauour. But assoone as he should be dispatched, new deuises should bee practi∣sed, new counsels taken, and that euery man would fall againe rather to their priuate, present, and sure commodities, then to attempt dangerous enterprises. Grounded vpon these reasons, the seruants do determin vpon the death of their Lord, the anoynted of the Lord, and a man reuerenced of so many Nations, is condemned to die by the bloudy swordes of them, who might haue said, that whatsoeuer they haue besydes their béeing, they haue it of him and his predecessors liberality, whose Grandfather came to begge to the dore of his auncestors. Rise vp O Lord, defend thyne Ordinance, and the powers which thou hast appointed. The 24. day of December is appointed for that cruell execution: their desperat parricide is sealed with an oth, so they depart. The King ignorant of this sentence of condemnation geuen against him, yet prouoked both by the old and new iniuries, proffered him daily by the Duke of Guyze, did meditate how, and watched for the opportunity, as by one blow to rid himselfe out of that danger and feare wherein he saw him∣selfe: and perceauing well by the partialities and partaking of (in a ma∣ner) the whole assembly of the States, and that contrary vnto his expecta∣tion: (for he thought by the consent of the States to haue conuicted, con∣demned, and executed both the Duke and few of the chiefest of his parta∣kers) he was in danger that which he pretended would be wrought against him either directly, or vndirectly by the sayd estates, determined to follow an extraordinarie way, and to preuent his enemy, knowing the Prouerbe to bee true, : and knowing the cause so to do to be lawfull, thought the course taken for the execution, would be diuersly iudged: yet hee thought to follow a iust cause some what vnlawfull (necessity enforcing him so to doo) might be well interpreted in a man of his degree and calling: he pronounceth therfore sentence of death against the Duke of Guyze, and few others. Here Christian Reader, thou seest the subiect and seruant to haue con∣demned
& appoynted to the slaughter his Lord and Prince, only through aspyring vnlawfully vnto his Scepter and Throne. Here thou seest the  soueraigne power ordayned of God for to reuenge the euill doer, to haue condemned his seruant for diuers crimes committed, the procéeding is ex∣traordinarie, but necessarie, and not at all to be condemned, considering the circumstances: but it is to be wished that it could haue béen done otherwise by ordinarie course. Marke also Gods iustice vpon carnall men destitute of the right know∣ledge of God, fellowes in a manner and companions of one affection, of one minde, of one consent, in persecuting the Sonne of God, in deuouring the innocent, as if they would eate bread: the Lord sent euill Angels a∣mong them to scatter them, their counsels and power; the one is possessed with an vncleane spirit of ambition; the other (bewitched with a spirit of hatred against the trueth of God) is made secure and flacke to preuent the euill betunes, vntill he is enforced to followe that course, which common∣ly men will condemne vpon his companion, his friend and familiar, who went into the Temples of their Gods to take sweete counsell together. O the depth of Gods iudgments, how deepe and vnsearchable be they: The Kings counsell and determination could not be kept so secret, the King hauing so many Leaguers about him to smell his breath, but the 22 of December, as the Duke of Guize had set downe to dinner, he found vn∣der his napkin a little bill, wherein was written that he should take héede, for they will play a shrewd play with him. In the same bill he wrote with his owne hand a mocking answere thus. They dare not, and so cast it vn∣der the table. The Leaguers neither could not keepe their breath so warily, but that their determination tooke flight abroad. For the same day the King recea∣ued diuers aduertisements of this perilous conspiracie, and determination of the Duke of Guize against his person. But specially ye Duke de Mayne brother to the Duke of Guize, sent Alphonse Corse expressedly to the K. to aduertise him to take heed of the Duke of Guize his brother: it was an easie thing (sayd he) to carrie a rope of Beades about his necke, but for cer∣taine hee knewe very well that his brother had a shrewd enterprise in hand against him. He knewe not when the execution would be, but he knew ve∣ry well that it would be shortly, and that he was in doubt least this war∣ning should come too late: and warned him in these words, that his Maie∣stie should beware of a furious and desperate minde. The Duke Aumale likewise sent his wife to Bloys to the King, to ad∣uertise him of the same daunger and conspiracie against him, and that the conspirators were vpon the poynt of the execution. Also one of the conspirators themselues mooued in conscience, disclosed vnto him the whole conspiracie, the day appoynted, the tokens & the names
of the conspirators, but in such a short time, that the King had scarse oppor∣tunitie and time to escape and preuent that imminent danger. The King also had intercepted not long before many letters, wherein in plaine tearmes the Leaguers had vttered their determination. The King hauing receaued so many messengers of death, and reduced to this extremitie, doth perceiue that he is beaten with his owne rod. For calling to remembrance the great iniuries which hee and his brethren had receaued of that house euen from their infancie, acknowledging now that all the former troubles (as hee confesseth in a certaine letter of his to the Lord Tageus) in his Realme, haue béen by their practises and procure∣ment: how that hee hath seene all the euident tokens of their aspyring to his estate, their clayming of the Crowne by their fayned geuealogies, set foorth in the sight of the world. He remembreth also the decay of his autho∣ritie among all his subiects, to haue béen their worke, by the diffamatorie Libels dispersed abroade, with diuers slaunders and calumnies. He ac∣knowledgeth the practising of the deliberation of Rome, about the rooting out or disheriting the royall bloud in France in the houses of Valoys and Bourbons, to set vp the house of Lorreyne. Among other things, he reckoneth the seditious preachers, as Iesuites, and other vncleane foules of that colour, hired by them of Guize, and Lor∣reyne, to stirre vp sedition, and steale away the people from his obedience, thereby to strengthen their partes. He calleth to remembrance, the taking vp of armes against his will, in the yeare 1585. the raising vp of the tu∣mult in Paris against his owne person, the letters of Guize intercepted, wherein he discouereth his minde so deepely, that thereby he might see eue∣ry veine and hole in their braine and hearts: the saucie parts, and manifest attempts, which both hee, and his partakers had vsed toward him in his owne presence, both in words and behauiour, the consideration also of these aduertisements from so many parts, did cause great passions in his minde. But did not consider from whence these blowes did come, neither from whence his slacknes, in repressing and punishing by time those offences. Specially, when remembring the fauours that hee and his predecessors had giuen to that famely: but he aboue all, had more esteemed them, then the Princes of his bloud, had made him his fellow and companion, in all the exploytes done against them of the reformed religion, whome hee had fauored with diuers great dignities, pardoned him of so many grieuous of∣fences, which he would not haue forgiuen to his owne brother: to be short, he loued and imbraced him, as his own soule: this incredible vnthankfulnes and treacherie, did moue him to great indignation. But specially, what griefes and sorrowes did this nhappy King conceaue in his heart, not onely to  so vnthankfully rewarded of them whome hee trusted most, but for that, he in the space of 20 yeares had seen so many warnings giuē, both
to his Brother Charles the ninth, and to himselfe, of their aspiring & wor∣king, not onely by the Princes of the bloud, by the King of Nauarre, by  many Lords, Gentlemen, and learned men in France, but also by the Prin∣ces of forren nations, and specially by the Princes of Germany, who from time to time had proffered their seruices, and their assistance vnto him, for the repressing of their insolent presumptuousnes. And namely, when he considered how halfe a yeare before, when he was in a manner dispossessed of his kingdome & Authority, after his flight from Paris, how his faithfull subiects, of all callings and degrees, resorted vnto them, both to shew him the vnsufferable indignities, which he had receaued of that house, and also to proffer him their seruice and assistance. When hee called to minde, how often and how faithfully, the King of Nauarre had proffered him his forces, and that in such sort, that if it had pleased him but to holde vp his hand onely, and let him alone with them, he with his owne forces and charges, would set him at hearts ease from any danger or sur of the League. He I say, as a man which is willingly, and wittingly lead to his fatall destruction and fall, had neuer regarded nor considered all these things vntil now, when being destitute of all meanes and deliberation, and scarse knowing whome to trust, hee is with too late repentance driuen to shift for his owne life, as well as hee may, which he seeth is most certaine∣ly to be taken away, within foure and twentie houres, if he dooth not pre∣uent the conspiratours. The King in this agony and heauy sighes, not considering the causes of these blowes and terrors of death, full of sorrowes and indignation, dooth determine with himselfe as well as hee can, to preuent the treasons of his domesticall enemies in this wise. The keyes of the Castell were brought euery night vnto the Duke of Guize, as being great Master of the Kings house, but the saide Duke of Guize the 22. of December, the night before his death, prouided not so wisely, but that the keyes fell into other mens hands, then them of his side. So the King tooke the keyes of his house in his custody, he also caused a ru∣mour to bee noysed abroad, that the day following hee will goe on pilgri∣mage to the Church, called our Lady of Clery, situated betweene Bloys and Orleans. And according to his prudence, he prouided that as well in the Castell, as in the towne, they of the League might not stir with any force against him; for within the Castell, he doubled his gardes. In the towne, hee tooke order that night, that the gardes of the towne gates should not in any wise open the saide gates, vntill they should haue expresse commaundement from him to the contrary; so both the Towne, Castell, and keyes thereof are made sure in that night; and all this was done, vnknowne to the Duke of Guize.
The Lord grand Prior that night made a match to play at Tenis with  the Lord Ianuile, sonne to the Duke of Guize, to whome he gaue his word, that the next day very early, hee would take him in his bed for that end. So the King hauing dispatched many things, but specially prouided to make all things sure which he thought needefull, to preuent the determination of the Duke of Guize, which was vpon the poynt of execution, retired into his closet, where he was all night, to doo many needefull dispatches. The same night, hee wrote to the Duke of Neuers, who was in the ar∣my, at the siege of Smache, hee wrote to Lyons, and to diuers other places, where hee thought it necessary, for the assuring of his affaires, and the pre∣seruation of his person. The same night, the Duke of Guize, Frier Lewis, the Cardinall his brother, and the Archbishop of Lyons, to take opportunity to commit their parricide, concluded to sit in counsell the next morning early. The 23. of December, the Duke of Guize, the Frier, Cardinal his bro∣ther, the Archbishop of Lyons, the Marshall Haultmont, and others, came to sit in counsell, in a chamber nigh to the Kings chamber, being but a na∣row aley betweene them. The K. being in his closet with certaine Lords and gentlemen, sent for 7. or 8. of those 45. Pensioners or gentlemen, yt were daylie attendant vp∣on him, very early in ye morning, to whom he vsed some speaches about his affaires so greatly importing him, & so nearely touching his person, & a∣bou the assured aduise & intelligences which he had receiued of the enter∣prize against his person & State. They prostered most willingly their rea∣dy seruice, to execute his cōmaundement in such a iust cause and defence. Within a while after, the Duke of Guize being in the counsell cham∣ber before they began to sit, was called to come to the king. He saw at his first comming the guards more carefully disposed than of custome, so that (as it happneth oftentimes, yt vpon the instant of great aduentures the mind of euery man is to him as a Prophet of ye euent, or a heauy presage of his mishappe) euen as hee had iudged of the enterprize of an other man, by calling to remembrane of that which he had in his owne mind, and te stroke which he receaued by that which he intended, he entred in∣to a motion of extraordinary mistrust, & so far that his countenance chan∣ging at that calling, his heart waxed cold, as though he had been ready to fall into a swound: whereupon hee sent to the L. Pre (one of them who did waite in the K. chamber) to aske some raysins, which were brought him. Afore his going out of the counsell chamber, hee sent a page to his chamber to fetch him a handkercher: his secretary had bound fast in one of the corners thereof a small bill written, contayning a warning to get him out, or else hee was dead. The handkercher was brought, but it was not deliuered, for it was intercepted, with the remem∣brance
when the page came vp againe with it. The Duke of Guyze being about to goe vnto the king, when hee went  forth of the counsell chamber into the alley which was betweene it and the kings chamber, encreased his mistrust, and would haue gone back; yet ne∣uerthelesse he did not. He had beene perswaded long before, that the Lorde Loignak had vn∣dertaken to kill him, so that of all other he hated him most, and mistrusted him greatly, and entering into the kings chamber, he saw the same Lord Loignak sitting vpon a coffer, hauing his armes a crosse, and supposing that he stayed there to set vpon him (for he shewed that hee was touched with a violent apprehension of mistrust) although the said L. Loignak did not stir: yet the Lord Guize notwithstanding did set vpon him, & setting his hand to his sword did draw it halfe, for he had his cloake (as common∣ly he was wont to haue) in scare wise, and vnder the cloake his sworde, which was the cause that he could not draw it cleane out of the sheath, before that some of them who were there, seeing him to enterprize such a violent fray at the Kings chamber doore, preuented, and killed him there. Beholde thou vngratious man, thou hast hidden all thy conspiracies vnder a cloake of religion, and so hast prophaned a prophane religion; say then . Thou vnthankfull slaue of ambition, hast thou thought to murther thy naturall prince, ordayned of God to commaund thee: Say then, or if thou wilt not, I will, . It could not be done without some rumor, which was heard out of the counsell chamber: whereupon the Cardinall his brother entred into mis∣trust, and conceauing a great feare, made haste to get out: but he met one of the skottish guardes who had charge to arrest him. He tooke that arrest very straunge, and made shew to resist: but seeing the rumor and daunger, hee ceased from his resistaunce and yeelded. The Archbishop of Lyons at this alarum, went forth furiously, and would know more, and as he said, would succour the Duke of Guyze, but he was arrested by some of the guardes, and his fury was so cooled, that from a woolfe, he was turned into the forme of a lambe, yet retayning still wooluish conditions: so these two Fryers (the deuills ghostly fathers) remayned both prisoners. The graund Pryor was gone very early to awake the Lord Ianuile, to to play the match which they had made the day before, and found him in his bed: and after he had made himself quickly ready (but whether it were that he saw the graund Pryor followed incontinently with some of the guardes, or some other matter) hee began sodaynly to mistrust, and went about to slip into a doore of his chamber, and to make some resi∣stance,
seeking to get forth with his sworde in hand against some of the guarde: but considering the danger he yeelded him selfe to the sayd guard.  The graund Pryor seeing that by these new euents, the match was bro∣ken off, went his way. At the same instant one Pellicart, secretary vnto the Duke of Guyze was taken, with al his papers & writings, by the which many secret coun∣sels of the sayd Guize were discouered to the King, with the names of the chiefest of the League, as wel of the princes and Nobles, as of the priests and townes. The king of the Fryers, to wit, the Cardinall of Bourbon, who was at bed, was desired by a captayne of the guarde to rise, and so was his per∣son made sure. The Marquesse d' Albeuf likewise, and many other of the partakers of the Lord of Guize were taken, and put in places of safety. That day the king made a fayre hande, for he caught a number of cru∣ell beasts and vncleane foules, as Woolues, Foxes, swine, wilde Boars, Apes, and such like. But the loosing of some of them afterward, was the cause of his vn∣dooing and death. For either through feare of the Popes excommuni∣cation, or to asswage the displeasure of his subiects, or some other cause lse, he did set at libertie the Archbishop of Lyons, which was one of the chiefest counsellors, deuisers, and procurers of his death. These exployts being done at Bloys, a gentleman was speedely sent in∣to Poytow to the Lord of Neuers, with commaundement to seaze vppon the Lord Chastre gouernour of Berry, who was greatly suspected, by reason of his great familiaritie with the Lord of Guize. But the layd Lord Chastre was aduertized by his friends of all that which happened at Bloys, before the gentleman (sent by the King) arriued at the camp: whereupon he went to the Duke of Neurs, saying, that he was aduerti∣zed how the Duke of Guyze had beene put to death, which thing made him beleeue, he had enterprized somewhat agaynst the king. Hee sayde that he had been alwayes seruant to the Duke of Guize, for his particu∣lar; but that if he had enterprized against the king, that hee was neuer made priuie to it. And forasmuch as the loue which the said Duke of Guize had borne vnto him, might happily make him to be suspected by the king, he yeelded himselfe willingly into the hands of the sayd Duke of Neuers for to iustifie his actions. Afterward the Gentleman went from the king to the sayd Duke of Neuers, who informed him of all that which is aboue sayd, and within a while after the Lord Chastre went to the king. The King had some speeches with the sayd Lorde Chastre of all that had passed touching the particular of him: the Lord Chastre of long con∣tinuance,
which hee woulde forget, and vppon the promise which the saide Chastre made, to remaine his faithfull seruant, commaunded him to make  sure the townes of his gouernement to his seruice, and to prepare himselfe to goe to Orleans, against them of the League: which thing the saide Lorde Chastre promised to doo. A little while after the death of the Guize, the King went to see the Queene his mother, and shewed her what was done that morning, where∣of at the first she was greatly moued: yet remembring the iust occasions which the said Duke of Guize had giuen him to seeke reuenge, shee prayed God that it might bee well done: and willed the King to aduertise the Popes Legat, that which was done. For a while after, the King sent the Cardinall Gundy, to shew to the saide Legat, the attempt of the Duke of Guize, against his person and estate; which thing had enforced him to doo that execution: he shewed that in it, he had followd the Popes his masters counsell, who aduised him so to doo, if by no other meanes he could auoyde such enterprises. Where it is saide, that the King dooth aleage to the Popes Legat, his masters counsell and consent, the matter goeth as the common report gooth. It is most certaine, that Frier Sixtus, and his Chaplines, with his predecessors before him had been, and were then the chiefest authors, set∣ters on, and maintainers of the League in France, and that by all meanes, so that it were not with money, (for to meddle with the purses of these ghostly fathers is sacriledge, and to tirannize the holy Church) did fauour, foster, and further all the felouies, trecheries, and treasons of the Duke of Guize. The King hauing a perfect knowledge of these their dooings, yet by policy he obtained Frier Sixtus, and his Priests, both his consent and hands, to iustifie his actions, which he entended to bring to passe vpon the persons of the Duke of Guize, and others his adherents: if the Pope, after the fact; if Soltan Solyman, out of the capitall of Rome, would thunder his vaine boults, not excommunication, but of proscription, which this Anti∣christ most arrogantly doo vsurp vpon Princes. He wrote therefore to Frier Sixtus, that he had a number of rebels of all degrees, as well of the nobilitie as of others, who had conspired against his life and state, whether that hee might make such a slaughter of them, by surprise, as hee made at Saint Bartholmew, in the yeare 1571. and kill them by all meanes possible, seeing that he could not follow against them any extraordinarie course. Frier Sixtus and his harpies about him, sup∣posing that the King by rebels, vnderstood the King of Nauarre, and others of the nobles with him, and of other degrees, and that he had so fetcht in his head, whereby he hoped to drawe them into his snare, were as ready to fur∣ther him to that exployte, as the King was ready to doo it. Frier Sixtus answered in his name, and of his Ianissaries, that hee might destroy them
by all meanes possible: for in extraordinarie dangers, extraordinarie course might be taken. This is that which he alageth to the Legat, touching the Popes counsell and consent. The Legat vpon this newes, was wonderfully amazed, for beside that, hee feared his owne skin, hee had also assured all Italy of cleane contrary e∣uents, then those which he saw to haue fallen out. The same day, the Legat was prayed to make intercession with the King, for the Cardinall of Guize; which thing hee promised to doo. Men cannot by any meanes prolong the time of their ende: many haue thought that the sauing of the life of the Cardinall of Guize, might haue been easily obtained. But as a haughtie courage, which thinketh to bee nigh to some great and extraordinary prosperous fortune, cannot easily quiet himselfe, when he seeth himselfe debased, and carried away farre from his expectati∣on. So this man fallen from so high, and moued with his domesticall los∣ses, could not quiet himselfe, but by hot words hee threatned, to performe more thē euer his brother entended, whose chiefest setter on he was. This his raging minde, wrapped him in the selfe same punishment with his Brother, being founde and iudged culpable of the selfe same crime of treason. Here marke Christian reader, a notable example of Gods iustice: for the King would easily haue pardoned him, and spared his life, but Gods iu∣stice bringing him to iudgement, forsooke him in the perturbation of his heart, to prouoke his Soueraigne King, whome hee had offended in the highest degree, against his will, to make him drinke of the cup of Gods wrath. So that the King seeing his threatnings, which discouered plainly the damnable thoughts of his heart, caused him the same day to bee strangled, as it is reported, with a tippet of silke, which he was wont to weare about his neck, to put a difference between him and the common sort of traitors: for they are strangled with ropes of hempe, but this traiterens Frier was choaked with a holy tippet of silke, in the selfe same place where he was a∣rested prisoner. These executions being done vpon the conspiratours, the King went to goe to Masse into the temple of Saint Sauiour, which is in the court of the Castell. There the Popes Legat did walke and talke long with the King, sometime smiling in the sight of a great number of people, which did marke it. Among whom, many seeing the ioyfull countenance of the Legat, thought that hee was not greatly sory for that which had passed there that morning, although that his great familiarity with the house of Guize, would haue giuen occasion to expect of him the contrarie. But all that was but to make faire weather, which the King fearing himselfe, vp∣on the heate of the Kings reuenge, to haue sustained the same punishment with his companions, which he had no lesse deserued then they had.
Now we haue to speake somewhat of the conspirators, who were of fiue sorts. In the euening, all things were as quiet at Bloys, as they had béen  before, saue the close and hidden sorrow, and murmuring of many, who had not foreseene such a suddaine tempest to fall vpon the house of Guize. Brissak and others, to mollifie the Kings displeasure, which they suppo∣sed by the guiltines of their consciences, the King to haue conceaued of them, that in time they might escape out of his clawes, made an oration gratulatory for his good successe, in escaping that conspiracy, but specially did clawe him in that place, where he did most itch, to wit, exhorted him to continue the warre against them of the reformed religion, vsing great outragious wordes and inuectiues, leauing them no hope of merrie. This oration was followed of many such others, not for loue to the K. but for three speciall causes. First, that with such holy water the King be∣ing blinded, they might flye out of his hand. Secondly, that by setting the King agaynst the King of Nauarre, and the heretikes (as they tear∣med them) hee should haue his forces scattered, and his person beeing the weaker by it, they might at some opportunity surprise him. Thirdly, they feared least he would vpon this occasion ioyne the King of Nauarre, and so to haue béene able to take reuenge vpon all the sort of the conspiratours: therefore they thought good to blow the coales to let all reconsiliation. The same day the King sent to the assembly of the states, to let them vnderstand that it was his pleasure, that the states should continue with a full determination to follow their reasonable counsels in all things. The 24. of December, the King dispatched diuers messengers into dy∣uers Prouinces with these instructions following. The first troubles raised vp by the Lord of Guyze in this realme, in the yere 1585. haue shewed sufficiently an other meaning in him, thē the zeale of the Catholike Religion, wherewith he hath couered his actions, to abuse them, who are more ready to embrace nouelties, then wise to consider the euents. For hauing couered his entents with the cloake of the catholik religion, and the rooting out of heresy, all his exploits haue béen executed in the ca∣tholik townes, and in the best, which he could seaze vpon, to lay downe a stedfast foundation of the drifts long before notoriously forecast for the sur∣pation of the crowne. The King sheweth that by the meanes of the rising of the sayd Duke, he was enforced to let him haue the best part of his forces and meanes, where∣by he hath not béene able to oppose himselfe to them of the religion, as he was willing to doo: whereby heresy (sayth he) hath taken deeper root in the Realme then euer it had before. He sheweth, that while his forces were occupyed against the heretikes in Guyen, Prouance, and Daulphine, he and his partakers haue practised to
withdraw all that euer they could from his obedience. He sayth also, that notwithstanding the seditious seazing of Paris by thē of the League, yet he was desyrous to forget all offences passed: and be∣sides,  he gratifyed him with as many graces and fauours, as hee could re∣quire, thinking thereby to mollify the hardnes of his hart. He aduertiseth them, that the ambition of the sayd Duke of Guyze, was growen to that contempt of his estate, that hee would no more depend of a∣ny other: and that in stead of thankes, to acknowledge these fauours, hee had vsed them to his further enterprises. He neuer ceased to practise the townes which were left vnder his obedi∣ence to his faction, so that the Magistrates could hold no longer the inhabi∣tants in their duty, nor from stirring sedition one agaynst another. Many men conuictd of capitall crymes, were so vpholden by his au∣thority, that it was not possible for the Magistrate to doo iustice vppon them. He and his did braue, threaten, and put in feare, them which would re∣mayne seruants vnto their King, to make them to forsake him, that so he might the more easily oppresse him. The Duke of Guyze by his partakers, had practised the Prouinces by his factions to render his authority, hatefull to his Subiectes, suborning them to make vnciuill requestes, that in obtayning them, they might de∣base his authority, and in refusing them (which he will perswade the King to do) hee might make him hatefull to his subiectes. The King had vsed all the prudence that euer he could deuise, vntill he perceaued himself to be fallen into the contempt of his subiects, which was a way to performe the blow long before hand entended. Besides, he sheweth, how hee hath had diuers aduertisements euen by the next vnto the Duke of Guyze to beware of him, by whom he was in danger to loose both his life and crowne. Hee notifyeth to them, that considering the euill could not be auoyded, but by the death of the author: he was enforced to saue himselfe by slaying the sayd Duke of Guyze, the 23. of December. To preuent therefore all false reportes, hee was willing to let them vn∣derstand the truth of the matter, that all occasion of tumult (which might arise by false reportes) might be taken away. He certifyeth his Subiects that he intendeth to follow the warre, for the extirpation of heresy, and the mayntaining of the Romish religion. Hee sayth also that he declareth to them, that he will haue his subiectes eased as much as shall bee possible, and that he hath sent word vnto the de∣puties assembled in the Towne of Bloys, that he would haue the states en∣ded with all liberty. He warneth them also, that he will haue no partialities, leagues, associa∣tions,
nor intelligences among his subiects, and that they shall not here∣after acknowledge any other then him, who is their King ordayned of  God. He certifyeth them also, that he will suffer no longer the contempt of his authority, but will chastize them who shall offend in that behalfe. These informations were sent by the King into the Prouinces to the go∣uernors and Magistrates, to geue notice of the same to the people, least by false rumors, they should haue béen stirred vp to rebellion by the Leaguers, who were dispersed in all partes of the realme. But particularly he wri∣teth to the Lord Tageus his gouernour in Xainctonge and Engolesme, wil∣ling him to execute sharp punishment vppon them, who shall stirre vp any sedition. Within few daies after these things so passed at Bloys, the Q Mother dyed, who there had fallen sicke vppon the first assembling of the states: she had liued a long age (and too long for France, if it had beene Gods will that it should haue béene otherwise) for she hath beene the cheefest worker of all the great miseryes, and lamentable alterations which haue happened in France: hauing bewitched with her Sorceryes (as an other Circe hir countrey woman) her owne Children, and many Princes and Nobles of France, whom she transformed not in outward forme, but in conditions and qualityes of Tygers, Wolues, Foxes, Swine, and all maner of cruell beastes, and vncleane fowles, euen a number transformed into the nature of vncleane spirits and deuils. She neuer ceased from her enchantments, vntill by Gods iust iudgement she had destroied her owne children, house & family. To be short, she was a woman of a base birth and ability, bold to worke all iniquity and vnrighteousnes. Now wee haue to descrybe the conspiratours, and how they shifted for themselues. The three greatest domesticall enemies that euer France or any King had in his bosome, were the Duke of Guize, the Cardinall his brother, and the Q Mother, they three are smitten downe by the finger of God, as if it had béen with a thunderboult. The second sort of the conspirators (most dangerous and cruell beasts) were in hold, as the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Marquis Albeuf, the Guizes sonne, and Frier Archbishop of Lions, as is before said, and more the King might haue caught: and if the King had béen a carefull reuenger of Gods lawe, and had feared God more then man, they had drunke of the dregges of Gods iustice as their fellowes did. The third sort of conspirators were in the Kings sight, and within the Towne, as Chastre, Brissak, Boysdaulphin, and others, to whom hée for∣gaue the due punishment: and they did speake him fayre for a while, vntill they sawe an occasion to worke him mischiefe, as the sequell did verifie.
The fourth sort of the traytors were, some in the Towne, and many in the Suburbs, there lurking vntill the Duke of Guize would haue giuen  the watch word, readie to execute or to helpe him in the execution of his en∣terprise, there notwithstanding the shutting of the gates, either through the testimonie and guiltines of their consciences, or that the rumour that was spread, flying ouer the wall gaue them the alarum; so that they of the reformed religion did neuer depart out of S. Germayne suburbe on Bar∣tholmew day in the yeare 1572. as these fellowes departed out of Bloys without boates or other furniture. These most damnable traytors carrying abroade the rumours of the Duke of Guize, with amplification, and with deprauing of the Kings fact, did begin and aduaunce the rebellion, which answered afterward agaynst the King. The fift sort was of them, who the day before tooke it to bee a poynt of honour wherupon to challenge to the combat, if any man had called them Royals: now they on a sudden did hate outwardly worse then murther to bee called Guiziens: of this sort were the most part of the Priestes and Commons there assembled at the States, who by little and little slyding away one after another, caused through the most part of those Prouinces which had rooted out the Gospell from among thē, an vniuersall rebellion. The King forgetting his calling, to wit, to bee a publike reuenger of Gods lawe, and executer of his iustice, who commandeth him that his eye shall not take pitie vpon such abominable contemners of Gods ordinance and iustice, whose Image his person represented, fearing men more then GOD, and vnder the colour of clemencie consented to their crimes, and through impunitie approoued their misdéedes; God a righteous Iudge turned this his pusillanimitie to a snare and a blocke of offence, by the which he wrought his owne ouerthrowe and miserable end. Now leauing the euents which followed this tragedie played at Bloys, we will fetch other matters and exploits which were done in other places, that varietie may not onely delight the Christian Reader, but also stirre him vp to feare, tremble, and reuerence Gods iudgements. For not onely at Bloys he powred mightie streames of his wrath vpon the wicked, but al∣so in other places the Lord at the same time fed his enemies with shame, clothed them with dishonour, and rewarded them with confusion, and in all places deliuered his Saints. It is sayd before, how at the making and concluding of the edict of reu∣nion in Iuly last, it was agreed that two mightie Armies should be muste∣red and made vp with as much readines as it could be done: the one should be conducted by the Duke of Guize into Guienne; and the other vnder the leading of the Duke de Mayne into Daulphine, there to roote out them of the religion.
But yet the Duke of Guize aduised by his counsell, to wit, the Cardi∣nall his brother, and the Bishop of Lions, altered his purpose for three causes. First, the cause of religion which he pretended, was not the marke that he shot at, neither did he greatly care which of the two went backward or forward. Secondly, he perceaued how he went to cast himselfe into the hazard of warre, which is vncertaine, but specially agaynst such a Captayne who he∣therto had remained inuincible, and knewe with fewe how to ouercome great multitudes and mighty forces, whom hee feared as the slaue doth dread his Lord, whom he hath greeuously offended. Therfore he thought good not to hazard that way, but to reserue himselfe to a better opportu∣nity, which would be offered him ere long. The third cause was, that if he should absent himselfe farre from Paris it might be that the King would enterprise it there uppon, and carry it a∣way from him. Also, if he should absent himselfe from the Court, he were not able easily to bring to passe his intent, nor giue the blowe which he had in minde long before. Therfore another is to be sent, yet it must not be any suspected person. As for the Princes they are partiall in this cause, and being of great au∣thoritie of themselues, are not to bee armed with power, for els they may marre the play. The Marshals Byron and Haultmont are good noble men, good French men and valiant, they are Royals, and therfore we will haue none of them. For it were not good to arme them with such forces: for if wee say they should in the meane time execute our enterprise, whilest they had such an armie they might marre all, and begin a new tragedie vpon the players of the former. Therefore such a Generall must néedes bee appoynted, as may flatter with both sides, and that will turne to the strongest part, and if he should be lost in the battell it maketh no matter who that should be. The Duke of Neuers, of Nation an Italian, an Atheist by religion, a Spanyard by faction; a Leaguer and a Royall both, by policie and dissimulation; in No∣bilitie nouus homo. For here is to be noted, that in Italy there is no ancient Nobilitie remayning, except it bee the Vrsins and Colomuae, and some of the Patrilij in Venice. For all the rest (perhaps some fewe excepted) are fami∣lies raised vp within these few hundred yeares, out of Colliers, as the Me∣dicis, Porters and Chimney sweepers, during the vniuersall rebellion of Italy against the Emperours, vnder the factions of Guelpses and Gibelius: and the Popes bastards also are the stockes of many families, which now are accounted of the chiefest Nobilitie there, as the houses of Parma, Vr∣bines, &c.
This Duke of Neuers hanging about the skirts of the Q. Mother, ma∣ried the onely heires of the noble and ancient familie of Neuers, whose fa∣ther  was slayne at the battell of Dreulx, being of the house of Gonzages, neuer heard of before these eight score yeares. The noble Princes of the royall blood, the ancient Nobility of France are no men, but set behinde the doore; they may not lead the kings armies, not for lack of sufficiencie: Why then: Because they are suspected by the League, to be true to their king, good louers of their country, and too na∣turall to their kings subiects and fellow Citizens. Whilest therefore the States doe continue at Bloys and Rochel, the Kings armie in Nouember taking their iourney into Poytow, with great preparatiō, intending as wel to recouer the places occupied by them of the Religion, as also to beat the king of Nauarre; in which doing not on∣ly they should make an ende of the warre by rooting out vtterly them of the Religion, but also should recouer the losse of the honour of the ar∣mie, which a moneth before had beene buried at Coutras by the King of Nauarre. This armie was great and strong, consisting of Frenchmen, Swis∣sers, and Italians, hauing a great number of armed men. And as it mar∣ched forward, so still it increased. For light horses and Noble men, with other qualities out of all partes, out of the cities and communalties of the Prouinces neere about, as well of the one as of the other side of the Loyre, did voluntarylie ioyne themselues to it. And among others out of the low Poytow, were the Lords of Roches, Beatault of Bourneueau, Bou∣cherie, and Saint Andre, with their companies. The Duke of Neuers, as is sayd before, was generall, assisted with the Lord Chastre and Sagonne, two notable traytors Leaguers, and Lauer∣dine, loyall and faithfull to his Prince, with other Lords and Captaines, Ordinance, munition, and all kinde of preparation of warre was great. The greatest part of this armie as well of the heads and commaunders, as of the Nobilitie and others which did obey, were Leaguers and lea∣gued, who thought that they could neuer worke mischiefe enough. It is an incredible thing to heare the mischieues, hauock, and oppres∣sion which this armie did where it passed through, but specially to them of the reformed religion, who were found before them, both in their houses and abroad: the people, men and women, euen in diuers places the very cattell did flie before this armie, as before a thundering tempest, euen as a flock of sheepe before a heard of woolues, sauage beasts, or monsters ne∣uer seene before. Sultan Soliman, Siech, Selymogly, did neuer cary greater cruelty, sa∣uagenes, barbarousnes and terror, into Austrich and Slireland, when he came downe with three hundred thousand men to the siege of Vienne, than
did this rbble of turkish broode, monstrous Cyclops, God-contemners' and Gyancs, into their owne naturall countrey, yet doo not I speake of all  generally, but of the most part. Rochel, and other townes of safetie, round about were quickly repleni∣shed of exiled people out of Poytow, Britaine, Touraine, Landomoys, and other places nigh the soiourning of this armie: Euen many Catholickes fled into the townes of the reformed religion, abhorring, accursing, & de∣testing those misbegotten monsters. The first place where this flood spewed out of the Dragons mouth to haue drowned the woman which was in trauaile, I meane this army was stayed, was before Mauleon, which is a small towne, feeble, and of no strength at all. There is in the same a Castell, which is of no better de∣fence than the towne. The king of Nauarre (as it is sayd) after the taking of Beauuoyre, lest within the same towne, the Lord Viliers Charlemaigne for gouernour, with a certaine number of Souldiers, not for to obstinate themselues vp∣on that naughty place (which was not able to resist a farre lesser than a royall armie) but for to keepe the field, and for to refresh himselfe. The armie descending from Turenne tooke way to Mauleon, about the 13, of Nouember. The forerunners of the armie shewed themselues: the garison there would not dislodge for them, but made a shew as though they would hold the place. But forces arriuing more and more vnlooked for, at length the Ordinance was brought before the place. The Lord Viliers seeing that, determined to capitulate by the meanes of the Lord Lauerdine, the cap∣tayne, and one Croix were appoynted to conclude the capitulation. The Lord Miraumont Sargeant maior of the battell, was sent for ho∣stage to Mauleon for safety. From Mauleon went forth also for hostage Captayne Laudebrix. The agreement was made and concluded with small aduantage to them who were besieged within the towne: for the Lords Brigneulx, and Chastiagueray did draw nigh the walles of the Town, which were already forsaken by the garrison, and not defended: and after they had pulled down few stones by surprising, and contrary vnto the agreement, entred into the towne, did kill and wound all them whom they found both of the garrison, and also of their owne side; notwithstanding the resistance and reproofe which the sayd Lord Miraumont could do, for to let such a treacherous vnfaithfulnes vnworthy of men of warre. The passion of these leagued Souldiers was shewed so disordered and barbarous, that they compelled the sayd Lord Miraumont to saue himselfe into the castell, with the remainant of the garrison which had escaped, for many had béene most vilanously slaine after they had yeelded their armor,
some did saue themselues by flight, casting themselues ouer the wall; other were hurt; some taken and spoyled of all that euer they had, contrary to the  agreement. The Lords Chastre and Lauerdine, aduertised of this disorder, hasted thether, and caused (although very late) the killing to cease, and conducted the rest of them who had escaped, beyond the riuer Seure, toward Fonteney. After this exploit done, the army marched straight way toward the Towne and Castell of Montagne, at the solicitation of them of Nantes, and Nobility of Aniou, and low Poytow, who were not of the religion, who altogether receaued by it many discommodities: the most part of Gentle∣men hauing retyred, some to Nantes and some to Angers: and they all de∣sired to haue that thorne out of their heele. Some were yet remayning in Poytow vnder the protections of the King of Nauarre, wayting for the oc∣casion to stirre at the comming of that army. This towne and castle of Montagne pertained to the Prince of Conde, which by the outrages of some of the countrey and neighbours had béen sur∣prised, and the walles so beaten downe, that there was no hope left that a∣ny warre could be made there. Notwithstanding, the Lord Colombieres whom wee haue said to haue brought certaine companies vnto the King of Nauarre out of Normandy, with his yongest sonne called Lucerne, & some companies with them had seazed vpon it: the towne was very little repai∣red of the former ruine and decay, which was great; the castell had béene better relieued, trenched and made commodious. The Lord Colombieres commaunded there; the King of Nauarre had sent thether beside to streng∣then the said towne the Lord Preau, with foure companies of his regiment at the approching of that army: for his two other companies had béen sent to Ganache, and other places. All that could bee in that place of footmen was about three hundred, and besydes, there might be about fifty Harquebuziers on horsebacke. There was in that place reasonable store of victuals for the time that they were minded to defend it, as well in wine (whereof there was aboue foure hundred pipes) as in corne, meale, salt, béefe, and other necessary mu∣nitions for mans life. About the 25. of Nouember, the Lord Miramont Sargeant maior of the army, accompanied with the Harquebusiers on horsback of the army, lighted at the Barillery, where afterward the Lord Neuers lodged, and from thence went with his company to view the place, and to make his ap∣proches. Captayne Beauuoys, and Beuf, leaders of the company of the Lord Co∣lombieres went out with a certaine number of souldiers to receaue them. The skirmish endured very hot a good hower and a halfe, and there were slayne of the side of the enemies Brichanteau, sonne to the Lord Bigueulx,
and many others, for whome there was great mone made in the army. Go now truce-breaker Brigueulx, & learne yet once to breake the pub∣like  fayth at Mauleon. Captayne Beuf, who issued forth out of the towne, was shot with a pel∣let in the thigh. After this skirmish ended, euery man retyred, and the e∣nemie went to lodge at the Barrillery. The two dayes following, passed a∣way in light skirmishes. The 29. the armie made approches on the side of the heath Buor. Then the Lord Preau issued out, so there was a fierce skirmish, in the which were layed on the ground a great many of the enemies, but none of the towne that euer came to knowledge. The enemies who had begunne their trenchs, were compelled by the sayd skirmishes to giue ouer their worke for that time. After that about eight dayes past, before that the Ordinance could ar∣riue, for the continuall rayne, floodes and foule wayes, which were the beginning of the sourge of that armie of sauage robbers. The eighth of December the Cannon arriued, and there passed three dayes before it was occupied. But the eleuenth of December, the Duke of Neuers saluted the towne with certaine volies of twelue pieces of ordinance, and at the same istant summoned them to render the towne. Whether the Lord Colombieres had beene already labored & wonne by some friends, whom he might haue had in the armie or otherwise, so it fell out, that vpon the summons hee shewed vnto the garrison, what small apparance there was to obstinate that place against an armie, and amplifiyng the great discommodities and inconueniences which might ensue, concluded to render the place, adding as some afterward haue reported, certayne discontentments which he said he had receiued, which did discourage him in the performance of that ser∣uice, to which the occasions and many other reasons did binde him. The Lord Preau on the other side, said, that the place might be reaso∣nably defended, That he was seruant to the king of Nauarre, to whom he had promised to keepe faithfully that place, so long as the skill of warre would permit him, and that his credit did restrayne him from consening to the rendring thereof. Out of this diuersitie of affections the diuision began, which after∣ward was the cause of the so sodaine losse of the place. The Lord Colombieres had on his side ye Harquebusiers on horseback, which had followed him, & were there in garrison. The Lord Preau had on his side his soure companies, some voluntary gentlemē and strangers: betweene them both were laboured by each partie: of the inhabitants there were few or none. t after long reasoning, Colombieres the gouernour caryed it away,
knowing very wel yt the enemie was not ignorant of that diuision, and sent to the camp, Captayne Courbe his lieftenant, to offer agreement to the  L. of Neuers, who tooke great pleasure in this occasion. For the soiourne of 15. dayes before that plate, in so fowle weather, in so great scarsitie of victualls as was in that armie, was a second wound of his dissipation. The tearme of this agreement was so short, that the king of Nauarre being vpon the poynt to succour them, was compelled to breake his enter∣prize, although it was agreed that the king of Nauarre should haue beene aduertized of it. The conditions of the agreement, were that the colours should be ren∣dered, the souldiers should goe forth with their match out, and the gentle∣men with their furniture, that they should all be conducted by a Herault and a trompet, as farre as Saint Albine, with condition that they should retyre within three dayes. The L. Colombieres conducted all the Garrison about halfe a league, and then he asked if yt there were any in the companies that would follow him: but almost all refused. Captaine Courbe with six or seauen more, as well of his houshold seruants as others, followed him. So he taking his leaue, and induced either with discontentment, or with some other affec∣tion, he ioyned himselfe to that armie. The rest of the troups were safely conducted nigh as farre as Lussen and Saint Gemmes, and were left there vpon the conditions abouesaid, by the Herault and Trompet. But the Lord Sagonne, Colonel of the light horsemen, did so cut the time prefixed (that desirous as it was supposed to reuenge the death of some friend of his in that armie, who had been slayn before in that place) surprized those companies who were at S. Albine, and charged them so hardly, that scarce they had time to get into a church, and to shut themselues therein. They were without munition of necessa∣ry things, so that they were cōpelled to render themselues yet once againe hauing little resisted. This composition was not like the first, for they had onely their liues: they were vnarmed and ryfled, and some few were slaine. With a speedy retire they might haue auoyded that iniurie. Montagne so surrendred; the towne of Ganache was greatly threatned. The Marquesse of Belisle, who made his abode at Maschecow, desired greatly to be dicharged of such neighbours. And besides, this place was very fit for him, if by the meanes of that armie he coulde haue gotten it. This place pertained to the Lady of Landimoys, of the house of Rohan, who had retired to Nantes, obaying the kings Edict concerning the alte∣ration of religion. The King of Nauarre had giuen the gouernement of this place, to the L. Plessis Gette, the which diuers times, but specially a few dayes afore the siege, had been greatly laboured by the said Lady, & also by the Marquesse
of Belisle, with faire and large promises, to yéeld the place into their hands, to whome he would neuer hearken, but determined to keep it faithfully. The towne of Ganache, being distant from Montagne but seauen leagues, the Lord Plessis fore seeing the siege, dispatched withall diligence to the King of Nauarre (who was at Rochel) the Lord Sabloniere and Ies∣serant, to let him vnderstand the small commodities that they had, to holde that place against a royall army. That notwithstanding the saide Lorde Plessis, with the rest of the Captaines with him, had determined to doo him good seruice, so that he would furnish them with meanes. At these newes, the King dispatched the Baron Vignoles, with all his companies, to strengthen that place. He sent also by sea, two Captaines of the regiment of his gardes, vnder the conduct of the Lordes Aubiguy, and Robiniere, who imbarked themselues part at Rochel, with powder, pikes, and other munition of warre, part at Esande. But the contrarie windes caused them to cast anker at the Iland of Rhe, where they stayed eyght daies for winde: during which time, many being sea sick were found wanting, so that at the imbarking againe, in stead of two hundred, were found fewer in number. The Lord Plessis in the meane time laboured hard in the places where was most neede, and caused the victuals, as well for men as for horses, to be brought in out of the vilages round about. The L. Ruffigny arriued there, with 50. Harquebusiers on horseback, by the cōmandement of the said King, in staying ye succor which came by sea. Ganache is compounded of a towne and Castell, situated in the borders of Poytow and Britayn, yet holding more of Poytow, it is distant from the sea three leagues, with an open prospect on that side: of the side of Mon∣tagne, and Maschecow, it is woody and couered. There is a great poole, which compasseth a great part of the towne, vppon the Castell side, which with diuers brookes, watereth the great medowes about it, that maketh the waies to the towne moorish and foule, but specially in winter. The said poole dooth compasse almost two parts of the towne, to wit, from the suburb Saint Leonard, to the suburb of Saint Thomas, which is al the side of the Castell. The towne is compassed with an indifferent good ditch, cut out of a rock; the wall is auncient, flancked with small towers, and made with loope holes, after the olde fashion; it was found better to resist the cannon, then it was thought it would bee, specially on the side where it was battered, the which for being too feeble and naked, (hauing but an olde gate) the Lord Plessis had fortified and couered with a spurre, assoone as he had the gouernement of that place, which did him good seruice during the siege. Hee made two bulwarkes more on the other side of the towne, toward thsuburb Saint Thomas, the one to couer a tower of the Castell, made af∣ter
the forme of a horseshoo, the other nigh vnto the causie, which dooth kéep the issue of the poole: ten dayes before the siege, which was the fourth of  December, hee builded another fort, which dooth couer the gate of the towne towards Maschecow, without the which, the enemy euen the first night of the siege, might haue lodged hard to the wall, that place being not flanked with any thing. The worke began to goe forward, after the succour ariued by the sea, with the munitions of warre, of whome a part was sent to Beauuoyre, by the commaundement of the King of Nauarre, to wit, they which were of the regiment of Valirant, who had embarked themselues with them, who were sent to Ganache. The Baron Vignoles, a Gentleman of Gascoyne, entred into Ganache, as also the Lord Saint George, by the King of Nauarre his commaunde∣ment, with his companie of 50. Harquebusiers on horseback. There was then none of all the forts of sufficient defence, vpon which occasion, they de∣uided ye quarters, as wel for the defence, as for to labour about the fortifica∣tions, euery one in his quarter, with such diligence as necessity required. The Baron Vignoles, with his captaines Piue, and Solas, tooke on him the keeping of the fort of the causy, right against a broaken chappel of Saint Thomas suburbs. This fort was commaunded by a little hill, coue∣red with fruitefull trees, and also by the suburb, for which cause they coue∣red themselues with barricadoes and Gabions. The two companies of the Kings gardes, which were commaunded by the Lordes Aubiguy and Robiniere, vndertooke the keeping of the fort of the tower, which we haue saide to haue the forme of a horseshooe. The Lord Ruffigny with his companie, vndertooke to keepe the fort of the suburb Saint Leonard, which was the best, hauing the ditches full of water of the height of 9. foote. Captaine Beauregard, who commanded ouer the company of the Har∣quebusiers on horseback, of the ordinarie garison: vndertooke to make a fort at one of the corners of the towne, but it was a worke of long time, and serued but a little, and cost much to keepe, and was not begon, but in hope that Montagne, which was already besieged, would debate longer then it did, notwithstanding, they laboured about it continually: and whereas the Captaine Beauregard had not aboue 18. Harquebusiers of his owne, halfe of the companie of the Lord Saint George was giuen him. The two captaines of the two companies of footemen, ordained for the ordinary gar ion, did drawe the lots to whome should remaine the fort which was begun at the gate; so it fell to the lot of Captaine Ferriere, who laboured so hard, that euen in ten dayes during the siege, it was made defensible, and serued to good effect. The other companie of the garison, vnder the commaundement of the
Lord Forestiere, a noble man of Britaine, was appoynted for the garde of the Castle, and the Doue house which was in the garden. The charges so deuided, euery man doth labour; some doo pull downe  the Suburbs; others goe about the Countrey to get men to labour: for there was none of the inhabitants left in the Towne, not so much as an ar∣tificer, but only a butcher. The Lord Plessis aduertised of the surrendring of Montagne, sent foorth his forerunners to scoure the countrey: they reported the 14. day of De∣cember that part of the armie was alreadie lodged at Lege. The morrowe was discouered a great troupe of horsemen, who appeared aboue the mils of Porrieres to view the Towne. The Lord Perrine, Lieutenant of the companie of the light horses of the Gouernour, (who had retyred before to his own house, supposing there to passe part of the winter) returned into the Towne about three daies be∣fore the siege, and went out with foure or fiue light horses to view them. The 16. day of December againe very early he went out on horseback, but he had not passed aboue halfe a mile when he found the forerunners of the enemie, whereof he aduertised the Gouernour. About 11. of the clocke there marched a great number of horsemen, conducted by ye Lord Sagonne, followed of many regiments of Chastiagueray, Brigueulx, Leslele, and o∣hers, who in hast aduanced to get the Suburbe of S. Leonard. These troupes discouered by the L. Perrine, hee turned face to them to hold them play, & to giue time to them of the Town to prepare to receaue them: which thing could not be done so timely, but that when the bel began to ring for the alarum, the enemie was at the entring of the Suburbe. The L. Ruffigny went to meete them with sword in hand, & resolutely followed by the Lord Vignoles and Maretes, sons to the Lord Sabboniere, and some other Souldiers of their companies with them approached nigh them. But the L. Ruffigny, for not hauing had leisure totake his Corslet, entring into a house where he sawe the enemies lodge, receiued a pellet in his stomacke, whereof (being carried thence) two houres after he dyed. This his death was occasion that the Suburbs were lost vnto the Cha∣pell sooner then otherwise it had béen. Captaine Iahn and fifteene Soul∣diers (besides them who were wounded) of the enemies side were slaine, aswell within the sayd house as in the Suburbes, as afterward some of the enemies reported. For to rescue them who did fight, came the Baron Vignoles, with Cap∣taine Forestiere, and 40. Souldiers harquebusiers, who defended all the day that which rested of the Suburbe betweene the Chapell and ye towne. There was wounded Captaine Mote, Standard bearer of the Lord Vig∣noles, with a pellet in the highest part of the thigh, whereof he dyed fewe dayes after. There was before the towne gate beyond an olde hollow way, certaine houses somewhat ruinous. The Lord S. George (the alarum be∣ing
giuen) went to lodge within the same ruinous houses, assisted aswell of his owne, as of some armed men of the companie of the Gouernour, to  helpe the harquebusiers if they should be forced. There also the enemie pre∣sented all his forces, and sent to begin the skirmish, which was sustayned and continued vntill night; so that the enemie was not able to lodge with∣in the sayd ruinous houses without great losse: and seeing the obstinacie of them within, lodged in a village vpon the way to Maschecow. They of the towne lost a souldier, and the Lord Coulee was there wounded. The night following, the regiment of Brigneulx and Chastiagueray, who had gotten the Suburbe of S. Leonard, lodged in the houses nigh to the Chappell which were pulled downe. Notwithstanding, they could not set vp any Barricadoes, by reason of the continuall shot which did raine out of the Forts and Curtine; so that they could not get out of ye houses. All the dayes following, to wit, from the 16. vnto the 29. of December, passed away in continuall skirmishes, as the enemie made his approaches for to lodge, but specially at the comming of the regiments of the Countie of Beaupre, who went about to lodge at the Planches: for there commonly began the skirmishes, which neuer ended but commonly by the death of some of commandement of the side of the enemie. Like skirmishes were daily fought on the side of the Poole, against ano∣ther regiment which was lodged at Guinefole, where certaine Gascoynes of the garison came to hand blowes with the enemie. All these skirmishes were so fauourable to them of the Towne, that beside the first day they lost not one man, onely some were hurt; so that the enemie could not (during all these skirmishes) get any aduauntage vppon them, not so much as the hedges within foure hundred paces of the Curtine and Forts. Euen ten dayes after they were besieged, they issued foorth and pulled downe cer∣taine houses in the sight of the enemie, and burned others, and among them a house called Escraziere, from whence the enemie who had lodged therein, was driuen out with losse of certaine men. The horsemen also did issue foorth, and tooke so great number of prisoners, that they were enforced to send back a great many of them that were most vnprofitable: they kept a great number to worke at the fortifications; others of greater calling were put to their raunsome. The Lord Chastre, accompanied with ten or twelue hundred horses, passed at the Planches to the place where the Lord of Neuers was; and sée∣ing certaine horsemen who were issued out of the Towne when he would haue gone to view, and aduaunced somewhat for that purpose, his horse fell in a ditch, and had not béen the diligence of them of his companie in succouring of him, and that he was couered with a great number of har∣quebusiers which followed those horsemen, hee had béen taken by them of the Towne.
As thinges did so passe there, the Lord Plessis sent diuers times to the King for to aduertise him of the state of the affayres, and by the same mes∣sengers  had answere againe. Whilest these skirmishes and blowes were geuen at Ganache the artil∣lery was brought from Montagne, and tooke the way of Maschecow for to auoyd the foulnes of the other way: they were whole fifteene dayes before they could conuay the said ordinance, although they of the Countrey did shew themselues so desyrous and ready to conduct the sayd ordinance, that they omitted nothing of all their meanes, industrie and labour: but speci∣ally the Lord Belisle, for the desire which hee had to possesse that place. There was of that artillery twelue peeces of Ordinance vz. sixe canons of battery, foure great Culuerins, and two of a meaner sort. This Ordinance being arriued the 21. of December about noone, the Duke of Neuers set his army in battell array, and saluted the towne with a voley of all these peeces, from the top of a little hill nigh the place of exe∣cution about fiue hundered paces from the towne. That being done, he sent an Herault of armes to sommon the Lord Plessis, to surrender him the towne as vnto the Kings lieutenant. The Lord Plessis, by the aduise of al the captaines, answered, that he and all his fellowes were most humble and faithfull seruantes and subiectes to his maiesty: but that hee did not acknowledge in all Guienne any other lieutenant generall for the King, but onely the King of Nauarre, to whom (& to none other, if it were not by his expresse commaundement) hee would surrender that place. The Herauld was yet sent twise from the Baron Paluan, and the Lord Villeneufue of Anjou, for to find the means to speake to the Lord Plessis, who knowing the importance of such parley, flatly refused it. At the selfe same time that the army did so muster in battell aray in the sight of all men, a souldier Wallon of the companies of Picardie, with his sword in hand drawen, began to runne ouerthwart a great medow right to the Fort of Captaine Beauregard, crying viue Nauarre: the Duke of Guyze is dead, and Niort is taken: that voice was so high, that it was heard of both sides; they let flie at him diuers shot, but not one did hit him, but on∣ly in his hat. They of the towne were fully aduertised by him of the state of the armie, and of the strange euents which had happened at Bloys. They vnderstood also of the exploit which the King of Nauarre had donein igh Poytow since the siege. All these newes brought not only great ioy to them of the towne, but also encreased their courage. The Duke of Neuers hauing receaued answere of the besieged, caused his Ordinance to bee planted in certaine ruinous houses on the one side of Maschecow, defended with certaine Gabions, which caused them besieged to thinke that they should bee battered of that side, where they also began
to crench themselues with great labour and dilligence. But now wee will leaue the siege of Ganache, whilest the Duke of Ne∣uers doth prepare his battery, to make a breach, and maketh himselfe rea∣dy  to giue the assault, and also the besieged do prepare themselues to defend the place, and receaue the enemie: and wee will goe to see what exploits the King of Nauarre hath performed in high Poytow. It is sayd before, how the King of Nauarre after the taking of Beau∣uoyre, set garrisons in the townes of Poytow, to keepe the countrey about, and to make head against that army which was comming with great pre∣parations, might, fury, and threatnings: which thing beeing done, hereti∣red to Rochel, to gather all his power, and to prouide all necessary things, either to crosse, or to geue battell to that army if occasion might serue. And whilest these blowes and skirmishes aboue sayd, did so passe at the siege of Ganache, and such strange and so vnlooked for euents did fall out at Bloys, the Lord Saint Gelays had long before hand curiously sought out the meanes to enterprise vpon the towne of Niort, as well to do seruice to them, whose part he followed (the inhabitants hauing béen alwayes of the chiefest of the League, and great enemies to them of the reformed re∣ligion) as also for the iniuries which they of the sayd Towne proffered vn∣to him, and to his houses thereabouts, doing vnto him all the wrongs that euer they could deuise. The King of Nauarre arriued from Rochel into Poytow, vnderstood as well by the sayd Lord Saint Gelays, and by others of the enterprise vpon the said towne of Niort, but the execution thereof was oftentimes delayd: at length the sayd King hauing with a type iudgement wayed all the cir∣cumstances, and seene the facility of the means to compasse that enterprise, at length ended his counsell, with resolution to try speedily the execution thereof: and for that purpose departed from Rochel to Saint Ihan d'Ange∣ly vnder other colours, about the 21. of December. The 24. of December, the Lord Saint Gelays departed from Rachel, accompanied with the Lord Ranques, with ten horsmen of his traine only, and arryued at Saynt Iahn about nine a clocke in the night. The 26. of December, arriued at S. Iahn early (at the first opening of the gates) a Post from Bloys riding with two Horses, who sayd that vo∣luntarily he had departed from Bloys, to bring newes to the King of Na∣uarre, touching the death of the Duke of Guyze. These newes did not stay the execution of the enterprise, so that the said King hauing geuen order to the men of warre which should be at the exe∣cution, and appointed them who should conduct them, to wit, the Lordes Parabiere, Harābure, Preau, and others, the Lord S. Gelays & Ranques, with twelue horsemen onely departed from S. Iahn, and making toward Villeneufue within a league from Saint Iahn, met about 40. Harquebu∣ziers
on horse backe of the regiment of the King of Nauarre his guards, who were conducted by the Lord des Listres: with this troupe the said  Lords Saint Gelays & Ranques went the way that goeth to the left hand of the Forest. Thence (beeing yet day) the Lord Ranques accompanied with ten or twelue Harquebusiers, left the Lord Saynt Gelays, and went the way to Foys: he was far gone on his way when he met with ten or twelue horse∣men of the enemies, who were thought to bee Albaneses: hee char∣ged them, and one was flaine, the rest saued themselues in the forrest of Chizai. In the meane time while the Lord Saint Gelays, with the rest of his troupe went the crosse way nigh to the towne Saint Plausiue, where the Lords Parabiere, Harambure, & Preau, with others who folowed him to the nūber of 350. men, with sixe mules, carrying the ladders & other necessary thīgs which met ye said Lord S. Gelays: ther they staied awhile for the rest of the troupe, all assembled together, which might be in number between three and foure hundered men Harquebuziers, and three or foure score ar∣med men. All this companie tooke their way toward Niort, with as much silence as could be, to the gate Saint Gelays. The Lord Ranques separated himselfe, as is saide before, to scoure the countrey, the way which goeth to Saint Jhans gate of Niort, to see that no man might goe into the towne, to giue aduertisement of the things which were done abroad. There were left behinde all the companies, two seruants of the Lord Saint Gelays, who went on foote, they followed their master the way of County, to Niort. A countrey man was sent to Niort, by the Lord Ferriere, Lieutenant of the companie of the Lorde Ma∣licorne, who then was in his house at County. This countrey man did ca∣ry letters from the saide Lord Ferriere, to the gouernour or to the Lieute∣nant of Niort (a man Leagued turbulent, and at whose beck all the inha∣bitants did tremble) with aduertisement, that already he had warned them twise to take heede, for although the report went, that the Hugonets were going to Coignak, it was fained, for certainely they had returned back, and went straightly to them. And that he feared least his men had been taken, seeing that he had not receaued since any newes, which thing caused him to send to them the third time that countrey man, to aduertise them careful∣ly to take heede. These seruants of the Lord Saint Gelays, asked the coun∣trey man whether he goeth: He answereth to Niort: and we also say they, but we feare it will be too late to come thether in time, for it was sunne set∣ting: care not for that saith the countrey man, for I can get in and if it were midnight, for I bring letters to the Lord Malicorne. The seruants hea∣ring that, and perceauing that the countrey man had the letters within a
ball of earth, which he carried in his hand, forced him, tooke his letters from him, and lead him with them, and meeting the Lord Ranques at the rendes¦vous,  at the winde mill, tooke him the letters, with the countrey man. When he had read them, hee shewed the same to the Lords Saint Gelays, Parabiere, and others when they came. This had been enough to put them out of heart: but in vaine dooth the garde of the citie watch, when God will surprise it, there is neither safety nor counsell against his power. The insolency of the inhabitants of Niort against the King of Nauarre, and them of the religion, was come to a full measure. For notwithstan∣ding the great doubt, least they of the towne had been aduertised of their enterprise, at the instat request of some, they determined to goe through. The troupes had already lighted a great halfe league off in the valey, nigh Vouilay, and had left their horses made fast, with certaine seruants to keepe them: they caused the Mules which caried the ladders, and other ne∣cessarie things, to goe through the fieldes vnto a quarrie of stone nigh the towne, and distant onely from the wall a bow shoot: there were the ladders vnloaden and destributed to them that should occupie them. There were prepared the petar shy two Gentlemen, named Vilesan and Gentil, who being very industrious in such things, should vse them, which were brought within a stones cast of the wal, and the ladders also, and all in the high way that leadeth from Chiçay, to the gate Saint Gelays: all this stirre passed without any perceauing of them within the towne. The Moone was not downe, nor went not downe foure houres after, which increased greatly the feare of them who did enterprise, least they should be discouered, yet they determined to abide patiently in silence, both the great and extreame cold, and also the going downe of the Moone, at whose shining, many lying vpon the frosen hard ground, did sleepe (being wearie of their long iourney) more swéete then if they had béene in their beddes. In the meane while, the Lordes Ranques, Valieres, Gentil, and others went to view the ditch, and the place where the ladders should bée set vp, and the gates where the Petars should be applyed. When they had viewed all, and sawe that nothing did stirre in the towne, and had made their report, they began to let downe the ladders into the drye ditch, by an easie path, and also to set the Petars to their places. The first company ofskaling ladders, was conducted by the Lords Ranques, Vali∣eres, Ionquieres and others, guided by a Souldier named Reuaudiere. At the second companyes of ladders, were the Lords Preau, Arambure, and des Listres, followed by the men which they had in their companies. The Lord Saint Gelays and Parabiere went to the gate of Saint Ge∣lays, where the Petars should play. The scalado was set vp at the wall of the towne, distant from the saide gate of Saint Gelays about thirtie or fortie paces.
They who caried the Ladders were not so soone descended into the ditch, but the Sentinel which was vpon the wall (farre from the place  of the scalado about forty paces) demaunded furiously: who goeth there: they without held stil without answere. He which commaunded the guard of the towne (which was vpon the gate of Saint Gelays) came forth and asked the Sentinel: who is there: The Sentinel answered, I heard some noyse, but it is nothing. There happened then a great darknes (as commonly doth after the going down of the Moone) which did fauour greatly them which were without, to steale away from the eyes of the Sentinel: for without any knowledge of the said Sentinel the Ladders were placed safely. It had been conclu∣ded betweene them that were to giue the assault, that they should enter as many as they could by the scalado, and tha the Petars should not play vntil an extremitie: so that surprize was begun by the scalado. The Lad∣ders then lincked one within another (for they were made with such an art) were applyed to the wall of ten foote in height, distant one from the other three or foure paces. The Lords Ionquieres and Sousonbre being vpon the wall, followed with fiue and twentie or thirtie next vnto the Sentinell, cast the sais Sen∣tinell ouer the wall, and as the remnant went vp the walls, the sayd Ion∣quieres, Sousonbre, with the Lords des Listres and Preau, and about fiftie with them set vpon the garde, where were seauen or eight poore labouring men, for the rich men of the towne were asléepe in their beds: for as they afterward reported, many of them had passed the most part of the night in playing and dansing, to whom no harme was done, considering the silence which they kept. A souldier of them which were entred, apprehending the great daunger of such a small number in such a mightie and populous Towne, cryed to set fire to the Petars: so that which was set at the gate of S. Gelays, shot and gaue the alarume to the inhabitants, it did open the gate with the shot. The other also was fired and brake the drawne bridge, and opened the gate. The Lord S. Gelays and Parabiere, with many other Gentlemen and Souldiers armed entred thereby. They who entred by the scalado di slide close (although few in number) a long streate, and went to the market place, where some of the inhabi∣tants running out of their houses, made shew of some resistance, & there was hurt the Lord Harambure. At the same instant came to thē the Lord Parabicre with his traine, they cryed to the inhabitants to put lights at the windowes, and in the streats, who hearing Viue Nauarre, and sup∣posing that it was a surprize, were affrayde, and obeyed thē, for they durst ot disobey being in a maze.
The other parte of them which had got vp by the ladders, found resi∣stance in a corner of the streate nigh the hospitall. For a certaine man of the towne, nāmed prince receiuer of the tallages, rising early to write let∣ters  to his children, being Schollers at Poyiers, at the alarum giuen went out of his house wth a broad Target in his left hand, and his sword in his right hand. But he forgot to set the scarfe of his Target about his neck, which turned to him displeasure. For hauing resorted to the Lief∣tenaunt of the towne, who was accompanyed with some of the inhabi∣tans and souldiers of the gouernours guarde, they with all this compa∣nie set furiously vpon them who had entred, and did aduance into the towne, and did driue them back. But the sayde Prince, weary with the waight of his Target, either for that he was hurt or otherwise, gaue it o∣uer: So that this being done, the rest began to wauer. The Liefetenant was hurt, and as dispairing of his life, put himself into the hands of some gentlemen, with promise of great ransonie, and therupon he was hidden, that it could not be knowen where he was, vntil after his death. The rest of the people which tooke weapons, did assemble together in the streate of the town house: they let flee certaine shott, but without ef∣fect, for incontinently they lost courage, as it falleth out ordinarily in such sodayne surprizes, specially where the warnings are neglected, as had beene done by this Liefetenant of Niort, disdaynfully few dayes before. Some cast themselues ouer the walls, whereof some were slayn; others were let down with cordes; many retyred into the Castell: others did hide themselues: so that these few companyes of the King of Nauarre in lesse space than three quarters of an houre entred, vanquished, and remained masters of the place, without any losse more than of fiue men. There was slaine of the inhabitants of the towne, betweene fiue and twenty and thir∣tie, & yet the greatest part of them for going indiscreetly to the place of the alarum with lincks and torches, which serued for leuell to the Souldiers in the dark to shoote at them. When the day began to appeare, the souldiers wandred about for the spoyle which was made in the houses, but so that it was done without a∣ny murther, or rauishing of woman or maide. And so much as was done, happened because it was impossible for the leaders wholy to represse it: For it was a town leagued ful of thē yt had their hands yet defiled with the blood of them of the religion, whom they had euery way cruelly handled, & were rich by the spoile of their goods, of such as had deserued the iust in∣dignation of the King of Nauarre, against whom they had behaued them∣selues no lesse rashly than presumptuously. To be short, it was a towne surprized by them, in whose affectiōs they had kindied the firebrand of te∣uenge, if the conqueter would haue vsed it: Yet all was doone with as much moderatenes, as the circumstance of the action, of the place, and of
the persons with whome they had to doo could permit. The richest sorte, and of the greatest calling, enemies to the resormed Religion, were quist, in redeeming their liues and goods by a small sum  of money, small in respect of the whole. For such as had tenne or fifteene thousand Francks, were quit for two or three hundred crownes. The leaders dispatched incontinently a messenger to Saint Iahn, to the King of Nauarre, to let him vnderstand the newes of that execution. About nine a clock in the morning, the Lord Malicorne who was in the Castell, was sommoned to yeeld himselfe and the place, at the discretion of the King of Nauarre. There was no meanes for him to yeeld, for all the Ordinance was in the towne: Hostages were giuen on both sides, two Gentlemen, to wit, Despaue and Rousiere, went foorth of the Castell for the Lord Malicorne, and the Lord Pont of Corle, with two souldiers of the guards of the King of Nauarre entred into the Castell, to lette the disorder that might rise there. The seauen and twentith day, the King of Nauarre arriued there with a certaine number of horsemē, he receiued at his comming the sayd Lord Malicorne very courteously, to whome hee permitted to carry out of the Castell all that was his, and graunted to the Lady Malicorne to enioy the Abbey of Saint Ligaire. The eight and twentith, after yt the Lord Malicorne had departed out of Niort, the Liefetenant was found dead in a poore house at the gate of Saint Gelays, where he died of the wounds which he had receiued in the conflict, his bodie was brought out to be hanged on a Gibbet before the Castell. The K. of Nauarre (notwithstanding) graunted it easily to his friends to be buried, although be had deserued some notable marke of dishonour, e∣uen after his death; for he had liued very seditiously, and had sworne to the League, one of the first, he had cruelly defiled his hands with the bloud of many innocent persons, vnder the colour that they were of the religion. And not long before had committed an act, no lesse odious and cruell, than felonious: for he had caused the dead body of the great Prouost of France, to bée drawne through the streates of the towne, after hee had béen slaine in the fight, nigh the walls of the towne, and that a little before his surprise, as is afore said. There was one Iamart, of the richest sort of the towne taken, who be∣ing vpon the point to be put to his ransom, and to be deliuered as the other inhabitants then were, was accused euen by many of the romish religion, and of the towne, to haue been a man of wicked life, who had committed many things punishable by the lawes. He was conuicted to haue been one of the chiefest doers in the sedition of the League, and had vnworthley, and outragiously spoken against the principall Princes of the bloud, his pro∣ces
was made according to the crimes committed by him. This was the onely man, who was iudicially executed at the surprise. There were found in that towne fiue great pieces of battery, carying halfe a foot and an ynch in the mouth, two very long Culuerins, which the Lieutenant abouesayd had caused to be cast (as he sayd in dirision) to sa∣lute the King of Nauarre, when hee should approach the walls of Niort. There were found also two meane culuerins: the fiue canons were made ready a new by workemen, specially called from Paris for that purpose, for to bee brought to the army of the Duke of Neuers, for the siege of Fonte∣ney, which was intended after the winning of Ganache. This towne was full of rich men and riches, by reason of the spoyle of them of the reformed religion, of all the countrey round about. There was sufficient quantitie of corne, to maintaine an armie of twen∣tie thousand men for the space of two yeres. There was also sound twenty thousand weight of powder, besides a maruelous quantitie which euery man had in particular. This is a rule of Gods iustice, he that spoyleth, shal be spoyled, he that wasteth shall be wasted. The King of Nauarre gaue the gouernement of that place, and of the countrey, to the Lord Saint Gelays: the Lorde Parabiere was appointed to dwell in the Castell. To conclude this booke with the yeare (Christian reader) thou maist see with thine eye, ye iudgements of God executed vpon his enemies generally for their Idolatry, superstition, and atheisme. But specially vpon Henry the third, for obstinacie, in refusing (through the hardnes of his heart) to heare the Lorde Christ speaking vnto him, and warning him to bee wise, and feare the Lord with reuerence, in refusing the counsell of wise & noble Princes Senators, noble men, and faithful friends, and following alwaies the vniust and wicked counsels of his mother, of flatterers, and sicophants, but specially of his domesticall enemies, by whose counsels and perswasi∣ons he lost his authoritie, credit, reputation, kingdome and life, as shall be said in the booke next following. Thou hast seene also, how the Lord out of the heauens, from the habita∣tion of his seate, hath derided & laughed to scorne the pride, arrogancie, and contemptuous presumptiousnes of the King of Spayne, hath extended his mightie armie vpon him and his seruants, as he did vpon Pharao King of Aegipt, & clothed him with dishonor, as with a garment, and made him ri∣diculous, and contemptible in the sight of the Princes, people, and nati∣ons of the world. We haue seene also, how that the Lorde, to punish the parricides, mur∣therers of the saints, atheisme, & execrable life of the Duke of Guize, of his bretheren, father, and vncles, turned him to a spirit of ambition, to worke all treasons, treacheries, villanies, commotions, seditions, and rebelli∣ons
against his naturall King, Prince, benefactor and countrey, couering all these execrable enormities, vnder the cloake of Catholick religion, and Gods glorie, by the which he hath wrought his owne, his children, house,  famely, bretheren and kindred sudden fall, being beaten downe on a sud∣daine and vnawares, from the top of high degree, honour, dignitie and wealth, as with a suddaine tempest: wee haue séene on the other side, how God (according to his mercie and promise) hath preserued from the suares of the enemies of his trueth. First, that great Elizabeth of England, nurce of Gods Church, the ioy of Gods people, hath decked her head with a Crowne of glory, hath cloathed her with honour, hath established her seate with iustice and godlines, hath made her the terror of al enemies of Christ, and the beauty of Europ. The same Gods (prouidence and merciful kindenes) hath also preserued Henry of Bourbon King of Nauarre, and now of France, from the com∣motions of the people, and whereas his enemies haue set vppon him by land, by sea, by force, by policie, poyson, and all other meanes which the an∣gell of darkenes hath been able to teach them, to swallow him alone aliue; beholde the Lorde, not onely hath established him in his owne hereditarie kingdome, but also by the meanes of his enemies (though against their wills) hath made him a way to place him in that throane of Maiesty, which appartained vnto him by that succession, which God had ordained in that kingdome, being one of the most famous kingdomes of Europ, and hath made him a victorious conquerour of the wicked, and the restorer of that af∣flicted state. But also in this booke, we haue séene how the Lord, in whose sight is pre∣cious the death of his saints, before the comming of those miseries, the Lord hath taken vnto himselfe the most noble, vertuous, and godly Prin∣ces, the Princes of Conde and Boillon, and many other noble men, least they should see euill daies, whose names are written in the booke of the righteous. Wée haue séene also, how the Lorde hath turned the most wicked and damnable oath taken, not at the states, but rather conspiracie of Bloys, to an borrible confusion, and dissipation of the wicked: for after that the wicked haue gone continually to wrack and confusion, and neuer preuailed in any action, but in wrapping themselues into miserable treasons, rebellions and commotions, replenishing their streates, with murther and bloud. The end of the fift Booke.
THE SIXT BOOKE. THis newe yeare bringeth foorth new euents and strange, full of confusions, the kings death, and an alteration in the succession of the Crowne of France, as it shall appeare. Wee haue left the royall Armie vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, weakened with hunger, colde, and hard lodging, amazed with the straunge accidents happened at Bloys, before the towne of Ganache, there preparing all things for the batterie. Also wee haue shewed what exploytes the King of Nauarre did in the meane while. Now wee will returne from Niort in high Poytow to Ganache, to see what would be done there. The first day of Ianuary 1589. passed away with light skirmishes, but without any great effect. The second day, they within the towne perceaued that the enemie was remoouing the Ordinance from the place where it was first pitched, and yet they could not know vpon which side of the Towne they intended to place it, vntill the morrowe being the third day of Ianuary, when it was seene at the Chappell Saint Leonard couered with gabions, and planted within two hundred paces of the wall. They perceiued also another batterie in preparing on the side of the Poole in a field toward Guinefole, so that the batteries did crosse one another. The Winter this yeare was so extreame during this siege, that the yce did carrie euery where: which thing caused great discommoditie to them which were besieged, the earth being so hard, that when they began to trench themselues within, (which was at the arriuing of the Canon) they could not in an houre open a foote of earth, although that they had made pickaxes and tooles for that purpose. But this also did greatly encrease their labour, for at the arriuing of the Canon they had saluted the Towne on the side of Maschecow, and being lodged within the ruines of certayne houses there, had planted gabions, which caused them of the towne to be∣léeue that they should bee battered on that side, where they also had begun their trenches with much and vnprofitable labour. For as it is sayd, the ordinance was remooued to another place, now hauing lost all their former
labour, they are set to worke night and day at the trenches, and when they went out of the watch, without rest or sleepe they must worke at the tren¦ches:  wine also fayled them, so that in time and toyle so extreame many fell sicke, but specially of the bloudy fluxe. The same, to wit, the third day a certaine Corporall was sent by them of the Towne, to see whether there was any meanes to enterprise vppon that artillerie, but he was slaine with a pellet in the breast. About noone the enemie shot certaine voleyes of Ordinance against a gate of the Castle which openeth into the garden, where they sawe by the moouing of the earth, that Pyouers were at worke. The fourth day, they within the towne at the breaking of the day, per∣ceiuing the preparations for the batterie, found themselues hardly distres∣sed, for that they had no trenches against the batteries, and that it was al∣most impossible to make any for hardnes of the ground, by reason of the frost, and yet they laboured hard about it day and night in that sort as is aforesayd. Whilest the Gouernour and the Captaines were assembled to take aduice what was expedient to be done, one of the companie proposed, that it were good to send a Drommer to play with his Dromme toward the broaken Chappell, vnder colour of making exchange of prisoners, and in the meane time to delay the batterie of the enémie. This was conclu∣ded, but afterward it was reuoked, by reason of the disaduantage which might ensue, least the enemie vppon that occasion should thinke, that they fearing the trench did seeke occasion of parley. Then the two batteries began, the one did beat the Fort of Beauregard, and that which was made aboue an old gate, as is said asore: the other bat∣tery did beat at the other said Fort which was vnder the gate. That which was made out of the old wall resisted the fury of the ordinance farre better then it was thought it would: for from halfe an hower after Sunne rising vntill Sunne setting, it neuer ceased to thunder without any intermission, so that there was let flie that day aboue eight hundered canon shot. The night beeing so neere, they who were besieged saw no apparance that the assault would be geuen, and had not prepared themselues to re∣ceiue the enemy that day, considering that the breaches were flanked with two fortes, which were first to be forced: notwithstanding all the French footmen and Swissers were seene a farre off in battle array about noone, which was the cause that they deuided speedily the small number of men which they had to keepe the Fortes: but specially the two Fortes which flanked the breaches on both sydes. They prouided also a certayne number to keepe the breaches if the enemy should proffer the assault. They were not aboue two hundred and threescore persons which were of ability to defend the breaches, for the rest were either sicke or hurt, or els occupied to keepe the fiue Fortes which were without.
The Gouernour tooke vppon him to keepe the breach which was at the left hand, with a hole to passe to the Fortes if they were assaulted, beeing  assisted with twelue men lying in couert, and certaine Harquebuziers. The Baron Vignoles was appointed to keepe the breach, which was aboue the gate, with fiue armed men, and fifteene Harquebuziers: and for as much as that number was not sufficient, the Gouernour appointed the Lord Perrine to assist them with fiue armed men more. When the breaches began to be reasonable, euery one hauing sixteene long paces breadth, the whole army beeing in battell array, the enemy be∣gan to styrre, and marching with a swift pace, stouping low, they set on both sides of the Fortes which were aside of the breaches. The enemy sustayned the first onset, wherewith these two Fortes recea∣ued them and passed throug, halthough that many remained vpon the pla∣ces, saluted by them of the Fortes with shot, and with the force of the pikes, yet in a little space they were masters of the two fortes. They might haue defended the said fortes longer, but two causes did let them, the one was the small number of the defendants, the other was the death of the Lord Marestes yongest sonne to the Lord Sabloniere, and brother to the Lord Vignoles, who after the death of the Lord Ruffigny, commaunded ouer his company and one of the fortes which had befollen him: his was slaine with the shot of a Culuerin. This his death did greatly hast the forsaking of that fort: his brother the Lord Vignoles made great mone for him. The Fortes beeing wonne, it was high time for them which kept the breaches to bestirre and defende themselues: and as they were assaulted furiously by the enemyes, so they receaued them coragiously. There was all manner of defence vsed, shot, pikes, pomgarnads, fiery hoopes, stones, and all other manner of defence were throwen vppon the enemy. Many of the enemies hauing the night fauourable, retyred vnder the sha∣dow therof, they who did obstinate themselues either were wounded, or els remayned dead in the place: in this assault happened a thing worthy to bee noted. The Baron Vignoles had a frend in the army named Poysson, a man of charge in that seruice. This man was greatly carefull for the pre∣seruation of the said Baron, and desirous to saue him, prayed a Captaine of the regiment of Chastiagueray (whose Standerd bearer was very sicke) to geue him his ensigne for that day onely, determined to enter one of the first to saue his friend, the sayd Baron Vignoles: the Captaine deliuered him his ensigne according to his request. Poysson at the assault geuē, was one of the first which went vp to the same breach, which the said Baron Vignoles kept, intending to haue saued him, but the said Poysson beeing not knowen by his friend Vignoles, was receaued by two Harquebuze shot, which did bear him downe to the ground, so that he was carried away.
The heat of the fight dured a long hower, and after that time the ene∣mies began to faint, but on the contrary their courage was doubled that  were on the breaches. Euen some of the souldiers who were gone towards the Castell to take breath, after they had retyred within the forts, ioyned themselues againe to the defenders of the breaches. Then went they apace to worke vpon the enemy. There was great disorder in the retire of the enemie, for most part of them did cast away their weapons, and lost them in the ditch, and in the fortes which they forsooke. Many were drowned in the ditch, casting them selues downe from the fortes vpon the yce, which (by reason of that) brake vnder them. The ditches were incontinently lighted with a number of torches and linkes out of the Towne and Fortes, for it was very darke. The besieged in the towne spoiled the dead that euening, some went out of the Forts vnto the brooke, which doth separat the town from the sub∣urbe to get armor. Notwithstanding, a point of humanity was shewed to∣ward the enemy worthy to bee remembred, for they did not hurt so much as to take any thing from the enemies, who were left hurt vpon the brea∣ches, and in the ditches, but rather they were had into the towne, their woundes dressed, and curteously vsed, euen to the day that the towne was surrendered. This victory is the more memorable, because about fifty men defended the breaches against such a multitude: for all the regiments of the Swis∣sers also assaulted the same, in witnesse thereof many of them remayned in the ditch. It is also to bee noted, that during the assault, when they within the towne had set fire into a pomgarnad for to cast it into the ditch, it fell again betweene the legges of the Gouernour, and did burst without doing any hurt. Upon this prosperous issue of that assault, the Lord Plessis gouernour, called all the Captayns and Gentlemen to render thankes to God for his gracious fauour shewed vnto them. On the side of the Towne the Lord Perrine was killed with a shot in the head, whereof he dyed within a while after. Captayne Forest, and the Lord of Saint Cosmio were hurt in both armes. Of the enemies syde there were found the fifth day of Ianuary aboue fifty dead within the ditch, besides them who were drowned, and many which dyed afterward in the side of the Towne: i is certayne that there were found missing in that day of the army aboue three hundred, and that one Captayne onely had lost aboue sixe score. Beside them whith were wounded in great number, was the Lord Brig∣neulx master of the campe, this man lost his Sonne at Montagne; now he
hath a blow; let him learne then, not treacherously to vyolate the right of Nations, as he did at Mauleon. The night after the assault was bestowed in fortifiyng and continuing the trenches. This day was bestowed of the enemie in the burying of the dead. The same day in the euening, a drumme of the enemie brought letters to the Lord Plessis, gouernour of the place, from the Lord Palneau. When he had receiued them, he assembled all the counsell to open the sayd letters in their presence. The letters in substance did import, that the said L. Palneau had great desire to speak with him about a thing which would bring him much con∣tentation, which he said he could not write. In the same letters he prayed the Lorde Plessis to giue him meanes and safe conduct to speake with him. All the Captaines gaue their aduise, that he could not refuse that par∣ley, because that the Lord Palneau, second sonne to the Earle of Carauas, was a faithfull seruant to the King, and great friend to the house of Bour∣bon, and deadly enemie to the League, and that by him they might also vnderstand newes of the King of Nauarre, whereof they were in great care. The 6▪ day of Ianuary, the Lord Palneau accompanyed with the Cap∣taine Grange, who was of the regiment of Countie Grapre, went to the fort of the tower of the Castell, made after the forme of a horseshooe. During this parley, they began the battery with two pieces at the breake of the day: about noone they encreased with three pieces more, and continued till night. There were bestowed that day aboue eight score Cannon shot. There were two souldiers slaine, whereof the one was named Bourg, of the company of the Lord. Vignoles: there was great mane made for that man for his great valour, for he was a rare patterne of godlines and vertue. The Lord Plessis going foorth to that parley, accompanied with the Lord Ayomont, vpon returne, reported to the counsell, that the Lorde Palneau had notified vnto thē, that the Duke of Neuers had determined not to vnbit nor to depart from that siege before he had salued his honour, and to that end he would spare no friend, no meanes, nor authority. That his stay there in that siege did hinder the affaires of the king of Nauarre more than they did think. That the King did besiege Orleans, by the citadell, where was the Marshal Haumont, and that the king would vse the forces of the King of Nauarre against the leagued. To be short, the Lord Plessis, and all others which had assisted him, had gotten honour enough in the defence of such a naughty place, and that
there was no more meanes to stand obstinate in defence of the saide place, the said L. of Neuers being sufficiently informed of the necessities, where∣in they were as well of men who were greatly weary, as of victualls. That if they would hearken to render that place into his handes, he offered vnto the gouernour & gentlemen, armes, horses and baggage, and to the souldiers, armes and baggage, and for the safe conduct, the County Granprè, the Baron Poluan and Bastenay, Captaine of an hundred light horses, should conduct them safely whither soeuer they would goe. He gaue them beside, eight dayes space to aduertize the King of Na∣uarre, of the capitulation, and in case that the said King should not giue a∣ny succour within the sayd eight dayes by any meanes, he in his person, or his Lieftenant, the sayd L. Plessis and his should surrender him the place, and they to enioy the benefite of the agreement. There were many gaings and commings vpon this proposition, and at length the affaires being propounded to the counsell, they did stick much vpon the voluntary proffers of the Duke of Neuers, to giue eight dayes to aduertize the King of Nauarre: which made them beleeue that the sayd king was neither ready to helpe them, nor had sufficient power so to doo, which notwithstanding was the only hope of them that were besieged, who otherwise could not withstand if they should be pressed. All things being well considered, they determined to hearken to so ad∣uantagious proffers, with hope thereby to make the K. of Nauarre priuie to their affaires, and for that intent to send Captayne Robiniere with a passeporte, that was concluded and sealed on both sides the sixt day at night. The seuenth day the truce was agreed, and hostages were giuen on both partes, and all acts of hostilitie ceased. The same day the Lord Robiniere departed with a trompet of the D. of Neuers to goe to the King of Nauarre. The gouernour in the meane while was greatly carefull, to take heede that no man should goe foorth to visit or frequent with them of the armie, and also that none of the ene∣mies should enter into the towne. To preuent all inconueniences, hee made a diligent watch both day and night vpon the breaches, so that hee himselfe tooke his meales, and did lie thereon, notwithstanding the hard∣nes of the winter. The eleuenth day of Ianuarie, the Lord Robiniere returned from the king of of Nauarre, and brought with him the Lord Rinuile to the Lord of Neuers, who after he returned to the king of Nauarre, obteined leaue to enter into the towne with the Lord Robiniere. By them, they within the towne were enformed, how the king of Na∣uarre had marched forward very nigh, intending to succour them, and to venture a battel for that end, but that he fel sick with a dangerous disease;
which had hindred the execution of his enterprize. They reported also howe that the said King of Nauarre had sent the  Lords Chastilion, Rochefocault, Trimouille, & Plassak, with the greatest partes of his armie, to trie how they might enterprize vpon the enemie: but considering that nothing could bee attempted without great disad∣uantage, they were faine to returne backe. For the Lorde of Neuers had lodged and trenched himselfe in so aduantagious a place, that the towne could not sayle but fall into his hands, except it were rescued by the win∣ning of a battell, which thing the time prefxed could not permitte, being already almost expired. Notwithstanding, the twelfth day at night the Lords Chastilion, Plas∣sak, & Trimouille, went to view the armie so nigh that in the darke night some shot of Ordinance was giuen out for a token of the alarum toward the Porrieres. The Duke of Neuers vpon this alarum, feared greatly, least the Lord Plessis seeing that helpe nigh, would haue receiued some succours with∣in the town, interpreting the tearmes of the agreement to his aduantage. But the saide Lord Plessis would haue done nothing of dangerous con∣sequence, much lesse against his promise. The 14. of Ianuarie, the Lord of Neuers perceaued that they within the town, went faithfully to worke, for euery man disposed himselfe to depart: also he vsed much courtesy toward thē who were besieged, prouiding carts for them, whereof they had need to carie as well their bagage, as thē which were wounded, & caused them to issue foorth out of the sight of ye army, least they should bée molested by any man. The said Lord of Neuers was in his own at their comming forth with a small companie, he commaunded their matches to be kindled, saluting very courteously euery man. There were some souldiers hurt, whome they could not carrie away, he commaunded them to stay, with assurance to be dressed, and otherwise courteously vsed. All the companies were safely conducted vnto the Abbey Brilleybant, the companies of the King of Nauarre being lodged at Palneau, halfe a league thence, to whome they ioyned themselues easily: the regiment of the Cunty of Beaupre was left there in Garison. So then the saide Duke of Neuers hauing receaued the towne of Ga∣nache, as is aboue said, on a sodaine that great and furious army was broa∣ken to pieces, as smitten with the finger of God. Many there dyed, many were hurt: they of the League liuing in great mistrust, either did dissem∣ble their actions, or retired to such places of safetie, as they thought most fit: the artillery returned into the places from whence it was taken. The Lord of Neuers went to Bloys; withall the rest of the armie as remained with him, whereof a part was sent to the Marshall Haulmont, who in the Citadell fought with the inhabitants of Orleans: within a few dayes af∣ter,
the Lord of Neuers went from the court, to his house of Neuers. So all the lowe Poytow, which had béene terribly threatned with that  tempest, was deliuered by this sodaine and vnexpected alteration. For the execution which was done at Bloys vpon the person of the Duke of Guize, was as an horrible thunderclap, not onely vnto the leagued, which were in the army of the L. of Neuers, of whom the most part did consist, and to others who were in multitudes in most partes of the realme, but also vnto all others of that confederacie which were out of the realme. For the newes fléeing as farre as Lorreyne, the forces of the Duke of Lorreyne, which had blocked Iamets in ye soueraignty of Boillon, euer since the moneth of Aprill before, were so amazed by the vnexpected losse, and surprise of that support, that they taking sodainely bagge and bagage, as men frighted out of their wittes, brake the siege, and retired away: so that God there deliue∣red his Church after a long and daungerous triall, which shall induce the posteritie, to feare and admire the iust iudgements of God, who within a moment, and by euents, not forséene by mans wisdome, dooth turne vp∣side downe the counsels of the wicked, to the ioyfull deliuerance and com∣fort of his saints. Righteous O Lord are thy iudgements, all thy waies are righteousnes and trueth. The army of the King of Nauarre returned to Niort and Fontenay. It is said before, how after the surprising of Niort, the King of Nauarre repayred to the saide towne, the 27. of December, and soiourning there a while, there he gathered the greatest part of his forces, and about the 6. day of Ianuarie, in this yeare 1589. the said King departed, with such forces as he had from Niort, toward the towne of Ganach, intending to succour them, who were besieged therein, or else to fight with the Duke of Neuers, if he would haue let him. But God who gouerned all things, with an vn∣searcheable wisdome, disappointed that enterprise by that dangerous sick∣nes, which fell vpon him. The cold was very extreame, and as he is a most laborious Prince, af∣ter he had béen long on horseback all armed, a great cold came vpon him, so that he was enforced to light downe of his horse, and goe on foote with a swift pace and violent motion to get him some heate: and a little after hee had eaten, a strange extraordinarie cold tooke him, with a great feauer. About the 9. day of Ianuary it was incontinently perceiued that it was a pleuresie. This happened at a little village called S. Pere: there he was enforced to stay, without any meanes to transport him to any other place, (by reason of the sharpnes of the sicknesse) but to a little Castle nigh that village, where being, the sicknesse did so increase that many doubted of his life. He also resolued himselfe constantly to abide the good will of GOD, readie willingly to end his life (if Gods will was such): the thing that on∣ly grieued him (as that good King Ezechias) was the néede which the
Church of God might haue of his presence in France, (if he should fall) and also the want of his fidelitie in that kingdome, if in the middest of so many great troubles and confusions he should be taken out of this world. Not∣withstanding,  he ceased not (as much as the disease which was sharpe and violent did permit him) to prouide & ordayne for the affayres of his armie, according as the occasions did fall out. He was let bloud, and worthily ser∣ued and succoured by them who were about him, as much as the discom∣moditie of the place could permit them. He sent to all the Churches round about to make prayers and suppli∣cations for him, which was done with much feruencie and sorrowe. The newes of his daungerous disease were brought to Rochel in the euening being the 13. day of Ianuary. The congregation was called spée∣dily with the ringing of the bell to repayre to the Temples. This was a∣bout seauen of the clocke at night, (an houre not vsed to such méetings) the necessitie notwithstanding requiring the same. The people aduertised of the cause, ranne with such multitudes to the places of prayers, so that the like was neuer seene in that towne. All manner of men indifferently, euen children and apprentises forsooke the houses to repayre to the Temples; the multitude was such, that many being not able to goe in, went home a∣gayne heauie & sad, answering by their priuate prayers to those that were made in publike, with much lamentation and teares. For all men knewe well the greatnes of the affliction throughout all France generally, if God at that time (so troublesome and confused) had taken out of this life that first Prince of the bloud, whom he had endued wih so many graces. The sayd extraordinary prayers were continued for the space of many daies, vn∣till that the recouering of his health was certainly knowne. The rumour of his death was spread into diuers places of the Realm, euen at the Kings Court, for the which reports all good and true men did greatly mourne. The great contentation which the leagued receiued there∣of dured not long; for the King receiued newes shortly after of his reco∣uerie. It is sayd before, how that after the execution done vpon the person of the Duke of Guize, the King sent into the Prouinces to aduertise the Go∣uernours, Magistrates and people, of the iust causes and necessitie that in∣forced him to doo that execution. And interrupting the continuance of the euents which followed that execution, we descended into the lowe Poytow, there to see what exployts the great royall armie (conducted by the Duke of Neuers) had done there, and also what the King of Nauarre did all that while. Now hauing seene that armie to haue made shipwracke and va∣nished out of sight, we will leaue the King of Nauarre being in bed sicke of a dangerous pleurisie, expecting health of the Lord which giueth saluation vnto Kings, and to restore him to his health and strength, and will come
to the matter agayne, and consider the horrible accidents which followed the death of the Duke of Guize, and of the bounsing Priest the Cardinall  his brother. After this execution done vpon the bouldest authors of the conspiracie, and the rest of the heads of the same being in holde, there was great hope that the burning fire of all ciuill dissentions should be on a sudden quench∣ed, the flaming torches of tumults being put out. But the newes of the sayd execution of the Duke of Guyze being brought into all parts of the Realme, by them that fled without bootes and spurres out of the suburbs of Bloys: the report came also to the Duke de Mayne, being then with an armie in Liomoys, he taking with him such as would followe him, went out of the Countrey for two causes. First, fearing (vppon these newes) the neighbourhood of them of Daulphine, Ʋienoys, and Viuarets, who might haue doubled their courage vpon that occasiō, being there most of the refor∣med religion. Secondly, that because of the death of his brother (the hope for the which he and his brother the Duke of Guyze did greatly enuie and malice one an other) with mutuall hared, doth now proffer it selfe vnto him, without any manifest competitour. This Duke de Mayne therefore now swallowing downe the crowne of France in one morsell by imagination, with as many as would follow him, made hast into Burgondie, and Champaigne, and there made sure to himselfe in those Prouinces as many places as hee could, preparing all thinges to warre agaynst the King. Here it might bee thought strange, how the Duke de Mayne doth so cruelly mooue warre and rebellion against the King, seeing that it was he himselfe and his cosin, the Duke d'Aumale, who gaue aduertisement to the King of the conspiracy, and intent of his brother the Duke of Guyze, as is aforesayd. The question is easily resolued: there is no fayth nor fidelity among them, who do aspire to the same one kingdome, there is no society, be it ne∣uer so sworne and holie. These three, to wit, the Duke of Guyze, Mayne, and Aumale, did affect the Kingdome: but because the Duke of Guyze was more fauoured of the partakers then the other two, he was carryed there∣too, as if it were vpon the shoulders by all the partakers, who attaining vn∣to it, would haue established the same to himselfe and to his Sonne already in mans estate, and to his posterity. The Dukes of Mayne and Aumale (no doubt) did loue more the Duke of Guyze, and would haue had the Crowne rather vppon his head, then whee it was: yet according to the rules of the Diuinity of Sorboun, that charity beginneth at it selfe, they would haue worne the Crowne of France euery one vppon his owne head, rather then that any other should
haue had the occupying of it howsoeuer great and deare friend hee might haue béene. This emulation about the affectation of the Crowne, was the  cause that these two, to wit, the Dukes de Mayne, and Aumale, each of thē in respect of himselfe discouered the conspiracy to the King, to the end that he beeing made away, they might march a playne way in the same steps which hee had traced before them, reseruing to the craftiest or mightiest hereafter to oppresse his cosine: for it is not to bee thought that there would haue beene more vnion and loue betweene the Dukes of Mayne and Au∣male, beeing but cosins, then there was between the Dukes of Gnyze and Mayne, being brothers. Thus wee see what ambition did worke in these new men by affectation of that roall dignity, which doth not touch them at all, and without any likelihood euer to approch néere vnto, namely rebellion agaynst their So∣ueraigne and benefactor, and parricide among bretheren, one to preuent another. The newes of the death of Guyze beeing brought into the Prouinces, the most part of Towns and Citties from the riuer of Loyre, West, North and East, being already surprised aforehand, and seduced from the Kings obedience by the Leaguers, vppon the rumor of that execution were so greatly mooued (the Duke of Guyze beeing accompted the onely piller of Popish religion, by the perswasion which the Catholikes had conceaued of him) that they began euery where to wauer, and kindle to a manifest rebellion, by the setting on of the Leaguers, who were the greatest part in number euery where. They did greatly by their inuectiues make heynous and odious that execution vppon the persons of Guyze, and the Romish Priest his brother, tearming it the Massacre committed at Bloys. And thus the iust iudgement of God, iustly taking vengeance for so ma∣ny murthers, shedding of innocent bloud, and innumerable villanies com∣mitted vppon the saintes of God, and for stopping their eares at the cleere and lowd voice of the Sonne of God, who so louingly hath called them by his word & promises, by his threatnings and plagues ofpestilence, famine and warre, gaue them ouer to a reprobat sence, with a senceles rage to fall to commit such cruelties among themselues, that no enemy would or could haue desired or deuised greater; their towns and citiesbeeing euery where replenished with massacres, robberies, banishments and proscriptions, not committed agaynst them of the religion, but euen of popish Catholikes against popish Catholikes, of Idolaters against Idolaters, of mur∣therers agaynst murtherers: so the Lord hath sent euill Angels among them. Paris the capitall cittie of the kingdome, as they more hoped vppon the Duke of Guyze then any other did, so they shew themselues most offended. There were firebrands which kindled the sedition to the vttermost, to wit,
the Duchesses of Guyze and Nemours, who with their outcries and lamen∣tations did animate the people to a raging madnes. Thereunto also added  the Iesuits and Fryers (set on by the aforenamed) all their inuectiues in∣solent and vnreuerent wordes in their ordinary tragicall outcryes, in their Pulpits, and philippicall sermons to make the people obstinate, desperat, and vntractable, to be hereafter reduced to any obedience. Other Cities followed the example of Paris, as Orleans, Roen, Anieus, Abeuille, Reymes, and Tholose, whereby the conspiracy and setting on of the Bishop of the place, in most cruel maner they tooke the first president of the court of Parliament, there hanged him vpon a Gibet, and afterward drag∣ged his dead body about the streets, beeing one of the most zealous romish Catholikes which then could liue in this world; the onely cause was that he would not allow their rebellion. The King vnderstanding the great sturres, perilous flames of rebelli∣on, in most part of the townes and cities of his realme, supposing by impu∣nity, which he calleth clemencie and gentlenes, to quench that fire, which was already too far kindled, writeth his declarations, emporting an obli∣uion of all iniuries to be published in all his Parliaments, and other courts in Prouinces. First, he sheweth how oftentimes hee hath borne with the perturbers of his realme, not onely in forgiuing them their offences, whome hee might haue iustly punished, but also by winning them by all fauours possible to be shewed, onely thereby, séeking the preseruation of the peace of his sub∣iects, and of the Catholick religion, vntill that hee was certainely infor∣med, that they had conspired against his person, life, and estate, so farre as he was inforced to make that execution extraordinarily. Secondly, he sheweth, that although many had béen of that conspiracy, whome he might haue iustly punished, yet for the loue which he beareth vnto all Catholicks, hée hath stayed the punishment vpon the two chiefest authors of the euill. Thirdly, he protesteth that he will haue the edict of reunion obserued in all poynts, burying al the former offences in perpetuall forgetfulnes, com∣maundeth his iudges and officers in all his courtes, to make no inquisiti∣on of the former offences, willing all men to liue in peace vnder his obedi∣ence, and if not, hee chargeth his officers to make exemplary iustice of the offenders. The King hauing assembled his estates, as is saide before, supposing by their help and assistance, to haue repressed the outragious attempts of the house of Guize, sawe himselfe in the middest of them, compassed with a company of mortall enemies to his person, life, and state. Whereupon destitute of authoritie, counsell and help, through pusillanimity, was faine to spare the liues of them who were in his power, and of others whome he
might easily haue apprehended, who had their hands as déepely in the tres∣passe, as the chiefe authors themselues. This was the worke of the Lord, to bring him to the consideration of his great errors, in refusing so often  the wholsome and brotherlike aduertisements of the good K. of Nauarre, and other Princes, both within and without the realme, his louing and faithfull friends. The more therefore he goeth about with impunity, of most grieuous offences, which in his declaration, hee tearmeth clemency, to bring that people of Paris (seduced from his obedience) to their duety, ye more that mi∣serable people condemned of God, and in his wrath, appointed to hauock and thradome, for multiplying rebellion, murthers, and confusions vpon their former murthers Idolatries, and abominations, dooth rage, and like mad dogs, as out of their wittes, doo run headlong, to worke the full mea∣sure of their desperat rebellions, accounting the Kings clemency, coward∣lines (which they might haue called pusillanimitie in deed) as though hée feared, either to haue them his enemies, or else to loose them from being his subiects. Therefore hauing committed greeuous crimes all manner of wayes, euen with greedines, at length hauing concluded to withdraw themselues from their soueraignes obedience, the chiefest players in this tragedie of rebellion, to colour their diuilish passions, with the authoritie of Gods law, as though they would haue asked Gods wil out of his owne mouth, adressed them themselues to the facultie of Theologie, there commonly called the Colledg of Sorboune. For that purpose they sent one Vrban, one of the Magistrates of Paris, to the sayd Sorboune, hauing framed in man∣ner of supplication two questions, to be resolued by them. First, an populus regni Galliae possit solui & liberari à sacramento fidelita∣tis & obedientiae Henrico tertio praestito. Whether the people of France, may not be discharged and setfree from the oath of allegeance and obedience made vnto Henry the third. Secondly, an tuta conscientia possit, idem populus armari, vniri & pecn∣nias colligere, & contribuere ad defensionem, & conseruationem Religionis Catholicae, & Romanae, in hoc regno aduersus nefaria conscilia, & conatus praedicti regis, & quorum libet aliorum illi adherentium, & contra publica fi∣dei violationem ab eo Blaesis factum in praeiuditium praedictae religionis Catho∣licae, & edicti sanctae vnionis, & naturalis libertatis conuoationis trium or∣dium huius regni. Whether the people may with a safe conscience take arms vnto thē∣selues, and make collections and contributions, for the defence and pre∣seruation of the Catholick Romish religion, against the haynous practi∣zes and attempts of the aforesayd king, and all other his adherents, and against the breach of publike faith, committed by him at Bloys, in the pre∣iudice
of the aforesayd Catholicke religion, and of the edict of holy vnion, and of the naturall liberty of the assembly of the three Estates of the  Realme. The seauenth day these priestes of Apollo, after a generall procession of all the orders of the said facultie, and a Masse of the holy Ghost (adsit reuerentia auribus) sung in the sayd colledge of Sorboune, at the request of the Prouost, Escheuins, Consuls, & Catholick citizens of the Citie of Pa∣ris: the maisters of the said facultie assembled to the number of threescore and tenne, hauing debated these questions (as they say) by the holy scrip∣ture, but specially by the Cannons and decrees of the Popes, al with one consent (either extreamely wicked, or else most pernitiously ignorant, or both) rendred this oracle out of the bewitching hell of Apollo: to wit, The people of France may doe all things which are propounded in the questions against their lawfull king and his adherents: onely they re∣quired that this their oracle of rebellion, might be sent to Rome, there to be sealed by the pope, and be burned with the mark of the spirit of diuels, and beare the Image and print of Antichrist. The eight of Ianuary, the said Vrban came to knowe the answere of the oracle, which he brought to the counsell of the citie, and after they had perused it, taking it for an answere of Vrim and Thumim, and a voyce of God, by whose authoritie they were put at liberty to doo what they would, with armed hand brought it to the Senate of Paris, which was the second Maiesty of France, and with drawen swordes required of the same to approoue the said oracle. The Senate flatly denied such a wicked, vnnaturall, and diuelish act to bee lawfull and worthy of the ancient loyalty of France, requiring to take some deliberation vpon it; and whilest they satte vpon it, the mu∣tinous rebels (impacient of delay) brake open the gates of the Pallace, and seazing vpon the whole bench, casting them into prisons: so now the Senate being carried away in a triumph, all reuerence of Magistracie being troden downe, the Temple of iustice is poluted, forsaken, and vsur∣ped by robbers. The ninth day of Ianuary, the seditious doo in hast choose a new coun∣sell, to the number of seauen and forty (who should administer the State in stead of the kings prime counsell) of the most vilest and factious per∣sons in the citie, as Rowland Compan, the villanous and incestious Picheuard, Louchard, Rue Clerke, Oliuer Seuault, & others of such like sortes, men neither of abilitie, authoritie, wisdome nor counsell, but one∣ly because they had solde themselues to the League, to worke all manner of villany, and shewed themselues bitter enemies vnto the King. This new Senate of conspiratours, firebrands of Hell, to replenish the Citty with confusion and mischiefe, considering at to preserue an v∣nity
among their company of robbers, they must needes haue a head, and rather then they should haue none, they will make one of an old blocke:  they aduised themselues whom they might make that would vphold their miseedes. To take some of the Princes of the bloud, they knew well them to bee wise ynough from leauing their lawfull vocations, to become heades and leaders of theeues, murtherers, and traytors. Therefore they concluded to continue the rebellion in the house and fami∣ly where the conspiracy (the mother of this rebellion) sprang out, was nou∣rished and entertayned these 40. or 50. yeares continually. The Duke de Mayne was thought to be most fit, as one who in so vile an enterprise should succeede his brother, considering that he was brought vp and nourished in the same schole, learned the same bookes, and had pro∣ceeded in the same degrees as his brother had done, was well acquaynted with such matters from his infancy, will, and ambition, boyling in him as hot as euer it did in his brother; after his brothers death, not much inferi∣our in fauours of partakers to his brother, though not equall in haugtines of mind. He therefore by the earnest sute and solicitation of his agent and parta∣kers, is made the head of the rebellion, and inuested in his absence of that proude and new title of Lieutenant Generall of that state and Crowne of France, which is a Periphrase of this word King. The Duke de Mayne now beeing made manipulus furum, must play the King: for he doth assemble all the Captaynes of the sedition, as name∣ly the aforesayd counsell newly established with the Dukes Aumale, and Nemours, with other seditious persons, few in number, nothing in coun∣tenance nor authority, to hold the States of the Realme as they did tearme them: assembled of the Princes, Nobillity, and Commons, when as there was not one Prince, nor any communalty, but few seditious persons. The Dukes Aumale, and Nemours, and Cheualier, Aumale, were made gouernours of Paris, to lead the seditious people to do such outra∣ges, and robberies, as neuer were done yet in any towne or Citty in this world. These three Captaynes of robbers and murtherers, dayly went to the houses of them which were knowen to be the Kings friends, depriued them of their authorities, if they had any, put them in Prisons, ransacked their goods, lodged their robbers (whom they called garrisons) in their houses, whereof many by a wise and prouident mynd, foreseeing the horrible tem∣pest and thunderclaps which would fall from heauen, vppon that sinke of traytors, fled out of their houses, carrying their liues for a pray. The Ladie of Monpensier, sister to the Duke de Mayne, the Ladyes of Mayne, Aumale,  Nemours, beeing then in Paris, caused a booke of
the riche men to be geuen them, so that there was no day but they sent some of these Captayns to raunsake and cary away the goods of some rich  Marchant, or other, vnder colour that they were royals, heretikes, or fauo∣rers of them. After many robberies and murthers committed in Paris, the seditious people were lead by their Captayns vnto the Loure the royal house, where they committed such outrages vppon the goods mouable which did par∣tayne to the King, that the posterity will scarse beleeue it. They violated the seale of France, the sacred instruments of Soueraigne iustice, brake it to pieces, & trampled it vnder foot: they did breake and dragged in the stréets, in a most spitefull sort, the armes of France, Valoys, and Bourbons. The tenth day, whilest these things were dooing at Paris, the King cau∣sed an expresse commaundement to be published at Bloys, that all the par∣takers of the house of Guyze, should depart and retire to their houses with pardon of their offences, so that they would remayne faythfull seruants vn∣to him. Hee sent Cotteblanch, Prouost of Paris, and the president Neuilly to Paris, to see whether they could reduce that seduced people to their dutye: the Lords Vilaguier, and D'Abin did the like, but neither of them could do any good. About the fifteenth day, these strange alterations beeing done in Paris, vnder colour of the authority of the States there called, and holden by few seditious persons, letters were sent from they sayd assembly of rebels there vnto all citties of their confederacy, to go forward in the like outra∣ges and furie as they had done. And first to autorise their seditious procée∣dings with great & honourable tytles, they call their letters a declaration of the Princes Catholikes, vnited with the three estates of France, tou∣ching the Massacre committed vppon the persons of the Duke of Guyze, and the Cardinall his brother. First, they doo warne their fellowes to beware of any manner of instruc∣tions giuen vnto them by the King himselfe, or any others, contayning a∣ny excuse of the execution committed at Bloys vppon the Duke and Cardi∣nall his brother. Secondly, they doo aduertise them that they haue as yet of that broode, the Dukes de Mayne, Aumale, Mercure, and Nemours, and that the Duke de Mayne hath a great armie in readines to defend them. Thirdly, they go about to cléere the Duke of Guize of the crime of trea∣son, saying, that it is but calumnies of hereticks, denised against that house the space of 25. yeares. So, with them to spye from time to time, the trayterous attempts and Note. secrecies of the house of Guize, is heresie, and a worke of heretickes. Fourthly, they accuse the King of violating the publike faith, and pro∣phaning
their corpus Domini, as they tearme it, vpon the which hee had sworne the edict of reunion. But in déede the King swore the edict, and not to suffer himselfe to bée murthered by the Duke of Guize. Note. At length they doo aggrauate the death of the Cardinall of Guize, and the imprisonment of the Cardinall of Bourbon, and Archbishop of Lions, and exhort their companies to vnite themselues and to followe theyr ex∣ample. In the first page of this letter was this marke, in the other side the Image of the Duke of Guize. Now wee will leaue these confusions of Rebells, assembled vnder the colour and name of the States of France, to procéede further, to fill the measure of their trespasse, and will goe to see what the King doth at Bloys, and elsewhere. Immediatly after the death of Guize, the King thought good to make Orleans sure of his side. The Citadell in the middest of all these tumults and rebellions of Cities, was and did hold for the King. And the Lord Antragues (who a little before had giuen ouer the League) did all that e∣uer he could doo to hold the Citie in the Kings obedience. But the inhabi∣tants being seduced afore hand by the Leaguers, partakers of the Duke de Mayne, encouraged by the conduct of Captain Breton, and others, who did promise to the inhabitants readie succour from the Duke de Mayne, tooke weapons, and by the confidence which they had in their riches and strength of their walles, did openly reuolt. It is commonly said, that the Citie of Orleans is the Citadel of France, as well for the commodious situation of the same vpon the riuer Loyre, as for the fortifications thereof. These reasons among others, caused the King to trie by gracious and fayre meanes, to bring them backe to their duetie. But reason not preuayling, (with a people carried away with pas∣sion, and seduced by the louers of alteration from the obedience of their King) he was compelled to trie by force the meane of the Citadell. He therefore sendeth the Marshall Haumont with forces as well of footmen as of horsemen, with him hee sendeth part of his gardes and the Swis∣sers. The inhabitants on their side goe about by all meanes possible to rid themselues of the Citadell as of a heauie burthen, they doo besiege it within the towne side, doo trench themselues, and couer themselues with horsmen and platformes, doo vndermine it to blowe vp that Fort, (which nothing els but onely one of the gates commonly called Porte-bamere) they make issues out and euen vpon the Swissers with some successe, they doo thun∣der and rase that Fort with shot of Ordinance on the inside thereof. They of the Kings side doo what they can, there is a great number slaine on both
sides. The Lord Antragues promiseth (notwithstanding) to the King to keepe (during the space of a moneth) the out side: (although it were but  broken walls and ruines) during the which time, he might call backe the armie which was in Poytow at the siege of Ganache, vnder the conduct of the Lord of Neuers. The inhabitants made two Mines vnder the Cita∣dell, but they were vented by them within. About the 17. of Ianuarie, there went forth out of Paris thrée thousand men, well furnished, but young souldiours, and not trained vp in warre, to goe to succor Orleans; but they were discomfited by the Lorde Montig∣ny, and other Gentlemen, who charged them betwéene Estampes and Orleans: many of them were slaine, the remnant were turned home na∣ked. The Duke d'Mayne about the last day of Ianuarie, sending some supply of succour to Orleans, stayed so their estate, which did seeme to hang a side, that they tooke courage, partly by ruines, partly with shot of ordi∣nance, and other meanes so wrought, that they of the Kings side were in∣forced to giue ouer the ruines that rested of that, which was called the cita∣dell. By these meanes, Orleans remained hardened at the deuotion of the League. So (good Christian reader) thou séest how the right of God and man is turned vpside downe: their popish religion, which they would séeme so much to honour, reuerence, and defend, they haue most wickedly propha∣ned, vsing it for a couering of their rebellion: thou séest how the reuerence of all soueraigne power and authoritie, is blotted out of the minds of them, the respect of all lawes troden vnderfoote, the sanctuarie of iustice violated and poluted: thou séest here a damnable and diuelish anarchie, the séeds and foundation of a barbarous and intollerable seruitude, laied downe in France by the Duke d'Mayne and his partakers, in a manner in like sort as Mahomet began his rebellion against the empire of the Romans. Therefore yée O Noble Princes, and Nobles of all the Kingdoms of Eu∣rope, all men who are the louers of vertue and ciuility, desirous to resigne to the posteritie, good lawes, christian libertie and discipline: vp, make hast to runne vppon these accursed enemies of all mankinde; put out by time that fire which dooth threaten all authorities and powers of an horrible cumbustion. Now there remaineth but thrée things for the League to bring to passe, to set vp and dedicate their Idoll which they haue made, to wit, the Duke d'Mayne, and to finish that piece of worke, which his brother the Duke of Guize had brought almost to an end, if he had not béen ouerthrown by the way. They follow on their accustomed course and method, vsed by them these 14. or 15. yeares, to wit, to seduce the people more and more, to make the
King hatefull to his subiects, that hee may bee forsaken of all men if it be possible, and to render the King of Nauarre, abhorted of all men, in  hope, that if they could bring to passe, any thing vpon the Kings person, by these meanes the said King of Nauarre may be excluded from his right of succession. The first poynt to performe, was left to the assembly of the pretended states, as it shal appeare hereafter: the other two pieces of work were com∣mitted to the Iesuites, Friers, and other of like sorte: de bacchandi & ca∣lomniandiperitissimis, for their dignitie runneth most of all vpon these two common places. Whether the King (considering the great necessities which hee should haue of money, to maintaine a dangerous and long warre against the re∣bels and traitors) had sent his cōmissions vnto his threasurors, and recea∣uers of his impost, to continue the receauing and gathering of tallages and impost, as they had done the yeare before, or else that the rebells in Paris, vsurping the name of the thrée estates of France, had forged such a thing, I am vncertaine. But so it is, that if they did not deuise, yet they did vse his action, to steale away the hearts of the people from his obedi∣ence, and thereby to make their part stronger, to aure the Kings subiects to ioyne hand with them in their rebellion. For immediatly after the Duke d' Mayne came to Paris, they set foorth a declaration, bearing the name of the Princes Citties and commonalties vnited, with the thrée estates of the realme, where in deede there was not one Prince, one∣ly the Dukes d' Mayne, Aumale, Nemours, and certaine other seditious persons of Paris, Anious, Roen, Orleans, and Abeuile, with their generall counsell, which consisted of seauen and forty persons most vile; and for their wickednes, picked out of the sinke of that rebellion, whereof we haue spo∣ken before. First, they doo still hide their damnable rebellion, vnder the olde ragged gaberdine of defending the popish religion: and because the poore people had béen of long time oppressed with diuers payments, and greatly impo∣uerished by long continuance of warre; vnto the defence of popery, they ioyne this plausible snare, to wit, to ease the people of the former accusto∣med payments. Secondly, vsurping the royall authoritie, they forbid all manner of offi∣cers to gather any payments, money, tole, impost, or tallage for the King, but to pay vnto their officers the tallages, according vnto the rate of the yeare 1576. Thirdly, they commaund, that in case they haue payed the saide somms vnto their commissioners, and the Kings officers should come to demaund the saide sommes, or should goe about to compell them to pay the same sommes, they to apprehend them, and to bring them vnto the next prisons,
and there processe to be made as vpon publick extortioners. Last of all, they commaunde all officers, and receauers of the Kings de∣maynes,  woods, graines, farmers of salt garners, receauers of tenths, and others whatsoeuer, to bring, pay and deliuer the same to none other, then to them or their officers, and that vpon paine of death. It is said before, that after the Oracle giuen out by the facultie of The∣ologie, in the colledge of Sorboun, the seditious brought it to the Senate of Paris, to bee alowed, inregistred, and published, who vppon the refusing of such a disloyall treacherie, were all brought to prison, and there as malefac∣tors detayned. Now vpon the Dukes comming to Paris, they were cal∣led, and offered either to remaine still in prison, or else to doo two things: First to alowe and approue the resolution of Sorboune: Secondly, to sweare to the new vnion, which was a confederacy of the rebells. This Senate, in ole time so famous and honorable, for feare of this dangerous conspiratie of the Leaguers, and rage of the people, against their alegeance and loyaltie, doo fall to this composition, with the generall counsell of the citie aboue saide, and the pretended states, to wit, the Se∣nat shall ioyne with the rebells, and sweare with them to persecute their King by all meanes, without any respect of person or dignitie, for the exe∣cution done by him vpon the persons of the Duke of Guize, and the Car∣dinall his brother, the 23. and 24. of December, which they doo tearme with an odious name of massacre. This excerable rebellion nowe hath gotten credit, by that so famous and reuerent Senat, the second Maiestie of France, in olde time so renowmed. The 30. day of Ianuarie, all the chambers of the Senat, with all the of∣ficers appertaining to that court, to the number of 326. gathered together, in the presence of the Duke d' Mayne; the generall counsell aboue saide, and the pretended states did sweare, and subscribe, some with their owne bloud (as Catelina in ole time, in like case) that forme of vnion, which they had concluded the day before, whereof the somme followeth. First, they doo sweare and promise to God, to his mother, to the An∣gels, to al the hée saints and shee saints of Paradise, to employ their liues, their goods, and all their meanes to the defence of the Catholick religion, and doo protest, that all that which they doo in this vnion, is for the setting foorth of Gods glory, and for the defence of the holy Church. Secondly, they sweare to defend the citie of Paris, with the state there e∣stablished, & also other cities of their association, which then were, or might be hereafter. Thirdly, they sweare to defend the Princes, to wit, the Dukes d' Mayne and Aumale, (for so they loue well to be called) the Priestes, Lords, and Gentlemen, vnited with them, both in their persons and goods, with the li∣berty of the states of the realme.
Last of all, they sweare to pursue by al meanes possible them that haue violated the publick faith, broken the vnion, franchizes and liberties of the  states (meaning the King) in committing the massacre (so they cal the iust punishment) of the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinall his brother, without any respect of persons, dignity or prerogatiue whatsoeuer, and also al them who shall fauour and assist the King by any meanes, with promise neuer to forsake one another. As this rebellious people did rage in the Senat house, in the counsell of the citie, and in their pretended states; so the people are set at liberty to commit al outrages & violences; the poorer sort are against the rich, the vile person against the honorable, the wicked against the vertuous, the igno∣rant and blinde against the learned: to be short, there is nothing but an in∣fernall horror. The Iesuits, Friers, & other vncleane fowles of like feathers, doo rage no lesse in the places and charges appoynted vnto them, to wit, in rayling most villanously against the King, and slandering the King of Nauarre, and them of the reformed religion, for the causes aboue saide, making their pulpets the trompets of murther, treason, and rebellion: for beside that, they did inuaigh against the King in all manner of vile tearmes, and interpreting all his actions maliciously to the worst: they also forbad the people, vpon paines of spirituall and bodily punishment (for if they did, it was a capitall crime) to pray for the King. Also the inhabitantes of the citie of Rhemes in Champaigne published an infamous libell, comming forth out of the Iesuites forge, bearing this title. A grieuous lamentation of the inhabitants of the citie of Rehmes, vp∣on the death of the Cardinal, Archbishop of Rehmes, peere of France, and what may he not be if they would. That libell was sawced with infa∣mous inectiues, vnworthy and outragious speeches against the king, by their language: the authors thereof did testifie sufficiently their con∣sent in the rebellion of other towns and cities. And seeing that the priests, Iesuites and Friers, did say such a masse at the funerall of their Bishop, it was no marueile if the ignorant people who beleeued them, answered Amen. And for as much as among those rebellious countreys and cities, there were none of the reformed religion, vpon whome they might spew their gall, they called their owne Priestes, Parsons, Vicars and Curates, for to subscribe vnto their rebellion, charging them vpon payne of death, not to pray (in their massing) for the King. But such as kept an vpright heart to their Prince, and would not conient to their prohibition, but in their prayers or otherwise did wish well to the King, were executed as male factors: and great fauour was shewed them, vpon great intrea∣tie of friends, if they might escape with depriuation of their liuings, or
imprisonment, and cary away their liues for a pray. And by such iniuries shewed vnto their owne priests, they placed such as were fit to serue their  turnes, in kindling more and more the fire of sedition. The third taske appoynted to the Fryers and Iesuites, was to render the King of Nauarre and them of his part, execrable in the eares of all men, that by the consent and generall misliking of all men (if it were pos∣sible) he might be excluded from his right of succession. The occasion was thus. The 26. of December, the King of Nauarre had surprized the towne of Niort in Poytow, of the taking it, & of the said Kings gracious goodnes and clemency shewed vnto the inhabitants his deadly enemies, which had committed great outrages vpon them of the reformed Religion, against his owne person, against the Princes of the blood, and of late agaynst the Lord Valette, an officer of the Crowne of France, as it is sufficiently spoken of before. These writers of lies (to testifie to the world whose Children they are) did set foorth such ridiculous falshoods, and execrable calumnies, and that with as much assurance, as they tell vs of their lies and lying miracles, which they did worke with their holywater among the sauadge people of Giapane, whether they be sure that no man will send to enquire about the truth of the matter, with so bolde and impudent faces they did auerre most manifest lies, which out of any parte of France might bee disprooued within foure dayes. The shamles pamphlet went abroade with this inscription: The exe∣crable cruelties committed by the heretiks against the Catholicks of the towne of Niort in Poytow. The fable sayth, that they of the religon would neuer haue taken that towne, without the intelligences of the politicks (that is to say, of them which fauour the king) which were within the sayde towne. It is sayde in the Pamphlet, that the Kinges officers of Iustice were slayne, that the Maior and the Aldermen of the towne were hanged. That many were hanged, onely for that they would not denie their religion: also, that all the Priests and Monkes were hanged for com∣panie. Also a Priest was opened aliue before his fellowes (by terror to make him denie God) and his noble partes were pulled out, but they remayned as constant as rocks for all those cruelties, and valiantly suffered mar∣tyrdome. That there were innocent persons killed in such great number through the towne, euen betweene two or three hundred persons, so that the streets flowed with blood and dead bodies.
That the heretikes (as the fable sayth) tooke a woman which reprooued them of their cruelties, whom they would haue enforced to deny the Masse;  which thing shee refusing, they filled her belly with powder, and then set fire to it to make hir burst: so that (sayth the lyer) there is nigh three hun∣dered martirs there put to death which are now in heauen. These holy Martyrs may be called in one word, holy . All this lying lybell is easily confuted, euen by the inhabitants them∣selues, by the Magistrates, by the Priestes, who there do liue in liberty of their Religion, and by all the people, who will testify that there was no such thing, nor otherwise then is recited in the discourse of the surprise of their towne, but will testify of the Christian mildnes, clemency, and mo∣deratnes of the King of Nauarre and surprisers, to haue béene far greater then euer they could haue expected, or had deserued at his hands. But this grosse kind of lying was spread abroad to hasten the rebellion of the Citties, and to render the people vntamed and hard harted, agaynst true and dutiful obedience whatsoeuer might fall hereafter: as if to fall in∣to the handes of the King of Nauarre, and of them of the Religion, were to fall among sauage beastes, mad Tygers and cruell Lyons. The King considering that the more he endeuored himselfe to winne the rebels by gentlenes, clemency, and promising of impunity; the more hard∣ned, obstiuate, insolent and bolde they became. Seeing that he must be driuen by force to chastise their rebellions, first he procéedeth against them by order of law. And for as much as the Dukes de Mayne, Aumale, and Cheualier Aumale, he as if it were subroged in the places of the Duke of Guyze and the Cardinal his brother: the King doth first and chiefly proceede iudicially agaynst them three by proscripti∣on, as attaynted of fellonie, rebellion, and high treason. First, the King doth shew himselfe to be a King ordayned and geuen of God, hauing receaued of God that sword and power which he had not by vsurpation, but by lawfull and naturall right of succession. Secondly, hee doth shew the great benefites, which hee and the Kings his predecessors had bestowed vpon them, and namely, that he hath spa∣red their liues (whom he might iustly haue punished for their diuers at∣temptes, fellonies, and disobedience) for the loue which hee had vnto them and their house. He sheweth also, how he had since this their last rebellion, sent vnto them diuers of his faythfull seruants with letters, and euen Heraulds of arms, to let them vnderstand his good will and readines to put vp all iniuries & offences, and to receaue them to his fauour. But that in stead of humbling themselues, and of accepting his gracious fauour, they became more inso∣lent: which they haue shewed in surprising his townes, fortresses, and in rebelling agaynst him, his Officers and Magistrates, couering their trea∣sons
vnder the name of Catholike religion. Therefore he doth declare the sayd Dukes de Mayne and Aumale, to  haue forfayted all estates, and offices, honors, power, gouerments, char∣ges, dignities, and prerogatiues, which they haue receaued of his predeces∣sors, and himselfe: hee doth declare them attaynted of fellony, rebellion, and high treason, commaundeth his Officers to proceed agaynst them by any maner of way, and agaynst their posterity, as agaynst such as he hath declared them, if they do not submit themselues by the first day of March next following. This proscription was declared the first day of Februa∣ry. The same day also the King pronounced the like proscriptions against the rebellious and trayterous Citties of Paris, Orleans, Anjous, Roen, A∣beuile, and others, declaring them conuicted of fellony, rebellion, and trea∣son in the highest degree, willing all his officers to proceede agaynst them, and against al them that doo, or shall assist them by any meanes, and against their posterity, as agaynst such as they be declared, if they do not returne vnder his obedience by the 14. day of march next following. The King intending by these thunderclaps to call them to their dutie, purposing yet to haue forgotten all offences, for the loue which he had to popish religion, common to the rebels with him, and for hatred of the re∣formed religion, gaue them (as is aforesaid) a certayne day prefixed, by the which tyme if they did not returne to their duty, he determined to cha∣stise them by force: and therefore the sixt day of February, hee sent forth his commissions to all Nobles, Gentlemen, and Captaynes, to prepare themselues with all furniture necessary, to repayre to him the 12. of March following. Neither is the sentence of the King an ydle threatning, but is (as if it were) a condemnation of Gods law, pronounced by the soueraigne Magistrate, whose punishments God hath partly executed, and partly hath reserued to execute hereafter in the fulnes of time. About the middle of February, the King vnderstanding what had passed in Paris, how the rebels had enforced the Senat to swear an vnion against him, his life, person and estate, did transport the exercise of iustice, and of all his courts, and chambers of Parliament from Paris: and also all other courts of iustice in the aforesaid townes of Orleans, Aujous, Abeuile, Roen, and others, to his citie of Tours vpon Loyre, deprauing the sayd trayterous cities of al offices, dignities, charges, and priuileges, commaunding al his Iudges, Counsellers, & officers of al his courts in the said cities, to repaire to the citie of Tours vpon Loyre by the fifteenth of Aprill next following, there to execute their charges, vpon payne of depriuation of their wages & offices: forbiddeth also, that no apparance be giuen by any officer vnto a∣ny suter, and also no parties to appeare in any other place saue in Tours onely before his Iudges there, vpon payne to be declared rebels. It is sayd before, how wee haue left the King of Nauarre sicke in bed of
a dangerous pleuresie, whilest the League haue nigh filled the measure of their execrable treasons and rebellion. Now the Lord reseruing that noble Prince, if not to restablish the flourishing estate of that Realm, yet he hath  raised him as it were out of his graue, to prolong the vtter dissipation of it, and in the middest of the horrible confusions thereof, to reunite the hearts and mindes of the godly and vertuous, to saue some corner of the sayd Realme, for a place of refuge for the remnant of the Israel of God. Be∣hold therefore O great King, the Lord hath restored thée to health, streng∣thened thine armes to warre, and thy hands to fight; he hath girded thée with force, constancie, wisedome and iustice; the Lord of Armies doth call thee to restore true religion, iustice, iudgement, Discipline and peace, vt∣terly decayed through the malice of thine enemies; be strong and faint not, for the Lord will put a great worke in thine hand to execute. Followe the vocation of God, and the Lord will be a shadowe at thy right hand to kéepe thée from euill: doo good things with good meanes, and thou shall see thine enemies to fall before thy face, thou shalt pitie them and do them good. Whilest the King doth so thunder the threatnings of Gods lawe, and the claps of his iustice agaynst those Rebels, forsaken and reiected of God (as is afore sayd); the King of Nauarre perceiuing the King to be in di∣stresse, persecuted and dispossessed out of his Towns and Cities, euen out of his owne houses by his enemies abroade, and to liue in great mistrust of his domesticall enemies, who did daily eate bread at his owne table; did greatly lament his case, keepeth himselfe quiet beyond Loyre, ceaseth from all acts of hostilitie and exployts of warre, least he should encrease his af∣fliction and heauines. And desirous greatly to make a proofe of his fideli∣tie towards the King, and to crosse the actions of the leagued rebels, prof∣fereth peace to the King, and watcheth diligently that his enemies might not set foote in any place where hee had meanes to make sure for the kings seruice, as for the ease of them of the religion. So that after the taking of Niort, (as is afore sayd) in the latter end of Ianuary the inhabitants of S. Meixant and Maillezay, two Townes nigh neighbours of Niort, yeelded themselues vnto him. The Lord Aubiguy was appoynted Gouernour of that Iland. About the 14. of February, the King of Nauarre hauing recouerd his perfect health and strength, with part of his forces tooke the field march∣ing toward the riuer of Loyre. The inhabitants of Lodune, Lisle, Bouchard, Mirabean, Chastelerault, Vinonne, and other places and Castles of the countrey of Turenne and Poytow, offered to open the gates of their townes vnto him, and also proffered vnto him their seruices. He receiued them ve∣ry courteously, and without innouation of any thing; he suffered them of the Romish religion to liue with all libertie with their ordinarie exercises: onely he commanded them of the reformed religion, with the exercise of the
same, there to be established, commaunding them of both religions to liue in amitie and peace. About the same time many Townes and places in diuers parts of the Realme (which before did seeme to bee at the deuotion of the Leaguers) were made sure for the Kings seruice, as well in Bourgondy as in other Prouinces, and among others, the Towne and Castle of Sancerre in Berry was seazed for the King. That Towne had béen greatly defaced in the former warres: for the walles of the Towne had béen rased by the Lord Chastre, Gouernour of Berry, who did put a Captaine within the Castle for the kéeping of the same, and to bridle the inhabitants there who were all of the religion. But after the death of the Duke of Guize, the Lord of Requien of the house of Montigny, Captayne of the Kings gardes, seazed both vpon the Towne and Castle, (the which Towne notwithstanding it was without walles, yet being situated on high and in a strong place by nature) hee vndertooke to fortifie the same, by the helpe of them of the reli∣gion, who did so resort thether from euery where daily, that the sayd Lord Requien waxed strong there (as hee is a valiant man) employed himselfe with them of the religion, to make warre against the rebelled Leaguers for the Kings seruice. About the 23. of February, the King of Nauarre being at Chastelerault, tooke occasion to seaze vppon the Castle and the Towne of Argenton in Berry by the meanes which followe. That place doth pertaine to the Lord▪ Monpensier, but it was graunted to the Lady Dwager of Monpensier, sister to the last Duke of Guize, by her contract of marriage, hauing that honour shewed her, to haue married the Duke of Monpensier, Prince of the bloud, and father to this Duke yet liuing. In the beginning of this last warre of the League, the castell of Argen∣ton strong and well furnished, was made sure for the League, the towne remayned at libertie as being not strong, and commaunded by the Castell. But after the death of the Duke of Guize, the garison of the Castell was increased double, intending thereby to assure the towne: also the garison vnderstanding of the taking of Chastelerault, (which is not farre of) by the King of Nauarre, fearing that which afterward happened vnto them, they sent to the Duke d'Mayne for succour, who sent certaine Captaines with their companies from Orleans. They of the towne refusing the asso∣ciation of the rebellion of the Leaguers, and willing to remaine faithfull to the King, doo aduertise him of all their estate and good wil towards him, doo require succor of him, as well against them of the Castell as others, which did approach to seaze vpon their town. The dispatch could not bée in so short space, but that in the meane time, they of the towne and of the Ca∣stell fell at variance vppon the matter, each party trusting in the succour which they hoped for.
The King of Nauarre aduertised of al this, and of the succour sent, they there by the Leaguers nigh aduaunced, with certaine troupes of horsemen,  determined to make them agrée; and vsing his accustomed celerity, it fell out with him so happely, that hee preuented them in a moment who were sent from Orleans, sending before some of his gardes, who entred on a sud∣daine into the towne, to the great amaze of the garison of the Castell. At the ariuing of the gardes of the king of Nauarre, there was a hot skirmish, and some were killed on both sides: few of the King of Nauarre his gardes, but many more of the garison; but when the Leaguers of the Ca∣stell saw the companies of the King of Nauarre, first they were amazed, and shortly after, conceauing a great terror yéelded the place. After that the King of Nauarre had taken possession of that place, he ap∣poynted the Lord Beaupre gouernour there, where he established the exer∣cise of the reformed religion with liberty and safety, in stead of the romish religion, as in other places. The King of Nauarre returned to Chastelerault, where considering how the King was in great danger, both abroad and at home, how hée had euill counsell giuen him, pittying his estate, and considering that hee could not bée moued, neither to make, nor to accept of his seruice for his defence: considering also that the Leagued rebels waxed strong, and the King weake, he putteth forth a protestation, bearing date the fourth of March; wherein he sheweth, that notwithstanding his affaires, and estate of them of the reformed religion was neuer stronger, who within thrée yeares, hath borne the fury of ten mighty armies, whereof some had béen beaten to cloutes, the others haue béen scattered as dust in the ayre; hee doubteth not, but the same God will strengthen him with the same force, and will defend alwaies hereafter his iust cause and innocency: yet hee dooth proffer them, that if the King will hearken vnto peace, hee was neuer so willing to imbrace it. Furthermore, hée proffereth himselfe to heare reason, and to bée taught by a conference and a counsell, promising that if he be conuicted by the word of God to be in any error, he will reuoke it, and bring all them of the reformed religion to doo the like. But to bring him out of that religi∣on, wherein he hath béen borne and brought vp, euen from his cradell; with the dint of the sword, he warneth them, that therein they haue taken a con∣trary course, by which they will neuer preuaile. Last, hee dooth adiure all the states by the name of God, by the ashes of their ancestors, by the loue of their natiue countrey, to counsell the King to this ordinary course, or else to deuise some better if they can, by the which they may stop the subuersion of their countrey. About this time came the excommunication rowling from the capitall, and thundering, like vnto a , of the olde Come∣dy, pronounced against the King, for the execution done at Bloys, vpon the
persons of the Duke of Guize, the Popes champion, and the Cardinal the saide Popes Chapline, and the imprisonmént of the Cardinal of Bourbon,  and the Archbishop of Lyons, shot out of the belly of Frier Sixtus, at the sute of rebels. With the stinke of this  of Frier Six∣tus, came forth out of the bottomles pit of hell a number of Iesuites and Friers, and such misbegotten monsters, to raile, to accurse, & defame their lawfull and naturall King and Prince ordained of God, without any re∣morse of conscience. Many of the Leaguers, who after the death of their Captaine had han∣ged downe their heads, had retyred to such places as they thought sure far them: some other who had forsaken their faith, their promise, and oath giuen to the League, now considering foure accidents which had happe∣ned, and seen to fauour the affaires of the rebels, doo rebell a new, doo for∣sake their King, whom God, nature, thankfulnes, and nobility commaun∣ded to dye at his feete. First, the vnseasonable lenitie, or rather pusillanimitie of the King, who had stated the execution of iustice for such notorious and hainous treasons committed, not against him, but against GOD in his person, whome God had consecrated to that high dignitie, vpon the heads onely of Guize and the Cardinal his brother, and in the imprisonmēt of six of the chiefest, without proceeding any further. Secondly, Fryer Sixtus his excommunication, by the which they sup∣posed (though not in conscience but in passion onely) themselues to be set at liberty to doe whatsoeuer without any grudge of conscience. Thirdly, the beating away of the kings garisons and forces out of the citadell of Orleans by the Duke de Maine, therein supposing in a manner (for so is the blindnes of mans passion) to haue conquered all France. Lastly, the euill counsell of leagued dissemblers and dissembling tray∣tors, whom they knew to be about the Kings person in great number, wayting for opportunitie to deliuer him prisoner to his enemies, or else to dispatch him out of his life with one blow; knowing that by their coun∣sels, his forces diminished, his cities and strong holdes were surprized, his enemies waxed strong. But specially they feared greatly the playes and tricks which they had taught Charles the ninth his brother and him, which they had played many times with them of the religion, they I say feared at length to bee snared in the like springes. Therefore all these things wel considered, they begin euery where to strike the alarum, and prepare themselues to the battell, against God, their King, their countrey, their lierties, and the graues of their fathers. So that the Lords Brissak, Chastre, and Boysdauphin, to whome a lit∣tle before the king had forgiuen great treasons, who a little before had promised with an oath, obediēce to the king, who did shewe a semblant of
great ioy, for the execution done at Bloys, they priuily doo steale away and breaking their fayth, promise and allegeaunce to their king, reuolted a∣gayne  to the enemie. Brissak went to Angers, where he thought to cause that Citie to rebell agaynst the king: for some of the citie of Angers, had hitherto dissembled their affection and good wills, whch they had to the league and rebellion, as well because they had the king at Bloys and Tours, who looked to them neerely and narrowly, as for not hauing the meanes to execute their en∣terprize. But now at the reuolcing of Brissak, they made him head of their enterprize, for to seaze vpon the Castell (one of the strongest places in all France). And for to bring their counsell to a good passe with speede, fearing least by delay they might be preuanted by the king, being so nigh them; therefore they followe a short course: for first they trie what cor∣ruption may doe. They doo promise to the Lord Pichery, gouernour of the Castell, an hundred thousand crownes, and to entertaine foure thou∣sand footmen, so that he would keepe it for the league. The Lord Pichery (as a faith full seruant to his Prince) refused all those proffers: whereupon the Lord Brissak with the rest of the rebells within the towne did assault the Castel, and fortified themselues by all meanes, with trenches and barricadoes vpon the ditch of the sayd Castell. Whereuppon the Lord Pichery aduertised the King of the state of his affayres and attempts of the Lord Brissak, and inhabitantes of the towne. The King sent the Marshall Haumont with the regiment of Picardy, and part of his guardes, who were admitted into the Castell by the Lord Pichery, who opened vnto them the great bridge of the said Castell. Assoone as the Marshall Haumont entred into the Castel, although the rebels were in farre greater number, yet the skirmish began: then was it tyme for the enemy to packe away in hast, many of the rebels were slayne. There they were taken prisoners to the Kings vse so many as yeelded one hundred throusand crownes for raunsome. Some were executed in the towne, and chiefly some Iesuits and Fryers, who had beene the firebrands to kindle the combustion, and the trompets of the rebellion. The Lord Brissak (head of the rebellion) there saued himselfe by flight with few of his company, and seazing vpon the townes of Mans, Alençon, and Faleze, caused the inhabitants there to rebell agaynst the King. About the same time (the Duke Mercure desirous to get the fauour of the townes and people, to assure better the dutchy of Britaine to himselfe) tooke vpon him the name of protector of the Romish Church in that pro∣uince of Britanie, by the helpe of the Bishops, and other rabble of that si∣nagogue, who prescribed certaine formes vnto the Iesuites and Friers, whereby in theyr sermons, to bring the people to that deuotion. Although Christian Reader, thou mayst easily perceaue by the whole
course of this his history, how from time to time the house of Guyze, who were not so much by nature as to bee admitted into the society of the No∣bility of France, at the first made a fayre wether, after that preferred them  selues before the Princes of the bloud. And when through too much lenity of the house of Valoys toward them, they had obtayned that, they haue practized to steale away the hearts of subiects from their natural Prince, & at length haue enterprized vpon his life. And when by a singular proui∣dence, God had deliuered the King out of their snares and clawes, and see they are not able to depriue him of his life, they doo depriue him of his Crowne ad dignitie. First by the iudgment of Sorboune. Secondly, by the assotiatiation with they haue sworne to present him to death by all meanes possible. Thirdly, by taking away from him the name of King, though not in plaine tearmes, yet by paraphrase: as when one taketh vp∣on him to be the protector of the Crown of France, y• other protector of the Church, and giue the same to themselues, which propery is and hath beene the office of the king of France. For the Kings in France haue had alwayes that honour (as due vnto them by right) to be Protectors of the Crowne, Dignitie, State, Kingdome, Church and people of their do∣minions, and neuer yeelded that title to any man, neither durst euer any man vsurpe that title, vntill this yeare 1589. by these two companions, to wit, the Dukes de Mayne and Mercure. But it may be obiected, that the same title hath béene geuen and taken to the King of Nauarre, as protector of the reformed churchs of France, and therefore they do that which the heretikes haue taught them. To this it may be answered, that the case is not alike, for the reformed churches were forsaken of the King without any cause, at the solicitation of flatterrs, sycophantes, and clawbakes, who to bring the King to that confusion that hee is come vto, did hold his kingdome into troubles and ciuill warres, by litle and little to entrench vpon his authority, & at length to tread him downe vnder feete. That part therefore of the Kings sub∣iects, which was the best, though not the greater in number, being wrong∣fully put from the Kings protection, and assaulted euery where, haue re∣course, not to a stranger, nor strange bloud, the first Peere and Prince of France, who after the King hath most interest to the Crowne, him they haue requested to protect them vnder the Kings authority, against the vio∣lences of them, who did so counsell the King to forsake the protection of his people. But these companyons, what hath moued them to vsurpe these tytles: The King did neuer forsake the Crowne, nor the Romish Church in god∣liues that way, in zeale, in integrity, and austericy of life, in wisedome, prudence and fortitude, to defend the romish Church: he hath passed all the Kings of all ages, he hath bestowed his forces, hath spent his goods, hath
ventered his life diuers times, hath made shipwracke of his honor for the defence of the Romish Church. What neede therefore had that church of  any other protector then their owne King, whose bountifulnes and libera∣lity they so oftentimes haue tryed: Whilest these things did so passe at Angers, the citty of Nantes vppon Loyre began to hault, by the secret practises and treacheries of the seditious Leaguers, who were within the cittie. But when the newes came of the taking of Angers, and of the execution done vpon some seditious Iesuits, and other Fryers, the rebels at Nantes tooke the alarum in this wise: for the Ladyes Martignes, & Mercure, wife to the Duke of Mercure, go∣uernour of Britayne, tooke occasion thereupon to hasten the rebellion: for beeing aduertised that many of the cheefest officers of iustice in that cittie, as also other good Citizens faithful to the King, seeing the practises which were wrought in their cittie by the Leaguers, did disswade theyr fellowe citizens to geue eare to such seditious persons, and aduised them rather to remayne faythful vnto the King, then to draw vpon themselues the Kings wrath with a cruell and mortall warre. For to breake the good purpose and intents of these men, and to chastise them for their too great fidelity to their King: These Ladies sent for two Captaynes of the towne, well knowen for their seditious practises & great affection to the traytors; they shewed vnto these two Captaynes their pas∣sions, with great amplifications of the thinges past at Angers. They began by many inuectiues and spitefull speaches against the K. to shew how the King had put to death a great number of Priests and Fri∣ers, who were taken at the winning of Angers, how he had taken the cha∣lices and relickes, and wholly became an heretike: then with much lying they fell to talke of them whom they would haue to bee taken prisoners in the citty, charging them that they sought to bring into their cittye the K. of Nauarre, with all his troups, with determination to haue the cittie ran∣sacked, to take away their goods, liues, and religion, and that therefore it was needfull they rayse the people to rebellion out of hand, to seaze vppon them which were faythfull to the King, and make the citty sure for the League. The chiefest Captaine appointed for this execution, was one Gassion a Gascoine, brought vp in the house of Martignes, and greatly affected to the League. An order before that time was, that the said Gassion for one halfe yeare commaunded in the castell, and the Lord Crambok, who was faithfull to the King, the other halfe yeare; this man no authority then at all. The counsell of these two accursed women was quickly executed by the said Gassion, hauing for that time the rule of the castell. The people vpon these furmises were armed, the streats were fortify to with Baricadoes.
The first execution of this rebellion, was the apprehending of foure score of the most notable men and richest families in all the Citie; and a∣mong  the rest were the Lord Miron the Kings threasurer in Britaine, the Lord Bourin a great Lawier, and one Doctor Rogues Dean of the facul∣tie of Phisicke, and many other faithfull seruants of the King, who were put in straight prison in the Castle, their houses were spoyled and goods rifled. The Citie being thus made sure for the League by the Rebells, the countrey about was not free from that tempest; light horses are sent into places most suspected; many gentlemen are taken prisoners abroad, with∣out respect of age, qualitie or religion: such as did escape with the losse of their goods, thought to haue sped well. In like manner, the Citie of Rhemes, head Citie of the lowe Britaine, (which had behaued themselues modeslie enough hetherto) might greatly haue fauoured & aduaunced the treasons of the Duke Mercure, if he could haue got it to his deuotion. But for that purpose, first it was needfull to haue the helpe of the Bishop of the place, named Emare Hannekin, sonne to a citizen of Paris; for the stage play could not bee well seazoned with mirth, except a Priest might play the diuels part. Sir Hannekin therfore bestirreth himselfe all that euer he can to bring his treason to passe; but his credite being there yet vnder age and small account, he taketh the Bishop of Dole of the noble of Espinay, to countenance the play, being also assisted by a citizen named Botelier, who was much beholding to the sayd Sir Hannekin, because he was such a louing ghostly father to his wife: he had also some other citizens, & some of the court of Parliament there, men of faction, who secretly set their shoulders to that worke. All this blessed com∣panie, by the counsell of these two sedicious Priests, deuisers of rebellion against their naturall and lawfull Prince, doo raise vp the people in armes, giuing to vnderstand (though most falsly) that the Lord Huuanday, Lieu∣tenant generall for the K. in that countrey, the Lord Moubarot gouernor of the Towne, and the Lord Asserake who accompanied them, would haue oppressed the libertie of the Towne, and brought in garrisons to sacke it. Vppon this false rumour spread abroade by those two lying Priests, the people armed did seaze vppon the Market place, and fortified the streates with Barricadoes. The Duke Mercure (who then was a petie King at Nantes) aduerti∣sed of these things so passing at Rhemes, and desirous to enlarge his new∣ly swallowed vp kingdome of little Britaine, doth gather forces as great as he can, and fayning to goe to Ʋaunes to the States of the countrey, ta∣keth his way to Rhedon, and turned vp short to Rhemes, where he arriuing was receaue with great ioy of thē of the League, he put garrisons within the tower of the Fuller, within the gate of S. George, & in the white gate.
It was time then for the Lords Huuanday, Montbarot, and Asserak, to keepe themselues close within their houses, being sought out for no lesse  matter then for the price of their liues. The Lord Montbarot had seazed vppon the tower of the gate Mordelese: hee was summoned by the Duke Mercure to yeeld the sayd tower into his hands, which thing he refused to doo, saying that there he was placed for the King and for his seruice. Vpon this refusall the Canon was brought before the Tower, and many houses pearced, to make it ready to the battery. There was no appearance to sus∣taine a battery, much lesse to hope for any succour: which thinges béeing considered, the Lord Montbarot agreed and yeelded the place with hono∣rable conditions both for himselfe and his fellowes. By these meanes Mercure remained master of the place, whereof hee changed the whole estate and gouernment, placing therein men at his de∣uotion: there he caused a Iesuit most bitterly, seditiously, and vnworthy to inueygh and rayle agaynst the King: he dispatched a Captaine Spaniard named Iohn with his company to scoure ye country, hee did execrable op∣pressions, robbing and sacking all indifferently, he tooke many gentlmens houses, which he robbed, & many men whom he cruelly entreated, and put to great raunsoms, sparing neither Nobles nor others of the romish reli∣gion, for that onely they were faithfull to the King. This exploit done, Mercure gathered as great forces of men of warre as he could, and from thence tooke his iourney toward Fongeres in the low Britayne, a towne which he had gone about long before to seduce, and had the chiefst of the inhabitants at his deuotion, they receaued him very wil∣lingly: and hauing the towne he agreed with the Captaine of the castell, who solde him the place with all the moueable goods and furniture there∣in belonging to his master the Marquesse Roche, for the summe of fifteen thousand crownes which he receaued. In Aprill the Lord Bordage and other Gentlemen of the religion, ac∣companied  with few men, tooke the town of Vitre, belonging to the yong Lord Laual: which thing when Merceur (who was then at Fongers) vn∣derstood, hee sent a Gentleman of Britaine named Tailowet, with cer∣taine companies of men of warre, and the commons of the countrey, whom he raised vp in armes to the number of sixe thousands: they besieged Vitre the space of fiue wéekes, but the place was valiantly defended by the saide Gentlemen and their small company. During this siege in the moneth of May, they of Roen (hauing receaued  letters from the King, by the helpe of some honest and faithfull men) came againe to their right wittes, and returned to the Kinges obedi∣ence, with whom they agréed for the impunity of that offence which was past. They tooke prisoner the Lord Charroniere, whome Merceur at his departing to Fongeres, had left there gouernour: they tooke also the Spa∣nish
Moore, to wit, Captaine Iohn, and many other of that faction and be∣hauiour, if the Lorde Merceur had béen there, it had béen an easie thing to  haue taken him also. Whilest these things were a dooing on both sides, the Lord Morlak en∣tred into the Castell Iosselin, the strongest place of all Britaine, for the Kings seruice. The Lord Saint Lauuers, a Captaine of the Leaguers, with certaine companies, enterprised to surprise the Towne, and so to kill Morlak therein, choosing for the executiō of his purpose, the day which they call holy Friday, a day of great deuotion among the Papists, least of al su∣spected, and so to haue taken it when they should haue béen busie about their ceremonies and enchauntings: so he surprised the towne, but not the Lord Morlak, who did holde the Castell. Whilest these broyles did so passe in Britayn, in other places also (as if it were at a day apponted) the traiterous Leaguers tooke Molins in Borbon∣noys, situated vpon the riuer Allier, which rising out of the Mountaines of Anuergne, falleth into Loyre at the towne Charite. That place was well defended by the Lord Rostayn: but being set on when the Garison was absent, for lack of men the towne was caried away to the Leaguers. About the selfe same time, the faction of the League in the citie of Bour∣deaux shewed themselues, and attempted to surprise the towne against the King. They had conspired an accursed practise, both against the Marshall Matignon (the Kings gouernour there) and also against the towne, and good inhabitants, who were knowne to bée faithfull to the King: their in∣tent was to stab the said Marshall Matignon, to saze vpon the citie and Castles, and to kill all them that should not bée of their side. The traitors had made a great preparation of shippes at Browage, had stayed many shippes which were bound to Newland for fishing, to fauour the enterprise vpon Bourdeaux. Vpon Easter euen, therebels there vppon the watch word, rose vp in armes, part of them did seaze vpon the gate of Saint Iulien; and part of them had incamped themselues at another side without the citie. The Magistrates of the citie séeing this commotion, with strong hand went toward them, who had stayed vpon the gate Saint Iulien, the rebels did resist the Magistrates, and beate them back. The Marshall Matignon taking part of the Garisons out of the Castells, with the assistance of the inhabitants, faithfull to the King, dooth march with some forces a foote through the streates of the towne, toward the gate that they had seazed vp∣on. The rebells séeing this power comming against them, without any fight began to faint, and in a while after to run away, and shift for them∣selues, yet could they not so spéedily auoyde, but there was fiue slaine vpon the place, & many of that conspiracie were apprehended. There were two executed, one a captaine of the citie, and the other was of the gades of the
Marshal, who declared the whole conspiracie, and accused a great number, and of the chiefest of the citie. They who had remayned within the towne,  fearing to be detected, by reason of a guiltie conscience; the night folowing left behinde them their maker, whome they shoulde haue swallowed downe whole and aliue the next day following being Easter day. They leapt ouer the walls: for on the morow, a great number of ropes were found hanging at the wals, by which they slided down: the greatest part of them retyred to Browage, and shortly after the King sent eyght hundred Launce-knights, there to bée in Garison to kéepe the rest in their due∣tie. Whilest these rebellions were a working in Britayne, and other places and Prouinces of the realme, the King vnderstanding the greatest part of his realme to be reuolted from his obedience, and how a great many No∣blemen and Gentlemen whome he hath forgiuen at Bloys, and let scape vn∣punished, abusing his lenitie, or rather accounting it (as it was in trueth) pusillanimitie, had turned againe to his enemies, began to fal in great mi∣strust, and to despaire both of himselfe and of his estate. The Leaguers who were about his person, to increase this his amaze, aduertised him (though falsely for the most part) that the Spaniard, the Princes, and States of Italy, the Dukes of Sauoy and Lorreyne, had sworne the reuenge∣ment of the death of the Duke of Guize. Also they perswaded him, that he was not in safety at Bloys, and therefore aduised him to retyre to Tours: this counsell they gaue him, not for any care which they had of his safetie, although that God turned it to the best, but for that they thought to haue more assistance there, to performe their wicked intent purposed against him, that citie being great and populous, and where were many of the chiefest Leagued, who had promised their helpe to the traitors. They tolde him also how the King of Nauarre with great power ap∣proched, and was already at Saumour to passe ouer Loyre for to inuade the Realme. The king not knowing what to doe, nor whom to trust, and perceiuing thē that were at Bloys for the most part to be his secret enemies, & to haue intelligēces wt the rebels, in the latter end of March departed from Bloys, and remoued to Tours, being wel assured, that at al extremities he should haue the King of Nauarre (whose fidelitie and valour he knew well, how∣soeuer the Leaguers of his counsel did terrifie him of his forces) there nigh at hand and ready to succour him, although that so oftentimes hee had been deaffe at his most reasonable counsells. The king being at Tours, the first thing which hee did was in the be∣ginning of Aprill, there he depriued the Duke Mercure of his gouern∣ment, of lands, dignities, offices and prerogatiues to him granted by him, for his treasons committed against his Maiestie in his gouernment.
In the beginning of Aprill the king being at Tours, and perceiuing the great dangers which compassed him about on euery side, hauing many  Leaguers of his counsell and about his person, the Citie for the most part leagued, bent against him: by the meanes of some of his saythfull counsellers, as of the Marshals Biron and Hautmont and others, and considering more deepely the reasonable and modest protestation of the K. of Nauarre, who in his great prosperitie (yet of late craueth for peace) desireth to be taught proffereth his seruice to the king, willeth them to de∣uise some good wayes to remedie the horrible confusions which doe ouer∣flow France, began to hearken to some good and moderate counsell, as to take some truces with the said king of Nauarre, & to vse his counsell and forces for his iust and lawfull defence. In the moneth of March following, after the taking of the Citadel of Orleans by the rebels, and the ennouatious which they had made in Paris, in the changing of the State, and treading downe vnder foote the kings royall authoritie: The Dukes of Mayne and Aumale began to shew such ielousies and suspitions, which ambition did worke in their hearts, as it did before in the two brethren, to wit, the Dukes of Guize and Maine. For the Duke de Mayne was caryed to the vsurpation of the Monar∣chy after his brothers death, as if it were vpon the shoulders o. rebells, and would haue had been sory, if his cousin (the Duke de Aumale) should haue had either the whole or else any part thereof in superioritie, but ra∣ther desirous that he should depend of his commaundements, and there∣fore did holde him short, with secret practizes and factions. The Duke d' Aumale would haue beene glad to haue had all to him∣selfe rather than his cosin, and if not all, yet he thought to get as good part in the cake as he might; but the factious were not so fauourable vnto him as to the other. Fearing therefore some Guizien trick (such as hee was well acquainted with) to be played against him by the helpe of the muti∣nous Parisiens, he putteth on a good countenance, and after infinite sack∣ings, riflings, and manifolde robberyes committed vpon the rich Mar∣chaunts and others in Paris (for in those dayes all rich men were either royalls or hereticks) he departed out of the Citie into Picardy, where he thought his parte might bee stronger, and hee mought bee in greater safetie. Mercure on the other side, for his part, was content if he might make sure vnto himselfe the Dutchie of Britaine, supposing that the throte of his ambition was not so wide as that he might swallow down the whole kingdom & Crown of France, yet betweene them 3. the glorious name of the League, and holy vnion, holy Church, and holy Catholick Religion did rowle among them, and were patched by the Fryers and Iesuites, for an olde gaberdine to hide vnder all their treacheries against the king,
and robberies against his subiects. All these things did flie abroad vnder the authoritie of the newe great generall Protector of the Crowne of  France, to wit, the Duke de Mayne, to whome that title was giuen by conspirators assembled at Paris, vnder the name of States, as it is afore sayde. All these three did well agree together in resisting the kings authority, and oppressing the kings subiects euery where, euery man reseruing to himselfe his owne thoughts: yet would they not be kept so secret, but that their enuies, ielousies and enimities, sometime would flame out, so that they could be euidently spied by other men. The Duke d'Aumale absented himselfe from Paris, and in the Ile of France, Picardie, Brie, Tartenoys, and Ʋermandoys, went about to doo his busines as well as he could, & his part as strong as strong might be, made with those great summes of money which for his share he had made of the spoyle of the rich men of Paris. The Citie of Paris is one of the greatest Cities in the world, but doubtles the greatest in Europe. It is deuided into three parts. The one and the greatest part lyeth in Belgik, on the banck of the riuer Seyne, in a low, fayre and plaine situation: That part is called the towne. Among other edifices on the lower end by the riuer nigh New∣gate, is the kings house called the Loure, and right ouer against it on the other side of the streete, is the auncient house called L'hostel de Bourbon: about a mile and a halfe vpon the same side of the riuer is the town house, called by a temple nigh to it, Saint Iahn en Greue. There is a long street from the pont anchange directly to Saint Denis warde, called Saint Martins streat; which deuideth that parte of the Citie well nigh through the middest. The other part lying in the celtick: on the south side of the riuer is the Vniuersitie, lesser than the former part, it is full of Monkeries, Friries, and Nunneryes, of all feathers and colours vnder the heauens. So that a man comming out of a strange countrey, and seeing so great diuersitie of fantasies, would think himselfe to wander into a countrey of monsters, or a Citie of mad men: but if he consider well he shall finde himselfe in the middest of Sodome, so cleane is their conuersation. Beside these infernall Locusts, there is a great number of colledges and houses of learning, for the which cause it is called the Vniuersitie, wherein are chiefly two col∣ldges, to wit, Sorboune and Nauarre: Sorboune is a colledge where Di∣uines and students of Diuinity cheefly haue allowance: and beside, it is an association of Diuines whersoeuer they haue taken degrees; it is more famous than Nauarre by reason of their ignorance, but Nauarre is grea∣ter in liuing and multitude of students. This Vniuersitie was founded, (or rather reformed I feare me from better to worse) by Charles the great, by the helpe of his schoolemaster,
one Alboinus an Englishman, sometime scholler of the learned Beda, who as it seemeth changed the former order of studie, and fashioned them to the forme of doctrine laide downe by the learned S. Augustine. This  forme there continued vntill yt time that a visiō was seen in the ayre, to wit, a man naked, hairy and deformed, carying a wallet ful of stones, & gnaw∣ing on a stone which he had in his hand. Immediately after, that forme of studie was changed, and diuinitie reduced to vaine speculations, carnall Philosophy, and fiuolous questions, without edifiyng or breeding a∣ny knowledge or wisedoms in the students. Then began Aristotle to beare sway in the Diuinity schooles, and to fitt in the chayre of Moses. The Bishop of Paris called Lombard, went about to amend the fault, and to haue pulled him downe out of that sacred chayre, propounding to the students a book of common places (such as it was) called commonly Ma∣gister sententiarum. Then came the begging Fryers with their wallets full of stones, and among them Scotus, and Thomas Aquinus, they layd down a forme of their dreames & questions, they turne the bread of life into stones wholy. There came after them worse then these, & more igno∣rant: these harpyes defile both the word of God, & this booke of sentences (though not pure before) wt vnnecessary questions and vnlearned gloses: to be short, as many writing Fryers, so many Alcorans they conceaue and bring forth: they did reuoke the studie of Diuines from Gods word, & the reading of the learned antiquitie, whose monuments they buryed in dust in their libraries, to the descanting of Scotus, Thomas, & the book of Sen∣tenices with their corrupted dreames, pro & contra. After that, these frogs (rising out of the infernall gulfebeing) striken with giddines, as they of Sodome at the dores of Lot by the angel of the Lord, were deuided among themselues, and to shew that they were no more of Christs people, tooke other names, and would be called by the names of their master, some Sco∣tists, some Thomists, some Simmonists: but rather they should be cal∣led by their qualities, Soccist, Momists, and Foolists. This palpable darknes of Aegipt was had in admiration, as the onely wisedome of the world, fed and entertained by these seducing Friers and Monks, vntill the wasting of that noble, and in olde time famous Greece, by Amorith the prince of the Turkes. For then many learned men being the keepers of pure learning, flying from that barbarous and cruel tiran∣ny, repayred some into Italie, some into Germany, some into France, who were entertained by the liberalitie of Princes, and common wealths, by whose exile we were deliuered from ye darke bondage of ignorance, which the legions of Fryers had brought into the world. About the same time, the most noble arte of Printing was reuealed of God vnto a noble man of Germany, whose name shall be blessd for euer in the generation of the righteous, wih facilitie to performe the worke
which hee had determined. Francis of Valoys, first of that name (a prince whose fame no age to come  shal blot out of mens remembrance) with his princelike liberalitie restored in this Vniuersitie a purer learning, and an easier traditine, by calling the∣ther famous men of all parts of the world. This his liberalitie, the Lea∣guers for the space of this twentie yeares, haue vsed to the supplanting of the state of his posteritie. The third part of that Citie, is an Iland betweene the Towne and the Vniuersitie, called commonly the Citie; that Iland is of the forme of an Egge. It is beautified with three special things: first, the palace of iudge∣ment, which heretofore had béen a Sanctuary of iustice. Secondly, a most sumptuous and rich Hospitall, the like whereof is not in the world. Third∣ly, the Temple of our Lady, much like vnto Diana of Ephesus Temple, the Bishops seate, and a sinke of Idolatry. The Suburbes bee of a wonderfull greatnes, and may bee compared with a great and sumptuous Citie. As this is great and large, so is it populous to admiration, surpassing the report which may be made thereof. The most sort of the inhabitants is a rascall people of all sorts of handicrafts, and of seruile nature. The people generally is of small stature, swartie of complexion, of countenance like Spaniards or Italians, fewe like one to another, as it is commonly seene among them that are a mingled sinke of diuers Nations, not like Frenchmen; they are craftie and deceitfull, great bablers and pratlers; suspicious, mutinous and factious; cruell, cowardly and effeminate, lewd of life and behauiour, desperatly supersticious and idolatrous, foolish and sottish so generally, that through all France they are prouerbially and re∣proachfully called badins de Paris, that is, a malapert sot of Paris; of nice∣nes and purposed folly, disguising and corrupting their tongue and go∣ing. The Duke de Mayne perceiuing the King almost destitute and forsa∣ken of his subiects, compassed about with enemies, at home with domesti∣call foes, in the Citie with vnfaithfull subiects, abroad in the field with se∣dicious and rebellious robbers; thought to haue a fit opportunitie to op∣presse the King. Therefore in a great heate he doth gather and muster a great and mightie armie of the basest sort of this people, but specially of such as were desperate and had nothing to lose, and had conceaued good hope to doo well their busines with gayne and aduantage, caused the Citie to prouide for them: they were lodged in the suburbes and small Townes about Paris. The Duke hauing this great armie, doth from weeke to weeke, from day to day so delay his iourney, representing to himselfe continually the valiannes, victories, faithfulnes and celeritie of the King of Nauarre,
who was not a dayes iourney from Tours, who would not suffer the King to be oppressed, nor easily surprised. These mutinous and rebellious com∣panies  did commit such intolierable insolencies, that the people both in Pa∣ris and about did cry out and complayne with great discontented mindes, both of these oppressions, and also of the scarenes of victuals which did growe in the Citie, by reason of the long soiourning of that armie about Paris. To pacifie therefore the vprore, about the middle of Aprill he did ven∣ture to goe foorth, and taketh the field, making great boast that now within fewe dayes he trusted to reduce all France to the obeisance of the League; and the least of his promises was, that he would bring the King to that passe that the most mutinous fellowes in Paris desired to haue him. Ta∣keth order for the safetie of the Citie: and whereas in the alteration of the state of Paris done in Ianuary last, they had made eighteene Colonels and Captaynes of so many wards as the Citie was deuided into: euery Co∣lonell should haue twelue hundred horsemen and footmen to walke about the Citie and to the Boys of Ʋicennes, least that Castle should be surprised by the enemies: the Lord of Mayneuille being left gouernour of the Citie with a strong garrison beside, to see well that in the absence of the great Protector of the Crowne of France, the malcontent people of Paris should not enterprise against him, and exclude him from their Citie, if at any time for feare of the King of Nauarre he should runne away. So the Duke de Mayne bringeth this holy and inuincible armie (for so it was commonly called) into Beausse, where was some good store of vic∣tuals, which aboue all things his holy armie desired. So that as well to ease the countrey about Paris, as to hast his wicked intent, he bringeth his armie as farre as Vendosme, wherein hee entred by the helpe of them who were of his confederacie. There hee tooke the Kings great counsell prisoners, so that none could escape but one; he seazed also vpon many o∣ther weake Townes in that champian countrey, where hee stayed very long doubtfull of minde what to doo, whether he should go néerer to Tours or goe backe. To goe further, he feared the King of Nauarre being so nigh a neighbour: to goe backe, shame (his great bragges and promises made to the rebels of Paris) would not suffer him. Concluded therefore to stay in Beausse, where lodging and victuals for the taking were to be had with∣out money, liuing in hope, and watching still for some conuenient occasion to execute his damnable purpose vpon the Kings person, by the intelligen∣ces which hee had with the Leaguers of the Court, and of the Citie of Tours. During his soiourne in Beausse, he made the like bragges and promises to the Nobilitie and people, as he had done in Paris. The Wallons which were in his armie considering that nothing was done, and lacking money,
determined to retyre home: but with much adoe were stayed, vpon pro∣mise that great forces were expected from the Duke Aumale out of Picar∣die, and that shortly they would goe about their busines handsomely like  good fellowes, and that one houre would make them men for euer. In the latter end of April, the Leaguers of Poytiers began to stir against the King, and to make that great and large Cittie sure for the League, & holy vion: vpon the newes thereof the king sent the greatest part of such forces as he had to rescue that piece which was of great importance. The Leaguers aduertised the Duke de Mayne (who was about Vendosme) of the state of the affaires, and how the King was left destitute of the grea∣test part of his forces, now imploied about the reuolt of Poitiers, how that he might come easily (and without finding any resistance) to lodge in the Suburbs of Tours, or the Abbey of Marmonstier neere by: and that they would so prouide within the citie, that by the helpe of his frendes the King might be dispatched, or deliuered into his hands aliue. The Duke de Mayne vpon these intelligences, setteth order for the safe keeping of Vendosme, and marched toward Chasteaurenault, the towne & Catell hee battered: he layeth also the siege before Saint Oine, nigh Am∣boyse, where the Countie Brienne was appointed by the King for the kee∣ping of that place, intending the night following by stealth to haue resorted to Tours, to execute ye enterprise of the Leaguers (which were in the court, and the Citie) vppon the Kings person. And that hee might be sure to worke safely, he had sent into Picardy to the Duke of Aumale his cosin, praying him to send him such forces out of Picardy as he might, putting him in hope by some new supply of succour, to bring to passe the thing which they had most desired: but the towne of Gaulis, which by the means of the Lord of Thore, was reduced to the Kinges obedience, hindered that this new supply could nether be so great, as was expected, nor could come in any time to do him seruice. Of these forces of Picardy, it shall be spo∣ken hereafter: but for this time wee will leaue this great Duke to batter Chasteaurenault, and Saint Oine, and will shew what was done in other places at the same time. The King considering that the enemy with a puissant army was on his armes, and stayed for nothing but to know what assistance he might haue of the Leaguers, of the court and of the cittie to worke his feat: knowing also the infidelity of his subiectes and seruants both in the court and in the cittie, and on euery side, and almost dispossessed of his Crowne and King∣dome, is enforced for the safety of his person, to cast himselfe into the armes of his mortall enemy (as he was made beleeue by the Sycophants, who alwayes had béen most in eredit with him) but in very deed, his most profitable and necessary frend, if long before he had vsed him. Truce ther∣fore at length is concluded betweene the two Kings: and among other
things it was agréed that the King of Nauarre should haue the Pont de Sel, a Towne vpon the riuer of Loyre, betweene Saumour and Nantes, tight a∣gainst  Angers, for the safety of his passage. But some difficulty beeing made at the surrendring of the said Pont de Sel, by the Captayne: the King graunted him the towne of Saumour vpon Loyre. The sayd towne was re∣ceaued for the King of Nauarre, by the Lord Plessis Marlin, to whom the sayd King gaue the gouernment thereof. But now before wee proceede further to shew the accidents which hap∣pened after this vnexpected reconsiliation of these two Kinges, wee wil search out what hath happened in other countreys. After the death of the Guyze, the Duke de Mayne sent into the Pro∣uinces, but specially into Normandy, to perswade the people that the Countrey men might arme themselues without any leaue or consent of the Nobility, who were not of their side, for the defence of the Catholike religion, & their liberty, he hired specially in Normany the priests, monks, Friers, Iesuits, & such rabble of woolues with summes of money, in their Sermons to stir the people to rise agaynst their Soueraygne, and to take counsell agaynst the nobility. The means or arguments (which these Atheists both for money will ryse agaynst God his ordinance, and set the world in an vprore, to pol∣lute the earth with bloud) were these. The King (sayd they) with great vehmency and amplifications hath murthered the Cardinall of Guyze, imprisoned the Primat of Lyons, and hauing touched two of the Lords an∣noynted, and layed handes vppon two chiefe. Pillers and rulers of holy Church, ouer whom neither hee, nor any of his had any power or iuris∣diction agaynst fayth and promise, and hauing violated the publike faith at the States at Bloys, the King was no more childe of the Church, was ex∣communicat, banished out of the Church, and cast out of the communion of Catholikes: and therefore the people were not bound to obay him any more, but that it was lawfull to persecute him by all meanes possible, as the holy faculty of Theologie had also of late determined; but rather that it was lawfull to murther and to destroy the King, and persecute them by all means possible that wil not league themselues and beare armes against the King. They dayly preached also that the King was a protector of he∣ritikes, and had intelligences with them, and that he sought nothing more then to stablish heresie in his kingdome. And for as much as examples do both moue and encourage to doo, or discouraging from dooing, they encourage the simple and ignorant; first declared themselues enemies to the King, renounced his obedience, gaue forth vilanous, vnworthy and traiterous speeches of him, so as nothing more vile may bee named and spoken. These were the deuout prayers of such despisers of God and all godlines in their Pulpits, to the which the
People said Amen. But after the truce was taken betweene the two Kings, then they had a  large argument to walke in, they cryed out that he serued himselfe of the forces of heretickes: & no maruel if they cry out now when they see a whip prepared for their backes, and that now they are further from bringing to passe theyr wicked thoughts th euer they were. By these execrable, outragious, and seditious inue ctiues of these dam∣nable Iesuits and Fryers, hyred to sound the trompet of rebellion in a ma∣ner throughout all France, but specially frō the riuer of Loyre, north, west, and east, and among other Prouinces, Normandy was so infected with their poysoned and detestable rebellions, that there was not so much as a Uillage to bee found, where there was not some of all qualities dronken with their cup of abominations. It is sayd before, how the King had pardoned Brissak, Boysdaulphine, and Chastre, with many others, who within a while abusing the Kinges facility, and ascribing their impunity to the Kings pullanimity, fled and reuolted to the League agayne. After this reuolt, Brissak and Boysdaul∣phine went to Angers (as it is sayd) and procured that great Citty to re∣bell: but after the reducing of the sayd Cittye to the Kings obedience by the Marshal Haumont, the said Brissak and Boysdaulphin fled, and in their flight caused by the meanes of their partakers the Citty of Mans (which was already wauering) to rebel against the King. To these 2. manipuli fu∣rum resorted the Lords la Mot, Serrant, Touchet, Angeruile and Nor∣mandiere, who by theyr treacherous solicitaion procured almost all the townes of Normandy to rebell and to open their gates to them, as Roan, which was reuolted long before, Luseulx, Falaize, Newhauen, Seas, Bay∣eux, Argenton, and afterward Alcencon: all these opened their gates to the rebels, who afterward a most in a litle space consumed them. There remai∣ned Caen, Constances, & few other towns in base Normandie in the kings o∣bedience, by the good and prouident counsel of the Lord de la Veaue, Beu∣uron, the Presidents Aulbiguy, and Lizeres, and some other loyall and Noble men. We sée how the cities of Normandie for the most part, at the solicitatiō of Brissak, Boysdaulphine and others, whose names shall be knowne here∣after, and by the preaching of the furious and frantick Iesuites and Fri∣ers, are brought from the Kings obedience, to a damnable rebellion. The countrey men also and pesants, were induced by the selfe same meanes to rebellion, vnder colour of the defending the Catholick religion, and hope of libertie. There is in high Normandie, a certaine place called la Chapelle Ganti∣er: thereupon the perswasions of the desperat Iesuites and Friers to countrey men, were stirred vp to rebellion, both against the King and the
Nobilitie, and began to commit horrible excesse and cruelties: by reason of this beginning, all the rebels in Normandy were called Gantiers: these  Peasants ioyned to themselues a number of Priestes, but specially the Priestes of Sees, and a great number of bedlem Friers, furious Iesuites, Parsons, and among others, the Parson of Vimonstier, the most pestife∣rous, desperat, and seditious firebrand of all Normandy. About the 19. the King vnderstanding of this rebellion in Normandy, and foreséeing the mischiefe which might ensue, if this euill were not in time remedyed, thought good with all spéede, to send the Prince Montpen∣sier, generall Lieutenant for his Maiestie into that Prouince, to reduce them into the true way of their duetie and obedience: and commaunded the Lord Saint Cire, one of his counselers, and Master of the requests of his house, to accompany and assist him. The King to bring this seduced people in the right way of iust obedi∣ence, gaue charge to the saide Prince, to offer pardon and impunity vnto the rebels, in case they woulde liue quietly and peaceably vnder his go∣uernement. Secondly, hee discharged them of the third part of all taxes due vnto him, hoping to haue a better opportunity, and more happie sea∣son woulde come when he might gratifie them in some greater matter. Thirdly, hée gaue a forme of an oath to the said Prince, to commaund all men to liue peaceably vnder his Gracious gouernement, and to for∣sake all Leaguers, and associations whatsoeuer: and in case they would refuse either to returne vnder his protection, or else to take that oath, he gaue him authority to chastise them with strong hand, as traitors and rebels. About the 30. the saide Prince departed from Tours, accompanied with the Lords of Backeuile and Archant, and came to Luce, where hee vnder∣stoode that Boysdaulphin, and la Mot, Serrant, and other rebels, had sur∣prised the towne of Mans, and purposed to méete with him to stop his way. The 31. day, this noble Prince of the house of Bourbon, passed hard by the nose of the enemies, and came as farre as Alencon, where hée found the inhabitants amazed, for the surprising of the towne of Mans by the enemy, whome the rebels also had enueigled to enter into their rebellon, and con∣firmed them in their obedience and duetie toward his Maiestie. There this noble Prince, with great deuotion and solemnitie kept his Easter: and hauing taken order for the safetie of the towne, appointed the Lorde Reuty gouernour of the said place, with two companies of shot on horse∣back, to kéepe the towne and Castell; and to make roades in the villages a∣bout, to repulse the rebells when they should come to forrage, and con∣straine the inhabitants to pay them taxes, and other tributes due to the King.
The 4. day, the Prince vnderstanding that the citie of Sees, were min∣ded to ioyne to the rebels, and had refused to take the oath, according to the prescribed forme of the King, purposed to passe that way, and sent worde  before to the Bishop and inhabitants, that they shoulde open the gates for him: who vpon a short consultation, answered that they were ready to re∣ceaue him: and being met by the citizens a great way out of the towne, hée accompanied with the Lordes of Bakqueuile & Archand, and their troupes passed through without any stay. The said Prince shewed vnto the Bi∣shop and the inhabitants, that he came from the King, to offer pardon vnto the rebels, and that the King ment to deale fauorably with his subiects, to make account of them, according to their duety and obedience towards him, to chastise the rebels & obstinat. The inhabitants protested (though with fained lippes) of their loyaltie, affection and obedience toward his Maiestie. The departing from Sees, met with the Lordes de Hallot, and Creue∣ceur his brother, with a good and honorable tronpe of nobilitie, to whome they proffered with many protections faithfully to serue the King, as long as breath was in their bodies. The 5. of Aprill, the Prince departed from Escouche, had intelligen∣ces that the Lords Touschet, Angeruile, Normandiere, Captaines of the rebels, with many Lanciers, and a good number of footemen, haue come forth out of Falaize, and marched on to stop the Princes way, and went as farre as a village called Perrefit, distant two miles from Falaize, where they being met by the Lords Bakqueuile, Archand, & Creueceur, were so charged, that they stood little to the fight: for the Prince (leading the maine Battaile beginning to appeare, they fled and left behind them) Touschet, Angeruile, and Normandiere, their chiefest leaders who were taken pri∣soners, and brought before the Duke, who were redeliuered into the hands of those that had taken them, till such time as hée should call for them a∣gaine. All the companies of these rebels were hewen in pieces, the Prince lost not one man, there was none hurt of his side but only the Lord Cham∣mont in the head, and in a short space after cecouered. That same day, the Prince Montpencier came to Falaize, where the e∣nemies made a shew, as though they would haue set open the gates for him, intending some surprise against him. The Prince hauing no Ordi∣nance to force thē, tooke his way to Caen, where he entred about ye seauenth day of Aprill; all the faithfull Citizens welcomming him with these saluta∣tions often reiterated, God saue the King, and my Lord the D. Montpen∣cier; & in token of an vnfained ioy, they kept that day holy day. The Lord Beuuron accompanied him to his lodging, which was the house of the pre∣sidēt Aubigny: thether came the L. Verune to do reuerence to the Prince, who receaued him courteously, and highly commended him for his loyall
seruice to the King, in kéeping the towne within his obedience. The said Prince soiourned in Caen about ten dayes to set all things in  a readines, as well for the safety and defence of the Citie, as for to assault the enemy, and to scoure the country. During the Princes soiourne, there ariued the County Thorigny, and afer him the Lord Longannay, with a great troupe of Gentlemen, who were courteously receaued and imbraced, with great thankes for their good affection toward his Maiestie, promising to aduertise the King of their duetifull seruice, and to requie it in parti∣cular, as occasion would serue. About the 15. of April, the Prince Montpencier hauing done al things that were there to bée done, and gathered such forces as hée might: and by the aduise of the Lord Saint Cere, he concluded to warre vpon the rebels, and to make them to leaue that which they hold so fast in the countrey, and because they had the chiefest townes, he resolued to carry a long some pie∣ces of artillery, to force them if possible he might. Therefore he sent away before Monsieur de Hallot, Batreuile, Archand, with the regiment of Monsieur Tracy, the companies of the Captaines Saint Denis, Maillot, Radier, Chauuaine, Daulphin, Roqueuile, Glaize, and other voluntary Captaines to attempt vpon Falaize. The Sonday, to wit, the 16. of Aprill, hée like a good Catholick, cau∣sed a procession to be made, and a sermon, and a certaine forme of prayers to bée dayly said for the safegarde of the King, and the good successe of his affaires against the rebels. The 17. the Prince hauing appoynted officers ouer his treasure, mo∣ney, victuall, and artillery, departed with two Canons, and one bastard Culuerine, hoping at the least to drawe the enemy to the field, ariuing at Falaize: he lodged at the Abbey Saint Iahn. On the other side, the ringlea∣ders of the rebels, as Brissak, the Lords of long Champ, the Barons of Es∣chaufour and Tubeuf, assembled the flower of their rebell forces, within the towne of Falaize. The 18. of Aprill, they laid their Artillery to batter, and hauing beaten downe thrée towers, they sent a Sergeant and ten Souldiours to view the breach: but séeing that they would haue enticed them to enter into the towne, to haue intrapped them, and considering that the wall was yet too déepe, the Prince sounded the retraite. And vnderstanding that the rebels had taken from about Aigle, Or∣beck, Sees, Argenton, Vimonstier, and other places néere thereabout, a company of more then sixe thousand Gantiers, wel appoynted for Muskets and Harquebuses as might bée among these peasants, they intermingled some seauen or eight hundred good Souldiours, such as they could come by; some also of the Nobility of the weaker sort: to these companies of rebellious robbers, resorted a great number of Priestes, Cāons, Monkes,
Friers, Iesuites, and such stinking poysoned vermine: the Lord Brissak accompanied with the Barons of Eschaufour, the Lords Vieupont, Ro∣queuual, Beaulieu, and Annay, and other Captaines receaued them, and  conducted them the right way to Falaize: to them repayred the Baron Ver∣nier with his forces from Damfront. The Lorde Pierrecourt also came with such forces, as hée could make out of Ponteau de mer, and Ange, and Houfleur, supposing to haue inclosed the Prince, betwéene the Towne of Falaize and these great forces, and so to haue surprised him and his power. The Prince hauing intelligences of the enterprize prouided for them, remooued his artillery from the trenches, and sent away his cannon to Courcy, and with the Culuerine resolued to encounter the enemie in the plaine field. The enemies had lodged in three seuerall villages, not farr distant a sunder betweene Argenton and Falayze, to wit, Pierrefit, villiers and Commeaux: The Prince Montpencier appoynted the County of Thoriguy and Longaunay, and the Lord Vickes the elder brother, to lodge betweene the said villages and Argenton, there to stay them if they should seeme to recoyle back. He sent also the Lords of Bakqueuile, Archand, and Benuron, with their companies, to enuiron them on the other side. The 20. day ye prince himself, ayded with the L. Hallot, & Creueceure his brother with the whole armie, and being on the top of a hil, commaunded the Lords of Emery and Surene, Marshalls of the field, to aduance the in∣fantry which was on the left hand, with the Culuerine, which they did: these footemen were lead by the Lords of Saint Denis, Maillot, Radier, Roqueuile, Chauuayn, Daulphine, Glayze and others, all so well resolute to encounter with that rabble of rebels, that they made no delay, but skit∣mished straight with a hot on set on both sides: but assoone as the culuerin had begun to play in their faces, they began to bee amazed, and Brissak himselfe caused his Cornet to turne bridle, and retyred from the danger with a number of horsemen as hardy as himself. The rebels notwithstan∣ding stoode to the fight, but when the Culuerine roared once againe, and they sw the Lord Vaumart, one of their chiefest leaders with fifteene o∣thers carried away with the shott, they began to quauer. Then the prince commaunded a fresh charge: hee marching formost of all his companies, which was giuen so hot and fierce, that al the rebels were put to the chase, to yeeld, and to fall downe before them, whom God had armed with au∣thoritie and force, to reuenge that most damnable rebellion. This first en∣counter was vpon two thousand, who were lodged at Pierrefit; they were all slayne or take prisoners, few onely excepted. The prince hauing assembld his troupes agayne, immediatly set vp∣on
the third village named Viliers, where were another company of re∣bels conducted by the Baron Tubeuf: they were all put to the sworde,  saue the Baron Tubeuf, and a few others who were taken prisoners. And because the night drew neere apace, the Prince thought good with all speede to assault the other companies of rebels who were at Comme∣aux, who were about a thousand or twelue hundred men, conducted by the Lord Beaulieu. This company had trenched and fortified themselues, and therefore the most part of thē were ye cannons, priests, monks, fryers, & Iesuites, of the Citie of Sees, and many persons of the countrey round about, who would shewe some proofe of their valour, and how they could fight better with a Caliuer then with their Portisse: but at length it was found that they had more skill in iugling a Masse and making of Gods, then in handling their weapons: among them was the Parson of Vimonstier, a desperate and se∣dicious Priest. The Lord Beaulieu was their captain, who at the first on∣set the sayd Lord Beaulieu was taken among the first in the forcing of the Fort, who being carried away by the Captaine Chauuayne before the Prince, sayd, that there were within that Fort at the least seauen hundred well armed and appoynted. The Prince vnderstanding that, commanded the Lords Bakqueuile & Archand to get into the Fort, and for that purpose he left them the Cul∣uering, and went that night to Escouche, where he arriued about eleuen of the clocke in the night. And assoone as he was gone, the rebels of Comeaux vnderstanding how their fellowes had sped, yéelded, with their liues onely saued, who were immediatly disarmed and brought to Escouche to the Prince. There the Duke soiourned all the next day being the 21. of Aprill, to take the view of the prisoners, who were in great number of all qualities of persons. The same day the Lords Hallot, Bakqueuile, Beuil, Bellefontayn, and Archand, went abroad with their companies, to see if they could méet with any ranging Rebells, where they mist not much to haue taken the Baron Vernier. The sayd Baron and Brissake with the rest of their complices, retyred in great speede to Argenton, fearing to be as kindly hit on the hips, as their fellowes had béen. The 22. day the Prince leauing the Lords of Harcourt, of Saint Ma∣ry, Venoix and Sassay at Escouche, went to Courcy, where hee vnderstoode that the Lord Pierrecourt was lodged with some Launciers not farre of, he mounted straight on horsebacke and went to finde them out, but he had dislodged a little before they came to the place. Here (Christian Reader) marke the presence of God in the assisting of
a good cause, and handled by persons of lawfull calling. First, thou seest how the King heretofore in the warres against the K.  of Nauarre had not prospered, but all things haue fallen to his owne char∣ges, dishonour and shame, because he persecuted him without a cause, and such persons were put in trust of his affayres, and aduanced themselues forward, intending vnder that colour to supplant their master. Now, when the King hath a iust cause in hand, and put men in trust that are lawfully called, bearing a true and vnfayned heart to the King, kingdome, Crowne and Countrey, such as bee the Princes of his bloud, and other of the true Nobilitie of France, the Lord also is of his side and fighteth for him, ma∣keth him victorious, and restoreth to him his authoritie by steps, as it shall appeare hereafter. Secondly, here is a notable thing happened, which neuer did happen vnto any Captaine that euer I haue read, saue vnto that noble Athenian Conon, that a Captaine had obtayned three noble victories in one day, but vnto this noble Prince of ancient and noble rase. Thus the Prince Montpencier by these victories, gaue a tast vnto the rebels of the cup of their treasons, and so did driue them into Townes and Holds, that afterward it was rare to see any rebels abroade, except it were when they had neede priuilie to steale out to robb their nigh neighbours of their goods. Hauing done this exployt, he purposed to bring the artillerie from Courcy, and returne to the Citie of Caen, intending shortly after to be in the field agayne, and to carrie by it vntill he had subdued the countrey to the Kings obedience agayne. By a pertinent digression I haue shewed what noble and profitable ex∣ployts the Prince Montpencier hath done in Normandy against the Re∣bels, now we will returne to continuance of the narration interrupted. It is sayd before, how the King seeing himselfe in extreame danger, made truces with the King of Nauarre, and deliuered him the Towne of Saumour, for his safe passage and repassage ouer the riuer of Loyre, which he committed to the Lord of Plessis Marline. Few dayes being expired, after the deliuering of the town of Saumour, the King of Nauarre went thether to the great contentation and reioysing of all the inhabitants, and of all the Nobility round about well affected to the Kings seruice, and good of the realme. Liberty was geuen by the K. of Nauarre to all the inhabitants concerning religion indifferently, as hée had done in other places. The King of Nauarre hauing ordered all things at Saumour, about the 17. day of Aprill went foorth and besieged the Castell of Brissak (the Lord thereof beeing a traitour, and a rebellious Leaguer) and tooke it by composition. The 18. the King of Nauarre passed all his Forces beyond the riuer of
Loyre ouer the bridg of Saumour, and within few dayes ioyned with other forces which stayed for him, gathered out of Normandy, Mayne, Anjou,  Perche, Beausse, and other countries beeing betweene Loyre, and Seyne, in∣tending shortly to see face to face the army of the rebels, conducted by the Duke de Mayne. Thus the King of Nauarre, greatly iniuried and offended so often, and at the request, and for the pleasure of the Duke of Guyze assaulted, now commeth to rescue out of danger captiuity and death, him that had per∣secuted him so long with all the forces of a mighty kingdome, he commeth (I say) with a chosen army, not onely great in number, but also in valour: so that euery common souldier might haue supplyed the roome of an Of∣ficer. Goe on O great King, put on the armor of God, & follow his calling, this day thou hast obtayned a greater and more famous victory, then at the day of Coutras, in ouercomming the desire of reuengement, which vpon diuers occasions might haue risen by the frailty of mans nature. The 21▪ the King of Nauarre hauing passed ouer the riuer Loyre, and ioyned with his forces, gathered out of the Countreys abouesayd, setteth forth a declaration, shewing the causes of this passage. First, hee sheweth that hee is called to enter into this action by God, by nature, by the lawe, and by the iust approbation of his Prince, which causes do moue him to determine to imploy his lyfe, his meanes & power, for the reestablishing of ye Kings authority, restoring of the realm, and for the defence of good Subiects within the same decayed, and oppres∣sed by the treasons of the Leaguers, vnder the colour of godlines and iustice. Secondly, he protesteth to hold for enemies onely them, who haue de∣clared themselues enemies of the realm by theyr rebellion, and outragious insolencies committed against the soueraigne magistrate and iustice: pro∣mising notwithstanding to receaue to mercy them, which (deceaued by the enticements of the rebels, or feare) rather then by their owne malice haue associat themselues to the said rebels. Denounceth therfore to all Prouinces, Cities, Commonalties, Church∣men, Nobles, Magistrates, Captaynes, Souldiers, Borgeses, Citizens, and all other of any degree whatsoeuer, to retire speedily from the society of those traitors and rebels, and to returne vnder the obedience of their na∣turall and lawful Prince and King: but specially willeth the Church men (whereof some haue rendered themselues instruments of the former trea∣cheries and rebellions) to loue peace, and to keepe themselues within their bounds, returning and abiding vnder the obedience of their King. Thirdly, he protesteth that this his passing the riuer of Loyre (by the commaundement of the King) is for their defence, and therefore taketh all
the Kings faithful subiects vnder his protection, but specially the Church men, forbidding vpon payne of death all his Captaynes and souldiers not  to proffer any iniury vnto any of them, their goods or places of exercises, willing also all the aforesaid persons to repayre vnto the king, or vnto him, to haue and receaue pasporte, and protections, that the faythfull may be discerned from the Rebell. Fourthly, he turneth his speach to the foresaid persons, admonishing them to consider the horrible euils which haue already and shall rise out of that damnable rebellion. To the Cleargy hee speaketh, to consider how godlines is euery where choked in the middest of those tumults, the name of God blasphemed, and religion despised. The Noble men he prayeth to consider how theyr order must needs fall, with the ruine of the King, Crowne, and Estate. The Magistrates hee warneth to represent before their eyes what exe∣crable violating of iustice will follow, by the examples of the Parliaments of Paris and Tholouse, carried away Prisoners as in a triumph by rascals, and vilanous persons. The commons hee aduertiseth to thinke how they are eased by these tu∣multes, where their goods are exposed to the pray of the vilest sort, their traffike interrupted, their husbandrie altogether turned into wast, and de∣solation. Last of all, he exhorteth all men to endeuour themselues to bring what they can to remedy these euils, which ye rebels haue procured to the realme, which cannot be done without a good peace, neither can that be obtayned, but by the returning vnder the Kings obedience, restoring his royall au∣thority, and reestablishing of iustice: hee assureth himselfe that God who geueth saluation vnto Kinges, will assist him in this enterprise and iust cause. Auuergne is a Prouince in France, full of hilles and mountains, wherein there be three Cityes, situated in forme of a triangle, and not dis∣tant farre one from another, to wit, Rion, Clermont, and Monferrant: the Kings long before had established at Rion, beside other courts, a soueraigne court of his treasurers, & receauers. This Citie had receaued the League, and had committed rebellion agaynst him, in shaking off the yoke of obedi∣ence. Therefore the King about the 24. of April, seeing their obstinacy in their rebellion, do reuoke from the said Towne of Rion all his courts, and doth transport the same to the Citie of Clermont, commaunding all his of∣ficers of al his courts in that citty, to repaire to the said Clermont, and there to execute their charge. About the same time also the King doth adiudge all the goods of the Dukes of Mayne, Aumale, and of the Cheualier Aumale, and of the vo∣luntary inhabitants of the cities of Paris, Roen, Amiens, Abeuile, Rhemes,
Orleans, Chartres, Mans, Lyons, Tholouse, to bee forfaited to his crowne for their treasons and perseuerance in the same, aboue the time prefixed vnto them, which was the 15. day of March last past, and ordained commissio∣ners  to sell the sayd goods and lands to his vse. The King of Nauarre in the meane time scoureth the countrey, and pre∣pareth himselfe to receaue the Kings commaundement: and vnderstanding that the Duke de Mayne was lodged at Vendosme, and Montoyre, the 28. of Aprill he determined to surprize some of the enemies, and about foure a clock in the morning, taking eight hundered horsemen, and one thousand shot on horsbacke, went to bait at Chaulx in Anjou, ten long leagues from Saumour: departing thence, & hauing already gone forward three leagues, he receaued newes how the Duke of Mayne had brought his forces to Chasteaurenault, and had sent part of them to besiege the County of Bri∣enne, who was at Saint Oyne, nigh Amboyse. The King hearing of the siege of Chasteaurenault, and Saynt Oyne, by the enemy, hauing him so nigh neighbour: and fearing that he would come to lodge in the Suburbs of Tours, being in danger to be deliuered into the hands of them, by the intelligences which they had wih the leagued of his Court, and of the Citie: he did dispatch diuers Postes both to Saumour, & also to other places to the King of Nauarre. And about three leagues from Chaulx toward Vendosme, hee was aduertyzed by three Postes, that the King sent for him: whereuppon the sayd King of Nauarre turned bri∣dle, and came that night to lodge at Maille vpō Loyre, within two leagues of Tours, after he had beene 24. howers on horsbacke, and immediatly sent word of his comming to the King. The King vnderstanding of his being so nigh him, did greatly reioyce, knowing that the enemy neither would nor durst enterprize any thing whilest he was so nigh his person. The enemy sent certayne companies in the euening with a great bra∣uade, and tooke a Suburbe of Tours, where they defloured a Mayd, who had fled into the Church before the high alter, & in the armes of a Priest: but hearing that the King of Nauarre was at hand (without any leasure to take breath) they retyred presently. The King of Nauarre rested himselfe and his troupes the next day, but the 30. of Aprill (beeing the Lords day) in the morning, the sayd King of Nauarre iudging that it were necessary for them both to see one another, thereuppon to take some certayne resolution of their affayres, beeing also requested by the King (although his counsell had diuers opinions of that interuiew) hee sent to the King by the Lord of Mignouuile, that he was gone to set all his troupes in battaile array at the Pont la Mot, a quarterr of a league from Tours, and thatif it should please his Maiesty to come to the Suburbs, he would kisse his Maiesties hands, and would receaue his commaundemēts to execute the according to the necessity of the affayrs.
After the said King of Nauarre, with all his troupes had stayed about two houres, the Marshall Hautmont came to him from the King, to pray  him that he would passe ouer the riuer, to come to him to Plesss les Tours, where the King with all the court stayed for him. That thing he imme∣diatly determined to doo, leauing of all suspitions, and despising the coun∣sell of many, who would haue him to differ that interuiewe vntill another time: considering also, that there was no apparance of danger, he passed o∣uer the riuer at the bridge of Saint Saphorine, & went to méete the King, accompanied with the Marshall Hautmont, and many of his nobilitie, and his gardes, leauing the rest of his forces to stay for him at the pas∣sage. He found the King staying for him, in the alley of the Parke of Plessis: there was so great throng, as well of Courtiers as of the inhabitants of the Citie, who ran thether from euery where, that the two Kings stayed the space of halfe a quarter of an houre, stretching their armes one toward another, before they could touch one another: so great was the preace; for the place (though very spacious) would not receaue the multitude, so that the trées were loaded with men to beholde that blessed méeting. The embrasings, the salutations, were reiterated diuers times of both Kings, with a shew of mutuall ioy and contentation. The reioysing of all the Court, and of the people was incredible: for all men did crie by the space of halfe an houre, God saue the King, a voyce that had not been hard either at Tours, or in any place else where the King had béen in more then foure moneths before. Another acclamation follo∣wed the first; God saue the Kings, God saue the King, and the King of Na∣uarre: all men praised God, and blessed that happie and long desired re∣consiliation. The two Kings parting thene, entred into counsell, where they were the space of two houres: and after the counsell, they tooke their horses and roade together, accompanied with the Court vnto Saint Anne, which is halfe the way to the Suburb called Roches, the streates were so full of peo∣ple, that it was hard for them to passe: all the way sounded with acclamati∣os and voyce of ioye, for the hope which euery one had conceaued, that these two Kings being so vnited, would ouercome their enemies, and re∣stablish the state of the kingdome, and would end the miseries which had vexed France so long. The said King of Nauarre, departed from the King at Saint Anne, repassed Loyre, where his troupes stayed for him, & lodged at the Suburbs of Saint Saphorin, nigh the bridges end. The morrow after, being the first day of May, about sixe a clock in the  morning, the King of Nauarre entred into the towne, to goe to salute the King. All that morning was employed in counsell, vntill ten a clock,
that the King would goe to Masse; where hée was accompanied by the said King of Nauarre vnto the Church doore: from thence hée went to sa∣lute  the Princesse of Condy and County, staying for the Kings returne from Masse. Afterward the said King of Nauarre, as long as hée made his a∣boade there, oftentimes visited the King, and tooke counsell together for the common benefit of the realme. The same day, the said King of Nauarre obtained of the King, for them of Sedan ten thousand Crownes for to helpe them in their affaires, with letters written vnto the Duke of Lorreyne, commaunding him to make warre no longer vppon Sedan, declaring that they were vnder his pro∣tection. Whilest these things were a dooing at Tours, the Duke d' Mayne did batter Chasteaurenault; but vnderstanding of the interuiew of the two Kings, at the selfe same houre of the interuiew hée brake the siege, and in haste retired to Vendosme. The King as is before said, stoode in great dan∣ger, to be either murdered or else deliuered to the enemy, by the intelligence which the Duke d' Mayne had with some traitours which were of his counsell in the Court and in the Citie. Now by this blessed reconsiliation, here is a great change to bée séene on a suddaine; for by this, the King is put out of feare, liueth out of danger of the rebels, is fortified by ari∣uall of this mighty Prince and army vnlooked for; the hearts of all good subiects are herewith encouraged, and the conspiratours are terrified: for the Duke of Mayne being at Vendosme, and in the territory there abouts, with a mighty army of traitors, had committed such insolencies vppon the people of their owne League and vnion, that the countrey was replenished with outcries, curses, and imprecations. Feare therfore of the King of Na∣uarre, and of some insurrection of the people of the countrey, constrained him first to place part of his army in garisons, in the townes of Beausse, An∣jou, Mayne, and Perche, to make hauock of all that he left behind, and after∣ward to returne to Paris. The Duke d' Mayne hauing so deuided his army, with one part of the same, giueth to himselfe many alarum in that retire to Paris. It is said before, how about the beginning of Aprill, the King conside∣ring the reasonable proffers of the King of Nauarre, who in his great pro∣sperity, and when he might haue enlarged his authority farre and wide throughout al France, proffered peace and ayd vnto the King, to his great disaduantage: at length necessitie inforced the saide King to conclude a truce with the King of Nauarre for a whole year, beginning at the 3. day of Aprill 1589. and ending the same day of the same moneth, in the yeare 1590. inclusiuely. The conditions of the said truce were agred vppon, and promised to be obserued by the two Kings, the 26. of Aprill.
First, in publication of the same truce, the King with a long discourse doth protest of his consiancy in the Catholick religion, and opposeth the  proofes which he hath shewed from his youth vp, as well in his priuat pro∣fession and exercises, as in pursuing the contrary religion by all meanes, and restablishing the said romish religion, in places where it had béene abolished, against the calumnies, false reports, and slaunders of the Lea∣guers. On the contrarie, sheweth how his enemies haue taken the pretence of religion, and discharging the people of sundry exactions, to make associ∣ations to strengthen themselues, to replenish the realme with tumults and confusions: whereby they haue giuen opportunity to the heretickes, to abolish the Catholik religion, and to enlarge theirs, and they themselues haue by sundry cruelties and extortions, oppressed his subiects of the Ca∣tholick religion: he complaineth that the Leaguers hauing attempted a∣gainst his person, and proclaymed an open war against him and his au∣thority, who through their iniuries, haue enforced him to call the King of Nauarre to his naturall and lawfull defence, against their rebellions and treasons. Secondly, he declareth how the King of Nauarre, acknowledging his duty toward his Maiesty, and pittying the miserable state of the realme, subuerted & brought to a lamentable confusion by the Leaguers, hath in∣stantly required peace of him. Whereupon by the aduise of the Princes of the bloud, officers of the Crowne, and Lords of his Counsell, he hath concluded a truce; and ceasing from all hostility throughout the whole tralme, therein comprehending the County of Venisse, and state of Auig∣non, belonging to the Pope, the said truce to begin the third day of Aprill, and to continue a whole yeare. The conditions of the said truce are as followeth. First, that the King of Nauarre shall not, during the time of the said truce, employ his forces within, nor without the realme, but for his ser∣uice, and at his commaundement and direction. Secondly, that wheresoeuer the King of Nauarre shall come, he shall alter, change, nor innouat, nor interrupt the exercise of the romish religi∣on, nor shew any displeasure to the Priests, nor to the places of their de∣uotions. Thirdly, that whatsoeuer place, Towne, Citie, Castell or Fortresse, he shall take by any meane whatsoeuer, immediatly deliuer the same to the Kings pleasure. Last of all, the King graunteth to them of the reformed religion, the li∣berty of their consciences wheresoeuer, within his dominions, and the ex∣ercise of the same in places were it was exercised at the time of the con∣cluding of this truce: also that they all shall enioy their goods wheresoeuer,
so that likewise they shall suffer the Catholikes to enioy the freedome of their religion and goods, in places which are in their power. This was proclaymed and recorded in Parliament the thirtie day of Aprill at Tours the day of theyr interuiewe. About the same time in like manner, the king of Nauarre did set foorth a declaration of the causes of these truces: wherein first he doth protest, that in all these ciuill warres, he hath armed himselfe and his friendes against his will, nature and necessitie enorcing him so to doe, and sheweth that his warre of the League began vnder a pretence and shadow of re∣ligion, but in very deede is found a war of estate. Protesteth that his great desire hath beene alwayes to doe some good and acceptable seruice to the king. Complayneth of the malice of his enemies, disguised and co∣loured with fauourable pretences to ouerthrow the State. Commendeth the king, who at length hath with a good iudgement discerned his inno∣cencie from their malice, through so great and thick mist of colours and calomnies of his enemies. Secondly, he sheweth that the Leaguers making the world beleeue to warre against the reformed religion, whome they doe cal heretikes, neuer went to seeke them out where they were, but abusing of the kings autho∣ritie and power, which they had il in hand, & to that end haue by the said forces, surprized the townes and fortresses which were furthest and least suspected of religion. Thirdly, he sheweth that they haue not vsed their preachers and Iesit∣ites to conuert the pretended hereticks as they should haue done, but in all places where they haue borne the sway, haue made them serue for trompets of sedition and firebrands, to sound the alarum, and to set the whole Realme on a fire, and miserable combustion, to rayse the subiects a∣gainst their prince, to seduce them from the obedience of their magistrats, to dispose them to tumults, alteration and noueities, whereby they haue procured an horrible deformitie in the Realme, a generall and incredible rebellion, by the which they haue banished all pietie and iustice out of all Cities and places which are vnder their tyranny. Fourthly, he sheweth the causes of this their reconsiliation and inter∣uiew, to haue been no respect of religion at all: But that he for his parte pitying the miserable state wherunto the enemies had reduced the realm, when he mought haue vsed the publike calamities of the saide state for to doe well and assure his affayres, forgiuing all iniuries and discurtesies receaued vnto the realme, hath offered to the king his life, and meanes to assist him to restablish his authoritie: which proffers the king of his cle∣mentie and goodnes accepted. And vpon that acceptation (that hee might the better haue meanes to doo him good seruice) the sayd King bath conciu∣ded a generall truce throughout all his Dominions for a whole yeare, in∣cluding
therein the Countie of Venisse and state of Auignon. Last of all, hee chargeth and commandeth all them of his side and reli∣gion,  to keepe the conditions of this truee inuiolable, forbidding them to enterprise, innouate, or alter any thing either in religion or policie, in any place of the Kings dominions. And as the King of his gracious goodnes had giuen libertie to them of the reformed religion, to enioy the freedome of their consciences & goods, he willeth also the like libertie to bee giuen to the Catholikes, who are in the Prouinces, Townes or Cities, holden by them of the reformed reli∣gion, so long as this truce shall endure. Among all other Prouinces, which through rebellion had forsaken the Kings obedience, Picardy and the Ile of France had waded most déepely in that rebellion, hauing generally reuolted, Calis and Boloigne excepted. In the Ile of France there is a small Towne named Seulis, in the way be∣wéene Champaigne and Paris, that Towne also had rebelled and ioyned to the vnion of the League, a Towne of no strength, neither in fortifica∣tions nor situation. About the beginning of Aprill, the Lord Thore of the house of Mom∣morency, went vp and downe in the Towne of Seulis, conferring with the good and faithfull inhabitants of the sayd Towne, who with his good and graue reasons reduced them to the Kings obedience. About the beginning of May, the sayd Lord Thore within the space of three dayes, made a choyse and muster of able men out of the villages of  the Dutchy of Mommorency, so that as well of his companies as of the inhabitants of the Towne, he made a sufficient number of resolute men to the number of two thousand, able to stand against any forces that should seeke to assault the Towne, furnishing the same aboundantly with victuall and munition, and all necessary things for the kéeping and defence thereof. This he did, not that the place was of any such strength, but reposing his trust in God, who is a defender of a iust cause, and in the courage & faith∣fulnes of the inhabitants and souldiers there. The Parisiens amazed to see the sdaine reducing of the sayd Towne to the Kings obedience, did all their diligence to put out that fire kindled so néere them. The Lord of Mayneuile (whom wee haue sayd the Duke de Mayne had left gouernour of Paris) in great hast with a company of Parisiens well armed, came to besiege the sayd Towne of Seulis. The Duke d'Aumale with a braue companie of horsemen and a sort of footemen, arriued inconti∣nently there after the Lord Mayneuile; so that on a sodaine they besieged the Towne, being at the dash to the number of foure thousand men. The fourth day, the Parisiens and other partakers and fellowes of the vnion, came posting from many places, being well horsed and furnished, and found themselues that day before that Towne to the number of sixe
thousand men. The fift day they sent to Paris for Ordinance, whereof three were sent  them, to wit, two Canons and one Culuerine: and because none would enterprise to conduct the sayd Ordinance, this way was deuised. In the alteration which was made in the Citie in Ianuary last, they had appoynted a Captain for euery warde of the Citie, which be eightéen, which by turnes should haue out of his warde twelue hundred men, to march to the Boys of Vicennes nigh Paris, to keepe that Castle from sur∣prizing by the Kings friends. Captaine Aubret his regiment was appoin∣ted that day to that charge, to wit, to conduct the Ordinance, to whome was added the companie of Captaine Compan; they (leauing for that day the kéeping of the Castle Vicennes, their baggage, apparell, and prouision of victuall, which was gone before through the gate S. Anthony) went through S. Martins gate, where the Ordinance was gone before, vnder the charge of one Brigard, Procurator of the Towne-house. They ariued with these three peces at Seulis the sixt day of May in the euening. At their arriuing they saluted the Towne with a peale of that Ordinance. At the noyse therof, they of the Towne on a sudden came to the Towne walles, and offered to make as great a breach in the wall as they would demaund, and so to ease them from taking so much paynes as to vse the Canon shot. The Duke d'Aumale presently sent to summon them to yeeld vnto composition: they within promised to make an answere the morrowe fol∣lowing. Vpon this answere, a Post of the Towne went to Paris to bring them good newes, which encreased greatly by the way, as the manner is: there the report went that Seulis had proffered thréescore thousand Crownes, some multiplied that to one hundered thousand, for their rausome. The 7. day, they of the Towne gaue their answere both by portraiture and by mouth: for they all night had portrayed on a cloath the Dukes de Mayn & Aumale hanged on gibbets, & the Dutchesse Montpensier knee∣ling at the feete of them with her head all vncouered, weeping and wailing and tearing her haire, which they caused to be set on the morrow (being the 7. of May) to bee spread vpon the walles, the people crying with vile and reproachful speaches, that the same was the portraiture of the composition that they demaunded. Vpon the sight of this picture, and words spoken out of the wall: they sent agayne to Paris for more Ordinance, to beat the Towne to dust, for they had sworne so to doo. The Parisiens made excuse, that they lacked Bullets, and such Pieces as they demaunded. The cause of this excuse was not lacke of will to do so much mischiefe
as the other intended to haue done: but for feare of the ielousies betweene the Duke de Mayne and Aumale: for the Duke Aumale had béen great∣ly,  and oftentimes desired (after his departure from thence) to returne to Paris, which he denyed to doo. The Parisiens therefore fearing that Au∣male hauing such forces as hee had at Seulis, and expected dayly from the Lord Balagny, and hauing store of Ordinance and munition, either might turne all these forces agaynst them, or keepe them short from hauing any victuals out of Picardie, or to make a third faction, and to striue with the Duke de Mayne about the state, and so weaken their party, to expose them to be a pray for the King. The Duke d' Aumale, seeing that there was little succour to bee ex∣pected from Paris, sent to Peronne, where he had sixe pieces of Ordinance, and out of Anjous one, which were conducted to Seulis by ye Lord Balag∣ny, gouernour of Cambray. About the 13. day of May they of Seulis made a sally out of the Towne with a hundered horsemen, whereat they that besieged the towne were so amased, that they thought best to flee: so the Parisiens casting away their armor, fled, and hid themselues in bushes on euery side. Of these hundered horsemen, fiftie returned into the towne, and the o∣ther fifty kept the field, for to ayde any that might come to succour them. About the 15. of May, the Lord Balagny with his companies of Wal∣lons, Cambresines and Picardines, came and ioyned to the D. Aumale, with sixe pieces of Ordinance, which hee had taken at Peronne and An∣jous, as is aforesayd. The 12. day of May, they began to batter Seulis, with ten pieces of bat∣tery, and within a while hauing made a great breach, the enemy confu∣sedly gaue the assault, who was repulsed with some losse. The same day about noone, word came to the enemy that the Duke of Longueuille, accompanied with the Lordes of Humieres, Bonniuet, la Nowe, Giury, Mesuiller, and Tour, and other nobles of Picardy were at hand to the number of a thousand horsemen, and three thousand footmen to rescue the towne of Seulis. Whereupon the Lord Balagny pitched in campe the best power of his men, and beeing then accompanied with the Lords of Mainuile, of Saisse∣ual, Mezieres, and Congy, with others, approched somewhat neere to the Duke of Longueuille, in good hope to discomfit him. The horsemen of Cambray, and the Wallons also first charged the footmen of the Duke of Longueuille. The said footmen departed themselues in the middle, & gaue roome for the ordinance to shoot: which at the first volye made a great flaughter of the Cambresines and Wallons, who lyking not that play, recyred backe with greater hast then they went to it: but afterward they came all to a set battaile, fought stoutly on both sydes, and with great cou∣rage:
but the Ordinance of the Duke of Longueuille made still so great spoite of the enemy, that conceauing a great dread they began to wauer,  neither could the Duke d' Aumale, nor the Lord Balagny by any perswa∣sions encourage them, nor bring them to good order agayne: so the confu∣sion and terror encreasing, the whole army which besieged the towne, fled away presently. The Duke of Longueuille his power, with the power which was in the Towne, issuing forth, did so follow the chase, that with handy blowes they killed as many as they could ouertake. There remayned slayne of the re∣bels vpon the place betweene fifteene hundred and two thousand, as many were slaine in the chase, besides them who were slayne in the Villages by the countrey people. All the Ordinance and munition of warre, bagge & baggage was left behind. The Duke d' Aumale had a blow which did him no good, the Lord Balagny had an other which did him no great hurt: hoth of them fled to Paris in lesser company then when they went to Seulis. The Duke d' Aumale the 19. of May went out of Paris, fearing there to be welome, and mistrusting the snares of de Mayne, mutiny and fac∣tions of the Parisiens, he retyred to Saint Denis. Balagny remayned in Paris, faining there that hee would take order for the gathering of the Souldiers, breathing out cruell threatning what hee would doo, and promising to the Parisiens, that a new supply of Wallons would come out of the low Countrey: he cheareth the people of Paris, who were smitten with the dread of Iericho. The selfe same day, the rebels of Rion in Auuergne, had an ouerthrow no lesse then this, but the particulari∣tyes are not knowen vnto me for lacke of instructions. We haue inserted by digression the iudgements which God hath execu∣ted vpon the rebels, before Seulis. First, how they were conuicted of trea∣son and felony vpon the walles of Seulis, and there their cheefest Captains hanged. Neither was that a play of boies, but the worke of God, which by that fearefull picture would haue admonished both the headlings and vn∣derlinges of that rebellion, of their offence, of his iudgements executed vp∣pon rebels in all ages, and put them in remembrance of their duty. Secondly, wee haue seene a blow geuen of God) vnto such vnfaithfull Traitors, despisers of Gods Ordinance) in earnest of heauier plagues, if through repentance they do not returne to their dutifull obedience. Now wee will returne to shew the effectes of the meeting, and inter∣uiew of the two Kinges at Tours the 30. of Aprill. It is sayd, how the Duke de Mayne tooke a fright as soon as he heard of this interuiew, returned to Vendosme, where soiorning a few dayes, hee ordered his army, placed part of them in garrisons in diuers townes and holdes, as is said. It is said also, how he had sent to the Duke Aumale, to send him some
supply of horsemen out of Picardy, that he might be the better able to geue the blow so long intended. The King of Nauarre taking for some dayes counsell with the King, about the publike affaires, made some light roads in the Countrey about which was leagued, expecting to haue al his forces in a readines to do some exploit. At length the said King of Nauarre vnderstanding how that the Duke de Mayne fled with parte of his army: about the thirteenth day of May followed him so neere vppon the heeles, that he put all straglers which were left behind to the sword, and did so scoure the countrey of Be∣ausse, that not one of the enemyes durst shew themselues abroad out of their holdes. Whilest the King expected certayne regiments of Suissers, and other forces, which did dayly prepare to come to hi, th King of Nauarre so∣iorning in Beausse, about Boysgency, had sent the Lord Lorges to scoure the countrey toward Chasteaudune and Bonaual, and retyred to his house of Lorges nigh Marchesnoyre. The Duke d' Aumale had sent the Lord Saueinze with some companies of Picardy, but specially the Lords of Brosses, with sixe or seuen score gen∣tlemen, al the choise of the Nobility in Picardy, that were fauouring that side, and soiorned at Chartres. This Saueinze tooke with him his companies of Picardy, and Arclein∣uile: for the Duke de Mayne gouernour at Chartres, accompanied with fifty horses, intending to haue surprised the Lord Lorges, Arcleinuile went before to view the countrey, and to know who stirred in the fieldes. The 18. of May, the King of Nauarre sent the Lord Chastilion, accom∣panid with the Lords Fouqueroles, Charboniere, Harambure, Mony, Resny, Saint Sere, Fresillon, and Chambalame, and other gentlemen to make warre with two hundred horsemen, and as many harquebuziers, and by Boysgency vnderstood that these troupes of Picary, sent by the Duke d' Aumale, came that way to haue met the Lord Lorgs: the Lord Chasti∣lion therefore with his companies directed his way toward Bonaual, and tooke with him the Lord Fonquerantes, with twenty of his gentlemen for scoute, they met Arcleinuile with fifty horses with him. The Lord Cha∣stilion maketh towards him to charge him, and so vsed the matter that they killed sixe men of the enemy. Arcleinuile hauing no great lyking of that play, retired and gaue the alarum to the rest of the troupes, a quarter of a mile comming orderly vnder the leading of Saueinze: he had 30. Har∣quebuziers of the Lord Forceuille, and many other Gentlemen of name, making in all the number of sixe hundred men. The Lord Chastilion changed his pace with a trot, for to entertaine them. Charboniere and Harambure, with their companies of light horse∣men were on his left wing on the other side.
Saueuze setting forth before his Harquebuziers, set his company of Launciers in rankes, and commeth a great pace without breaking ranke  for the space of a quarter of a mile. The Trompets sound the charge on both sides. The Lord Chastilion casteth about a little to stay for his Harquebu∣ziers, he deuideth his horsmen into two companies, and hauing placed his footmen, goeth to the skirmish. Saueuze commeth forth very brauely and couragiously, galloping for thirty paces, his Harquebuziers on horsebacke gaue the onset neere y∣nough. The Lord Chastilion his footmen receaued them, who after the first Harquebuziers were discharged, euen during the fight rushed in among the horsmen, killed many horses with their swords: of the Lord Chasti∣lion his men were slayne one that had beene of the King of Nauarre his guardes, and two souldiers of the garrison of Boysgency and no more. Saueuze, who on a sudden had bent him selfe against the light horsemen, charged so furiously the Lord Chastilion, that the first rankes were bro∣ken, which hee vnhorsed and layed along, and eight or ten of his gentle∣men incurred the like misfortune, among whom was the Lord Mony, Rosny, Saint Sere, Freslon, Chamberlan, and among them three were hurt with Launces & twenty or thirty of their horses slaine. The Brosses set vppon the rereward of the Lord Chastilion which were greatly dis∣tressed. At length the Lord Chastilion, and others that were ouerthrowen, re∣couered themselues, and fell a fighting with their swordes on foot, and he aduaunced so far that he was hurt in the face. In the meane while the Lords Harambure, Charboniere, and Fonque∣rules with their companies, set vpon Saueuze and his troupes so furious∣ly, that they entred and brake a ray, put the enemies to flight in such sort, that they could not gather together agayne. There were slayne some of their Captayns, all the gentlemen of Picardy, and aboue threescore in the flight, so that there were aboue two hundered of the enemies slayne: but specially all the Harquebuziers, two cornets were taken, and the bearers slayne, forty Gentlemen were taken, and among them Saueuze and Forceuile: Many of account were hurt. The Lord Chastilion lost but thrée men, as is aforesayd: this execution was done nigh Bonaual about foure a clocke in the after noone. Here (Christian Reader) may wee see the great goodnes and mercy of God, which calleth sinners and transgressors to repentance, sending them messengers and tokens of his wrath, & denouncing them assured destruc∣tion: for first at Seulis the Lord represented vnto the heads of the league. the greatnes of their trespasse by the painted punishment deserued.
Secondly, the Lord prospered the Kings armies with three noble vic∣toryes in two dayes, in the sigt in a maner and hearing of three great and mighty rebeiled citiyes, to wit, at Seulis, nigh Paris, and at Rions in Auuer∣gne,  and at Bonaual, not far from Orleans. Furthermore the Lord hath exe∣cuted yet most terrible iudgements since, because they despysed these gra∣cious wargs, by consuming them with a long and continuall disease, as if it were with a phisike, carrying with them the worme of the conscience, oppressd with famin, pestilence, sword, and with intollerable bondage vn∣der the Leaguers. The King of Nauarre after this ouerthrow of Saueinze and his compa∣nies nigh Bonaual, about the 22. of May being at Boysgency vpon Loyre veneath Orleans fiue leagues, writeth a louing letter to the rebels of Orle∣ans, to proue what reason and fayre offers might do with them, wherein he sheweth to them. First, that he hath foreseene and forewarned France of the euils which this last ciuill Warres would bring, and protesteth of the disly∣king of it at all times. And although his protestations and warnings haue béen little regarded, notwithstanding the iniuries which he hath re∣ceaued, yet wil he not fayle in his duty toward his countrey, but will séeke the meanes to cure her disease, or die wih it both in generall, and parti∣cular. Secondly, aduiseth them to consider the causes of their rebellion to bee in themselues, and not in other men: for it cannot be for any religion, or a∣ny violence, or necessitie which hath enforced them thereunto; but a wicked and rash minde, which maketh them pretend a feare of some euill that may come hereafter: and so doing they make themselues vnfortunate, and cast themselues in a miserable state. And in preuenting a fault that may bée hereafter, they doo commit a manifest and heynous crime: in going about to stop an euill, which they doo imagine to see a farre of, they doo procure to themselues innumerable euils: to assure a libertie to their children, which no man will hinder, they doo throwe themselues into a present bondage: To make sure (as they say) their state and goods, they yéeld themselues to be spoyled and robbed. Put them in remembrance of the calamities which will accompanie their rebellion and their obstinacie in the same, as that they doo drawe a cruell warre to their gates, whereby they shall be continually in feare and alarume; by it they shall haue need continually of an armie to gard them; by it they shall see their houses, their fieldes, their vines set on a fire, their wiues and children spoyled, their traffique stopped, their husbandrie wa∣sted: and all this they are like to suffer for going about to reuenge another mans naughtie quarrell, and for to make their backes to be footsteps for o∣ther men to get vp vnto the scaffold of their ambition: which if it doth fall
(as it cannot stand) it will quaile, stiffle and vndo them. Thirdly, admonisheth them to call to remembrance the fidelitie and loy∣altie  of their ancestors to Charles the 7. whom they defended against Eng∣land and the most part of France, which had conspired against him, and ex∣horteth them also to remember their oath naturally giuen, to keepe their fidelitie, loyaltie and duetie inuiolable to their naturally Prince. Last of all, hee assureth them of the Kings clemencie and gracious fa∣uour, and proffereth them his meanes to further the same, if they will re∣turne vnder his obedience. Afterward the King of Nauarre scoured all the countrey of Beausse, ha∣uing enforced the rebels to keepe in their Holds. At length the King hauing receaued certaine regiments of Swissers, and encouraged with these good beginnings against the rebels, (knowing the God of battailes to be of his side) in the latter ende of Iune gatheres all his forces together, and came in person to his Campe▪ Helpe commeth to him from all parts of the Realme, his armie encreaseth daily in num∣ber, fame and power. The state of the King thus suddenly, many Cities begin to entreate vpon peace. Thus the King hauing recouered part of his authoritie, and in good hope to recouer the whole, and more then euer he had, by refusing the coun∣sell of strangers, and following the good, wise, sage, and discreet counsell of the Princes of his bloud, and other his noble and faithfull counsellers, sub∣iects and friends; he marcheth directly toward Paris to begin the punish∣ment, where this vnthankfulnes, treacherie and rebellion had begun. He taketh Pontoys, S. Clow, seazeth vppon Poissy, S. Germayne, Charanton, and other Townes round about Paris. Meloune and Corbeil he had forti∣fied and holden euer since the beginning of the rebellion. The Princes of Germany and Italy sent Ambassadours vnto him, doo wish him well, doo proffer him money and men to represse that barbarous  treacherie of his enemies. Some of the first conspirators also through dis∣payre, flee vnto his mercie. Finally, all things now fall contrary to their expectation and traiterous desires, without any hope to looke any more (so long as the King liueth) for any condition of agreement or suretie of life. To be short, the case is altered. For the King leading his power nigh Paris, to compasse it round a∣bout, and hauing all the Townes about, beginneth so to distresse it, that either none or small store of victuals could be brought into the Citie. The conspirators begin to tremble at this newe and sudden chaunge: therefore the heads of the traitors seeing themselues so hardly beset, doo enter into counsell to determine vppon the extremitie of their affayres. One among the rest declared the daunger wherein they liued; he shewed that the mindes of the Nobilitie were mutable and inconstant, fawning
alwayes on Fortunes side. He shewed also that the fearefull Cities could not be kept faithfull vnto them, and that vppon the sight of any imminent  danger, they would be ready to reuolt agayne to the King. Also hee discoursed how the Cleargie were couetous, and neuer gaue but very little of their owne to their Kings, and therefore there was small hope that they would giue to them who might but intreat for it. And thus stood their case at home. From abroade (sayd he) lesse hope was to bee looked for: for the Spa∣nyard was olde and carefull for the quietnes of his owne familie, vnto whom it was more securitie that France should bee troubled, then vsurped by any other then himselfe. The Italian Princes are circumspect and wise. The Germanes are couetous and misers. The Pope is subtill, craftie and inconstant, gréedie for his owne gayne, and turning with euery blast of fortune: therefore he concluded, that there was none other remedie remayning for them but to dye or runne away, except one thing could bee brought to passe, to wit, the death of the King, which (if they would auoyde their assured vndoing) was to be laboured by all meanes possible, and that there was no other remedie for redresse of their distressed estate. In this counsell sat the Duke de Mayne (as a King in hope) Aumale, Nemours, the treacherous Bishop of Lions, whom the King a little before had pardoned and set at libertie, the Lords Rosne, Boysdaulphin, Brissak, Sagonne, the 47. chosen for the counsell of the Citie, as aboue sayd, the seuentéene Colonels appoynted ouer the eightéene wardes of the Citie. All this blessed company hauing heard the discourse aboue sayd, and sée∣ing with their eyes vengeance to be at the doore, concluded the condemna∣tion and execution of the King speedily to bee dispatched and murthered, but the meanes are found very difficult to bring such a famous act to passe. Now therefore they must search out some way to bring such a bold and daungerous enterprise to possibilitie: he that shall happily vndertake that feate, ought to bee willing, bold, sturdie and quicke handed, and a man so qualified, that without any suspition may haue a speedie and sure accesse to the Kings person. Many offered themselues to be the executioners of that vilanous act. But it was considered that they could not passe through so many gards and doores without suspition, which if they should bee taken, by torments they would be made coufesse the matter, and that would be a caeat to him to looke more diligently to himselfe, which would bring the matter to impossibilitie. Many are solicited thereunto by great and fayre promises, and lacked no good will, but onely courage. But aduising themselues of the Kings more then supersticious heart, concluded to make choyse of some saucie de∣sperat
wretch, who couered with the cloake of hypocrisie, might pearce through all the gardes of the Kings house without any suspition or exa∣mination. To spie out such a one as would vndertake to atchieue such a desperate parricide, was committed specially to one Pichnard an incestuous & most vilanous person. This Pichnard therefore to giue some good grace to this tragedie, brought in a Frier to play the diuels part, & such a one as might at all times assure himselfe of free accesse. And for as much as among all o∣ther sects of idolatrous Friers, the Dominicans were most welcome to the King, he made his choyse of one of that order for the determined exe∣cution, as shall hereafter be declared. But we will by a digression shewe the holines of that order of Domi∣nican Friers and others, that it may appeare that it is not newe nor con∣trary vnto Frierie and Monkerie to bee hold, readie and strong to commit all vilanie. All about one time out of the bottomlesse pit of hell (by a iust iudgement of God to reuenge the vnthankfulnes and idolatries of the world, and to fill the measure of iniquitie of the spirituall Sodome by Antichrist) there issued two frogges with lying spirits to seduce vtterly the world, to wit, Francis in Italy, and Dominick in Spayne, two misbegotten monsters in all respects one like to another, saue onely in their haire and king of francie. These two seducers like in hypocrisie, ignorance, superstition, idolatrie and rage, were possessed with diuers spirits of francie. For Francis was a franticke sot, ignorance it selfe, made onely to make the world laugh with his follies, and yet by his follies (such was that accursed age) he gat him∣selfe a great fame and reputation of holinesse, and drewe after him an infi∣nite number of disciples of the like humour to his. Dominick in Spayne was of a hotter francie, so that it may bee sayd of him as of Caligula, vrceus conflatus ex luto & sanguine, immanitate opple∣tus. For his owne Friers doo write of him, that whilest he was in his mo∣thers wombe, she dreamed that she was deliuered of a Dogge that held a burning Torch, wherewith he kindled a fire in the world and set it to com∣bustion. What this mad Dogge did in France, the horible murthers which he caused to be committed vpon the Albigeoys, who (after the cruell conflicts of the Waldenses with Antichrist) had restored the Gospell in Guien, Gascoyne and Languedock, but specially in the territorie of the Citie Alby, as also the raging follies which was committed at Tholouse were in∣credible to report, except his owne disciples had written them in his le∣gend. His disciples after him haue shewed no lesse furie and rage in diuers re∣spects, but specially vppon the most noble Emperour Henry the 7. of the noble house of Bauierne, who did poyson him with the powder of beaten
Diamonds mingled in his challice, when they did minister to him such a communion as they had deuised of their owne. For that cause onely that the good Emperour wished, & had some speaches about the reforming of the  Church. But the accursed rage of the Inquisition (which doth consist most of Do∣minican Fryers) hath so farre surpassed all the tyrants that euer were, that O yee Busiris, Perillus, Phalaris, Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Helio∣gabalus, and thou vnnaturall house of Otheman, and yee that are famous for any notorious wickednes, reioyce, for your infamy is iustified by the raging cruelty of these Atheistes, Sorcerers, Negromancers, Idolaters, Enchaunters and Parricides, the accursed Dominican Fryers, and the whole rabble of Friery and Monkery, against the Church and Christian Princes. I leaue off the hipocrisy, enchauntments and sorceries, which these com∣panions played at Berna and Orleans: no maruaile therefore if wee heare neuer a pleasant tale, but of the deedes of Friers: wee neuer laugh but at theyr follies; we neuer wonder but at their impudency; we are neuer asto∣nished but at their furie; we neuer tremble but at their rage; we neuer see a mery play, but a Frier playeth the Deuils part. Pichnard therefore considering all things, as is aforesaid, thought good to pick out such a one as was brought vp in Dominiks schoole, well practised and exercised in the affaiers of their order. Whereuppon he solicited one Iames Clement, ano∣ther S. Dominicke in all respects, in ignorance exceeding, so that he knew no more then his Portiforia, such a one as for his lewdnes, and for beeing taken often tymes in stewes and whorehouses, had béen by the order of their discipline diuersly punished. This Frier Iames was in great fauour before with the lady Montpen∣cier, sister to the late Duke of Guyze, being her confessor, not for any good quallity in him, but because hee was a lusty sturdy ghostly father among Ladies of her religion, & could giue her such good counsell as could please her well. Pichnard perceaued this companion to bee a fit instrument to execute their damnable and deuilish sentence, made motion of the matter to him. The Frier, although very desirous of the Kings death, yet willing that it should be done rather by another then by himselfe, feared to thrust himselfe into that assured danger of a present death, was vnwilling to heare any more of that. Fryer Iames is called in. There were the Dukes de Mayne, Aumale, Nemours, the Lordes Rosne, Sagonne, Brissak, Boysdaulphin, Villeroy, and such good Catholikes, and to fill the messe there was Pagarola, Fryer Six∣tus his Chaplaine, a very louing Priest, and one that can write very lo∣uing letters to the Curtisans of Rome, to giue them such spirituall coun∣sell
as he can skill. They had (poore silly Frier) Iames Clement vnder be∣nedicite: there they shewed to this accursed parricide what a good deed he  might doo to deliuer holy Church from the tiranny of Henry the third, who was become an heretike, and that with one blow hee might procure peace to the whole realme, and a blessed quietnes to the holy Church. They shewed vnto him, how his order had done many times such good seruice to holy Church, as in ridding away the Emperour Henry the 7. who intended to persecute holy Church. They let him vnderstand, how among all other order of Friers, his had deserued the greatest praise in spilling daily the bloud of heretikes as wa∣ter in the townes, and citties of Spaine, and Jtaly, and all for the honor of God and exaltation of holy Church. But this pinch would be the noblest act that euer was done by any man: the rememberance thereof should re∣maine for euer, and his name should be made immortall thereby, and if he should die, he should dye a glorious Martir, as Thomas Becket did in England. Afterwad he was brought to the Ladies, catholike and chast women, the Duchesses of Montpencier, Guyze, Aumale, Nemours, Foyeuse, the mother and the holy Virgin the Ladie Saint Beufue, who as a speciall fa∣uour had bestowed the pockes of late vpon the Duke de Mayne, and be∣side diuers of the principall leaguers in the time of her Virginitie. This Lady is of such holynes, that shee is neither a maide, nor wife, nor widow: in this company were Thais, Lais and Bacchis of Corinthus, all holy Catholike women. They began to shriue the Frier, if they were men, or if they could be so transformed into men, that they might haue accesse to the tirant, they could finde in their harts to stabbe him: that is a speciall point of honor which they do proffer him to doo such a famous deed. It is hereditarie to his order to exalt the Church, and to deliuer it, hee is a man endued with strength, they haue béen his good Ladies, they haue fauoured him greatly and pleasured him in any thing that euer he requested. What, will hee not do so much at their request: they must die all, and all the citie of Paris; what a good deede it is to saue the liues of Princesses, Ladies, good Citizens, deuout Priests and religious men of so many innocents, whose death the tirant had sworne, with the razing of the cittie. If he refuseth to do that good deede, they thinke him not to be that man that they tooke him for. They shewed him how easy it was to performe it: for there were many Leaguers, and their partakers in his counsell, in his court, in his chamber, in his campe, in his gardes, who would assist him: and if any danger should stirre, they would defende him and rescue him, and that none would bee so hardie, as to proffer him a blowe: for else Frier Pagarola would fome like a boare and thunder like a deuill against them.
What and if it should happen, that he should die for holy Church, then he should be happie to deserue the name of Martir, & that his brother Fri∣er  Sixtus would make him a Saint. But if hee returne safe (as hee shall no doubt) God forbid else) hee shall be well rewarded in money, hee shall haue a Bishopricke for his paines: Frier Paugarola will procure Frier Sixtus to make him a Cardinall, for a Frier will doo for a Frier, and who knowes not that by these meanes hee may be made Pope, after Frier Sixtus is weary of his roome. To bee short, if hee will not do it, he shall see with his eies his good La∣dies, all his order, all the good Catholikes of the whole citty of Paris put to the sword, the cittie razed (for the tirant hath sworne both he shall die him∣selfe an assured death ere it bee long) the holy Masse, the holy Saints, I∣mages and relikes, the Churches shall all be destroyed, and the heretikes shall haue all thinges: all these mischiefes cannot be auoyded but by his death. By these perswasions, the accursed Fryer (otherwise ready ynough to all mischiefe) is induced to commit one of the most villanous parts which euer was committed in France. So Sathan hauing possessed his hart, the Fryer perswadeth himselfe, that an Angell hath appeared vnto him, and commaunded him to kill the King: he opened this to another Fryer which was greatly esteemed in Paris, by reason of a good opinion of great holi∣nes which the people had of him. The other Fryer doth encourage him, promiseth him, that by doing such a holy deed, he shall deliuer the Church, and set the whole realme at quiet, banish warre, and restore a most assured and perpetuall peace, as Iudith did deliuer Betulia by the death of Holo∣ferns. Behold (Christian reader) the King condemned to dye, the executioner to commit the parricide sought out by Pichenard, perswaded by the heads of the League, and some Ladies belonging to them, deluded by Sathan, confirmed in this delusion by another Frier as good as himselfe, with as∣sured promise of a most sure and constant peace. Frier Clement desireth to knowe how he may doo it surely and safely. The Leaguers therefore enter into deliberation about three things, to wit, the accesse to the Kings person, the stroke and secrecie. As for the first poynt to conuey him to the Kings person, they considered his coate, which for the reuerence and loue which the King did beare to it, would prepare him the way. Secondly, whereas the rebels in seazing vpon Paris after the death of the Duke of Guize, had taken the Senate prisoner, and did as yet hold a great many prisoners, and among other the first President of the Senate named the President Harlay. They had also in like sort many of the chie∣fest Citizens for bearing good will to the King, or because they were rich,
(as is aforesayd) whom they detayned in like manner prisoners. The sayd Lord President and some of the sayd Citizens, procured to write let∣ters  vnto the King, which should bee deliuered to Frier Iames Clement. They taught him also a lesson contayning matters of importance, with commaundement that they should not be disclosed vnto any man but vnto the King onely, and that in secret. As for the stroke, it must néedes bee deadly too; for els it would but in∣crease their miserie, and such a blowe could not bee giuen but by a secret weapon that might bee hidden easily about him: for otherwise if it could be perceiued, it would make the King more warie hereafter and carefull of himselfe. But what could be more fit then a knife, which might bee easily conueyed in the Friers sleeue, and whose noyse might not detect the trea∣cherie. But yet there was another mischance to be preuented, for the woūd of a knife might light vppon such a place as could not be deadly, they finde the meanes to worke surely, that if he cannot kill him out of hand, yet that at length it may be his death. Therefore Frier Paugarola (Frier Sixtus his Chaplaine) must blesse the knife with some poulderdoribus of Rome, which such men as he is doo commonly carry in store for great holines among other holy reliques of Rome, hauing greater force thē their Agnus dei, or any other agios: others they haue to worke miracles, and such as the master Frier in Rome dooth vse to giue in a drench to his friends, when hee is wearie of their companie to make them giue roome. But because such waightie matters cannot bee kept so close very long, but will vent out: therefore least the smoake of this execrable intended parricide should flee ouer the walles of Paris, and so by giuing intelligen∣ces, their haynous vnnaturall and hellish treason and murther might bée preuented, it was diligently prouided that no man should goe out of Paris before the exployt were done. Therefore the gates were shut vp and care∣fully kept, and all the issues at the Suburbes end straightly and narrowly watched, that no man could goe to tell tales out of the schoole. Now the Frier hath on his hypocriticall coate, his letters in his hand, his lesson in his head, his poysoned knife in his sleeue, order is taken that no intelligences may be giuen, the way is made plaine before this diuellish murtherer, euen as farre as to the Kings gate, the doores are made open to him by these meanes, the execution is to bee performed speedily, least delay should disappoynt his enterprise. This murtherer accompanied with the other Frier, who had confirmed him in his reuelation or illusion, where∣with Sathan had deluded him: (as is aforesayd) the 21. of Iuly, which by the newe heauen of the Popes making, is the first of August, out of Paris taking his way to S. Clow, which is a Towne vpon Seyne beneath Paris two small leagues, and comming to the Campe, he tolde them whome hée
met first, that he had letters from the first President and certaine other Pa∣risiens well affected to the king, which contayned matters of great impor∣tance,  and beside that, hee had great and waightie things to disclose to the King. The King being scarce ready, and aduertised of this accursed Friers comming, commaunded that he should attend, and that speedily hee should be admitted to his speach: the Frier did attend with his letter in his hand, which he said was from the first president detained prisoner. The King being made ready, and at such an houre as he was wont to enter into his oratory, and when it was not lawfull not for the Princes of the bloud to haue accesse vnto him, caused that sauage murtherer to be cal∣led to him. The Frier came before the King with a bolde countenance, the King looking merily vpon him, said these words; amice ad quid venisti? The Frier making a low and humble reuerence, euen to the ground, gaue the King the letter, which he said came from the first president of Paris: which letters when the King had read, asked the Frier what newes hee brought from Paris: the Frier answered that hee had matters of great importance to declare vnto him. Whereupon the King commaunded two Gen∣tlemen, who waited and serued him at his vprising, to goe foorth out of the chamber, and sat downe in a chayre, to heare what the Frier would say. The Frier drew nigh to the King, and falling vpon his knées, began to tell a tale: the King stouping somewhat low, to heare what the Frier was about to say, gaue more attendance to his words than to his fingers. The Frier drawing softly his knife out of his sléeue, stabbed the King there with in the lower part of the belly, and made hast to get away. The King amazed at the suddaine and vnexpected stroak, cried out, and laying hand vpon a dagger that lay nere him, stroak the Frier, who partly for the blow, & partly for feare, fell presently down. Vppon this noyse, the Lordes came running into the Kings chamber, and after many woundes slew that cursed Frier. Some doo report that the King commaunded that hee should not bee flaine, but taken vp and examined, which declared who set him on, and the authors names of so vile treacherie: the wound was presently dressed, and as the report went, seauen stitches made in it: at length the wound be∣ing dressed, hee was laide on his bed, and slept a little vppon his paine and griefe. After his sleepe, hee made his praiers vnto God, and with a loude voyce, made a confession of his faith, and of the féeling which he had of his redemp∣tion, adding there unto this feruent praier.
IF it bee to thy glorie O God, and the commodity of thy people, graunt me, I most humblie desire, first pardon of my sinnes, and then some lon∣ger  dayes of life. But if it be otherwise, I thanke thee most highly O Fa∣ther, that thou doost barre me hence forth from the thraledome of sinne, whereby we most oftentimes procure thy wrath against vs, and therefore I am ready, most willingly to come where thou callest me. The King hauing made an end of his praiers, sendeth for his brother the King of Nauarre, and for the chiefest Lords of his court, gouernours and captaines, but specially for the heads of the strangers, to the intent that if it were Gods will that hee should dye, they might knowe his last will. First, speaking to the King of Nauarre, commended vnto him the charge of his Realme, the gouernement of his subiects, the lawes of France. Often times he repeated wordes, whereby hee charged the said King of Nauarre, to haue a speciall care to keepe Christes flocke in vnity and concord, and to preserue the godly and ancient institutions of the realme, requested him that by all meanes he would pacify the matter of religion in France, and not to alter any thing therein, but by the aduise of a generall or naturall counsell lawfully called: which things the King of Nauarre promised to doo. To the rest of Princes, Lords and Noblemen he signified, that the law∣full succession of the royall state of France, fell not to any other then to the person of Bourbon, and declared at that time the King of Nauarre first successor: he prayed and exhorted the whole company to acknowledge him, and to be faithfull vnto him, willed them also to protest in his presence, all with one voice the acknowledging of him, and to promise true obedience vnto him, as to the true, lawfull and naturall heire of the Crowne: willed them also to cause the like promise and acknowledgement to be made in the Campe, by all true and faithfull Captaines and Souldiers, that could not be present at that assembly, consisting as well of Frenchmen as strangers. In all these speaches he shewed himselfe of a good cheere, which caused all men to hope that hee stoode in no danger of death. The said King sent presently letters to all Prouinces and Cities, to ad∣uertise them how things had passed at S. Clow, and of his will and last Testament, requiring all his faithfull Subiects to protest the fulfilling thereof. The second day toward the euening, there appeared in the King acci∣dents, prognosticating an assured danger, not so much through the nature of the wound, as through the poysoned contagiousnes of the weapon wher∣with the wound was made; so that all remedies being vsed by the Phisiti∣ons
and Chirurgions, to preuent the danger, and nothing preuailing, the King called againe to him the King of Nauarre, and other Princes and  Lords, before whom he greatly bewailed the accursed ciuill warres which had béen the vndooing of his house, his nobility and realme, and the bree∣ders of so many treacheries and treasons, whereof he feeleth the smart, im∣puting the causes thereof vnto himselfe, in that hee had alwaies preferred the bad and violent counsell of his secret enemies, before the good, wise & moderat admonitions and warnings of the Princes of his bloud, and ma∣ny other Princes, strangers and faithfull friends: willeth him to make a iust reuenge (for example sake) vpon the authors of such a vile act. The King of Nauarre, with the rest of the Princes and Nobility depar∣ting very sorowfull and dismaied, the King called for his Confessor, to whose eare he confessed his sinnes, and hauing craued pardon for his offen∣ces, said, that he had a sensible feeling that they were forgeuen him through Christ. The Mediatour desired to communicat of his sacred body, and that all might heare that he had receaued fréely of God the forgeuenes of sinnes, in like casehe not onely forgaue the conspiratours, but also the ve∣ry murtherer and procurers of the murther: so the poyson preuailing and scattering it selfe through, did infect the noble parts, whereby the night following the 22. of Iuly he yeelded his soule vnto God. Here Christian Reader thou mayest see with the eye notable examples both of Gods iustice and mercy, shewed vppon this noble King of a noble kingdome, issued out of noble Kings. First, how this King hauing obstinatly persecuted the Gospell, partly for hatred, partly at the pleasure and solicitation of Priestes, and Fryers, and other sycophants, and clawbackes, who were continually about him, and set him on still, that vnder the colour of catholike Church, and rooting out of heresie, they might weaken him, spoile him of his authority, of his Kingdome, and at length of his life. For they neuer gaue ouer, nor left him at rest vntill they had snatehed his forces out of his hand, and kept his ar∣mies alwayes in their hands, or of their friends and partakers, then by calumnies, slaunders, libels, seditious preachings had procured the con∣tempt and hatred of his subieets agaynst him. Moreouer vpon oportunity they seazed vppon his Townes and fortresses, expelled him out of his owne house, seat, city, of his kingdome, and of his realme, condemned him twise to die: and at last executed that condemnation with hipocrisy and treachery, which thing they could not bring to passe by force. Who did all these vnnaturall iniuries vnto their naturall King: They whom he had so far fauoured, as to expose his goods, his state, his credit, his honor & his life, for the defence of their iuglings, filthy pleasures, pride, ambition and atheisme, to wit, of the Priests, Monks, Fryers, and Guy∣zes, in whose loue, fidelity, and force he trusted more then in God. But be∣hold
with trembling the iudgements of the Lord, which are all righteous and pure. This King had not harkened vnto Gods wisedome which-cryed  in the streates of the Citie; O ye foolish how long will yee loue foolishnes: Gods wisedome therefore forsooke him in the day of calamitie, and so his table was made an occasion of fall vnto him: so that his familiar friends with whom hee tooke sweet counsell together in the temple of their Gods, haue lifted vp their heeles agaynst him. This second iudgement of God is also to be considered with feare and trembling. The famous Gaspar Coligny Admiral of France, with a great number of the chiefest Nobilitie of the Realme, were most vniustly and cruelly murthered in the yeare 1572. the 24. of August. This King being then King Charles the 9. his brother and Duke of Anjou, who issued out of noble rase, not regarding his degree, debased himselfe so farre as to be∣come the chiefest Captayne of an accursed sedition, and procurer of such a murther as hated both of God and man, the fame thereof shall be execrable and stinking in the eares of men for euer. And after the murther most cru∣ell indignities were shewed vpon the dead bodies of the sayd Admirall and his fellowes, who after were carried to bee hanged at the place where men executed for exemplarie iustice are hanged in chaynes, called Monfaucon, which lieth right against the place where the King was murthered on the North side of the riuer Seyne: so that euen as Pompey after the poluting of the Temple of Ierusalem, did neuer prosper; but after many calamities suffered, came to Alexandria, where in the hauen, as a man should say, in the sight of the Temple, he was villanously murthered by them whom he trusted. Euen so this King after that murther (thereby hauing poluted the Temple of iustice) neuer prospered, and from the Lord deliuered into the hands of vile and base men whom he trusted, was brought to receaue the punishment for that murther, nigh to that place where they had executed the vttermost poynt of infamie, vppon the bodies of the sayd Admirall and other noble men. Thirdly, whereas S. Peter in his second Epistle and second Chapter, doth forwarne the Saints both of false Prophets and errors which they shall bring foorth with them, among others maketh mention that they shal not onely contemne, but also shall speake euill of authorities. Behold, thou (Christian reader) hast seene in the former bookes of this historie, all the prankes which this holy League hath played for the space of these twelue yeares, all the horrible villanies, poysonings and murthers by them com∣mitted, and hauing in their mouthes nothing els but holy League, holy Vnion, holy Church, holy Catholike faith, euen holy murthers, and all that is prophane, wicked and damnable is holy with them, so that it be for holy Church: God through iustice and mercie in this peruerse age & dan∣gerous times, when men will not discerne the trueth from lying by the
word, but by their affection, according to the doctrine of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4. hath marked by these their abominations, as with a hot burning yron,  their idolatries, hypocrisie and false religion, that men looking vppon the fruites, may iudge of the goodnes of the tree which beareth them. So in his grace and fauour he hath preserued his Saints (professors of his word) from such abominable déedes, that his trueth being iustified may be louing and amiable vnto men, carying the stampe and grauen image of the sonne of God, which is innocencie, mildnes, and perfect Christian loue. Herein also is noted the mercifulnes of God, who will loose none of his children. This king dyed not presently of that wound, but God prolonged his life, both to giue him time of repentance, and to lay the foundation of the restablishing of that afflicted estate. For first, as concerning his repentance, it doth appeare that hée entered déepely into he consideration of his sinnes, and by that foundation of faith which remayned in him, confessed in the symbole touching the death of Christ, the forgiuenes of sinnes through him, made him as if it were for∣get the most part of the idolatrous fantasies and tromperies, in the which he had béen brought vp and delighted all the daies of his life, and necessitie and feeling of his sinnes enforced him to repose himselfe on the onely sa∣crifice of the Sonne of God. So the Lord knoweth who are his. Herein also appeareth euidently the mercifulnes of God, who worketh all things to the best and comfort of his children. For when as the Rebels and murtherers supposed, that by the Kings death they might easily make an alteration of the state, and transferre the Crowne vpon the head of the Duke de Mayne, and so disappoynt the Princes of Bourbon of their right of succession, the Lord turned al their counsels vpside downe. For the Lord mooued the King lying on his death bed, when he was in perfect memorie, and farthest (as the manner in such a case) from all manner of affection and parciality, to pronounce his sentence and decrée, or rather supplying the person of God, to proclayme the King of Nauarre, right heire and succes∣sor of the crowne, and by the inuocation of the glorious name of GOD, bund the Princes, péeres, Nobles, Captaines and Souldiours, to yéeld him dutifull obedience: so that God himselfe, hath béene the iudge of his cause, giuing sentence on his side, by him whome he appoynted his officer in that behalfe. It will stand. Thus much of the vnworthy death of so great a King, in whom ended the issue of the noble house of Engolesme, according vnto the fatall period of great, Noble and mighty families which is , wherein we haue to note the whole family excepted onely Francis the first, as Henry the second, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, Fran∣cis Duke of Aniou, and this last King Henry the third  per sanguinem ruit, and haue died of an vntimely or violent death, because
they were polluted with that accursed woman Catherine Medicis, Pope Clement his sisters brothers daughter. And so making an end of the Epitasis of this vnnaturalltragedie play∣ed by leaguers, we will make an end likewise of this 6. Booke. Here endeth the 6. Booke. THE SEVENTH BOOKE. NOw we will follow the Catastrophe and last act: which although it be full of Calamities, yet it is like to bee ended with a ioyfull and happie suc∣cesse. The King beeing dead, great heauines and sorrowe seazed vppon men of all degrees, the Campe was full of sorrow and lamentation: the wise saw this to be new seeds of a world of euils, which wil worke the vtter subuersion of France. On the other side, great reioysing was seene among the rebels and trai∣tors, authors and procurers of the murther, their ioye they shewed diuers waies, but speciallie with contumelies and sarcasmes, demaunding one of another, whether the Friers knife was sharpe enough or not. The rebels in Paris certified of the assured death of the King, and sup∣posing that the army had béen greatly dismayed, replenished with teares and lamentation, conceaued a good hope to do some great and notable ex∣ploit: and imagining that it were easie in this mourning of all men to de∣feat the Kings forces: all that night the Duke de Mayne did muster and prepare a mighty army, and early in the morning issuing out of the Sub∣urbs, was so receaued by the Kings forces, that he was enforced to retire within the Citie with blowes and dishonor. That morning, being the third of August (but by the right calender the 23. of Iuly) the King of Nauarre, who was appointed the Kings Gene∣rall lieutenant by the King, after that hee had receaued the wound, assem∣bled the Princes, Lords, Nobility and Captaines to deliberat how to re∣medy those great euils, and to put out that combustion which the rebels had kindled in all partes of the realme.
First, there was a capitulation made and concluded betweene theKing and the said Princes and Nobles, Lords, gentlemen and souldiers, that  there should be no innouation made in the Romish religion, but the same should stand and be exercised peaceably without any interruption. And that the reformed religion should be contained with all liberty in the exer∣cise thereof within the places, where it was then at that present time esta∣blished: prouided that the Romish religion should bee there exercised also without any disturbance. And that men professing these two religions, li∣uing peaceably like good subiects, should be protected by the Kings autho∣ritie, in their liues, goods, liberties and franchizes, vntill that by a natio∣nall Councell some good and peaceable order should bee taken for some re∣consiliation or vniformitie touching religion. Which thing the King pro∣mised by the faith of a Prince to kéepe inuiolably, and with as much speede as might be to prouide that a Councell and méeting of the learned might be assembled. This order being concluded, and the obseruation thereof promised by the King, all his Princes, Nobles, Lords, Gentlemen and Captaines, promised vpon their othes all duetifull fidelitie and obedience vnto the K. and to assist him with their liues, goods and meanes, as well in the defence of his royall authoritie agaynst all traytors, rebels and Leaguers, which goe about to vsurpe the state; as in the execution of the exemplary punish∣ment vpon them, who haue procured or committed that haynous disloyal∣tie, felony and treason vpon the Kings person last deceased, and all others who shall be knowne consenting, knowing, or accessarie to the same. This order being taken as the readiest and most expedient to vnite the subiects with the King, being promised and sworne, the King of Nauarre was saluted, declared, proclaymed, and crowned King of France and Na∣uarre, by the name of King Henry the 4. And whereas in this historie hée had béen discerned from the King of France, by the title of King of Na∣uarre; now in the course of this historie following, he shall be simply na∣med King, without any other addition or title. This noble King being proclaymed King, is crowned and put in the possession of the Crowne of France, due vnto him by right, not with trif∣fling, childish, and Monkish cerimonies, with holy oyle, holy water, holy toyes, and holy trashes; but after the ancient manner of the Emperours of the Romanes, in the Camp by the whole army, Princes, Péeres, Nobles and Captaines of the kingdome. Here (Christian Reader) is to be noted Gods most gracious fauour to∣ward France, and prouidence toward this great King: for except the Lord had prepared this heroicall Prince to restablish this decayed state, which was cast downe headlong into such a depth of miseries by the Leaguers, as in mans iudgement it was impossible that it could euer haue been vni∣ted
againe, but rather reduced into a lamentable desolation. But the Lord in his mercie beholding from heauen his holy habitation, with his lightfull  countenance after so many tempests, hath raised vp, lead by the hand, and placed by his own authoritie and power, this great Prince on the Throan of that state, whom hee hath endued with wisedome, prudence, fortitude, moderatnes, modestie, iustice and pietie, to bee able to heale the deadly wounds of that sickly state, to pacifie the controuersies of religion, to lodge therein iustice and iudgement, so long exiled out of that common wealth, and to restore peace, so long wished and desired. Againe, we may with admiration, celebrate the prouidence of God, that cleane contrary vnto the expectation of all men, the Lord hath giuen him to France, for her good. For first, the Leaguers in the beginning of their insurrection, made him a party. Then they vsed for the space of foure yeares, all the power of France to oppresse him: when force would not serue, they procured poysoners, to try what might bee done that way. But that taking no place, they degraded & debarred him from his right of succession, by a fundamental law of the realme, which they sweared, sealed and decréed, that it should be vnchangeable, and should remayne for euer: they made him hatefull, and abhorred of the common people throughout all France. After they had missed of their purpose intended against the King▪ they so vrged their attempts, that the King was enforced to yéeld himselfe into the King of Nauarre his hands for his safety: at length they murdered the King. Then I will aske them what haue you gotten by it? They answered that they haue gotten the Crowne, either part or the whole. Why? Because there is no successor. Demaunde. What are the Bourbons then. Answer. They are excluded by a fundamentall lawe of the realme, sworne by the vnion at Bloys. Dem. What saith God to that. Ans. Beholde the Lord saith, that hee will haue the King of Nauarre head of the house of Bourbon to succeede, because it is his right, for it is not reason, that a confederacie of conspirators should make a law contrarie vn∣to the fundamentall lawe of the realme, confirmed by the consent and cu∣stome of so many nations, by the space of twelue hundred yeares, not con∣trarie vnto Gods word. Dem. But where dooth God speake it. Ans. By the mouth of a Soueraigne Magistrate, ordained by him, to bée the interpreter of all iudiciall lawes. Therefore beholde the meanes which the rebels haue sought, to exclude the King of Nauarre from his right of succession, the Lord hath vsed to the stablishing of the said King, and hath vnited the Princes, Péeres, and chie∣fest Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines and Souldiours of the realme, to as∣sist,
place and defend him in that roome; so the arme of fleshe shall not preuaile against the power of God, and the hand of the Lord shall be vpon him. The Prince Montpencier, gouernour, and Generall for the King in Normandie, then being at Audely, a towne vpon the riuer of Seyne, aboue Pont de Carche, caused all his army to take that oath, exhorting them to de∣fend constantly the Kings will, according to their oath. About the 26. day of Iuly, there was an assembly holden at Caen in Normandie, of the court of Parliament (whereto the late deceased King had transported the said court from the Cittie of Roen, after the rebellion thereof) of the Nobilitie and Gentlemen of the countrey, and of the bodie of the towne and Vniuersitie, and of the Citizens and inhabitants of the said towne: where the Lord Lizores, Lord President of the saide court, did sit as head of the saide méeting, in whose presence, the saide President hauing declared the haynous déede, committed vpon the person of the King late deceased, and shewed the equitie of the Kings testament and last will, on his owne behalfe protested perfect loyaltie to the King, right and law∣full successor of the Crowne of France, & after the publication of the Kings, and of ye Prince Montpencier his letters, all vniformally with one consent, did sweare their acknowledgement and fidelitie, vnto the lawfull successor of the Crowne of France, and to maintaine al things contained in the will of Henry d'Valoys, lately deceased. The like declarations and promises were made, and othes of fidelitie and loyalty taken, publikely in many townes and cities in France, euen on the North side of Loyre, to the same effect. The rebels vnderstanding in Paris, what the late deceased King had done, and how the King of Nauarre was proclaymed King of France, contrarie to their expectation, & that they were worse hampered now then before, like to haue him to be their master, whome they had refused and dis∣dained, thought good to trie what might be done by treachery, vpon the per∣son of the King. And because that a Friers coate could not beguile this King, as it did the other, by reason of the little acquaintance and credit which hée giueth them, they suborned a murtherer, who vnder the colour of a Gentleman, should shoote him through with a Piece: but the Lord watching for his an∣nointed, brought the murtherer to confusion. All thinges falling out so confusedly in France by the death of the last King, and the newes thereof fleeing abroad into forreine countries, reple∣nished mens harts with admiration of Gods secret iudgements with a maze, indignation and feare. The King taking counsell what was best to be done in these extremi∣ties, for to saue the remnant of the realme from vtter subuertion, did resolue
vpon these three pointes which will follow this miserable murther. First, the King considering how his enemies long time aforehand had  rendered him by slaunderous libels and seditious sermons, of Iesuits and Friers, by these meanes to make him abhorred of the commonaltie, and thereby to make them vnwilling to acknowledge him for their King, and to render him fidelity, loyaltie and obedience, which long practised malice of his enemies would procure him much labour, and long continuance of warre betweene him and his subiects. Secondly, he knew that in the Campe, vnder the banner of his prede∣cessor, and also in his counsell were many deuoted & sworne to the League, whom he durst not trust, and knowing that they would not do him faithful seruice no more then they did to his predecessor, hee determined to licence them to depart so many as would, and to liue peaceablie in their houses vnder his obedience: whereupon many disbanded themselues, and retired some home, and some to the enemie. Last of all, the K. foreseeing that the heads of the League vpon this pros∣perous exploit done vpon the person of the King lately murthered, will double their rage, and with great forces (which they could quickly set vp in such a mighty and populous cittie) would set vpon him, and with multi∣tude might greatly distresse him, determined to send part of his forces into Picardy, vnder the conduct of the duke of Longueuile, & the Lord la Nouë, there to minister play to the enemy, and with the greatest part of his army to retire into Normandy, there to gather greater forces: and if need should require, to be nigh and ready vpon the coast, there to receaue supply of for∣ces from the mightie Princesse the Queene of England, which might bee done vpon short warning, considering the small distance which is from Coast to Coast. As for the Swissers and other Germans, who serued the King his predecessor, hee sent their Heads and Captaines vnto their Princes and Signories, to vnderstand their pleasure, whether they would call their men home, or giue them leaue to serue him. The said Germans & Swis∣sers (according to the Kings will and promise made vnto him) proffered vnto him their faithfull seruice. Thus the present estate and summe of affairs being managed, he reti∣red into Normandy, hauing not with him aboue eight thousand men of all sortes, and stayed there a while beholding what the enemy would en∣terprise. Now we wil leaue the King about the Sea coast in Normandy, where we haue brought him with eight thousand men of all sorts, and will goe to see what is done in other places, what preparations the Leaguers do: and after we will passe ouer the Alpes, to see how doth Frier Sixtus, and what iolly diuinity is with him and his Chaplains.
About the 31. of Iuly, which to the Papistes is the 21. of August, the D. of Lorreine thought good to blow the fire of rebellion to make it burne  more furiously. There is Langres a noble City in that part of Bourgondy, which commonly is called Bassigny: the citizens had euer remayned faith∣full to the King, and could neuer bee brought to associat themselues to the League, smelling the breath of the Lorreins, as nigh Neighbours to Nancie. This noble Citie the Duke of Lorreine desired greatly to bee of the association of the rebellion, knowing the importance of that place, by reason of the strong situation thereof, to make much for the affayres of the rebellion. First, he sheweth his sorrow for the Kings death to be so great, that hee cannot keepe himselfe from weeping. This weeping and teares are to be supposed to proceede from ioy, he himselfe beeing one of the procurers of the murther. Secondly, he fayneth a great feare, least the Gospell (which he calleth heresie, entring into their City) should breake the necke of Popery, and so rid their Citie of that deceitfull guest, which by all meanes possible hee would haue courteously entertained. Thirdly, he exhorteth them to admit none of the Kings fauorers within their walles, and in so doing promiseth them all ayde and fauour. The noble Citie of Langres, after curteous thanks geuen him for an an∣swere the third of August, doth first protest of their zeale, goodwill and constancie in the Catholike faith. Secondly, doth protest of their great sorrow conceaued for the death of their late King of blessed memorie, proffering themselues, their liues, their goods, and whatsoeuer is deare vnto them for the iust and due reuenge∣ment of that most vilanous and execrable deede. Last of all, doth protest of their dutifull obedience to their King, promi∣sing all assistance, with all their meanes todefend him, and nobility ioyned with him, both in the defence of the Crowne and State, and also in pur∣suing the authors of that murther, vntill that a sufficient reuengement be taken of them. The Citizens of the Noble Citie of Langres, perceauing by these let∣ters of the Duke of Lorreine, that further matters might be attempted to procure a rebellion within their Citie, to preuent all that might happen the third day of August, and in their Popish calender. The twelfth, they assembled al the Magistrates, Officers, Citizens, and Inhabitants of their Citie in the Towne-house, after ripe consideration of the euils procured by the Leaguers and rebels, and of their duties, of their lawfull obedience, did all with accord and minde promise and sweare. First, the keeping of the Catholike faith. Secondly, they do sweare neuer to admit any confederacy, society, fac∣tion
or conspiracie, neither with the Lorreyne, nor any other forreine, nor within the Realme, without the expresse commandement of their King. Thirdly, doo acknowledge Henry of Bourbon the 4. to bee their lawfull King and naturall heire, and successour to the Crowne of France, and sweare neuer to depart from his obedience, but to obey him, and to defend him and the fundamentall lawes of the right succession of the Crowne, proffering all their liues, goods and meanes to preserue his person, his state, Crowne and kingdome, and not to admit any sedition or conspiracie against him. Last of all, doo sweare to assist him with all their power and meanes to reuenge the vnworthie death of Henry de Valoys lately deceased. Many other Townes on the North side of Loyre, as in Gastinoys, Hurepoys, Auxerroys, Bourgundie, Bassigny and Champaigne, being wauering, encou∣raged with the example of the noble Citie of Langres, did resolue them∣selues in reiecting the entising perswasions of Rebels, to remayne in the Kings obedience, and tooke the like oath voluntarily as the sayd Citie of Langres had done. As the Rebels in the rest of Townes and Cities, tooke occasion by the proclayming of the King, to stirre the people to their societie of vnion, that is, to rebellion, crying still the Catholike, the Catholike religion, heresie, heresie, heretikes, heretikes: so in like manner the heads of the rebellion doo prepare all the forces that euer they can: for the Duke of Lorreyne ga∣thered a great power of horsemen and footmen, which he sent to the Duke de Mayne to Paris, conducted by his eldest sonne the Marquesse du Pont. The Duke de Mayne also sent to the Duke of Parma for succour, sup∣posing that with the great forces which he was able to make within Paris, the succour which was expected from Lorreyne, and some companies of horsemen of Wallons and Germanes, he would easily make an end of the warre. The Duke of Parma therefore sent lustie companies of horsemen and Wallons, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Brounswicke and Countie Egmond, who did arriue about the beginning of September. Now let vs leape ouer the Alpes to see Frier Sixtus, and pray to God that the pockes may neuer depart from him, nor from that holy sea, seeing that his predecessor Iulius the great warriour, being either the first or one of the first in all Italy, which was infected with it (if Ihuigo doth not lye) and of a speciall grace and Apostolicall fauour, left it to all the legions of Friers and Massemongers, for a token of their honest and chast life. The Rebels hauing committed that sauage murther vpon the person of their Soueraigne King and Prince, whom God commaunded them to o∣bey, serue and reuerence, and such as in Catholicisme did surpasse the best Catholike in the world: and to bee short, with one blowe hauing executed the secret counsell of Rome, for the rooting out the rase of Valoys, and put
out the Lamp of France, (as for the Bourbons they had made their account to haue destroyed them all ere now) they sent in post to Rome to congratu∣late Frier Sixtus for their good successe, and also to haue his Frierlike  counsell to bring their worke to perfection, according to the sacred counsell of Rome, as is aforesayd. In this message (as it appeared in Frier Sixtus oration) they had certified him, how miraculously the Frier went out of Paris in great daunger to be searched out, and afterward miraculously pas∣sed through the Campe of the heretikes, and through the Kings gardes, not perceiued of any man, (but as if the diuell should conuey him inuisible in a clowde) vntill he came into the Kings presence: so that no man had no power to examine him, nor to aske him Domine quo vadis? The newes of this exploit so happily brought to passe, arriuing at Rome, filled the Citie with Gaudeamus, the Churches with Te Deum, and the court of Rome with Curtizans. Thereuppon, that Fryer Sixtus may fill the measure of iniquity, and that he may leaue a testimony to the world to be knowen whose Vicar hee is, he called together all his Chaplains into the Consistory, and telleth them the happiest newes that euer came to Rome, since the day that it was taken and ransaked by Charles of Bourbon, to wit, that Henry the third K. of France, was slayne by the hands of a Frier: and that hee may giue some ground to his oration, flourished with Monkish eloquence he taketh a text out of A bacuck. I haue wrought a worke in your dayes, and no man would beleeue it though it be told them. Vppon these wordes the lewde lying Frier taketh vppon him to make the articles of our Faith, as touing the incarnation and resurrection of Christ, and the execrable parricide of this accursed murdering Fryer to bee equally miraculous, and wrought by the will, counsell, finger and power of God, and by the inspiration of the selfe same Spirit which guy∣ded the Prophets and Apostles, and wrought in them the measure of all wisedome, righteousnes and holines, conducted this Fryer through all the difficulties of the way, and directed him and his hand in committing such a damnable Paricide. The Lord reproue the lying spirit of blas∣phemie. Thus may we see the hellish diuinity which Frier Sixtus (which sitting in his Consistory in his Pontificalibus cannot erre) spueth out by the inspi∣ration of Sathan. This impudent Frier, the other day being Sonne to a Swineheard, & lying in Ouens for lacke of better lodging, though he be neither Prophet (a spudevp-prophet let him be) nor the sonne of a Prophet, yet telleth to his Chaplayns, that hee prophecied to the red-cap Priestes, called the Caroinals Joyeuse, Leuencourt and Paris, how the King should be the last of his name, and should die an infortunate and violent death. By this pro∣phecie
euery man may see how deeply this murthering Fryer Sixtus had his fingers in the conspiracy of the Kings death. Thirdly, because the King would not yeeld himselfe to be slayne by the Leaguers, according to the secret counsell of Rome. Also by reason that he suffered the execrable murtherer to bee slayne, and willed the King of Nauarre, and the Princes with him to make exemplary iustice vppon the authors and accessaries of his death. Frier Swineheard, (otherwise Six∣tus) sweareth by his cornerd cap, that as when it is vppon his head, there lyeth vnder it the foure quarters of a false Frier: so the King shall haue no Masse of Requiem of him, but shall souse, burne and broile in purgatory vn∣till he be as cold as a Frogge. So Fryer Sixtus hauing taken so great paines for the holy Church, as he did that day, his belly began to call him to another worke. And all the red cap Priestes making their abashio vpon their knées, began to whistle with his mouth, and with his two forfingers and his thumb, hunting flies ouer their heads, blessed them, voto milesorum nemo vestrum frugi e∣sto, get you to dinner, edite bibite, cras moriemini. Not long after, at the solicitation of the rebels, who had promised (in case Fryer Clement should bée slaine in such good seruice to the holy Church) to make him a Saint. Fryer Sixtus (for why should not a Fry∣er doo for a Fryer, euen a greater thing then that) made him a holy mar∣tyr, who suffered for the Catholick faith, and Deum tutelarem of the Citie of Paris. Then his Image was set vp in euery Church, Massing, sen∣sing, offring, kissing, kneeling, and ducking, is dayly done to the Idoll: there was neuer so much a doo about the Idoll of Molok, there was neuer so much crying about the Altar of Baal, as there is ora pro nobis about this new Saint: there was neuer so many flyes about Beelzebub, as there is Idolaters in Paris about this new Idoll. Now before we do enter into the narration of King Henry the fourth, we will represent an image of the miserable confusions which are in the realme, by a comparison. Henry the fourth, Emperour of the Romains by the mothers side, was of the royall bloud of France▪ a man of great wisdome and integrity. The holy Empyre was set on a fier of sedition, by the Bishops, Priests and Monkes, by the procurement of the Popes which then liued: seditious rebellions, and commotions were raysed vp by the Shauelings throughout all Germanie, about the bestowing of Bishoprikes and Be∣nefices. First, they stirred vp Saxonie: after Suobland they set vp an vsurper, to wit, Radolph, but to his great harme. Then they set vp his owne Sonne against him, to wit, Henry the fift. Last of all, the Bishops, Priests and Monkes, by treason oppressed
him: this noble Emperour could neuer be ouercome by force, but had al∣waies the victorie against the Shauelings and their partakers: his age was blinded with grosse ignorance, and a vaine feare of the Popes vayne  craking excommunication. Henry of Bourbon the fourth, all one in name, in number, in vertue, and force, and prosperous successe is all one, with that noble Emperour, issu∣ed out (if we should well consider the histories) of the same famely as the other was by the mothers side, his Kingdome is all set on a fire of rebel∣lion: the Priestes and Fryers haue blowne and kindled it, religion is pretended, but in very déede, ambition is the procurer of all these euills. This age is not so blinde, if they would, but men are more malicious, they vse now the old rusty sword of the Popes excommunication, as they did then, not that they doo passe for it, but to serue their owne turne, to bée the trumpet of all rebellion: he hath sustayned the fury of the Priests and Fryers, and of their partakers for the space of these 14. yeares, and had neuer any foyle, but hath had alwaies the victory on his side. The Emperour Henry the fourth, was oppressed by the treasons of popelings: this I hope will beware of such Chaplaines; Popery then did preuaile, but now the Gospell shall florish, mauger all the religions of idolatrous Fryers, and all the route of Antichrist. We haue left the King on the sea coast of Normandie, there to view the preparations and attempts of the Leaguers: where vnderstanding that the Leaguers did insult, by the good successe which they had, in executing their traiterous felony vpon the Kings person, and that they had prepa∣red a mighty army of such rablement of rebels, as Paris could afoord them, and had receaued certaine swart Ruters, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Brunswick. He was aduertised also, that the Duke of Lorreyne had sent his sonne the Marquis d'Pont, with certaine companies of Horsemen: and that they had receaued certaine Wallons out of the Low Countrey, conducted by the County Egmond. The King I say, aduertised of these things, sent from Deepe to the Quéene of England for some succour, who (as her Maiesty neuer fayleth to helpe them who are vniustly distressed) sent him forces, according to his request. All the Kings forces at Deepe, were not about nine thousand men, before the Englishmen arriued to him. The Duke d'Mayne hauing a mighty army of fiue and twenty thou∣sand men, set foorth out of Paris about the beginning of September, gi∣uing foorth, that he went to a certaine victory, and vaunting that he would brig to Paris the King dead or a liue, or else he would driue him into the Sea, approached toward Deepe. But the God of battels, turned as ea∣sily with few as with multitude, all these bragges to vanitie and shame. For the King hearing that the enemy approached very fast, encamped
himselfe at Arques, about two myles from the towne of Deepe, by the pru∣dent counsell of the Marshall of Byron. The King viewing the place, iud∣ged  by and by what the enemy was able to doo against him: whereupon hée caused trenches to bée made on the top of the hill, in most substanciall manner, as farre from Arques as a Canon can shoote, so that all the army for a néede, might bée couered therewith out of all danger. Vpon the same trenches, hée caused foure pieces of ordinance to bée pla∣ced, right against a great plaine, where hée supposed the enemy would come to fight, whether also he might come without any danger: the kings companies were quartered in the Villags round about. Whilest these things are a dooing at Arques, the enemy approached more and more very fast, and on the 15. of September, lodged his vaunt∣garde, within three miles of Deepe. The King that morning, perceaued that they intended to spoyle the sub∣burb Paulet, before he enterprised vpon any thing at Arques. Therefore with spéed, he fortified the said Suburb, but specially the milles which steed most open to the enemy. This thing being done, the King determined as nere as could bee, and with small company, to view how the enemy was lodged, and perceauing by occasion of some that they were too forward, commaunded fiue or sixe of his company to giue them the charge, in the which seauen of the enemy re∣mained vpon the place: which thing being done, the king returned to lodge at Arques. The 16. before day, many issued out of Deepe, who made hot skirmi∣shes vpon the enemy, where the Lord Chastilion commaunding ouer the footemen, shewed himselfe a most skilfull warriour. The King had pla∣ced certaine horsemen betweene his footemen and the enemy, to represse the Leaguers of the Souldiours, least rashly they might haue bred some confusion. The skirmish was such, that the Harquebusiers did neuer dis∣charge a bullet that day in vaine. That day the King permitted certayne English gentlemen to skirmish with the enemie, who imployed themselues so valiantly, and with such a noble courage, that in lesse then the turning of one hand they ouerthrew, slew, or tooke prisoners all that encountred them. The same day, about 25. of the enemies had passed the brooke, which did runne betweene the Kings armie and the enemie, and were already in the medow to haue assaulted a Village named Boteille, where the Kings Cor∣net was lodged: great troups of horsemen came downe the hill, to passe in like maner the brooke to haue assisted them: but there came out of the Vil∣lage sixe gentlemen well armed to meete the enemy, among whom were the Lords Saint Marke and Slurbe, with two Harquebuziers on foot, charged the enemy so hard, that they were faine to retire with swift flight,
feare and sorrowfull countenance. All this day there continued hot skirmishes at the milles, which are at the end of the Suburbe named Paulet, and whereas the King aduaunced  still to view the enemies doings, an Harquebuze shot strooke his horse in the thigh. The same day the King sent the company of the Prince County, conducted by the Lorde Armilie his Lieftenant to the Marshall Biron, who was at Arques, which immediatly commaunded them to goe and spie the lodgings of the enemy, who did lye in a Village called Martinglize, where were the Dukes Aumale, Nemours, and the Lord Sagonne: this company of light horses comming to the place, and forgetting to bring word to the sayd Lord Biron of that which they had seene, ran so fiercely vppon the enemy, that they killed aboue an hundred and fifty, and among them the Marques of Meneiay, they tooke many Captains and other prisoners, and ouerthrew their rampiers and Barricadoes being still on horsebacke. The rest being foure regiments of footmen fled with great terrour, Aumale, Nemours and Sagonne, shewing to these companies the way to flee, and striuing among themselues who should flee ye swif∣test. The Lord Armilie was dangerously wounded through the body with a sword. The King from Diepe vnderstanding the skirmish, made hast thi∣ther with three hundered horses: but the enemy was already chased before he came. The 17. of September the King caused a Canon to bee discharged a∣gainst the enemie on the side of Arques, whilest the Lord Chastilion did valiantly skirmish with the enemie at the ende of the Suburbe Paulet, where he slewe many of the enemies, and tooke many prisoners, without the losse of any one man, saue onely fewe of his were wounded. Another company of the Kings Campe at the same time went to view another Village on another side, where they surprised the enemies, slewe thirtie of them, and put the rest to flight. During these skirmishes, a great number of Gentlemen and Soul∣diers came to the King, and of their owne voluntary motion and goodwill, yéelded themselues and their seruice. They were part of the troupes of the Lord Rabempré, who a little before was taken by the enemie at Gournay, a Towne situated in Beauuoysin, betwéene the Cities of Beauuoys & Roen, who had followed the enemies for their safegard. The enemie trusting in his great multitude, determined to passe ouer the little riuer which ran betwéene them and the King: and hauing made certaine bridges of wood to bee cast ouer, the 19. day of September about fiue of the clock in the morning, the enemie marched from Martinglize in battell aray, well ordered, strong and thicke. Their footmen well placed at their wings, their faces set toward Arques, & the quarter of the Swissers
The Lord Billing with two thousand shot was appoynted to giue the onset. The Duke de Mayne stood behind with great strength in battell a∣ray,  readie to giue succour where néede should be. The King had watched all night before on horsebacke, to giue order in euery place, which hee did so diligently and circumspectly, that the enemie could doo him no hurt, without great disaduantage and losse to them∣selues. But in the morning hauing seene the order of their battell aray, incon∣tinently he sent foorth his light horsemen, and the company of the Prince County, lead by the Lord Montater: he sent also his Cornet, wherein were the Lords graund Prior, the great Squier, the Countie Rochefocault, and the Countie of Rossie his brother, with the Countie of Rochefort, with di∣uers Gentlemen who were néerest to his person: all them he set about his footmen, deuiding the Swissers into two parts. The enemies were 25. thousand, and he had not aboue nine thousand and that to the vttermost. With this small number the King (knowing that God would consider iustice of the cause, and was able to vanquish as well with fewe as with a great number) hauing earnestly desired Gods ayde in his priuate prayers, commaunded publike prayers: which being ended, marched against his e∣nemies with such resolued and princelike courage, that at the first encoun∣ter, as it were with one blowe, the enemie left vpon the place fiue hundred men, beside a number of prisoners and wounded souldiers: but the rest fled with great feare and disorder. In the same méeting the enemie lost, as is aboue sayd, at the first en∣counter fiue hundred men, among whom were the chiefest Sague, Co∣lonell of the light horsemen: the Lord S. Ʋidal chiefe Marshall of the Or∣dinance, the Lord S. Andrew, brother to the Countie of Saulx, the Lord Vienuille, eldest sonne to the Marshall Vienel, who were caried to Roen and there buried, with many more of great account. The Countie Billing Marshall of the Camp, Temblecourt, the Coun∣tie of Lorreyne, who had the first regiment, and the Lord Sauelak, with di∣uers other Captaines were taken prisoners. Of the Kings side dyed but 26. among whom were the Countie Rossie, brother to the Lord Rochefocault, and also the Lord Bakqueuile, whose ver∣tues were commendable among all men, for whom the King was greatly grieued. There was among the enemies, one Lorde Sagonne, a proud man, greatly boasting of his valiantnes, who with feeling, escaped from the slaughter at Seulis, the Lord Graund Prior prouoked him to fight, who ioyning together, the saide Lorde Graund Prior gaue him such a blowe, that in retyring and lighting downe of his horse, hee fell downe and brake his neck.
Thus the enemy hauing retyred with shame and losse, the King com∣maunded all his forces to refresh themselues, which thing being done,  fifteene hundred Launce-knights, presented themselues to a little trench, which was kept by some of the Kings Launce-knights, and lifting vp their hands, protested and desired to yéeld vnto the King, so that the Kings seruants as well as they would put vp their weapons. This caused great ioy in the army, and euery man putting vp their weapons, the Kings men scattered themselues among them: without any suspition of treason, sha∣king hands like good fellowes, two of the Captaines went to meete the King, and being examined suddainely, faultring in their speach, as kno∣wing not what they said, as men troubled in minde, named themselues ser∣uants to the Duke d' Mayne: in the meane while, they fed the Kings Soul∣diours with fayre words, to delay the time, till their troupes of horse∣men shoulde drawe neere, to assist them, desiring very much to see the King. The King hauing no liking of them, commaunded his forces to march downe the medowes from them, and whilest these villanous dissembling traitors passed toward the Suissers, as though in deed they would yeelde themselues to the King, seeing no more the kings horsemen before them, and their horsemen approaching still, then they seazed vpon the Countie Rochefort, and began to set vpon the Kings troupes with all their might, whilest fiftéene hundered horsemen came marching a long the medowes to assist them. The enemies by these meanes, being three thousand, and the Kinges forces there, beeing not aboue three hundered Horsemen, put this small companie in great feare, and began to retyre toward the Swis∣sers. The Swissers neuer shronk for all that multitude, but stoode still firme∣ly, shewing such a manly countenance, that the enemy suspected the retyre of the Kings horsemen, to haue been a policy to draw them into the danger of the Swissers. At the same instant that the treason was discouered, the Lord Chastili∣on brought out of Deepe fiue hundred Caliuers. Thus all these troupes were deuided into two parts: the Harquebusiers of the Kings side were so fitly placed, that the enemy durst not venture to set vppon them. The Canons in the meane time played vppon them, and killed ma∣nie. The King in this extremity, and suddaine discouering of this vnlooked treason, hauing ordered all things, set vpon the enemies, and shewed him∣selfe both King, Captaine and Souldier, and by his princely courage, did encourage all men to play their partes valiantly. The King recea∣ued a shot in his boete, and his horse being hurt, accompanied with the
Marshall Byron, fought on foote, vntill hée was reuenged of his ene∣mies. The enemie retired with shame and losse, leauing their dead on the place, and hid himselfe at Martinglize. The King remayned on the field, and commaunded certaine pieces of Ordinance to bée discharged against Martinglize: which thing being done, he gaue thanks to God, with ear∣nest praiers for his gracious goodnes, succour and presence, in defending them and his iust cause. This being done, hée greatly commended the good and faithfull seruice of the Swissers, in presence of their Cap∣taines, and dronke to them for their valiant exploytes done that day. The 23. of September, the Lord Staphord, Ambassadour for the most Noble Quéene of England, arriued at Diepe, bringing both money and munition, but hée sawe not the King, vntill the next day following. A∣bout midnight following, the same day the King perceaued that the enemy had changed his opinion, and that hée would rayse vp his ar∣mie. The 24. of September very early in the morning the enemy raised vp his Camp, without any sound of Drumme or Trompet in the sight of the King and of his army. This their remoouing was done with such great feare, and so cowardly, that they left their wounded in the Villages behind them, and without giuing warning to their Sentinels to retire and saue themselues: they left their victuall and munition of warre in the way as they went. They tooke their iourney as though they went to the towne of Hewe, and at length they turned to Saint Vax, Quinqueuile, and Bures, and camped themselues on the other side of Diepe, entrenching themselues in the néerest Villages, Ianuile, Boutiles and Apeuile. The King who was on the other side of the hill in battel aray, séeing their departing to be like a fearefull flight, while hee receaued the Lord Am∣bassador of England, sent certaine companies to puriue them, who also tooke many prisoners ofthem. These Prisoners beeing demaunded the cause of the sudden retire, an∣swered diuersly: for some said, it was by reason of the comming of the English ships, which lately arriued, wherein they doubted great aid to bee sent to the King. But some gaue another answere, to wit, that vpon the death of those Noble men who had béen slaine, great strife had growen a∣mong them, for placing other in their roome: some allowing one, & some choosing another: so that it seemeth that these two causes troubled the e∣nemy. The King seeing the enemy encamped in another side, caused his bat∣taile to bee pitched in the plaine of Arques, and afterward in the euening brought his army into Diepe, and the Suburbs of the same, and all night
caused great and large Trenches to bee made in a place called the hill of Cats: and by the Morning the Trenches beeing strong, he placed part of  his footmen vnder the gouernment of the Lord Chastilion, with thirtéene Ensignes of Swissers: vppon the Fort of the side of Januile hee pitched two double Canons, which did greatly endomage the enemy, because they were all on an heape, and their horsemen could not retire into their quar∣ter without the danger of the Canon: so that it neuer shot in vaine. The King sent the Regiment of the Lord Garde, into the Castle of Arques. The first day of October, the enemy planted sixe pieces of Ordinance vpon the top of the hill by Ianuile, and shot fiue or sixe voleies of shot into  the Towne, wherewith was slaine one of the Kings Cookes, a Woman, a Maiden and a Boy, and great hurt done to two Shippes which lay at Anker in the Hauen. The Lord Staphord Ambassador of England, had presented a Canonier to the King, who beeing very skilfull, with a shot killed the master Gun∣ner, and dismounted two pieces of the enemies Ordinance, which caused them to remooue their Canon: during this time the Kings troups dayly did set vppon them, and drew them from their Trenches with blowes and deadly woundes, who beeing weary of that continuall play, the fourth day of October they brake their Rampiers and Gabions, & vpon intelligences of the comming of the Prince of Soisson, the Duke of Longueuile, & Mar∣shall Aumont retyred with shame and losse of men, and in the Kings sight raised their camp, and dislodged on a sudden, taking their iourney toward Picardie, and in the way shewed all crueltyes that could bee. The King seeing the sudden and vnexpected departure of the Enemy, supposed that he went to fight against the power which was broughtto him by the said Prince of Soissons, Duke of Longueuile, and Marshall Aumont, afore they should ioyne with him: which thing he mistrusted the more, be∣cause the enemies shifted into three seuerall places, and neuer frarre from him. But the King knowing that these helpes were come within seuen or eight leagues, tooke betweene three or foure hundred horsemen to goe to meet with them about the sixt day of October, leauing the Marshall Bi∣ron in Diepe, with all the rest of the armie. The same day he tooke the towne and Castle Samache in the sight of the enemy. The 8. day, hée tooke the towne of Hew, giuing great occasions to the Duke d'Mayne to fight. Whilest these things were passing at Diepe, and sometime before there was a méeting of the deputies of the Dukes d'Mayne and Parma, in the town of Aras, where the Duke d'Mayne bound himselfe to the Spany∣ards, to deliuer all the townes of Picardie into their hans, so that they would come to ayde him: but the Spanyards would not styrre
out of their places, before hée had performed what hée was bound to doo. The Duke d'Mayne therefore, to colour his cowardlines, shamefull flight and disgrace receaued at Diepe, and for that hée durst neuer hazard the battell: he bruted abroad, that he went into Picardie, to take possession of the townes of that Prouince, to pledge them to the Spanyards: and so hauing passed the riuer of Some, he tooke away with him, all hope from the King to come to any battaile. The King knowing well the nature of the French men, who though sometyme in their heat and naturall hastines they doo fall to sedition, yet are vnpacient of a strange gouernment, assured himselfe that they would ne∣uer admit the gouernment of that nation, whom they of all most hated, nei∣ther would they yeeld vnto the Flemmings whom they hated also, for the naturall iniuries which they do proffer one to another in time of warre, as it falleth out commonly among Borderers. Therefore he stayed yet a while in Diepe, as well for the affaires of Normandie, where hee left the Prince Montpencier for Gouernour, as for to receaue foure thousand En∣glishmen sent vnto him by the renowmed Queene of England. And the 21. of October hee departed from Deepe, and with small iour∣neyes coasted the enemie betwéene the two Riuers of Seyne and Some, vn∣till hee came to Meulan, a Towne situated a little aboue Pontoys distant from Paris ten leagues, and there vpon that bridge passing on the South side of Seyne, with all speede went to Paris for two causes. First, for to drawe him to fight: for although hee would not venture a battell for the winning of Deepe, (notwithstanding he had so promised to his partakers) yet the King was in good hope that he would fight for Paris. The other cause was to withdrawe him from Picardy, where he had taken the towne of Fere, and some other small Townes, the most part of the Nobilitie and Gentlemen of the countrey being with the King. About the 28. of October, the King lodged his armie a mile from Paris in the villages about. The morrowe after, the king in his owne person went all about to view the Trenches along the Suburbes. The last day of October, the king hauing prepared all things by the ad∣uise of the Princes, Marshals and expert Captaines, determined to assault the sayd Suburbs the next morning by breake of the day in three sundrie places, and to that purpose deuided his forces into three seuerall compa∣nies. In the one were the foure thousand Englishmen, vnder the gouerne∣ment of the Lord Willoughby their Generall, with two regiments of Frenchmen, and one regiment of Swissers, with the Marshall Byron, and the Baron Byron his sonne, the Lord Guittry, & diuers other Noblemen, who had commandement to assault the Suburbs S. Victor & S. Marcel.
The second troupe was of foure Regiments of Frenchmen, two Re∣giments of Swissers, and four companies of aduenturers with the Mar∣shall  of Aumont, accompanied with the Lord great Esquire, and the Lord Rieulx Marshall of the field, with a great number of Nobles and Gentle∣men, who had charge to assault the Suburbs of Saint Iames, and Saint Michael. The third companie with ten Regiments of French men, and one Re∣giment of Launceknights conducted by the Lordes de la Nouë and Chasti∣lion, should assault the Subutbs Saint German, Bucy and Nille. Euery troupe had a good number of Gentlemen well armed to assist the footmen, if any great resistance should be made. The King also commaun∣ded two Canons and two Culuerins to be planted in the rereward of e∣uery troupe. He seperated also all his horsemen in three companies, he himselfe com∣maunded ouer the first, the Prince of Soissons ouer the second, & the Duke of Longueuile ouer the third, each of them appointed to strengthē the com∣panies which were set to assault the Suburbs, thus deuided as is afore∣said. The first day of Nouember by breake of the day, beeing a very thicke myst, in this order the Suburbs were assaulted, and so shaken by the Kings power, that in lesse then an houre they were all taken with the losse of fif∣teene hundred men of the enemie. There were also fourteene Ensignes taken, and thirteene pieces of Ordinance. The chase was followed with such a furie, that the Kings men mingled among the enemies followed e∣uen within the gates of the Citie, and if the Kinges Ordinance had come, as it was appointed, the Gates had béen beaten downe before they could any way haue fortifyed them. So the King came into the Suburbs of Saint Iames, about seauen or eight a Clocke in the Morning, the people crying in the Stréetes with a lowd voice, Viue le Roy, with more shew of ioy then of any feare at al. About a hundred and fiftie Harquebuziers of the enemies tooke for their defence ye Abbey of Saint Germayn, making a shew as though they would hold it perforce, which thing they might well haue done, by reason of the strength thereof: but about midnight beeing charged to render the place, they gaue it ouer. Then was the King master of all the Suburbs, which do lye on the side of the Vniuersitie, which are as big as the Citty of Lon∣don within the walles. The King being master of the Suburbs, in the space of two hours (saue the Abbey as is aboue said) tooke such good order that none started from his company for any pillage, vntill the Quarters were appointed vnto the Souldiers where they should haue their pray. That day was employed about entrenching before the Gates of the Citye, and watch and ward
set in conuenient places. About midnight following the said 1. of October, the King was aduer∣tised  that the Duke de Mayne came into the Citie of Paris with his For∣ces, whereof the King was exceeding glad for two causes: first because the enemy was new retyred from Picardy. Secondly, because that hee was in good hope that he would bee drawen to a battayle for the defence of that Citie, by which meanes he should not be enforced to execute his iustice agaynst the walles of the Citie, and his owne subiects, who were greatly seduced by the bad perswasions of the enemy. The second day of October the King stayed all the day to see what the enemy durst attempt, and whether hee would venture to come forth to fight, but seeing they shewed no feeling of their losses receaued the day before. The third day, the King determined to yéeld them the Suburbs, to see whether that would prouoke and encourage them to attempt any thing. Therefore leauing the Suburbs set himselfe in battayle aray, staying in the field from eight vntill a eleuen a clocke, and seeing that no man appea∣red, he marched thence quite for two causes. First, for very compassion which hee had of an infinit number of peo∣ple seduced from their dutie and obedience, supposing that time and this perill which came to theyr doores, would make them wiser, and call their dutyes to remembrance. But if not, that it was the iust and heauy iudge∣ment of God, who hardneth theyr harts as hee did the Egyptians in olde time, that he might reuenge the idolatryes, whoredoms, contempt and ha∣tred of his Gospell, and the bloud of his Saynts, which they had powred in their Stréets lyke water, and that such a great City (when theyr ini∣quity and rebellion had come to a full measure) might be assaulted at any o∣ther tyme. Secondly, he thought good to reduce into his obedience the Countreys which did lye betweene the riuers Loyre and Seyne, which their enemies had seduced for two causes, that hee might haue a sure way for munition and victuals out of those countreys which are very fruitfull. Secondly, to procure a safety vnto the countryes, which are vnder his obedience, but specially to the Citie of Tours, which by his predecessor was made the seat of the Realme, and was in a manner all compassed (but spe∣cially on the North side) with townes, castles and holds, rebelled and fur∣nished with garrisons of rebels. The Duke de Mayne playing the night Crowe, fearing the day light, arriued in the night at Paris, neither proffered any issue nor skirmish vnto the King, nor shewed any token of his being there, no more then if they had béen fallen on a sudden into a lethargie. The King being retyred from Paris, the sayd Duke fell to a saffer and
more profitable kinde of warre: for his money being spent in erecting so many Trophées in Normandy with that mightie Army, as he did after he had receaued so many stripes and bastonadoes, as he sayd, that he will no  more of that play: he determined to search the Coffers of his friends the Parisiens, whom he loued well, yet their money better. And as it is sayd commonly, that the man who desireth to kill his dog, maketh himselfe beléeue that hee is mad: so this valiant Duke, to picke a quarrell, doth easily make himselfe and the Parisiens beléeue that they had procured the King to come to Paris, and that which the King had done by valour, was done by winking of them, and was enterprised vpon intelli∣gences which they had with him, and that if hee had not come with spéede they would haue deliuered the citie to the King. No man could deny this, for there was within the citie witnesses, who were returned from Picardy, to the number of twentie thousand, who had the Fortresses of the Citie in their hands; all these would beare witnesse agaynst them. And who will not beléeue such a multitude of witnesses: But yet if it had not béen so, their goods were sufficient witnesses of the crimes aboue said: so that who∣soeuer was rich or so accounted, was sufficiently conuicted to haue practi∣sed against the association and holy vnion. Whosoeuer had goods was quickly conuicted to be an heretick and betrayer of the Catholike religion. Therefore hot skirmishes were within the Citie, deadly warre is proclay∣med against the Coffers, Closets and Counting houses of rich men. Rich Marchants are sent for, pulled out of their houses with their wiues and children, their goods taken to ye holy vse of the holy League, they are made fast to a payre of gallowes and there hanged: for the very zeale and deuo∣tion which the Leaguers haue to their Catholike faith, and holy mother the Church, they did throw into the water the wiues and children of many rich citizens, least they should clayme any part of their goods. All parts of the Citie were full fo horrible executions, weeping, mourning and heauie lamentation. The King did neuer shewe the hundred part of that extremitie vnto his enemies, as the heads of the League did vnto their friends, whom they should haue defended from being executed by others. So that the heads of the traytors hauing obtayned a profitable and gaynfull victorie agaynst the Counting houses and Coffers of their friends: and hauing that which they most desired, doo rest themselues, take their case after so many skir∣mishes fought in Normandy, but specially in Paris: for now they haue mo∣ney to spend. The King being at the Village Liuars vnder Mount berry, remayned there a whole day to try whether the enemies (hauing rested and refreshed themselues thrée dayes in Paris) would haue gathered stomacke and pur∣sued him. But vnderstanding of their kinde of warre and victories which
they had agaynst the Coffers of the citizens of Paris, hee determined to leaue those wicked rebels to destroy one another, and to take the Towne  of Estampes vpon this occasion. The Lord Clermont of Lodeshe in Languedocke, had thrust himselfe in∣to the sayd Towne with fiftie or threescore Gentlemen, through the assu∣rance which the Duke de Mayne had giuen them, and confirmed the same by many of his letters, which were intercepted, that he would come to re∣léeue them with his armie. The King by these letters knowing that the Duke de Mayne stood bound vpon his faith & honour to rescue Estampes, with all his armie the fift of Nouember hauing sent part of his forces to compasse the sayd towne, which was done the same day early, he followed and arriued at Estampes with the rest of his armie when it was dark night, and at his comming he wonne the Suburbs, which the enemies had made shewe to haue defended. The same night also the Towne was taken, the Souldiers retyring into the Castle. The sixt day of Nouember the Castle was enuironed, approaches made, and two Culuerines placed in batterie. The stout Souldiers with the Lord Clermont, who did looke so bigg first, seeing that the army which should rescue them did not appeare, and that they had no newes of it, de∣manded parley, and yeelded themselues the same day, with condition that eight of them should remayne prisoners, vntill such time as they should giue eight others (who were named to them) to be deliuered. After that agréement, the King did shew that fauour to the Lord Cler∣mont, and vnto fiue others, that should haue remayned prisoners, to send them away vpon their oathes: so there departed out of the Castell, about forty Gentlemen, and two hundred Souldiours, who were safely conduc∣ted halfe the way to Paris. The King considering that poore Towne of Estampes, to haue béene taken thrée times in foure moneths, and thought it had been necessary for him, to haue kept a good Garison in it: yet notwithstanding, being of his owne nature, as easie to be ouercome with lemency, as he is inuinsible to his enemies, by force was centent to take no other assurance of the towne, then the oath of the inhabitants, wherein he reposed his trust. And that the Castell should not bée a meane of their rigorus vsage, hereafter hée determined to rase it, and to commit the keeping of the Towne to the townesmen, onely perswading himselfe, that they comparing the vsage which they haue at his hands, and of his enemies together, it will be the surest Garison to keepe them in obedience. About the eight of Nouember, the King remayning yet there, arri∣ued a Gentleman from the Quéene Dowager to the King, bringing a request, which she presented vnto the King, veséeching him to doo her iustice, for the detstable murther committed vpon the person of the late
King her Husband: the King deferred the answer vntill such time, as hée sat in counsell. The ninth day of Nouember, the Gentleman was called before the King and his counsel, who after he had deliuered his message, the request was read aloud in the presence of all the Princes, Marshals of France, and other Lords and Gentlemen, who were then in great number about the King: by the which request, besides the desiring of the King, shee did adiure, not onely the Princes and Nobility of France, but also all Chri∣stian Princes, to be assisters in this cause. The King making answer, himselfe declared, that he highly commen∣ded her vehemency in following this sute, and sent the said supplication vnto his court of Parliament, transported to Tours, commaunding his generall atturney, with the atturney of the said Lady; to make informati∣on against the offenders, to the end the matter might bée determined af∣terward in his presence, in manner and forme conuenient. And for his owne part, he would not cease to prosecute the matter, but vowed in pre∣sence of all the company, to employ his trauailes and armes, vntill such time as he had doue the iustice that God had appoynted him to doo. So that as the pittifull tearmes of the request of the said Lady, had filled the eyes of all with teares, so the princelike answer of the King, had quickly dried them vp, and replenished their hearts with iust indignation, and burnng desire of reuenge. At that time, all with a loud voyce, renued the oath of not laying downe armes, vntill such time as they had reuenged the hatefull death of the late King their master. The King séeing that there was no hope to bring the enemy to a bat∣taile, but by extreame necessitie, sent back the Duke of Longeuile, and the Lord la Nouë, with such forces as they had brought out of Picardie, to refresh themselues in that Prouince: he did the like also, by the Lorde of Gyury, who met him with a good troupe at his departure from Paris, and sent him againe into the Country of Brie. The King with the rest of his army, determined to make a voyage to the riuer of Loyre, in the meane time, whilest his strange forces that were comming, would be further in their way. Therefore the tenth of Nouember hee departed from Estampes, and marched through the Countrey of Beausse, and being aduertised that the towne of Ianuile, stopped all the passages, he desired to winne it in passing by the way. The 11. of Nouember, the King arriuing, the Captaine that was within it, made a shew as though he would defend it: but when hée sawe the Canon approach, he yéelded it vp, and departing with two hundered Harquebusiers, the King entred therein, and there stayed the day after. They of the Towne receaued no displeasure, nor discommodity, no more
then if they neuer had reiected his obedience. The King leauing a good Garison in the Castell, which is a good  strong place, departed thence the thirteenth of Nouember, to the Towne of Chasteaudunne, where as soone as he was arriued, he sent to sommon the Towne of Vendosme, which was his auncient patrimony, and the an∣ciēt title of his predecessors, and because that thereby they were his dou∣ble subiects, they were the more culpable in taking his enemies part: yet the King hauing more care to kéepe them from further offending, then to punish them for their double treasons, he stayed thrée dayes at Chausteau∣dunne, to giue them time to aduise themselues. Whilest the King lodged at Chasteaudune, the Captaines of the Suissers arriued, who were sent immediatly after the death of the late King, by their Clonels of the foure Regiments, to knowe the pleasure of their superiours, whether they should continue in seruice, or aske leaue to returne home. The saide messengers reported vnto the King, that they had expresse charge from their Seignories, to giue his Maiesty to vnderstand, that they not onely doo commaund the Colonels and Captaines of the said re∣giments, to continue in dooing his Maiesty good and faithfull seruice: but also that they did offer him all such other succour, as they shall be able to make, and as he shall néed, holding from that houre the same aliunce and good friendship, confirmed with his Maiesty, as they haue had with his predecessors. The Lord Malbenehard, some dayes before, vnderstanding of the kings comming into Beausse, had called vnto him certaine Gentlemen beeing his friends, and with them had foure hundred Souldiours in Garison there beside the inhabitants, which came to eyght hundred able men, and knowing that there hee should bée besieged, whilest the King was yet at Chausteaudune, desired to parly with the Lord Richlieu, great prouost of France, with whome hee was familiarly acquainted: and when the saide Prouost came to him, he desired of him, that without yéelding of the place the army might retyre. The 16. of Nouember, the King departed from Chausteaudune, ha∣uing sent part of his army before, who the same day inuironed the Towne of Vendosme. The same day, the King arriuing at Mlay, before he lighted, went to view the towne and castell, which are both of a good reasonable strength. The Towne is compassed with a great ditch, well watered, and a strong wall well flanked, and in many places rampered within: the Castell is much stronger, being situated vpon an hill, inuironed with a déepe ditch toward the field, and it is of a great height ouer the towne, it is defended with a strong wall, with many Towers. The same day, the King caused
the Suburbs to bee won, and parted the Lordes, Marshalls of Byron and Aumont, the one of the one side of the riuer Loyre, the other on the other side, and hauing well considered of the forme of the siege, hee determined  first to deale with the Castell, which being wonne, the Towne could not hold long, which thing would haue happened, if hee had begon with the Towne. The Towne of Ʋendosme being besieged, the Lord Malbeuehard sent againe for the Lorde Richlieu, who had no wiser answer then the first: wherein appeared, that God would make him féele the recompence of his deserts, not permitting him to helpe himselfe with resolution, but GOD left him in the dampe of his rebellious cōscience, as a man troubled with giddines of the head, not knowing what he did. The seauentéene and eighteene dayes, the King bestowed in viewing where he should place his battery, putting all things in readines, and be∣ing present at the workes all day long, and part of the night. And the night following, the eighteenth day, hee passed in a manner, in conducting and placing the ordinance to the battery. The 19. of Nouember at the dawning of the day, hee began to beat two towers of the Castell, and to take away the defences of the breach which he purposed to make, and after the bestowing of sixe score Canon shot, ha∣uing made a hole in one of the said towers, where onely 2. men could passe in front, certaine Souldiers were commaunded to sée if they could lodge in the said tower: they gate vp, and in a furie entred the retrenchment, and being followed by some, conducted by the Baron of Biron and others, and others by the Lord Chastilion: they made those within so dismaied, that af∣ter they had offered to fight, they fled, and abandoning the Castell, ran in∣to the towne, where they were followed so néerly, that part of the Kinges souldiers entered confusedly with them, and made themselues within lesse then halfe an houre masters both of the towne and castell. The said Malbeuehard and his souldiers being retyred into an house, did yeeld incontinently vnto the Baron of Biron, none otherwise, then at the Kings mercie. In this assault there was none of the Kings side slaine, and very few of the towne. All the inhabitants were pardoned, saue the Lord Benehard and a seditious Franciscan Frier (whom the Inhabitants accused to haue béene the Author of the mischiefs happened among them) they two were executed, he gaue the towne to the pillage, causing the Churches carefully to be kept. The 20. day he commaunded all his army to depart out of the Towne, permitting no man any longer to bee pillaged or raunsomed. Hee restored the ecclesiasticall persons vnto their seuerall charges, much more peace∣ably then they were, when the towne was in the occupying of the League.
The King beeing at Ʋendosme, finding himselfe so neere Tours, purpo∣sed to make a iourney thether, to determine with the Lords of his Parlia∣ment  there of certaine speciall businesse, leauing in the meane time the ar∣my to be conducted by the Marshall Biron. The 21. of Nouember hee departed from Melay by Vendosme, and arri∣ued at Tours the same day two houres within night, where he was atten∣ded with so great ioy and gladnes of all the people of the Citie, that such store of lights there was prepared in the Stréets at his arriuall, that it was as light as the noone day. That night the Prince, Cardinall of Vendosme, came to the King to doo him reuerence, who receaued entertainment and countenance agree∣able vnto his neerenes of bloud with the King. The 22. of Nouember all the chambers of the Parliament came perso∣nally to salute and acknowledge the King the first president, making the re∣lation with such substance and eloquence as caused a great contentation to the King. After them came the Maior and Iurats of the Citie, who were most eurteously accepted by the King. Last of all came the ecclesiasticall persons of the Towne, all with great shew of ioy and hope of an happie and quiet gouernment: therin they were confirmed by the answers which they receaued of the King in most excel∣lent tearmes and Princelike eloquence. The same day the Ambassador also of the state of Venice had audience, where first he presented the letters of the seignory vnto the King, and af∣terward declared the ioy they had of his happy succession vnto the Crown, beseeching him to accept the offer of the friendship of the said feignory vnto his Maiestie, and to promise and assure them of his, and to maintaine the good entercourse betweene his crowne and the said signorie: whereunto the King answered to their contentation. The King was determined to haue stayed at Tours but one day, but the people were so desyrous to see him, that hee was faine to stay there foure dayes. During which time of his aboade there, the terror of his armes, the loue of his clemencie, which he shewed wheresoeuer he came, the opinion of his iustice, and the admiration of his wisedome and modestie did so mooue the people, that the Townes of Lauerdine, Chasteaudeloyre, Montouert, si∣tuated vppon the riuer Loyre, and Montrichard situated vppon the riuer Chere in Toureyne, voluntarily yeelded themselues. So the 25. of No∣uember the King departed from Tours, and with one iourney went vnto his army at Chasteaudeloyre, ten leagues of. The King hauing great desire to besiege the Towne of Mans, from Chandeloir, sent to the Lord Farges to compasse the saide Towne, and to
common it. The Lorde Boysdaulphin, which commanded in it for the League, made answer as though hee had been resolued to bury himselfe therein, and all those that were with him, rather then to depart out of it:  and the 27. of Nouember the sai Boysdaulphin went out of the towne, to burne a great part of the Suburbe named la Consture: but the Lord Far∣ges comming vpon him with his troupes, reseued a great part of the said Suburbe from burning. The 28. of Nouember the King departing from Chasteaudeloyre, the se∣cond day arriued at Iuray Leuesine, distant from Mans one League. The 30. of Nouember the Baron of Biron, and the Lord Chastilion ar∣riued with the greatest part of the French infantry, by whome the same night the trenches which the enemie had made in the Suburbs was woon in some twenty foot high, and might easily haue attended the Canon, af∣ter that it was supposed that they were easier to be dealt withall then it was looked for, considering the high loftie speaches of Boysdaulphine, Captaine of the Rebels. The 29. of Nouember the King came and lodged in the Suburbs, which are faire, and in a manner more commodious to lodge in then the Towne. The same day the King caused all the rest of the Suburbs to bee woon, except the Suburbe Saint Jahn, situated on the other side of the ri∣uer Sarthre, which was woon the day after. The said Boysdaulphin had burned more then halfe, but specially that part which was next the bridge beeing the fairest houses: so that their valour appeared in nothing else but onely in burning the houses and goods of their owne frendes. The King bestowed three daies and nights trauelling himself almost the whole night in making Gabions and other preparatiues necessary for the battery, and to see the pieces brought to their places. All things beeing in a readines, the second of December the King be∣gan  to batter certaine defenses of the wall of the Towne, and after cer∣taine volis of Canon, Boysdaulphin perceauing that within three howers he should haue had an assault geuen him, and (his hart failing) not willing to abide it (for he was a man experienced nt in feats of armes, but onely in feats of sedition among a mutinous company of robbers, as it did ap∣peare in his dealing in Paris.) After few voleys of Canon shot, his high wordes were turned to vanity, he demanded parley, and in fine by two a clocke in the after noone the said Towne of Mans was yelded vnto the K. which without great are of the King had béene sacked by the Souldiers, but he caused the gates to be kept shut, and to take away all occasion of an∣noyance to the Citie, he would not lodge in it himselfe, but kept in the sub∣urbs where he was first lodged. There was within the Towne more then two hundred gentlemen, and twenty ensignes of footmen, who duing the time of parley did publickly
scolde and outragiously reuile one another. For the gentlemen said, that the Souldiers would not fight; the Souldiers said that against their wils  the gentlemen would compound: but in verie deede beeing but a rable of seditious persons when they came to the pnch euery one did feare his skin. For whereas they had caused the towne to bestow aboue two thousand crownes in fortifications, they had burned aboue one hundred thousand crowns in housing in the suburbes, they had ruined the countrey sixe times as much more, and yet would they not abide aboue three voleyes of Canon. Whilest the King battered Mans, Brissak another busie Captaine of rebellious robbers heard the thundering of the Cannon, beeing at la Forte Bernhard with two regiments, who were cōming to succour the town of Mans, beeing put in great feare gaue to himselfe the alarum and fled back againe twelue leagues, and in retiring, fell vnawares into the Rutters quarter that serued the King, who tooke from him thirtie or fortie horses & chariots without the losse of any man. The King restored into the Towne the Bishop and the Lord Larges his brother, to his office of Gouernour there, as he had been before, and pardoned the inhabitants, who came as well Ecclesiasticall as other to giue him thankes, with protestation of fidelitie and true obedience. The King abode there after the taking of it fiue daies, during the which time the greatest part of Gentlemen who were in the Towne of Man, and had bin seduced by the League, and by them induced to this rebellion, put themselues into the Kings seruice. About the second day of December, the Castles of Beaumont and Tou∣uoy yéelded vnto the King: and about the same time in the countrey of La∣ual, the Townes of Sabliee, Laual, Chasteaugontier, townes of importance, and many other of lesser name were brought vnder the Kings obedience. About the 9. of December, the King sent his armie to Alencon, vnder the conduct of the Marshall Byron and the Baron his sonne Marshall of the Campe, whilest he himselfe made a voiage into the countrey of Laual, to the intent by his presence to comfort the Nobilitie and people of that countrey, who were newly redeemed from the slauerie of the Rebels and reduced to his obedience: but specially to cause the Prince D'ombes to re∣payre vnto him out of Britaine that he might see him. So taking his iour∣ney the eight of December, arriued at Laual the ninth day. There as well the Ecclesiastical as Cannons, and other sorts of popish priests with their ornaments, wherewith they had accustomed to go to procession, met him a great way out of the towne, and hauing by the mouth of one made their submission and protestation of their fidelitie and obedience, they accompa∣nied the King marching before him vntill he entred into the towne, sing∣ing with great melodie all the way along, Viue le Roy.
There came out likewise the Magistrates of the sayd Towne to méete him, and the people saluted him as he passed through the stréetes with this  acclamation, viue le Roy. The King abode there ten daies, and in the mean time the Prince D'ombes arriued with a great companie of Nobilitie out of Britaine, who was most courteously receaued of the King. In his way from the Man to Laual, certaine of his companie departed from him, and tooke in their way Chasteaubriault in Anjou, and brought with them the Captain to the King being at Laual, with many other pri∣soners. The King hauing spent certaine dayes with the Prince D'ombes, and taken order for the affayres of that Prouince, sent him againe to his charge of Britaine, and dispatched the Marshall Aumont to gather his straunge forces together: so that the 20. of December the King departing from La∣ual went to Mayennelafahes, where hee was very well receaued, assured himselfe of the Castle: and withoutleauing any other garrisons in the Towne, passing through a most foule countrey, arriued at Alencon the 23. of December. Now the Marshall Byron departing from the Towne of Man with the armie the ninth of December, could not reach to Alencon, vntill the 15. day of the same moneth, by reason of the foule way which hindered the carriage of the Ordinance: but hauing sent the Lord Artray certaine daies before, he had compassed the Towne, and at his first comming tooke the Suburbes, and drew them of the Towne to composition. Captaine Lago Gouernour of the Towne, retyred into the Castle with foure hundred and fiftie Souldiers, making shew as though he would de∣fend it. The place was very strong, enuironed with water and strong wals, well flanked and good towers. The Marshall of Byron being entred the towne, kept so good order in it, that it was not seene that it had bin besieged, the shops being kept open that day as if it had bin in time of peace: and presently caused the artillerie to be brought before the Castle, and shot at the defences, found meanes to take away their water. The 23. of December the King being arriued at Alencon, and viewing what was done at the siege of the sayd Castle, sayd that the siege would not be long. The same day the King caused the sayd Lago, who was within the Ca∣stell, to bee aduertised that he was come, and to bee sommoned: at which newes he began to bee astonied, and the morrowe after he required parley, and the same day yeelded the place with promise of safetie of liues, armes and baggage. The King hauing prouided for the assurance of the place, left there for Gouernour the Lord Artrey with a good garison in the towne and castle,
and departing herehence, the 27. of December went and lodged at Sees, where the Bishop and his Priests, with the Magistrats of the Citie, came  to méet him, and receaued him so well, that he trusted vnto the inhabitants of the place, without leauing therein any other garrison. The 28. of December the King departed from thence to Argenton, which is a good towne in Normandie, wherein is a Castle of good strength. There was in the same Castle three Ensignes of footmen, whom the Lord Brissak had left there, who with Captaine Picart and his regiment were come from Paris to Man, and had promised to shewe himselfe at all the sieges which the King would take in hand, and he would empeach him from the taking of any towne in the countreys of Mayne and base Nor∣mandie. But this great warriour was as olde in courage as he was hot in words: for he neuer shewed his face at any siege. The inhabitants of the towne of Argenton hauing determined to yeeld to the King, came foorth and met him, most humbly desiring his Maiestie to receaue them to his fauour: which thing he did willingly. The Souldiers seeing that, retyred into the Castle, beseeching the K. to suffer them to depart with their liues and baggage: which thing the K. granted vnto them. The 29. of December, the garrison of Damfront vnderstanding that he had sommoned the towne, and that the inhabitants had determined to ac∣knowledge and admit the King, entred in consultation what they should doo, and being deuided into contrary factions, put themselues in armes one agaynst another. It happened that they who would submit themselues to the King, although they were not halfe so many in number as the other, were encouraged and assisted of God; for the iustice of the cause had the vic∣torie. The Baron of Verny Gouernour of the Castle was slayne, and cer∣tayne other: whereupon as well they of the Castle as of the Towne sent to the King to craue his fauour and clemencie, which they obtayned. The 30. of December the King sent to the towne, to be assured of both partes, which thing was done without force or violence. The Lord, Brissak, and his companions rebels being beaten away out of all townes of Anjou, Mayne and Perche, had put himselfe with the regiment of Captaine Picart, into Falaize, a Towne situated betweene Argenton and Caen: where is a Castell very strong, and esteemed to be the best place of base Normandie, the Castell of Caen only excepted. The∣ther Brissak had entised many Gentlemen and Souldiours of the Coun∣trey, men of his owne humour, whose heart did boyle with rebellion and treacherie, and also the remnant of the Gantiers, who had escaped the slaughter done vpon them before, by the Prince Montpencier: vaunting that they would repayre the honour of their companions, who had yeel∣ded and lost all other townes, and that at this place all the spoyle which
the King had gotten, should be surrendred. The night following, the 30. of December the King sent the Baron of  Byron to enuiron it, with certaine troupes of men of warre, who came thether the morning following so happily, that hee found the Lord Bris∣sak, comming out of the Towne, purposing to haue burned the Towne of Gybray, which is as if it were a Subbb of Falaize. The saide Lorde Brissak perceauing the troupes of the Baron of Byron, returned back in∣to the Towne in hast, and with great terror, so that by the comming of the said Byron, the Towne of Gybray was kept from burning, seazed vpon, and the enemies there inforced to rtyre into Falaize. The 31. of December the King arriued, and went presently, accom∣panied with the Marshall Byron, to view the Towne and Castell, which are both strong. The Towne is compassed with a great poole, whose water cannot be drawne away: the wall is good, and flancked with good Towers, and hard to approach for the battery of the Ordinance. The ca∣stell is much stronger fortified with great and strong towers, and very good walls, with a dongeon, separated and compassed with great & deepe ditches. Besides this, the Lorde Brissak was within, well accompanied with Gentlemen, Captaines and Souldiours, and made a great shewe that hee would defend that place effectually, with intent to get ho∣nour. The first day of Ianuae, the King sent to sommon the Towne, to the which the Lord Brissak made answer, with a great bragging of resoluti∣on, that he had vowed vnto God, neuer to speake of any composition for that Towne. Vpon this answer, the King caused with great diligence and expediti∣on, gabions to be made, baggs to be filled with earth, and al things neces∣sary for the battery to be done: which thing was so dil gently followed, that the third day of Ianuary all was in a readines, and had begon to bat∣ter that day, but he stayed for three Canons, which the Prince Montpen∣cier did bring to him out of the Castell of Caen, which arriued at the sige that same day. That sme day the Prince Montpencier came to the King, hauing with him, about twelue or fifteene hundred Soudiours, a good troupe of Gentlemen of the Countrey, and certaine companies of men of ams, with the three Canons aforesaid. They which were within the Towne, did neuer all these foure dayes sally out, but with great braggings, she∣wed a resolut minde, supposing therewith to feare away the King. The King hauing put all things in a readines for the battery determi∣ned to make one worke of two: for knowing that the Castell being won, the Towne could not hold out long hee concluded to place three batteries, whereof two from sundry parts should batter at one breath of the Castell
The third being placed vpon a rock, should scoure certaine waies along  behinde the breach of the side of the Castell. Therefore the fift day of Ianuary, at eight of the clock in the morning, his Ordinance began to beate two great towers, which flanked from the one to the other, whereof the one serued for a defence to the breach, which he supposed to make. And after the bestowing of foure hundered Canon shot, the top of one Tower being fallen, and a hole being made in the other Tower that de∣fended the creach, the King caused it to be battered spéedily, for there née∣ded but the beating of a little piece of a Wall. This done, the King com∣maunded certaine companies of Souldiours to goe and view if they could lodge in the said Tower: at whose commaundement, certaine of them entring the hole which was made through, went into the Ca∣stell, and finding no resistance, called their fellowes, who entring one after another, in a shortspace they became Masters of the Castell and Towne. They within, being sore dismayed, without any fight retyred into the dngeon, out of the which they sent thrée Gentlemen, to beséech the King to receaue them vpon any composition. The King answered, that he would not receaue them, but at his plea∣sure, and that they should proue his clemency, without binding him else vnto any condition. The sixt of Ianuary, the King suffered the Lord Brissak to come and submit himselfe vnto him, and being ouercome with pitty, which hée had vpon the young Gentlemn, graunted their iues, in choosing fifteene of the best sort of them, whome hée would keepe prisoners as warlike ene∣mies, and fifteene more, such as hee should thinke good, should bée at his Maiesties disposition. Thus God did so beate downe these proud and insolent rebels, roaring and breathing a little before, nothing but fire and bloud, that none of them did proffer, or séemed to make head otherwise then by words. The Towne being taken by assault, could not be preserued from pilla∣ging and sackaging, that there might be a difference betweene them that fled to the Kings clemency, and those who obstinatly did proue the force of his army, the one being wholy desolat, the other reioysing in a full quiet∣nes and perfect peace. The 15. whom the King tooke for warlike Enemies were put to their ransom; the town was geuen to the Souldiours: of the other fifteene, who were at the Kings disposition, the Lord Brissak (as consenting and accessa∣ry to the Kings death) was condēned to die. But wheras after the Kings death and when the townes of Picardie did reuolt, the rebels had taken the Duchesse of Longeuille, mother to the Duke now liuing prisoner, for ab∣horring
their rebellion, and detained her in captiuitie in the Citie of A∣miens.  The Duke of Lōgueuille greatly desirous to deliuer his mother, beg∣ged the said Brissak to set his mother at liberty and in place of safetie by ex∣change with the said Brissak, which thing the king granted, supposing that it would not bee long afore he would come againe into his hands, to receaue the reward of his rebellion and parracide. Hetherto Christian Reader thou hast seen into what miserable and wo∣full state the whole Realm was throwen in by the Leaguers, by their Fri∣ers, Monkes, and desperat Iesuits, and by their venimous seditions and vngodly sermons preached to the people, to stirre them to all manner of damnable license. And how that kingdome sunke and drowned in a most confused rebellion was left by the king Henry the third, and last of the no∣ble familie of Valoys, and deliuered to Henry the 4. now king of France and Nauarre, named, declared and inthronised by his predecessor, approued, accepted, and proclaimed lawfull and natural heire and king of ye crowne of France, after the maner of the Emperours of the Romans, by the Prin∣ces, Nobilitie, Officers of the Crowne, not among few Priests, Bishops, and Monks, with a trash of ceremonies, but in the middle of an armie, by ye Marshals, Colonels, captaines & Souldiers acknowledged, & obedience sworn vnto by the best and soundest part of the realm, towns, cities, Com∣monalties & people, as well ecclesiasticall as temporall, resisted onely by few rebels and robbers, who hauing surprised some Townes and Cities, do exercise an intollerable (and more then Turkish) tyranny ouer the Citi∣zens otherwise well disposed. Thou hast séene also, how God hath guided his hands to battell, and his fingers to fight, hath blessed his armes before, and now in the begin∣ning of his raigne with prosperous successe of victories, and reduced Townes, Cities and whole Prouinces, seduced by the Leaguers, to their duetifull obedience, and hath so restored to them, which will be quiet vn∣der his gouernement, peace, iustice and iudgement, that they may say, that the Lord after a long continual stormy tempest, hath geuen them as a calme weather to restore in that afflicted state saturnia regna, wherein god∣linesse and iustice ought to raigne. Now before we make an end of this yeare, and this seuenth booke toge∣ther, wee will lay downe other exploits of warre done in other partes of France, but specially in the Prouince of Daulphine: and hauing no ample informations nor obseruation of time and other circumstances necessary to the perspicuity of the history, we will put downe onely the euents bare and naked as it were priuate memories, in such sort as they were sent to the no∣ble Princesse of Orenge out of her soueraignty of Orenge by some of her ser∣uant there, desyrous onely to aduertize her excellency simply of the acci∣dents which had passed there.
It said before how the Guizes (head of the League) tooke for party the king of Nauarre, and with him the professors of the reformed religion as  onely hinderers of their driftes. And afterwardes they proclaimed open warre against the Lords Espernon and Valete his brother, who with their faithfull seruice and wise counsel were stumbling blockes in the way of the said Guizes and Leaguers, disappointing them of their purposes. The L. Valete beeing in Prouance and Daulphine, and vnderstanding of the execu∣tion done at Bloys vppon the persons of the Duke of Guyze, and the Car∣dinall his brother, by a prudent wisedome foresaw how some new tumults would ryse thereupon, and how the king would turne his forces against the Leaguers, & vpon that occasion would reconcile the king of Nauarre to him, and vse his seruice, and of them of the reformed Religion. And thereupon, to auoyde all inconueniences which might ensue this strange and vnexpected accident: thought good to make peace with the Lord des Diguieres, a noble man of great valour, who had constantly and valiantly defended the cause of the religion, and brought many Townes, Cities and Fortresses, from the tyranny and slauery of the Leaguers, to the Kings obedience. And when after the death of the Duke of Guize, many Townes and holds had rebelled, partly induced by the outries of ye Leaguers, and partly surprized by them, but specially in Prouance. Peace vpon these occasions was made betwéene them, that their forces being ioyned together, they might the better be able to preuent the trai∣terous attempts, and resist the practizes of the saide Leaguers. After which agréement, the said Lordes des Diguieres and Valete came toge∣ther, and oftentimes sat in counsel, to take aduise for the safe kéeping of the countrey of Daulphine and Prouance in the Kings obedience, they toge∣ther entred Valence, Romans, Tullet, and other places. After these two Noble men by this newe reconsiliation had been some dayes together, they determined to separate themselues and their forces: the Lord des Diguieres remayned in Daulphine, and the Lord Valette went with his forces into Prouance, there to stop the attempts of the Re∣bels. After the separation of these two Noble men, the Lord des Diguieres first layed the siege before the fortresse of Auxonne, right agaynst Montli∣mart, which had been surprised by the Rebels, and tooke it by assault the fift day of Ianuary, the Captayne of the sayd Fort and all his men were put to the sword. Shortly after the taking of Auxonne, the Lord Eschambault, who had constantly defended the reformed religion in Viuaretes, ioyned his forces with the Lord des Diguieres, which thing before he could not well doo. From Auxonne the Lord des Diguieres, strengthened with the forces of the Lord Eschambault, layd the siege before the Hold of Colonseles in the
countie of Griguan, which he tooke by assault. The Gouernour of that Hold  was hanged, and all his companie put to the sword, one onely saued vpon condition that he should pay all the expenses that the whole armie had béen at that siege. The sayd Lord des Diguieres departing from Colonseles, tooke his way straight to the County of Veyascin, and assoone as he was entred the coun∣trey, the Holds of Bauuyes, Taussie, le Bouschl, Racheringes and Rochegar∣des yéelded vnto him, neuer expecting the Canon. These Forts being sur∣rendred, he went to lay the siege before Camaret, a place well fortified, di∣stant from Orenge about two miles. The sayd towne yeelded at the sight of the Canon with safetie of liues, as well of Souldiers as inhabitants. From Camaret he went to the siege of Vacquiras: he tooke also by com∣position Aubiguan, where he rested the whole armie to refresh his Soul∣diers ten dayes. Thether came the Deputies of the countrey to demaund a truce. From Aubiguan the Lord des Diguieres went to besiege an Hold cal∣led Cayranne, which was taken by assault, the gouernour thereof being an Italian was hanged in the worship of Nuestra donna de Loretta, and all his Souldiers for company with him, or els put to the sword. After this execution done, the Gouernours of all places and Townes thereaboutes, as Rakesell, S. Romans, Villedieu, Boysson, Mirebel, Payme∣rat, S. Romanet and others, came to him and offered him their keyes. From Cayranne the Lord des Diguieres went foorth to besiege Molans, a place well fortified, where are Castles very strong. There he bestowed three hundred shot of canon, and at length a breach being made the assault was giuen, and after two hundred and fiftie men of the enemies had béen stayne the Towne was taken. The Lord of the sayd place had his life sa∣ued, in paying ten thousand Crownes for his raunsome, and besides his house sacked. There was during the time that these affaires did so passe in Daulphine, a certayne méeting of Deputies of Grenoble, and other Townes & Cities of that Prouince, making suite for to haue a truce for foure yeares: vppon whose suite the Lord des Diguieres drewe néere to Grenoble, and lodged his armie thereabout in the Countrey: but hee himselfe went to Nions. There the Deputies me, and requested to haue truces and ceasing from warre during the space of foure yeares. But when as they could not agree vpon the conditions, the Lord des Diguieres appoynted another méeting at Bogency within two miles of Grenoble, and at length a truce was con∣cluded betweene them about the latter end of March, which was signed, sealed and confirmed with great solemnitie in the Suburbs of Grenoble. It was agréed that the principalitie of Orenge should be comprised in it, and that they of the League, who wre returned to the Kings obedi∣ence,
should pay to the Lord des Diguieres, for the intertainement of his companies, eyghtéene thousand Crownes, and the one halfe of all tolles,  which was thought to amount to fifty Crownes a day. Moreouer, they a∣gréed to pay him eyght thousand Crownes, for the intertaining of cer∣taine Ministers, and workes of pietie in Daulphine. Also that the Fort of Bogencie, and diuers other holdes kept by the Leaguers, should be beaten downe, and rased to the geound. This truce was proclaymed in Grenoble on Easter day. About the same time, there was an assembly of the Prouince of Lan∣guedock, holden in Nismes and Lunel, about the like truce. It is said before, how the Lord des Diguieres and la Valete, had ioy∣ned themselues in amity for the Kings seruice, and how the Lord Valete after hauing soiorned with the said des Diguieres, to take counsell og∣ther about the Kings affayres in Daulphine and Prouance: the Lord Va∣lete with his forces went into his gouernement of Prouance, where find∣ing that Countrey full of confusions and factions, by the meanes of the Court of Parliament at Aix, and the Lord of Vins, which not onely were rebels, but also had solicited the Countrey to the like rebellion; the said Lord Velete had caused an assembly of the states of Prouance, to be holden after his arriuing there: and being very strong, and hauing the greatest part of the holdes in the Countrey, they agreed in the saide assembly, to make warre against the said court of Parliament and Lorde of Ʋins, and for that purpose the States there deliuered him ten thousand Crownes. The Lord Monbrune ioyned himselfe with the Lord Valete, and sur∣prised some strong places in that Prouince. The King had called the Lord Mommorency from the gouernement of Languedock, and had giuen that charge to the Lord Ioyeuse, but at length the King perceauing, that the said Ioyeuse by the perswasions of his mother, inclined to the rebellion of the Leaguers, he tooke that go∣uernement againe from him, & restored the Lord Mommorencie to that charge, with commaundement to remoue the Parlament of Tholouze to the Citie of Narbonne, because that Tholouze had rebelled against the King as is aforesaid. The Citie of Narbonne, vnderstanding of the restablishment of the Lord Mommorencie by the King, shut vp their gates against Ioyeuse, & sent for the said Mommorency, being then in Auignon, proffering to re∣ceaue him, saeing that it was the kings pleasure to haue restablished him in that gouernemēt. The said Mommorency departed from Orenge the 28. of March to Narbonne ward. The Townes of Languedock, which were in the power of them of the Religion, refused to haue his authoritie published among them, without
the expresse commaundement of the King of Nauarre. The Lord des Diguieres hauing concluded a truce as is aforesaid, in  Daulphine, and set that Prouince in some good stay, with his campe mar∣ched toward Prouance, to ioyne with the Lord Valete, to reduce that coun∣trey to the Kings obedience. It is said before, how the King during the déepe winter, did great ex∣ploytes, with prosperous successe, in subduing the Countries of Beausse, Anjou, Toureyne, Mayne, Lauall, Perche, and most part of Normandie, in reducing them to their duetie of aleageance, restored them peace, iu∣stice and iudgement, vtterly subuerted and troden vnder foote by the Lea∣gurs, and how hauing continued few dayes at the siege of Falaize, tooke it by assault. Now we will returne againe to few matters, which were done in the end of this yeare. It is said how the Duke de Maine after the Kings de∣parture from Paris, gaue himselfe to fight with the Coffers and counting houses of the Parisiens. But for recreation sake also he put on the armor of Venus to fight with the Curtizans of Paris, so that beeing molten in all filthy pleasures, the Lady Saint Beufue, or some other such Uirgin did so dresse him, that his name shortly after was writtē in the Chirurgians hall, among them that had the pockes: and lying in Paris about two moneths with his army about the Citty, without dooing any thing for the aduance∣ment of the holy Union, onely that it might appeare that he was a King of Fryers, he was first annointed King of Fryers by the Chirurgians of Paris, with that holy Oile and extreame vnction, wherewith the Popes Priests, Monks, Fryers and Iesuits are oftentimes annoynted, and af∣ter that crowned with such a crowne, as the Fryers themselues are crow∣ned with: and about the time that he had somewhat recouered his strength, and téeth began to be somewhat fast in his head, and his drabbling had left him, Fryer Sixtus (who somewhat afore the Kings death had called home his Legat, who was a Uenetian Bishop of Brixia, for that he was thought in Rome to fauour very much the kings affaires) vnderstanding the kings affaires to haue better successe then hee would wish or had expected, sent a new Legat into France to comfort, assist and further the affaires of the Re∣bels: he sent I say Fryer Henrique, Cardinall Caietan his brother, Ca∣nuillo Caietan, Patriark of Alexandria, when he can haue it, Frier Philip Siga Byshop of Placentia, Frier Francis Pauigarola Bishop of Aste, Hie∣ronimo Moceuigo Bishop of Ceueda, Laurence Bauchet Iudge de Rota, and Secretarie of this Legacy, all whelps of one litter, and by one ye may know all the rest, who were sent in company with their traine to rid Rome of so many Caterpillers. These routes of filthy Friers with their Mou∣chachos arriued in Paris about the middle of December, with loads of such blessings and holy reliques of Rome, as the Mules of Frier Campe∣gius
did ouerthrow and scatter in Cheapside, when hee came into England about the diuorsement of King Henry the eight, and Queene Catharine  of Spaine his first wife. This Frier Henrique called the heads of the League to counsell, kee∣peth a stirre with them, chid them, that they were lurking in taking their pleasures, without dooing any thing for holy Church and holy vnion: but now they must go about their businesse handsomly, wherefore comprehen∣deth the whole affaires in four principall points, whereof three of them he would performe himselfe. And first after the maner of Fryers, which is alwaies in their Sermons to remember their conuent to begin with the Deuill, hee proclaimed a Iu∣bile through all France, to prooue yet whether hee might with that old pat∣ched net of robbery, called indulgences, fish any money, to helpe his ma∣ster (who had sent him to fish) to maintaine in their brauery the holy Mo∣chachos and Curtizans in Rome. During the time of this Iubile, which began at the feast of the natiuity of Christ, Frier Henrique do replenish the minds of the Parisiens with su∣perstitions, the streates of Paris with processions, the Churches with sot∣tish Idolaters, his belly with the best meat he could get, and his purse with as much money as he could. This Fisher with his ragged net was not so much superstitiously recea∣ued in Paris, as he was despised and laught to scorue euen by the Catholiks generally through all France, maruelling that this Saint Peter fisher had no better tooles to goe about his busines: and so as the Prouerbe is, sel∣dome doo speede the fowler, neuer the fisher: for beside what he did in Paris, in any where else he get not a poore peny to blesse himselfe. Secondly, he goeth about to weaken the King: for hee wrote letters to the Cardinals, Bishops, and Nobility of the Catholick religion, where∣with he warned them of the great danger of their soules, in following, ayding, & assisting a King heretick, shewing them the great harme which this schisme would doo in time to the Catholick Church: by which word he meant the Legioss of Locustes, of Priestes, Monkes, Friers and Ie∣suites. He wrote this, supposing that his bare letter would haue caused the Catholicks by heapes, to forsake the Kings defence, and to ioyne with the rebels. This letter of Frier Henryque had thrée diuers effects: for first some Bishops thought good to repayre to the King, to sée whether they could make him a Catholick: to whome the King answered, as he had once be∣fore answered a Cardinall, that he was able sooner to make a Cardinall a Hugonet, then a Cardinall would make him a Catholick. Others, as the Cardinals of Vendosme and Leuoncourt, with diuers o∣ther Byshops were of opinion, that it was most expedient to call a natio∣nall
counsel, according to the which the king had promised to reforme him∣selfe. But vnto this Frier Henrique the Legat would not harken by any meanes, fearing both the light and the pinch. The nobility answered, that they did hold him for the true heire and suc∣cessor of the Crown, whom they would establish in the full possession ther∣of: and when the king had pacifyed the Realme, they will thinke on that matter. The third thing was to encourage the rebels to set vpon the king two manner of waies, by counsell and money. First, he shewed vnto them, that it was shame for them, that while the king and hereticks had made great conquests, they had done nothing but lurke and take their pleasures. That Frier Sixtus, his Masters plea∣sure was, to set vppon the king with all their forces, before hee were strengthened and confirmed in the kingdome, the longer they should de∣lay and linger, the harder it would be for them to preuaile against him. Now they ought to beate the yron while it is hot, and followe the mat∣ter while the rebellion is vniuersall, the number of partakers great, the hearts of them animated, while there is great store of money gotten out of the coffers of the inhabitants of Paris, out of the confiscations and pro∣criptions of the Royalls, they had receaued great store of the Catholick K. of Spayne, and he had also charge from Fier Sixtus to deliuer to them fiftie thousand Duckets. On the contrary, he shewed vnto them how the King was destitute of men and meanes, there were a great number against few, their furniture and munition was farre passing that of the King, they had the countrey fauorable, and enemy vnto him. They were strong, usty, & rested long, but the K. with his forces was wearie, wea∣ther beaten and weake, by reason of his long toyling and moyling all the déepe of winter. They had Frier Sixtus blessings, but the king had the accurle: therefore he concluded, that they should make no difficulty of the victory, it was too sure on their side, and in a manner, if GOD himselfe would fight for him (for the Friers former spéeches emported but little lesse) he could not preuaile. He shewed also, that there were already in the way, forces out of Flanders comming to them, by the procurement of Bernardino Mendoza, and Frier Cardinall Damnj, the King therefore was to be set on, before he had any leasure to employ forten Princes to as∣sist him: and to shewe the great good affection which Frier Sixtus had to this worke of mercie, hée had sent them fiftie thousand Duc∣kets. The Duke d' Mayne, with the heads of the League, receaued this holy money, with as great deuotion as the Iubile and pardons, or rather greater. And if Frier Sixtus had sent all Saint Peters treasures, it had been yet more deuoutly accepted, and spent as merrily in Paris, inter bonas
socias, as in Rome, but they were content to receaue that in hoping for more. Now wée sée the state of the Leaguers and rebels very strong and rich: for they had set and gathered an excessiue impost, and somme of mo∣ney vpon Paris: they had made aboue a million of Gold, of the robbing and confiscations and ransoms of the Royalls in the Citie. They had re∣ceaued three hundred thousand crownes of the Spaniard. They recei∣ued fiftie thousand Crownes from Rome: nowe they are very lusty, they deck themselues all with gold and iewels: and perswaded by Frier Henryque, they prepare themselues to goe forth out of Paris, soone af∣ter the holy dayes, and to goe to séeke the King, vntill they had found a mishap. Here endeth the 7. Booke. THE EIGHT BOOKE. WE haue séene what the Legacie of Frier Henri∣que hath done in Paris, how he hath heated the  rebels, set them on horseback, and sent them pac∣king to séeke ventures. Now in this eight booke we will see how they haue sped after their depar∣ting from Paris. Kind Henry the third, intending to besiege Paris, sent Captaine Saint Martin, with a strong Garison, to seaze vpon and kéepe the Ca∣stell Ʋicennes nigh Paris, which the rebels had forsaken after their losse at Seulis, from whence hée did so molest the Parisiens with continuall roades and courses, that no man could venture that way. The Duke d' Mayne, to pluck that thorne out of the héele of the Pa∣risiens, and to set them at liberty, that way had practized by all meanes, the said Captaine to render the place, and to ioyne himselfe with the Lea∣guers, which he would neuer doo: therefore about the beginning of Ia∣nuary, after they had made their This is a dronken bā∣quet vpon Twelf tide, as wassellis in England. Roy boy in Paris, he went forth to besiege that Castell, and battered it with foure péeces of Ordinance. The said Saint Martin, séeing that the King was farre of, and he not able to defend the place, yéelded it, with condition for him and his to goe foorth
with bag and bagage, and to be suffered safely to repayre to Seulis, which was performed. It is said also, how the said King Henry the third, in his way to the siege of Paris, had taken Pontoyse, and set a strong garison there, to inter∣cept all manner of victuals, prouisions, or marchandize, which were car∣ried vp by the riuer Seyne to Paris, which did greatly annoy and distresse the Citie. The Duke d'Mayne hauing taken Vicennes, mustered all his forces, and found them all lustie, and more glistering with gold, then valiant in courage, and found his forces to arise to thrée thousand horses, and thir∣téene thousand footemen, with whome, whilest his succour of Flanders should draw néere, about the latter end of Ianuarie hee lead his forces a∣gainst Pontoyse, which hee besieged, in hope to ease the Parisians of that heauie burthen, and when he had battered the same, they within conside∣ring that they were not able to defend it, yéelded the place vpon the same conditions, that the Leaguers had yéelded it to the King not long before, to wit, with their armies, whereof part went to the King, to continue in the Kings seruice, and part ioyned with the Leaguers. The Duke d'Mayne hauing taken Pontoyse, more full of money and hope, then courage, determined to descend into Normandie. And in his iourney, with his great army was stayed at Meulan, a Towne situated vpon Seyne betweene Mante and Pontoyse, distant from Paris ten leagues, and from Homfleur where the king was, thirtie leagues. There he boa∣sted and threatned that he would goe to make the king to raise the siege, or else fetch him out of Homfleur: but he protracted so the time, that the king had time both to seaze vpon the said Towne of Homfleur, and to rest and refresh his army there some dayes. The causes of the Dukes delay were two: First, the mistrust of his cause, which did still abate his courage, which otherwise was neuer great: Secondly, for that he expected great forces out of Flanders, who were already comming vnto him, vnder the conduct of the County Eg∣mond, and the Lord la Mote gouernour of Graueling. Whereupon he tooke occasion to excuse the basenes of his heart, who durst neuer see the king face to face, except they were three to one, or very nigh: yet to ease his stomack, hee casteth forth these vaine, boastings and threatnings aboue said, but he durst not come nigh the king, afore he had ioyned with this new supply, for feare of the bastonado. The king on the other side, hauing taken the Towne of Homfleur, and rested there his forces for certaine dayes, said nothing, but about the middest of February, tooke his iourney to high Normandie, to cause the Duke to raise the siege from before Meulan, and hauing trauailed thrée∣score miles in the déepe of winter, proffered battell to the enemy.
But the Dukes heart fayling him, and hauing aduertisement that the forces of the Low Countrey were entred into France, after that hee had  battered Meulan diuers dayes, hee went to méete the Flemmings and to muster them. The Duke de Mayne receaued in Picardie betweene foure and fiue thousand Wallons, conducted by the Lord Mot Gouernour of Graueling, and a little after arriued the horsemen, conducted by the County Egmond, with thirtéene companies of souldiers taken out of the garrisons of Fln∣ders: three companies of Launces of Spanyards, conducted by Don Iuan Moreo, Don Pedro Moreo his brother, Don Iuan de Cordoua, and a great company of Harquebusiers on horsebacke, led by Captaine Colin, rising all to two thousand men all old Souldiers. The Duke being flided away, and the King seeing the opportunitie of battaile gone with him, determined to do his businesse and to take Dreux, garded by Captaine Falande with a strong garrison, that if he had it in his obedience, he might ouerlooke and bridle the Citie of Chartres, vntill that conueniently he might haue opportunitie to enterprise vpon it. The King in going to the siege of Dreux tooke Noueyncourt, and being at Dreux, and the breach being readie to giue the assault, the King vnder∣stoode that the Duke was returning toward Seyne, for to passe ouer the bridge at the Towne of Nante, which then did hold for the Leaguers, full of confidence and trust in that proude and mightie army which consisted of thrée and twentie thousand men of all sorts. The King considered wel that the Dukes forces were but borrowed, and that now out of hand hee must hazard, or els his companies in a small time would disband themselues and retyre home, and that with delaying with him he might dissipate his forces. He knewe well also that they who doo proffer iniurie, are common∣ly more desperat then they who doo withstand it. He weighed well his small number in comparison of the great multitude, and that there were forces comming to him out of Champaigne, as good as these which his e∣nemie had receaued out of the Low Countrey, which he might in protrac∣ting the time receaue shortly. He sawe well that the countrey was fauou∣rable to the enemie; which reasons might haue perswaded a great warri∣our, by policie to haue weakened the enemie, as Fabius did Hannibal. But the King had more sufficient and substanciall reasons, which did bid him to encounter the enemie, as the assured confidence whereby he re∣posed himselfe in Gods goodnesse and protection, and casted himselfe in his armes; the equitie of his cause, his lawful vocation agaynst mutinous traytors and parricides: so that each of these reasons was stronger to him then so many hundred thousand men: which made him to conclude, that considering these causes God could and would dissipate his enemies, not∣withstanding their great forces, as well with fewe as with many. Being
also confirmed by the experience which he had at Arques, and in the Sub∣urbs of Paris. In the meane time while the King was at Dreux, the Duke de Mayne  hauing receaued the forces which came out of the low Countrey, thought himselfe sure of a prosperous successe: and promising an assured victory to his partakers, passed his forces ouer the bridge of Manie, and marched toward Dammartin, which was but four miles off. The King vppon the reasons aforesayd, resolute to encounter with few that huge multitude, on a sudden from before the breach raysed vp the siege from Dreux, and departed the second day of March: the besieged with great  reioysing, beholding and wondering at the cause of such a sudden depar∣ting. The same day the King went backe the way that he was come, and lod∣ged in the Towne of Noueyncourt, to cut the passage to the enemy of a lit∣tle riuer which runneth by. Assoone as he came thether, hee caused war∣ning to be giuen, that on the next morning euery man should bee in a rea∣dines. The night following that day, the King set in order the manner of the battaile, which in the morning early the third day of March, he shewed to the Prince Montpensier, to the Marshals Biron and Aumont, to the Ba∣ron Biron Marshall of the field, and to other Princes and Captains of the army, who with one voice hauing considered of it according to the skill of warre, they approoued, and would change nothing of it. That day hee gaue charge to the Baron of Biron, to set euery man in his place and order, and did choose that morning the Lord Vieques sargeant Maior of the battell, who was one of the ancient masters of the footmen in France. This thing beeing done, the King willing to begin this great worke with prayer, with great vehemency and confidence hee made his prayers vnto God in the hearing of all men: wherein hee called God to witnes, that hee knew the purpose of his hart, and well vnderstood whether it were for desire of glory, or for ambition, or for desire of blood, or longing for reuenge, which made him resolute to this battaile, that hee was his iudge and wit∣nes vnreproueable, that nothing mooued him thereto, but the tender loue that hee did beare to his poore people, whose peaceable and quiet estate hee esteemed more then the safety of his owne life: he besought God so to direct his will as hee should best see to be good for the benefite of Christendome. And as for himselfe he prayed God to saue and helpe him, as he knew to be good and profitable to the weale and quiet of the state, and not otherwise. This prayer eloquent in words, but more passing pure and deuout in sense, did so rauish all those that were nigh, that euery man after his exam∣ple did the like. And after that, all that after noone was seene in Noneyn∣court
the Churches full of Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Souldiers of all Nations hearing Masse, communicating and playing the good Ca∣tholikes.  They of the reformed religion made their humble prayers and supplications to God. The court of Parliament at Tours being aduertised of the things which were like to passe betweene the King and his enemies, commaunded ge∣nerall processions and prayers to be made the third and fourth of March, for the King and for his good and prosperous successe. Lyke commaunde∣ment was sent vnto the reformed Churches about to do the like in their congregations, though not in the like forme: so that at Tours the Catho∣likes did almost nothing else these two daies men women and children, but pray after their maner. This deuotion beeing done at the Campe, the whole army did shew such countenances, as though euery man had receaued a seuerall answer of God, concerning the happie successe which each of them should ob∣taine. The King had caused sommons to bee giuen to the Towne of Saint Andrew, beeing from Noueincourt eight miles in the way going to Iury, where he supposed the enemy and his army had béen lodged. The Kings companies came to a great plaine nigh the towne Saint Andrew. About the same plaine there are certaine villages, and a litle wood called la haye de Pres, that is the medowes border, or hedge. There the King with the Marshals Biron, Aumont, and the Baron of Birō mar∣shal of the field, began to set the battaile in order, following the plot agreed vpon before. The King hauing tryed in battels and skirmishes before, that it is more aduantage to make horsemen fight in squadrons then in rings, specially his that haue no launces, deuided all his horsemen in seauen squadrons, and all the footmen placed at the flankes of the said squadrons, and euery squadron had a company of forlorne footmen. The front of the battel was in a right line, bending somewhat at the 2. endes. The first Squadron on the left side was that of the Marshall Aumont, consisting of three hundred good horsemen, hauing on his two sides 12. regiments of French footmen. The second, was the squadron of the Prince Montpensier consisting of three hundred Horses, and on his left hand foure or fiue hundred Lance∣knights, and on the right hand a regiment of Swissers, euery company of the strangers forces being lyned with footmen. The third Squadron was of light horsemen deuided into two compa∣nies, the one, whereof the great Prior Colonell was the Leader, and the o∣ther company of the light horsemen was conducted by the Lord Gyurye,
Marshall of the field of the said light horses, hee was able to make foure hundred horses. These two companies of light horses were placed a little  before the foresaid squadrons, and at the left hand of them was the artille∣rie, to wit, foure cannons and two culuerins. The fourth squadron was that of the Baron of Biron, which might bee of two hundred and fifty horses, and in the same ranke and order at the left hand towards the Prince Montpensier was a company of light Horse∣men. The fifth squadron was the Kings, which made fiue rankes, and in eue∣ry ranke sixe score horses: he had on the left side two regiments of Swis∣sers, of the Canton of Glaris, and of the Grisons, and on his right hand a great Battailon of two other regiments of Swissers, the one of the Can∣tons of Solethurne, and the other of the Colonel Balthazare, which amount in the whole eighteene ensignes. The Battailon on the right hand had the regiment of Brigueulx, and on the left wing the regiments of Vignoles and S. Iohn. The sixt Squadron was of the Marshall Byron, who had two hundred and fiftie good horses, with two regiments of French footmen. The seauenth Squadron was of the Rutters, who had ioyned with them French footmen like as other companies had. Things were so ordered by the King, and Lord Marshalls and Baron of Byron plied the matter so, that in lesse then an houre all was so fitly dis∣posed, that it could not be deuised better. And while the King did thus set in order his battell, the night before and that morning there arriued vnto him sixe hundred horses vnlooked for, to wit, the companyes of the Prince Countie both horsemen and footmen, there came also the Lord Guiche great master of the Ordinance, and the Lord Plessis Morney with their compa∣nies, to whom vpon deliberation was graunted place in the Kings Squa∣dron. The same day also while the King stayed in battell array, came compa∣nies from the garrisons of Deepe and Arques, and other companies and Lords out of Normandie, to the number of two hundred horse and more, who were placed some vnder the gouernment of the Prince Montpencier, some with the King, and some with the Baron Byron. In the meane time the King sent light horsemen for Spyes on the left side of the battell, supposing that the enemie did lye at Iury, which is a great towne, hauing a bridge ouer the riuer Eure, thinking there to set vp∣pon the enemie. But when they had scarse passed halfe a mile, they vnder∣stood that the enemie was aware of the matter more then they thought, and that the enemie had passed the riuer Eure, and that they began to shew themselues in battell array. The enemie had passed that riuer, not thinking to haue the Kings army
so nigh. But the king hearing of their going to Verneuille, thought to méet them there: and arriuing thether, found that the enemie had sent his  Harbingers for to take vp lodgings, euen néere the place where the kings army lay. When these newes came to the Campe, there was an excéeding ioy a∣mong all men of all degrees. Betweene the two armies there was a Vil∣lage, in the playne which was holden by the enemie, which the King made straight way yeeld to him: but for al this occasion giuen the enemie did not stirre. But the King seeing that it was nigh Sunne setting, and hauing not yet descryed the manner of the lodging of their Campe, and conside∣ring they might bee at some aduantage, was aduised not to march for that time any further: whereupon there he stayed his armie for that night. All that day the two armies were in sight one of the other. There were onely some odd skirmishes betweene them, in the which prisoners were taken, who reported that the number of the enemie was greater then they were aware off, and that they were giuen to vnderstand, that the Kings com∣panyes were come thether rather for a fashion, then minding to bid bat∣taile. The night drewe on, which caused the army to encampe there where they were set in battell array. It is reported that the night following the third day two armies were seene in the Skye, and the lesser number put the greater to flight. The King would not departe from the army, before hee had know∣ledge of the enemies lodging, and had set all his watches in order. The Noble men lodged in the villages about the playne, which the ene∣mies thought to haue surprized that day: the king was the last at fielde, and two howers in the night lodged at Foucraynuille, which is a Village at the left hand of the same plaine, and there hauing a little refreshed him∣selfe, sent word to his men, euery one to be in a readines against the mor∣ning: and after he had rested himselfe about two howres on a pallet, ob∣seruing the auncient precept by Homer, giuen to the Princes, , very early he sent to enquire for newes of the enemies: newes came that the enemie séemed to haue repassed the riuer Eure: hee sent the second time, then word came, that vndoubtedly they had not repassed Eure, but that they lay in the Villages about Eure, some what further then they were supposed to be. These newes cheered the king, who desired greatly to come to hand with the enemy. Day light being come, the Princes and Lords Marshalls came to the king, and set their men in battaile aray. The king bgan in the presence of his houshold seruants and other present, to make a most feruent and deuout prayer to God, committing his life, and the liues of his faithfull subiects and seruants, and the defence of his cause vnto him who is the
mightie God of battailes. The Princes and Lords Catholicks, went to heare Masse, and their deuotions done, went to refresh themselues. The  King sent to them of the reformed Religion in like manner, to commit themselues to Gods most mercifull protection by prayers, & went in like manner to refresh themselues. The king liueth so in the presence of God, that hee is a spectacle of royall godlinesse and vertue to men, and to the blessd Angels of God. All the kings companies hearing that they should ioyne in battaile that day with the enemies, did exceedingly reioyce, and by nine a clock the king came into the field, and vppon warning giuen by two Canon shot, by ten a clock all the companies were in order in their places. The placing of the Duke d' Mayne his battaile, was much like to the kings: the Duke d' Mayne with his Cornet, which might bee of two hundred and fiftie horses, was in the middest of two Squadrons of Laun∣ces, of them that were come out of Flanders, which might be of twelue or thirteene hundred horse. The Duke of Nemours with his Squadron of two hundred and fiftie horse for his safety, set himselfe in the middle of these Squadrons of laun∣ces. The Knight d'Aumale likewise thrust himselfe into that companie, thinking himselfe there to be safe, so that there was in that huge compa∣ny about eighteene hundred horsemen marching in a front. On the sides t this great huge companie, were two regiments of Swissers, lined with French foote men. There were two other Squadrons of Launces, the one of light horse∣men, French, Italians and Albaneses on the right hand: the other on the left side of Wallons and Spanyards: in the middle betweene both were French-footemen and Lance-knights. The two wings were two great companies of Rutters, which might bee on the right wing seauen hundred horse, and on the left side fiue hun∣dred, they had on their left wing two Culuerins and two bastard Culue∣rins. The king perceauing that the enemy would not come forward, went toward them, and hauing marched about a hundred and fiftie paces, got the aduantage of the sunne and winde, and perceaued that his enemies were in number more then they thought: for the king perceaued that they were fiue thousand horsemen, and eightéene thousand footemen. The rebels were glistering with gold, which they had gotten out of the coffers of the Citizens of Paris, Rhemes, and other townes by violence and robery, and out of the king of Spayne his coffers, and also out of Saint Peters treasure. The kings army was glistering with yron and stéele, there were in the
kings army to bée séene a terrible sight, of two thousand Gentlemen in complet armour from top to toe, burning in affection to doo their king  and Countrey good seruice, for the conseruation of their wiues, children, houses and goods. The King was in the front of his Squadron, with a great bunch of white feathers on his Helmet, and another bunch on his horses fore∣head. The Princes, Earles, and knights of the holy Ghost, and other prin∣cipall Lords, and Gentlemen of the chiefest houses in France, were in the fore ranke. The king exhorted all his company with great modesty, with their humble prayers, to commit themselues vnto God, and to shew example to others, began to conceaue a feruent praier: which done, the king walked vp and downe, willing them to doo the like, and encouraging them like valiant men, to stand to the defence of a iust cause. As soone as hée was come to his place, the Lord Mariuault brought him newes, that certaine companies of Picardie, vnder the conduct of the Lords Humiers and Mouoy, with other Lords and Gentlemen, to the number of two hundred horse, were within two miles of him. But the king fully resolued to giue battaile with that power which he had, would not delay any longer, but sent commaundement to the Lord Guiche, to cause him to shoote with the Ordinance: which thing hée did straight waies, whereby the enemies receaued great hurt: for the king had discharged nine Canon shot, with great effect, before the enemy could begin. After thrée or foure voleyes of shot had passed on both sides, the 1. Onset. Squadron of their old light horsemen compounded of French men, Ita∣lians, & Albaneses, consisting of fiue or sixe hundred horses, came to giue the charge to the Marshall Aumont, carrying with them the Lance∣knights who were on their side. But the Marshall Aumont willing to begin, set vppon the enemy so hardly, that he enforced them to scatter, and to flée with great confusion and feare, whome he chased to a little wood on the back side, where the said Lord Marshall stayed, attending the Kings comming as hee had in charge. During this chase, the company of Rutters on the right hand of the 2. Onset. battaile of the enemies, marched to haue seazed vppon the artillerie, but they were met with light horsemen, who made them quicklie re∣tyre. Then the Squadron of Launces, Wallons and Flemmings, marched 3. Onset. on to haue charged with a fresh charge, the saide light horsemen fighting with the Rutters: but the Baron Byron shewed himselfe in the field, and
gaue the onset on the reregard, because he could not set on the forefront, there in the conflict he was hurt in the arme, and in the face, but at length  the enemy was deeted and scattered. The Lord Montpencier séeing a great army of seauen hundred Spa∣nish Launciers, and thrée hundred Harquebusiers on horseback, with corselets and murrions, with thrée great standards that were vnder the gouernement of the County Egmond, aduaunced toward them, and gaue them such a charge, as that (albeit he was vnhorsed) yet quickly getting vp againe, brake their aray, put them to flight, and aboade there Master of the field. There was a frantick Franciscan Frier of Biscay, called Frier Mathew de Aguirre, who runne vp and downe with his GOD, (whome they call Crucifix) in his hand, (all his wit was in his Crucifix∣es head) and incouraging the rebells, and running against the Hugonets, as though he would haue frighted them, and wrought some myracle with his Idoll, or played the bulbegger in a cloyster, but a shot of Ordinance did beate him downe and his God, so that there he ended his frantick fit. At the selfe same time, the great Squadron of the Duke d'Mayne came marching to the battailion, hauing on the left wing foure hundred 4. Onset. Harquebusiers on horseback, who gaue a volley of shot within fiue and twentie paces of the Kings Squadron: the same volley being ended, the head of the enemies Squadron set on the Kings Squadron. The King receaued the enemy with such a constancy and courage, that after a quar∣ter of an hower of hard fighing (hauing before played the part of a king and great Captaine, in commaunding and ordering of things) now hee playeth the part of a lusty and braue Souldiour. So that in such a great and furious assault, he behaued himself so valiantly, that he brake and put in disaray that terrible Forrest of Launces, and at length after he had put them to flght with great confusion and terror, he followed the victory, and being lost in the chase, caused a great heauines in his army, vntil that within a while they spyed him, comming all berayed with the bloud of his enemies, without any hurt receaued. And as the king was returning from the chase to his company, with fifteene or sixtéene horses, he was set on by two battailions of Swissers e∣nemies, and three companies of Wallons, and certaine other who did weare redd crosses. The king did set vpon them with his small number, tooke away their Cornets, and killed those that carryed and guarded them. When the King had come to his place againe, the whole armie in to∣ken of thanksgiuing to God for his safe returne, aluted him with this acclamation, God saue the King. Two thousand horsemen in all, of Princes, noble men and gentlemen,
did defeat al this huge army of fiue thousand horsemen and eight thousand footmen, the rest of the Kings forces neuer sirring from their places. Thus the Horsemen béeing scattered, there remained yet Swissers, Lanceknights, and French footmen. The Launceknights and French footmen were charged, and about two thousand and foure hundred remained on the place, as it were in a mo∣ment. The rest were taken prisoners, and some of them fled into the woods, whereof a great number wandering abroad were slaine by the Pe∣sants. The Swissers notwithstanding they had lost their Horsemen, which were at their wings part beeing slaine, and part fled, set a good counte∣nance on the matter. The King once was minded to set the French companies on them to disaray them, and had sent the Baron Biron to that effect: but calling to mind the ancient aliance betweene that nation and the crowne of France, called him back againe with his companies, and offered them grace and mercy: so much he did to those companies of Frenchmen, who were with them, who refused not his gracious fauour, but comming and passing by him, rendered vnto his Maiesty their Colonels, Captains, Souldiers and Ensignes. The King staying to pardon the Swissers, gaue the enemy leasure to auoid by flight. And whilest he stayed to do this Princelike act, iudging that he was not called to that high degree of Maiesty, ad interitum: but ad beneficentiam generis humani. The Marshall Aumont with a great com∣pany which he had assembled from the pursute, in like manner the grand Prior, and the Marshall Biron, who by reason of his great experience (for that hee had béen at so many stormes of battails and skirmishes) with his horsemen and companies of French footmen, was reserued to the last on∣et, if need had béen relyed themselues to the King. The companies also of the Lord Humiers, Mony, and other gentlemen of Picardy, came in the middle of the battell, and after the victory came to the King. The Duke de Maine seeing that the mishap which he wished to others fel vpon him, tooke his way with great terrour toward Iury, leauing be∣hind his ordinance, bagge and baggage, and as many beside as could not runne away so swiftly as he did, the great kill▪ Deuils Don Pedro Mo∣reo, and Don Iuan de Cordoua, two Spanish Moores, with such as could follow them ran after him. Great companies of the enemie had gotten be∣fore, some followed after: and as feare made them hast to presse ouer the bridge of Iury to runne a second course toward Mante, it is reported that he killed some with his owne hand to make him a way ouer, least he should be the hindermost: and when he had passed ouer he caused the bridge to be
broken, leauing his friendes to shift for themselues, and by that occasion many through feare beeing out of their wits, cast themselues into the riuer,  where were drowned aboue fifteene hundred persons. Others fearing to be taken by them who followed in the chase, killed their Horses to stop the wayes, and many supposing to haue saued themselues in the woods, fell in∣to the hands of the Pesants and countrey people, which vsed them more cruelly then the Souldiers would haue done. The Duke de Mayne hauing passed Iurye & broken the bridge, tooke his way to Mante, there to passe ouer the bridge, and to retire to Pontoise. The inhabitants once had determined not to let him in: whereupon some do report, that beeing before Mante, he swore with great othes that hee had discomfited the Kings forces, and had killed the King with his owne hand: but when they would not be mooued therewith, knowing the contrary, hee began to intreat them, shewing them the danger wherein hee was; they mooued with his prayers to compassion of his estate, let him in, with con∣dition that his retinue should passe by ten and ten that night ouer the Bridge. The Duke of Nemours, Bassampierre, the Vicount Tauaine, Rosne, and many others fled to Dreux, and the day after to Chartres: many who could not follow them went astray, and knowing not whither they went, were taken prisoners. The King hauing played the great Captaine and lusty Souldier in getting the victory, now sheweth himselfe a right Generall of an army in pursuing the sayd victory: for which well to doe, he deuideth his forces as followeth. The grand Prior with a great company hee sent to chase the enemy on the left hand toward Eureux. The Baron of Biron, and with him the resi∣due of horsemen, who were gathered together, and the companies which were arriued out of Picardie at the instant of the battel, he sent at the right hand toward Dreux. The King himselfe accompanied with the Princes Countie and Mont∣pensier, the Marshals of Aumont, and Trimouille, with a great company of other Lords and Captayns of the same army, followed on the victory, and continued the chase fiue howers. The King vnderstanding how the Duke de Mayne had entred into Mante, tooke vp his lodging at Rosnye, two miles from Mante, where he was as meanly lodged as the enemy. Many were slaine in the pursute, many were taken prisoners. The King with two thousand horses killed aboue two thousand horse∣men, and many of them Commanders: fiftéene hundred and aboue were drowned at the riuer Iury in the flight. The most part of the footemen were cut off in peeces, fewe ranne away who were either slayne in the chase, or
by the people of the country, & aboue 4. hundred of the enemies were takē prisoners. The Swissers and the Frenchmen ioyned with them, yeelded  themselues to the Kings clemencie: So that of three and twentie thou∣sand of ye enemie, there returned neuer home aboue eight thousand. Their bagge, baggage, artillerie and munition was stayed in the Kings hand. There were aboue twentie Cornets of horsemen taken, and among them the white Cornet, and the bearer thereof, to wit, the Lord Boysdaul phine taken prisoner by the King. The great Ensigne of the Generall of the Spanyards and Flemmings, the Colonell Cornets of the Rutters were taken, aboue threescore Ensignes of footmen, as Flemmings, French men and Launce-knights, and foure and twentie of the Swiffers that yeelded themselues: all these ame into the Kings hands. Among them that were slayne were chiefest of all the Countie Egmond, the Duke Brunswicke, Captaine Colin a Spanyard, the Lord Chastaigue∣ray, and many others. Of prisoners taken were the Earle Austfrist, who was with the Rut∣ters: many Lords, Spanyards, Italians, Frenchmen and Flemmings. Of Frenchmen, the Lord Boysdaulphine, Cigoigne, who bare the white Cornet of the Duke de Mayne. This is the third time that this Rebell had fallen into the Kings hands within foure moneths, and had alwayes found fauour at his hands. There were also prisoners, Mesdauid, Fouteyne, Martil, Lechant, Lodon, Huguesan, Falandre, Tenisay, Chasteliere, Descuueaux, with many others. Of the Kings side were slayne the Lords Clermont, Antragues, & one of the Captaynes of the Kings gards, who deceased nigh the Kings per∣son. The Lord Tischombert who had borne great charges in warre, and now would needes serue as a souldier in the Kings Cornet. The Lord of Longauluay in Normandy of fourescore yeares of age, the Lord of Creuay Cornet bearer to the Prince Montpencier, the Lord Vienne Lieftenant to the Lord Benuron, the Lords of Manuille, Fequers, Ʋaloys, and twentie Gentlemen more at the most. There were hurt the Marquesse of Neste, the Earle of Choysy, the Lord d'O, the Earle Lude, the Lords Montluet, Lauergne and Rosny, and about twentie Gentlemen more without any danger of death. The King going to chase the enemie, and hauing deuided his compa∣nies (as is aforesayd) left the Marshall Byron with the rest of his forces to conduct them and followe after him. Here (good Christian Reader) thou hast to note certaine fatall periods of things, to wit, the circumstances of the persons, time and place in the execution of Gods iustice vpon his enemies. The 23. day of December 1559. Claude Duke of Guize, and Charles
Cardinall of Lorreyne his brother, in the raigne of Francis the second, pro∣cured Annas du Borg, one of the chiefest Senators of the Court of Parlia∣ment  of Paris, to be burned for the Gospell at Saint Ihan in Greues in Pa∣ris. The 23. of December (as their Calender is now, which was the day of the natiuitie of Henry of Bourbon which now raigneth) in the yeare 1588. the last Duke and Cardinall of Guize were slayne at Bloys, when they had concluded to murther the King the next morning following that day. The fourth day of March 1561. Claude of Guize, father to this last, tooke armes agaynst the edict of Ianuary, and committed the cruell mur∣ther of Vassie, by the which breach of the peace were ciuill warres raised vp in France, and euer since haue béen entertayned and nourished by his poste∣ritie: which warre was his vndoing. The same day of the same moneth in the yeare 1585. the last Duke of Guize, sonne to the sayd Claude, tooke armes against the King, which was the beginning of these last ciuill warres of the League, by the which they haue procured their owne vndoing and of many others. The same day of the moneth, the Duke de Mayne, brother to the sayd last Duke of Guize, and heire of the Captainship of the rebellion, made a shipwracke of all his forces at Saynt Andrewes plaine, without hope e∣uer to recouer the like forces. Claude Duke of Guyze, in December, in the year 1561. fought the first battell that was giuen in all these ciuill Warres with Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Condie, Prince of famous and blessed memory, in the plaine of Dreux, with an vncertaiue issue, but in equall losses, so that to this day, it is vniudged who had ye victory: but well knowen that the Duke of Guyze had the greatest losse. The Duke de Maine fought agaynst Henry of Bourbon, the fourth of that name, now King of France and Nauarre, at the plaine of Saint An∣drew, next adioyning to the other, and the places not distant passing a mile a sunder, with a reparable losse. The Lord Rendan a rebellious Leaguer in Auuergne, with such power as he could make in the sayd countrey, but specially in the Townes of Ri∣ons and Brion, rebelled, and holden in the same rebellion by the Iesuits, besieged Isoire, a great and populous towne in the said Auuergne, because it continued in the Kings obedience. The Lords Chasseran, and Rochemayne, willing to do some honora∣ble seruice to the King, and good to their countrey, gathered such power as they could of the Kings subiectes to rescue the sayd towne of Isoire, from falling into the handes of the rebels, and with a meane power, trusting in GOD the defender of his Ordinance, and wayghing the right of the
cause, marched towards Isoire. The sayd Lord Rendan, vnderstanding of their approach, raysed vp the  siege, and went intending to meete the sayd Lordes Chasseran and Ro∣chemayne, and at the same day and time of the battell at Saint Andrewes playne, meeting in a playne field not farre from Jsoire, tried the quarell by the sword. There the sayd Rendan was ouerthrowen, and aboue fourescore Gen∣tlemen of his were slayne on the place, all his footmen cut to pieces, the artillery, bagge and bagage, with many prisoners taken: so the Towne of Isoyre was deliuered from the danger of the enemie, retayned and confir∣med in the Kings dutifull obedience. It is said, how after the victory the King deuided his army into foure parts, three of them were appointed their quarters to follow the chase, and the Marshall Biron to follow after the King with the residue of the army. The King hauing taken this order, followed after the Duke de Mayne: but finding the bridg broaken, was faine to go thrée miles about, to passe the riuer afoord, and in that way he found many straglers, whom he tooke prisoners, which was a good turne for them, or else they had béen slaine by others: he came so fast after the Duke d' Mayne that hee did misse him but a little: but vnderstanding how he was receaued in Mant, the king lod∣ged that night at Rosni (as is said) very simple. The fift day the Duke d'Mayne very early, fearing to be besieged there, retyred from Mante to Pontoyse, where he soiourned few dayes, to take some sure order for the safety of the Towne, and after went to Saint De∣nis. The same day the King sent to sommon the Towne of Mante, which deliuered the keyes of their towne to his Maiesty, receaued and acknow∣ledged him their king and prince, and continued there vntill the twentie day of March to refresh his army, wearied with so many labours and hardnes of winter, to take counsel of the course which he was to take here∣after, and to expect certaine munition of warre, which was comming to him from Diepe. The Citie of Paris first author of this warre, had conceaued an assu∣red confidence of all prosperous successe, by the vaine bragges which the Duke d'Mayne did cast foorth, afore hee went out with the army. The Friers & Iesuites increased this vain confidence in their pulpets, by assu∣ring them, either of a certaine victory, or else of recoyling of the King as farre as beyond Loyre: so that euery day they looked for the King dead or aliue, and all his spoyles to be brought for a spectacle, and to bee solde and bought among them, or else to heare of his flight as farre as the riuer of Loyre.
This great confidence made them to liue very secure and carelesse in prouiding for the Citie: besides that they rested much vpon the great mul∣titude which is within the sayd Citie, there beeing great bablers and boa∣sters  (for the Parisien is as Epimenides speaketh of the Cretayns, a lyer, euill beast, and slothfull belly) The towns also which then did hold round about their Citie, as Pontoyse, beneath vpon the same riuer, Charonton, Meaux, Laguye, Corbeil, Melun, Montereau, aboue vpon the riuer, perswaded them that the King whatso∣euer might happen neither durst come neere them, neither was able to let the carriage of the victuals to their citie, which was the cause that they li∣ued from hand to mouth, and had prouided no more then in tyme of the greatest peace that can be. But after the rumor of the ouerthrow of the Lea∣guers came to Paris, all the Cittie was replenished with terror: many of the Citizens came to the King to plead their innocency, but specially two of the chiefest of the citie, to wit, Belieure, who was one of the Kings late∣ly deceased Secretaries of estate, and Brulart President of the Court of Parliament in Paris. These two men had béen wauering a great while, not faythfull to their old maister King Henry the third, who had preferred them, neither did greatly trust the Leaguers, and yet liued in some suspition of this King now raygning. But when they heard of the Kings good successe, contra∣ry to their expectation, like good Mariners they turned their saile to the wind, came to the King to make their excuse and submission, and both of them were receaued curteously of the King. The King said vnto Belieure, that he had thought him to be an honest man, vntill he fell to the Q Mother, and ioyned to the company of Vileroy: but Brulard was receaued with greater fauour, whom the King hath employed since in great affayrs, as to bee his Ambassador to the Cantons of Swisserland. In this consternation, the Parisiens who had liued in great security be∣gan to open their eies, and see the danger whereto the great bragges of the Duke de Mayne, the promises of the Fryers and Iesuits, & their vaine hope had cast them, and did threaten them at their doores, and caused them to bee deuided into diuers opinions: for some who were of a hot nature, would haue a new muster to be made in the Cittie, and on a sudden, afore he had suplyed the roome of them which were dead in the battell, to set vp∣pon him: but this course was thought rash and dangerous for many eauses. Other gaue a wiser counsell, if it could haue béen followed, to wit, to try his elemency, and that vpon reasonable conditions, ther was no doubt, but they should find fauour and peace: and for the proofe thereof, alleaged his gentle disposition far from all cruelty, and desyre of reuenging which hee hath alwayes shewed in all his actions. Some were of a contrary opinion, and gaue counsell to take order for
the prouision and fortifications and pollicy of the citie, they shewed that by the multitude and other meanes which they had they were able to geue  him a new battell, if he would goe about to draw neere to their Ctie, and at the worst they were able to abide a siege: they shewed, that he was not able with as great forces agayne as hee had to force them, and that hee would not hazard his old experienced Souldiers so rashly, knowing that it were hard for him to recouer the like againe: to be short, great variance rose among them, as the manner is in such a case. Whilest this variance was among them, the Duke de Mayne came to Saint Denis to view the countenance of the Parisiens, feare and shame warning him not to come into Paris. None or few of the inhabitants of Pa∣ris went to salute him, but they onely who had sent him to the butchery in the playne of Saint Andrew, to wit, Frier Henrico Caietano, Frier Six∣tus his Nuncio, the blinde Captaine Bernardino Mendoza the Spanish Moore, Ambassador of Spayne there, and the incestuous Fryer Byshop of Lyons, with few more to comfort him, and to goe forward in his begun re∣bellion. Therefore it was thought good to remedy the affayrs as well as they could deuise, that the sayd Duke de Mayne and the Comendador Mo∣reo who was then in Paris, should goe with all speede into Picardie to stay the remnant of the forces of Flanders, which were going home through Pi∣cardie, after they had lost their guide the County Egmond, and that there the Duke de Mayne should gather such new forces as he could: the Comen∣dador Moreo should goe to the Duke of Parma to bring him ye goodnewes of the victory of the County Egmond and his company: but specially great care should bee had, least Paris and Saint Denis should in any case yeeld to the King. In the meane time Frier Henrico and Bernardino would take order to pacify the strife and diuersity of opinions. They returning to Paris, scattered few Pistolets of Spayne, and Duca∣dos Italianos among the Fryers and Iesuits, to teach them Frierlike Rhe∣torike. These rauing Prophets, and among them one Peter Crestin (such a one as was of my remembrance magister nostor de cornibus, or magister noster Olyuer Maillard) stept vp: they fret, they fume, they fome lyke Boars, they rayle, they reuile, there is nothing holy before them: they shew how the King is an heretik, a relapse, son of an heretike father and mother, they looke euery day for a new excommunication from Rome, he is out of the bosome of holy Church, incapable of the Crowne of France, no obedi∣ence is due vnto him: they descant vppon the praise of his gentle nature, how it is but fayned, and if he were once established, hee would shew such cruelty vppon holy Church, as hee did vppon Borgoyn, Gessey, and few o∣ther Fryers, he would roote out the Catholik religion, and plant here sie. It were far better to die all, then to admit such an heretike ouer them: if
they die in this quarrell, they goe straight way to heauen, they are blessed Martirs, they shall be Saints, as Frier Iames Clement was of late: these  raging furies of hell do so perswade the people, that as a people destitute of reason, and eret of their witts are lead to their owne destruction by these enchaunters: so that afterward if any man should speake of peace with the King, or of any thing besides warre, fire and desolation, hee was presently murthered by them, or cast into the riuer: in one day more then twenty per∣sons were so murthered. But fearing to bee compassed with a siege afore they had set order in their affayres and pollicy to daly with the King, they sent from Paris Fryer Paniguerola, Bishop of Aste, and in hast, and Vile∣roy to busie him, and to dilay the siege, which they supposed the K. would haue layedd presently, with speeches of truces or peace, that they might for∣tify themselues in the meane space. The King would haue no speeches with such companions, but yet of his accustomed clemency, sent Paniguerola to the Marshall Biron to see what he had to say, and what wisedome he had brought with him out of Italy. After many salutations and popish blessings, the Frier did wonder much to see (sayd he) that so great companie of Catholikes could finde in their hearts to followe after an hereticall King. The Marshall Byron answered the saucie impudent & malapert Frier, that it would not be safe for him nor good for his master to meddle with the Kings affayres: we (sayd the Lord Byron) hold the King for the true and naturall heire of the Crowne of France. That the King maintained their lawes and liberties inuiolable, and had none for enemies but fewe straun∣gers, thrust forward by ambition, who vnder ye pretence of religion sought to ouerthrowe all good lawes, to lay downe the foundation of their tyran∣nie, to giue entrance to the Spanish King, and for religion to bring in all Atheisme. The Frier protested that his master was free from medling in any such enterprises. But his doings, his practises, his ministring of money to the Rebels, his conuersation and familiaritie with Bernardine Mendoza, was so auerred to the foolish Friers face, that he was proued a lying false flattering Frier. Thereupon master Frier (his stomacke being not yet satisfied) would haue a saucie Frierlike fling against the King, and demaunded the Mar∣shall Byron, how they being professors of the Catholike religion, made so light account of his masters holines and purposes, to carrie armes against the Catholikes their brethren. The Lord Byron answered, that they carried armes agaynst rebels and traytors, and told him agayne, that it were very wisely done for him & his master to looke somewhat neerer to his owne estate. For if he so encroached and medled with them, they would quickly excommunicate him. And that
there were diuers Bishops in France as good Catholikes as his master, who would bee glad to bee made Patriaches in their seuerall Prouinces,  and would finde as good Scripture to maintaine their authoritie, as his master had any to defend his. Some reasoning being vpon this poynt, Frier Paniguerola was found to be so great a Clark, that he could answer little or nothing. But at length to conclude the talke, he shewed the somme of his Ambassage, to wit, he desired a good peace to be concluded, and some paynes to be taken to bring the King to be a Catholike. But he shewed not his intent which was to delay the siege of Paris, if the king had intended to besiege it out of hand. The other Ambassadour, to wit Vileroy, was sent by the King to the Lord Plessis Morney, a noble man of great wisedome and profound learn∣ing, who handled the sayd Vileroy very plainly and roughly, reproaching vnto him his vnfaithfull and treacherous seruice to his old master Henry the third. And when he had denyed these things wherewith he was char∣ged, the Lord Beaulieu both condemned his fayre flattering wordes and promises which he brought now full of dissimulation, and verified his olde trayterous practises agaynst his olde master: it was thought that iustice should haue been executed vppon him for his treasons, according to the Kings edicts. The King hauing soiourned at Mante fewe dayes, tooke his way to Vernon, which lyeth between Mante and Pont de larche, which also yéelded vnto him. From Vernon the Gentlemen of Normandy, to the number of fifteene hundred horses, retyred to their home about the eight of March. The Lord Chartres gouernour of Deepe, returned to Deepe sicke, in whose absence certaine Leaguers (inhabitants there) went about to haue seazed vpon the towne for the League, who being detected and preuented at his returne, were exiled out of the Towne to the number of sixe score, among whom were many of the richest sort of all the towne. About the same time that the King soiourned at Vernon, the Duke of Longueuile, & the Lord of Tinteuille arriued to the King with eight thou∣sand Rutters. The King hauing seazed on Vernon and Mante, and stopped the traf∣fique of that riuer with the Citie of Paris on that side, and prouided for the safetie of the sayd Townes, concluded in his counsell to besiege Paris, the principallest Citie of the Realme, where it was considered that the Citie being populous and great, would easily be woon by famine, which would eschewe slaughter both of his owne Souldiers and Citizens, whome hée would by all gentle meanes bring to their duetie of obedience: and there∣fore it was thought good to stop the passages of the riuers Oyse, Marne, and Seyne aboue Paris. For in stopping Oyse the Towne of Pontoyse also should bee distressed. Therefore the King deuideth his armie as followeth.
The Duke of Longueuile should haue part of his armie to besiege Beau∣mont vpon Oyse. He sent the Marshall Byron with another part of the ar∣mie to scoure the riuer Marne, where he tooke Cressie, a towne situated in  Brie betweene Meaulx and Corbeil, where a Parisien named Peter was Captaine, for whose raunsome was proffered eight hundred Crownes: but the King for some speciall causes commaunded him to be hanged, and fiue and twentie of the chiefest of the towne with him. The sayd Marshall Byron immediatly after the taking of Cressie, layed the siege before Lagnye vpon the riuer Marne right agaynst Corbeil. The Citizens required space of time to send vnto the King, which was yet in Normandy, to craue his gracious mercie, which they obtayned. The King about the 21. of March hauing receiued certayne munitions from Deepe, and taken order for the safetie of Normandy, with part of his armie coasted betweene the riuers of Seyne and Eure, and tooke the townes of Possie and S. Germain, and the Pont S. Clow, and marched toward Cor∣beil, to seaze vpon the riuer of Seyne on that side. It is said before how the Leaguers had compacted with the King of Spayne, vpon some conditions of receiuing a certaine somme of money, to haue deliuered the Citie of Marsels, a great & strong Citie in Prouance, vpon the Mediterran Sea: but being disappoynted of his purpose, as is said in the first Booke, that Citie continued faithfull vnto the King, vntil the Duke of Guize his death. The King of Spayne had corrupted aforehand the chiefe gouernour of the Citie, by giuing him pay, to the summe of fifty Crownes a day, he had also drawne to his faction, three score of the chiefest Citizens, paying to some forty crownes, some more, and some lesse a day. Thus the hearts of a great number of Citizens being disposed, the death of the Duke of Guize was bruted euen to the coast of the Mediterrane Sea. The gouer∣nour and his complices hearing of that, began to nuaigh and bring the City to a wauring and inconstancy of wills & counsels: some would haue the Towne to yéelde to the League, and some would not: so the Citie remayned as neuter, hanging neither to Spayne nor to France. In the meane time, the Lord Valete as is said, hauing made peace with the Lord Diguieres, and considering the wauering of that Citie, had prepared a nauy of Galeys on the Sea before the said City, to controule such Ships or other vessels, as might come or goe that way to benefit the said Towne, whome he molsted as Leaguers. The gouernour and the rest of malcontents, hired by the King of Spayne practized, that the said King of Spayne, and the Duke of Sauoy, should send Galleys thether, in shew to clense the Seas: but in déede to bring with them thrée thousand men, that should vpon a luddaine be lan∣ded there at the time appoynted, and should seaze vpon the City, to the
King of Spaynes vse. At the time appoynted, came the Galeys and Soul∣diours and tooke land. The second magistrate of the city being a faithfull  Citizen, and in that neutrality of the City, suspecting some treason, thought to preuent it by diligence, and as it pleased God, that night tooke vpon him to view the watch, and in his way met with certaine Mariners all amazed and frighted, requiring him to prouide for the safety of the ci∣ty, for that there were a great number of Spanyards already landed: wherupon he commaunded the townesmen presently to arme themselues. And going a little further accompanied with some good Citizens, did light on the company where the chiefe gouernour was, there taking or∣der with the enemy for the entring of the Towne. This magistrate dnderstanding of these things already, well accom∣panied with townesmen, commaunded the dromme to sound the alarum, and with great courage charged vpon the Spanyards, whome they slew in great number, he tooke many of them, and the gouernour of the City prisoner with them, and such of his complices as were with them: so the City was yet once preserued from the Turkish bondage of the Spani∣ards. Euen as the shéepe straying from their shepheards, runne into the Wolues daunger; so townes and Cities, euen whole Prouinces, with drawing themselues from the obedience of their Lords, are dayly in dan∣ger to be made a pray to their enemies. It is said how the Duke d'Mayne, after his flight from Saint An∣drews plaine, went to Saint Denis, to sée what entertainement the Pari∣siens would shew him: and after he with few had concluded to holde Pa∣ris, and Saint Denis specially, fast from the Kings power, and so he and the Spanish Moore, Commendator Moreo went into Picardie, & thence to Bruxels to the Duke of Parma. The Duke d'Mayne soiorned at Pronne, a towne in Picardie, situated vpon the riuer Sonie, betwéene Amiens and Saint Quintine, to gather such forces as he could, he craued aide from al parts, but they are as slow∣ly to come to him, as he is earnest to enuite them. Balagny Gouernour of Cambray, did promise him fiftéene hundred horses out of Picardie. There the Duke d'Mayne séeing that al things went contrary, yet to ease his stomack, he maketh great braggs, how that he will make againe an army of thirty thousand men. These great bragges did procéede of the vaine hope which they had al∣ready conceaued of the King of Spayne: for while these things aboue saide were a dooing by the King, about the 20. of March they sent foure Am∣bassadors into Spayne: first from the Duke d'Mayne, and another from the Duke of Lorreyne, the third from the Duke Merceur, and the last in the name of the whole body of the League. They arriued at Vadolit, in the latter end of Aprill.
The somme of their Ambassage was to begge, and not much neither, but thrée Milions of Gold, and thirty thousand men, vpon that condition  that they would make him King of France, if he could get it, yet promi∣sing their furtherance. So after much capping and crouching, begging and crauing, chopping and changing, what money they obtayned, it is not certaine, but it is reported that they were promised one Milion, and that they had thirty thousand Crownes, which they tooke, in hope that more would come, and an army out of the Lowe Countreyes of Flanders. The King of Spayne was willing to hearken to these Ambassadors for thrée causes, ambition, feare, and desire of reuenging. First, by the proffer of this Ambassage, hée was put in some hope, that considering the great power of these three Dukes, and the great power of the League, that is of the Townes, Cities, and commons rebelled, hée might perhaps spéede better then he looked for. And if he should not spéed in the whole, yet he might in part thereof. The second cause was feare, which caused him with all his meanes to keepe the King from growing mighty: for considering his great valoure, and the iniuries which both his predecessors & he had receaued at the Spa∣niards handes, would in time call them to remembrance, and seeke the means to recouer his owne. The third cause was desire of reuenge, supposing that in working him mischiefe, he might bee reuenged of the losse, reproch and dishonour of his Spaniards and Flemmings, who had remayned to dung the playne of S. Andrew: by reason of these particular affections, & not for any loue which hee had to the Leaguers or Leagued, he wrote to the Duke of Parma, to passe in person with such Forces as hee had and could spare in the lowe Countreis, to succour the rebels in France. In the meane while that the King soiorned at Mante, the Parisiens beeing hardened by the Deuillish and seditious Sermons of the Fryers and Iesuits, as the Egyptians were by the enchauntmentes of Iamnes & Iambres: they elected for gouernor of their city the Duke of Nemours, by whose conduct they began to fortify their walles: men, women and Chil∣dren, night and day, they pulled downe many houses in the Suburbs, they receaued into the City three thousand Germans, whom they placed part of them in the Arsenall, and others in watch and ward in the most needfull places of the city. They gathered corne and wine into the Citie so much as the could. They fortified also Saint Denis, Corbeil, Melun, Montereau fault yonne and Sennes. The King passing in the sight of the Citie of Paris, layed the siege be∣fore Corbeil, which shortly after yelded: the King stopped the riuer of Seine with a chayne of Iron, so that no boats being neuer so little could passe by.
From Corbeil the King went to lay the siege before Montereau, which is a great towne situated vppon the fall of the riuer Yonne into Seine, which  yeelded without any resisting. From Montereau the King returned to Melune, a strong towne vppon Seine: this town part of it lyeth vpon the South banke of Seine, and part is in an Iland within the sayd riuer, there the Rebels had placed a strong garrison: but the Citizens and Souldiers perceauing that they would be forced, and that there was no hope of succour, yeelded the place, and put themselues in the Kings seruice. The King hauing placed a strong garrison there, wentbacke agayne to Sens, compassed it, doth plant sixe pieces of Ordinance agaynst the wall, sent a Tompeter to the City to sommon them to render the place, promi∣sing them all good and gracious fauour. The Gouernor called the Lord Chambalon, determined not to receaue him, except first he would become a good Catholike. Whereupon the K. began to batter the towne in two seuerall places, gaue two assaults, where he was repulsed, beeing within the town one thousand and eight hundred Souldiers, besides the Citizens and Inhabitants, who were able to make two thousand Souldiers more. The king therfore thought good to leaue of that enterprise, and to follow the course taken, to wit, the siege of Pa∣ris, raysed therefore the siege, and marched toward Paris. The 25. of Aprill the king layed the siege agaynst Charanton, a towne situated vpon the fall of Marne into Seine, in the sight of the City of Paris. There was in a Tower ten souldiers of Paris, which did obstinat them∣selues in the defense of the same, whom he forced and caused their Gouer∣nour to be hanged. Hauing seazed vpon Charanton, the king doth present himself before the Citie, about the 28. of Aprill, tooke the Villages about, began to lay downe the forme of the siege, where he determined to send part of his for∣ces on the South side of the Cittie, therewith to compasse that side. And with the other part to besiege the North side, and the Towne of S. Denis all at once: there he maketh all things ready, maketh his approches, sit∣teth still without proffering any force, but onely doth stop the entring in of victuals, hoping that scarcenes and neede would haue mollifyed their hartes, and the present danger of the very famin which did threaten them would haue mooued them to some moderat counsell. Now wee will leaue the king before this siege, harkening what the de∣termination of the Parisiens is, and goe to see what is done in other places. About the beginning of May, there was in the noble and loyall Citie of Renes in Britaine a sauey sot, prating Frier, who in the pulpit to stir vp se∣dition in the cittie, tooke it for a poynt of diuinity, and an ornament of Fry∣erlike
Rhetorike to call the king heretike: but the Court of Parliament there so gagged him with a cord about his necke, that when hee had prea∣ched  his last Sermon on the top of a Ladder, he brake his necke with a sore fall: there were also sixe of the chiefest Cittizens hanged with him for com∣pany, for hauing procured this seditious Frier in his Sermons to stirre vp sedition. About the selfe same time, the Lord Rieux defeated the Duke of Lor∣reyn nigh Mtes, and tooke away all his artillery. It is sayd before, how the King sent the Duke of Longueuille with part of the army to scoure and stop the riuer Oyse, who accompanied with the L. la Nouë tooke Beaumont, which was gouerned by the Lord Pierrencourt: there the Duke of Longueuille caused the chiefest men of the Towne to bee hanged. Paris beeing besieged by the king, as is sayd, the people do harden their harts more and more, being perswaded by the Fryers and Iesuits, and by them whom that sottish and Idolatrous people had in admiration, to wit, the Popes Legat, the Spanish Ambassador, the Bishops of Paris, Lyons, Glasco, Placentia, Aste, Rhemes, Sanlis: there were the Duchesses de Ne∣mours, Mayne, Montpensier. The Prouost, Escheuins, & other officers, they partly encourage, part∣ly do terrifie the people, doo yet once agayne gather a great somme of mo∣ney vpon the inhabitants: they doo cast great store of artillerie, and prepare all things to withstand the siege. They made a search of all the grayne and prouision of victuals which were within the Citie. They made also a reckoning of the people, which did amoūt to two hundred thousand persons: the corne came to that quan∣titie as would suffice the citie for a whole moneth, allowing a pound of bread to euery one a day, and besides fourtie thousand bushels of Oates. They appoynted one Anthony L'amy, a rich Marchant of the Citie, to haue the charge of the market, and to appoynt Bakers in euery quarter of the Citie, to whom he deliuered the corne at foure Crownes the bushell, and not aboue, & after that rate they should sell the pound of bread at halfe a Spanish royall. This order being taken, they went about to assure themselues of the wil of the Citizens, for feare that any sedition should arise by reason of the scarsenes, which vndoubtedly they sawe would ensue. They gathered all the chiefest Citizens and Captaynes in the halles of their quarters, and there they were made sweare neuer to consent to receaue any hereticall King. They were sworne also to detect and reueale any man whom they knewe to dissent from this their vnion and oath. This last part of the oth taken, replenished the citie with proscriptions, confiscations, banishments, cruell torments, executions, funeralls and la∣mentations:
for a great many were murthered, many iudicially executed, many emprisoned, many saued them by flight: but all lost their goods and  substance, which was no small pray to the heads of the rebels. And that they might molest the King with sallies, they hyred the Lord Vitry, Captayne of one hundred and fiftie horses, with the somme of two thousand Duckets, which the Ambassadour of Spayne did pay. Thus hauing set a Militarie policie in the Citie, touching the strength of the Citie and the sinewes thereof, they sometime would set their heads out of the gates to see what weather was about: but fearing some shewer of blowes, they ranne in agayne. The King hauing distressed Paris alreadie twentie dayes, or very nigh, and looking that vpon some reasonable condition they would haue sought meanes of peace: and seeing them contrary to his expectation hardened, and waxed more obstinate and malicious, with part of his forces set vppon the Suburbs of S. Martin, which he tooke without any great resistance. From that day vntill the beginning of Iune, the time passed away with∣out any great exployts, but onely certayne light skirmishes. For the king would not shewe any extreame force, hauing a care of them, hoping still that famine would haue mooued them to hearken to reason, and to remem∣ber their dueties. In the meane time the King caused the peeces of artille∣rie, wherwith the Duke of Longueuille had battered Beaumont vpon Oyse, to be brought to Paris, which being arriued, the King battered the walles with thirteene péeces of double Canon. The Duke of Nemours had in the meane time cast great store of Ordi∣nance, whereof hee caused threescore and fiue peeces to bee set vppon the walles. About the 13. of Iune there came foorth out of Paris a strange kinde of men of warre, which were neuer seene in the field before▪ Quintus Curtius in the life of Alexander (if I remember well) reported of such a kind of strange warriours. For when Alexander came into India with his victo∣rious armie, they perceaued on the top of a mountaine an army of men, as they thought with pikes and long staues: whereupon that terrible armie of Macedonians sounded the alarum. Alexander sent horsemen to viewe the enemie: when they came néere they perceaued an armie of Apes, which had imitated the armie of the Macedonians, whom they had spyed out of the trees and mountaynes. All the courage of the Macedonians was tur∣ned to laughter. So the Bishop of Sanlis would play the like part, he made himselfe a Captain, his Souldiers were the Cartusien Friers, the reformed Ber∣nardines and barefoote Friers: the Cartusiens are of the dyet of the Ot∣ter, for they eate nothing but fish, their cowle is like vnto the bag where∣with the Apothecaries doo straine their wine hippocras: and by reason of
their flegmatick féeding, they are all rotten, and leapers afore they come to halfe of their age, they doo crawle with lice, and taken with that sick∣nes,  which the ancients doo call Hydrokephalia, that is a madnes procured by rotten flegme enflamed. The reformed Bernardines are of the dyet of the asse, which féedeth vpon grasse and thistles, for they eate nothing but hearbs sod or rawe, which thing doth cause them to haue dry and skiruy bodies, and that diseaze which is called , but with all to haue asses wits: they goe all in black, hereby they doo represent to the world their melancholik humor. The bare foote Friers doo shew what humor dooth trouble their braine, imitating the frantick mad men, which haue delight to goe bare foote winter and sommer: for we account that man mad that will go bare foote, when he may haue shooes to put on. All these rakehels armed themselues vnder their lousie raggs, doo march in battaile aray through the City, mumbling their portuses, and when they had giuen a sight of their prowesse vnto the Citizens, they would also goe to sée what weather was out of the Towne: and when they had marched a while, the Kings gardes in the Suburbs tooke the ala∣rum, supposing to haue to deale with men; but when they had the sight of this legion, and perceauing that they were apes imitating men, they tur∣ned their fury to aughter, hooping & shooting: whereupon the apes re∣turned with great speed into the City, and this was the end of this skir∣mish. They had for an ensigne a Crucifixe, and our Lady carried before them to play the bulbegger. About this time bread began to be scarse in Paris. whereupon the ma∣sters of the Citie fearing the increasing of famine, sought out all the poore within the Citie, who came to thirty thousand, and determined to haue turned them forth out of the City to take their fortune. But some of the counsell of the Citie, thought that it could not stand with the great∣nes and honour of the Citie, and therefore were stayed in, which thing did greatly hasten the famine, which shortly after followed. In the middest of Iune the famine being very great, there was little or nothing to eate, the Souldiours had no pay, neither was there money to pay them, the Citizns refused any more to contribute, aleaging the great and huge sommes of money which they had disboursed: and for feare of some sedition in the Citie, Frier Henrico Caietano, Frier Goundj By∣shop of Paris, and the blinde Captaine Bernardino Mendoza, consented to rob all the Gods which were in the Temples of Paris, they take the golden cuppes of their Gods, and all the shrines of golde and siluer, which Demetrius his prentizes had made to Diana, to Venus, to Belona, and to many Diuels of hell: they turne their reliques & old rotten bones of old Friers, old dogges and horses, (which they had made the people
worship, for the bones of Apostles, Martyrs, and other Saints of God) out of their coates of gold and siluer, and make good money to pay the re∣bells to warre against their naturall and lawfull King, contrary to Gods  ordinance, to that end that things most wickedly abused, might remayne still in the same nature. The blind Captaine Don Bernardino, doth pro∣mise to bestow euery day in almes sixe score Crownes: Frier Henrico Caietano, said he would doo the like: but that deuotion waxed as could as the weather was hot, according to the Aphorisme of Hypocrates: ventres hyeme calidiores estate frigidiores. The King knowing well of the great extremity, wherewith the Citie was distressed, pittyed them, and willed them to take some pitty of their distressed estate, promised them mercy and fauour: but the Friers Henri∣co Caietano and Goundi, answered contrary to the meaning of the poore people, that they had determined to dy all, rather then to admit an hereti∣call King. Vpon this answer of the Parisiens, in the latter end of Iune, many no∣ble men and gentlemen began to mutter in the Kings army, what great imminent danger, was hanging ouer France; the ruine of the nobility, the decay of so great and noble a City as Paris was: and the desolation of the whole realme, which euills the King could redresse, in making himselfe a Catholicke. Of this faction, tending to some enterprise, was chiefest the prince of Soisson, and went so farre as to speake openly, that they will serue no longer vnder an hereticall King. The King aduertized of this muttering, called his nobles and Cap∣taines, shewed them what hee was, what his right and cause was. And whereas they willed him to become a Catholicke, he put thē out of doubt, that for to purchase many Kingdomes, as great as the realme of France was, hee would neuer so little depart from his religion, which hee knewe was grounded vpon the infallible truth of God. As for their seruice, he made no great account, knowing that it was God who was his strength, force, and defender of his cause, willed them to depart from his army when they would, and that hee had rather haue their roome as their company: he knew that GOD would giue him the meanes and power in time to represse his enemies: he knew that GOD would raise him friends enough to assist him. It is sayd before, how the King all in one worke did besiege S. Denis, which is a towne walled within foure miles of Paris. In this Towne in an Abbey where the burials and monuments of the kings were: this towne was so gretaly distressed, that they had neither bread nor munition to defend themselues, they had consumed all their prouision, Horses, Asses, Dogges, Cattes, Rattes, Mice, Hearbes, Rootes, and whatsoeuer the belly could aduise them: Euen to haue tryed to make bread with flower of Oates,
huske and all, and dust of old rotten postes, some tryed straw grownd to dust. The sayd towne therfore considering how the famin within, & the sword without did threaten them, proffered parly, and at length concluded to deliuer the towne to the King, with liues reserued vnto all maner of men, the souldiers and all manner of men to retire with all thinges which they would carry away: who of his great clemency gaue them Horses and Cartes for their carriage. The same day the King entred into Saint Denis with great reioycing of all men, who had proued his gracious fauour and clemency. And beeing setled in his lodging, he spyed in the chamber of presence three men walking in the habit of gentlemen, whom hee knew not, but he suspected that they were there for no good. They vppon that suspition were apprehended, and examined by certayne noble men appointed by the King: vppon a sudden they faultered in their answeres, and changing their countenance were sent to prison: but afterward being narrowly exa∣mined, they confessed that two of them were Fryers of Saint Francis or∣der, and the third to be a Priest, and they three were of the 24. who had cō∣spired, vowed and sworn the kings death. They were hanged without any scraping of the holy greasing which they had of their Bishop. These mur∣therers left a president what trust princes may haue in the rable of Friers, Monkes and shaueling Priests. About the same time the Lord Rubempre, gouernour for the King in Tourreyne, gaue an ouerthrow to the Lord Chastre in the Countrey of Berrye. About the beginning of Iuly, the Lord Viques a most cruell Leaguer, had besieged Pontarson a towne in base Britaine, holding for the King a∣gainst the Leaguers, and after three assaults, in the which he was repul∣sed, he heard that the county of Thorigni was comming with great for∣ces to rayse the siege: wherupon he retired to S. Michaels mount, & wrote letters vnto the Duke Merceur, who was then at Nantes for succour, fea∣ring least he should bee forced in the sayd mount Saint Michaell. Hee that carryed the letters came with the sayd letters to the Earle of Thorigny, who hauing perused the letters, sent the copie of the same to the Prince Dombes, who was betweene Saint Mal and Ʋitre, and forth∣with sent the Messenger to the Duke Merceur with his letters: who after hee had seene them, sent by and by an answere to the sayd Lord Viques, praying him to be strong, and that within three daies he would come to his aide with three thousand men to rescue him from the Earle Thorigny, and to oppresse him, seeing that the sayd Earle could not haue helpe from the Prince. The Messenger came agayne to the sayd Earle, and shewed him the an∣swere
of Merceur: the copie thereof was sent immediatly to the Prince, the resolution was so taken betweene them, that the Prince caused all the horsemen to march speedily, and to get betweene the sayd Merceur and  Nantes, and the Earle of Thorigny marched towards the sayd Merceur. The Duke perceauing that hee was compassed betweene two armies, ventured to fight with the Prince Dombes, and whilest they were a figh∣ting, the Earle came vppon him on the other side: hee was so beaten be∣tweene them, that he lost seuenteene Ensignes, and twelue hundred of his company were slayne on the place: he saued himselfe by flight into the Ca∣stell Josselin, one of the strongest places in all France. When the Lord Viques vnderstood of this ouerthrow, he yeelded, and in the conclusion he gaue his Daughter in marriage to the yonger brother of the Lord Montgomery, who was kept prisoner by him. He was permit∣ted to keepe Saint Michaell for his safety. About the same tyme the strong Towne of Dinan in base Normandie hearing of the sayd ouerthrow of Merceur, did beat out of their town their gouernour, brother of the Duke Merceur, killed many of his Souldiers, and among them the chiefest of his Captayns named Iahn, and so yeelded vnto the King. About this time also the inhabitants of Kilbeuf in Normandie took a gal∣ley of the Duke Aumale laden with his goods, as it was going vp to Roan. In this moneth of Iuly, the Franciscan Fryers of Sanlis must needes plaie a Fryerlike part: they were greatly desyrous to betray the towne, and to deliuer the same into the Leaguers handes: which for to bring to passe, they caused many Captains of the rebels to come thether, apparrel∣led like Countrey men, hauing each of them a basket full of Cheries vp∣pon their shoulders, as though they were market-folkes to sell Cheries. These Cherie mongers were receaued by the said Friers into their Fryery house, where they had gathered together great prouision of ar∣mor. But this thing beeing suspected by some good Citizens, they notify∣ed it to the King. Whereuppon many were taken, and of the Fryers, Masse-mongers, Chery-mongers and treason-mongers of the Towne were hanged, to the number of seauen score, and so the play was ended. Wee haue left the King at Saint Denis, whilest wee went to see what was done in other places of the realme: now wee will come to the siege of Paris, and first speake of the state of the Citie. There the famin had so preuailed in the beginning of Iuly, that it far passed the famous famin of Saguntum. Then began they to denounce war agaynst all the leane horses and skiruy iades, agaynst the asses, cats and dogges: these things were more dayntie vnto them then the daynties of Sibaris little bread, and that of Oates with huske and all was very scant, it
was for Princes and great Ladies, and that a small quantity euery day. In this extremity Fryer Henrico Caietano had sold and wasted all his  money and plate, and begging was there little regarded: he with the rest of his Masse-mongers did bury in their stomackes their God, whom they had made with fiue words, in horse dung, if they could get it: but a strange thing there happened, as had béen heard of in any age, to wit, the Asses of Sorboun were enforced to deuour their owne brothers flesh. There were foure sorts of men who went about to remedie this extre∣mity, each one following their course. Some of the best sort and stoutest stomacke pittying themselues & their fellow Citizens, whom they saw perish by heaps for the pleasure of few rebels; by the aduise of one Renard Atturney in the Court of Parliament, tooke counsell how to deliuer the Cittie into the Kings hands, of whose clemency and gracious fauour toward the poore distressed people, they as∣sured themselues. But beeing discouered, some fled to the King, who were graciously of him receaued: some were taken prisoners, and the said Renard with some others were executed, but the goods of all were forfay∣ted to the heads of the League. The second was the Duke de Mayne, who fearing greatly the losse of Paris, being abroad where he made shift for good cheere, though it were at other mens charge, as the saying is: Qui satur est pleno laudat ieiunia ven∣tre. He writeth letters to the inhabitants of Paris, commending them for their great constancie, promiseth them succour and great prouision of vic∣tuals within a certayne time prefixed in the letter, willing them to bee pa∣tient yet, and not to goe about any making of peace with the King. The Friers and Iesuites tooke the copies of these letters, read them in their pulpets, and serued them for text to discourse vpon, and to make braue and lustie sermous. The third was the blind Captaine Bernardine, who taught the delicate Parisiens the dyet of his countrey, to wit, to take Oates ground, meale huske and all, and therewith to make a kinde of pap, such as the countrey men in Spayne doo vse for their ordinarie dyet, and as they doo in France for the fatting of their hogges, and here in England the Hunters doo for their houndes: and that slubber sauce to bee sould to them that had money by a measure, which was followed as long as Oates did last. The fourth was the Priests, who would also feede their mindes with idolatrous fantasies, as their bodies were fed sparingly with spanish slub∣ber wash: and first to begin, they perswaded them to vow to Nostra donna di Loretta, a lampe and a ship of pure siluer of the waight of three hundred markes, which should be sent by some of the chiefest of the Citie. The second idlatrous fantasie wherewith they deluded that besotted people, was, that they made them runne to and fro in procession bare footed
and bare legged from Church to Church, from Idoll to Idoll, carrying  their God in the streetes, which their Priest had made with fiue words. All the streetes did sound with weake Ora pro nobis. The third was a Pageant which they played in this wise: they had made vppon the great Altar of their Churches a graue like a monument, there they buried their God, (who be like was dead with famine) and let him lye for the space of 8. daies, and in the same space the Churches were full night and day with Candles, smoake, idolatries and starued people. Who had required these things at your hands? It is submitting them∣selues vnto Gods ordinance, that would quickly remedie this distresse, and not these idolatries. The Oates being spent, the famine preuailed more and more, the har∣uest time also was come. The King did winke at many sallies which they did, to steale away some sheaues of corne, hoping by that meanes to inter∣cept some of the heads of the rebellion: so there were daily skirmishes a∣bout the haruest, and they also carried away with them somewhat, which (although dearely bought) did relieue somewhat the extremitie of their hunger. Whilest these sallies were adoing, about the fifteene day of Iuly the Lord Chastilion arriued vnto the King with one thousand horsemen and two thousand footmen Gascoynes. The King perceauing the wilfull obstinacie of that people, or rather the hard bondage that they were in vnder fewe rebels, set all his forces in or∣der, and set vpon all the Suburbs of Paris all at once, which seazed vppon without any losse the 18. of Iuly, supposing that his neighborhead would cause them enter in consideration of their miseries and daungers. This narrow siege, debarring them wholy from the fields, made the famine yet to preuaile more: so that now in few dayes, the people dyed by heapes in the houses within, and in the streates without. Now the com∣mon people wisheth for peace, and imputeth all their miseries vnto blind Bernardine, many did threaten openly in the streates, that it were a good déede to hang that Spanish Moore, and all his company of Sarrazins broode. Blinde Bernardine hearing of these newes, wished himselfe to haue béen in Spayne a dauncing naked with the Sarrazen Moores of Spayne: yet to pacifie the people, hee did bestow of his Spanish potage made of Oates, vpon them so much as he could spare, for hée was fallen to his olde dyet of Spayne, and withall hee gaue them old starued horses which were like to dye, for to kill and to ete, yet all this poore liberality which then was great, consiering the time, could not pacifie the people: for as the Prourb is▪ Ventur non habet aures. Therefore many tooke counsell to∣gether in the night, to haue seazed vppon a gate, and to haue let in the
Kings forces, but this counsel being detected, this enterprise could not be effected. The morrow after being the 19. day of Iuly, a great multitude assem∣bled  themselues in the palace, and requird of the Pseudosenat, that they might haue peace with the King, otherwise there was no remedy, but they were like to perish miserably, they were intreated to quiet them∣selues, and to haue pacience for ten dayes, so they departed like to dye in the meane time with hunger. The 27. of Iuly, they assembled themselues againe into the palace with strong hand, and required of the Pseudesenat, either bread or peace: and whereas a Marchant of the City named Goys, did reproue them, by them he was hurt, so that within few dayes he yeelded his rebellious soule: the matter tending to sedition, the Duke of Aumale came to the palace, shut vp the doores, and tooke some prisoners, whereof two of them were hanged. Then the mutiny of the people encreasing, they went to the Bishops house, willing him to goe about the matter, that they might haue either bread or peace: whereupon some of the counselers of the Pseudosenat, pit∣tying their owne, and the misery of the people, with the Bishop of Lions, the Duke of Nemours, and others of the chiefest of the rebellion entred in counsell, whether they ought to admit the King vpon reasonable conditi∣ons, specially hauing their autonomy. The matter being discoursed, and some altogether inclining to peace, withstanding that counsell, the Duke of Nemours, gouernour of the city, said in great anger, that he had rather see the City consumed then lost: meaning that if it were yéelded vnto the King, he estéemed it lost, and going foorth in great anger, would not be present any longer in such deliberation: notwithstanding, they agréed all to send Ambassadors to the King, to entreate of an vniuersall peace. The messengers were the Bishops of Paris and Lions, and certaine others de∣puted for the City, who went to the King, lodged them in Saint Anto∣nies Abbey nigh the City, whome he receaued more courteously then they thought he would haue done. They propounded to the King two things, an vniuersall peace, and that he should become a Catholick, and so the City of Paris would set o∣pen their gates, acknowledge and Crowne him King of France. The King answered that he would receaue them to mercy, without binding himselfe to any thing: it appertained vnto Kings to pardon his subiects, but not to subiects to prescribe peace, and to deuide peares with their King, as for his religion hee commaunded them not to mooue any talke thereof, for hee was resolued in his faith, which he did not meane to change, and willed them with this resolution to returne to Paris. The Duke d'Mayne vnderstanding that the Kings forces were lod∣ged
at the gates of Paris, and that the City within was full of vprores of the people, perishing for hunger: perceauing also the long delayes of the  Duke of Parma, and fearing greatly that the City would fall into the Kings hands, one way or another, he sent Vileroy to the King, and wri∣teth a letter to the Parisiens, to send the Bishops of Paris and Lions, to shew how desirous they were to make peace. The King gaue them license to come in his presence, and also to repaire to the Duke d'Mayne with this answer, that hée had not any delight in their misery and vndooing. The intent of this Ambassage, was but to de∣lay the time, least the K. should force the City while he posted to Bruxels, there to solicit the Duke of Parma. For he wrote a letter vnto the Pari∣siens by a secretary of the Bishop, by the which he willed them to hold out, and to make no peace, for there was a rescue comming, great forces, and great store of victuals. Now we will leaue the King in the Suburbs, and walke to Bruxels in Brabant, to see how the Leaguers affaires doo speede there. It is saide before how the Leaguers sent foure Ambassadors into Spayne at one clap, and there the causes were shewed, which moued the King of Spayne to hearken vnto their petition, & how he sent to the Duke of Parma to goe into France, with such power as he could conueniently make, to relieue and rescue Paris. Now wée will shew the intent which the King of Spayne kept, vncommunicable to himselfe. The King of Spayne hauing placed the Duke of Parma, as regent in the Low Countries, and perceauing that he being setled in the Country, and hauing purchased friends and partakers there, began to suspect him, as that hée should not bée able to haue him out, without some wrangling and wrestling,  that the Duke would keepe that countrey in recom∣pence of the Kingdome of Portingal, whereof he thought himselfe vniust∣ly defrauded. This suspition made the King oftentimes to play the Phisition with the Duke, and to minister him spanish phisick, afore he was sick, as boles, pills and potions. But the said Duke being skilfull in Italian Phisick, prouided such counter phisick, that by boles, pills and potions, he preuen∣ted the druggs of Spayne. The Spanish King therefore séeing that his Phisick would not work, tooke occasion by this Ambassage, to rid his hands of him, either by some blow yt he might receaue, or else by preuention: therefore he commaunded him to take such regiments of Wallons & Italians, as he knew well to fa∣uour the said Duke, & such Lords as had any amity with him, to go with all spéed to ayde the Leaguers: yt by these meanes the Spaniards remai∣ning in the countrey while another gouernour should be sent, might seaze vpon the holds and forts of the land, & so to shut him out, and exclude him
from that gouernement, to be sent into Italy, from whence he came, there to be a petty Duke, and to busie his head about the prouiding of a Galey,  if the Turke should chance to inuade Italy. But the Duke of Parma hauing learned this Latine in his youth, fraudē fraude fullere laus est, thought good to obey his masters commaun∣dement, though little to his aduauntage: for beside his commission hée purposed to take with him the two regiments of Spanyards, that were appoynted to remayne in the Countrey, and to haue shut him out of the doores. The Duke of Parma had béene long sicke of the purre, the pockes, the murre, the cough and the glaunders, and yet his teeth were scarse fast in his head. And beeing most resolued en his iourney, then seemed hee col∣dest and most vncertayne. The Spaniards hauing already (through a brain sike imagination) conquered France, did vrge the iourney: the Dukes friends did excuse the delay by his weaknes. There was dayly quarrels betweene Spaniards and Italians: some Spaniardes were so bold to call him Viliago tradi∣dore. The Duke did dilay his iourney to terrify the Duke de Mayne, and to driue him of necessity to come in his owne person to begge his helpe. The Duke de Mayne (as is before sayd) hauing taken some order to stay the Kings power from forcing the citie of Paris, posted to Bruxels in Brabant, there the Duke of Parma entertained him as a gentleman would entertaine a lackay. There the D. de Mayne afore he might be admitted to come in the presence of that great Potentate, was put to learne so many Italian abassios, so many duckinges and Spanish ceremonies, by crou∣ching to euery rascall Spaniard, that at length when h had learned well to make a legge afr the Italian or Spanish maner, he was let into ba∣siare las manos. There he vrged and prayed very deuoutly for speedy helpe, she wing the extremity that Paris stood in if it were not with speed relieued, farewell all the League, Leaguers, and Leagued, and Catholike fayth. Vppon this extremity, the Duke of Parma (who had all things in a rea∣dines) sent the D. de Mayne before him, to put such forces in a readines, as he could make vp against his comming, that entring on the frontiers, they might ioyne their forces together. The Duke de Mayne returned into France, put all the Leaguers in great hope of good successe, reuiued ye hungry Parisiens with fair words, sent to the Duke de Aumale and Vidsame d' Amiens, who were gone into Picardy to relye such forces there as they could, and to repaire into Cham∣paigne to him. Now hauing brought the Duke de Mayne from Bruxeles into Cham∣paigne
againe, there we will leaue him to prepare for the comming of the Duke of Parma, and returne to the siege of Paris. Now in the latter end of Iulye, the famin did so preuaile in the Citie of Paris, and encreased more and more daily, that they dyed by heaps euery where sinking downe in the Streetes starke dead. They who were able to buy oaten bread were allowed no more but sixe ounces a day. By the end of Iuly, they had eaten in the Citie aboue two thousand hor∣ses, and eight hundred Asses, or Moyles: great warre was denounced in the Citie agaynst Dogges, Whelps, Catte, Kitlings, Rats, Mice, and other such things which the bellie could deuise. There was no wine in the Citie, nor graine to brue beare. They who had money did drinke Tisen made with water and liquorice, which was to be sold in wine Tauerns in stead of Wine. They who had no money did drinke with the Cow out of the riuer Sein, which for the space of thirty yeares they had defiled and coloured red with the bloud of the Saints, and now of late with the bloud of the royals. In the beginning of August, they sought all hearbs and weedes which  could bee had and sed them in water without salt, which they did sell for a Spanish Royall a pound to them which had money. A bushell of wheat was sold for 70. crownes and more. Blind Bernardine Ambassador of Spayne, one of the chiefest workers of all these mischiefs, hapned to tell in a company how he had heard say, that in a certain fort of the Turke besieged by ye Persians, in like case they did grind bones of dead men, and made bread thereof. Some who heard this tale told, tooke that for a counsell, tooke bones (whereof is great store in Paris, specially in the Churchyard of the Innocents) ground them, and made bread of that kind of stuffe. Some did take the small dust of worm eaten posts mingled with a small deale of Oaten meale, wherewith they made bread. From the latter ende of Iuly, vntill the time that the King raised the siege, this miserable people did shift with that kind of poore fare. About the 29. of Iuly the asses of Sorboun, Monks, Friers and Iesuits, considering now that asse flesh could not be had any more, or that they had no money to buy any, and also that it would not bee had neither vpon cre∣dit, nor for begging. Considering also that the 50. thousand duckets which the Pope had sent (which they thought to haue had either wholly or in part) was bestowed vppon men and Souldiers, not vppon Asses, and that they had no part thereof: and seeing that contrarie to promise they were out of  to receaue any, but rather that they were like to die for hunger, and were alrea starued▪ they fell into a elting chafe, and in that anger wrote vnto Frier Sixtus a letter, wherein they reproch vnto him the great good
turnes, which the Vickars of Rome had receaued of their auncestors, whereof he shewed himselfe very vnthankefull. They quarell with him how they hauing encouraged the people in their Sermons (to withstand their King, and to set the realme in a combustion) to the catholike faith, vpon promises of his aid and succour, but now when they haue need nothing is perfourmed: the people doo take them (as they may well) for abusers, and the Pope for a cogging Fryer, a deceauer, a giuer of good morrows and faire wordes. They say, when they haue shewed their néed and gréefs vnto his Nuncio, they had faire words, how the Pope is very wise, knoweth well what hee hath to doe, hee will do his promise when he seeth his tyme. Maister Frier Sixtus and his Nuncio, you doe not vnderstand well Note. perhaps the nature of Sorboun: they haue a rage in the belly, which will not be asswaged by words, I thinke no people in this world is so troubled with that sicknes as these bee, but specially now when Asse flesh faileth them. They accuse Frier Sixtus that he playeth Iack of both sides, he holdeth with the hounde and runneth with the hare: hee holdeth with the Catho∣likes, and secretly fauoureth the King, that they prooue by two Argu∣ments. First by the good entertainment which was giuen to the Lord Luxenbourg, who first with dissimulation was excluded, and afterward vsed very frendly. The second argument is, that Fryer Sixtus had beene greatly desired by the holy vnion, and also had promised to pronounce excommunication a∣gainst the King and the Royals, which he would neuer doo. They pray him instantly to send forth that excommunication, and let them alone with that. And whereas these Magistrinostri dare not beg openly, yet they say that letters haue béene written from Italy, by many great men, to bee but folly to expect any money from Rome. The reason I can giue you, for they haue little enough to serue their turne. At length they fall out with him openly, with this praier, that God so help him as he dooth help them. But to returne to the purpose, the staruing and eating of such vncleane things, did bring generally to all the disease  and a dropsie, so that betwéene the famine and these diseases, there was most commonly two hundred and more in a morning, found dead at the doores of the rich, where they came to get somewhat, and were not able to depart from thence, beside numbers which did dye euery where by heapes. Al the musick that was in the streates was mourning, wéeping, lamen∣tations, and weake voyces of begging people, and none able to relieue them. The pompe of the City was turned into funerals, leanenes, pitifull
sights, and euident tokens of Gods wrath powred vpon a people, which lead by seducers, haue resisted Gods power and Ordinance. The state of that people being so lamentable: Frier Henrico, Frier Sixtus Nuncio (who was come himselfe to sixe ounces of aten bread, and halfe a pound of asse flesh if he could get it) supposing to be in antro Tro∣phoni, where the Poets doo faine the people to liue by shadowes, went a∣but to relieue this people with idolatrous fātasies, to wit, with pardōs & indulgences: whereupon processions doo runne (but softly) vp and down, they set their Idoll which their Priests did make with fiue words, in his graue againe, which they made for hm vpon the great altar, to see whe∣ther they might awake him out of his swound with smoak, or candels, or thumping on the breast, or with weake misericordia, or a faintie ora pro¦nobis:  the more the famine did encrease, the more Idolatries did multiply. The Friers and Iesuites would sometime step vp in the puspit: there they did looke like their woody and smoaky Idols, which are by heapes in their temples, differing nothing from them but in apparell and speah. They had lacked their bread of chapter, and vinum capitulare so long, that they could no more rumble and thunder their sermons, beate and shake their pulpets, but with a mourning voyce, prayed them whom they had cast headlong into that heape of miseres to bée patient; if they dye, they shall be made confessors; within ten dayes they shall haue victuals and suc∣cour enough. But when they heard for a truth of the Duke of Parma his marching, there they did with their weake voyces extoll him, as the only Captaine of the world, the deliuerer of France, and of the holy Church. What was he not: Thus this miserable people, kept downe by the tyrrany of the Lea∣guers, hardned by seditious sermons of starued Friers and Iesuites, fed with vanities of the Popes Nuncio, blinded with ignorāce and Idolatry of ignorant and Idolatrous leaders, was not suffered to goe foth, and to submit themselues to their King (to whom nothing was more deare then their preseruation) neither could they be prouided. But the tirranous re∣bels hauing yet somewhat to kéepe soule and body together, had delight to behold with their cruell eyes, that wretched people to pyne away by hunger. The famine goeth worse one day then another, in somuch, that if the King had continued his siege any tyme longer, that desperat rabble of re∣bellious Idolaters, would haue done as the Saguntines & Lampsarcens which destroyed themselues. In the beginning of August the rebels did issue foorth, conducted by the Duke of Nemours, to charge the Kings forces: but they were so receaued by the Kings Captaines, that they who returned home, said they would do so no more.
The King perceauing that the message of Vileroy, was nothing else but to delude him, and vnderstanding that the Duke d'Mayne was gone into  Brabant, to hast the Duke of Parma his iourney, placed thirtéene pieces of Ordinance to batter the gate of S. Germaine, on the south side of the City. But hearing that for a certainty, the Duke of Parma was ready to march with fiftéene thousand men, Spanyards, Italians, Wallons, and Flemmings, all of the old bands & garisons of the Countrey, he thought good not to giue any assault: but knowing that they were extreamely di∣stressed with famine, thought to vrge them with the same more narrow∣ly then euer he did, and so to enforce them to come to some reasonable com∣position, and so to reserue his nobility and braue Souldiours, to the ene∣mies comming. The famine did so preuaile, that nothing being left to eate, but them∣selues, they began to fall to mans flesh. Pedro Corneio a Spanyard, who was in that siege, dooth report that one of the Pseudopresidents there, told him for a truth, which hee knew very well, that there were of his knowledge two and twenty Children eaten in that siege. The King vnderstanding of the greatnes of the famine, the wilull obstinacy of that damned people, who will rather perish like the heathe∣nish Saguntines, then to try his clemeny and fauour, whom they knew to be therewith indued, more then euer had béen any King in France be∣fore him: hearing also of this sauage and barbarous act of , by some that fled vnto him out of the City, was greatly moued: so that lifting vp his hands to Heauen before his nobility, protested vnto the Lord, as Titus did in like case at the siege of Ierusalem, that hee was not guilty of those abominations, which were there committed, neither of the bloud of them that so desperatly perished. That hee was their lawfull King, ordayned of God to gouerne them, that he had proffered vnto them (contrary to their deserts) mercy: that he might haue forced them; but to spare their bloud, he had delayed it to his great hinderance, hoping that néed would haue caused them to consider their duty. But contrary vnto duty and nature, they had obstinated themselues, and committed more a∣bominations, then any City euer did among the heathens. This good King, his eyes full of teares, retyred into his Chamber, full of compassi∣on, admiration and loue of iustice. Compassion was not in him only, as it was in Scipio, at the burning of Carthage, an affection procéeding of a milde nature, but a true Christian mercy, by the which he did féele the griefes euen of his mortall enemies, and therefore gaue certaine passeports vnto many, to haue dayly out of his campe a certaine alowance of victuals, and liberty to his souldiours, to sell some victuals vnto the besieged for necessary thinges, as shooes, hose, apparell, and other such things, which did somewhat relieue them,
and stopped the barbarous eating one another. The admirations of this strange hardnes of hart of that people, brought  him to consider Gods iust and secret iudgements, who in his wrath hath sent euill spirits of Idolomany in the mouthes of their false prophets, that as through blindnes of Idolatrie this fiftie yeres past and more, they had replenished their streates with burnings, murthers, and massacres of the Saints, and had stopped their eares vnto the voyce of Christ; so they should bee replenished with error and idolatrous hardnes by the wicked Friers and Iesuites, possessed with lying spirites, to bring them to that thraldome and obloquie: neither will that Citie euer be restored to peace and iustice, vntill that the streetes thereof be washed with the bloud of that damned generation. The King considering his office and charge annexed and inseparably ioyned to his Crowne, to minister iustice, that is, to punish the offenders and transgressors, and that there began the rebellion, there was by the con∣sent of most wrought the death of the King, and that by the reioycing and approbation of the sayd death, they had rendred themselues accessarie and guiltie of the same, euen their walles, houses, temples, all whatsoeuer they had. Therefore he considering correlatiuely his office & their offence, could not giue ouer the siege: and seeing that they refused lawfull try all by their rebellion, hee would followe that which in such a case God hath ordained, that is, force, violence and warre: yet hee determined to trye (fashioning himselfe after Gods Image, who is long suffering) whether they might be prouoked to take pitie vpon their afflicted estate. Here we will leaue the King for a time, and will passe into other places to see what preparations of warre be made. We haue sayd how the Duke de Mayne returned from Bruxels (where hee was royally receaued as a poore simple lackie (as is sayd) into Champaigne: thence he sent to the Duke Aumale, and the Vidasme d'Amiens into Picardie, to gather such forces as they could, and to repayre vnto him with as much speede as they might to ioyne with the Duke of Parma, who was comming with great forces. Wherevpon, about the middest of August, the Lord Iumeges vnder∣standing that the sayd Duke Aumale and Vidasme had gathered forces, & were going toward the Duke de Mayne to ioyne with the Spanyards comming out of the Lowe Countrey, met with them nigh Amiens, dis∣comfited them, and slewe thrée thousand of them, as the common report is, among whom was the Vidasme of Amiens. The Duke Aumale by flight saued himselfe within Amiens. The Duke of Parma in the meane time commanded the two regiments of Spanyards, appoynted by the King of Spayne to keepe home, and to doo their feate as they should vnderstand when the opportunitie should serue to march forward before him. For although (leauing the countrey
vnprouided of sufficient forces) the States would take occasion to do their busines, and to surprise places: yet according to the prouerbe, he consen∣ted  to some losse for feare of loosing all. The Spaniards were very vnwilling to goe to that iourney: but hee put them in hope of doing some great and waightie exployts, which were not for euery man to knowe, and which could not be effected without their counsell and helpe, making them beléeue that they were the onely Soul∣diers of the world. At length the Spanyards as a restie horse which stri∣ueth with the rider, and goeth backward afore hee will take his way for∣ward. Vpon their departure, hee sent foorth euery where to shewe his iourney into France; hee setteth foorth a description of his armie, how many thou∣sand footmen, how many thousand horsemen, how many Princes, Dukes and Earles; what Caesars and Alexanders there was in that armie. And when all came to all, there were three which are by him called Princes, euen such as he is himselfe, such as may be a Knight here in England, which do hold some small Dukedomes of small townes in Italy either of ye Pope, or els of King Philip, such as are holden in flauerie, as the Bassas by the Turke, to wit, the Princes (for so hee tearmeth them) of Ascoly, Castel Bertran, and Symay, two Princes as obscure, as the name of their princi∣palities. There were ye Marquesse of Renty, the Earle Berlamount. There were also Dons of Spayne, as Sanctio Layeua, Iuan Baptista, Tasis, Alonso Idiaques, Antonio de Zuniga, Pedro Gaetano, and Capechuca Romano. All these Dons were such as might be twentie groates in the bookes of Subsi∣die: so great noble men they were, men that could haue shewed great pro∣wesse vpon the naked Iudiens. To be short, there were three great Lords, Pride, Vanitie and Folly, who were masters of the Campe. There were also fewe Carrowssers out of Flanders, Henault and Brabant: hee gaue them terrible names, as Amutinados, that is, angry men, Mansferidos, and other such I wot not what, as would make the poore heathnish wo∣men in Italy and Spayne crosse their foreheads, thinking to heare some names of diuels. He setteth foorth his furniture, his stable, his pages, the couerings of his coffers and moyles, and why not the belles of his moyles. But a great ouersight was committed by him that made no mention of his Curtizans; that was not for lacke of good will, but now his age doth great iniurie to his memorie. O man too much pride hath put thee out of thy wittes, or els hath blowne thy wisedome into thy cap. When hee entred into France, hee began to enquire how many dayes marching there was to Rochl; for he would take it by the way. Man looke well to the would of thy cap. He imagined that the king at the first hearing of his comming would haue runne away, and he would haue pursued him
as far as the playns of Bourdeaux, where he would haue fought with him, & sent his head in a charger to his master, as Herode did of Iohn Baptist. The Friers and Iesuits lacked no monkish Rhetorick to encrease, nor winde to blowe vp these bladders. Wheresoeuer he passed there he left to∣kens of his progenie, to wit, tokens of the most vilanous lthines and most barbarous crueltie that euer was vsed by any wilde people, except it were by the Popes adulterous broode. But whilest these things were a dooing, there fel out such a chance, as almost marred all. Frier Sixtus a little before he went to render a count of the treasons & murthers, which he had caused (to his power) to be com∣mitted, fearing by the threatning of the Lord Luxembourg (who was sent to Rome by the Catholick nobility, to doo a message in their name) least the King would séeke for reuengement of the presumptuous iniu∣ries receaued at his hands, sent a flattering mandamus, by the which hée dischargeth the King from excommunication, and willed all his subiects, nobles, and others to obey him, and pray for him, whose subuersion hee himselfe desired. Here Christiā reader, thou maist sée what piety, iustice or godlines is in this sinke of lewd Friers: for aduantage this Frier Sixtus was the chief∣est instrument & countenance of the Leaguers, to raise vp that most cruel warre, and confused rebellion that euer was heard of n any realme, by his excommunication, by his aduise, practises, counsell and money. Now when he seeth the whip in the Kings hands, fearing to be handled as his countrey men did handle their flaues, or as one of the Kings predecessors handled Boniface the eight, whom he hanged at his owne window in the Citie Perugia: now he sent his Curriero with his mandamus with his praiers, he commeth as the Demonicles came vnto Christ. Let therefore Christian Princes, take héede not to trust these false dis∣sembling Friers, who do carry two faces vnder a hoode: for there is no∣thing so wicked, but for aduantage they dare doo: there is nothing so vile, but for aduantage they will debase themselues thereto. But Frier Six∣tus his mandamus, his Curriero, his commaundement was as much re∣garded of the Catholicks and Leaguers, as of them of the reformed reli∣gion: for the Leaguers will follow their deuotions, that is, their rebelli∣on, though all the Popes that haue béen euer since the diuel layed downe the foundation of that seate, should say nay, and therefore they tooke that mandamus abusiue for assentamur. The Catholick Nobles who were with the King, tooke that for a thing which is neither here nor there, which could neither hinder nor fur∣ther the cause, wishing that Frier Sixtus would sit at home, and make some new almanack, or some new calender, because yet we lack one or two to furnish the table, and that by his Apostolicall authority, hée would
commaund the Sunne, not to goe any more out of the way, but to kéepe is course: as some of his predecessors was so bold, as to commaund the  Angels. They of the reformed religion laughed at the impudency and variable∣nes of the Friers wit, who had breath both to warme his fingers, and to coole his potage. The K. did make account of all this Frierlike flattering, rather to re∣dound to his hindrance and dishonor, then to any futtherance of his cause: for he knoweth well, that the praiets of Iolaters would not be accepted of God, and that all the godly minded, would without the Popes bidding, make their humble praiers and supplications to God for him, not onely in France, but in all Christendome. Neither will he accept that obedience which is done by the Popes cmaundement rather, then in considerati∣on of Gods ordinance. And to receaue any goodnes of him, or depend of him, the King dooth knowe well, that euery good gift commeth from aboue, euen from the father of lighs, and that hee is his aboundant reward. But the Pope is equus Seianus, vnto as many as do meddle with him. Whilest the Duke of Parma marched toward France, the Duke de Mayne returned home to gather forces, as is said before: some were cut off by the waies, as Aumale, and the Vidasme of Amiens: but certaine for∣ces he receaned of Balagny gouernour of Cambray, and the Lord Saint Paul, with whom he made toward Paris. The King vnderstanding of this, went from his armie with a troupe of horsemen without any baggage, and marched 17. Leagues without bayte, to meete with the said Duke de Mayne to bid him welcome out of Brabant: but the K. came too short by an hower. For the Duke de Maine vsed with long experience to flee away from the Kings presence, had saued himselfe in the towne of Laon in Champaygne: but the King seeing that he had escaped out of the net, he returned to his army. Shortly after the D. de Mayne hauing gathered all his forces, came to Meaux in Brie: & to ease his stomack geuing out that he came to giue bat∣tell to the King, whereupon the King departing againe went almost to Meaux: but seeing that the Duke had enclosed himselfe betweene the ri∣uers of Marne, and that which commeth from Crecy, the King returned to his army once more. In the latter end of August, the Duke of Parma, that great Soltan So∣lymon, Mussulman, Siech, with his dronken Belerbeyes, Bassas and Ia∣nissaries entred into France. The Duke de Mayne, to requite his curtesy shewed him at Bruxels, sent the Lord Saint Paul (who the other day was a lackay, and afterward houshold seruant to the Lord Beauuayes Nangy, then he rose a step higher, to wit, hee was made one of the bawdes of the
Duke de Mayne, and now one of the chiefest of the League. When the Duke of Parma came to Meaux vpon Marne, about the 27.  of August he thought himselfe to shew yet once an Italian proud tricke to the D. de Mayne, for his so basely receauing of him in the land: then he be∣gan to looke with a sower Italian brow, and as the saying is, Fronte ca∣perata: neither would he goe further, except hee had an absolute power to commaund ouer all the forces, as well French as Suanish: which thing when he had obtayned, he began to esteeme lesse the Duke de Mayne and his Captaines, then the Duke de Mayne had esteemed him in sending a lackay in a Noble mans apparell to receaue him. Now the Duke of Parma beeing on Cockhorse, beginneth to triumph and disdayne all: he altered the Duke de Mayne his resolution, and the course of this voiage: yet necessitie which hath no law, made the Duke de Mayne to take all these Italian insolencies & pranks in good part: & néede (which maketh the old woman trot) enforced him to put in vre all the reue∣rences and ceremonies which he learned at Bruxels among the Spani∣ars, wherein he had profited very wel for his time. The Duke of Parma in taking his iourney, beeing troubled with the hu∣mor that Monarcho his countrey man (who was here in England, the ga∣sing & pastime of children in London) was troubled with, had imagination in his conceit, that by that time he should enter France, the King would be fled from Paris halfe the way out of France. But when he came to Meaux, whilest they played these mery parts betweene them, he heard that the K. was still at the iege of Paris: whereat he maruailed greatly, musing why the King should stay there: and perceauing that the King stood not in any feare, they eased their harts and couered their dread by publishing abroad e∣uery where how they wil giue battell to the King, of him and all his there is not a breakefast. And thereupon in great earnest he called for the Cards, and thinking himselfe far wiser then the Duke de Mayne, who now was but a poore Souldier vnder him: and hauing appointed to lodge at Chel∣les, began to march forth out  Meaux, to take his lodging wher the King had appointed. The King hauing intelligences of the Duke of Parma his marching out of Meaux the 30. of August, raised his armie from before Paris, leauing ye citie and the Suburbs at liberty. The King with part of his armie went before, with commaundement to the rest to follow after. Pedro Corneio a Spaniard, who was in the Citie during that siege, reporteth, that if the King had staied two daies more, it was impossible for that Citie to haue holden any longer, but that the gates had beene opened to him. The Paristens seeing, that when they had come to an extreame period of danger (which in truth had béen an easie and an inestimable benefite to haue fallen into the Kings hands) were filled with great ioy. The Duke
de Nemours, Frier Henrico, Fryer Sixtus his Nuncio, blind Bernardino and all other rabble of Rebels went in procession to the great church called  our Lady, with a great number of people, drawing their drie and starued bodies after them with much adoo, and there they song merily te Deum laudamus. The last wheat that had béene sold there was sold aboue two hundred Crownes, and within three daies after it was there for foure or fiue Crownes. The Duke of Parma at his first marching from Meaux, hauing passed the brooke, which runneth by the Towne of Clay, lodged at the Castell Fresme. The King departed from the Village Chaliot, neere to Paris, and ap∣pointed a generall meeting of his whole army in the plaine of Boundie, ma∣king his reckoning the next day to haue battell. Therefore hee mustered his army there all that day, and there he staied two daies expecting the e∣nemies comming: but hearing no newes of the enemy all that time, hee resolued to draw neere to them, and for that intent sent the Lords Lauer∣dine and Chastilion to seaze vppon Chelles, where he intended to lodge. The said Lords there arriued, found the enemies Harbingers, who had begun to take lodgings, whom they put to flight. The King comming after them, deseried some 7. or eight hundred horses of the enemie, whom he charged so violently with farre lesser number that he conducted, beating them euen vnto their lodgings. The Duke of Parma vnderstanding that his Harbingers had béene bea∣ten out of Chelles, and that the King lodged there, did double his feare, and disappointed of his lodging, would néeds goe (accompanied with the D. de Mayne) to view the plaine where the King stood in battel aray: but per∣ceauing the King comming with a good troup directly toward them, was contented for that time to take no neerer sight. The fifth day the Duke of Parma placed his army inclosed betweene two brookes, and on the one side vpon one of the brookes, there is a wood and a Castell called Brow, and a little aboue the Castell a hill. All that day the King stood in battell array in the plaine by Chelles. The Kinges power of ten thousand foot Frenchmen, foure thousand Swissers, four thousand horsemen, whereof three thousand were gentle∣men of the chiefest families of Nobility in all France, eight hundred Rut∣ters. In that army were sixe Princes, two Marshals of France, and a great number of noble men and Captains, who were able to leade as great an army as that was. About 11. a clocke that day the Duke of Parma with the Duke de Maine went vp on the top of the hill to view the army, and the situation of the plaine, which when hee had descried hee gaue a deepe sigh, and fell into a
chilling cold, and after in a pelting Italian chafe (after the maner of Italy, and the custume of his predecessors the Popes of Rome) swore and blas∣phemed God most horribly, and reproched vnto the Duke de Mayne, that  he had brought him to the slaughter, and that he descried before his eies not ten thousand men, as he made him beleeue, but twenty thousand men the brauest and best ordered that euer hee had seene. This great Caesar that heretofore would kill the Deuill, hethertoo had couered the fear which did lurk in his hart, with swearings, blasphemings, braggings and boastings, now not able to keepe it any longer hidden, doth lay it open: for he maketh hast to his campe, biddeth his men to lay downe their weapons, and to take in hand pickaxes, shouels and mattocks. The Macedonians were neuer so busie in building Alexandria, as these men were in trenching themselues in their Moore, for feare to bee set on by the King. The King continued thrée dayes more, in shewing himselfe in battaile aray vpon the said plaine, and prouoked them continually by skirmishes, alwaies some remayning behinde vppon the place, or carried away priso∣ners. The 6. day the King assaulted them, and did beate them from one of the brookes, the wood and the Castell, and driue them all into the moore, where they in great hast (as is aforesaid) had entrenched themselues very strongly. Some prisoners being demaunded wherefore the Duke of Parma would not make a way through the Kings campe to goe to Paris, and ha∣zard the lot of the battaile. They answered, that after they had descryed the Kings power, they had lost all stomacke to fight. The Duke d'Mayne had left behinde him the Towne of Lagny, which is vpon the riuer of Marne, right against Corbeil, which he thought could work him some displeasure, he therefore did send the seauenth day of Sep∣tember, certaine companies of Spanyards and Italians with ordinance, to take the said Lagny, which was but a weake Towne. The Captaine named Laphin, otherwise determined to leaue the Towne as not defensi∣ble, when he sawe the enemies approach with such disorder as they did, tooke another resolution, to wit, to defend it, to hold them play: the ene∣mies passing ouer the riuer, vppon a bridge made with boates, began to batter it with nine pieces of artillery, the breach was made before the King had any notice thereof, by reason of the great winde which was con∣trary, and a great thick myst: yet assoone as the King had any knowledge thereof, he sent succour to haue rescued the Towne: but the enemy giuing the assault afore the Kings forces could come, and being few against ma∣ny, the enemy carried it away, which being entred into the Towne, omit∣ted no barbarous cruelty and villany, which that Sarrasenicall sauage
nation could deuise, there were betwéene two and thrée hundred Souldi∣ours within the Towne, gouerned by the Lord Laphin, who defended that  weake towne so valiantly, that the enemy lost in that assault the most part of them that were at ye siege, all the Garison Souldiours with their Cap∣taines were slaine in like sorte, as Leonidas with his Lacoues at Ther∣mopylas. The King tooke that losse very sorrowfully, and supposing that this beginning would haue cheered and fleshed the enemy, commaunded the skirmish to be giuen hoter then euer before. But as the Woole pursued and hunted, hauing gotten his den ouer his head, will rather dye there then to get him forth, and trie the matter with the hunter: so these sauage rauening monsters, could not be drawne out of their moore. The King perceauing that nothing would encourage these fearefull warriours, departed out of the campe with a good company of horsemen with ladders, and marched toward Paris, and caused certaine companies to draw nere the walls, betwéene the gates of Saint Iames and Saint Marcel, which being detected, the alarum was giuen in the City, the Kings Souldiours did hide themselues in the darkenes of the night, be∣ing a great myst withall. The Parisiens returned euery one home: the Iesuites, who are the most desperat and warlike of all the legions of the locustes of the kingdome of Antichrist, watched all the night vpon the wal, fearing some surprise, and about foure a clock in the morning, the Kings Souldiours lying in the towne ditch, began to scale the wall: the Iesuits fearing to be researched, first for their horrible treasons doo sound the a∣larum, and doo kéepe of the Kings men from leaping vpon the wall as well as they can, whilest company doo run to helpe. The inhabitants doo cast fagots kindled into the ditch, by which meanes the Kings Souldi∣ours being discouered, did sound the retire, gaue ouer the enterprise, and so the King returned no more to Paris. Here Christian reader, thou shalt note in this City, the notorious sins of the inhabitants, the iudgements of God shewed vpon them, and what is yet to come. This City hath béen first of all the bulwark and strong hold of all Idolatry, and heathenish superstitios, which they haue increased of meere malicious wickednes, and as it were to spight the Gospell, whose voyce had been heard, and had knocked at their gtes many yeares. They raised the alarum at the sound thereof, they haue murthered the Saintes in the streates, they haue shed their bloud vpon the earth like water, their bodies they haue drawne by heapes, and giuen them to bee meate for the beastes of the field, and the fowles of the ayre, they haue searched them out as it were with a lanterne, that they might roote out the knowledge of God from the earth, they haue made the gospel of life a hissing, a by word, a nodding of the head, and a song of despight and contempt among them.
Therefore the Lord hath giuen them to a reprobate minde, to commit a∣mong themselues all the abominations of the heathens, and hath solde  them to seducers and rauing false Prophets. For beside the infinit heards of Epicures, and idle bellies of idolatrous Priests, Monkes and Friers, about the yeare 1560. when the Gospell did knock at their gates, there crept out of Spayne and Italy the vermine of Iesuits, whome Sachan did burst out as vltimum , by whose desperat rage, specially these sinfull people haue béen blinded and seduced to the vtermost. They haue kindled and maintained to the vttermost of their power, war against them of the reformed religion. They were the first in all France, to shew the fruite of their hellish Idolatry, that haue rebelled against the King, who was of their owne religion, & as great and deuout a Catholick, as a∣ny was in the world: they stirred vp and inuited to their rebllion all o∣ther Cities of France, by their example, letters and Ambassadors, and at length they haue shortned his life, by an haynous parricide, by the which they haue made their walls, their houses, their temples and themselues guilty of the damnable crime of treason, hated both of GOD and man. Now let vs sée the fearefull iudgements of God shewed vpon them: the Lord hath executed his iustice vppon that defiled City, defiled I say, with the bloud of the innocents at all times, by punishing them with his scourges of pestilence and dearth. But after they had defiled their hands with the Kings bloud, the anoynted of the Lord, who represented before their eyes the image of God: the Lord strooke them with the giddines of Sodome, and the darkenes of Aegipt, and sent euill Angels among them, to vexe them with disquietnes, with guilty consciences, with vprores and seditions. And now when the Lord during the siege, had sent them mercy and fa∣uour, euen to their gates, by the band of his messenger and Lieutenant, Henry of Bourbon, now raigning Prince of great and famous renowne. They as men senseles fallen into a letargy, and out of their wits, would hearken to nothing, but to the voyce of sedition, of commotion, of bloud and murther, being deliuered into the bondge of raitors and tyrants. And when the Lord had broaken the staffe of bread among them, with greater rigour then in any place, which euer was heard of, they did not turne vnto the Lord, who had giuen them bread, wine, oyle, flaxe, as Osea speaketh, but multiplyed their idols, & worshipped diuls, as Iames Cle∣ment the parricide and others euen with gréedines. They did rather choose to eate the flesh of their sonnes and daughters, which by the lawes of that realme is a capitall crime, and to bee ruenged with fire, then to accept grace and fauour at the hands of their King, whome law, nature and God had giuen vnto them.
Now let vs consider, what by al reasons (grounded vppon the stedfast∣nes of Gods threatnings) is like to ensue: tha God may powre downe the  fulnes of his wrath and iust indignation vppon that accursed City, he (in whose gouernment are the hearts of Kings and Princes) doth alter the minde of the King, to giue ouer that City, vntill the day of vengeance. Not for that he was not able to haue distressed the same longer, and haue kept the Duke of Parma from approaching to it, but to that end to ham∣per his enemies yet more in wicked desires, and to deliuer them into the hands of barbarous tyrants, as (it fell out after) more heauy and intolle∣rable vnto them, then the extremity of the famine it selfe, that God might take vengeance of that sinke of accursed idolatrous rebels: first by a long calamity, like vnto a consuming and pining disease. And to giue space vn∣to them there, whome hee knew to bee his, to goe out of that Babilon, and cage of all abominations and vncleane fowles, that in great wrath, that blasphemous and rebellious City may be swallowed down in destruction. It is said before, how the King hauing missed to take Paris by Escalade, gaue it ouer, perceauing that God had a further and a heauier iudgement to execute vpon that City, then he was determined to shew, if it had come into his hands: and therefore resting himselfe vppon Gods good will, which will turne all things to the good and comfort of them that bee his, returned to his army, which had remoued from Chelles to Boundy. The enemies (notwithstanding the King Campe had remoued) remay∣ned still in their myre, fearing still to be drawne where they were not re∣solued to goe. The Nobility, who vpon the newes and rumour of the battayle, had re∣sorted vnto the King without any prouision of necessary things, and by the obstinacie of the enemies, perceauing that they were not determined to come to handy blowes, brged their departure. The King in like manner being out of hope to come to hand with the enemie, otherwise then leasure might afoord, from Boundy tooke vp his lodging to goe to Gonesse. The 12. day of September at Gonesse the King assembled the Princes, officers of the Crowne, and the expert and valiant Captaynes of the Ar∣mie, which altogether made a noble and famous counsell. There he dis∣coursed how it was playne that the Prince of Parma cannot, or dared not fight. But that there was some hope that by coasting him still, he might be hereafter had at aduantage. To returne to Paris, he shewed that he had not purposed, and was not willing to take it by force. And whereas the enemie would not warre after his maner, he thought conuenient to apply himselfe vnto his. And sith he would not haue the ho∣nour to fight with so many honourable personages, as were assembled for that purpose, it would be expedient to distresse him with other discommo∣dities,
as want of victuals and surprises. He shewed also, that in furnishing the Townes round about Paris with  strong garrisons and victuals, the Citie would remayne still distressed, as well as with an armie. Also that a meane power was sufficient to coast the enemie, and to bée at his heeles whatsoeuer he would attempt, and that the rest of the forces might returne to the Prouinces whence they came, which would be a great reliefe for them, and by relieuing themselues, might haue opportunitie still to get somewhat. Lastly, by these meanes in bridling the enemie from doing any exployt, when forces of straungers should chaunce to enter into the Realme, they might easily assemble together agayne thus refreshed, & be twise as strong as they are now. These things being propounded by the King, he required their good ad∣uise and faithful counsell: which things being debated by that noble coun∣sell, at length were approoued by the consent of all and followed. And first the King did begin with the Towne of S. Denis, which after great suit of diuers noble men, it fell to the lot of the Lord Lauerdine, who thankfully accepted it. The King also prouided garrisons to fortifie the Townes of Melune, Corbeil, Sanlis, Meulan, Mante, and sundrie others which did hold Paris distressed on euery side. The King sent the Prince Countie into Toureyne, Anjou and Mayne. He sent the Prince Montpensier into Normandie. The Duke of Longueuille into Picardie. The Duke of Neuers into Champaigne. The Marshall Aumont into Bourgondie. Euery one hauing sufficient forces to keepe their Prouinces in peace. The King himselfe with a com∣panie of eight thousand, and the Marshall Byron crossing the countrey lying betweene Marne and Oyse, determined neither to goe farre from the enemie, neither to spend his time in idlenes: and therefore went to lay the siege before the town of Clrmont in Beauuoysin, where he stayed about ten dayes, which he tooke partly by assault, and partly by composition. The Duke of Parma durst neuer come foorth out of the myre where hée had wallowed himselfe abou 14. dayes, vntill he heard the King was ve∣ry nigh twentie leagues from him. At length hearing the King to bee farre enough, and that he had passed the riner Oyse, towsing bunselfe out of the dyrt, tooke his way to Paris in hast, as one that is carried with a fearefull imagination. At that time as many noble men who had repayred to the King, vpon the rumour of a battaile which should haue been fought out betweene the King & the Duke of Parma, were returning to their home: among others
the Lord Guiche, Ragny and Ciper returning into Normandy, met with the Vicount Tauanes with fiue hundred horses néere to Meulay, whome  they charged, and left aboue fiftie on the place, and tooke as many prisoners with their baggage. The King being at the siege of Clermont, the Duke of Parma was re∣ceaued in Paris with great ioy and triumph. For they supposed to haue re∣ceaued some of the petie Idols of the Heathens, called Dij tutelares. To be short, he was welcome, but his victuals which he brought with him yet better. Hauing soiourned there fewe dayes, the pride and vilanie of the Spa∣nyards was so rife, that no man was any longer master of his house, wife, children and goods, all was exposed to the appetite and lust of fewe Gotes and Sarrazins, confusedly heaped in Spayne, as into the sinke of all Eu∣rope. The triall of fewe dayes gaue the Parisiens a proofe of their folly, who had reiected a lawfull King, and had admitted most sauage monsters to oppresse them with barbarous tyrannie. In these extremities they being not able to rid their hands of them, if by any meanes they might be shifted off, requested the sayd Duke of Parma that hee would open the riuer for the traffique, without the which thing that mightie Citie could not be pro∣uided of necessaries, wishing that their neighbours might bee combred with them rather then they themselues. The Duke of Parma to please the people, made them beleeue that out of hand he would goe to take the Townes situated on the vpper part of the riuer, then hee would goe to rescue Clermont, then will hee take all the Townes betweene Paris and Roan. At length with much adoo he vndertooke to assault Corbeil, as next neigh∣bour. This is a small town seauen leagues from Paris vpon the selfesame riuer that Paris is, famous onely in Paris by reason of the great aboun∣dance of Peaches which growe in their vineyards, which they sent to the markets of Paris: otherwise it is nothing, neither in greatnes nor in strength, by nature nor by art. This great Tamberlaine made such a preparation with boastings and swearings alo modo Italiano, that Solyman the great Turke kept neuer such adoo about the siege of Vienna, as this doth about poore Corbeil Hée draweth thether 22. peeces of Ordinance; he bestoweth fifteene daies in making his approaches, in placing his Ordinance, planting his batterie, and at length the fifteene day of the siege, a great breach being made the assault was giuen. The besieged did welcome him so curteously, that ma∣ny remayned there among them longer then they had wished. They within the towne were not commaunded to obstinate themselues in the defence of such a naughtie place; but to linger the enemie for a time,
that in trying what great kunning and discipline of warre this newe God had brought out of Brabant, he might wearie himselfe in doing nothing. After this slaughter of Spaniards and Wallons, and the repulse and foile giuen to a great multitude by few vpon the walles of Corbeil: this D. hauing learned from his infancie to sweare o his grand-father Pedro A∣loysio, or else his great grand-ire Frier Paulo Farnesio (in despito del Dio) hee began to make greater preparations thn before. Within few dayes after, they gaue the second assault, which was as deare bought by the Spaniard as the first, so that most of them said that they would no more come to such a feast. After these two wellcommings the Duke of Parma rested himselfe vn∣till the fifteenth day of the first assault geuen: and in the meane while hee was not idle, for hee erected an Arsenall, wherein hee kept a number of workemen, that laboured night & day: they were not suffered to goe forth nor to speake with any man. The Duke de Mayne could not know what great misteries were wrought there. Many did expect shortly to sée mira∣cles, many did feare, least by some new magick, not onely Corbeil, but al∣so the countrey about, would be transported beyond Perow, or Gyapan: but beware yee shall see wonders. Nascitur ridiculus mus. For there commeth forth few boats couered with earth and turfe to transport a few Souldiers ouer the water. This was receaued of many with as much laughter, as the mouse which came forth out of the Mountains belly. The 30. day of the siege, when this great Sultan had ended his wonders at the breake of the day, he began to beat the wals agayne with 22. pieces of artillery, vntill almost night. The inhabitants considering their case, how the most of them were mai∣med and weary, few in number, and the enemy strong in armor, strength of body, and multitude, seeing the breach made wide and large, desirous to saue the remnant, their wiues and Children: and waighing the danger wherein they stoud, seeing they were one hundred of the enemyes against one of theirs, came vppon the walles of their Towne to parley with the Prince, there they offered to the said Prince to yeeld vp the said towne, con∣ditionally that hee would grant them their liues with bag and baggage. The Duke of Parma, by occasion of their humble submission, waxed the more presumptuous and cruell, contrary vnto all heroicall Princelike na∣tures, which are sooner ouercome by submission then with force, spewed out of his blasphemous mouth two or three othes of Italie, that he would put them euery man, woman and childe to the sword. The reason that mooued him to cute this cruell answere vppon them, was, that whereas he first supposed that they would haue yeelded at his whistling (for such conceits his Italian arrogancy had bred in his mind) they had so resisted him, and slayne a great number of his best and most approued Souldiers in three se∣uerall
assaults, by which meanes as he had greatly empaired his reputati∣on, there he would make vtterly shipwrack of the rest, by making himselfe  famous with the reprochfull infamy of cruelty. The inhabitants hearing the sentence of death pronounced against them, and perceauing yt nothing would perswade him to saue their liues, neither of their wiues and children, resolued themselues and went so fiercely to the fourth and last skirmish, that they determined to bee reuenged of the ene∣mies to the vttermost: the assault was sharp and cruell which continued 2. howers together. In the said assault the French men Leaguers made the first point. The inhabitants being most of them maimed and few in number, defen∣ded the breach valiantly, and made a foule slaughter of the enemies. The Spaniards seeing the great butcherie made of them by the towns men, re∣coiled, and let the French Leaguers atchiue the winning of the breach. The inhabitants being few, and wearie, maimed and out of breath, ouercome by the multitude of sound, lustie and fresh, were enforced to gene ouer the defence of the wall, and sought to saue themselues. The French Leaguers from the breach went to the gates, opened them to let the Spaniards enter in. The Spaniards and Wallons entring into the gates, least it should bee said that they had done nothing, did measure to the French Leaguers with the selfe same measure full and pressed downe which they had measured to the inhabitants. Between them therefore began a new skirmish, the Spa∣niards killed the French men, and the French men the Spaniards, and the Wallons against them both. Now when the Spaniards had shewed to the Leaguers what they could do, to wit, to kill them by whom they were called for helpe, when the fray began to be pacifyed. Then did they agree among themselues to set all together vpon the poore vnarmed multitude, whom they murthered with∣out respect of age or persons. Here is to be obserued (Christian Reader) the iust iudgement of God, France, Picardie, Normandie, Britaine and Champaigne, to be short, all the Prouinces betweene the Brittish sea, and Loyre, most obstinatly, malici∣ously & wilfully sould themselues to commit all that was euill in the sight of the Lord, as to withstand and persecute the truth of God, to roote out the Gospell by an immortall warre and hatred implacable: behold in all these warres begun and continued by the League in a maner all the spoiles, ha∣uocks, ransackinges and slaughters hath beene committed in the Popish countreyes, and by Papistes against and vpon Papists, and among others, in this place were Leaguers against Leaguers, Papist against Papist, A∣theist against Atheist; so that this euill is not come nigh Gods people, but they haue & do behold the confusion and butcheries of Idolaters a far
of. And why? Because him that loueth iniquity, the Lord dooth hate, and vpon the wicked he raineth snares: fire, brimstone, and stormy tempest  is the portion of their Cup. The execution being done vpon the inhabitants, there they committed what euer Gotes, Sarrasines, Atheists, and rebels, mingled and associ∣at together could deuise, when God hath deliuered them to Sathan, to fulfil the workes of darkenes. The execrable cruelties and villanies there committed, shall be buried in euerlasting silence, for lack of words to ex∣presse them. The Towne being taken by assault, and the people destroyed, the Duke of Parma made his entry into that Village, with his Italian sower looke, and frowning brow, as though he had been some Paulus Aemilius, some Marcellus, or Scipio Aphricanus, who had triumphed of all France. These noble Romans, whose names doo yéeld a swéete sauour of prince∣like vertues, doo differ from this, because there was nothing in them, which is in him, and there is nothing in him which was in them, like one∣ly in the shape and forme of man. The newes of the taking of Corbeil▪ flying to Paris, caused such a ioye, that Rome neuer did so reioyce for the burning of Carthage, as these poore sotts did for the taking of this obscure Village of Corbeil. They made an end of burning that small store of wood as remayned to them, in making of bonfires. The Macedonians did neuer wonder at their great valour, for to haue subdued Asia, as farre as the riuer Ganges, as the Souldiours did tri∣umph at the taking of the cottage of Corbeil. Then began the Parisiens to conceaue great hope, and proclayme li∣berty: the Captaine began in his conceit, to dreame of conquest, and the Souldiour to cry victory, & all as the auncient saying is, . The Parisiens to make him partaker of their ioy, must néeds inuite him: they dressed his lodging, and serued him with the best stuffe and fur∣niture of the Kings of France, which they had riffled out of the Kings house, in the beginning of the rebellion. The Ladies Montpencier, Guize, d'Mayne, Aumale, and such, did welcome him so kindely, as his great Grandfather Frier Paule Pharne∣se, was neuer better welcome in the stewes of Rome. This feasting ended, he returned to Corbeil, there he began to enquire for all the ingeniours that could be heard of, he will builde forts and bul∣warks, he would fortifie that Towne so, that if the Gyants of old time should put Osson vpon Pelias, & Pelias and Osson vpon Olympus, yet would they labour in vaine, so strong and impregnable the Village of Corbeil should be: to be short, he would make it the chiefest key of France, not to
enter in, but to get out the nerest way to the Arbre de Guize, by crossing Brie and Champaigne, when he should sée his time to run away. Whilest these fortifications were a dooing, this poore Duke sat dayly  in counsell so hardly and so closely, that it was no more lawfull for the Duke d'Mayne to know what he did, then to knowe the mysteries of Ceres. The great matters put in deliberation in that counsell, were the men∣ding of an errour, which he had committed afore he departed from Brux∣els: for there he tooke counsell how to enter into France, but not how hée might goe forth. Now therefore (as his suddaine departing did euident∣ly shew) he tooke counsell how to get out, and considered well the olde say∣ing, facilis descensus Auerni, sed reuocare gradum hoc opus hic labor est. As the Parisiens prayed him to goe forward in his good enterprises, to open the riuer for the traffik, hee fed them with these great morsels of words, that he would goe to besiege Melun, Montereau, Prouins, and other small Townes situated aboue Paris vpon the riuer, and after he will goe downe to take Poissy, Meulan, Mante, Vernon, Pontdelarche, &c. all these things were but one breakefast, or at the most a dayes worke: let him alone for his throat is so wide, that he will swallow all these townes in one mor∣sell: for he is Pantagruels sonne, who was Gargante Pharneses Sonne. During these thrée wéekes, that he spent in consulting more about his flight out of France, and safe returne to his home, then about the fortify∣ing of Corbeil, the garrison of Melun did dayly issue forth, vpon such of his forces as were at Colbeil, vnder the conduct of the Lord Gyury, and for that space did almost liue vpon nothing else, but vpon such booties, vic∣tuals and spoyles, which they tooke dayly from the Spanyards, whome they dayly killed or tooke prisoners. The Duke of Parma seeing that he had no meanes to represse the on∣sets of the Lord Gyury, retired sixe leagues from such trouble some neigh∣bours. At length after the Duke of Parma had made his aboade in Pa∣ris and thereabouts, towar the latter end of October, the cold hauing cooled his warr, came again to his right wits, from which too great opi∣nion of himselfe, and of his forces, and too great contempt of others his betters, had transported him. And perceaued by the experience which hée had at Corbeil, and with the Garison of Mlun, that hauing thousands of Townes in France to win by conquest, he néeded after the taking of euery one, to make a new army, which was more then his master would alowe him or could doo, not if he should arme all his apes of the East Indies: be∣side that to performe it, he néeded to haue the life of Metuselah Therefore he concluded with such poore weather beaten and women beaten Soul∣diours, as had escaped from the breaches of Corbeil, to retyre into Brabant,
where was fairer weather, least hée should hereafter be compelled to buy repentance dearer then he was able to pay for. This great Cham of Tartaria had behaued himselfe, both in Paris and else where, as at Lagny, Corbeil, and other places, so insolently a lo modo Jtaliano, or Hispaniolo, that the Leaguers themselues accursed the time, that euer they sent for such a guest, féeling by experience, that hée had en∣tred into France, not in presidium, but in exitium, as a scourge of Gods wrath. So that al the Frenchmen rebels, who had accompanied him with the Duke d'Mayne, all in a manner retyred home, as loathing his compa∣ny, and abhorring his dooings. Hee séeing himselfe destitute of forces (for his chiefest forces and best Souldiours he had lost already, both at the siege of Corbeil, and in other skirmishes) and that the leaguers had forsaken him, retyred home and left him in the briers, he thought to be high time for him to looke to his affaires. And in the latter end of October, taking his leaue from the Pa∣risiens, and commending them to the mercifull kéeping of our blessed La∣dy, who dwelleth there in the great tempell, and to the good old great S. Christopher, dore kéeper of the said tempell, marched homeward through Brie. But before his departing, fearing that hée would bée pursued by the King, he went about to beguile him with dissimulations, for he procured the Duke d'Mayne to send Vileroy to the King, to moue a parley about the renuing of some treaty of truces, that in the shadow of the same, hée might slide home without any Sunne burning, vsing the pollicy of the fish, called Sepia, which powreth out his ynke in the water, that in the dark∣nes thereof, he may auoide from the sight of the fisher. About the fourth day of Nouember, the King vnderstanding of the Duke of Parma his retyre out of Paris, supposing that it was to returne home, departed from Escouis in Normandie, with few light horsemen with him, and certaine Harquebusiers on horseback, leauing the rest of the army vnder the conduct of the Marshall Byron, to employ it where he should thinke most expedient. About the sixt of Nouember, arriued at Compiegne, a Towne in Picardie, situated vppon the miéeting of the riuers Oyse and Ayne, where immediatly after his arriuall, he sent to the nobili∣ty of Picardy, to inuite them, to come and assist him, to reconduct the Duke  of Parma, according to the honour and papall nobility of his house, who had deserued that fauour at his hand, if not for any seruice done, yet for the small hurt that he had receaued by him. The Duke of Parma departed from Paris, and soiorned for some dayes in Brie, about Chaust heaut herij, there in that fat soyle to refresh his Soul∣ours, hungerbitten and weake: to proue whether hee might procure any of the Leaguers (vpon the misliking of séeking parley with the King) to
forsake the Duke d'Mayne, and to make him their Soueraigne gene∣rall, whereunto by secret practises he solicited a great number. But spe∣cially  he feared greatly to venture his way alone: for being forsaken of the Frenchmen, he assured himselfe that he would be assaulted in his retyre by the King, who did waite for the opportunity not farre of. Therefore hée instantly vrged the Duke d'Mayne, that he would rely his forces to kéepe him safe, caring little what might become, either of the Duke d'Mayne or of the Leaguers, so that hée might get out of this lurch that hée sawe himselfe in. This feare was the chiefest cause of his long soiourne in Brie. But whilest hée was carefull of his safe returne into Brabant, the King had appoynted the Lord Gyury (a man of great valour & policie) to make choise of some sufficient number of his best and most approoued souldiours, and to march toward Corbeil, there to seeke opportunitie to reuenge the cruel iniurie done to his subiects, by the Spanyards and Wallons, wher∣of part to the number of one thousand were left there in garrison. The occasion of recouering Corbeil was thus. The maner of Wallons and Spanyards and popish nations beyond the Seas, is to drinke and quaffe very largely the tenth day of Nouember, in the worship of that good Bishop S. Martin, who gaue halfe of his cloake to the diuell, when hee was through pouertie enforced to begge. But it is most like that they doo keepe that ryot more in the worship of the diuell who begged, then of that good man, who in his life time knewe very well, that it is not the custome of the Church of God to worship the Saints, neither with drunkennesse, nor by any other meanes els. The Lord Gyury knowing that dronken fashion of them very well, tooke that opportunitie to do his feate. For he delayed the time to approach the Towne vntill he supposed them to bee so crammed with good cheare and wine, that it was time for them to goe to sleepe. Then about midnight when that Spanish garrison were vino somné{que} sepulti, he placed his pee∣ces of Ordinance, and on a sudden battered the same breach which the D. of Parma had made, which was not yet fully repayred. The breach being quickly opened, the assault was giuen. The Spanyards and Wallons halfe dronke and halfe a sleepe, ranne as desperat persons to the walles, and made a very forcible resistance, which continued all that night vntill nigh seauen a clocke in the morning. The Duke of Parma heard the battering of Corbeil, and fearing least his Trophe should bee marred, sent presently a power of Spanyards to succour them: but comming too late, were enforced to cast away their wea∣pons, as Demost henes did, that they might fight another time. The 11. day betweene sixe and seauen of the clocke in the morning, the Town was throughly taken by the Kings forces, and reduced to his obe∣dieuce,
who entred by the same breach which the Duke of Parma had done and entred before. There were found slayne two hundred Wallons, three  hundred Spanyards, and among them the Cheualier Aumale, brother to the Duke of Aumale, (one of the greatest cutthrotes of all the Leaguers) was found dead. The cause of his being at that banquet, was, that he was appoynted to prouide victuals for Paris. Foure hundred were taken prisoners. There were taken also foure bra∣sen peeces, and two Canons ready charged. There were taken many spa∣nish Ensignes which were made newe, and newly displayed vppon the wall in token of victorie and in spite of the King. There were taken also two hundred fat Oxen, and foure hundred sheep, some killed, and some dressed, and some aliue, which the Knight Aumale had prouided for Paris. This exployt being atchieued, the Lord Gyury with all his companies with feruent prayers gaue thankes to God, acknowledging this deliue∣rance and happie successe to haue been the worke of his right hand and power. The newes of the retaking of Corbeil, caused diuers and contrary mo∣tions in diuers persons: the King receauing the newes thereof, did ad∣myre Gods iustice, which euery where thundreth the claps of his displea∣sure vpon them who doo resist his ordinance, and more and more conceaued hope that the Lord would performe the worke which he hath begun: first, in cloathing his enemies with shame and dishonour as with a garment: and secondly in him to restore that afflicted estate. The Parisiens and the Duke de Mayne were replenished with rage and feare together: for they feared least by the taking of Corbeil, and the retyre of the Duke of Parma, the shambles of horses, asses and dogges should be opened again. The Asses of Sorboun began to feare their skinne, least for want of foure footed Asses, they should be assaulted and brought to the shambles. Therefore they ranne to the sayd Duke of Parma, they adiured and coniured him by the name of God, yea by Gog and Magog, and Beelzebub, to returne to the recouering of Corbeil. But the Duke of Parma remembring the price that hee payed for the sayd Corbeil, would no more of that play, specially knowing that he which did possesse it was a man resolute of courage, valour and industrie. Yet to please them, he fed them daily (vntill he should receaue supplie of forces to gard him) with fat morsels of words, to wit, that he would take Chasteau∣therij and Compeigne, and in the meane while he walked in Brie and Cham∣paigne, in like sor as the Hords of sauage Tartarians doo remooue from place to place to grase vp the countreyes: so did this great Crimme, saue that his cruelties and villanies which he vsed there, are yet vnknowne to the Tartarians.
Whilest he dooth raunge, ransacke and riffle that countrey, some of the Kings Captaynes tooke the towne of Lagny, another Trophee or monu∣ment of the Duke of Parma his crueltie, which thing both encreased his  feare, and hasted his iourney out of France. Now we will leaue this omnipotent Cham with his hords of Tarta∣rians to deuoure that countrey, whose comming the vnnatural inhabitants had procured to maintaine a most damnable rebellion and contempt of lawfull power, and we will see what the king had done soiourning in Com∣peigne, about fifteene or sixteene dayes. The King soiourned in Compeigne for these causes following. First to espye what the Duke of Parma would attempt: for after the taking of Corbeil, hee looked daily that he would haue returned backe to recouer it: for which cause the sayd King had sent for his forces to be in a readines at a dayes warning, intending vpon such occasion to trye the quarrell with a dayes worke. Secondly, to expect the Nobilitie of Picardie, whom he had inuited to reconduct home the Duke of Parma, as is sayd. Thirdly, that by his neighbourhead he might represse him from attemp∣ting vpon any places, which were vnder his obedience. Fourthly, hee stayed in Compeigne without interrupting the soiorning of the Duke of Parma in Brie, to geue leasure to the rebellions Prouinces to prooue what difference there is betwixt the milde, good, iust, and father∣like gouernment of a vertuous and lawful Prince, and the cruell bondage, of heathenish sauage, and barbarous tyrants. The sayd King during his abode there, among other deliberations con∣cluded to pursue the said Duke of Parma in his retire grounded vppon iu∣stice, to wit, a wil and desire to punish him who had offended, as far as God should geue him power and lawfull means to do it: for as much as the D. of Parma beeing not prouoked with iniurie or vniust dealing, had not only against the law of nature maintained and assisted the rebels in his realme, enemies to all iust and lawful superiority, but also had committed horrible murthers and crueltyes contra ius supplicum, innumerable whoredoms, Sodomitries (hereditarie to the papall house of Pharneses) & all maner of vilanies vpon his faithful Subiects, and also the necessary defence of his estate and safety of the places, which in that countrey were vnder his obe∣dience. Uppon this iust resolution, the twentith of Nouember the King with his forces departed from Coeuures in Picardie, hauing with him of the No∣bility of that countrey about fiue hundred horses beside his own forces, and began to march directly against the said Duke of Parma. It is said how the Duke of Parma departed from Paris, and made their abad in Brie: the causes also of that soiorning there haue béene opened, what euents also haue happened during that time.
Now the sayd Duke perceauing that all his practises (in seeking to sup∣plant his friend) would not frame, vnderstanding of the Kings prepara∣tions, for to accompany him into his countrey, and that the King was all  ready at the doore, began to feare yet more then euer before, séeing the tem∣pest which would follow, and wished that the Duke de Mayne had made more speed to send him the succour promised, wished also that he might be quit in ceasing the clampering noyse of his Moiles belles: and in the meane time about the 23. day of Nouember hee remoued to the towne of Phismes vpon Voisle, there within a wall he determined to expect the com∣ming of the Duke de Mayne, who was comming with speed. The King in this retire of Parma to Phismes arriued and met a certain companie of Spanish footmen, whom hee put all to the sword without the losse of any of his men. The Duke de Maine with his forces repairing to Parma seeing all this exploit, and durst neuer rescue them: that exploit done, the King went to take his lodging in the Towne Feres in Tarte∣noys. The 25. of Nouember the Duke of Parma accompanied with the Duke de Maine, departed from Phismes, & tooke his way to Pontauers, which is a towne situated vppon the riuer Esne, where he had determined to lodge the night following. The King hauing about eight hundred Launciers, and so many Har∣quebusiers on horseback, sent the Baron of Biron with fifteene light horses to view the enemie. In the meane time the King tooke 25. horses, and kept to the right hand by a wood, seeking to iudge by sight the enemies marching. But the Baron of Biron brought newes that the enemy was departed from a Village named Bazoges and marched toward Pontauers. The King immediatly with all his forces following the enemie entred in∣to the said Village, where he found few Farmers and husoandmen armed and ready to fight in his Maiesties behalfe, of whom the King learned more particular newes concerning the enemy. The Kings Captaines, but specially the Baron of Biron still pursued them, and meeting with straglers payed them their wages for their com∣ming so farre, and gaue many onsets when occasion serued, alwaies to the enemies costs. The 27 the King sent the Lords Fronterack, Chicot and Dauers, on the top of Saint Martins hill to view if the enemie had put any ambushes at the hilles foote, but they saw them in the open plaine marching apace to∣ward Pontauers: the way beeing without ambushes, the King sent the Baron of Biron with a troupe of horsemen, and he with an other company followed after, commaunding the Lord la Now to send him ten out of e∣uery company, and to rest the remnant. The King made fiue smal squadrons of fiftie horses in euery one of al these
companies. There was a hot alarum geuen in the enemies camp, and gaue a dozen onsets on the enemies. But whilest these things were a doing, the  King spied on an other side behind 300. Harquebuziers on horseback, who conducted the carriage of tronkes and baggage: and fearing the retyre of the enemy would haue brought him out too farre from his forces, retired in∣tending to charge these companies of Harquebuziers. One of the Kings Gards beeing fallen into the enemies hands, cried for helpe: whereuppon the Baron of Biron charged them, and slew twelue or thirteene of them, but his horse was killed, whereby he was put in great danger, if he had not béene rescued by the King. This fray beeing begun, there was a great ala∣rum geuen in the enemies campe, which began to march toward the King. But he considering that it was better to hazard few common souldiers thē the Nobilitie, caused the companies on horseback of the Captaines, Saint Denis and Saint Foelix to light, and to charge the enemy: there was a hot skirmish begun. The K. in the meane time retired with his nobillity to a Village called Longauall: thether also the Harquebuziers retired after they had fought a long space, and in the retire Captain Saint Foelix was slaine with a shot, the Souldiers retyred so leasutely that they did draw the dead corps with them by the legges. When the King had passed Longauall toward Pontarsie, the Harquebu∣ziers of the enemy came to the wall, and in a brauing fury srooke with their swoords vpon the gates of the towne: but being saluted with the Har∣quebuziers within with shot through loope holes, and seeing many of their fellowes fall vpon the place, they retired and sound the means by the gui∣ding of a man of that Town to seaze vpon an other gate, and entered about sixe of them. Captaine Bonmouoyr set vppon them and killed two of them: the other retired. The Harquebuziers tooke their horses, forsooke that towne, and follo∣wed after the King, who was before to take his lodging about Pontarsy, si∣tuated vpon the riuer Esne beneath Pontauers, and the enemy presently en∣tred the said Towne of Longauall. Part of the Enemies followed af∣ter the King, and seeing a Wood betweene the sayd Longaual and Pon∣tarsie, stayed there, mistrusting some ambushes: but at length passing through they met with the Baron of Byron, who charged them so roughly with a small company of horsemen, that he layed downe vpon the ground thirtie of them. The King commanded Captayne Langemis to light and set a fresh on them, who killed a great number of them, and then retyred into the towne of Pontarsie. The enemy went not to Pontauers that night, but encamped in the plaine field with great feare of an alarum, vnderstanding that the Duke of
Neuers with fiue hundred horses out of Champaigne, and the Lords Gyu∣ry out of Corbeil, and Parabelle out of Melun with good and Iustie com∣panies  of horses were expected that day to come to the King, euery man accompted him happie that might returne into Brabant in a whole skinne, there to prooue whether they had forgotten the art of Carrowsing, the chie∣fest trade of that countrey. The 28. day in the morning, thirtie harquebusiers of the enemies ha∣uing lost their way, went into the Towne of Longaual, enquiring for the Duke of Parmas quarter, whom the inhabitants disarmed, and throwing them vnder the bridge drowned them. The same day came to the King the sayd Duke of Neuers, and Lords Gyury and Parabelle with eight hundred horses all well appoynted. The 29. day the King went out of Pontarsie with one thousand horses, intending to giue his enemies a fresh charge, and to carrie away the Rere∣ward: but their Ordinance being stucke fast in the myre, the whole armie remayned all that day in battell array in that place where their Ordinance was, and there also encamped themselues all the night following; so that nothing could be enterprised vpon them. The 30. day of Nouember the King determined to did the enemie fare, well with a fight of horsemen: the Duke of Parma with a good will would haue spared that curtesie, and bee glad to get out of the Realme without so much adoo. In the morning very early the sayd Duke marched toward Marle, a towne nigh the head spring of the riuer Oyse, from thence to get Larbre de Guize, and so to leaue the realme of France. The King commanded all his horsemen to be in a readines, and directly to march toward Cressie with all furniture, yet without baggage or car∣riage. And being first of all arriued at the rendes vous, vnwilling to ouer∣slip any opportunitie to see his enemie that day, which hee thought should bee the day of their separation, sent the Lord Baron of Byron to march before, and hee himselfe to followe him within the distance of a hundred paces onely with fourtie gentlemen. The Lord Longaual followed the King with fiftie horses and the rest of the Cornet. As they had marched a good space, there appeared at the side of a Wood about sixe score horses vnder the leading of Colonell Baste, who came in hast to charge the Ba∣ron of Byron: the sayd Baron gaue so resolute a charge that he made them to retyre to theyr maine battaile: and when the enemie had ioyned with their fellowes, they came agayne to giue a fresh charge, in the which the sayd Baron of Byron his horse was killed, and he in great daunger to bee slaine: but the King did gather them quickly that were scattered, and with them caused the rest of his troupes to come forward: which being in bat∣taile aray, and ioyned with them that had bin gathered out of the skirmish,
gaue such a fearefull charge, that all the rereward of the enemie thought vpon nothing but vpon the meanes how to saue themselues, leauing their  dead armed vpon the place. If all the Kings companies had come in time enough, there had not returned so many home to play at carrowse as there did. The first day of December, the D. of Parma entred the dominions of the low countrey. He had neuer so much neede of his Nurce about him with clowts, as he had during the space of these last fiue dayes of Nouem∣ber: most of his companies accompanied him home as well as they could: part of them remained with the Duke de Mayne, vntill that tempest was ouer past. The first day of December, the Lords of Neuers, Giury and Parabel, who were come fresh and strong to the King, departed from the Castell of Nisy, and pursued the enemie, marching toward the Larbre de Guize: but what exployts were done that day we haue nothing to speake off, for lack of instructions. During this retraite, the Duke of Parma was so distressed, that he was very greatly disappoynted of his lodgings. As he tooke no compassion at Corbeil of them which suppliant fell before his knees: so pitied he no more his owne Souldiers, who could not make so good speede in running away as he could doo, but left them to ye mercie of the Peasants of the countrey, with whom they found no more fauour then with their master. Of foureteene or fifteene thousand men which he brought into France, there returned not home aboue eight thousand, and they were in a manner in as great miserie as their fellowes, who returned into Spayne from the conquest of England in the yeare 1588. The first day of December the King went to Saint Quintins, situated vpon the riuer of Oyse, where he was royally receaued with great reioysing and comfort of all men. And when the King had stayed there a few daies, he heard that the Lord Humiers, with other noble men of Picardie, had ta∣ken the towne of Corbey, situated vppon the riuer Some, and in the middle way betweene Amiens, Peronne and Dourlan, three great townes in Pi∣cardie, which haue continued in their rebellion. During the time that the King soiouned in Picardie, and pursued the Duke of Parma, the Marshall Byron tooke fiue strong Townes and aboue twentie Castles in Normandie and Beauuoyin, wherein the Rebells had layed strong garrisons. By these narrations (Christian reader) thou mayest see what the rebels (enemies both of God and man) hauing drawne vpon theyr owne heads a stormie winde of tempest, least they should not haue calamities enough, according to the measure of their offence, they sent for the Duke of Parma to deliuer them, who comming into the land, gaue them an egge and de∣uoured
the Hen, and where they were beaten by themselues with scour∣ges, now this deliuerer did bruse them with barres of yron. It pleased God (in whose hands the harts of Kings and Princes are) to turne the Kings will from hindering the sayd Duke of Parma from dooing all that he durst or could doo: that God might giue the King to vn∣derstand what therehence hee had hereafter to feare, as long as he playeth the parts of a right King, and that hee is his aboundant reward. Secondly, that it might euidently appeare, that as the sayd Duke of Parma was not able to doo good to his partakers, so came he not but to bée a scourge of Gods wrath vnto them. For he came to raise the siege from before Paris; if that had not béen done by dutifull submission, the Citie might haue been relieued, iustice & iudge∣ment (which are more then centplex murus to a Cittie) had beene establi∣shed: they might haue had their owne Autonomie, to wi, their Religion and Franchises in peace, security and libertie. Their commerce and traf∣fike (by which the greatnes of that Citie is entertained and nourished) had been opened: to bee short, it would haue florished more then euer it did, but the comming of the Duke of Parma disappointed them of all these bene∣fites. The Duke of Parma brought a little store of victuals: but hee and his consumed not onely that within a few dayes, but also all other prouisions which could be made for the Citie: so the inhabitants were hungerbitten still, & with sorrowfull eies they saw others to intercept that which should haue béen their sustenance. So that (if it were not for the Kings goodnes, which by winking, and forbearing some store of victuals to goe to their market) they would haue beene enforced in few dayes to open their sham∣bles of horse flesh and dogs flesh. Hee came to deliuer them (as they thought) from cruell handes: but what could Busyris haue done to his enemies, that this man did not to his friends? to their wines and children? To be short, now he is returne home with shame, dishonor, hunger, na∣kednes, feeblenes and stripes, and they remaine in a worse case then euer they were before: for before they liued in hope of him, now they know that he neither may nor will do them good, but hath lingered their miseries, and heape of euils, that they may perish as with a sharpe and consuming sick∣nes. Last of all, that al men may learne by seeing the punishment of rebellion, to submit themselues vnto the powers ordayned of God, as vnto his mini∣sters for the good of the iust and the punishment of the wicked and vniust, and that they may discerne between a sawfull power and . It is sayd before how after the death of the Duke of Guyze, the Lords Diguieres and Valete, vppon a good iudgement entred in league of amity,
for the Kinges seruice, and after that separated themselues, and within a short space scoured the Leaguers for the most part out of Daulphinee  some he enforced to receaue the Kings commandement, and the rest enfor∣ced to seeke for truces for foure yeares, which in March were granted and proclaimed in Grenoble vpon Easter day. It is saide how the Lord Valete went into Prouance, and gathering the states of the countrey by a common consent, they concluded to warre against the Senate of Aix, who were the ringleaders of the rebellion, and had intelligences with the Duke of Sauoy. The Lord Diguieres hauing put the countrey of Daulphine in a good stay, went into Prouance to the Lord Valete, making warre against the rebellious parliament there, and the Duke of Sauoy. The rumors went abroad that they had lost a field, and were sent into their countrey with store of Bastinadoes: but for lack of instructions I affirme nothing. The Lord Diguieres being in Prouance with the Lord Valete, had di∣uers letters from the King, but specially in the latter end of May, com∣manding him to warre against the Duke of Sauoy. But the saide coun∣trey of Prouance being assaulted by the Leaguers of Sauoy, Lionnoys and Daulphine, he thought good yet to employ the moneths of Iune and Iuly with the Lord Valete, for the establishing of the affayres of the sayd Pro∣uance: wherein they had so good a successe, that the enemie in token of that cowardnesse, which their rebellion doth bréede in their hearts, aban∣doned the townes and Castells of Peruis, Pumichet, Valansele, Montignak, Soluiers, Pignauers and Lorgis: some were brought to the kings obedience by force, and some by composition. In Iuly during the soiourning of the Lorde Diguieres in Prouance; there was in Daulphine one captaine Cazete, who with intelligences which he had with the Duke of Sauoy, would haue sould him the townes of Briancon and Essiles in Piemont, yet pertayning to the Dolphinate. These two townes were kept by the Neutrals, that is to say, by them who would admit neither the K. nor the Leaguers. The said Cazete had receaued commission from the Duke of Sauoy, to leauie souldiers to that intent, in expecting the arriuall of foure and twenty companies of Spa∣niards, to bring his enterprize the more easie to passe. The inhabitants of the valleies perceauing well, that if this trayte∣rous captaine should preuaile, great warre and miserable desolations of their countrey would ensue: therefore the chiefest of those valleyes ma∣king acquainted the Lord Diguieres of their purpose, determined to rid the sayd Cazete out of the way, and did worke so, that the fifteenth day of Iuly his house was blowne vp and he slaine. This traytor being made out of the way, the inhabitants of the valleis seat word to the Lord Diguieres, that they would send their deputies to
Ambrun, to treate with him. Vpon the receipt of this message, the Lord Diguieres (considering the greatnes of the affayres, and that it was very expedient for the king to  haue those townes of Briancon and Essiles in possession, to haue passe and repasse into Piemont when néede should be) departed out of Prouance, and in hast marched towards Ambrun, where the deputies of the valeys did méete him. And among other things, shewed the treasons of Cazete, by the papers which they had found in his house. After that they bound themselues by oath to be faythfull to the King, they promised also to doe their indeuour to confirme the people into his Maiesties seruice and obedience: this was done about the fourth of Au∣gust. Immediatly after this méeting, the Lord Diguieres being aduertized of the wauering which the death of the sayd Cazete, and voluntarie yéel∣ding of the valeys, did cause in the towne of Briancon, which was Neu∣trall, knowing also that those who did fauour the kings side in the towne, began to be encouraged, caused foure Canons to be drawen and brought to that place, and after a breach made, the enemie did parley, and came to that issue, that Clauison (appoynted there gouernour by the Duke de Mayne) surrendred the towne and Castell the tenth day of August. Whilest the Lord Diguieres did these exployts in Daulphine, Martinen∣go, one of the Duke of Sauoys great warriors, did besiege Saint Maxi∣mine in Prouance: for which cause the L. Valete did daylie solicit the sayd Diguieres to assist him in the rescuing of the sayd Saint Maximine. The Lord Diguieres considering the safetie of Saynt Maximine, to make much for the preseruation of Prouance, when as hee had gone to Montgeneure, to take Essiles, vpon intelligences which hee had with the gouernour thereof, and séeing that there was neither certaintie in al that, neither was he sufficiently prouided to force the place, was contented for that time to take the oaths onely of the commonaltie, who shewed them selues greatly affectionated vnto the kings seruice. These affayrs beeing done in Daulphine, hee tooke his way into Pro∣uance, and lodged nigh Barcelona▪ Barcelona is a towne in Piemont, in the countie of Nice▪ Salines an old Spanish Captayne beeing chiefe Colonell of the light horsemen of Piemont, was gouernour thereof vnder the D. of Sauoy: the said Salines immediatly after the comming of Diguieres; went foorth out of Barcelona, and assaulted the quarter where the companie of footmen of Boyset, and twelue launces of the Lord Brickmault were lod∣ged. These companies of Boyset and Brickmault did receaue him so va∣liantly, that by the helpe of other companies which vppon the noise they heard, came running thether, that the sayd Salines left behinde sixe score dead layd vpon the ground, and thirtie Spaniards taken prisoners, and
he saued himselfe with sixe men onely into the towne, from whence he came the fifteenth of August. In that skirmish was hurt and taken Voluant, who two yeares before had sold the strong Towne and Castell of Carmaniole vnto the deceased D. of Sauoy, after the death of the Marshall Bellegard. The sixteenth day the said Lord Diguieres tooke by composition the Castell of Rosoles in Piemont, which partained vnto the Duke. There was two companies of footmen in garrison, who were permitted to de∣part with armor, leauing their Colours behind. After this exploit, the said Diguieres continuing his way, about the 22. of August came into Prouance, hee was not so soone entred the countrey, that Martinengo who besieged Saint Maximine, hearing of it, remooued the siege: which thing the Lord Diguieres hearing, brought three Canons before the Castell of Barles the 23. of August, and the 31. of the same Mo∣neth tooke it at his discretion. Some time before the Lord Diguieres had fortifyed a Church called Saint Paul, with flankes and ditches about, distant foure or fiue leagues from Ambrun: during the time that the Lord Diguieres soiorned at the siege which he had laied before Barls, the Duke of Sauoy accompanied with thrée thousand footmen, and foure hundred light horsemen, came to besiege and batter with three Canon the said Church Saint Paule, which the 31. of August he tooke by composition, the same day that Barles was taken, the garrion thereof going away with their armor, colours and drum in bat∣tell array. The same day, the Lord Diguieres aduertized of the siege of Saint Paul, marched in all hast to succour it, with intent also to offer a battell to the D. and vsing a maruellous celerity, he lodged in Varret the third of Septem∣ber. The Duke vnderstanding of this so sudden and vnlooked for arriuall of the Lord Diguieres, fell into such a dismay and feare, that he retired that night from the mountaine Larche, and marched all that night with links, beeing followed the next day with his forces. The fourth day the Lord Diguieres commaunded some of his compa∣nies to follow after the enemy, who did slay many of the rereward of the Duke, and tooke one Don Pedro Vegieres a Spaniard of the gard of the Duke: hee himselfe with the rest marched toward S. Paul, resolutely de∣termined to assault Saint Paul with handie blowes for lacke of Canon, & hauing blowen vp one of the gates and a breach made tooke it by assault, which continued three houres, and caused two hundred Souldiers, that were within it, to be put to the sword, taking none prisoner but Captaine Strata gouernor of the place, and his Ensigne named Hercules Couero of Milan: of the Kings side was killed only Captaine Bouloneuue, and few Souldiers hurt, he caused the place to be rased hard to the ground.
The sayd fort remained not foure whole dayes in the Duke of Sauoy his power. At the same time that the Duke did batter Saint Paul, which was in the end of August, he sent his forces of Sauoy and Piemont, beeing foure thou∣sand footmen and three hundred horsemen into the valey of Essiles to spoyle the Countrey of Brianconoys, to batter Guylestre, and ouer runne Am∣brunoys. The Lord Diguieres vnderstanding of this, hauing rased Saint Paul, presently the fifth of September tooke his iourney toward Briancon, and beeing informed that the enemy was lodged in Chaumont, made prepara∣tion to force the passage Selt, kept and fortifyed by the inhabitants of the valeies, sent thither the Lord Morges his Nephew, with his company of fiftie horsemen, and two ensignes of footmen, who arriuing at Selt the 19. day of September at the same instant that they were in skirmish, he ligh∣ted with his men, and setting them in battell array, did so both encourage his men and charge the enemie (assaulting the fort and bulworks in sundry places with fifteene hundred footmen, and one hundred and fourescore men of armes) that the said enemy was not onely repulsed, but also beaten with the losse of sixe score men lying vpon the ground. The thirteenth day of September the Lord Diguieres after he had ra∣sed Saint Paul, marching toward Essiles ouer the difficult Mountaines, arriued at Douley three leagues from Essiles, where newes was brought him that the Duke (hauing sent part of his forces to the Lord Sonnes) was gone to Nice. These newes made the sayd Lord Diguieres iudge that the said Sonnes beeing now strengthened with a new supply of men, would ad∣uenture to hazard the battell. And the more to prouoke him to it, determi∣ned to batter Essiles, and with foure Canons which hee brought from Am∣brun, ouer the high & (as it séemeth) inaccessible Mountains began the bat∣tery, and withal shewed himselfe euery day before Chamoys, where the said Sonnes was. But displeased with ye importunacy of the said Diguieres, left Chamoys, and retyred to Suze, accompanied with fifteene hundred Harque∣buziers, and fiue Cornets of Horsemen. The 26. day of September the Lord Diguieres followed the enemie, and found them at Ialasse halfe a league from Zuze, whom in the entring of the playne, hauing but eight score horsemen, hée assaulted so furiously, that beside some footmen, he laied dead downe to the ground foure hundred Launciers on the place: among whom were Clapot the elder, the Lords Montaignes and Valuernes, 17. Captaines or chiefe officers slayne or ta∣ken. Among the prisoners was Clapot the yonger wounded, and died two dayes after. There were also taken prisoners Labras, Lieutenant of the Marquesse Taforts, the Gouernour of Breshe, Captayne Trisolts, de la Riuiere and S. Lorens. Sonnes also was thought to be either slayne or ta∣ken:
but about midnight he came alone before the gates of Zuze. The 27. of September the Lord Diguieres receaued supplie of forces, as well of the inhabitants of the Townes of Briancon and Pons, as of the  gouernours there, and two or three hundred shot of the companies of S. Sauiour, which caused him to alter his purpose concerning Essiles, which be∣gan alreadie to parley, and caused him to continue the siege of the sayd Es∣siles vnto the end of the same moneth. Possonnes, the Duke de Mayne his gouernour there, considering the state of the Duke of Sauoy his affayres, seeing the Canon planted, and the Lord Diguieres fortified with newe supplies, all the commonaltie bent a∣gainst him, and being without any hope of ayde or reliefe, the 30. of Sep∣tember yeelded the Towne of Essiles by composition, that his Souldiers should freely depart with bagge and baggage. So by these meanes the passages into Piemont doo remayne in the Kings power, and the countrey of Daulphine is limitted with his olde limits long before fortified by the French Kings during the warres of Italy. Sonnes (generall of the Duke of Sauoy) had prouoked the Lord Morges his nephewe, to fight fiftie agaynst fiftie on horsebacke, and appoynted the place: which thing the Lord Diguieres vnderstanding, conducted the sayd Morges vnto the place, where the sayd Morges remayned with his forces readie to accept the offer from nine a clocke in the morning, vntill three a clocke in the euening, and at length came a Trompetter with a letter from the sayd Sonnes carying an excuse. The Lord Diguieres in attending the comming of ye enemie, had espied a passage néere Iallon, where the enemie had entrenched himselfe, and there lodged eight companies vnder the conduct of Captaine Venust: and per∣ceauing that there was no more hope of Sonnes comming to the combat appoynted; he determined to spend the rest of that day in doing some ex∣ployt, and to assault the sayd companyes, who did lye vpon the hanging of the mountayne betweene Suze and Noualize: and hauing found meanes to place one hundred Musketters, who battered the enemie vpon the side of their fort, the trenches of the enemie were forced, and fourescore of them slayne: among whom were Captaynes Venust, Gassard and Charband: Captayne Vilars with some other was taken prisoners, and foure compa∣nies of Senton (master of the Campe) were so scattered, that they came ne∣uer  together agayne. This exployt was done the first of October. This being done, the Lord Diguieres returned again to Essiles, and sent backe the foure Canons to Ambrun, and caused two great peeces to bee drawne from Gap to Barcelona, a place situated in the County of Nice, and pertayning to the Duke of Sauoy, hee sent his forces before to besiege the sayd Barcelona: and when hee came himselfe about the eleauenth day of October, and had made a breach, the same day the enemie did parley, and
yéelded themselues with safetie of their liues, leauing behind them their ar∣mour, colours, horses and baggage: the Captaines were permitted to de∣part  with their swords vpon an hackney. The inhabitants had graunted them to enioy their goods, abiding vnder the Kings obedience, as the rest of his subiects, vpon condition to pay sixe thousand Crownes for the army, and the fraight of the Artillerie. The 13. day the gouernour called Coreloere departed with three soul∣diers with him, and as many of citizens and countrey men who repayred to their houses vnder the Kings safegard. The 14. day the Lord Diguieres layd batterie before the Castle of Metans, which he slenderly battered the 15. day, only to view the enemies countenance. But they being greatly afrayed, the next night did steale a∣way, and so saued themselues, except thirtie of them, who were intercepted by the watch. In this way of Piemont, the Lord Diguieres had neuer aboue three hun∣dred horses and twelue hundred shot, and found no greater enemie then the inaccessible height of the mountaynes, where ouer he was forced to passe the Canon, but chiefly in his iourney to Barcelona. The Citie of Grenoble in the land of Daulphine, notwithstanding the truces and good entertaynment from time to time receaued of the Lord Diguieres, had been seduced after the King last deceased, and did hold still after for the League, though not with such desperat madnes and insolen∣cie as many others had done. Now the L. Diguieres hauing well repressed the madnes▪ & chastized the rashnes and folly of the D. of Sauoy, and hauing in a manner subdued and pacified that countrey, forsooke the Duke of Sauoy, and determined to scoure as much as he could, all the remnant and ragges of rebellion out of that prouince: which thing to bring to passe, he thought good to be∣gin at the head, to wit, the Citie of Grenoble, and as by the euent which followed, it seemed that he did besiege & distresse that Citie: which thing caused the inhabitants to consider that the Lord Diguieres had in a man∣ner all the land of Daulphine at commaundement: His power was increa∣sed, and returned out of Piemont with few victories of many: they weighed also how they were out of hope of any succour, as well from the Duke de Mayne as from the Duke of Sauoy: who being taught by the schoole∣master of fooles, which is experience, would not haue hereafter great lust to returne in haste into Daulphine. These circumstances caused them well to consider the danger wherein they stoode, which thing moued them to make a motion of peace, by the which they were reduced to the dutifull obedience of their lawfull Soueraigne. This peace was concluded in the suburbs of Saint Laurence by Grenoble, the two and twentith of De∣cember, betweene the Lord des Diguieres, one of the kings priuie coun∣sell
and of estate, captayne of a hundred men at armes of his Ordinances, and generall of the armie leuied for the kings seruice in the land of Daul∣phine  on the one part: and the court of Parliament, the commonalties of the countie, and the Consuls of the same. First, that the exercize of the Romish Religion, shall remaine frée both within the towne and suburbs thereof, as hitherto it hath béen, and that the Cleargie in all the prouince shall enioy the full possession of their goods in any place in the prouince vnder the kings protection. Secondly, that the frée exercize of the reformed Religion, may be pub∣likely celebrated within Trescloistre suburbs of the sayd citie, without any let, trouble or molestation. Thirdly, that all dwellers in the same towne that will continue there∣in, shall personally protest and acknowledge Henrie the fourth, king of France and Nauarre for their Soueraigne, and shall yéeld to him the oth of fidelitie in like cases requisite, in the hands of the Lord Saint Andrew, president of the court of Parliament, and Chastelard, counsellor in the same court, in the presence of the Lordes of Blemew and Calignon: and vpon the same oath taken, the sayd inhabitants shall bée maintayned and restored in the full and peaceable enioying of their goods, offices, priui∣ledges and franchizes. Fourthly, if any man of whatsoeuer calling or condition soeuer it bée, shall be vnwilling to take the sayde oath, and shall be desirous thereupon to departe else where, hee shall be safely conducted to any place that they will go, and may enioy their goods, offices and dignities, either by sale, or by receauing their annuall fruits or stipend thereof at their choyce, pro∣uided alwayes that they enterprize nothing against the Kings seruice. Fiftly, that the custodie and gouernment of the said towne shall be re∣ferred to the Kings good pleasure, who shall be requested to prouide it of such a gouernour, and so sufficient garrison as he shall thinke meete for his seruice, and the preseruation of the towne. Item, that in the meane time as the Lord Arbucy, hitherto gouer∣nour of the sayd towne, vpon some considerations, cannot as yet resolue to take that oath, that the sayd place shall remayne in gouernance of the Lord Rochegiron, and that the Lord Arbucy shall haue three moneths respit to resolue vpon the same oath: which thing if hee doth, the King shall bee requested to graunt him againe the gouernment of the same towne. Sixtly, that generally all the inhabitants of whatsoeuer calling or degrée they bee, shall stand discharged and acquited of all leuying of the kings impost or coynes, bearing of armes, treaties and practizes, euen with Forreiners, or any other acts of hostilitie, and that the Lord Di∣guieres hath vndertaken, within two moneths to deliuer vnto them suf∣ficient
prouisoes for the same from the King. Seuenthly, that the memorie of all the offences past in all these trou∣bles,  shall be extinct, as matter not happened. And that the Lord Digui∣eres, with all other gentlemen of his partie doe promise, that by them∣selues and by their meanes, such matters shall neuer bee reuiued, and that it shall not be lawfull to call such things to remembrance, and that it shall be forbidden to argue or quarrell about it, that al the kings subiects may liue together in peace, like brethren, friendes, and fellow citizens. Eightly, that for a more perfect vnion of the hearts of the Kings sub∣iects, the Lords of the court of Parliament, who by the Kings com∣mandement had retired, and are yet resident at Rouan, or elsewhere, shall returne with conuenient speede to Grenoble, there to follow and continue their charges. Last of all, that within two moneths, there shall be summoned a gene∣rall assembly of the states, after the manner accustomed, for the hasting of the meanes to discharge and relieue the people, and establish the com∣mon bodie of the countrey. Now Christian reader, I beseech thée to consider, both the euident and sencible mercie and iustice of God, & the difference which is betwéene the vessels of glory & of wrath: for this honourable L. des Diguieres in all the wars of Daulphine, euer since the rising of ye execrable League, hath neuer shewed any point of crueltie vpon his enemies, in which there might ap∣peare any small token of particular anger, or appetite of reuenge: but al∣waies hath shewed good & gracious entertainmēt, euen vnto the very ene∣mies, in whom he hath marked some simple dealing, & had not vsed any n∣ormities or proud insolēcies. If he hath shewed somtime some extremity, yet did he neuer so much as he might haue iustly done, & hath knowen in such, alwaies some notable iniuries, which he wt a iust & prudent wisdome hath thought to haue deserued some sharpe punishment. To be short, it may bée sayd of him, In consilijs sapiens & prouidus, in aci fortis, in pace & foederibus, iustus fidus & constans. Therefore the Lord hath guided his armes, hath made him victorious in all conflicts and méetings, and hath endued him with such strength of the bodie, as beyond all expectation, to haue surmounted the inaccessible Alpes, and at length hath not onely sup∣pressed and rooted out the naturall rebells of the countrey, out of Daul∣phine and Prouance, their confederates of Spayne, Italy and Piemont, but with an incredible felicitie, hath restored the afflicted state of that coun∣trey, and established peace, iudgement and iustice. On the other side, whereas it is the dutie of Christian Princes, not to rauish other mens kingdomes, to enuade their landes and principalities, to robbe, spoyle and murder their borderers and neighbours: but to go∣uern their Dominions in peace, with piety, iustice and discipline, to liue
friendly with their Neighbours, but specially to relieue other Estates af∣flicted, to assist Princes neighbours, when through disobedience and rebel∣lion  of vnnaturall subiects they are disquieted and tormoiled. But it fell so otherwise with France: for when through the sinnes of the people, and euill counsell of Henry the third, the Kingdome was so torne with dissentions and rebellions, that it seemed as in a shipwrack the pie∣ces did flye abroad, exposed to euery man that could catch & hold. First the King of Spaine (who had beene this day a Muscleman, and not a Catho∣like, if it had not beene for the kinges of France) with his Gold thought to haue all. Secondly, the Duke of Sauoy (who whithout the goodnes of the Valoys, had beene a pety and a poore Duke) made his reckoning to goe away with the Prouinces of Daulphin and Prouance, bordering vpon him, for his part. Thirdly, the Duke de Mayne (who without the gratious fauour of the Valoys, had layn obscure in the Mountains of Lorrein, there a digging for brasse in the cauerns thereof) made his accampt of some scambling among the other, as to haue carried away all that bordereth to Lorreyn: d' Aumale made his reckoning of Picardie, and Merccur of Britayn. Last of all, Fryer Sixtus, and after him Fryer Gregorie the fourtéenth thought by these meanes to maintayne their tyrannie in that Realme. All these I say were so farre from dooing the duties of Christian Princes and Pastors of the Church, in assisting the right owner of the Crowne, and in preseruing that Realme, as one of the chiefest members and ornament of Europe, that euen as the Edomites in the sacking of Ierusalem cried∣downe with it, downe with it euen to the ground: so haue they not in words but in kindling and nourishing the flame of rebellion, & assaulting by all meanes the said Realme, haue encreased the plagues and multiply∣ed the sorrowes of that aflicted state. Therefore behold the Lord hath accursed their armes, and as for the Duke of Sauoy his owne hand hath weakened him, so that he durst neuer come to see the said Lord Diguieres in the face one way, but he is gone out of the field seauen waies. He did neuer in all these warres any thing with valour, but by treachery and treasons, as the taking of Carmagnole, and his practises in Prouance doo testify: thousands of his most approoued and skil∣full Souldiours and Captains haue béen killed by few, not only in their inuasions attempted in Daulphine & Prouance, but also at home, where the said Lord Diguieres hath forced their strong holds, hath put them to the sword, and cast their carcases on their mountains to bee meat for the beasts of the field, and fowles of the ayre. See therefore how contrarie licours do flow out of contrary vessels, and how the Lord protecteth the vertuous and iust, according to his promise, and clotheth the wicked with calamity, shame and dishonor, as with a Cloude. Here endeth the eight Booke.
THE NINTH BOOKE. I Haue declared in the former booke those euents which happened in the yeare 1590. and how the King conducted very curteously the Duke of Parma, if he would haue taken it so, and how the sayd King retyred to Saint Quintin in the be∣ginning of December 1590. but what course he tooke, nor what coast he followed I haue nothing to speake of for lacke of instructions, except wee may gather some thing by the euents. It seemeth therefore, that the King after he had soiorned some dayes in Picardie, hee returned to his army which he had leftin Normandie, where he tooke aduise concerning the citie of Chartres, great, mighty, strong and riche, situated in the countrey of Beausse. This is that Citie whereunto K. Henry the third soiorned for a time after hee was put to flight from Pa∣ris in May 1588. This Citie is ancient and famous for the ancient superstition of the Druides, & in our dayes for the renowmed Idoll of our Ladie of Chartres: that Citie hath been therefore both with the Pagans, & with the Romanists a seat of most damnable Idolatrie, and of late one of them which rebelled first of all agaynst Henry the third after the death of the Duke of Guyze, and had continued still in the same rebellion. In the beginning of Ianuary therefore the King hauing prepared all thinges, determined to wrest this Citie out of the tyrannous bondage of Leaguers, and to enforce the same to returne to theyr dutie. And for lacke of instructions of al the notable exploits done in that siege, wee haue to shew two things. First, of a stratagem vsed by the King: and secondly of the yeelding of the same. This town of Chartres is very strong both by art & nature, yet was it not very well prouided of Souldiers besides the Citizens and Townesmen. After that the King, acompanied with his owne forces and the Marshal Biron, hauing laine long time about the said Chartres, came to his campe, he perceaued that it would be very difficult to obtaine the same by force: therfore he aduised himselfe to prooue what might be done by stratagem.
And about the fourtéenth of Februarie he seperated himselfe from the Marshall Biron, and faining to geue ouer that siege, marched towardes  Dreux, geuing out that hee would goe to besiege the same, and went but thrée miles from the said Chartres. The Marshall Biron in like manner séemed the next day (which was the fiftéenth of the saide moneth) to raise vp the siege, and to followe the King, as though he dispaired to doe any good there. They of Chartres with such forces as they had, seeing that, resolued themselues to make a sally, and to set vpon the rereward of the Marshall Biron, as hee was marching toward Dreux: vpon this determination they issued out of the towne, and roughly charged the Marshals hinder troups. The Marshall first seemed to make head against them, but soone after began to retire himselfe, geuing place to the enemies. The enemies followed him amayne continually skirmishing, vntill they came about two miles from the Towne. In the meane time the King lying in ambush, when he saw his time got betweene the Towne and the men thereof that followed the Marshall of Biron, and so couragiously charged them behind: and the Marshall turning his face towards them agayne, that in lesse then an hower that they fought he slew them all, except thirty cuirasses which hardly escaped. The King following the victorie, entred presently one of the Suburbs of Chartres. The townesmen seeing this, began to make a motiō of peace with him, and offered to deliuer him the towne, & fiftie thousand crownes, vpon condition that hee would remooue his forces, and place no garrison therein: which the King refused to doo, and thereupon prepared to batter the towne in two places, hauing resolued not to leaue it vntill he were ma∣ster of it. For lacke of instructions we omit here many particularities & exployts valiantly performed at that siege. During the which siege, the inhabitants (enforced by ye rebellious Leaguers which were many) shewed themselues very malicious and obstinate agaynst him, refusing to acknowledge him for their Soueraigne, with threatnings and breathing out most vnreue∣rent and vnnaturall speaches agaynst him. The King in that siege hauing made diuers times many breaches, gaue assaults vpon them, which they endured with great losses, vntill they saw theyr walls wonderously battered and beaten downe to the playn ground. Then offered they diuers times to yeeld vp vppon certayne conditions. But the King answered, that it was for him to giue them lawe, and for them to receaue it at his hands. The King did delay the sharpnes of warre, hoping through considera∣tion of the extreame daunger, to bring them to reason and duetie. But when that would not preuaile, about the 16. day of April there was a great
and terrible assault giuen, which the inhabitants notwithstanding sustay∣ned, but very hardly and with great losse. The wisest and best sort of the inhabitants, considering that it was in vayne to with stand the King, and that in fewe such feasts all their citizens might bee spent, and yet the King neuerthelesse would enioy the Citie by force, which would redound to their extreame perrill, agreed to yéeld them∣selues to his gracious clemencie. There was a great number of Leaguers within the Citie, who vnder∣standing of this resolution, shewed themselues greatly offended at it, threatning the rest that they would make them repent that euer they went about such matter. The rest of the citizens séeing this discontentation of the Leaguers, con∣sented that the sayd Leaguers who were so obstinately bent and so hot in the cause, at the next assault should defend the breach. So the eight day a newe assault being giuen so hot, that a great number of them were there throughly cooled, and the rest glad to retire and giue ouer, and with the rest without any further disputation did submit themselues, perceauing now that the League did nothing els but seeke the ruine and destruction of the countrey, and that in vayne they did resist him whom God had sayd should raigne ouer them. Therefore they agreed to send to his maiestie, offering to acknowledge him their onely King and Soueraigne, and to craue par∣don for their disobedience and vnnaturall rebellion, yéelding themselues and their Citie to his accustomed gracious mercie. The King graunted their petition, and hauing seazed vpon the Citie by such as were appoynted by his maiestie, with his Princes and Nobles prepared to enter the towne. The ninth day of Aprill the citizens considering with thankfull mindes the Kings great and gracious fauour, who might haue had conquered them by force, and by lawe of armes iustly taken away from them their lands and goods, and for their rebellion put them to the sword; they I say prepared themselues in their degrees to attend his Maiesties comming. First the whole Cleargie went before in their attyre and order: next vnto them the Magistrates with their robes, and after them the Citizens follo∣wed euery man according to his place, and all falling downe vppon their knees before the King, did acknowledge him their Soueraigne with this acclamation: God saue Henry of Bourbon our mercifull and gracious King, long may he liue the noble King of France, with great reuerence and submission crauing pardon, and shewing themselues sorrowfull for their rebellion and offences committed agaynst his maiestie. The King considering their repentance and submission, pardoned them with louing, gracious and comfortable words: whereupon were the keyes of their citie deliuered him, who receaued them with amiable countenance.
These things being done, the Citizens marching before, the Magistrates after, and the Cleargie following them, conducted the King and his Prin∣ces  in most triumphant sort to his lodging, the people saluting him all the way with this acclamation: Long liue Henry of Bourbon King of France and Nauarre. It is sayd before, how the Lord Diguieres had pacified Daulphine, hath assaulted the Duke of Sauoy abroad and at home. The Duke of Sauoy séeing himselfe hardly matched, aduised how to mo∣lest the sayd Lord Diguieres, sent to his good master the King of Spayne to bee reuenged: therefore they tooke this aduise, to send foure hundred light horses of Naples, with some of the best of the olde garrisons there, in∣to Piemont, which by reason of the swiftnes of their horses, should molest the land of Daulphine with daily courses, roades and inuasions. These foure hundred Neapolitanes hauing taken counsell how to en∣ter the land of Daulphine with a swift pace, had not determined with what pace they should get out. They therefore ranne as swift as their horses could goe as farre as the fort Bowe, where the Lord Diguieres méeting stayed them so, that they are not like to goe euer to Naples agayne, to tell newes vnto their Curtizans of their light horses being there all slayne, on∣ly a fewe excepted. There it appeared to them, that the best warre is not in Italy, nor the best souldiour of Naples, and that there is a great difference betweene the soul∣dier trayned vp in Militarie Discipline, and daily employed to great and waightie affayres, and him who vnder the name of souldier is moulten in filthie pleasures in the Stewes of Curtizans, as these were. There ap∣peared also how the horse is but a vayne thing to saue a man in an vniust cause, and that they were but robbers who came to spoyle and molest them that had neuer proffered them wrong. This exployt was done about the beginning of March, as I can coniecture. The Lord Digueres hauing cut short those insolent Italians, deter∣mined to pursue some forces which were retiring out of Daulphine into Sauoy againe, whome hee followed so short, that hee entred the citie of Chamberie, Metropolitan of Sauoy. This is a great Citie, famous for the straunge Idolatrie vsed in the same: There is an olde filthy ragge, some gowtie clowt of some gowtie Frier, they haue made the world be∣léeue (such is the spirit of Idolatrie in them that know not God, and such is the spirit of Auarice in them that applie religions to gaine) that it was the shrowd wherein Christ was buried, therefore certaine times of the yeare, there was a resort of infnite mltitudes of people, of diuers coun∣treys and nations, which came to worship that holy ragge, and pray holy  ora pro nobis. The Lord Diguieres hauing taken the same, sacked and spoyled it: but
hauing not forces sufficient to munit and keepe it, left it, and returned  home with a fat spoyle, without any losse. Whilest the Lord Diguieres was in Sauoy, the Duke of Nemours, go∣uernour of Lyons, descended from Lyons with his forces into Daulphine, desirous to haue surprized some townes in that Prouince, in the absence of the Lord Diguieres. But the said Diguieres in returning home from Sa∣uoy met him, and so charged him, that after he had slaine most of his hors∣men, put him to flight, and followed him so hard, that the inhabitants of the Citie cleane burned the suburb called Guiltiere, being very fayre, great and rich, fearing least the sayd Lord Diguieres would haue entrenched himselfe in the sayd Suburb. Whilest these things did so passe in Daulphine, there happened in Pro∣uance, that certaine great practizes were discouered to the losse of the au∣tor, as the old saying is, . The Lord Dampuis, Lieftenant to the Duke of Sauoy in Prouance, being resident at Aix the Metropolitan Citie there, had wrought a trea∣son to surprize the Citie of Tarascon, situated vpon the iuer Rosne, by the meanes of certaine Dominican Friers and thirtie or fortie of the inhabi∣tants of the towne, to whome hee had made many fayre and large pro∣mises. The bargaine being made, the meanes and time must be sought out, which were in this wise; about midnight the black diuels Friers should rise to sing their holy mattens and black santus, and should giue the watch word with three strokes of the bell: whereupon the trayterous Citizens should seaze vpon one of the gates, & the L. Dampuis should haue come to the gate with fiue hundred Cuirasses, & 5. hundred Harquebusieres, who should haue entred by the meanes of the traytors who were within. This counsell could not be kept so close, but it came to the eares of the Ladie of Oruano, and one captaine Corses, by whose diligence and good order vsed, the treazon was disappointed in the manner as followeth. The gouernour hauing intelligences of their intent, and whole plat∣forme, caused the Friers and their complices he night before to be taken and layd in sundry prisons: the night appoynted to worke the feate being come, an ambush of certaine souldiers of his companies was set out of the town in a conuenient place: the said gouernour also had appointed a com∣panie as well of his souldiers as of the faithfull citizens to stand in silence within the gate of the Citie, vntill the watch word agreed betweene the Friers and the enemies, should be giuen with thrée strokes of the bell. All things beeing in a readines, and the time come to worke, the Lord Dampuis came vnto the gate with his companies according to promise, harkening to heare the watch word, and to bee admitted into the Citie by the complices.
Well the three strokes of the bell were heard, the ambush began im∣mediatly  behinde, and the towns men opening the gate before to assault them so furiously (not with the sounding of the bell, but with sound of the Harquebuze shot) that the enemies beeing compassed about, within halfe an hower were slayne in a manner all, and the Lord Dampuis taken priso∣ner, and so wounded, that two dayes after hee died of the woundes: so the Towne was preserued from sacking, and the people from murther and bondage, and both the towne and People reserued to their kinges seruice: this was done about the end of March. About the selfe same time the Countie of Carces had wrought another such practise also against the Towne of Tolon, by the treason of the chiefest Consull and other Townes men, which was in like maner discouered, and the conspiratours apprehended and chastised. We haue said before, how the Senat of Aix in Prouance were rebels, who not onely had committed treason, but also solicited others to the like of∣fence. The sayd Citty had admitted the Duke of Sauoy for their Soue∣raigne, who had put in garrisons to keep them in subiection, and about the beginning of this yeare began also to build a citadel in the Citie: whereup∣pon the people fell to a mutiny, refused to receaue any more garrisons in his be hoofe. The Citie of Marseilles is an ancient Colonie of the Greckes named Phocoei, who forsook their countrey, when Cyrus king of the Persians did war and subdue Asia the lesser, that citie had been commended in the time of the Romans, by reason of learning and good discipline which florished there. It is a Citie gouerned by their owne Magistrates, as Rochel is vn∣der the protection and obedience of the kings of France, and hath continued very long in their sidelity, vntill now a dayes degenerating greatly from their ancient vertue, they haue shewed great inconstancie in their duty of sidelity vppon these occasions. The king of Spayn hath beene greatly iealous of that Citie, and hath v∣sed all the meanes possible to reduce that Towne vnder his obedience, since that he dreamed of some possibility to inuade Frāce, supposing that it would haue been a fit Port, as a gate for him to passe and repasse, to goe in and out of France vppon all occasions at pleasure. To bee short, to make it an Arsenall to subdue all those Southernly Prouinces lying vppō the Medi∣terran Seas. Therefore at the beginning of the League this citie was one of the pledges that should haue béen deliuered him by the Leaguers: which practises haue been put to execution twise all ready, but through the watch∣full dilligence of some faithfull Citizens haue beene disappoynted of their purpose. The King of Spayn notwithstanding the great charges, which hee sus∣tayned by giuing great pnsions vnto some Captayns and Inhabitants
there, to fauour his proceedings, seeing himselfe still disappoynted, yet  would he not geue ouer, but began to worke another way, to wit, to con∣tinue, or rather increase his beneuolence towards the inhabitants, perswa∣ding thē in the mean time to associat themselues to the League, and to ac∣cept the Duke of Sauoy their neighbour for their Protector, supposing by these meanes in time the faction of the League preuailing there, to make himselfe master of that place. The Citizens corrupted with Spanish money, and otherwise greatly addicted to Popish vanity and superstition, to continue this Spanish libe∣rality among them, and to please thus farre the king of Spayne at his re∣quest, accepted the Duke of Sauoy for Protector of their City: and in signe that they were Leaguers, aduanced the Standerd of the holie League, and set it vppon their walles, which is an Idoll, which they called the Cruci∣fix, in that state they continued nigh a yeare. But now vnderstanding the cogging and double dealing of the sayd D. at Aix, in intending and attempting there to build a Citadell, and how both the nobillity of the Countrey had forsaken him, and the people resisted his attempts, pulled downe the Standerd of the League, and erected the armes of France, publishing that they would hold for the King of France. Wee haue left the King with his Princes at Chartres there to take pos∣session of that great, riche and florishing Citie, and haue walked through part of Piemont, Daulphine and Prouance. Now let vs returne to Chartres, there to know what the King doth, and shew also the prosperous successe which haue followed the taking of this Cittie of Chartres. The Citie of Chartres beeing in the Kings power, the Parisiens con∣ceaued a great amazement and terror, knowing very well that this exploit would be a scourge vnto them. For as in the ancient time Alexandria and Sicilia were the Nurces of Rome, so the countrey of Beausse and this Citie of Chartres were the chie∣fest prouiders for the Cittie of Paris. Now therefore the carriage of any kind of victuals and prouisions beeing stopped both aboue and beneath the riuer, from the North side and the South, and finding themselues desti∣tute of victuals, money, and all other warlike prouisions for their strength and succour, they fall to their olde custome: that is, to demaund bread of their Idols: therefore the Bishop of Placentia, their Fryer Gregory the thirteenth his Legat, after the returne home of Fryer Henrico Caietano, Sponte insanientes instigat, set them on to running and gadding about the streetes, to carry their Idols with or a pro nobis, there is mourning, wee∣ping and beayling, there is stridor dentium, horror empiternus and reg∣num tenebrarum. Yet the Fryers and Isuits do comfort them with sedi∣tious
sermons, and bitter wordes as well as they can: but venter non habet aures. During the Kings soiourne at the siege of Chartres, the Duke de  Maine with such power as he could make, went and layd the siege before Chasteauthierij, situated vpon the riuer Marne. The gouernour which was within, snt word to the King that he would hold it against the ene∣mie a whole moneth. The King hauing taken order of the safe kéeping of the Citie, about the twelfth day of Aprill remoued his armie from Chartres to Aulneaw and Macheuile, which townes were reduced to his obedience. About the fiftéenth day, the armie remoued to Dourdan, which towne immediately his armie entred by force, where was found great store of victualls gathered, with intent to be conueighed to Paris. The sixtéenth day, the castell a very strong place, was assaulted and ta∣ken. So by this expedition Paris is disappoynted of victuals and prouisi∣on, and distressed neerer and neerer. The same day the King separated himselfe from his armie, and lea∣uing the same to the leading of the Marshall Biron, with a great troup of horsemen took his iourney toward Chasteauthierij, purposing to rayse the siege, and to see his face, whome he had not seene many yeares before, and to craue more acquaintance. The Duke de Mayne ashamed and afeard to shew his face, for the guiltines of rebellion and parricide, procured, had no great liking of that acquaintance, neither durst be so bold to stay there, and contrarie vnto the, promise of the captaine of the place and the Kings expectation, the Castel being rndred to the sayd de Maine, he fled as fast as his horse could cary him to the Citie of Reames. The King hearing not onely of the hastie retire of the Duke de Maine from Chasteauthierij, but also that he had deuided his armie into sundry parts; and that they should continue in that sort for a certaine time, deter∣mined to stay at Sanlis, there to view the countenance of the enemie, and in the meane while to take the townes of Dowserie and Claye where the e∣nemies kept garrison: which thing was speedelie done. In this pursuite the king also tooke the towne of Tremblay by Mountfort, which is nowe a great hinderance fo the enemie by reason of the passage. The one and twentith day of Aprill, while the King pursued the ene∣mies, the Duke Espernon, and the Lords d'Ho and Vicres vnderstanding of a great number of boates as great as lighters, laden with corne, mo∣nie, and other prouision of war, going from Chasteauthierij downe the ri∣uer of Marne to victuall Paris, set forward with great diligence to ouer∣take them: which hauing done, with great speede were sunk in the mid∣dest of the riuer, to the number of fifteene of the greatest sorte, with all
the prouision that was therein, few small boats of the lesser sort escaped towards Meaulx. The same day the King vnderstanding of some companies of the ene∣mies, who were lodged in certaine villages betwéene la Fere and Cha∣steauthierij, being the greatest part of the forces of the enemies, depar∣ted early from Senlis to Crespij, a towne in Valoys. But for all the Kings secret and sudden departure, yet by that time he had passed fiue miles, he vnderstoode that his comming vpon coniecture being blazed among the enemies, they had fled and passed beyond the ri∣uer Marne, with great amaze and terror: this is according to the saying of the wise, that sayth: that the Kings countenance scattereth the wic∣ked. The 22. of Aprill, the King from Crespij where he was returned, tooke his way to Chauny, intending to take the Castles of Manican and Genlis: and for the better effecting of his purpose, he caused two great Canons of Ordinance to be brought from Compiegne. But they who were in Mani∣can Castle did not attende but left the place, and fled before hee arriued there. The 24. of Aprill, the King caused the said Ordinance and more which was brought from S. Quintins, to bee brought before Genlis: but at the sight of the Ordinance the sayd Castle of Genlis yéelded vnto the King. About the same time, two regiments of garrisons of the Leaguers were repayring to the Duke de Mayne, whereof the Kings garrison of Saint Goubin hauing intelligence, issued foorth vpon them and put many to the sword. The Duke de Mayne had receaued seauen companies of Germanes, being nine Ensignes, who most wickedly as Mercenaries and slaues to their owne couetousnesse, had for money consented to defend one of the most notable Rebellions that euer had béen, hated of God, and detested of all good Princes of the world. Them the Duke de Mayne in the diuision of his armie, as is aboue said, had placed in certayne Villages betweene the riuers of Marne and Oyse, intending to place them in Meaulx and Soyssons: and as they marched they came to Coussie, where they supposed to bee receaued: but the gates of the towne being kept fast agaynst them, and hearing a rumour of the Kings comming, such a sudden feare fell vpon them, that they fiercely ranne into the Forest, hoping thereby to saue themselues. The garrison of S. Goubin hearing of this amaze of the enemie, sent fifcie men on horsebacke, conducted onely by a Sargeant, went foorth, and taking about fourescore peasants of the countrey with them, marched into the Forest. This small company was greatly encouraged, by hearing of the arri∣uall
of the King from Genlis, and pursued after these companies, and char∣ged them so roughly, terrifying them with this voyce; Viue le roy. Imme∣diatly the enemie supposing the King to haue been there indeede, in great  terror fled away without any resistance. This small companie little think∣ing of any such good successe, couragiously pursued them, slewe them, and tooke them in a manuer all, except about threescore men, who flinging a∣way their weapons and armour, the better to saue themselues, retyred in∣to the towne la Fere. Their Colonell was slayne, and all the Ensignes ta∣ken saue two onely. About 29. of Aprill, the Lord Humiers knowing that the companie of horsemen of Mountcaure had assembled in a Village not farre from Cor∣beil, departed out of the sayd Towne of Corbeil to charge them. As he went about that exployt, he met by chaunce the companie of horsemen of Dourlay, whom he charged in that skirmish: most part of the enemies were slayne, part were taken prisoners, and few by flight saued themselues. The company of Mountcaure were in ye village playing some at cardes, some at ice, some drinking, and some sléeping, garded negligently with a small watch: the Lord Humiers hauing done this exploit, ceased not to prosecute his former enterprize vpon the said Mountcaure his compa∣nies, who marching forward and comming to the village where they were, set vpon them vnlooked for, like a sodaine tempest which should fall sodain∣ly from heauen, whom finding busied (as is aforesaid) easily discomfited them, killed them, and tooke them without any resistance. The King hauing in a little space eased that part of Picardie, which bor∣dreth vpon Brie, of the insuries of the rebels, beaten the enemies which executed intollerable oppressions, betweene the riuers of Oyse and Marne, as is said, was aduertised that the enemie was in fild in Britaine: his Ma∣iestie tooke his iournie thetherward with a small companie, and had there that successe which followeth. The Lord Tremblay did commaund in a towne in Britaine, named  Monconter, where is a castell of reasonable strength, wherin he had set a garison, and departed thence to goe to doe some exploit fifteene leagues off about the beginning of May. The enemie aduertized of the absence of the said L. Tremblay, tooke the said Monconter, but they of the castell held out, attending the succour which was coming from diuers parts vnto them. The L. Tremblay hauing speedy intelligence of that which was past in Monconter, tooke his iourney with 50 light horsemen, resolued with that small companie to enter into the Castell with ladders, which he perfour∣med. And after out of the sayd Castell he made diuers issues vpon the ene∣mies in the Towne with terrible slaughter of them. Many of the nobility of Britaine beeing then at Renes, vnderstanding of
the sturre of Monconter in the absence of the Prince D'ombes, who was a little before ridden foorth about eighteene miles from the sayde Renes,  mustered vp immediatly so many as they might procure vppon the sudden, which was about one hundred and fiftie horse men wel appointed, and com∣maunded straight waies all the garrisons thereabout to march toward the sayd Monconter, intending either to rescue the said towne out of the ene∣myes hand, or else to let their further enterprises: their forces came to two hundred footmen wel furnished: these companies bring in all three hundred and fifty men came about two furlougs from the said towne of Monconter, there to stay for other companies, who came from other places for the same purpose. Whilest these preparations were a making, the Lord Saint Laurence, Marshall of the army of the rebels vnder Merceur, had entred into Mon∣conter with three hundred horsemen well appointed, and one thousand Harquebuziers, intending to fortife that towne agaynst the King. But in the meane while, the King in proper person with sixe score horses onely had marched so farre as Londiak, intending to search out the enemy. The Lord Saint Laurence aduertised of the Kings comming, conside∣ring that there was mustering round about, knowing in his conscience the Kings iust cause and wisedome, and mistrusting the quarel of his side, con∣ceaued a great terrour, and perceaued to haue cast himselfe so deeply into the Mire, that if pollicy doth not plucke him out, hee is like there to sticke fast a good while. Therefore considering the small company which was a∣bout the King, determined to assault him with many: and for to bring to passe this his intent, supposing the better to depart frō Monconter in time, then to enioy it a while to his great domage: he departed from Monconter about 11. a clocke in the euening with two hundred and fifty horsemen, and sixe hundred Harquebuziers, and trauelling all night came to Londiak by sixe a clocke in the morning, beeing the twelft day of May. The King being at Londiak, & vnderstanding of the enemies cōming, delayed no time, but went immediatly to the field to receaue the said ene∣mie. The enemie perceauing the K. to haue determined to bid him battel, & to be already in the field, left part of his footmen to force the trenches & barricadoes of Londiak: and this being done, the enemie brought his horsemen and part of his footmen into the field to encounter the King, there he deuided his companies into two troups, in the one there was fiftie horsemen, and in the other two hundred. The King had but six score horsemen, whome he deuided likewise into two troupes, in the one thirty, and in the other ourescore & ten horsmen. The King hauing set few foot∣men in battaile array, called with a feruent prayer vpon the name of the GOD of armies, and cheered vp his souldiers, encouraging them to shew themselues men, in defending such a iust cause as they had in hand,
which being done both armies ioyned, and the enemie hauing made a ve∣rie small resistance, was strooken with a sodaine terrour, as if it were  with a thunder-clap from heauen, so that they began to wauer. The Kings Souldiers perceauing this sodaine dread vpon the enemie, gaue such a fresh and hot charge, that they turned their backs and fled. The King pursued them two miles from Londiak, to a towne holden by their fauourers, where these horsemen saued themselues. There were fiftie horsemen slayne, as many more taken prisoners, many footmen slaine on the place, and many both horsemen and footmen wounded. The rest of the footemen saued themselues by flight into the woods which were neere at hand, and there hid themselues. Lo how there is neither strength nor counsell against the Lorde: Lo howe the wicked is snared in his owne counsell. The news of this foyle being blazed abroad throughout the enemies troups, came also to Monconter, by meanes whereof there rose such a sudaine feare among them, that immediatly they retyred from the saide Monconter with al possible speed, leauing the town frée from any strength of the enemie. The Lord Tremblay being in the Castell, and molesting the enemies daylie by sallies and slaughters of them as is sayd, seing how wonderfully God had terrified that rebellious route, went foorth of the Castell with his forces, followed them, and immediatly charged them so roughly, that they were all slayne and taken prisoners, by meanes whereof hee got both bagge and baggage from the enemie: So was that accursed company (e∣nemies of mankind) vtterly rooted out. It is said before how the Lord D'ombes had gone from Renes into hase Britaine to a Towne called Quinpercorenten, and in departing out of the sayd Towne to returne to Renes, the garrisons of the enemies in townes about holden by them, charged vpon the sayd Prince, but were so receaued by him, that there was slaine of the enemies side three Captayns of name and of great estimation among the Rebels, seauen gentlemen of great ac∣count were taken prisoners, all the rest in the pursuite were put to the sword. Here thou mayst see (Christian Reader) that all these blowes, slaugh∣ters and ouerthrowes euery where receaued, cannot make these damned rebels consider the wrongfulnes of the cause, which so obstinatly agaynst all lawes of nations, agaynst nature and agaynst God they do defend. As the rebels haue been beaten euen with a rod of yron by the Lords hand in his wrath both in Picardie and Britayn: so now haue wee to consider an other example of Gods iustice executed vppon rebels in the Countrey of Caux in Normandie. In this Moneth of May, victuals beeing deare wares in the Citie of
Roan, one regiment appertayning to the Duke of Lorreine, and the other to the Lord de la Lownde departed out of Roan, & planted themselues in a  village called Cinqcens, determining there to abide, and to surprise such victuals for their maintenance as they could come by, vntill the next har∣uest should prouide more plenteously, there they fortifyed themselues with Trenches and Barricadoes: this place is distant 9 Leagues from Diepe. They fearing to be molested from Diepe, had placed a troupe of horsemen in a wood distant two leagues from the place which they had fortifyed, be∣ing fully in the high way from Diepe, supposing if any forces should come from Diepe vpon them, they might retire backe to geue intelligence vnto the sayd Regiments, or else by making resistance should geue leasure to prepare themselues, and to procure a fresh supply from Roan, to back them if occasion should serue. The Lord Chartres commaunder of Malta, gouernour for the King in Diepe, and Sir Roger Williams an English gentleman of great va∣loure and experience in militarie affayres, who lately came thether, ha∣uing receaued intelligence of that fortification of Cinqcens, and intent of the enemy, resolued speedily to depart from Diepe in the euening the 19. day of May, and trauailing all night came to the wood early in the next morning, hauing with them four hundred French men and three hundred Englishmen. There they found a troup of horsemen to stop their passage, vpon whom they made a very fierce assault. But they that came from Diepe gaue such a hot charge vpon them, that all those horsemen were so slaine, that none of them escaped any way. Thus they leauing the dead bodies of the horsemen in the wood, and taking some of their horses, the Gouernor and Sir Roger Williams passed a long to Cinqcens, and beeing come the∣ther before noone, they discryed the enemy with their Ensignes displayed within the Fort. The Gouernour of Deepe perceauing their fortification so strong, allea∣ged that it was vnpossible to enter it, & therefore went about to perswade Sir Roger to goe backe agayne, considering that the enemie was two to their one. Sir Roger answered, that it were a great dishonour for him so to doo, and determined to set vpon them with his own thrée hundred men, though it should cost both him and them their liues: and with this resolution ad∣uanced his Colours, marching toward the enemie, intended (by the assi∣stance of God to enter vpon them, or els to lose his life in that place. The Lord Chartres seeing that most honourable resolution of Sir Ro∣ger, was wonderfully encouraged to the enterprise: and thereupon prote∣sted to take part also in the sayd attempt with his foure hundred Soul∣diers, whatsoeuer should chaunce: and therevpon displayed his Ensigne, and together with Sir Roger vowed (by Gods assistance) to enter the
Barricadoes and to charge the enemie. The sayd Lord vpon this resolution chéered vp his Souldiers, and wil∣led  them to fight in the behalfe of their lawful King, whose right they were bound to defend, and God doubtles will prosper the same to the confusion of his enemies. Sir Roger in like sort, like a true Christian Knight, encouraged his Souldiers, shewing vnto them, that although fewe of their side haue to deale with a great multitude skilfull, stout, hardie, and trayned vp in Mar∣tiall Discipline: yet considering yt their cause is but an execrable rebellion agaynst their Soueraigne, they are but a multitude of traytors, opposing themselues to Gods ordinance, therfore condemned of God to a shamefull death, both here and in the world to come. He assured them that God will assist them in the execution of his sentence pronounced agaynst them: hée alleaged the common experience in all ages and Nations: hee concluded that the God of battailes will so fight for them, that their eyes shall haue their desire vpon them, as vpon enemies of God, of man, societie and na∣ture. He assureth them, that in putting their confidence in GOD, not one haire of their heads shall fall: which when hee had finished to speake, hee prayeth vnto the Lord with great confidence. And when he had ended pra∣yer, he made them to promise each vnto other to die euery man rather then they would flye one foote. These things being done, they marched forward with great courage, displayed their Ensignes, strooke vp their Drummes, & with their Trom∣pets sounded defiance, and with this resolution full of confidence, these va∣liant English Souldiers gaue a fierce charge vpon the enemie, and assaul∣ted them in such sort, as if they had not trauailed all night. This fight con∣tinued two houres space, the English men still hartening the Frenchmen. At length they entred the Barricadoes of the enemie. Sir Roger being one of the formost fought hand to hand with the chiefest gouernours of the enemies. The gouernour of Deepe on another side entring, did valiant∣ly behaue himselfe: at length the enemie began to recoyle backe, and being all enclosed within their Barricadoes, as a flocke of sheepe in a Shéepcot, were all put to the sword by the English and Frenchmen, suffering none to escape aliue. Hauing obtayned this wonderfull victorie, vpon their knees in the same place, gaue thankes vnto GOD which had subdued their enemies vnder foote, and with singing of Psalmes gaue the praise vnto the highest. All that the Gouernour and Sir Roger Williams lost, were not aboue eleauen men, and fewe wounded, but not very grieuously. This exployt being so prosperously done, the Generals tooke order not to stay there at any hand, but speedily to returne to Deepe, least some newe fresh supply should come from Roan vpon them, or by casting about should
meete them in the midway homeward. They gaue order also that the Souldiers should leaue the spoyle behind them, to the end they might not ouercharge themselues with carriage. The Souldiers obeying the counsell of their Commander, tooke no∣thing but that which was light and easie of carriage. Thus safely they re∣turned to Deepe. The enemie as it was supposed came with a great po∣wer to meet them in the middest of the high way: but they had passed foure houres before, and so the enemie disappoynted of his purpose returned backe. Wee haue shewed before how the King hauing had a prosperous suc∣cesse in chastising the Rebells in Picardie, went in person into Britaine, where likewise God prospered his wayes. Whilest the King was in Britaine, his armie soiourned for a time at Vernon, wayting to surprise the towne of Louiers, situated vpon the riuer Eure betweene Pont de larche and Eureux. The particularities of this sur∣prise could I neuer heare, but such as the King himselfe did write vnto the Prince Countie, Gouernour for his Maiestie in Anjou, Vendomoys, Tou∣reyne, Poytow, Berry and Limosin. The sixt day of Iune, ten of the Kings men possessed themselues with one of the gates of the towne, and as it is reported by others in this man∣ner. There was a certayne Corporall in that Citie, who was in great cre∣dit with the gouernour of that towne called Fonteyne Martel. This Cor∣porall considering the great wrong which the Rebels did to the King, and desirous to doo to his Maiestie some seruice of import, practised that there should be at seuerall times by sixe at once, a number of footmen and horse∣men sent into the Wood hard adioyning to the towne, and in the meane time hauing woon to himselfe foure or fiue Souldiers of his owne compa∣nie, his time came of his watch. About noone day the sayd gouernour being at dinner, and according to his signe giuen there came certaine horsemen of the Kings, which he espy∣ing went presently to the gouernour who had the keyes lying on the table by him, and sayd he marueiled that they sat so long at dinner, shewing that there were some friends come vnto him. The gouernour commaunded the sayd Corporall to take the key and let them enter, which he did. The King had caused the Baron of Byron to come néere with his forces, who soone also entred therein. Fonteyne Martel had one hundred Cuirasses in that towne, beside the inhabitants, who obstinatly made a strong resistance to the King, which was cause of a terrible fight. The King himselfe made one of the gates of the Citie to yeeld to him, whereto most part of the men of warr and the inhabitants withdrew them¦selues
to resist, yet at length the Towne was taken. There the Bishop of Eureux, and Fonteyne Martel the gouernour of the place, were taken  prisoners. There was found great quantitie of Corne, Wine and Bacon, beside other munitions, and as the report is, foure thousand fat Oxen in the me∣dowes. That towne was so fortified, that it might bee called one of the Forts of France. There the King lost about eighteene or twentie men, a∣mong whom were fiue Captaines. At the selfesame time that this exployt was done at Louiers, the Lord sent prosperous successe to the Kings affayres in other countreys. The Vicount de la Guerche, a most wicked rebell in Limosin, had greatly troubled the Kings peace in that countrey, and about the begin∣ning of Iune had besieged Belak, (a towne in Lymosin, famous in that countrey, for making a kinde of rough cloth like vnto Irish rugge) with two Canons, one Culuerine and a bastard péece of Ordinaunce. The Prince Countie being come into Poytow with an armie for the Kings seruice, to purge that countrey beyond Loyre, of the oppression and tyranny of some remnants of rebels which were spoyling that countrey, and being aduertized of the said siege of Belak, marched directly thither to rayse the siege, or to bid battaile to the said Vicount, if he durst stay his comming. The fift day of Iune, hauing marched a great dayes iourney, as far as Lusack, was giuen to vnderstand, that the sayd Vicount had withdrawn his siege, and with his horsemen had betaken himselfe to Chauigny, a towne in Toureine, leauing his Canon and footmen at Montmorillon. The Prince séeing that he had missed the sayd Vicount, determined to besiege the town of Montmorillon, which the same day he caused to be summoned, but they within being not willing to giue any answere, the Prince com∣manded to giue certaine volleys of Canon: after which he caused them to be summoned agayn, but they still continued i their resolution to keepe aloofe. The sixt day of Iune at fiue a clock in the morning, his excellencie changed the battery, which continued very furious till ten a clock in the forenoone, at which time a breach being made, the Prince commaunded to giue the assault, which was done very couragiously on al sides of the town, and continued the space of three long houres together. But in the end, the Princes forces seazed vpon the high town, & compelled the enemy to retire into the low towne, which is separated from the high by the riuer Vndre, which floweth through the middest of it, where they hid themselues with∣in a Chappell, from whence they greatly endomaged and molested the Princes Souldiers who were in the high towne: which thing when the Prince perceiued, he commaunded six or seauen voleys of the Canon
be discharged against the gate of the Chappell, which being immediatly broken, the enemie was compelled to forsake it, whome the Princes po∣wer  pursued, and possessed the whole towne of Montmorillon. There was slayne in the towne more than fiue hundred foomen, and thrée score Cui∣rasses, two masters of the field, and all the captaines slayne, wounded or taken prisoners. The Prince caused many of these rebells to be hanged, to requite that which the Leaguers had done not long before at Saint Sauin. There were in that towne foure Canons taken from the enemie, and good store of other munition, seauen Ensignes also were taken there. The Prince lost in that exployt but one souldier of his guardes, and a Gentleman named S. Martin. The Marshall of men at armes was hurt with an Harquebush shot, and very few Souldiers beside wounded. The towne of Montmorillon being taken the seauenth day, the townes of Chauigny, Saint Sauin, and Blank en Berry were voluntarily yeelded to the Kings pleasure, also the Castells Bourg, Archambault, Plaisance, Bel∣arbre, Auailles, Belawne, Angles & Bisse, did voluntaryly submit themselues to the Kings obedience. Hauing layd downe the prosperous exployts done in Lymosin and Tou∣reyne, by the noble Prince County, we will also represent to the reader the attempts and vnluckie successes of the rebells of Britaine. The great and famous Quéene of England, among other prince like vertues of a true Christian Princesse, desirous to restablish the afflicted state of France, sent vnto the King a new supply of forces to assist him in repressing of the rebellion of Britaine, vnder the conduct of that noble and valiant Captaine Sir Iohn Norris Knight, Generall of her Ma∣iesties forces there. The rumour of english forces flying in Britaine, had caused noblemen and Gentlemen about fiue hundred in number, with their wiues and children, and all their chiefest and most precious wealth, to retyre into the Citie of S. Guingcamp, strong by Nature and Arte. There were within that citie besides the sayd nobilitie, three hundred good french Souldiers, with a great number of the inhabitants, able men and experienced. The renowmed Prince D'ombees, generall of the Kings forces in Britaine, accompanied with (to the terror of the rebells) the honoura∣ble Sir Iohn Norris, determined to lay siege before Guingcamp, there to take all these vnaithfull, vnnaturall and bastarde▪ Frenchmen, there heaped as if it were in a cubbe. They arriued before the towne the third day of Iune, and about three a clock in the after noone the sayd valiant Norris hauing obtayned to geue the first assaut, after certaine companies of French men had refused it, did
so presse the enemie for the space of three howers vntill the night did sepe∣rat them, that after that day, they determined not to come any more to  such a feast. The enemies within defended themselues most valiantly, yet feeling so many woundes as they had, and seeing so many dead of theirs as they saw, determined the night following to talke of composition the next day. In this assault, Sir Iohn Norris lost nine worthy souldiers, three valiane Captaynes, to wit, Denis, Herne, and Wolfe, and about fortie souldiers hurt. The fourth day of Iune in the morning the Lord Norris gaue a fresh assault, with that courage, that when the enemies had sustayned it with much a doo lesse then halfe an hower, the remembrance of the losse past put them in fear of that which was present before their eies, fearing to repent too late, they made a token of parley, determined to yeelde themselues if they might find any reasonable composition. The Generall making signe to his people, willingly harkened vnto them, and promised to vse them well if they would freely yeeld themselues. That seemed vnto them somewhat hard, therefore they couenauted that the citie should not be sacked, and that the souldiers within should depart with their weapons and other furniture, and that they would bee content to pay any reasonable summe of money. The assault being stayed, and the agreement concluded vpon the promise of the sayd Generall: the nobilitie most willingly, and of their owne ac∣cord did yeeld themselues, and swore obedience to the King, promising to withdraw themselues presently euery man to his own house, & to be ready to serue the King in any his busines, and payed fifteene thousand crowns, and the Citie 25. thousand, which was farre lesse then they did think they should haue payed. The souldiers were permitted freely to depart according to the agree∣ment, and the gates of the Citie ioyfully were set open. The Generall did not suffer any kind of iniuries to bee done to any ma∣ner of persons. All these things beeing doue, hee caused thanks to be geuen to God for his gracious and fauourable protection. After the taking of Guingcampe, the purpose of the Prince was to haue assaulted the towne of Morlaix, to the end to reduce it, & the base Britayne, withall to the Kings obedience. But Merceur, Captaine of theeues, robbers and rebels, vnderstanding the losse of the towne of Guingcamp, and of the reuolting of so many noble men and gentlemen as had sworne to obay and serue the King, fel in a pel∣ting Lorreine chafe, and swore by Saint Francis holy briech that he would be reuenged, and presently remooued from Pontignie, where hee ioyned
with foure thousand Spaniards, vnder the leading of Don Iuan de Lagu∣la, whom he hath sent for vppon the rumor of the losse of the sayd Guyng∣camp,  and from thence began to march towards Morlaix by the way to Corlay. The Prince vnderstanding of that, and discouering the enemies forces to be of seauen hundred horses, foure thousand Spaniards, and two thou∣sand Harquebusiers French, considered howe daungerous a thing it was to engage his armie before a towne, vntill he were master of the field, the enemie being farre stronger, and fauoured of the countrey, who on a sodaine might be assisted with a multitude of Pesants, long before ar∣med and addicted to him: considering all these difficulties, the sayd prince made a stay about the towne of Guingcamp, as well to repayre the fortifi∣cations of the said towne, as to attend the bringing of two Canons, and two Culuerines, drawen from Brest to Lagnon, with certaine powder and munitions brought from England to Pinpoll, to the ende that these things being in place of safetie, the said Prince might sollow the better his other enterprizes. The seauenth of Iune the Duke Merceur arriued at Corlay, distant three Leagues from Guingcamp. There is a Castell belonging to the Lady Guimeney, sister to Boys∣daulphine Lieftenaunt to the Duke Merceur, they fayned as though the sayd Castell did holde for the King, intending thereby to haue drawne the Prince to some disaduantage, for the eight day the Castell rendred without the sight of the Canon, and the gouernour remayned with the e∣nemie. From thence the Duke sent a trompeter to the Prince, about certaine prisoners taken at Corlay, who signified to the sayde Prince, that hee had charge from the Duke to entreate him to appoynt some day and place for the battaile. The Prince did greatly reioyce to heare these newes, and would not re∣turne answere by the mouth of a Trompetter which might be disanowed, but by his writing signed with his owne hand, in the which the said Prince (least the Duke should alleage any matter, either to delay or auoid the bat∣tell) doth referre to him the choise of the place for the encounter: so that it might be able to receaue both armies. The Duke Merceur remooued from Corlay the eighth of Iune, and came to Saint Giles, two small leagues from Chasteau Laudran. The same day also the Prince departed from Guingcamp about three a clocke in the morning and lodged that night at Chasteau Laudran, where the Duke Merceur his Trompetter met him, and deliuered an answer to the sayd Prince from Merceur, signed with his owne hande, wherein this malapert companion hauing altogether troden vnder foote all reuerence of
superiority sheweth the cause of his rebellion to bee both to withstand the Prince (called with lawfull vocation) and an hereticall King, for the de∣fence  of the holy catholike religion, do assigne the thurseday next at ten of the clocke in the morning, and the place most fit for that action betweene Corlay and Guingcamp. The Prince to prouoke this cowardly Captaine through impaciency or otherwise to battell, sheweth the causes of his comming into Britayne, to be to punish him and his complices for their traiterous rebellion against the King, and for the opprobrious imputations and tearmes which he geueth to the King and to him, hee saith, that therein he lyeth: this was the ninth day. Merceur hauing receaued this prouocation, fell to sweare, fume & brag, that he within three dayes would geue the Prince battell. And on the ninth day of Iune beeing Wednesday dislodged, and that day encamped him∣selfe at a Village called Quelnec, a league and a halfe from Chasteau Lau∣dran, situated at the foot of a hill, which by deepe ditches, hedges and inclo∣sures bordereth vppon a little Heath of two miles compasse. The Prince hauing discouered the enemy mounted on horsebacke, and goeth to make choise of the place for the battell, & findeth about three quar∣ters of a mile from the saide Quelenec a large playne skirted with copses wt a little hill, and the ground raysed with ditches aduantagious to the e∣nemies, who by three large passages might enter into the same heath. The tenth of Iune, the enemie within a quarter of a league of the Heath, sheweth his whole army in order of battaile, vpon the top of an hill. The Prince on the other side, put his troups in order within the heath, and by the aduise of Sir Ihon Norris disposeth the same in three battails, wherof the English footemen made two, and the Launceknights the third: that day was spent in light skirmishes, wherin the Princes men followed the enemie euen into the maine of their armie. The eleuenth day the enemie drew his armie to the foote of the hill, and placed his artillerie vpon the side of the heath, in a place of such aduantage, as commaunded the whole heath, and bordreth all the hedges with shotte. By that time the enemie had done all these things, the Princes armie marched into the heath in order of battaile, and presently sent two hundred footemen to view the enemies countenaunce, whome they charged, put them from their hedges and barricadoes, and slew diuers of them. Vpon the retraite of these two hundred men, the Duke put foorth fiue hundred Frenchmen, and three hundred Spaniards, to repossesse the pla∣ces, whome he followed with the great of his armie. The Prince perceiuing this, and remayning on the heath with the L. Hunaulday, commaunding the auangard, hauing his regiment of horse on the right hand, and Generall Norris, the Lords of Poigny, Pruneaux,
Mommartin and Bastenay, gaue order to put foorth three hundred foote∣men, commaunded by Captaines Anthony Wingfield and Murton, and  the English horsemen lead by Anthony Sherly. The Prince also commaunded to be drawen out of the battaillon of the Launce-knights, one hundred men shot and pikes, and one hundred and fiftie shot lead by the Baron Molak, backed with fortie light horse, con∣ducted by the Lord Tremblay, appoynted to force ye enemie from the place which they had taken. All these set valiantly vpon the enemie, whom they enforced to flee, many were slayn, and the rest saued themselues within the defence of their artillerie, where the whole strength of the Spaniards with the rest of the armie was placed. During this skirmish, there was a great number of shot placed vnder the hedges, which hauing meanes to doe hurte, stoode quiet as though they had fallen asleepe, or else had béen placed there onely to keepe the hedges, least the Prince should come to cut them downe and cary them away. In this skirmish, don Roderigo chiefe marshall of the Spaniards, and a Spanish captaine, two hundred French Souldiers, and threescore Spaniards were slaine. The Lord Tremblay tooke the Lord Guebrian, Colonell of the foote men of the enemie. This charge did so amazethe enemie, that the Princes men were suf∣fered to disarme the dead, and to leade away prisoners within ten paces of their canon, and retired at their ase without any proffering to follow▪ Long, Lieftenaunt to Captaine Dolphin, receaued in his body fiue Harquebuses shott: the English men behaued themselues valiantly in that charge, the residue of that day they spent in light skirmishes. The twelfth day the enemie made a great shew to come foorth to bat∣tell, but at last sent out some number of shot to skirmish, agaynst whome Anthony Sherley with fifteene horse and few footemen made head, and speedely put them to flight, and followed them to their Barricadoes, where master Kemp a Gentleman of that Cornet was slayne, Anthony Sherleys horse was shot in the head, and Charles Blunt his horse was kil∣led vnder him with the Canon, and he himselfe somewhat wounded. The thirteenth day the enemie offered some light skirmishes, but see∣ing that he could get nothing by it he refused to bitte. The fourteene day the Prince expected the battell, as vndertaken by don Iuan de Lagula, generall of the Spaniards, in the worship of Saynt Iohn, whose day it was with them. But fearing that bonfires would bee made to their cost and charges, they gaue quite ouer the game, prepared the same night to dislodge, and the next day following repassed the hill: for hauing spent al their victuals, they must go forth to rob for more.
The Prince stayed sixe dayes vpon the Heath, and in the meane while the enemie durst neuer presume to draw his armie into the Heath. The sixteenth day the Lord la Now with the troupe of the Countie  Mongomery, and the Countie Chombourg, came vnto Chasteau Lau∣dran, whose arriuall giueth hope of good successe in the Kings affayres. They yt haue written the history of wilde beasts, which doth recite that there is a wild beast in Asia named Pardalis, it yeeldeth such a sauour that the Woolfe hath a great delight to follow a farre off, but if it chance that this Pardalis dooth looke back, immediatly the Woolfe retyreth and fly∣eth away. So the Noble Princes of Bourbon doo yeeld sweete sauour of pietie, vertue and valiantnes: Merceur followeth them a farre off, but if they turne their face hee runeth away, as it hath appeared in the things which heretofore he hath attempted in Poytow. There is a towne in Picardy situated vpon the riuer Oyse, called Noyon, commended (if there were none other cause) for being the place of the na∣tiuitie vnto that man of God Iohn Caluin of blessed memory, whose name is written in the booke of life, and shall yeeld a sweete sauour to the true Church of God to the worldes ende, whatsoeuer Sathan doth rage a∣gainst the name of this seruant of God. This towne was seduced long before from the Kings obedience by the Leaguers, and through rebellion was possessed by the Kings enemies. The King therefore after the taking of Louiers, thought expedient to re∣mooue his armie from Vernon, and to draw Eastward, that doing still some profitable exployt, he might expect and receaue the forces that came to him out of Germany: and considering that the sayd towne of Noyon did lye be∣tweene S. Quintin, Compeigne and Corbey, which were long before vnder his obedience, thought good there to stay for the approaching of the Ger∣manes: and during the moneth of Iuly, hauing reduced the sayd towne to great distresse, made his account shortly to be Lord of it. The Vicount Tauanes (head of the rebellion in the Citie of Roan, and most hatefullest enemie of any that the King had) enterprised to relieue the sayd towne of Noyon, and for that intent in the beginning of August in the night season departed from Roan, accompanied with foure hundred horse, and fiue hundred footmen, with good hope either to succour the said towne, or els by surprise greatly to hinder the King. But the King hauing intelligences of his comming, met him about two or thrée leagues from Noyon, (as I haue heard reported) where his power was discomfited, slayne and taken prisoners, and he himselfe after being wounded in the assault was also taken prisoner. So the Lord knoweth bow, where and when to stay his enemies. The newes of this sorrowfull successe of the Leaguers flying abroad,
caused the Duke Aumale to assemble as great forces as he could make in the towne of Han, which is situated vpon the riuer Some betweene Saint Quintin and Peronne, vndertaking either to amend the fault committed by  Tauanes, or els to release the towne of Noyon, accompanied with the Lord Largue and Lawney with all their forces, ioyned all with the light horse∣men, the seauenth of August charged vpon the quarter of the Kings light horse, where they were stoutly receaued: and after more then twelue char∣ges giuen, the Kings companies (yet very like to haue the victorie of their enemies) began to retyre: at which retyre, that valiant man at armes the Lord Baron of Byron hauing twelue of his owne men did approach, and the Kings forces supposing he had brought a supply of fresh Souldiers, so soone as they heard him named, tooke a wonderfull courage, and seeing him in the middest of them, gaue a fresh charge vpon the enemie with such force, that they did driue the enemie euen into the gates of Han. To whom there was also comming a new succour and fresh supply of men, who per∣ceauing the euill successe of the rest, retyred in agayne: so that some of the Kings forces followed them euen into their Barriars. In these so many charges geuen, there were a number of armed men slayne on the enemies side, and among them diuers of commandement. In the number of the dead were found Don Francisco de Gueuara, the best Captayne of light Horsemen which the King of Spayne had in the low Countreys, also his lieutenant was slayne outright, with diuers other of great accompt. The Lord Longchamp (one of the best Captains of the rebels) was taken prisoner, with more then foure score men at armes of account, and lost aboue fifteene hundred of their best horses. The King lost in this skirmish about twelue horse of his light horsemen, and among a few which were slayne the Marshall of the light horsemen, whose death was greatly bewayled, beeing accompted a man of great valour. The same day the Duke de Mayne arriued at the said towne of Han, with all his troups of horsemen which he could gather, which thing made the King thinke that he would goe about either to raise or to interrupt the siege, or attempt some thing. In the meane time he lost no opportunity about this siege: for the same day that this exploit was done, to wit, the seauenth of August, the Canon began to beat a church that standeth in the middest of the Suburbes, which together with a great ditch did strongly defend the same. The sayd Church beeing battered from the morning to three a clock in  the after noone, had by that time made a great breach in the same. And a fierce assault being geuen, there were slayne of the enemies about thirty, and about fifty of the Souldiers retired into the vaultes of the said church.
The sayd Church beeing taken, and consequently the Suburb (in a ma∣ner as strong as the towne) gaue occasion both to them that had retired in∣to  the vaultes to yeeld to the Kings mercy, who sent them away safe with bagge and bagage, and also to the Gouernor of the towne to mooue spea∣ches of composition. For the Gouernor (called the Lord Vile) considering how the Towne was slenderly furnished of all thinges, but specially of men of armes, and that the most part of them had béene slayne in the assaults geuen to the Cittie, and how the King was strong and not like to bee enforced to depart afore hee had the vpper hand ouer the sayd Towne. And vnder∣standing that the Duke de Mayne was come to Han with Forces, in hope to relieue the sayd distressed towne, and that the Lord Rosne, who led the Duke de Mayne his army towards Lorreine, was returning backe to Laon in Champaygne, he delayed the time of composition to see what succor they would geue. But at length, seeing no reliefe comming, and the King vrging the towne, the sayd Lord Vile concluded an agreement with the King in this maner following. The Lord Vile (as well for himselfe as for the Gentlemen, Souldiers and inhabitants of Noyon) hath promised to yeeld the sayd towne vppon monday next following, being the eighteenth of August, together with all the munition for warre, artillerie and victualls, which at this present was therein, conditionally if sometime of the day the Duke de Mayne doo not giue him a battell, or by force put not within the towne one thousand soul∣diers, or by some meanes doo not raise the siege. Also that the sayd Ville, Gentlemen and Captains shall depart with armour, horses and baggage, and the Souldiers with their weapons and horse. And that the inhabi∣tants shalbe receaued into the Kings fauour, & entreated as good subiects, in rendring him their duetifull obedience: but specially and namely that the Lord of Ville his mother may freely remaine there & enioy her goods, in performing the submission of loyall fidelitie as other subiects. Item, that if any of the inhabitants be desirous to depart, they shal safe∣ly passe among the men of warre. Item, that the Lord Ville shall be permitted to send the Lord of Brouly to the Duke de Mayne, to aduertise him of the condition of this capitula∣tion, and that the King shall safely conduct him to that effect. And for the accomplishing of the premises, the sayd Lord Ville hath promised to sende hostages to the King, the Lord Rieulx, the Abbot of Genlis, with foure of the towne, such as the King shall choose, whom the King doth promise to deliuer vppon the performance of the sayd condi∣tions. The King also doth graunt to send two Captaynes into the towne to
keepe and see during the time, from labouring to the contrary. It had pleased the most famous and renowmed Queene of England,  during this siege, to send a new supply of men to the King, to assist him in the recouering the possession of his right, vnder the conduct of th most ho∣nourable and famous Earle of Essex, whom the King leauing his power before Noyan, went to meet at Gysors in Normandy, whom hee receaued in most courteous sort, accepting most thankfull her most excellent Maiesties gracious fauour, and the said Earle his good and readie will, for hazarding himselfe in such a dangerous iourney for his seruice. After the death of Frier Sixtus, which was hastened by the Spanish faction with a little slubber sauce, was elected a newe Vicar of Rome, of the house of Sfondraty, if I remember well, and is as much to say as burst bel∣lie, naming himselfe Gregory the 14. This Frier Gregory being set on horsebacke, will ride (as the prouerbe is) vntil he breake his neck. First in Ianuary he sent a Legate into France, agaynst whom the King procéeded as agaynst an enemie of the publique peace of his subiects, and in March last the sayd Frier Gregory pronoun∣ced a Bull agaynst the King, his Princes, Nobles, subiects and realme. Then not long after it is reported that he sent certain forces, mustered out of the Stewes of Rome, to the Duke of Sauoy to inuade Prouance, con∣ducted by some bastard of his: and that Superstition, Folly, iniury and wrong might goe together, he must coniure and charme the Standard of holy Church (as all the sort of such idolatrous Antichrists haue bin Con∣iurers, poysoners, and Sorcerers many yeares together). To play this Comedie, he sitteth disguised in his Pontificalibus, the Standard of holy Church holden before him, he hisseth, he bloweth, hee mumbleth, he cros∣seth, he charmeth, he stinketh: but behold, he that did hold it (rather by some presage and token of the fall of that idolatrous rabble, than by negligence) let the Standard fall vppon the braynesicke Frier Gregories head, which not onely did beate downe his triple Crowne from of his head, but also gaue a knocke vppon his foolish pate. All these companies shortly after were cut to peeces, and the charmed Standard taken by the Lord des Di∣guieres, as is reported. Fryer Gregorie not content with all these iniurious prouocations, sent one M. Marcilius Laudrianus, by name an Italian, by surname a Bri∣taine, but by sawcines and desperatnes a Iesuite, vnder the name of his Nuncio, to publish a certayne infamous libell, full of impietie heresie and sedition, vnder a Maske of religion in forme of Bulls, against the King, his Princes, Nobles & subieces, but specially agaynst the French popish Church, which this sawcie companion enterprized to publish at Pont de Larche in Normandie▪ whereupon the K. finding himselfe sore iniried at the hands of this tyrannous vsurper, commaunded his courts of Parlia∣ment
to proceede by law agaynst these iniuries, and so the Kings gene∣rall attourney in his court of Parliament, holden at Caen in Normandie,  requiring iustice to be done vnto the King, his Princes, Nobles and sub∣iects. The court of Parliament therefore, al Chambers assembled, the third day of August did proceede agaynst Fryer Gregorie his person, his v∣surped tyranny, his Nuncio and his Bulls. First, they doo declare the sayde Fryer Gregorie, an enemie vnto the peace of Christianitie, a troubler of the Catholick Romane▪ Religion, enemie to the King and Estate of France, a conspiratour and associate with the rebells within the realme, and accessary to the death of the late deceased King most trayterously murthered, a firebrand of sedition, and stirrer vp of warres, and procurer of murthers. Secondly, they doe condemne his vsurped power vpon the state and Church of France, to be vsurped, abusiue and wrongful, contrary to Gods worde, holy decrees and liberties of the French Church, commaunding all Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Colledges, Couents, Chapters, Communalties, bodies of Cities, Curats, Parsons and seruing Priests, not to acknowledge any superiority or power of the same Fryer Grego∣rie, nor to render him any obeisance, neyther to assist or fauour anie ex∣communications, publications or readings of any thing that should pro∣ceede from him. The court also dooth forbid, not to pursue or receaue of him, or anie other whatsoeuer qualitie or conditiō they be, his complices & adherents, any collations, confirmations, or prouisions for benefices, graces, dispen∣sations, or other expeditions, nor to answere, beare, or cause to be borne by way of banque or otherwise, any gold or siluer to ye court of Rome, nei∣ther to pay any thing or render obeisance to the Archbishops, Bishops, his adherents, who haue put in execution any of the pretended diffamato∣ry libell, in forme of excommunication or interdiction, in payne of con∣fiscation of bodie and goods, as infringers and perturbers of the pub∣lique peace. The court doth commaund the Ecclesiasticall persons, by vertue of the Kings letters directed vnto them, that they shall not suffer the liberty of the French Church to be in any sort diminished: but beeing assisted by their K. (their soueraigne Iustice) to oppose themselues against all the Popes enterprises. Thirdly, the court doth declare the foresayd Marcilius Ladrianus, Fryer Gregory his Nuncio, acommon enemy of al men, a kindler of hatred and a sower of sedition, commaunding the sayd pretended Nuncio to be pursu∣ed, taken and apprehended, aliue or dead, and to be deliuered to iustice, if it bee possible, to receaue the punishment according to the greatnes of his of∣fence.
But if he cannot bee apprehended, within three daye to be summo∣ned by the voice of the publike Cryer in the towne of Pont de Larche, that  there it may bee proceeded against him according to the Lawes of the Realme. The order of the courts of France is, that after a man is summoned at 3. seuerall tymes, if he doth not appeare, he is condemned as conuicted, and then executed in picture. Last of al, the Court doth declare Fryer Gregory his excommunication and Bulles, infamous libels full of impiety, heresie, deceit and slanders, & condemneth the same to betorne and burned publikly in the place of execu∣tion, by the publike executioner of iustice, forbidding all men to receaue, al∣low, reade, fauour or conceale the said infamous libell, vppon payne to bee attainted, & conuicted of high treason: & commaundeth also all manner of persons quickly to reueale to the court, if they should know any such to bee kept secretly on the paines aforesaid. This sentence of the Popes banishment, and of all his tyrnnie out of France, was pronounced the third day of August at Caen in Normandie. The selfe same proceedinges were vsed in all Courtes of the Realme, whereuppon ensued the burning of the sayd Bulles in diuers and sundry places of the Realme, but diuersly, but euery where in as infamous ma∣ner as could bee. It was burned at Tours in this maner. The Magistrats and the common people of Tours being assembled be∣fore the Pallace gate, there a piller was crected a little distant from the foot therof, there was a fire made by the common Hang-man of the town, then did he take the Bull and hanged it on the top of the Piller, which bee∣ing done, he kindled another fire at the very foot of the Piller, which by degrees crept vp vntill it tooke hold of the Bull, which presently was consumed with fire, to the great ioy of all the beholders. Now Master Fryer, I ween you be one of them that did drop out of the horses belly of Troy, but I will thinke rather that you dropped out of an Asses bellie, because you haue an Asses head. Did not a little before your Standard reproue you to your face, and told you what would follow your saucines: and to put you in considerati∣on of your folly gaue you a souse vpon the pate: And you beeing of Asses brood, will goe about to get Bulles, and lo, your Bulles bee turned into gydie Calues. You neuer read (for reading belongs not to your occupa∣tion, but scortari crebro, crebro conuiuarier) that it was writtē in the horse of Troy, sero sapiunt Phryges, but it shal be hereafter in Asino Romano, scrip∣tum erit sero sapiunt Romanenses. You knew not when you were well, now haue with you to Auignon. The towne of Noyan being surrendered, according to the agréement be∣twéene the King and the gouernour of the saide towne, the King went to
receaue the right honorable Lord Earle of Essex (as is said) in the towne of Gisors, and from thence returned into Champaigne, to ioyn with the Ger∣mans,  who approached the borders of France, leauing the Marshall By∣ron, to reconduct his army into Normandie. During the siege of Noyan, the Lord of Pierrefont had béen taken prisoner, and had promised vpon his deliuerance, to surrender the Castell Pierrefont, a place situated vpō a rock, and inaccessable almost on euery side. The said Lord of Pierrefont being a desperat Leaguer, had rather breake his faith with dishonor, then to ful∣fill his promise with honour: whereupon the Marshall Byron layed the siege before the saide Castell, and battered it with nine skore shot of Or∣dinance, wherewith hee made but a very small hole: the stuffe where∣with the said Castell is builded, being of such qualitie, as resisted the shot, euen to admiration, which caused the said Marshall Byron to breake off his enterprise, and march toward Normandie, who ioyned with the English forces, conducted by the right Honorable Lord, the Earle of Essex, the ninth of September, and the twenty one of the said moneth, laide the siege before the towne of Gourney. It is saide before in the seauenth booke, how after the cruell death of King Henry the third, and last of the rase of Ʋaloys, the authors of that murther, vnder the conduct of the Duke d'Mayne, with great bragges and confidence, went with a mighty army into Normandie, hoping to op∣presse the King, who with a small power had retyred to Diepe, for the cau∣ses there alleaged. It is said also, how the Duke d'Mayne in that iourney, tooke the said towne of Gourney, and the Lord Rubempre which his companie therein. This Towne is distant from Roan ten Leagues, from Gisors fiue, from Beauuoys sixe, and by estimation somewhat bigger then Diepe. The Leaguers had fortified it with fortifications, munition of warre, and strong garrisons, for Leagued Gentlemen of the Countrey, to the number of foure skore, and such power as they thought good to entertaine, had settled themselues therein, and from thence issuing dayly, made cour∣ses to the gates of Mante, Vernon, Pont de larche, and Gisors, spoyling and wasting all that was in their way, and taking prisoners such as trauailed on the high way to Diepe. This towne being besieged, the enemy put on a stout countenance at the first, and being summoned to surrender the said towne, they answered that they had receaued it of the Duke d'Mayne, and for him they intended to kéepe it, neither would they render it, but to him onely. This answer being giuen, the English forces intrenched themselues within a stones cast of the gate, and in making and kéeping the said Tren∣ches, they had sixe men hurt, and one killed. The enemies attempted di∣uers times to put men into the towne, but they were in such sort looked to
by the English men, that they durst neuer approach. The 25. day of September at night, the Marshall Byron planted nine  pieces of Ordinance before the towne, & the 26. in the morning hee began to batter it, and a breach being made, the English men were called to the number of one hundred shot to giue the assault, who with great gladnes approached within sixescore pases of the wals, the breach was scarse assaul∣table, the ditch was more then halfe full of water: it is reported that they had within certaine sluces, which they might haue opened, and greatly mo∣lested the assaulters, the French men were very vnable to giue the assault, because of their long toyling and wearines, yet on a suddaine the enemies demaunded parley, which being graunted, they yeeldéd to foure dishono∣rable conditions: such is the fainting of rebels. First, that all Souldiours should depart without bagage and armour, with a white rod in their hands. But the Lord Earle of Essex, excepted the Queenes Maiesties subiects: therein was found none but one Irish man, who was executed. The second was, that the Gouernour, Captaines, Lieutenants and Gentlemen of quality, should remaine to his mercy. It was thought that the Gouernour and some Captaines should be executed. The third was, that the Citizens should haue their liues, but their goods rested at the Kings pleasure. The fourth is, that they should receaue such garrisons as should bee thought good. The taking of this towne is a great ease to the Countrey, and preparation for the siege of Roan. About the 28. the army tooke his way toward Caudebeck, a smal towne, situated vpon a rock, on the banck of Seyne, betweene Roan and Newha∣uen, entending to cleere all the coast round about Newhauen, of all filth of rebellion. FINIS.
¶ Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Woodcock, and are to be sould at his shop in Paules Church∣yard, at the signe of the black Beare. 1591.
