7605.5 S1914 22914992 25874
LIBER VIARVM DEI.
THIS IS the boke of the wais of god whiche was she∣wed from the Angell of god almighti, most high vnto Elizabeth the hād mayden of Christe, and of the lyuynge God, in the fyft yeare of the vi∣sitation of her, In the which yere the spirite of our Lorde hathe visited her, to the health of all theim whyche perceyue and take the fatherlye monicions or warnyn∣ges of our lord god with a thankful blessyng and benediction. And it was in the yeare of our Lor∣des incarnation a thou¦sande, a hundred fyftye and sixe.
¶ The fyrst Chapter. IT was doone in the beginnyng of the fyfte yeare of my visitation, then dra∣wynge nere the feast of Pentecoste, called whit sontyde, I Elizabeth in the vision of my spiryte haue sene a highe hylle, lightned in the toppe of that hill, with plētuous light. And as thre wais set or stretched from the fote or roofe of that hyll vnto the height therof. And of those thre ways one which was the mid¦dell waye sette and put right agaynste me, that way had the semyng or likelyhode of the cleare heauen, or of the stone Iacynctyne. And that
way whiche was on the right partes to me appe¦red grene. And that wai which was on the lefte partes was pourple. There stode forsooth a certayne noble man in the toppe of that hyll, a∣gaynst the mydle waye, and he was clad with a iacinetyne cote, and gyrt at the raynes, with a white brode gyrdle, and his face shinynge as the sonne. His eies trewly bryghtly glitterynge in maner of sterres. And the heares of his head as woull moste whyte. He had forsoothe in his mouth a swerd of either part sharpe. And in his right hande he hadde a key. In his lefte hande trewelye he hadde as thoughe tt were a kyn∣ges
steptre. The second vision. ¶ The .ii. Chapiter. IN the solempnite of Penthecost cal¦led whitsontide I didde see agayne in the height of the said hyl on the left parts of the said mā next vnto the ways of the fyrst vision, other thre ways hauyng such varietie or difference as foloweth. One forsothe of those thre ways whi∣che appered nexte vnto the greene waye, was fayre or pleasaunt, but on euery parte therof so walled & couered with thick brembles that thei whiche walked by that way must nedes be pric¦ked with those brles
without or excepte they diligently streygned to∣gither, & bowed downe myghte go that waye. There appeared also a certayne pathe delecta∣ble, very straite, and as but littell troden or v∣sed, & that waye had no brembles, but was of either part walled with pleasaunte grasse, and plentuousely with flou¦res of dyuers kyndes. Forsoothe the myddell waye betweene those twoo wayes was one waye, hauynge more breadthe than the other wayes: & it was playne or smoothe, and as it were hauynge a paue∣mente of readde tyles: whyche waye whan I diligently had loked on, the angell of the Lorde
whiche was assistant to me, sayd: Thou lookest on this waye, and it se∣methe to thee fayre and proufitable to walke in it: But it is perillous, and they that walke by it sone or easily do falle. ¶ The thyrde Vision. ¶ The .iii. Chapiter. AGayne in the V∣tas of Pentecoste called Whiteson∣tide, in the tyme of the midday rest, sodeynely the eies of my hert were opened withoute vex∣ing of my fleshe, as and in the foresayd visions, and I did see agayn all that I didde se afore in the visions afore reher∣sed, And besyde those waies whiche I did see afore, our Lorde dydde
shewe to me other foure wais next the .iii. waies of the first vision on the right partes of the mā whiche stode on the top of that hylle. One of those wais whiche was next to the purple waye seemed to haue greatte difficulte vnto the mid∣des of the hyll, because of the thicknes of brem¦bles, with whiche that way was sette on bothe sydes. The other parte truly of that waie vnto the top of the hylle was pleasaunt with floures, & free without lettynge or impedimente, but it was narrowe or straite and it appered but a lit∣tel trodden or vsed. The waye whiche was next to that semed to be drye and in maner of a fielde
eared, sharp with great cloddes and very com∣berous to them that go or walke therein. And I was thynkyng to my self of these two wayes how harde the goinges therein was: And the angell whyche stode by me answeryng, sayd: If any doo walke by these waies, let hym beware that he offende not, nor hurte his foote: He for∣sothe that dothe offende and hath fallen, if he do not ryse agayne, but bi∣deth in his fall, he shall not see the euerlastyng lighte. Truely the other two wayes whiche to∣gether with these wais didde appere, they were playne, and spedye to walke, and fayre to the syghte hauyng bryght∣nes
as the ground well vsed or trodden in the hyghe waie. And when I beganne to looke on those waies, I hearde agayne the angell, sai∣ing: The waie of right∣wise mē is made right, and the iurney of sainc∣tes is made redy. The Interpretacion of the first vision. ¶ The fourth chapiter. THis is the Inter∣pretacion of the first visyon, as by thangel I haue lerned. The highe hil is the al∣titude or heighte of the heauenlye blisfulnesse. The lyght in the toppe of the hyll is the clere∣nes of euerlasting lyfe. The dyuers wayes in the hyll, they be the dy∣uers
and varyable as∣cenciōs of them whiche bee chosen, wherewith they ascend to the kyng¦dome of clerenes. The Iacinctine waye, is the study of the diuine con∣templacion: they walke in that way which with busye meditacion, and holy desyre, make sure or fast the eye of theyr mynd in heauenly thin¦ges. The greene waye longeth or pertayneth to them which studie to be perfite & irreprehen∣sible in the actiue lyfe, going forth in al the cō∣mandementes of oure lord without quarell, & thei in all their workes take no hede to transi∣torie thynges, but at∣tende & set the goynges of theyr mynde in the
grene way to attain to the high & euerlasting gift of the high & great reward of euerlastyng life. The purple wai is the ascēding of the bles¦sed martirs, who wor∣kyng in the Iustice of god by pacience in the torments of their pas∣sions in the purple of their blud, thei contēde to passe & to go to the diuine or godly lighte. The noble man vpon the hill is Christe, the shinyng of his chere or face is the signe of his diuine or godly cleare∣nes. His eies with be∣mes glittering, is his plesant lokes or aspec∣tes vpon his elects or chosē. His heares like white wol shewth him to be old of dais, altho
he was borne after his manhoode in the laste dayes. The two edged swoorde in his mouthe is the sentence of hys tetrrible iudgement, to procede frō his mouthe strikynge them that be reproued wyth double contrition of bodye and soule. The keye in his right hande hath appe∣red, for why, he it is whyche onely openeth the gate of lyfe, and no mā shutteth it: and he shutteth, and none can open it. Hee it is also, whyche also to whome he will, sheweth & ope∣neth the profounde and secrete thynges of the mysteries of God, and ther is none can shet it. And he signeth or shut∣teth, & none can lose or
open that signe or shut∣tynge. The sceptre in his lefte hande, is his kyngly or roiall power, which he hym selfe bea∣reth wytnesse, that he hath receyued & taken that power, accordyng to his manlye nature, saying: There is giuen to me all power in hea∣uen and in earth. The Iacinctine coate she∣weth the vertue of hea∣uenlye contemplation, which perfectely posses∣sed al the whole mynde of our sauior. Forsothe he tooke not the spirite to measure, as other men do. For in hym all fulnes of the godheade dwelleth and abidethe in hym corporally. The brode whyte gyrdle be∣tokenethe in hym the
beautye or bryghtenes of inuiolable innocēcie. He dydde appere in the waie whiche signifieth the Contemplation of his diuinitie or godhed: for why, so he will haue that waye abyde for e∣uer, where as the other waies shall not be euer permanent & abidynge. He didde not appere in all the wais, and neuer¦thelesse he was in euery of those waies. For why eche one of theim beto∣keneth syngular ver∣tues, by the whiche iust or rightuous men come to that high hill, where they receyue for syngu∣lar vertues syngular re¦wardes. And in alwais of truthe God almigh∣ty is to be hadde in con∣templation.
¶ The Interpretation of the second vision. The fyfte Chapter THe misterye of the seconde vysion is of this maner. Three wayes whyche haue appered of the left partes of the man stan∣dyng in the hyll next to the grene waie, they ex∣presse ye propretie of .iii. orders in the churche, yt is to say, of thē yt be ma¦ried, of them that liueth chaste or continent, & of prelates & gouernors. The waye walled with brembles, is the waye of them whiche be ma∣ried. This waye appe∣reth pleasaunt, for that this lyfe frome the be∣ginnyng was institute or ordeyned of God. And yf laufullye it bee
obserued or kepte, it is faire & well pleasyng in the sighte of our lorde. And they whiche walke so in it, without doubte they ascend into the hill of the lorde. but infinite thornes & prickes of se∣cular cures & busynesse commeth on of euerye parte, with the whyche the walkers or goers in that way muste nee∣des bee pricked, excepte that with scarcelye ly∣uyng all maner waies they constrayne theym¦selues, & alwaies hum∣bling thēselfe afore god and men, they muste go as it wer bowed doune. The way which is free from brēbles, and wal∣led aboute euery where with plesant floures, is the way of them which
lyueth continente and chaste. Forsoothe the propretie of them is to withdrawe their minde frome all cares and bu∣synesses of this present lyfe, and to thinke what theyr duetie is to oure Lorde, that they maye bee holy bothe in bodye and soule: Strayte or narrowe is this waie: For why that laufullye and wyselye this waye maye bee obserued and kepte, it is necessarye to sette straightely the goinges of theym whi∣che walke in this waie in the custody of greate discipline or correction, lest perauenture they li¦uynge after their owne will, maie fall into for∣nication, or els be depu∣ted with folish virgins,
or with delicate wydo∣wes, which here liuing are dead. This waie is but a lytell troden or v∣sed: for in respecte of o∣ther, few there be whi∣che enter by this waie: and fewer there be whi¦che abydeth or continu∣eth in it. That waie is walled about very plea¦sauntly with floures of diuers kindes. For why all kinde of vertues ad∣ornethe or beautifyeth the liues of them which lyue in continencie and chastitie. The myddell way betwene those two wayes is broader than they bee, and that is the way of the prelates and rulers. Forsothe where as that waie is institu∣ted or ordeyned to go∣uerne the way of them
that bee maryed, or the waie of them that lyue chast or continent, or of bothe, therfore the lesse they bee restreigned or coarcted, the more free∣lyer they maye vse or exercise their owne wyl And by that the goyn∣ges of theym whyche doo walke in that way maye easylye slyppe or slyde in it, and that the playnnesse of that waie aptely doothe signifie. And therfore that way is sayd to be perillous, for so manny there bee whyche falleth in it, so in that waie very fewe be found stable or sure. Forsoothe because that waie seemeth to haue a pauement of redde ty∣les, whyche are sodden or roasted in the earthe
with fyres: That sig∣nifieth the busynes and charge of Prelates, wherwith it is necessa∣ry theyr myndes busily to bee occupied, and or as it wer soden among their subiects, to whom they owe procuration bothe of sowle and of bodye. The Interpretacion of the thirde vision. The .vi. chap. WHan I asked of the angel myne instructour the Interpretacion of the thirde vision, he sayd to me: Lo thou haste be∣gonne the bokes of the wais of god, as it was promysed to thee: ther∣fore the angell sayd so:
for in the yere afore on a certayne day, when I was in spirite, he ledde me as into a certayne medowe, in whyche me dowe there was a tent fixed and sette vp. And we entred thereinto it. And the Aungelle she∣wed to me a great heap of bookes there layde, and hee sayde: Seeste thou these bookes? All these are yet to be made afore the day of Iuge∣mente. And forsoothe, he lyftynge vppe one of those bookes, sayde: This is the booke of the Ways of God, whi∣che is to bee shewed by thee, whan thou shalte visyte thy syster Hyl∣degarde, and shalt haue hearde her. And so for∣soothe it beganne con∣tinually
to bee fulfylled when I wente agayne frome her. ¶ The declaration of the .iiii. waies. Cap. vii. THis is the signifi∣cation of the foure wayes which wer shewed in the thyrde vysion. The fyrste whi∣che was nexte to the purple waye in the ne∣ther or lower part was sharpe with thornes, and in the vpper parte forsoothe it was speedy and flourishynge, it sig∣nifieth the lyfe of them whiche laufully lyuing in the worlde, do make halfe theyr dayes in ca∣res or busines of world lye thynges. And from
thensefoorthe go forth to the flouryshynge and speedie waye of theym, which lyueth continent and chaste. They with theyr rule constrainyng them selues ascende to∣gyther with theim in∣to the hylle of god. The drye waye, and sharpe with cloddes, that is the hardest kynd of lyfe, in that waie go∣eth foorthe holye here∣mites, and manny other hauynge their conuer∣sation in company or fe¦lowshyppe of men. These men make theyr fleshe leaue beyonde all measure of manne, and drye it vp with fastyn∣ges, watchynges, kne∣lynges, scourges, heare and with manny moste greuous afflictions.
All such thynges be as mooste sharpe cloddes. Muche vigilaunt and good discretion is neces¦sary to them, whiche do walke in that waie, lest peraduenture with to muche sharpnesse of su∣che thynges they maye offend, and fal more gre¦uousely then other men Of the two wayes whi¦che appered with those waies whiche afore are written or described: One of them as it was sayde, semed to be more vsed or more trodden, and also more spedy. Of that waye the aungelle myne instructour spake sayenge: By this waye go forth the holy soules of infantes, whiche are sanctifyed in the holye baptsme, and go frome
this lyfe within seuen yeares, for whye they which do not expert nor know the malice of the worlde they with moste free and with spedy go∣inges come to the kyng¦dome of god. Truly of the other way the angel sayd: this is the way of yong men adolescence, whiche more slowlyer than the other go forth. And therfore their way apperith lesse spedy and lesse vsed or troden. Lo these be the visions and the interpretacions of them. Without doubte he whiche hath opened myne eies, yt I mighte se the visions of god he by his angell as it plea¦sed hym thoose visions to be vnderstand in this maner as is afore writ¦ten
haue showed. ¶ An other vision. The .viii. Cha∣piter. IT ws doone in the feaste of saynt Iames, whan I was in spirite, and did see the vision or sight of the wais of god, I was take vp and as it were nere to the toppe in the hylle of god and I be∣helde. And lo that great light which occupied or spred the toppe of the hil it semed to be cut or de∣parted in the mids, and I loked in by it and did se a multitude of sainc∣tes the number of them coulde not be estemed. And the aungelle my leader sayde vnto me.
Looke and see and con∣syder all these, whyche thou nowe seest. Here thou seest Martyrs, ho¦ly byshoppes and confes¦sours of our Lorde, vir∣gins, religious persons of bothe kyndes, wido∣wes and secular, mari∣ed persones, and noble persons, and them that were not noble, all these reignyng with Christe. All these haue walked the wayes of our lorde, the holy wayes whyche thou hast sene, and they haue come to, and haue attayned and receyued the euerlastynge glorye of Christe oure Lorde with his aungelles. Nowe therefore euery one oughte to consyder his waye: And he why∣che hath walked vnrigh¦tousely
or not truely, he must or ought to correct himselfe with humilite charitie and obedience, and so dresse his way, & if he perfectly commeth to, he shal receiue euer∣lastyng rewarde. ¶ Of the waie of con∣templatiue liuyng. The fyrste Sermon. AFter this, I was restyng in my lyt∣tell bedde, but yet I tooke no sleape: And sodeynely the spirite of our lorde dyd visite me, and fulfilled my mouth with this sermon as fo¦loweth. Take hede now therefore you, whyche haue forsaken and re∣noūced worldly desyres and haue chosen to fo∣lowe the steppes of
hym whiche hath called you into his meruail∣lous lyght: and also he hath named you his e∣lecte chyldren to hym, and hath ordeyned you in the end of the worlde to iudge the children of Israel. Thinke to your selfe how you may lyue with lowlynes or meke¦nesse, and with obedy∣ence, and with charitie, withoute grudge, and wythoute detraction, and without enuy, and wythoute pryde, and frome all other vyces absteyne your selues. Loue you eche one to∣gyther with brotherlye loue that your heauen∣ly Father bee not blas∣phemed in you, and so he to be displeased: and then you maye perisshe
frome the ryghte waie, that is from the way of contemplation of hym. Then the aungelle of the Lord prosecuted set¦tyng to this sermon in this maner: if forsothe there bee amonge you striues and discensions detractions, grudgyn∣ges, wrath, hate, enuy, extollyng of eies, appe∣tyte of vaynglory, vayn speeches, scurrilities, whyche is yll behauior in their deedes, fyllyng of the bealy, sluggysh∣nesse or sleapynge, vn∣cleannesse of the fleshe, ydelnes, and such other lyke vices, in whyche doo walke the chyldren of this worlde, what place to the diuyne or Godlye contemplation shall there bee in you? And
be reiterent to aungels: And the pure and clean thynges of the sacra∣mentes of Christ why∣che ought to be worship¦ped, thei dyshonor with theyr vnreuerent mini∣sterie and with vnlaw∣ful hert: who so reproue them, they laugh him to scorne: & him thei make heuy with cursyng and persecutiō. They which seme to bee beste of that sort, they be abhomina∣ble afore the lord. They walke in clothes of hu∣militie, but their hert is farre from it: they mul∣tiplie praiers, but what profitteth that while in their hertes they speake agaynst god, while bro∣therly charitie they ne∣glect or forsake: one en∣uieth an other and back
biteth, and for prelacye they stryue. They pro∣fesse the despising of the world, but those things whiche beelonge to the world, they do worship, and those they without shame couer and desire: And they be born about wt euery wynd of theyr owne will. Thei cast a∣way the ordinaunces of the anciēt holy fathers. They set thēselues gre¦dily into the cares or bu¦synes of the world, and thei fulfill the church wt sclaunders. And lo for ye cause religion suffereth despisyng, and faith suf∣freth diuision or cutting asunder. And what shal I adde to theym more saith our lord: Lo I cry after them, and thei wil not heare nor harken.
The voyce of my war∣nynge they put & strike it away as it wer with theyr hele or foote. I vi¦site theim by suche my graces which haue not ben harde of afore, and their visitation thei wil not know. And more o∣uer they do laughe it to scorne. I smyte them & they recke not, nor be so¦ry therfore: I cast them hedling doune, and thei are not afraid: The wo of them is an wo horri∣ble, it is reposed to me. Lo it shall come anone, and as a soden flowing & ragyng water, it shall fall vppon them, & shall wynd them into pardi∣tion or losse vncurable: those whiche he findeth without feare. You ther¦for my peple nat people
of fained religion, you which haue determined in your mindes to fight agaynst the world, & to beare heauen in youre mynde: You (I saye) go away from them which be of that sort afore re∣hersed, and bee you nat partetakers of theym. Stande in the waie of the vysion whyche you haue chosen, and make cleane the eyes of your herte, that you may lift theym vp into the con∣templation of the light, in the whiche dwelleth lyfe, and your redemp∣tion. Forsothe these be thse thynges whyche maketh cleaue the eyes of youre heartes, that they may be lifted vp to the true lyght. The ca∣styng away of worldly
busines, affliction of the fleshe, contrition of the hert, often & priuie con∣fession of syn, & the wa∣shing or lauer of wepīg for the offence of synne. And whā all vnclennes or foulenesse is sent out or put quite away: then these thynges be those, which extol or set vp the eies of your herte. The meditation of ye meruai¦lous essence of god, and the inspectiō or inward∣ly loking on the chast or pure truthe. A strong & clean praier. The ioyful¦nes of ye praise or laude of god, & the burning de¦sire in god. Halfe you these thynges, & be you still in these, and runne you towarde the viuifi∣cal light, which light of∣freth him selfe to you as
to his children, and wil¦fully setteth himself in∣to your myndes. With∣draw your hertes from your selues, & geue thē into those thynges whi¦che you haue now herd. and your hertes shalbe fulfilled with godly splē¦dour or shinynge, & you shalbe ye childrē of light and as the aungelles of god, which angels cesse not desirously to drawe in toward the lord ma∣ker, and agayn to shede or to poure in ye strēgth of their contemplation into his original. O you chyldren of Adam, see∣meth it vnto you but a small thyng to be made the children of god? And whi turn you awei your face frō ye contēplatiō of his there, or frō the plea¦sant
loke of him whiche hath geuen such power to men to you singular∣ly which haue chosen to be pesible in this world and in the earthe to bee conformable to angels. You are the lanternes burning which the lord hath ordeined in his ho¦ly hylle to lighten or to geue lyght with youre wordes, & with your ex¦amples ye darknesses of the world. Se and take you hede that the lighte whiche is in you, be nat made voide or taken a∣waie with the wynd of pride or of couetousnes, whiche wynd blew out the light of your fyrste parentes in Paradise: bowe away youre eare frome the cries of this world, and geue silence
to the spirite the whiche speaketh in you. Make perpetuall holyday of oure Lorde in your har¦tes, and the peace of God shall reste vppon you, whyche ouercom∣methe and is aboue all wytte or knoweledge, and you shall delighte in the multitude of the sweetenesse of hym. Bee not moued nor let nat youre myndes bee troubled all though the worlde despise you, and esteeme you to bee as deade and barayne: bee not sorye or heauye all thoughe with sorowes, throwes, and with po∣uertie your life be made thinne, nor bowe not a∣way your eies from the sight of the light of him whiche is afore youre
face. Lo forsoothe it is nere and at hande, that thys worlde shall va∣nysshe awaye, and the flower therof must dye, and you shall iudge the louers thereof, and you shall treade the neckes of theym whyche waxe proude. And they seyng shall stonny fearefully vpon your glory, when your richesses shall bee shewed foorth the why∣che you haue treasured to youre selfe in hea∣uen: and then that whi¦che is imperfect of your contemplation shall be made voyde. And the face of euerlastinglight shall take the eyes of his Egles, and as the floud ouerflowynge, so shall redound his light¦nyng or shinynge in the
heartes of men, whiche haue sought hym in tru¦the. The angell had not yet ended these wordes which he by times spake to me, when there tel to me a certayne doubt of the distinctiō of ye waies of God which were de∣scribed. And I asked hym, sayeng, My lorde, Are not we Cenobites, that is, religious perso∣nes in the way of contē∣plation, where as we be in the way of conti∣nencie, may it be so that wee maye bee in bothe waies? and the angell sayde: The way of con∣templation is common to you with them of the clergy, as ye way of cōti∣nency is cōmon to thē of the clergie wt you, know thou neuerthelesse, that
many be in the way of continencie, which are not in the way of con∣templation. And there be many of the clergie which neither walk in the way of cōtemplati¦on, nor in the way of continencie, & those be vnhappye. Neuer the les thei suppose thē sel¦ues to be in the way of contemplation when they are not so in dede. And agayne I asked more, sayinge: What shall we say of the by∣shops & other gret pre¦lates of the churche? And the angell answe¦red to me these woor∣des: Pride reigneth in the hertes of prela∣tes & of them which be greatte persones, and thei thruste god backe
from their hertes, and he wyll not rest but v∣pon hym which is low¦ly or meke, and vppon him that is quiet, and vpon him which drea∣deth his wordes. For∣soth ons our sauior cō¦manded his disciples, sayeng: Thei which re¦ceiue not you, go forth from them, & smite the dust frō your fete into the testimonie of them And what thinkest yt of god, sauior & maker of all creatures, whan he shal com, what shal he do to them which will not receyue hym, but put him back frō them Without dout he shall send them into euerla∣styng fire, where shall be weping of eies, and gnasshynge of teethe.
What shall profite thā to them pride & riches? And all these sermons or wordes performed in ye day which we had the memory of saincte Michael: the angel a∣gayne presented hym to me, and I spake to him, saying: My lorde may we surely affirme al these wordes or ser∣mons to procede from thee? Therefore this I saide, for in parte he spake these woordes, neuer the lesse so that I coulde not see his face, and truely these wordes in parte were pronounced by my mouthe in spyryte. The angell therefore with great seueritie or sharpenes lookyng on me, said: Beleue with
all thy herte all these wordes whiche be des∣cribed or afore reher∣sed, haue proceded frō my mouthe: Blessed is he which shal rede and shall here the wordes of this boke: for why, they be tru, nor neuer they decline frō truth. Of the waie of actiue lyuyng or lyuers. ANd by and by the angell began an other sermon wt these wordes, sayinge: I warne them whiche be oppressed in world∣ly busynesse & cares sometyme: or at one tyme or other to think & to remēbre what be ye preceptes of life, that is to loue god aboue al thyng, and their neigh¦bour
as thēselues not to flea or kill, not to do thefte or felony, nor to couet any other mens goodes. These & other thinges which ar writ¦ten in the lawes of the lord, to kepe & obserue with al diligēce, and so they may know yt they may entre ye kyngdom of god. If thei bee not able to lifte or to rayse vp theimselues to the helth of contemplatiō: Thei must study to ful¦fill the office of laufull dedes: They must and ought to haue always in theyr myndes, the drede and feare of the lord, & he shall dresse al theyr woorkes & theyr doynges. They ought oftē to come to ye house of praier, which is the
churche, and that with greate reuerence. And with their faculties or goodes when nede is, they muste honorably helpe it: Thei ought to worshyp the sacramen¦tes of ye lord in faith & ī humilite, & thei must gladly giue ere to here the word of god: Thei ought to esteme ye sācti¦fied mynisters of god worthy of all honor: & thei must be cōsenting & agre with mekenes to their disciplin. They ought to giue peasibly to euery man yt is his right or duty, nor they may geue to none any occasiō of quarel. And if any wrong be don to them, thei must suffer, leauyng the reuenge∣mēt therof to ye iudge
of al men. Thei ought and muste speake con∣stantly the word or ser¦mon of truthe, when tyme serueth: nor they may not refuse to take labour on them selues for Iustice sake. They must defende a father∣lesse child & a widowe, and them that haue no helpe when theibe op∣pressed, & wt pitie to cō¦fort thē in ther angui∣shes or troubles. Thei ought to refreshe hym whiche is hungry and thirsty, they must cloth the naked, they oughte to gather into them su¦che persons as lacketh lodging they must vi∣site them whiche be in prison or diseased with sicknes: thei shuld liue gratis, that is without
reward, and intend to do all workes of mer∣cy and equitie. They which are wise & haue knowledge oughte to teache & instruct them whiche be vntaughte: thei ought to cal them again to truth whiche do erre: or those which walke shrewdly out of the waie: they must set neighbors that striue at a cōcord: thei ought to flee from drunken∣nes, & from muche ea∣tyng, and from vnclen¦nes of the fleshe: they must leaue and fle frō vaine plaies & synnes of woordes & ydelnes and arrogancy of gaie clothes and thornes of cares, as the worde of god commandeth, set∣ting all their busynes
find mynd toward god, nor thei may not forget the affliction of ye flesh. I sai to them that serue to workes of necessitie: worke you in your wor¦kes with a good & a sim¦ple hert without grud∣gyng, & without vayne speeche, & that none be greued by you, and that you may help hym that suffreth nedynesse. Be∣ware of all auarice or couetousnesse. Forsoth that causeth yt all your workes maie be deceit∣ful, and you shal lie and defraude or deceue your neighbors, and so for∣sweare the name of our lord, & gather togither riches wickedly, which drowneth to deth them that possesse them. You which be in high autho¦ritie
do not proudely or sternely to them whych be aboute you, nor op∣presse theym not wic∣kedlye, but rather de∣fende theim, and in all benignitie kepe theym, and make fyrme and sure peace among you. For therfore you ar set vppe of oure Lorde. This is the waie of the Lorde ryght and faire, the waye of holy dee∣des. He that walkethe in this waye vnto the ende, he shall fynd lyfe, and shal also rest in the holye hlle of god, and his chaunce or lotte is with the chylderne of lyghte. ¶ Of the waye of Martyres. A Sermon.
A Feastful day was in hande, and we were assistyng in office of diuine ser¦uice, where as of cu∣stome the angell appe∣red to my syghte, When afore hym I accused and blamed my selfe of my faultes or synnes, thynkynge them to bee the cause why he taried longer thenne he was wont to do, and I sayd vnto hym: My lorde, it may plese the now that thou wyll tell to vs the discipline of the thirde waie which is of holye martirs, nr be not re∣frained frō this thy be∣nignitie bycause of my faultes. Then he ope∣nyng his mouth spake, sayeng: Christ the lābe goth afore his holy mar¦tyrs,
& they folow hym with psalms & crounes ioyeng together to hym with a noble triumphe. And Christe hym selfe appereth in theim as a glasse and example, and as a glorious beauty∣fulnes. Much and ma∣ny are the passions by the whiche it behoueth the chyldren of God to bee crowned, and none shall be crouned, but he yt laufully hath fought. Heare you these thyn∣ges, and with your hert perceiue you that suffre persecution for iustyce, go you ioying by the no¦ble way, by the waye of the menne of warre of oure Lorde, made pur∣ple with the bloudde of Saynctes, and of the lambe. Wayle not you,
nor let no grudge ascēd into your hert against our lord, as though you were of hym forsaken, and as some new thing myght chaunce to you. Reade you in the scrip∣tures of the holy ghost, and thynke agayne on the olde daies. All they as many as haue been afore you whiche haue walked in this way ech one haue plesed god in their laboures, and by many anguishes or pai¦nes they haue gon into the brode libertie of the glory of the children of god. The firste whiche ranne afore the lambe was Abell, whiche dyd shede his bloude in the earthe afore the lord vn¦der the hand of his wic¦ked brother, in testimo∣nie
of innocencie, faith∣ful Abraham father of faithful people was sti∣red of wicked people to do idolatry, and he dyd those rather to be dissol¦ued with fyre, than to syn in his and our lorde god, and by the hand of ye lord he was broughte out from the fyre of the Caldeis. Ioseph where he was a louer of inno∣cēcie, and he accused the fauit or crime of his bre¦thren to his father, he was sold to aliens. And agayn where he wolde not consent or agree to the wickednes of ye har∣lot the aduouterer, he therfore suffred prison∣ment a long tyme with a pleasant mynde. The seruantes of truth, the prophetes of the Lord
haue fought vnto deth agaynst the preuarica∣tours of the lawe, and by many passions haue beene consumed. The children of the lorde in Babylon dydde speake gaynst the commande∣ment of ye proude kyng whom al the earth fea∣red, and they chose ra∣ther to be giuen to hor∣rible fyres, than to the contumely of our lord & creatour, to bowe theyr knees afore a made cre¦ature. Daniell loued of god for that he gaue ho¦nour to the lorde god of his fathers, he was gy∣uen to the teeth of liōs. Plentuous is the num¦bre of sainctes, whiche afore the coming of our sauiour haue giuen ex∣amples of worthy passi¦ons
and suffrynges lau¦dable, & with their deth haue preuēted the deth of our lorde. Last of all was innocent. Baptist, a greatter than he dyd not rise among the chil∣dren of women, and he for testimony of truthe lost his heade, and was gyuen to a mayden in price of a skyp or leape, so it was comely to bee done, and it was plea∣syng afore the lord, that not onely the bloude of lambes and of wethers and of other beastes, shuld be sent forth afore in figure to the bloud of the lambe whiche was to be offred for the helth of the worlde, but that also the blod of the chi∣dren of god, which were to be redemed shulde be
shedde in the coming a∣gainst him. Forsothe in the last days was sente frome the secrete of the father the offerd lambe taried & abiden for from the begynnynge of the world whom Cherubin and Seraphin and all the multitude of angels do worship to clense the sinne of the world, and they whome he came to saue, haue done in hym what thei wold. Bokes be full of his labours, and of his anguishes, and you rede his passi∣ons, and you do not per¦ceiue them with hearte and mynd. O you chil∣dren of men howe long wil you be hard herted? The earth whiche hath no sense or feelyng toke the drops of his bloude
frome the woundes of our sauiour, and coulde not susteyne the maie∣stie therof, but was mo¦ued and trembled, and stones most hard were cut asunder. And lo by scriptures ye manyfolde passions of the sonne of god for you slayn, drop∣peth on ye hertes of you which haue reason, and may you then conteyne your selues from way∣lyng wepyng and fea∣res? You here vanities whiche perteyn not vn¦to you, and you can not conteyn from laughing And agayn after these, he layde to more, & said: You whiche goe by the way of the tribulation of the lorde Iesu, take heede and se if there be any sorowe lyke as is
his sorow. He hath not synned, he onely was borne withoute synne vpon the erth, and they fulfylled his soule with sorowes of them which were synners or yll do∣ers, and all these thyn∣ges which foloweth did not stirre to sharpnes ye mekenesse of the lābe, ye bondes of the wycked wherwith they bounde hym, their lieng▪ fautes which vntruly thei laid to his charge, theyr naughti mocking, their makyng of hym naked, their scourgyngs, their smitinges & claps, their filthy spittings, ye thorn pricking his forhed and head, the crosse, the nai∣les & the speare, and the shedding out of his in∣nocent bloud. But in al∣thynges
his pacyence did ouercome, & had the victorye, and he diynge brake asunder the prick of death. You yt be chil∣dren of the crosse, take heede with your mynde the way of the lambe & walke surely, and with a ferme mynd after the steps of his blud. He is ye leader of your iorney, & crieth to you, sayeng: Be of good chere & trust well, I haue ouercome ye world. & why ar you afrayde of the face and fearyng of men, you ha¦uyng suche a leader or capitayn which can not be ouercom, and also so many thousande of his folowers goynge afore you with a meruailous victory. Lo forsoth euē a litle afore your tyme,
innumerable fightyn∣ges of the seruantes of god is made and doone both of thapostles and of martyrs, and of per∣fect virgines, and they haue giuen plesant spec¦tacles or lokyng on to ye companies of heuen in their victories, & thei lo¦ued god more thā their owne soules, & for his name thei haue set forth their soules to all kyn∣des of deth: and as cley whiche is troden of eue¦ry one, so they haue suf¦fred to be troden & sup∣pressed: and the louers of the worlde in their cō¦mon places and coun∣selles haue laughed to skorne the nakednesse of sainctes: & they haue be full fed with the moc¦kynge of the confusion
of them, and they haue been merye in the draw¦yng away of ther feshe as a beast is mery whā he deuoureth his pray, and they haue dispersed the Innocent bloud by tormentries, & by wor∣des by fiers and by gur¦gettes of waters, by y∣ron nayles, by teeth of beastes, and all kynde of tormentrie, whiche the cruelnesse of wicked mē, by their mind could imagynde or deuise, that was assayd in the mor∣tification or kyllyng of them. And the knygh∣tes of god ioye in their confraction or tormen¦tes, as though they had bene in great delires or pleasures: and they deli¦ted in the chalice of bit∣ternes, as they whiche
ioy in many pleasures & delectatiōs. Then was the pacience of sainctes found faithfull in their examination, & stronge aboue the strengthe of kynges and princes of this worlde. Therefore lo they be brought oute in refreshyng of conso∣lation or comfort, & thei rest in the halsing of the right arme of god and of his holy angels, by∣cause they haue borne his ignominy afore the dwellers of the earthe. O thou man, which art weake hearted to these thynges, take hede, and with a vigilant mynde draw thy self to the suf∣ferynges of the passion of Christe: take thy con¦templation of the ioye and myrthe whiche is
enuyronned all aboute with Martyres of the lord, and thou shalt not drede nor dout to make thy self cōmon or parte taker to the sorowes & anguished of thē. But first is, that thou muste haue the substaunce of this worlde vnder thy feete, and to esteme the glory thereof to be no∣thyng, nor of any valu: whiche this day is, and to morowe it appereth not. Forsothe if thou lo¦uest those thyngs, than shall flee frō the strēgth in tyme of pressure and despection. And now I say, lette not thy lyfe be precious in thy eies, but esteeme it all vile and worthy to bee despised. Forsoth thei which loue themselues and in their
owne mynde to theym selfe be great, they may not susteyne or indure any paine or treadynge doune in persecution, & to the fyght of sayntes, they be not mete or apt, a happy chaunge with great gayne is set forth to the: Denie or cast a∣way this lyfe of a small tyme, and of miserable condition, & thou shalte receyue agayn therfore a lyfe, whiche knoweth no faute nor no disease or molestyng: and that lyfe is full of glory and ioy whiche no tong can tel. O thou mā of darke vnderstandyng, lyft vp thyne eies, and beholde in time to come the blis∣full reformation of thy body, which shall come to the from thy sauiour
when he shal pul away and roote out from thy body the thorne of A∣dam, and shall confi∣gure it to the clerenesse of his body, and thus it is shall or may be done that with myrthe and quicknesse thou shalte make haste to shed out, or to sette out thy life or soule into all peryll, in the feruencie of the cha¦rite of hym, and so thou shalt esteme the state of this thy lyfe, as a drop of water smitten out of a bucket into the groūd O thou manne of god, why art thou yet in an∣guyshe or aferde of the face of thy persecutour? Be of good comfort, be of good chere, Christ is with the in persecution and his angels ar with
she in thy fyght, & they nūbre al thy labours, & they susteyn thy wery∣nesse. And also for thee, they fyght throughly a∣gaynst thyne enemies: remembre the wordes whiche the lorde said to his seruantes: He that toucheth you, he tou∣cheth the balle of myne eie. O thou seruant of God, what shalte thou geue to thy sauior whi∣che hath so ioyned thee to hym that withoute wrong be done to hym thou can not bee hurte. Ones he hath suffered for the, and yet euerye day in the, and in thy fe¦lowes his seruauntes, he suffereth, and is had to open scorne. If thou bee sorye or heauy, not for thy hurt or wrong
be sory, but for his hurt or wrōg, be thou sorow¦ful or heuy, therfore for thy selfe ioy and be me∣ry, for by trouble thou art preparid or made re¦dy to glory and to euer∣lastyng ioye. Thou art the golde of the lord by fyre he examineth thee, that thus thou beynge proued he may receyue the into his treasours. And forsoothe afore the angel which spake with me had ended these wor¦des, it was so, that ther came on the feast of the blessed virgins Vrsula and her felowes the ele¦uen thousand. And thā was in the seruice of matens these goodlye woordes of scripture, which is thus in latin: Reddet Deus mercedem la∣borum
sanctorum suorum et deducet eos in via mirabili, and in englyshe thus: God shall yelde or geue the hier or rewarde of the labours of his sain∣tes, and he shall leade them forth in a meruai¦lous waie: and thereof I takyng occasion whē the angel myn instruc∣ctor apered to me in the secretes of Masse time (as mostly his custome was) I asked hym say∣eng: My lord, Shewe to me what is that way meruailous, wherof ye scripture maketh men∣cion, sayēg: And he shal leade them foorthe in a meruailous waie. And streight wais the angel answerd, saying: That is the way of holy mar∣tires. And agayn I as∣ked
saying? And why is it called meruaylous? And he said, it may wel bee called meruailous. It is not forsooth mer∣ueylous in the eyes of men, that god so infla∣methe the mynde of a man which is frayle or weake that through the bignesse of loue wher∣with he bournethe in∣wardly toward god, he forgetteth his own life, in so muche that he is made as it were insen∣sible or nat felynge the most greuous tormen∣tes, and withoute any care for hym self, glad∣ly he suffreth all thyn∣ges for his name. This mayst thou see in these holye virgines, whose feast of martyrdom you celebrate this day, they
wer fraile both in kynd and in age, nor they ne had any defender: and neuerthelesse they ney∣ther feared the tyrantes nor their swordes, but with all constance offe∣red their tender mem∣bres and bodyes into deth for our lords sake, and for cause they were comforted with the bur¦nyng of the loue of god in theyr spirite, so that death outwardely they felt nat. And certaynly that was muche mer∣uailous in the eyes of men, but nat in the eies of our lorde, to whome all thynge is possible. And hast not thou sene this waye meruailous in spirite, and it was fayrer and more nota∣ble than any of the o∣ther
waies: & so knowe thou that the retribu∣tion or reward of mar∣tyrs is more excellente than anye gyfte or re∣warde, and to the glory of theym, there is no∣thyng to be compared. After these whenne the feast of sainct Martin was come about myd∣nyght afore the vigil of Matins, sodeynely I was afrayde, and the slepe fledde from myne eies. And lo the angell of the lorde stode afore me, & I spake to hym, saying: My lord I pray the now that thou wilt fulfyll the exhortation of thy sermon of holye martyrs, and conclude with a competent ende: and when he had cau∣sed me to be in contem¦plation,
and to see cer∣taine hyghe thynges in heauenlye places, of whose syght I was vn¦worthy, he fulfilled my petition, saying: Agayn I sayde to thee, and I warne you the children of god, that more dili∣gentely you attende to youre antecessoures or goers afore, whiche are afore to you in this pre¦sent sermon howe they dyd bourne in the cha∣ritie of Christe. Runne and bee confirmed or made sure, and thynke nat afore. Lo forsoothe there watcheth vppon you the soonne of peace which may receyue and reward you aboue any mans estimation, that spirite of burnyng and of charitie of Christe,
whiche ouerrometh all fraylenesse he myghte vouchsafe to graunt to you, whiche in perfecte trinitie lyueth and rei∣gneth very god by the infinite world of worl∣des. Amen. ¶ Of the way of them that are maried. A sermon. I Was in prayer, & as it was the customed maner, my lorde the angel ap∣pered to me, and I as∣ked of hym the disci∣pline of that way, whi∣che perteyned to the or∣der of them whiche be maried: and by and by he assented to my peti∣tion, & thus he began: Lo I say and I warne
you seculers that be ma¦ried, absteyne you from your shreude woorkes, wherwith you are defi∣led, and the erth is defi∣led, or made fowle of your most noughty wic¦kednes, which are aua∣rice, lechery, fornication adultery, maslaughter, pride, wrath, hate, enuy blasphemye and drun∣kēnes. Take hede ther¦fore & looke vpon your wai how you mai walk by it: for why, it is im∣possible to you with su∣che vices to entre into it, and this spoken he wēt his way. And whē he appeared agayne, I praied him that he wold prosecute or folowe on the exhortation of his sermon begun. And he saied: But for cause the
lorde god is benigne & mercifull, els he myght be brought into irksom¦nesse or wearynesse, for that he warneth so ma∣ny waies the dwellers of this world. And tru∣lye they take his war∣nynges for nothynge, nor no waies they take heede or remembre the loue, wherewith they ought to be kyndled to∣ward hym, and his fa∣therlye monytions or warnynges, they turne them to indignation & despise them, and to his messages they disdaine to take hede, yf it were possible any trouble to be in hym, for that cer∣tayn he might be trou∣bled, that so many wais this worlde is raised a∣gaynst hym, for whiche
he was borne and suf∣fred passion, and hathe wroughte many myra∣cles, and yet dayly doo woorke, although they take no heede thereto. And lo, he commaun∣dethe his warnynges also to theym whyche in this worlde all ma∣ner of wayes are set a∣gaynste hym for his thankefull benignitie, and also for the loue of them, whiche although they be conuersaunt in the world, yet neuer the lesse thei loue and serue hym, but wo, of theim are few in numbre: for∣sothe more abundantly he wolde doo this, and shewe his grace, if with a better deuotion, they wolde take hede to his warnyngs. After these
he opened his mouthe. and spake, saying: O ge¦neration lackyng witte and combrous or gre∣uous to your lorde god, wherfore with so great studye loue you those thynges, whiche youre heuenly father hateth, and you ar not afrayde to prouoke the lorde of heauens, in whose eye sight or loke al the mul¦titude of angelles doo tremble, telle me what fruite or proufitte they haue gotten in these shreude noughty thyn∣ges, whyche I haue afore numbred to you, all they which from the beginning of the world haue be found to walke in those vices, if they haue not plesed agayne the face of our lord with
penaunce doyng afore theyr departyng, what haue al thei which bear witnes to truth shewed vnto you of theym. If you haue forgottē it, lo again I wyl tel & shew to you afore the lyuyng god that heuen is shut from them with an eter¦nal & indissoluble shut∣tyng, and the pleasant & desirous face of oure lorde god is and shalbe hidden from them, and they be alienated from the feast of the euerla∣styng myrth of saintes, and those sainctes haue euer abhorred their wic¦ked wais: And lo those synners are made the felowes of the mooste harde and cruell deuyl, and of his vnhappy an¦gels, whiche withoute
mercy, & without ceas∣syng are scurged, & thei treade the neckes of them, which necks thei haue reised vp agaynst their lorde maker, and they be fed in the moste bitter plages of them. And bycause they haue shutte theyr eyes that shulde not see the lyght of the knowlege of god and of his holy iustifi∣cations, and they haue loued the woorkes of darknes, therfore they are deputed to the hor∣rible roryng or swalo∣wynge of darkenesses, whiche haue none out∣gate, nor it can not bee lightned neuer with no light. They haue despi∣sed to haue ye holy drede of god in their mindes, & they haue prouoked
hym in the myrthe of their voluptuousnes or lust: and they haue kin∣deled in themselues the vnlaufull bournynges of lust and of wrath, & of vnsaciable auarice, therefore there abideth vpon thē dredeful hor∣rour and heuynes with out comforte, and a bi∣tynge indignation, and they be made the coles of euerlastyng fyre, whi¦che can neuer be quen∣ched nor cōsumed with any bournynge. Heare these thyngs you why∣che be prouokers of god & while you haue tyme of correctiō, forsake and go awai from the wais and woorkes of theim that are lost, and turne agayne to the way vn∣defiled, which god hath
prepared to you frome the begynnynge: take heede howe you maye walke with the drede & fere of god in that way forsooth your honora∣ble mariage is nat of the inuencion of man, but it was instituted in paradise of innocencye of hym that is lord ma¦ker of all thynges whā he made or created your fyrst parents male and female, & he spake in ye tong of Adā, who was first made: Seing for yt a mā shal forsake father & mother, & draw to his wife, & they shalbe two in one flesh. O you mā & woman geue honour to your order, which the lord vouchsafe to make honorable, and se that you sette nor bryng no
spot nor diuision or cut∣tyng to your copulati∣on. The law of the lord might ioyn and halow you: and there must bee to you bothe one house, one table, one common substance, one bed, and one soule, which is one minde and one wil, and geue place to the drede and feare of the lord in the middes of you. For soth the drede & feare of our lord is ye faire beau¦tyfulnes of the chaum∣ber of theim whiche be maried, and he which is voide from the drede & feare of our lord, is re∣puted of our lorde to be vncleane and accursed. And there his lust shal ouercome himself whi∣che knowe the no staye nor good or holsome
form, & also such works there shall be exercised yt are not worthy to be spoken of, which nature hath not ordeined, nor it is not belonging nor perteining to generatiō They which work that which is ylle afore our lord, I wold thei might here and vnderstand, & that thei might take a∣waye ye filthy spot from their conches, therfore the drede & feare of our lord must bind your har¦tes, that you maye set a bridle to your selues in that worke to you gran¦ted, so that not lyke in facion of beastes, you shall not folowe euery brūt of your desire. You ought to honor by con∣tinence or chastite feast full daies, and daies of
fasting ordeined by the law, & times of purga∣tion, & if you adde more thereto, our lorde shall adde and geue grace to you & to your generati∣on. Forsoth thei whiche will not make no diffe∣rence betwene day and day, betwene time and time, to kepe thēselues in continence or chasti∣tie, thei shal fele the ven¦geance of the lorde in thēselues, and in their sede what hour or tyme they shall thynke leaste therof. Eche one of you must exhort other to cō¦tinence or to chastitie, & eche one of you pray for other, and also pray to∣gether that you may cō¦teyne, and that the spi∣rite of vnclennes may flee from you. Forsothe
when infirmitie preuai¦leth, with remedy gran¦ted, it ought to be expur¦ged, lest it fal to yt thing which is not lauful, as ye doctour of the gentils writeth. A mā hath no power of his own body but ye womā, & ye womā hath no power of her bo¦dy but the mā: and you may not deny together duetie. But this truely you must knowe, that ye prīcipal cause of your mutual cōiunction is to bring forth a child, & yf any other cause therbe, it perteineth to infirmi¦tie, and if it haue mode∣ration of the dread and feare of our lord, & with remedy of almes to ob∣tein pardon. The mā of the womā, & the womā of the mā must support
and bere one anothers infirmitie with paciēce and cōpassion: nor you may not one despise an other, but rather studye to geue reuerēce one to an other. Stryuyng or bitter wordes may ne∣uer be herd betwixt you but reproue your exces∣ses or fautes togither wt a soft spirit, and with good seueritie or streit∣nes. The woman must be obedient to the mā, & as to her superiour she ought to giue place, and to him ministration of seruice, as our lord ma∣ker of them bothe hath ordeyned frō the begin∣ning. Also the woman must suffer the maners or doyng of ye husband although thei be shreud & she must forgeue his
fautes or wikednes, she must preuente ye face of our lorde in almes and praier. Honest & comly garmentes, softenes of worde and speche & de∣murenes of her goings and lokes ought to testi¦fie outewardely the in∣ward purenes and clen¦nes of her mynde. Her eye shuld not loke in an other mans face, but wt ai care she must auoide the occasion of all suspi¦cion and yll saying. He that hath a witty and a timorous wife, shoulde not dishonor her with a foule or bitter word but he ought to honour her as the vessel of the glo∣ry of god, and must yeld himself consentynge in felowshyp to her, & he ought to geue thankes
to our lord god of heauē, whiche hath blessed hym wt such a mariage. Here me yt nowe speake to the, and bewaile or lamēt the children of men. Men of these dais in a great nū∣bre haue declined vnto ye folishnes of women, and ar made starke fooles in consentyng to ye madnes of them. The arrogancy of clothes or garmentes which thou hastsene, and thou dyd detest or abhor it in the women & dough¦ters of this world which cam to the, that is increa¦sed out of mesure in ye lā∣des, and ye womē ar mad therin, and thei bring the wrath of god īto ye world and they glory or ioye to walke trym in trippyng and dancyng goinges in ye multitude of their gay
and new facion clothes, and they study to cōsume vnprofitably those thyn∣ges whiche be necessary to the vses of theim that are nedy. O vnhappines O most miserable blind∣nes: that thynge whiche was gotten with muche swette & labour thei com¦mitte it to durt, to drawe the eyes of aduouterers to loke on them and that wherewith they myghte get the kingdom of hea∣uen, therwith they bye ye fyre of helle. O you men take away that yll from the eies of our lord, and ioye you nt in the vani∣ties of your wynes, but rather haue disdayn, and be displeased therewith: for why they dresse them selues after the maner & facion of harlots. This
superfluitie of clothes & the streitenesse of their garment is to nothynge profitable, but strangle their cōceiuinges of chil∣dren, and the arroganye of the coueryng and she∣wyng of their heare, and many suche lyke facions are the inuēcious of wo∣men that will setforth & sel them selues, and such things do nat pertayn to lauful matrons. My cry from the lord to you whi¦che haue put awaye the grauitie of manhod, and haue put on the moliche∣nes or faynt softnesse of womē. O you fooles and most vayne, why haue you forsaken the earnest good maners of old and ancient rightuous men, which were your prede∣cessours, and you are de∣clined
into vanities and into madnes of ye diuels inuention, whiche profit to you nothing, but to the increacyng of your payn and burnyng. Wo to you whyche waxe proude in your gaye or bryght clo∣things and superfluous and delicately made or facioned: and that which was deerely gotten, you ioye or are glad to bryng it to nothyng. Wo be to you which be lasciuious or take delite in the brai¦dyng of womens heare, and are not ashamed to make foule the forme of a man in your selfes. Wo to you whiche in vayne plais, and wo to you whi¦che spende your tyme in muche eating and dron∣kēnes. Wo to you which haue a busy tong to scor∣nes
and detractions, and to talk of that thyng whi¦che profiteth nat, and to imagine deceites, and to subuerte the cause of an innocent. Wo to you whi¦che haue your wordes or tale in counsel to sel, and ioy to fulfyll your bealy of the anguishes and lose¦ses of them which be op∣pressed. Wo to you which be striuing and fearefull amonge citisens. Wo to you raueners and deepe in herte for to multiplye the substāce of the world whiche vanisheth awaie with you. Suppose you not that he, whiche hath planted an eare, shal not heare? or he whiche hath fained or compouned an eie, can not consyder? O you children be in peace, and leaue prouokyng of
our lord: for it is at hand that he wyl awake & de∣uoure them in the fire of his zele, which hath pro∣uoked him. Agayn I say to you, whiche are vnder ye yoke of mariage, drede you and fear god, & kepe togither your faithe im∣maculate and vndefiled. Norish your sonnes and doughters and your fa∣milie in the dreade and feare of oure lorde with chastitie. You maye not kepe with you vnpayd ye tenth or tithe of our lord nor the wages of the hy∣red man or labourer, nor you may not forget your good doynges to a poore man, and all other thyn∣ges whiche I haue she∣wed and charged you to kepe, in the sermon of ho¦lye and holsome deedes, whiche
priuylye he defileth his neighbours wife: and a∣gayn, the wyfe taketh on her the husbande of an other woman: And this is moste greate wycked∣nes or iniquite, and most is the numbre of theym whiche offendeth therin. Forsoth the world is full with the vncleannes of fornication, as thoughe there were a thyrsty hast vnto it, and scante there is to be foundeth that doth not cast doune hym selfe into the pitte or dyke. Whan they burne in con¦cupiscence, they scantely may abyde tyll thei haue brought about and done the dede: and when that they haue fulfilled their noughty and worst desy∣res, they rest nat, but a∣gayne and agayne they
go and doo the same, and they suppose themselues neuer to be saciate, or to haue inoughe: ye & afore they be ripe, and or they can exercise this shreude noughtines, many wais they defyle theyr inno∣cencie. Forsothe therfore in blamynge the fautes of them that are maried, I put to the name of for¦nication, for why, they also afore they take the lawe of matrimonye on theym, they defyle them selfes oute of measure, and prouoke the wrathe of God on them. Ther∣of it is, that somme whi∣che are maried, haue no fruite of childerne, and they meruaile howe that so chanceth to them, not knowynge the cause of their bareynnesse. For∣soothe
they of that sorte whiche haue haue gene∣ration, eyther, in theyr chyldren, orels in other thynges or wayes, they are stryken with punish∣ment by the diuine iuge∣mente, and all thynges chaunceth to theym vn∣happily, or nat luckilye. Agayne whan I asked hym of the name of blas∣phemye, he answered, I haue sayde, that bycause of theym whyche disho∣neste theyr neyghboures with fowle tauntes and rebukes. Also I asked of hym what were the doubtynges, whyche he semed to reproue in this sermon. And to that he thus answered: There be many in the churche, hauynge the fourme of christen men, & yet they
are doubtful of the chri∣sten faith, and they be o∣penly conuersaunt with them whiche are catho∣like, they enter into the house of praier, they re∣ceyue with other the sa∣cramentes perteynynge to the fayth, and yet they gyue no faith therto, nor esteeme theim to be any thyng profitable to their helthe: that forsothe they openly proue by their yll workes whyche they do. Forsoth if in them were true fayth, they wold ab∣steyn from many iniqui∣ties whiche they worke: and he said more: Many heresies be in these days priuily, and many here∣tikes priuilydo impugne and ar agaynst the catho¦like faith, and they turne many frō the true faith.
Then I asked hym, say∣eng: My lord, what sayst thou of them whiche are called catharis, for they fully reproue the lyfe of them which are maried? and he answered, saying: There liue of theym, of whom thou ask this que¦stion is abhominable a∣fore the lorde: and they can not blame or rebuke the lyfe of theim whiche laufully doo marye, and dwel togither accordyng to the lawe of the lorde, kepyng in the drede and feare of god holy feriall dayes or feries and fea∣stes, and geuynge theyr mercye to the needes of theim whiche are poore. Forsothe agayn I spake to hym, sayeng: Lord as I haue herde somme of them affirme, that there
is nor can be lawful ma∣riage but betwene them whiche on bothe partyes haue kept theyr virgini∣tye vnto the tyme of ther lawful copulacion, what saiest thou to that? And he answerd saieng: wher suche mariage is or may be, that is very pleasaūt and thankefull to oure lorde, but that chaunceth very rare or selde, neuer∣theles of them whyche haue not conteined them selues, the mariages be acceptable afore our lord which walke in the com∣maundementes of oure lorde, or els the number of the people of god shuld be into a greate skarse∣nes, and these of whome thou speakest, they haue nothinge a do to reproue any thinge in the church
of god: for by the waye they themselues are wor¦thy to be reproued. And thou shalt know for cer∣tayne, that they be the ministers of Sathanas, whose shrowed workes they doe exercyse, and he is the leder of them, and he goeth afore thē, with all examples of wycked∣nes, and they folow hym in all thinges, with most noughtye workes. And I sayed: Lord what ma∣ner of faythe haue they, & what is their life? And he aunswered? Shrewed and noughtye is theyr fayth, and theyr workes are worsse. And agayne I said, they seme though to be ryghteous or iuste in the syght of men, and thei be praised as though they were doers of good
workes, and he sayd, so it is, they make a semblāce of theyr outwarde face, as though they were of a right and innocent lyfe, and thereby they drawe many to thē and disceiue them, forsoth inwardlye they are full of moste worst and rotten poison. ¶ Of them the which li∣ueth in continencye or chastitye A sermon. WE celebratynge the solemnitie of blessed Iohn the Euangeliste, I was in∣tendyng to prayer, after the vigil of matens, and with a strong and harty intent of mynde or hert I praied the lord, that ac¦cordyng to his customed benignitie, it wold please him to vouchsafe to open
to me the discipline of the the waie of them whiche liue in continencie or in chastytie. And also I praied the holy euange∣list, and the angel my lea¦der, that they therto bee my helpers, & whē I was weary of prayeng, I did set myn eies to slepe, and after a litle while I was afrayde, and lo the angel standynge by me, began with these words the ser¦mon whiche I desyred. I say to you, O you the chyldren of God, O you the children of light, loke and beholde your waye, howe it florysheth, and howe delectable it is to runne in it, runne there∣fore, and haste you redily to mete wt youre spouse, whiche abideth and tari∣eth for you. Loue you
chastite, and kepe to him the integritee of youre virginitie. A virgin arai¦ed or adorned with cha∣stite & charitye, with pru¦dence and with humyly∣tye runneth wele. And whan he had sayed these, he than spake no more: trewly the nexte daye fo∣lowynge whan the office of the masse of the blissed innocētes was in doing, I taking occasion of the lesson of the Apocalipse, whiche than was redde. I prayed my Lorde the angel which againe stode by me, sayeng. Lord if I haue founde grace afore the, I beseche the to tell me, what maner a songe is that song, which these holy martyres doe synge afore the sete of God and of the lambe, as this pre∣sent
lesson testifyeth, or howe folowe they the lambe, wheresoeuer he goeth. And he answering sayed. What doest thou aske me, no tonge on the erthe hath knowen that tonge, nor I wyll tel the nothinge therof. Forsoth of that thou asked me, what is that they folo∣wed the lambe whereso∣euer he goth, this is that they folow hym in al ver¦tues, whych may be con∣sidered in the lambe they folowe hym in virginitie whiche is in them with∣out anye spotte, euen as that holy lambe is with∣out spot, they were meke and symple without dis∣ceyte, euen as the lambe was, they had pacyence in theyr martyrdome in the likenes of the lambe,
which neuer shewed any impacience in his passi∣on, wherby he quenched the synne of the worlde: Ther be not virgins nor any martyres, whiche so properly or nerely folow the steppes of the lambe as these doo, except oure quene, whiche fyrst kept her virginitie to the lord cleane, and not defyled. That noble virgine and these blessed martyrs are a glasse to all holye vir∣gins, and many haue fo∣lowed them, which haue shedde theyr bloudde for theyr vyrgynitie, and therefore they bee crow∣ned and glorified in the syght of the Lorde. All virgins ought to loke on these virgines, and to consyder with what ho∣linesse they are gone a∣forsoth
felte heate in my hande. Therof he sayde: It is hote, and the more hotter it be, the more la∣bour it muste haue to be washed away, and so the more a man defileth or maketh himselfe foule in vncleannes of concupis∣cence, the more labour he must haue to purify him selfe thereof. Neuer the lesse he maye be made in sorowe of holsomme pe∣nance, and with wepyng teares, and with good woorkes, so that he may be made more acceptable to god than he was. Is not thy hand cleane and fayre inwardly: so is vir¦ginitie as long as the vn∣clennesse of the yll worke or deede come not to the inward part therof, then it maye bee made cleane,
fo that the integritie ther¦of shall suffer no hurt, in lyke forme as thy hande easily may be made clean when it is only outward¦ly defiled. But forsothe if the vncleannesse cometh to the inward partes to ye effect of the dede, it shall be impossyble to make it then so clean that it may come agayne to his first beautie or holines: neuer¦theles they ar many, whi¦che although they bryng not their lust to the dede of cōmixtiō or mingling, yet they neuer the lesse many wais defile the in∣tegritie of their virgini∣tie, and thei take no hede nor put nat to their mind or hert, that they may be made cleane fullye with remedy of penance, and that they maie satisfye to
god, and so they abide & tary vnto thend: the vir∣ginitie of them is not ac∣ceptable to god, and their mede or reward is taken awaye from them: When the angel had sayd these, I was afraid lest perad∣uenture the order of his wordes shulde fall frome my mynd, therfore I as∣ked of him, that he might speake them agayne, and in that gently he herd me Forsothe whan in the v∣tas of saynt Iohn, he pre¦sēted himself again to me he preuented my wordes thus meryly speakyng to me: Thou wylt aske me some thyng: aske, and I shall answer the. And I said as I was afore war¦ned of hym that taughte me: Lord that whiche is written, Vontas pro facto
reputabitur, which is in en¦glishe, The will shall be reputed for the dede, mai that be againste thy say∣enge next afore rehersed by the. And he answered Not one whitte: Also he said more. True certain∣ly is that thou sayest is writtē: Loke what work a man hath wille to per∣forme, so that he will ne∣des perform in dede that which by his wyll dothe couete, and so he inten∣deth abidyng in that wil or mynd vnto thend, that is reputed afore god as though it wer done. And if any yll there be that a man desyreth to doo, that yll may bee put away by the vertue of true penāce what soeuer a man shall doo with thought or wyl it maie bee so anulled a∣fore
God, as thoughe it neuer had ben. Remem∣bre what I sayde to thee the seconde tyme, that thou shuld put thy hande agayne in the myre or durte, and then I affir∣med, that it was to thee more harde to make thy hande cleane agayne: so fyrste a man is polluted onely with thought, and then after also with will, and than it is more diffi∣cile or hard for hym to be made cleane, and yet ne∣uerthelesse the integritie of his maidenhod or vir¦ginitie remaineth hole. And thenne he brought foorth a scripture, wher∣of I thought to ask hym sayenge: It is written: Qui viderit mulierem ad con∣cupiscendam eam, iam mecha¦tus est in corde suo and that
is in englisshe thus: He that shall se a woman to couet her, euen nowe he hath done lechery in his herte, that is so if a man be permanent or abideth in wyll and mynde to ex∣ercise his luste, and will not nor doth not go from his desyre, but as muche as in hym is, dooeth to bring it to effect, and that shreude wil he put nat a∣way with the fruite of pe¦nance, though the inte∣grite abideth, yet it is vn¦profitable, nor no fruite he shal get therof. Again I ioyned to more, saying Lord, ther ar som whiche in tentaciō against their wille haue experience of the prickes of the fleshe, and ar sory therfore, and beare cōbrousely the bur¦ning which is aduersant
to the cleannes of theyr bodye, nor by no repug∣nyng can eschue it, shall that be reputed to thē for synne? And he saide: If they suffer that agaynste their will, nor with their mynd consent not therto with a lyghter penance, they shal get forgiuenes of their faute, which ther¦by thei draw to them, and shall obteyne a great re∣ward. And he shewed to me of a persone familiar in Christ, whether it wer man or woman, god kno¦weth, and that person suf¦fred of ye aduersary great impugning and tempta∣cion against his chastite, and therfore he scourged his soule wt many huge molestes or doyngs, and the angell saide: Shewe thou to him comfort, and
say to hym that he maye spare som of his afflictiō, and tell to hym yt he may cal to his mynd that whi¦che is writen of the elec∣tes of the lord: Tanqua au¦rum in fornace probauit eos. That is in englishe: As gold in a fornace he hath proued theim, and ioy be to hym, neuerthelesse his ioy is not without heuy∣nes, for that whiche our lorde, hath vouchsafed to put vpon hym some su∣che thynge, wherby he is made redy to a great re∣warde, & yet nat without heuines, for that in that temptation, synne is not therin fully eschued. And I said, lord, by what mea¦nes may he resist the ad∣uersary, and with what armour shal he ouercom hym. And the angel said:
He must fight with prai∣er & with cōfessiō, & with scourgyng of the flesh, & thus he shal ouercom: al¦so he mai not cesse to prai to our lorde, that he may be deliuered frō yt pricke, & he must pray this prai∣er, yt our lorde may haue mercy on hym in tyme of tentacion, if he shalbe in secret place, he mustknele on his knees .iii. times a¦fore our lorde, forsothe if there lack the oportuni∣tie of place, he then shall signe his hert thre times wt the signe of the crosse, & must thus say: Saluator mundi salua nos, qui per crucē & sanguinē tuū redemisti nos, auxiliare nobis te deprecamur deus noster & in englishe it is thus. O sauiour of the world, saue thou vs, whi¦che by the crosse & by thy
bloud haste redemed vs, we beseche the which art our god to help vs. After these, one dai he reised vp his tong into these wor∣des: O you virgins be∣hold the diuine voice cri∣eth to you, the voyce of youre spouse knocketh & calleth at your eares, opē to hym, & leade him into the palace of your hart, & halse him, for he is fayre and more amiable then any creature. And again he said: The lord of maie¦stie, the only begotten of hym which is most high, the kyng of goodly com∣panies or hostes, fulfyl∣lyng heuen & erthe with his magnificall glorye, great and dredeful in all his mighty strength and power, sweete & amiable in his incomparable be∣nignitie,
and fully and al wholly to bee desyred in the clerenesse of his per∣fect beautie, in whose a∣miable cheere visage or face, Cherubin and Se∣raphyn, and all their fe∣lowshyp or company de∣lite to loke vpon with an incessable desyre. O vir∣gins, this is he which co¦ueteth youre beautie, he calleth and byddeth you to his chaste halsynges, he asketh of you the glo∣rious lylies of your vir∣ginite, that with them he maye dresse and adorne his chambre, that cham∣ber knoweth no spotte of vnclennes, & any thyng which is corrupt, entreth not there, the precious floures of virginitie ther doo not drye awaye, nor there they fal not away,
but they abide styll in vn¦corruptible and perfecte beautie, and the immacu¦late lābe gladly coucheth in them, and they breath to hym an odour or smell of swetenes, holy virgi∣nes so shyne in the cham¦ber of their spouse as pre¦cious stone and perle de∣syrable to syghte, he the moste specious virgine which hath washed them in the bloude of his side, and hathe signed the face of them: he is glad in the lokynge of them, and the mysteries of his beautie and clerenes he sheweth to them which be to hym most dere: ther soundeth the organes of election, the concordance of peace in spirite, and a songe is song desirous to the eare a song of singular myrth
which only is to be song of vyrgines, and of the highe spirites familiars of the chābre, the spouse leadeth the quyer in a clere and excellent voyce and in thousandes of them whyche syng, there is not one can be lyke to hym. The voyce of hym is a sweete voyce in the fulnesse of grace, whiche fulfyllethe all heauens with myrth: blessed are they whiche heare that voyce, and hyghly they are blessed whiche synge togyther to hym, among the whyche the virgyne Theothocos oure prin∣cesse hathe obteyned the primacye, to her onely is gyuen to exalt her voyce aboue all the voyces or tunes of angels. O you doughters take heede of
the wordes of my mini∣stery, and marke them in the hydde place of youre mynd, if your herte be to the especiall and noble spouse. and he is worthy to be beloued, why aryou negligent, and wherfore doo you tarye to extende your selues with al ver∣tue in him most specious whom nothynge is more clere, nothyng more ami¦able in heuen or in erth: & if you loue glory, what thyng is more glorious thā to haue such a spouse & to possesse al thyngs in hym, if you couet to haue delites and ioyes, make you haste to the chambre of pleasure and myrthe which is made redye for you, to whose pleasure and sweetenesse, all that eie hathe seene, or eare
hath herd, or that which hathe ascended into the harte of man can not be cōpared therto, and whā he had sayd these, I dyd remembre the woordes whiche he spake of the virgins song, and asked hym, sayeng: My lorde, is it so that also aungels sing that song, and whe∣ther not also all virgins? And he sayde, truely an∣gels syng that song, and euery one whiche frome this lyfe withoute spotte or defilyng comme to the kyngedome of heauens. And agayne, I sayde: Howe is than that scrip∣ture vnderstande, which sayth: That none myght saye that songe but those fortye and foure thou∣sand? are al virgins vn∣der that numbre compre¦prehended?
and he sayde, so it is that noumbre is perfect, and it signifieth the perfection of theim, which haue kepte theim¦selues immaculate or vn¦defiled, as the infancy of the innocentes is with∣oute spotte, and what he sayde more of that num∣bre, the weakenes of my witte or senses coude not beare it away. Agayn he takyng the worde of ex∣hortation spake, saying: O you virgins, go and bye to you mariage clo∣thes, and enter with hym to maryage, and leste peraduenture you maye bee deputed with them whiche bee repro∣ued, thynke you nowe wyth all busynesse of mynde, howe you maye please your spouse when
he shall come, orelles it shall be sayde vnto you, Howe haue you entred hyther, not hauyng ma¦riage clothes. Wake or watche you therfore, lest he find you slepers with the folyshe virgins, and agayn he said: Here you therfore O you virgins and open the eares of your hart, & vnderstāde how your spouse stireth and calleth you, if that you knewe howe fayre and howe amiable he is whom all the heauenly multitude beeholdethe, without doubt with all defyre you wold alwais despise the worlde with all the ornament therof, and all the glory of this worlde you wolde caste behyde you, and you wolde put al your study
fully to loue your holye spouse Christ our lorde, and you wold be alwais busye to keepe to hym your hert & youre bodye clean and immaculate: and after these I asked hym, sayeng: Lord whi∣che be those mariage clo¦thes, of which thou hast spoken. And he answe∣red: Virgines ought to go to the inward partes of their hertes, & there to bye thre kindes of or∣namentes: one clothyng or ornamēt, it behoueth them to haue whiche is white & vndefiled that is innocency of the flesh and it is necessarye for them a coueryng or mā∣tel, wherwith they must be cladde rounde about, whiche is charitie, and therwith Christe theyr
spouse of theym oughte to bee beeloued. The third ornament of them is in latyne called Tor∣ques aurea, in englishe, a wrethe braided of golde for their necke, which in latin is called Pudicitia, in english, maidenly be¦hauior, wherwith a vir∣gin ought to constrayne her selfe, that she shulde be shamfaste to speake, to heare, to laugh, or to do any thynge which is not pure or honest, that is the signe, wherof it is said: He hath put a signe in my face, he saide that as I suppose, for that in the feast of saynt Agnet I asked of that word, & than he gaue none an∣swer to me therof: again I said, Lord with what price these ornamentes
are to be bought to these virgins. And he sayde: With chastifyng of their owne bodies, and with one peny, whiche is the Contemplacyon of the purenesse of the spouse, whyche they oughte to putte in the myndes of theyr hart, that peny is signed with the kynges ymage: for why he is kyng of al kynges, bles∣sed in the worldes. Agayne I asked hym, sayeng: Lorde remem∣bre of that godly word, whiche thou dydst saye: A virgine araied or dres¦sed with chastitie, chari∣tie prudence, and humi∣litie runneth weil: ther∣fore there thou madest distinction of foure or∣namentes: and now for¦soth in this later distin∣ction,
the two firste thou forsoth hast assigned, tru¦ly thou seemest to let go or owytte. And he sayd: Thou mayst be called a person of desires, that so diligētly inquireth this. Then he aunswered to my questiō, saying: The two which to thee seme to be left or omitted, are comprehēded vnder the name of Torques, in la∣tin, in english, a wreath braided, forsoth it requi∣reth greate prudence or wysedom, that a virgin shuld constrain her hert agaynst al thyng which is nat pure or vncomly. And if there be true pru¦dence, there must nedes be humilitie. And again after certayne daies, I asked an other question: Lorde, seynge there are
no vrgins which shal en¦tre with the spouse in ma¦riage which shal be foun¦de without mariage clo∣thynge: with what rea∣son may it be sayd to thē How haue you entred he ther, not hauīg mariage clothes. To that he an∣swered, saying: this wor¦de perteyneth to the laste iudgement, there shal be gathered to gether afore the face of Christe his e∣lect spouses, al they arai∣ed in mariage clothes, ac¦cordynge to the iust wor¦kes which they haue don in thys worlde. There shall be also those, why∣che are reproued, hauing no beautyfulnes pertey¦nyng to the mariage, by cause thei haue neglected to woorke or to doo any good things in their life
therfore the spouse shall say to them: Go you ac∣cursed into euerlastyng fyre: In that voyce they shall receyue yt blaming or rebuke, Howe haue you entred hither not ha¦uynge mariage clothes. Agayn forsoth he made exhortatiō, sayeng: Her¦kē to, and bowe thy hert to me thou symple vir∣gin and amyable of the lord, folowe not ye may∣dēs and doughters of ye worlde which go prospe¦rously in their delites, & they seke to please in the eies of men & not of god they studye to be trīmed and dressed all aboute yt they maye haue prayse of the mouthes of them which looketh on them, and that they maye be made in snare & subuer∣sion
of many. And as ye woorde of them whyche praise them, so the farre¦nesse of them is lastyng but of one momente, as the frooth of water is ea¦sily dyssolued, and as a sparke risyng from fyer, is sone out, so sone is quenched the beautye of fleshe, and all his glory, and it is as a floure of a tree, which in one howre appereth, and streyght ways is it smyttē away with the mouynge or blaste of the winde: but forsoothe ye doughter, set thy hert yt thou maye be trimed or dressed to wal¦ke spectable ī the sight of thy cōtynēt louer, our kī¦ge, which loketh on ye frō heuē, & nūbreth all thy ways: take to ye that be∣auty, which nether with
sore, sycknesse, nor with age, can not decaye nor perishe, nor ye nedinesse of this worldelye perys∣shyng substaunce dothe make it fowle, the fairer ye art in face, thou muste take hede to be the more faire & specious in mid, a disceiuyng grace is of the face, thy glory muste be inwardly, that thou please thy spouse, which loketh on thy herte. Be∣holde the way of chasti∣tie, & take heede it haue pleasaunt grenenesse of gree on bothe partes, and outwardly beauty∣fulnes, gyue thou place to chastitie, not onely in fleshe, but in spirite, for why, vayne is the cha∣stitie of the flesh, where as reigneth the inconti∣nency of the spirite, and
any other thynges why¦che defileth ye soule, take hede what I say: As a lāpe can not shew light without nouryshyng of fatnes, so can not ye cha¦stitie of the fleshe shyne afore the heuenly spouse without the chastitie of the spirite. And I set to these wordes this questi¦on: Lord? in the vision our way apered narow or straite: and what is that which the scripture speketh. And I walked in breadthe, bycause I sought thy commande∣mentes, what is that brodenes? and how can I consider that breadth or brodenes ī that way? To this he thus answe¦red, That brodenesse or bredth is the strong in∣tēt of the hert, & the bur¦nyng
charitie inwardly wherwith the chast fou∣les doo bourne to theyr spouse Christe the lord, which is the breadth or brodenes, & plentuous∣nes of all the wayes of god, consider the libertie of this waye, that it is without thornes or let∣tes, that is the effecte of charitie whiche he wor∣keth most in virgines, where he sendeth foorth the thornes of charges, and of all malice, that they may be vacant, and thynke those thynges, which belongeth to god, and how they may plese hym whom they loue a∣boue all thynges. And whā again I asked him of the narownes of the way, he said: That is yt virgins shuld constrayn
them selfe, yt in nothing shuld excede from them selues, & to hym I said: Lorde may they excede from them selues? And he said. they myght, and I sayd: What thynges be those, by whiche they may excede from theim selues? And he sayde: Those be ydeines, fabu¦lation, that is telling of tales, and all thynges which taketh awai their heuenly spouse frō their myndes. And he sayde more: The narownesse of the way & of the tor∣quis which afore I told to you, they shewe vnder one signification. that they must walk to christ theyre spouse alwayes in narrownesse in those thynges the whiche per¦teyne to thys worlde.
And whan these words ware completed, in the seconde sonday of the ho¦ly feast of lent in ye feast∣full day of sayncte Ma∣thy apostle in the tyme of dyuine office or sacri∣fyce, the holy blyssed an∣gell of the lord appered to me. And I sayde to hym. I beseeche the my lorde, yf it be now tyme, if it pleaseth the, nowe to set an ende to thy ser∣mon, whiche hetherto ye haste prosecuted and fo∣lowed on to the virgins of the lorde: skāte I had fulfylled my prayer, and by and by he opened his mouth wt these wordes. Lo I shal sette to more ouer to admonysshe or warne you most beloued chyldren to the lorde. Absteyne you from the
noughty lusts or delites of vices, which fyghteth agaynst the spirite caste the thoughtes of youre hartes on the lorde, and he shall norishe you, as it shall be pleasynge to hym, and he shall bryng you into the feasts of e∣uerlastyng lyfe, whiche he maye vouchesaue to graunte to you, Iesus Christe the sonne of the liuing god, which with the holye ghoste lyueth and reygneth lorde god by all world of worldes. Amen. ¶ Of the wave of prelates. A Sermon. THe sermon afore written broughte to an ende, the an¦gell of the lord differred his cōmyng to visite me
longer tyme thanne he was wont to do, & that I dyd impute vnto my synnes, and I was an∣guished in my selfe, and I gaue my selfe more di¦ligently, with wepynge teares and prayers, and our couente holpe me wt their comon prayer. and whan seuentene dayes were past from that the sayd other sermon was ended, aboute the third houre of the day I stode alone in the oratory, she dyng my herte afore the lorde, and sayinge. Not by my merites lord thou haste loked in all these thynges whiche ye haste wroughte with me, but in thy meye thou haste doone all these, therfore I beseche the not to bee refreygned for my syn∣nes
or fautes, or for the synnes of any other, but that it may please the of thy goodnes to bring to ende those thynges whi¦che hytherto thou haste begon with me. Of the way of the gouerners of thy churche, which thou haste shewed to me in mystery, it maye please the to wytsafe to shewe to vs a congruent disci∣pline or teachyng, of the which some fruite of cor¦rection may comme, as thou knowest it to be ne¦cessary to thy people. Yet I speaking these and o∣ther like wordes in prai¦er, lo the aungel of my desire, sodeynly appered afore me, and with these woordes he began, say∣enge: Thus saithe the lorde: Beholde, I sende
myn angel that he may shewe to you which are set in high power, & you are prouokers: forsothe I saye to you, that the wickednes of the earthe which you haue hidden for golde and syluer as∣cendethe afore me, as smoke frō fyre: Are sou∣les thinke you no better then golde or siluer? and them you strāgle in euer¦lasting fire for your aua¦rice. Therfor your own religion accuseth you a∣fore me: lo forsothe you haue made your sancti∣fication to stynke in the sight of the people, and it is turned to me in ab∣homination: you haue occupied the principate of my saynctes, and I knewe it not: you haue defiled my bedde, and I
haue hold my peace, and said nothyng: What is a doo with me and with you, whiche are the ex∣asperatours or sharpers of my mekenes: From whens ar you ascended to trouble my flock, and to aggrauate my heart vpon my childrē, which I haue begotten in the bitternes of my soule in the day of my labour & of myn anguishes. And agayne the angell set to speake more to me, say∣eng: Are not my shepar¦des obdurate or made hard, as it were in a gre¦uous slepe, & howe shall I make them to awake vpon my flockes, which ar dispersed as shepe be whē they ar fed ingrene pastures: my people are made vagant, euery one
foloweth his own mind and in the bront of their herte, they runne about eche one after their con∣cupiscence, and there is neither voyce nor wytte with my shepeherdes, to blame and to gather to∣gether them whiche are dissipate, to me they are dombe sayth the lord, to me they are made foles, forsothe to theimselues they are wyse and ware or subtil, their mouth is open, and their tonge is versatile or sharpe to ga¦ther the grape or vine, in the whiche they haue not laboured, swifte is their foote, and they run in tumulte or in greate noyse to roote vp and to suppe vp the carnal thin¦ges of my peple, to whō they doo minister no spi¦rituall
thynges, they ar so slow that thei wil not moue ther fīger to teach my sowles frome wyc∣kednes, for whō I haue tasted death: they ar not afrayed to persecute me as a peple which know∣eth not my name, they walke vnder my name, & thei make heuy ye hert of my peple, with vnlau¦ful exaction, & thei mind not to take awaye from mine eyes, the wycked∣nes of ye adulterer, & of the fornicator, & of the smyter, and of hym that is violent in his neigh∣bor, & of a thefe, & of an yll doer, & of him that is forsworn, & of an vsurer & of him that disceyueth in weight & measure, & of him whiche polluteth my saboth dais in plais
of filthynes, and of him whiche depriueth the co¦uenant of sanctimonie, and of hym which is vn¦circuncised, dishonoring myn aultar, not deming or iudgyng that whiche is cleane or pure, & most cleane or most pure, and of hym whiche selleth & bieth my sanctification, and exercisynge pride in the heritage of my sanc∣tuary: these & other thin¦ges whiche with my la∣wes I haue forbidden, waste my house as a fla¦me of desolationi, & they make me yrke or weary vpon the chyldren of mē and my shepeherdes are dombe in their maners, and rest in the desires of their soule, they go well their gates after theyr plantacion: and our lord
saithe: that thereafter their goynges shal fynd a woorthye retribution or rewarde: The aun∣gell thus prosecutynge, whyche spake to me by dyuers tymes: I sayde vnto hym, Lorde, what is that wakynge why∣che our lord hath thret∣ned to his shepeherdes? and thereto he takynge agayn the worde, as in anger of threatnynge, sayde: You whych slepe in my blamynges, and your hearte is blynded in youre sleape, I shall make you to wake: whē olde death shall comme on you, and that inue∣terate serpente, and he shall deuoure you with a greate brunte or vio∣lence: for why you haue treasured to you trea∣sures
in the paynes of helle, O you vnhappye and insensate or vnwise: Open youre eyes, and rede scriptures, and re∣membre with what re∣ligion your antecessors haue gone afore you: a∣gayn after a little while or tyme, the aungell ad∣ded, saying: Behold and see the great byshop and high aboue all thynges our lorde Iesu Christe, howe he walked in his dayes in the myddes of his dysciples, not in heighte as of bearynge lordshyp, but in humble lowelynesse, as he that doth ministration of ser¦uice, as a meke or pitu∣ous folower of his flock vnto the consummation of death for them. Loke vpon his sede, whiche is
blessed, the ministers of his callynge his blessed apostles, and their suc∣cessours, in whoe com∣panies you glory to be, and you feede the wille of your hearte in their labours: are your wais as theyr wayes hathe beene, thynke not so, theyr wayes were faire and ryghte wayes, for∣soothe your wayes are defyled, and there is none order in them, thei haue not walkid in high¦nesse of theyr spiryte or mynde, nor in the tu∣mult or noise of a proud companye folowynge, not in couetousnesse of gettyng, not in magni∣fcence of ryche twa-thynge, nor in dissolu∣tion of hearte, not in muche eatynge, dryn∣kyng
and foule spottes of the flesshe, not in va∣nitie of theym whyche play, nor theyr running was not afterdogge nor byrde. Forsoth they drue towarde the steppes of the great shepard or pa∣stoure in sinceritie and purenes, wakynge and watchyng faithful wat∣chinges vpon the flocke of our lorde bothe daye and nyght, in laboures and in throwes, in pe∣nurie of necessitie, and as patient in anguisshe they haue fulfilled their ministery, sufferyng ab∣iection and contumelye of menne, and persecu∣tions more then any mā can noumbre, and they haue giuen theyr soules to deathe for that they might fulfyll the earthe
with the gospell of god, & that they myght wyn or get the soules of the electes. We halowynge the feaste of Easter in tyme of sacrifice, after ye readyng of the gospell, there appered to me the angell of the lorde stan∣dyng afore me, and whē I asked of hym that he wolde vouchsafe to pro∣cure that no negligence shulde chaunce in that holy cōmunion, whiche we taried for: & I praied hym further, that he would vouchsafe to fo∣low on the sermon, whi¦che he had begun of the rulers of the Churche. Wherevnto he gaue me a short answere, saying: If they were woorthy, oure lorde wolde shewe many great thynges of
them. And that spoken, he went streyght waies to the aultar, and stoode with two angelles, whi¦che came in the begyn∣nynge of Masse, with great diligence tyll that we wer all houseled: the next day about the same tyme comynge, thus he beganne, sayenge: The head of the churche cri∣eth, and his membres are dead: for why the a∣postolical seate is obses∣sed with pride, and it is tylled with auarice, and it is fulfylled with ini∣quitie and wickednesse, and they sclaunder my shepe, which they ought to kepe and gouern, the worde is with the lorde with his power. Shall my right hande forgette this, no without doubt,
excepte they shall be con¦uerted, and shall correct theyr noughtye worste wayes. I the Lorde shall breake theym a∣sunder. Agayne, an o∣ther day, he added ther∣to sayeng: These sayth oure Lorde to the great prelate of the churche. Remembre you what accompt you shall yelde in my dreadefull iudge∣ment of my shepe, why∣che you haue taken to gouerne and to keepe, whan you haue appri∣sed the spirituall gyftes of my people with the price of vnhappynesse, trowe therfore I send to you fatherly monitions or warnynges: see that you bee not iudged, but be you conuerted frome your most yll vices, and
make clean your consci∣ences, and I shall be re¦conciled to you, or els I the Lord shal put away your memory frome the lande of them whych li∣ueth: after these he as in spirite of softnes she∣wyng the worde of god, sayde: I the Lorde crie and warne my shepar∣des, and why here they not the voyce of my ad∣monition or warnyng: I stande and knocke at the doore of their herte, and they wyll not open to me: Heare harken & vnderstand the wordes of my warning, and de∣lite you in my loue, for why, I warne the she∣pardes & my shepe with a fatherly warning: for soth there be among my shepeherdes, whiche are
seue to me good and pea¦syble, to howe fewe of them there be, and other many ylle and peruerse or frowarde which pro∣uoke me to anger, ther∣for it behoueth to warn the good to profyte into better, and forsoothe to warne the ylle and the peruerse frowarde, that they may be conuerted, that they perysh not frō the right waye. And a∣gayne when he dyd vi∣site me, he ioyned more wordes to: Lo our lord hath yet set to his shepe herdes, sayeng: With all busynesse of mynd take heede your way bee the right waye and erre not therin. Wake or watche you, and kepe the vigils of the nyghte vpon my flock, as good folowers
lest peraduenture there maye come ouer you a flocke of goates, which be malignaunt spirites, of the which the flockes of my sheepe are disper∣sed: Ioy you with glad¦nes, you whiche are pea¦sible saith the lorde, and remembre my woordes whiche you haue found in this present sermon, and keepe you from the vnlaufulle. thynges of this world, and loue my warnyng: forsoth I am to bee beloued for suche warnynge, & if that you loue me, and giue honor to my name. for of me you haue receyued that honour, I shall honour you afore my holy aun∣gelles. As yet the holye angelle speakyng to me these wordes of the pa∣stors
or shepards of the churche. it was seene or some behorable that I shuld aske for them whi¦che are doubtefull, and take occasion of their er¦roure, I asked therfore not as doubtīg in fathe but as couetīg our faith to be made ferme, of the angelles authorite, and I sayd, Lorde, haue the offices of those bishopes whiche wrongfully and nat after god haue ētred to their bisshopprickes, lyke truthe in the sacra∣mentes of the church, as of those byshops whose entree is good. And he answeryng, said: Many whan they fear the suche thinges so depely ar ra∣ther made therof worse, than better, and therby not amended, and the
lorde wolde shewe suche thynges, if they would not the more frelyer of∣fende, they to whom su∣che thinges do perteine. and these spokē, streight waies he was taken frō myn eies. Forsooth the next day when he came agayne to me, I asked hym, repetyng the same words, and he said, they haue lyke vertue, but it is more pleasyng to god in the offices of theym which haue wel entred. And agayne I sayde: My lord is it not so that priests ordeined of them whose entre is nat good haue the same power to consecrate in the aultar the body and bloudde of our Lorde, as they whi∣che are ordeined of them whyche laufullye haue
entred. And he sayd: Let neuer that doubt hereof ascende into thy hearte, but knowe for certayne, that all they which haue taken priesthoode in the ordinaunce of the chur∣che haue the same po∣wer in the consecration of the lordes sacrament whether they, whyche haue ordeyned theym, haue entred well or yll, those dyuyne woordes whyche in the holye ca∣non are sayde, are of su∣che vertu afore the lord, that trewely in the pro∣nunciation of those wor¦des, there is the bodye and bloude of our lorde of what so euer prieste they be pronounced: for so the neither by the me∣rites of theym that bee good it is made, nor by
nor by the synnes of thē that be yll is letted that consecration, forsoth al∣though ther be no insuffi¦cient efficacie in the di∣uine sacramentes aswel the priestes as ordina∣ries, neuer the lesse for their yll they be damna∣ble, and hereafter shall be punisshed with more greuous damnatiō. By cause all this sermon se∣med to pertaine to oure spirituall fathers, ha∣uyng Iudgementes in the churche, I prayed the angell of the lorde, saying: Lord I pray the that as thou hast mini∣stred hitherto wordes of admonition or of war∣nyng to the spiritual go¦uernoures, so it maye please the to shewe from the lorde to them which
haue auctoritie of secu∣lar iudgementes, some admonitions or war∣nynges, whereby they maie be corrected. And he streight wais geuing consente to my petition with these woordes be∣ganne a sermon pertey∣nyng to them, sayenge: Lo our Lorde hathe or∣deyned vppon his peo∣ple princes and Iud∣ges that they shoulde doo iudgement and iu∣stice, and confirme tru∣the and peace betwixte man and man, that all the people shoulde bee well pleasyng afore the lynynge God. Nowe forsoothe sayeeth oure Lorde: My Princes and iudges ar as a hors or a mule, in whome there is no vnderstan∣dynge:
They walke a∣fore me with the necke extended, and blowen with pride, not geuyng glory to god, of whome is all power in heauen and in earthe, but they glory in theyr vertues. I haue exalted theym & made theym honorable on the earth: and lo they despise to knowe that, and to geue me the glo∣ry. Forsoth if they knew my name, whyche is great, and to be feared, and my stronge righte hande, whyche I haue stretched vpō them, per∣aduenture they shuld be made low and meke vn¦der hand, & shuld with∣drawe agayne to theym selues theyr necke whi∣che they haue erected into the contumelie or
displeasure of me, and shulde bowe down their there into the earthe frō whens I toke them and their fathers: I saye to you kyngs of the earth, whyche are lyfted vp in heighte, and the crye of your iniquite ascendeth into heauen afore me, heare you the voyce of my blaming, and I shal discept or with strife dis∣pute with you in the ea∣res of my people. Know you not that al the king¦doms of the worlde are myne, and all the glorye of them, & that I haue power to geue theym to whom I will, & agayn what hour I wil to take them awai? Do you not know, that al thyngs ly¦uyng stand vnder the cō¦mādemēt of my mouth,
and that my woorde is mighti to diuide betwen your spirite and fleshein the twinkling of an eie: and why is your hert set vp in pride in these thyn¦ges whiche by my ordy∣nance you haue taken, & not rather you to be bu∣sy to minister to me in ye degree of youre height, and to geue thankes to me for the multitude of my benefites: go agayn to your hert, & see what I haue done to you, and what you haue yealded agayn to me. I the lord youre dominatour haue founde you without me rite of thankes geuing afore me, & neuertheles I haue takē you vp, as I wyl of al the numbre of muche people, and I wyll lifte you vp aboue the
heigh of prynces, and of Iudges of the earthe, & I haue shed on you vnc¦tion of my holynesse, & I haue put the diademe of glory on your head, and I haue porrected or re∣ched vnto you the rodde of the kyngdom to your right hand: and I haue girt you with the swerd of my vengeance, and I haue glorified you afore all my people in ryches, in high power, & I haue giuē to you gret strēgth to rend asunder the ver∣tue or strength of the re¦bellers against you, & I haue dilated & set abrode the fame of your name, accordyng to the bredth of therth. I ye lord haue done to your al these, to ye intent yt you shuld mag∣nifi ye praise of my name
vpon the earth, and that you shuld exercise my iu¦stice or lawes in theym which I haue made sub¦iect to you, aswel to high as to the low, to ye more as to the lesse, and that you shulde set at one all my people in the bandes of peace and of equitie, and that you shuld faith¦fully giue your selues to be a refuge or helper to euery one whiche is op∣pressed, or to hym which suffreth wrōg, and that you shuld be my dēgers against thē, which break or violate peace or iustice & yt you shuld make the erth to rest frō thē whi∣che troubleth it, & make it desolate with sword & fire, & with violent pray deuoureth other mēs la¦bors, & make ye tillers of
the erthe to be vagant & beggers, & thei dishonor my holy name, wherwt I haue signed & marked them, and I haue disse∣uerde thē in heritage to me. This was ye yoke of my thraldom or seruice, which I haue put vpon you in the daye yt I dyd exalt you ouer thē whi∣che ar most high aboue my people: you forsothe haue smitten away that yoke from your neckes, and for al ye glory which I haue giuē to you, you haue yelded againe not drede & honor, but despit and prouoking, and you shutte the eies of youre mind that you shuld not loke to your iuge which is in heuens, & you haue subuerted that which is right for ye auarice and
pride of your hert, & you haue cōfirmed wicked∣nes in the earth, & haue set that vp in high place where you walk abrode on the earth: I here we∣pyng and wailyng after you, and a great & much quarell accuseth youre pride, for your cōpany of horsmen is intollerable and it is beyōd numbre, the iniquitie of thē whi∣che walke in the circuite of you: you ar combrous & chargeable to my peo∣ple, & that to you semeth but a trifle, but also to your lorde god, you are greuous and abhomina¦ble of the defilyng or fil∣thynes of your shamful vnclennes, wherwt you ar not afraid to prouoke me to indignation, and you haue dishonored the
holy oile, wherwt I haue anoynted you, and you haue polluted my hono∣rable name, whyche I haue put on you, & haue made it to bee blasphe∣med in the multitude of people for the insaciable sinne whiche hath lorde∣shyp in you: therfore sai∣eth ye lord, I haue sworn in ye strēgth of my right hand: for why, lo nere at hande I shall yelde my moste harde vengeance on your heades, and as you haue myghtyly fyn¦ned, so I shal make you myghtilye to bee tour∣mented, and to bee tro∣den downe togyther of yll and vncleane spiri∣tes, to whome you haue mynistred, & the scourge shall not go from you in this tyme, excepte you
shall doo penaunce, and go away from your wic∣ked wais, wherwith you haue brought my wrath into your kyngdeomes. Doo penaunce therfore and tary nat, and studye with all vigilance to ful¦fyll your ministerye, to which I haue called you and I shall remembre my auncient mercies in you, and shal haue mer∣cy of your manyfold wic¦kednesses, and I shall magnifie you after the magnitude of my seruā¦tes kynges, which haue ben afore you, & I shall set vnto you the crowne of glory in my kingdom whiche shall not perish-frō your head into euer∣lastyng. Behold all you princes and my iudges these my woordes, you
which beare the wicked¦nes of your kynges, and correcte youre shrewed wayes in my blamyngs in whiche I haue chydē them, and go you frome auaryce & dysceytfulnes you whiche do suffocate or strangle my Iustice, for rewards and fauour of men, and you lyft vp the hertes of my people, that one may noye ano∣ther, trustynge in youre vnrightuousnesse. I the lorde haue made subiect my people to your domi¦nacyon, that you should be to them in defence, from the face of the vio∣lente, and of the robber, and lo your herte ys lyf¦ted vp in pryde, and as dyrte in the streete, you treade them downe, by whome you ar glorious
and as rauenous wol∣fes you exercise madnes in youre propre flocke. I haue likened you to my principates, whiche are ouer the knighthode or chyualrye of heauen, and you wold not vnder¦stand your owne honor and you haue clad your selfes with the similitud of the prynces of hell, in the multitude of malyce wherwt you skourge my people in the boldenes of your spirit, and in the spottes of your Intem∣peraunce, wherewithe you haue dishonored my face, whiche lokethe on you from heuen therfore the lorde sayth, I lyue, and the strength of my righte hande lyuethe, yf you wyll not here of my warning, and be turned
agayne to me, I shall drawe you downe from your height, whiche you haue ylle vsed into the depenes of hel, and you shal be felowes of them to whō you haue made your selfes like, in quick bournynge fyre euerla∣styng. In the holy daye of Penthecoste, called Whitsontide in the fyrst houre afore the celebra∣tion of the diuine office when I was in prayer, the angel appered afore me, and settynge hereto with the adding of these woordes, fulfylled this sermon. Thus saith the lorde, kyng of kynges, and lorde of them whi∣che haue lordeshyppe ouer all the earth: Here you, and vnderstande you the woordes of my
mouth, and amend your waies in my eie syghte, for if you study to please and to appease me, the more hygher you are in this, the more hygher place I shal geue to you named in my kyngdom that you may lyue and reigne with me without ende. Amen. ¶ Of the way of them that ar wydowers or widows. The .vii. sermon. IN the feaste of saint Martin be∣twixte the silence of the Masse, I spake to the angell, sayenge: Lorde it please the now that thou may exhibite to vs a conuenient disci¦pline of that way, wher¦of one parte is occupied with brembles, and tru¦ly
the other part is plea¦sant and fruitfull with floures, and narow, ha∣uyng nothyng of brem∣bles and of lettynges or impedimentes. Scante I fulfilled the woordes of my petitiō, & straight wais he saied: Lo I say to you, whyche in this world be wydowes ly∣uyng in fleshe, in labors and in many anguishes absteyn you from the vi¦ces of this worlde, and walke you in the way of continencie or of chasti∣tie, which waye is plea∣santly dressed, and so li∣uyng accordynge to the spirite, go out frome the myddes of thornes, whi¦che are in the circuite of you. for lo your snare is dissolued wherwith you wer boūd to this world,
and as captyues you were led to serue to the will of an other, & you wer not your own whā you did or performed the wyl of the flesh, after all the desires of the heart, you tooke than excuse of the necessite of mariage. And if you will againe obey to the fleshe, what excuse shall you haue? Wherfore couete you to please againe to ye syght of man in a proude clo∣thing, in the ornamente or dressing of your face? to whom more now doo you bye or set your flesh partly deade in the deli∣tes of this worlde, and in those desyres whiche be aduersant against the spirit?, and you heape to youre selues vayne and superuacante busynesse
more then is expedient. Heare you rather godly counsell, and go awaye from the voluptuousnes of this lyfe: for they are disceyuable, leste perad∣uenture you be afore oc¦cupied with theim, and your laste dooynges bee worse thā the fyrst, take to you quietnes of mind & spirituall delites whi∣che god offereth to you, doo the residue of your daies in obsecrations & in vigils, and in chasti∣syng of your fleshe, and in workes of pitie. And in the vigile of the apo∣stles, he set to more, say∣eng: and what shall I more adde to warne or admonisshe you: Lo I haue shewed you the way, I haue instructed you with doctrine, feele here
and there, consyder the wordes, reteyn the exā∣ples: Loue chastitie and runne to the clerenes of god, and of our lord Ie∣su Christ, which he may witsaufe to graunte to you, which liueth & rei∣gneth by all worlde of worldes. Amen. In the day of the translation of sainct Benet, I dyd co∣uet to take ye beginnyng of the .viii. sermon, but that day my praiers wer letted with the presence of gestes, and my desre was translated vnto the next day. Then forsothe I standing in praier af∣ter the houre of the cha∣piter, the aungell of our lorde presented himselfe to me, and I asked that he mighte begynne the sermon to theim, whose
life in vision appered to be occupied as with clod¦des, and streight waies he opened his mouthe, and spake these wordes. ¶ Of the waie of here∣mites, & of them which liue soli¦tarily or alone. A sermon. TAke heede you yt haue chosē to dwel in wildernes what discrecyon you maye haue. Forsoothe discre∣tion is mother of al ver¦tues, the sharpe clodde is youre waye, for the hardnesse of lyfe, se you leste peraduenture your foote maye offende, and if it offend, beware that the lyghte whiche is in you bee made voyde or extincted: forsothe ther∣fore it is necessarye for you to haue discretion,
that you may not folow to soone euery brunt of your zele or desyre, whi¦che impelleth you to the height of perfection, nor go not ouer the measure of your vertu or strēgth with immoderate la∣bors, many walkyng in the presumptiō of their spirite, with to muche af¦fliction, haue quenched their lyfe, and they haue parished in their inuen∣cion, many exceedynge their measure haue sub∣uerted mans vnderstan¦ding in themselues, and haue ben made vnpro∣fitable like iument bea∣stes, sauoryng no witte or knowledge: many by immoderate fatigatiōs haue ben broughte into irkesomnes, & the vertu therof hath waxed sycke
or wery, & they went a∣waie backward, and are reuolued agayne to car∣nal or fleshely voluptu∣ousnes, & they are made a laughyng to scorne to wicked spirites: good is the vexatiō or punisshe∣ment of the flesh, bicause it is aduersant agaynst the concupiscence of vn∣cleannes, but if it exceede measure, it is vnprofita¦ble bicause it suffocateth or strangleth the deuoti¦on of contemplation, & quencheth the light ther¦of. O thou man, haue thou mynde therfore of thy fraylenes, that thou mayst go warely in the harde way, whiche thou hast entred into, and do paciently in thy hasting or festination, lest yu suf∣fre ruine or decay, dresse
al thy labors in the coū∣cels of wise mē & not in thyn owne wit or mynd and thou shalt not be cō¦foūded in thyn outgate, tempt not the lord of he¦uen, as they whiche nat takyng hede, outwardly cast awaye the charge & cure of themselfes, and they haue trust that the power of our lorde shall be made meruailous in them after as in the an∣cient dais. To these take to thee the eruditiō and discipline of cōtēplation whiche I haue shewed from the lord & comfort in that thyne abiection. We sittyng togither in ye chapterhous to heare a lesson of the rule in the feaste of saincte Mary Magdalen, my lord the angell stode afore me, &
fulfilled this present ser¦mon wt a cōuenient end saying: O mā now take hede, yu which hast chosen to leade thy life alone, & thou haste renounced or forsaken ye voluptnous∣nesse of ye worlde, what fruite thou bryng forth. Truly ther ar som men which loue more to be a lone for the libertie of their owne wil, than for frute of good worke, but if thou perseuer or abide in goodnes, the lord shal geue to thee the thynge which the eie hathe not sene nor ye eare hath not hearde nor hath not as∣cended into the heart of man, whiche he myghte vouchsafe to graunte to you, whiche lyueth and reigneth god by the infi¦nite world of worldes. Amen. ¶Whā the feast
of saynt Iames the apo¦stle was in hande in the first euen song the angel of the lorde appered a∣fore me, and I did as the writer of these sermons enticed me, and I asked of the aungelle that he wolde please or vouche∣safe to pronounce the ti∣tle whiche was to bee writē in the begynning of this boke. And by & by he assented to my pe∣tition, and sayd: This is the booke of the wayes of god, which was she∣weo of the angel of god, most high to Elizabeth the handmayd of Christ the lyuynge God, in the fyft yere of her visitati∣on in the which yere the spirite of the lorde hath visited her, to the helthe of all them whiche take & perceyue these father∣ly
monitiōs or warnin∣ges with a thankefull blessyng. and it was the yeare of our lordes in∣carnation, a thousand, a hundred fifty and six. ¶ Of the way of adole∣scence, that is of them whiche be yong, and aboue seuen yeares. A sermon. IN the moneth of August the .v. day of that moneth, in the mornyng after ma∣tens, when I was cou∣ched in my little bed, nor as yet I toke no sleape, sodeinly appeared afore me the angel of our lord and began thenyneth ser¦mon of this presēt boke with these words. Lo or behold I haue somwhat to say to you, which are put or set in youth as a
lyly which afore ye sonne risyng or springing was close or shette, and when the sonne shined in his vertue, then he openeth him selfe and deliteth in the ardure or heate of ye son, so is a man, & so his fleshe flourisheth in his youth or yonge age, and he many waies touched deliteth his mynde, and is resolued of the softe glosyng or flatteryng of his naturall heate: here you therfore chylderne, and in the words of my ministery perceyue the calling of your most best father from heuen, whi∣che shall geue to you a place of most swete ame¦nitie or pleasure afore ye seate of his glory, if you wyll chose to walke in his counsels: lerne first
to dreade or feare ye lord of heauen, and often cu∣stome your selues to be bowed doune vnder the yoke of his dread or fear from the beginnynge of your youth. Lo he hath prepared in the cruel hel fyre and brymstone, and hugely many scourges and most bitter bitings of the horrible spirites, doyng yl to small and to great, and spareth none age: therefore I saye to you, learne to conteyne your selues from all yll works, & kepe your in∣nocency as chosen gold, whose price in beautiful¦nesse as yet you knowe not, forsothe when your vnderstandynge shall growe in age, than you shall know, and you shal taste therof the fruite of
myrth which no manne knoweth, but he that ta¦keth it, O you litle chil∣dren, the counsell of our lorde is that whiche I say, lo there is in youre bosome a treasure desy∣rable & precious aboue al the rychesse of the worlde, that is the pre∣cious stone of your vir∣ginitie, you shall be bles¦sed if you wyll keepe it, caste nat that thynge so precious in ye myre, nor chaunge it not for a vile delectation, whyche is but of one moment, for ones caste awaye, it can no more be found again that is the propre signe of our fraternitie in he∣uen, and therfore singu∣larly we delite in theym in the earthe whiche we fynde or see signed with
our title, and if it please your soule or mynde to keepe it, take heede to youre selues, that you defyle it not with the negligence of your light¦nesse, decline with the feare of your harte from the prouokinges of vn∣cleannesse, and flee from the confabulations and collusyons of yong weu¦ches, and keepe you no felowshyppe with the corrupters of theym. Kepe your mouth from vncleane or foule wor∣des or talkynge, & bowe away your eare from it, and absteyne youre eies and your handes frome all fowle fylthynesse. Heare you and vnder∣stande the scripture of a wyse manne, whiche sayth, Happy is she whi¦che
hath not knowē the bedde in synne, she shall haue fruite in respect of holy soules: and he whi¦che is gelded, and hathe not wrought by his han¦des iniquitie, there shall bee gyuen to hym the chosen gyfte of faythe, and the moste accepta∣ble lotte or chaunce in the temple of the lorde. Whā I required of hym of that scripture whose it shoulde bee, he sayde: The holy ghoste spake it by the mouthe of a wyse man. And streight ways he was taken frō myne eies, nor he wold not more suffre no que∣stion to be asked of him. After these agayne he sette to and sayde: Yet I shall adde to speake to my bretherne and fe∣low
seruantes, the war¦nyngs or admonicions of the father of them. O you children bring it in custome to you, the ma∣ners of holynes in your floryshinge age, whyche you maye exercise in the tyme of your rypenesse, sharp your maners ther¦in, that you may be aba¦shed from yll, meke and sobre, lowly and mercy∣ful, and be pacyent to cor¦rection, loue you & serch the doctrine of wisemen and fle from lying wor¦des, and frō wordes of malice, and theft or stea¦ling, muche eatyng, and striues, and such playes or gamyng, which aua∣rice hath found, and fle from them whiche gyue occasion of vncleane vo¦luptuousnes: it is expe∣diente
also to you to in∣tende to often praier, for why a praier procedyng from an vndefiled con∣science, is in heauen as incēse of swetnes, make supplication to your ma¦ker whiche hath created you, that he may keepe you vndefiled from this worlde, and trust not in the lengthe of this lyfe present: for youre ende from hens is vncertain: this is the beautie and fayrenes of your waye. O you adolescentes and yong persons immacu∣late, walke therin, and you shall be chyldren a∣miable to our lorde, and lyke to the aungelles of god in heauen, to whose felowshyp our lord Ie∣su Christe may vouche∣safe to bring you, and he
is blessed and laudable with the father, & with the holy ghoste in euer∣lasting worldes. Amen. ¶Of the waye of In∣fantes. A sermon. IN the vigill of the assumption of our Lady, whan the sermon afore rehersed, was completed by the angell, in the same feast full daye, in the tyme of diuine office, the angell visited me agayne, and sayde: Lo yet I wyll say and make an end of my sermons, for there is yet place, and I haue some what shortly to say to in¦fantes, whiche can not keepe them selfe for ig∣noraunce, therefor it be∣houeth
to admonyshe or warne theyr mothers, that they maye kepe thē with the dreade or feare of god chaste and imma¦culate, that by chaunce they perishe not. And to that I asked and sayd: Lord what is that whi∣che thou hast sayd (chast and immaculate) what can infantes do wherof they mai defile their cha¦stitie, and if they do any thyng amysse, dothe not ignorance excuse theim. And he sayde: They de∣fyle oftentymes theyr chastitie with vncleane wordes, and with wor∣kes, suche as they may performe, and although they may doo it by igno¦raunce, yet they bee not without faute, for that they were not therefore
chastised of any bodye, nor they knewe not of them selues how to doo penaunce for their faut, therefore they ought to bee chastised of their pa¦rentes for theyr fautes, for as they are accusto∣med or vsed to dooe yll: so should they learne to doo well, yf they were nourished therto by cha∣stitie: In that I sayde, Immaculate, I sayde it for theym, which whē they a lyttell bee paste seauen yeares, then the more they defyle theym selues with yuell wor∣kes: for why they than knowe to thynke more of euyll, for also they as muche as they maye, woorke the woorkes of vncleannesse, so that they whyche bee ioyned
in kynrede, are often coupled, not knowynge what they doo: There∣fore suche if when they dye frome this worlde, they suffre great peynes tyll they may bee made pure, for why, no spotte may enter into the king¦dome of heauen, that therefore is theyr pery∣shyng, wherof I sayde afore, and the lesse they bee holpen with prayer and almesse of theyr frendes, forsoothe the more greuous and more longer they are puni∣shed, for that they be∣leeue that they neede no healpe of prayer or al∣messe to bee doone for theym. I saye to you theyr parentes, and to you whyche haue kee∣pynge of yonge lyttell
chyldren, loke vnto how you maye keepe theym with muche cautele or beynge ware of theym, for in you redoundethe their fautes, yf you bee neglygent of them: all fleshe by hym selfe is re¦dy to noughtynesse or to yll: and therfore norishe nat them in your vani∣ties, nor incline theym not to dronkennes and to vain and shreude tal∣kyng or tales tellynge, nor induce not thē by de¦licate educatiō to pride: forbyd them from conui¦tious and vncleane or foule woordes, & frome sylthy songes, and from yll playes, & from strife, & from vnware vagatiō laugh not at their fau∣tes, but make thē afraid with words of correctiō
and with ye rod of meke∣nes: for they wille bee stoute bold and sturdye, if they bee lefte to theyr owne wyl. Begyn ther∣fore in the mornyng of theyr age, to bow them to the dreade and feare of oure lorde, and take you charge to styll into theyr eares, and to tea∣che them the articles of they holy fayth and prai∣ers to god, and al thyng whyche perteynethe to good maners. Forsothe the angell made an end of this sermon in the v∣tas of the Assumption of our Ladye, with the settyng to of these wor∣des: Nowe forsoth you moste deare chylderne, how fayre is your way, runne in it. O howe a∣myable is your father?
Howe precious is your rewarde, and the kyng∣dome of heauen, whiche he may please, & vouche¦saue to graunte to you, ye soonne with the holye ghost ī worldes of worl¦des. Amen. ¶ The protestacion of ye angell of the shewynge of the booke of ye wayes of god. WHAN al these ser∣mōs war allmooste consūma∣ted or fyni¦shed, to the feaste of the apostles of Peter and Paule, afore the houre of the dyuyne office▪ I was prayeng in secrete place & there appered in my sighte the angel of the lord, and I herynge him, he spake these wor¦des.
To the byshoppe of Treuerense, and to the byshoppes of Colayn & of Maguncies, it muste be showed to you, from the lord god greate and to be fered, and from the angell of the testament of thys booke, that you may shew these wordes whyche you shall fynde in thys present booke, so the Churche of Rome & to all the pte, and to all th rche of god, a∣mende youre selfes, and be you conuerted frome youre errours, and take not disdaynfully this ho¦lye and diuyne monici∣on or warnyng, for they be not of mans Inuen∣cyon, truely I speake to you by name, for that in thys prouince, you haue the name of religion,
rede and here these dy∣uyne monicions, or war¦nynges, and take them with a pleasaunt mynde and suppose not them to be fygmentes, or fay∣nynges of women, for they be not so, but they bee of god the father al∣mighty, who is the well and sprynge, and begin∣nyng of al goodnesse: for sooth that I say to you, I saye to all other. THys is the adiura¦cion of hym, that wrote these sermons or boke. I adiure by ye lord and by his angell euery one that shal transwrite thys boke, that diligent¦ly he may amend it, and that he may wryte thys adiuracion to this boke. Laus deo.
HIC est liber via rum dei, qui annuncia∣rus est ab an∣gelo dei altis∣simi Elizabeth ancillae Chri∣sti & dei viui, in quinto an∣no visitationis eius, in quovi∣sitauit eam spi¦ritus ad salu∣tem omnium qui paternas admonitiones Dei gratia be∣nedictiōe per¦cipiūt. Et erat in anno domi¦nice incarnati¦onis, Millesi∣mo cētesimo quinquagesi∣mo sexto.
Capitulo. 1. FACTVM est in ex∣ordio quī¦ti anni visita∣tionis meae iā appropinquā∣te die festo Pē¦tecostes. Ego Elizaibeth vi∣di in visione spiritus mei, montem excel¦sum copioso lumine in sum¦mo illustratū. Et quasi vias tres à radice e∣ius ad cacumē vs{que} porrectas. Quarum vna quae media e∣rat in directū mihi posita: speciem habe∣bat sereni coe∣li siue lapidis Hyacincthini,
quae vero à de¦tris mihi erat, viridis appare¦bat: & quae à sinistris purpu¦rea. Stabat au∣tem in vertice montis cōtra viam mediam vir quidam in signis tunica Hyacinthina indutus, & praecinctus ad renes baltheo candido, faci∣es splēdida e∣rat vt sol. Ocu¦li vero in mo¦dū stellarū ra∣diantes, Et ca¦pilli ei{us} tāquā lana candidis∣ma. Habebat autē in ore gla¦diū ex vtra{que} {per}te acutū, et ī manu dextri clauim, in sini¦stra vero quasi
sceptū regī. Visio secūda. Capitulo. 2. VIdi rur∣sus alia visione in solennitate Penthecostes in ascensu mō¦tis eiusdem à sinistris prae∣fati secus vias prioris visio∣nis, alias tres vias varietatē habentes hu∣iusmodi. Vna earum quae vie viridi propin∣quior appare∣bat: amoena quidem erat, sed ita ex om∣ni parte vepri∣bus condēsis vallata erat & obtecta: vt ab eis pungi ne∣cesse esset am∣bulātes
per e∣am, nisi dili∣gēter cōstricti & inclinati in¦cederent. Ap∣paruit & semi¦ta quaedā de∣lectabilis ar∣cta, & quasi modicū trita nihil habēs v prium, sed ex vtra{que} partcio cundo grami∣ne & floribus diuersi gene∣ris copioseval ata. Media a¦tē inter has du¦as vna erat ā∣pliorē caeteris habēs latitudi¦nem, plana & quasi pauimē∣tū habēs ex la¦terib{us} rubeis, quā cū diligē∣tius aspicerē: Angelus Dēi qui mihi assi∣stebat,
dixit: Viā hāc intue¦tis, & pulchra tibi uidetur et commoda ad ambulādū in ea: sed pericu∣losa est, & fa∣cile labunt{ur} in∣cedētes {per} eā. ¶ Visio tertia. Capit. 3. RVrsus in octa∣ua-Pen∣thecostes in tē¦pore meridia∣ne quietis: su∣bitò apertes ūt oculi cordis mei sine car∣nis vexatiōe, cut & in praefa¦is visionibus et uidi iterum uae praedicta sunt oīa. A die cit autē domi¦nus ostendere mihi {pre}ter eas
quasvi derā, a∣lias quatuorse c{us} tres vias pri¦mae visionis à dextris viri{que} stabat in cacu¦mine montis. Vna earū quae proxima erat viae purpureae vs{que} ad mediū mōtis difficul¦tatē magnā ha¦bere videbat{ur} à ve prium dēsi∣tate quibus ex vtro{que} latere obsitaerat. Re¦liqua vero {per}s eius vs{que} ad sū¦mū floribus a moena, & ab īpedimētis li∣bera, sed arcta & modicū tri¦ta apparuit. Quae erat pro∣xima huic, ari¦da videbat{ur}, & ī modū cāpi a
rati glebis ingē∣tibus aspera et viatoribus su∣is plurimū o∣nerosa. Etam autē cogitans apud me de his duabus vi∣is: {quod} diffici∣lem haberent incessum, & respōdens an∣gelus qui mi∣hi assistebat, ait: Si quis am¦bulauerit per vias istas, caue at ne offendat pedem suum: qui autē offen¦derit et cecide¦rit, si non sur∣rexerit, sed {per}∣manet: non vi debit lumē ae∣ternū: relique vero duae quae pariter cū his apparebāt: pla¦e  expedite
erant, & aspe∣ctu pulchracā dorē habētes, quasi terre be¦ne trire in stra¦ta publica. Cū{que} hererem in aspectu earū. Audiui rursus angelū dicen∣tē via iustorū recta facta est: & iter sāctorū praeparatū est. Visionis prime interpraetatio. Cap. 4. VIsionis primae si¦cut {per} āgelū ac¦cepi interprae∣tatio est haec. Mōs excelsus altitudo cele∣stis beatitudi∣nis est. Lux in vertice mōtis, claritas est vi∣tae aeternae. Viae diuersae in
monte, electo¦rū variae ascen¦siones sūt, qui¦bus ad regnū claritatis ascē¦dūt. Via Hia∣cincthina diui¦nae cōtempla∣cionis studiū est. Ambulāt in ea, qui iugi meditatiōe & desiderio, in deo et in coele stib{us} mētis o∣culum figunt. Via viridis eo¦rum est: qui in actiua vita {per}fe¦cti et irrep̄heti sibiles esse stu¦det, incedētes in oīb{us} māda∣tis dn̄i sineque rela, qui dum trāsitoria, sed īmarcessibile brauiū su{per}ne retributiōis in cunctis o{per}ib{us}
suis non atten¦dunt. gressus mentis in vi∣ridi figunt. Via purpurea ascensus bea∣torum Mar∣tyrum est, qui in tormentis passionum in iustitiam De per patiētiam operantes: in purpurea san∣guins suis sui ad diuinū lu∣mē trāsire cō∣tēdūt. Vir insi¦gnis supra mō¦tē, Christ{us} est. Splēdor vult{us} ei{us} diuinae cla¦ritatis eius est signū: Oculi radiātes, sere∣nus aspect{us} e∣ius su{per} electos Capilli lane al be similes, an∣tiquum dierū
esse pronunc āt, licet in no∣uissimis die∣bus secūdum carnem sit na¦tus. Cladi{us} an¦ceps in ore e∣ius, terribilis iuditii senten¦tia est, de ore ei{us} processura feriēs re{pro}bos duplici contri¦tiōe corporis & animae. Cla¦uis dextera ei{us} apparuit, qm̄ ipse est qui so∣l{us} aperit ianuā vitae, & nemo claudit: clau∣dit, & nemo à perit. Ipse quo{que} est, qui pro¦fūda mysterio¦rū dei cui vult reserat, & non estqui claudat Signat, & nō st qui signacu¦lū
soluat. Scep¦trū in sinistra eius, potestas regia est. quo∣niam & secū∣dum humanā naturam se ac¦cepisse testat{us} est, dicēs: Da∣ta est mihi om¦nis potestas in coelo & in ter¦ra. Tunica hia¦cinthina virtu¦tē indicat coe∣lestis contem∣plationis, quae totā perfecte possi debat mē¦tē saluatoris. Nō enim vtcae¦teri hoīm ad¦mensurā spiri¦tū acceperat: in quo habitat oīs plenitudo diuinitatis cor¦poraliter. Bal∣the{us} cādid{us} in¦uiolabilis īno¦centiae
cādorē in eo designat. Apparuit ī via quae diuinita∣tis suae cōtem∣plationem si∣gnificat, quia sic eā vult ma∣nere in aeternū cū caeterae per mansurae non sint. Nō appa∣ruit in omni∣bus, & tamen erat in omni∣bus, quia sin∣gulae significāt virtutes, per quas iusti ho∣mines veniūt ad montē ex∣celsū, vbi reci∣piūt pro singu¦lis virtutibus singulas mer∣edes, & in o∣mnib{us} viis ve¦ritatis cōtem∣plandus est Deus.
¶ Visionis se∣cūdae inter∣praetatio. Cap. 5. VIsionis secūde myste∣rium huiusce∣modiest. Tres viae quae à sini∣stris viri stātis in mōte secus viā viridē ap∣paruerūt, pro∣prietatē expri¦mūt triū ordi∣nū in ecclesia, videlicet, cōiu¦gatorū, conti∣nētium & re∣ctorū. Via vo∣pribus valla∣ta, vita est cōiu¦gatorū. A moe¦na aparuit via haec q̲a abīitio īstituta ē a deo haec vita. Et si legitime obser¦uet{ur}, pulchra et
bene placens est in conspe∣ctu domini, et ambulantes in ea, procul dubiò in mon¦tem dei ascen∣dunt. Sed in∣finite secula∣rium curarum sentes huic ex omni {per}te im∣minent, qui∣bus pungi ne∣cesse est viato res eius, nisi et parce viuēdo sese omnibus modis cōstrin¦gāt, & coram Deo & homi∣nibus se humi¦liando semper veluti inclina¦ti incedant. Via à veprib{us} libera et iocū∣dis floribus, v∣trin{que} vallata, via continen∣tium
est. Horū etenim proprium est à curis & soli¦citudinib{us} vi∣tae praesentis mentem ab∣strahere. & so¦la quae domi∣ni sunt cogi∣tare, vt sint sā∣cti corpore & spiritu. Arcta est via haec: quia vt legitti¦me & sapien∣ter obseruetur magnae disci∣plinae custodia coarctari ne∣cesse est gres∣sus ambulan∣tium in ea, ne forte secundū arbitriū pro∣prium viuen∣tes, aut in for∣nicatiōem la∣bantur, aut cū fatuis virgini¦b{us}
siue viduis delicatis quae viuentes mor¦tuae sunt depu¦tentur. Modi∣cum trita est: quia respectu aliorum pau∣ci sunt qui in∣grediūtur per eā, pauciores qui perseuerāt in ea. Florib{us} diuersi gene∣ris delectabi∣liter vndique vallata est. qui a omnia vir∣tutum genera continētium vitā adornāt. Via media in∣ter duas prae∣dictas latior illis: Via Re∣ctorum est. Ea enim cum sit instituta ad regendam vitam coniu∣gatorum
siuo contnētium, siue vtrorum que minus il∣lis coarctatur & liberius ar¦bitrium habet propriam vo∣luntatem ex∣ercēdi, ac per hoc facili{us} in ea, lubricant gressus ambu¦lantiū per eā. quod & ipsa eius planicies apte signifi∣cat. Propter qd & pericu∣losa dicta est: quia tā multi in ea labūtur, vt in ipsa pau¦cissimi stabi∣les inueniant{ur} Quia autem quasi pauimē tū habere vi∣sa est ex late∣ribus rubeis,
quae sūt in ter∣ra ignibus co¦cta; solicitudi¦nē gnficat praelaoum, quae circa sub¦ditos mentis eorum iugitr decoqui ne∣cesse est, qui∣bus animae & corporis {pro}cu¦rationē debēt Visionistertiae interpretatio. Cap. 6. VIsionis tertiae ī¦terprae∣tationem cū ab angelo in∣structore meo suscitaretur: dixit ad me. Ecce, incepi∣sti librum via rum dei, sicut propositū tibi fuerat. Haec id circo dicebat:
quoniā in an∣no priore die quadam cum essē in spiritu duxerat me quasi in pratū quoddam, in quo fixū erat tentorium, & introuim{us} il∣luc. Et ostēdit mihi cōgeriē magnā libro∣rū illuc depo∣sitorū, & ait: Vides libros istos? Omnes adhuc ante di¦em iudicii di¦ctādi sūt. Ele∣uans autē vuū ex eis, dixit: Hic est liber viarū dei: qui per te reuelan¦d{us} est, quādo visitaueris so∣rorem Hilde∣gardū, & au∣dieris eam. Et
ita quidē im∣pleti coepit cō¦tinuò, cū ab ea rediissem. Declaratio qua∣tuor viarū dei quae sint. Capitulo. vii. EST autē quatuor viarum, quae ī tertia vi¦sione mōstra∣tae sunt, signi∣ficatio haec: Prima, quae e∣rat viciniorvi ae purpureae, ī infetiori parte dimetis aspe∣ra: In su{per}iori autē expedita & florida, vi∣tā significat e orū qui legiti¦me in seculo viuētes, in cu∣ris rerum mū¦danarum dies
suos dimidiāt ac deīde ad flo¦ridā & expedi¦tam cōtinēciū transeunt vitā Eotū{que} regula se constringē∣tes: pariter cū illis in montē dei ascendūt. Via arida & glebis aspera: durissimum il¦lud genus vitae est, quo ince∣dunt sancti he remite, & nō∣nulli ī societa∣te hoīm cōuer¦sationē habē∣tes. qui carnē suam supra hu¦manū modum macerāt, & ex siccāt ieiuniis vigiliis, genu∣flexionib{us} fla¦gellis, cilicio & grauissimis quibuslibet af¦flictiōib{us}.
Om¦nia huiusmodi quasi glebe as¦perrime sūt: et multo conatu ac vigilātia o∣pus est ambu∣lantib{us} per viā hāc, ne forte ī nimia ei{us} aspe¦ritate offēdāt, & grauius cae∣teris corruāt. Duarū viarum quae simul cū his quae descri¦ptae sūt appare∣bāt, vna vt di∣ctū est, magis irita & expedi¦tior visa est, de qua locut{us} est īstructor me{us}, dicēs: Per hāc viā incedūt sā∣ctae animae in∣fātiū quae in sa¦cro baptisma∣te sanctificate sunt: & infra
septēniūè vita discedūt. Qui qm̄ saeculi ma¦litiam experti nō sunt: expe∣dito & liberri¦mo gressu ad regnū dei per ueniūt. De al∣tera vero ait: Adolescenciū via est haec qui paulo tardius illis īcedūt, & idcirco minus trita & expedi¦ta apparet illo¦rum via. Ecce sunt visiōes et interpraetatio¦nes earū. qui a peruit oculos meos, vt vide∣rē visiōes dei: ipse proculdu¦bio pangelum suū sicut placi¦tum fuit ante ipsum in hunc modum intel¦ligēdas
esse de¦mōstrauit. Alia visio. Ca. viii. FActū est autē in fe¦sto beati Iacobi cū essē in spiritu & vi¦derē visionem viarū dei: rap∣ta sū ī sublime & quasi in vi∣cino mōte dei contēplata sū. Et ecce lux il∣la īmensa quae mōtis verticē occupabat: {per} mediū scindi visa est: & in∣trospexi {per} eā: & vidi sancto¦rum multitudi¦nem, cui aesti∣mari nō pote∣rat numerus. Et ait ductor
meus ad me: Cōspice & vi¦de, et cōsidera oēs quos vi∣des. Hic vides martyres san∣ctos ep̄os & cōfessores dn̄i virgines ceno¦bitas vtrius{que} sex{us} viduas & seculares cōiu¦gatos & conti¦nētes nobiles ignobiles oēs regnātes cum Chr̄o. Hi am∣bulauerūt vias dn̄i vias sāctas quas vidisti, et peruenerūt & perceperūtim marcessibilē à Christo dn̄o cū angelis e∣ius. Cōsideret nūc vnusquis∣{que} viam suam: {quod} si īiuste am∣bulauerit, cor¦rigat
seipsum cū humilitate & charitate & obedientia & dirigat viā suā quia si perue∣nerit, recipiet praemiū aeter∣nū. De via contē∣platiuorū. Sermo. i. ca. 8. ERā post haec quie∣scēs in le¦ctulo meo nec adhuc somnū ceperā, repēte visitauit me spūs dn̄i, & re¦pleuit os meū sermone hu∣iuscemodi. at¦tendite nūc er¦go vos qui re∣nūciastis secu¦laribus daeside¦riis, & elegi∣stis vt sequa∣mini
vestigi ei{us}, qui vos vo¦cauit in admi∣rabile lumen suū, qui & ip∣se vos nomina¦uit sibi filios e¦lectos: & cō∣stituit vos ī fi∣ne saeculorū iu¦dicare filios Israel. Cogita¦te apud vos, quomodo vi∣uatis cū humi¦litate & obedi¦entia & chari¦tate sine mur∣muratione & sine detractio¦ne & inuidia, & sine super∣bia, & ab aliis vitiis abstine∣re vos. Diligi∣te vos inuicē, vt nō blashe¦met{ur} pater ve∣ster celestis in vobis, & irri∣tetur,
& perea¦tis de via iusta Id est, de via cōtēplationis eius. Tūc pro¦secutus est an¦gelus dn̄i ser¦monē in hūc modū adiiciēs Si enim sūt in¦ter vos lites et dissensiones, detractiones, murmuratio∣nes, ira, odiū, inuidia, extol¦lētia oculorū appetitus ina∣nis glorie, va∣niloquia, scur¦rilitates vētris īgluuies, som¦nolentia, car∣nis immundi∣tia, ociositas, & similia: in¦quibus ābulāt filii huius se∣culi quis loc{us} erit diuinae cōtem∣rā
las sacramē rorum Christi mūditias irre∣uerēti ministe¦rio & illicito corde exhono¦rāt: arguētem irridēt, male∣dicto & perse¦cutiōe contri¦stāt. Qui meli¦ores sūt in eis: abhominabi∣les sunt & ipsi corā domino In vestitu hu∣militatis am∣bulāt: sed cor¦eor eorū lōge est ab ea. Ora∣tiōes multipli¦cant: sed haec quid prosunt dū in cordib{us} suis deo cōtra dicūt, dum fra¦ternā chari ta∣tē negligūt al∣terutrū īuidēt & detrahūt &
de praelatione contendunt. Mundi con∣temptum pro¦fitentur: sed ea quae sunt mundi vene∣rantur & im∣pudenter am∣biunt, & om¦ni vento pro∣priè volūtatis circumferun∣tur. Patrum in¦stituta abiici∣unt: negotiis saeculi se inge∣rūt, et scādalis ecclesiā replēt Propter hoc ecce contemp¦tum patitur re¦ligio, & fides scissuram. Et quid addā fa∣cere eis dicit dominus: Ec∣ce clamo post illos, & non uscultant.
Vocem com∣monitionis meae quasi cal∣ce repellunt. Visito illosper inauditam gra¦tiam & visita∣tionem suam non agnoscūt insuper & irri¦dēt. Percutio eos: & nō do∣lent: praecipito eos, & nō ex: pauescunt. Ve illorū vae hor∣ribile repositū est apud me. Ecce veniet ci¦to, & quasi re∣pentinus tor∣rens irruet su∣per eos: & de∣uoluet in per∣ditionē, quos absque pauo∣re inuenerit. Vos ergo po¦pulus meus populus non
fictae religiōis qui posuistis ī corde vestro mundū expu∣gnate coelum mente gerere vos inquā de∣clinate ab is qui eiusmodi sunt, & ne si∣tis participes eorū. State in via visionis {quam} elegistis, & mundate ocu¦los cordis vt subleuare eos valeatis in cō¦templatiōem lucis quam in habitat vita et redemptio ve∣stra. Quae au∣tē oculos cor∣dis emūdant, vt ad verū lu∣men subleuari possint: haec sūt. Secularis curae abiectio
Carnis affli∣ctio, cordis contritio, fre∣quens & pura delicti cōfes∣sio, & lauaciū fletus: & cum foras missa fu¦erit omnis im¦munditia: sur∣sum ista eos extollunt: me¦ditatio admi∣rabilis essen∣tiae dei & ca∣ste veritatis in¦spectio, ora∣tio munda & valida, iubi∣lus laudis, & desiderium ar¦dens in deū. Amplectimi∣ni haec, & in his estote, & occurrite vi∣uifico lumini quod tāquam filiis vobis se offert, et men¦tibus
vestris se vltro inge∣rit. Abstrahi∣te corda ve∣stra à vobis∣metipsis, & date ea i haec quae audistis: & implebun∣tur splendore deifico, & eri∣tis filii lucis ei tanquam an∣geli dei qui non cessant inhiate crea∣tori suo & cō¦templationis vigorem in su¦am resundere originem. Fi∣lii Adam nū parū vobis vi∣detur filios dei fieri? Et quare faciem vestram auer∣titis à contem¦platione vult{us} eius, qui dedit
potestatē talē hominib{us}, vo¦bis singulari∣ter qui pacifi∣ci esse elegi∣stis in mūdo, & cōformari angelis in ter∣ra. Vos estis lu¦cerne ardētes quas cōstituit dn̄s in monte sācto suo illu∣minare verbis & exēplis ve∣stris tenebras mūdi. Videte ne lumē quod in vobis est, e∣uacuetur a vē¦to superbiae & cupiditatis q̲ parētū vestro∣rū lumē in pa∣radiso exuffla¦uit. Declinate aurem vestrā filii pacis à cla¦morib{us} mūdi, & date silētiū
spiritui qui lo∣quitur in vo∣bis. Sabbatū perēne domi∣ni in cordibus vestris agite: et requiescet su{per} vos pax dei, {quam} exuperat om∣nem sensum, & delectabi∣mini in multi¦tudine suauita¦tis ei{us}. Nolite cōmoueri ne{que} cōcidatmēs vestra: si sper∣nit vos mūd{us}, & tanquā mor¦tuos et steriles vos aestimat. Si dolorib{us} & ae∣rumnis & pau¦pertate, atte∣nuatur vita ve¦stra: ne con∣tristemmi, ne∣que deflectatis oculos ab as∣pectu eius lu∣minis
qd est ā¦te faciē vestrā Ecce enī {pro}pe est vt euanes∣cat hic mūdus & flos ei{us} inte¦reat & vos iu∣dicabitis ama¦tores ei{us} & su¦perborū colla calcabitis. Vi∣dētes obstupe scēt super glo¦ria vestra: cum reuelabuntur diuitiae vestrae quas thesauri∣zatis vobis in coelo: tūc eua∣cuabitur quod imperfectū est cōtemplatiōis vestrae: & susci¦piet oculos a∣quilarū suarū facies lucis ae∣ternae, & tan{quam} flumē redun∣dās sic redūda¦bit fulgor eius
in cordahomi nū qui exquisi erunt eā in ve∣ritate. Nondū verba haec fini erat angel{us} qui per vices mihi loquebatur cū īcidit mihi du¦bitatio quaedā de distinctiōe viarū dei quae descriptae sunt Et īterrogaui eū dicēs: Nun quid dn̄e mi, nos cenobitae sum{us} in via cō¦tēplationis cū sum{us} in via cō¦tinētiae An es∣se potest vt si∣mus in vtra{que}? Et ait. Coīs est vobis via cōtē¦platiōis cū cle¦ricis, sicut illis eo īs est vobis¦cū viae cōtinē∣tiae. Scito tū {quod}
multi sunt in via cōtinentae, qui in via con∣tēplationis nō sunt. Et sunt multi clericorū qui ne{que} in via contemplatio∣nis ne{que} in via cōtinentiae am∣bulant, & hi in¦felices sunt. Ar¦bitrantur in via contemplatio∣nis se esse cum non sunt. Rur∣sus adieci, di∣cēs: Et quid di∣cemus de ponti ficibus & prae∣positis & huius¦modi magnis ecclesiae praela∣tis? Et respōdit mihi in hec ver¦ba. Superbia re¦gnat in cordib{us} praelatorum & magnorū: & re¦pellūt deum à
cordib{us} suisqui nō vult quiesce¦re nisi super hu¦milē & quietū & trementem verba sua. Prae∣cept enim olī saluator disci∣pulis suis dicēs: Qui vos nō re∣ceperunt, exit & excutite pul¦uerem de pedi∣bus vestris in e¦orum testimo∣niū. Et quid pu¦tas de deo sal∣uatore & con∣ditore vniuersae creaturae qui eī nō recipiūt, sed repelunt à se, quid factur{us} sit illis cū adhuc venerit? Procul dubio mittet e∣os in ignē aeter¦nū, vbi erit fle∣tus oculorū & ridor dentiū.
Quid proderit tūc eis superbia et diuitiae? Et cō¦sumatis omni∣bus sermonib{us} his: in die qua beati Michaelis memoriā age∣bamus: iterū se mihi praesenta∣uit, & allocuta sum eū, dicens: Nunquid dn̄e mi secure affir∣mare poterim{us} oēs hos sermo∣nes ex te pro∣cessisse? Haec id circo dicebam: quia ex {per}te ver ha ista protule∣rat, ita tn̄ vt fa∣ciē eius non vi∣derem, ex parte vero {per} os meū in spū fuerāt {pro}¦nūciata. Ille igi¦tur cū magna se¦ueritate me in∣tuēs, ait: Crede
ex toto corde tuo verba haec quae descripta sūt, de ore meo processerūt. Be¦atus qui legerit & audierit ver∣ba libri huius: quia vera sunt & à veritate nunquam de∣clinant. De via actiuo∣rū sermo. ALiū quo{que} sermo¦nē conti¦nuo inchoauit his verbis, di∣cēs Ammoneo eos qui in secu∣larib{us} curis op∣pressi sunt: ali∣quando cogita re quae sunt prae¦cepta vitae, idest diligere deū et proximū sicut
seipsum: non occidere, non furtum facere, aliena non cō∣cupiscere Haec & alia quae in Lege Domini scripta sunt: cum omni di∣ligentia obser∣uare, & scire possunt se reg∣num dei posse intrare. Si ad altitudinem cō¦templationis se non valent e∣rigere: legiti∣marum actio∣num officia stu¦deant adim∣plere: In men∣te habeant ti∣morem domi∣ni semper, & ipse diriget v∣niuersa opera eorum. Do∣mum orationis cum reuerenti
frequentet: & cum oportue∣rit de facultati¦bus suis hono∣rent. Sacramē∣ta domini in fi∣de & humilita∣te venerentur: & verbo dei li∣benter aurem accommodent Sanctificatos Dei ministros omni honore dignos existi∣ment, & disci∣plinae eorum cum mansuetu dine acquies∣cant. Vnicui{que} quod iure de∣bent, pacifice exhibeant: no∣mini dantes vl¦lam occasionē querele: et cum iniuriati fue∣rint, tollerent seruantes vin∣dictam iudici
vniuersorum. Sermonem ve∣ritatis in tem∣pore suo con∣stanter loquan∣tur: & pro iu∣stitia laborem subire non re∣cusent. Pupil∣lam & vidu∣am & eum cui non est adiu∣tor: in oppres∣sione defen∣dant, & angu∣stiis eorum pia consolatione occurrant. Esurientem & sitientem refi∣ciant, nudum operiant, hos∣pitem colli∣gant: Infirmū & incarcera∣tum visitent. Dent multum gratis, & quae∣cun{que} sunt mi∣serationis▪ &c
e¦quitatis opera sectentur. Prudentiores, in soctos eru∣diant, errantes & praue ambu¦lantes, ad veri∣tatem & iusti∣tiam reuocent, & discordias inter fratres ccompesant. Fugiant ebrie∣tatem & crapu¦lam, & carnis immunditiam: iocos vanos, & peccata ser∣monum & o∣ciosilatem, & vestimsnto∣rum arrogan∣tiam, & spi∣nas curarum, sicut iubet ser∣mo Diuinus, omnem solli∣citudinem pro¦icientes in de∣um, & carnis
afflictionē non negligūt. Dico antē iis qui ope¦rib{us} necessitatis inseruiūt: Ope¦rimini o{per}a vr̄a corde bono & sīplici, sine mur muatiōe, sine vaniloquio, & ne quis graue per vos, & vtne cessitatem paci¦enti subuenire possitis. Caue∣re autē ab omni auaritia. Haec e∣nim agit vt do∣losa sint opera vestra, & vt de∣fraudetis proxi mos vestros & mentiamini & {per}iuretis nomen domini, & con¦gregatis pecu∣nias īiquas quae mergūt in inte∣ritū possidentē eas. Vos qui in
sublimitate e∣stis, nolite su∣perbe agere in eos qui eiusce∣modi sunt, ne{que} opprimatis eos inique, sed ma∣gis defendite, & in omni be∣nignitate custo¦dite & pacem inter vos firm¦te, quia in hoc positi estis à do¦mino Haec est via domini re∣cta & pulchra via actionū san¦ctarū. Qui am∣bulauerit in ea vs{que} ad finē vi∣tam inueniet, et requiescet in monte sancto dei, & forseius cū filiis lucis. ¶ De via mar∣tyrū. Ser∣mo.
DIes festus agebatur & eram{us} assistentes diui¦no officio: cum ex consuetudi∣ne apparuit an∣gelus in conspe¦ctu meo. Cú{que} de mora eius so¦lito lōgiore de∣licta mea corā ipso culpassem: dixi ad eū: Pla∣ceat nūc domi∣ne mi, vt & ter∣tiae illi{us} ve quae est sāctorū mar¦tyrū disciplinā nobis insumes: ne{que} ab hac tua benignitate pro¦pter aliqua mea delicta compe∣scaris. Tunc a∣periens os suū' locutus est di∣cēs: Agn{us} Chri¦stus {pro}cedit co∣rā sanctis mar∣tyribus:
& ipsi squuntur eum cum psalmis & coronis cōgau detes ei cū triū¦pho nobili. Et ipse Christ{us} ap∣paret in eis qua si speculū & ex¦emplar & de∣cor gloriosus. Multe pssiōes sunt: per quas oportet filios dei coronari, et nemo corona bitur, nisi legi∣time certauerit Audite hac & corde percipite qui persecutio∣nem parimini propter iustitiā ltc gandētes {per} viam nobilem, viam bellatorū domini purpu∣ratā cruore san¦ctorū & agni. Nolite i gemi∣scere,
ne{que} ascē¦dat in cor ve∣strum murmur cōtra dominū, quasi derlicti sitis ab eo, & tā¦quā nouum ali∣quid accidat vo¦bis. Legite scri∣pturas spūs san¦cti: & recogita∣te dies ātiquos. Oēs quotquot fuerūt ante vos in via hac qua ambulatis: deo placuerūt in la∣boribus suis, & per multas an∣gustias trāsierūt in latitudinē li∣bertatis gloriae filiorū dei. Pri∣m{us} agni praecut sor Abel, sub manu fratrisini qui, sanguinem suū fudit in ter∣rā, corā domi∣no testimoniū
innocentiae fide¦lis Abrahā pa∣ter fidelis popu¦li, deidololatria solicitatus est à genre iniqua, et elegit dissolui incēdio magis {quam} peccare in su¦um deū, & per manū domini eductus est de Hut Caldaeorū. Ioseph cū esset amator innocē¦tiae & accusaret crimē fratium apud patrē, ven¦ditus est alieni∣genis. Et iterū¦cū nollet con∣sentire iniqui∣tati adulterae, carcerem lon∣gi temporis pla¦cita mente susti¦nuit. Serui veri¦tatis prophetae domini, contra praeuaricatores
legis vsque ad∣mortem dimi∣cauerūt, & per passiones mul∣tas consumati sunt. Pueri do∣mini in Babylo¦ne, superbi im∣perio, quem tre¦mebat oīs terra cum fiducia cō¦tradixerunt: & dari ignib{us} hor¦rendis elegerūt magis{quam} ad con¦tumeliam crea∣toris genua cur¦uate ante crea∣turam. Daniel deo amabilisco {quod} dedisset ho∣norem deo pa∣trūsuorū, lonū dētibus tradit{us} est. Copiosus est sanctorū nu¦merus, qui ante saluatoris aduē¦rum laudabilis sufferentiae exē∣pla
dederūt, & morte sua mor∣tē domini prae∣currerunt. Vlti∣m{us} omniū erat innocens Bap∣tista, quo maior inter natos mu∣lierū non surre¦rit, qui & ipse pro testimonio veritatis capite minoratus est, & datus puelle in precio faltus ita decebat fier: & placitū erat ante dominū: vt nō tantū san¦guis agnorū & aetū & aliori animalium san∣guini agni qui pro salute mur¦di immoland{us} erat, in figura premitteretur, sed & filiorum dei qui redimē¦di erant sanguis
in occursum e∣ius funderetur. In nouissimis autē diebus mis¦sus est à secreto patris, expecta∣tus ab origine mundi, agnus immolat{us}, quē adorant Cheru¦bin & seraphin & omnis multi¦tudo angelorū, vt expiaret pec∣catum mūdi, & fecerunt in eo quaecū{que} volue∣rūt: et ipsi quos saluare venie∣bat. Pleni sunt libri laboribus & angustiis ei{us} & legitis passio¦nes eius, & nō {per}cipitis corde. Vs{que} quo duti e∣sti filii hoīm? Terra quae sēsu nō habet: susce∣pit guttas san∣guinis
de vulne¦ribus saluatoris & sustinere nō potuit maiesta∣tē is sed com¦nota est & con¦tremuit, & scis∣ sunt petrae du¦rissim: & ecce per srpturas stillat super cor¦da vestra ratio∣nē habētia, mul¦tiplex passio fi∣lit dei provobis occisi & conti¦nere potestis à gemitibus & à lachrymis Au∣ditis vanitates quae non perti∣nent ad vos: & nō continetis à rfe. Rurs{us} posi haec aiecit, & dixit: Vos qui transitis per viā tribulatiōis Ie∣su, atendite & idere si est do∣lor
sicut do∣lor eius. Non peccauit solus sine pec∣cato natus est super teram, repleuerunt a∣nimam eius do¦loribus scele∣ratorum, & non exaspera∣runt mansue∣tudinem ag∣ni, vincula im∣plorum, cri∣minatio men∣dax, illusio ne∣quam, denu∣datio, flagel∣lum, colaphus, alapa, & spu∣tum, & spina verticem eius pungens, cruae & claui, & innoxii cruo∣ris effusio. Sed in his om∣nibus supera∣uit patientia e∣ius:
& contri∣uit moriens a∣culeum mor∣tis. Animad-uertite filii cru∣cis viam agni, & ambulate cō¦fidēter post ve∣stigia sangui∣nis eius, dux itineris vestri, ipse est, & cla∣mat ad vos, di∣cens: Confi∣dite, ego vin∣ci mundum, & quare trepida∣tis à facie ter∣roris humani ducem haben∣tes inuictum: & tam multa milia imitato∣rium eius praee∣untium vos cū victoria mira∣bili? Ecce e∣nim modicum ante vos in∣numerabiles
pugne seruo¦rum Dei fact sunt apostolo∣rum & marty∣rum & inuicta∣rum virginum, & dederunt le∣ta spectacula cū¦ctis exercitibus coeli in victo∣riis suis: dilexe∣runt Deum ma¦gis{quam} animas su¦as: & propter nomen eius ex∣posuerunt eas cunctis gene∣ribus mortis & quasi lutum ab omnibus con∣culcari susti∣nuerunt: rise∣runt in theatris & conciliis, a∣matores mun∣di nuditatem sanctorum: & saturati sunt il∣lusione confu∣sionis eorum,
sicut letatur be∣stia eum deuo∣rat praedam: & disperserunt sā∣guinem inno∣centem per cru¦ces & gladios, ignes & gur∣gites aquarum vngues ferre∣os, et fauces be¦stiarum, & quicquid tor∣mentorum ex∣cogitate po∣tuit crudelitas impiorum: hoc in eorum mor∣tificatione ten∣tatum est. Et exultauerunt quasi in epu∣lia athlete Dei in confractio∣nibus suis: & delictari sunt in calice ama∣ritudinis, qua si qui letan∣tur in delitiis
multis. Tucin∣uenta est patien¦tia sanctorū fi∣delis in exami∣natione sua: et fortis supra for¦titudinem re∣gū et principū mundi. Propte rea ecce educti sunt in refrige∣rium consola∣tionis, & requi∣escunt in ample xu dexterae dei, et sanctorū an∣gelorum, quia portauerunt ig∣nominiam eius coram habitan¦tibus terrae. Haec attēde, et vigili mente retracta O homo qui pu¦sillus es corde adsustinentiam passionū Chri∣sti, cōtemplare gloriam, et leti∣tiam quae cir∣cundedit
mar∣tyres Domi∣ni: et non ti∣mebis commu∣nicare dolori∣bus & angusti∣is eotum. Sed primum est, vt habeas sub pe∣dibus substan∣tiam huius mū∣di, & gloriam eius quae est ho∣die & cras non comparet. Si e∣nim haec amas: fugiet à te for∣titudo in tem∣pore pressure et despectionis. Etiam dico, non sit precio∣sa in oculis tu∣is vita tua, sed vilem atque de∣spicabilem sem per arbitrare. Qui enim se∣ipsos amant, & magni sunt a∣pud
set concul∣cationem in persecutione su¦stinere nō pos∣sunt, & ad cer∣tamen sacto∣rum idonei nō sunt: felix com¦mutatio tibi {pro}∣posita est. Ab∣nega vitam exi¦gui temporis et misere condi∣tionis, & acci∣pies pro ea vitā quae nescit defe¦ctum aut mole¦stiam, plenam gloria, & exul∣tatione, quā lin¦gua nesciteffa∣ri. O homo te∣nebrosi intelle∣ctus: leua ocu∣los tuos, & pro¦spice in futurū, et intuere beatā reformatiōem corporis tui, quae veniet tibi
saluatore tun, quando euellet à corpore tuo spinam Adae, et configurabit e∣am claritati cor poris sui: ita fi∣et vt festines cum alacritati effundere ani∣mam tuam in omne pericu∣lum, in feruore charitatis ipsi∣us: & sic aesti∣mabis ditio∣nem vitae tuae, quasi stille de situla excusse in terrā. Quid adhuc anxiaris O homo dei, à facie persequē∣tis? Consorta∣re, cōsolare, te∣cum est Chri∣stus in persecu∣tione. Tccū an¦geli eius funt in certamine: qui in
omnes labores tuos dinume∣rant, & lassitu∣dinem tuam su¦stentant, nam & pro te ini∣micos tuos ex∣pugnant. Me∣mento sermo∣nis quem dixit ad seruos suos. Qui vos tan∣git, tangit pu∣pillam oculi mei. Serue dei, quid tribues sal¦uator tuo, qui ita sibi te con∣iunxit, vt sine ipsius iniuria, ledi non possis? Semel pro te passus est: & ad huc quotidie in te & conseruis tuis patitur, & ostentui habe∣tur. Si mestus¦es, non de tua, sed illius iniu∣luria
dole {pro} te ergo gaude & letare, quia per tribulatiōē prae pararis ad glori¦am, et gaudium sempiternū: Au¦rum dn̄i es per ignē te exami∣nat, vt in thesau¦ros suos proba∣tū te recipiat. ¶ Factum est au¦tem prius {quam} vaer ba haec termi∣nasset angelus qui mecum lo∣que batur, vt su∣perueniret festi¦uitas beatarum virginum Vr∣sulae & sociarū cius vndecim millium, Tunc decantabatur in vigilia ma∣tutina sermo il∣le diuinus, quo dicitur: Reddet deu mercedē
laborum suo∣rum, & dedu∣cet illos in via mirabili: vnde ego sumpta oc∣casione inter∣rogaui instru∣ctorem meum m inter silen¦tia misse michi more suo appa∣ruisset, dicens: Domine, de∣monstra michi quaenam est via illa mitabilis, cuius meminit scriptura, di∣cens: & dedu∣cet illos in via mirabili. Qui continuò re∣spondens, ait: Via sanctorum Martyrum haec est. Rursus in∣terrogaui, di∣cens: Et quare vocatur mira∣bilis: Bene, in∣quit,
mirabilis appellari potest Nunquid enim non est mira∣bile in oculis hominum, {quod} mentem fragi∣lis hominis ita Deus inflam∣mat, vt prae a∣moris magni∣tudine, quo in∣tus erga eum e∣stuat: & pro∣priae vitae obli∣uiscatur, in tan∣tum vt ad gra∣uissimos quos libet cruciatus, velut insensi∣bilis fiet, & sine sui cura liben∣ter omnia pro¦nomine eius su¦stineat. Hoc in tueri potes in sacris illis vir∣ginibus, qua∣rum hodie mar¦tyrum celebra∣tis.
Fragilis e∣rant & sexu & aetate, ne{que} ali∣quem habebāt defensorem: & tamen non ti∣muerunt tyran¦nos nec gladi¦os eorum, sed cum omni con¦stantie obtule∣runt tenera mē¦bra sua in mor∣tem pro dn̄o, qa diuini amo∣ris incendio cō¦fortabāt in spū vt eam foris nō sentirēt. Et hoc quidē vehemē∣tr erat mirabi¦le in oculis ho∣minum: non an¦tē in oculis do¦mini cui possi∣bilia sūt oīa. Et hoc quidem ve¦hemētererat mi¦rabilē in spiritu vidisti, & erat
pulchrior et no tabilior caeteris omnibus? ita scito {quod} retribu∣tio martyrū om¦ni retributione excellentior est & gloriae illorū nichil compara¦tur. Post haec cu adesset festiui∣tas sancti Mar∣tini: circa me∣diū noctis ante vigiliā matuti∣nam, subito ex∣pergefacta sum et fugit somnus ex oculis meis▪ Et ecce angelus domini stabat corā me: & al∣locuta sum eū, dicens: Oro mi domine vt ex¦hortationē ser¦monis tui de sanctis martyr¦bus iam cōple∣as, & competē
ti fine conclu∣das, qui cū me contemplari fe¦cisset sublimia uaedam in coe∣lestibus, quorū aspectu erā in∣digna: petitio∣nem mam im¦pleuit, dicens: Iterū dico tibi, & āmoneo vos O filu dei: vt di¦ligentius atten¦datis antecesso¦res vestros, qui praenomīati sūt in praesenti ser∣mone quomo∣do arserunt in charitate Chri∣sti. Currite & confirmamini, & nolite prae∣meditari. Ecce enim vigilat su¦{per} vos fili{us} pacis qui vos recipiat et remuneret su¦pra humanā aesti¦mationē
illū spi¦ritū ardoris & charitatis Chri¦sti, qui superet omne fragilita¦tē vobis praesta¦re dignetur: qui in trinitate per¦fecta viuit & re¦gnat deusverus {per} infinita secula seculorū. Amē. De via coniuga¦torū. Sermo. FVI in ora¦tione et ap¦paruit mi∣hi solito more dominus meus & postulaui ab eo disciplinam viae illius quae ad ordinem cō¦iugatorum per¦tinere dicta est, statim{que} assen∣sit petitiōi meae sic{que} orsus est. Ecce dico, &
ammoneo sec¦lares cōiugatos abstinete vos à prauis operib{us} vestris, quibus cōquinati estis, et contaminata est terra ab ini∣quitatibus ve∣stiis pessimis, quae sunt auari∣tia, luxuria, for∣nicatio, adulte∣riū, homicidiū superbia, ira, o∣diū, inuidia, bla¦sphemie, ebrie∣tates. Attē dite ergo et intuemi ni viā vestram, quomodo am∣buletis {per} eam, m̄ impossibile est vobis cū tali¦bus vitris intra∣re per illā. His dictis abscessit: Et cum iterū ap¦paruisset, roga∣ui vt proseque∣retur
īcepti ser∣monis exhorta¦tionē. Qui ait: Nisi quia beni∣gnus & miseri¦cors dn̄s est: in tediū posset ad∣duci, pro eo {quod} tot modis habi¦tatores mundi admonet: ipsi vero pro nichi∣lo ducunt mo∣nita eius: ne{que} vlatenus ani∣maduertūr dile¦ctionē, qua de∣bebēt accaedi er¦ga paternas ad∣monitiōes eius in īdignationē conuertunt & spernūt eas: & ad legatiōes ei{us} attendere dedi∣gnantur, si pos¦sibile esset in ip¦so esse perturba¦tionem: ex hoc vti{que} posset tur∣bari,
{quod} tot mo∣dis hic mūdū aduersus ipsum erigitur▪ {pro} quo & natus est & passus, & multa miracula est o∣perat{us}, et adhuc licet non attē∣dant: operatur. Et ecce admo∣nitiōes suas mā¦dat etiā iis qui in seculo omni¦b{us} modis se illi opponnūt pro sua gratuita be∣nignitate, et {pro} eorū dilectiōe, qui quamuis in seculo cōuersā∣tur: ipsum tamē diligunt ac ser∣uiunt ei, quorū heu paruus est numerus abun¦dantius autem hoc faceret, si meliori deuo∣tione monitis
eius intendere vellēt. Post haec aperiens os suū locutus est, di∣cens: O gene∣ratio insensata & onerosa do∣mino deo vr̄o: vt quid tāto stu¦dio diligetis, quae odit patei vester coelestis, & dominū coe¦lorū irritate nō timetis, in con¦spectu cuius o¦mniū angelorū multtudo con¦tremiscit? Dici∣te mihi quē fru¦ctum consecut sunt in his pra∣uitaribus quas enumeraui vo¦bis: omnes qui ab initio saeculi inuenti sūt am∣bulantes in eis, & nō apposue∣runt placare fa¦ciem
dei nostr remediis peni∣tentiae? quid vo¦bis annūciaue∣runt de his vni∣uersi testes veri¦tatis? Si obliti estis, ecce iterū annūcio vobis coram deo vi∣uēte, quia clau∣sum est eis coe∣lū aeterna & in∣dissolubili clau¦sura: & abscon¦dita erit ab eis desiderabilis fa¦cies dei nostri, & alieni facti sunt à conuiuio sempiternae leti¦tiae sanctorū qui abhominati sūt vias illorū ini∣quas. Et ecce consortes facti sunt durissimi diaboli & infe∣liciū angelorū eius, qui abs{que}
misericordia & sine cessatione affliguntur, & calcant ceruicē eorū quam ad∣uersus factorē suum erexerūt, & pascuntur in amarissimis pla¦gis eorū. Et q̲a clauserunt ocu¦los suos ne vi∣derent lumē ag¦nitionis dei & sanctarū iustifi∣cationū eius, et dilexerunt ope¦ra tenebrarum, deputati sūt vo¦ragini horrēdae caliginis, quae exitum non ha¦bet neque illu∣strari poterit ab vllo lumine im¦perpetuum. Ti¦morem domini sāctum habere despexerunt, et irritauerunt eū
in letitia volup∣tatis suae, & suc∣cenderuut in se∣ipsis illicitos ar∣dores libidinis, & irae, & insa∣ciabilis auari∣tiae, propterea manet super eos timor plen{us} hor¦rore & incon∣solabilis tristi∣tia, & mordax indignatio, & facti sunt car∣bones sempiter∣ni incendii, qui extingui non po¦terunt in aeter∣num, neque vlla adustione consu¦mi. Audite haec ir∣ritatores Dei, & discedite à viis perditorumdum tempus correcti∣onis habetis: & redire ad viam immaculatam
quam praeparauit vobis deus ab in∣itio, & videte modo cum timo¦re Dei ambule∣tis in ea. Non enim est ab in∣uentione homi∣nis honorabile Coniugium ve∣strum: sed ab ip∣so conditore v∣niuersitatis in Pa¦radiso innocen∣tiae institutum est quando mascu∣lum & foeminam creauit parentes vestros, & lo∣cutus est in lin∣gua protoplasti, dicens: Propter hoc relinquet ho∣mo patrem & ma¦trem, & adhaere∣bit vxori suae, & erunt duo in car∣ne vna. Date er∣go O vir & muli∣er honorem ordi∣ni
vestro, quē de∣us honorare dig∣natus est, & noli∣te inducere scis∣suram & macu∣lam copulae ve∣strae. Lex domini iungat vos et san∣ctificet, & sit vo∣bis domus vna, mensa vna, sub∣stantia cōmunis, vnus thorus & a∣nima vna, & dato locum timri do¦mini in medio ve¦stri. Decus enim tha∣lami coniugalis, est timor domi∣ni, & qui ab eo va¦cuus fuerit, ma∣ledictus & im∣mundus reputa∣bitur à Domino. Ibi dominabitur libido quae mo∣dum nescit, & ex∣ercetur opus eti∣am sermone in∣dignum,
quod na¦tura non ordina∣uit, & non perti∣net ad generatio∣nem. Audiant & intelligant qui o∣perantur quod malum est coram domino: & tol∣lant maculam de cubilibus suis, propter hoc liget corda vestra ti∣mor Domini vt in operae vobis concesso frenum vobis ipsis impo∣natis, & non mo∣re bestiarum om¦nem imperum de¦siderii vestri se∣quamini. Dies Festos & dies legitime ab∣stinentiae, & tem¦pora purgatio∣nis per contmen∣tiam honorate: & si quid super∣addideritis, ad∣det
Dominus gratiam vobis & generationi ve∣stri: qui enim in∣ter diem & diem & inter tempus & tempus conti∣nendo non di∣stinguunt: vin∣dictam Domini in seipsis, & in semine suo, qua hora non puta∣uerint sentient. Exhortamini al∣terutrum ad con¦tinentiam: & o∣rate pro inuicem vt continere va∣leatis, & vt spiri∣tus immunditiae fugiat à vobis. Cum autem prae∣ualuerit infirmi∣tas, concesso re∣medio expian∣da est, vt illicita nō labatur, ficut scribit Doctor Gentium.
Vir proprii cor∣poris potestatem non habet, sed mulier: & mu∣lier proprii cor∣poris potestatem non habet, sed vir, & propte∣rea debitum in∣uicem negare nō potestis. Illud autem sci∣tote quod mutuae coniunctionis ve¦strae praecipua cau¦sa esse debet, pro¦pagatio prolis, si qua alia est: ad infirmitatem per¦tinet: & habet indulgentiam si timoris Domini moderationem habnerit, & ele∣mosinarum re∣medium. Vir mu¦lieris, & mulier viri infirmitates cū patientia & cō¦passione suppor∣tēt,
& nolite sper∣nere inuicem, sed magis honorem alterutrum exhi∣bere studete. Sermo litigiosus & amarus nun∣quam oriatur in∣ter vos: sed in spiritu lenitatis & bone seueritatis inuicem excessus vestros arguite. Sit obediens vi∣to mulier, & tan∣quam superiori in omnibus ce∣dat & ministret, sicut ordinauit ab initio plasma∣tor vtriusque. Mores viri etiam prauos toleret, & propicietur ini∣quitatibus eius, faciem{que} Domi∣ni in eleemosy∣na & oratione praeueniat. Pudicitiam inte∣riorem
foris po∣testuri debet per modestiam vesti∣menti, & sermo∣num, & gressu∣um, & aspectus. Non haerebit o∣culus eius in fa∣cie aliena, & cum omni solicitudi∣ne suspitionis & maledicti occasi∣onem abscindat. Vir qui sensatā et timoratam sorti∣tus est vxorem, non ea in ho∣noret tupi & a∣maro sermone: sed tanuam vas glorie dei hono∣ret, & consenta∣neum se illi prae∣beat, & gratias agat Deo coeli: qui beatificauit eum coniugio ta∣li. Audi me & in∣gemisee super ma¦lis filiorum ho∣minum
quae lo∣quor ad te: Viri dierum istorum in numero ma∣gno declinaue∣runt corda sua in insipientiam mulierum, & stulti facti sunt, cōsentiendo in∣sanie illarum. Arrogantia ve∣stimentorū quā vidisti, & dete∣stata es in filia∣bus saeculi quae venerunt ad te, increuit supra modum in ter∣ra: & insani∣unt in ea, & in∣ducunt iram dei in mundum, gloriantur am∣bulare compo∣sitis gressibus in multitudine pannorum suo∣rum: & inuti∣liter consumere
student quae in∣digentium vsi∣bus necessaria essent. O infe∣licitas, O mi∣serrima caeci∣tas, rem multo sudore conqui∣sitam luto com¦mendunt, vt post se trahant oculos adulte∣rorum: & vnde regnum Dei cō¦parare poterant gehenne incen∣dium mercan∣tur. Aufrie viri malum hoc ab oculis domini: & nolite glori∣rari in vanitati∣bus vxorum ve¦strarum, sed ma¦gis indignatio∣nem habete: quia scortanti∣um similitudi∣nem induerunt. Pannorum ista
superfluitas & strictura vesti∣menti, ad nihi∣lum vtilis est, ni∣si ad sffocan∣dos partus, & arrogantia cri∣nalis operimen∣t, & multa hic fimilia, venaliū mulierum adin∣uentiones sunt, et non pertinent ad legales Ma∣tronas. Clamor meus à domino ad vos quì deposita vi∣rili grauitate, mollieiem foe∣minarum indu∣istis. O stulti & vanissimi, Vt quid dereliqui∣stis serios mores iustorum senum qui vos praecesse runt, & declina∣stis in vanitates & insanias dia∣bolicae
adinuen∣tionis, quae non proderunt vobis nisi ad augmen∣tum incendii ve¦stri. Vae qui su∣perbitis in pom¦pa vestimenti splendidi & su∣perflui & deli∣cate compositi: & quod auare quaesitum est ad nichilum dedu∣cere gloriamini. Vae qui lasciui∣tis in capillatu∣ra muliebri: & formam viri in vobis deturpare non erubescitis. Vae qui in ludis vanis, vae in co∣messationibus et ebrietatibus tē∣pus infructuose deducitis. Vae qui linguati e∣stis ad irrisiones & detractiones,
& ad fabulan∣dum quod non prodest, et ad cō¦cinnandos do∣los, et ad subuer tendam causam innocentis. Vae qui venalem ha∣betis sermonem in consilio, et ex angustiis oppres¦sorum ventrem adimplere gau∣detis. Vae qui li∣tigiosi et tumidi estis inter ciues. Vae vobs rapa∣cibus & profun¦dis corde ad multiplicandam substantiā mun∣di, quae vobiscū euanescit. Nun∣quid qui planta uit aurē non au∣diet? aut qui fin∣xit oculum non cōsiderat? Quie∣scite filii homi∣nū ab irritatione
domini, quia in proximo est vt euigilet, et in ig∣ni zeli sui irrita∣tatores suos de∣uoret. Iterum di¦co vobis qui sub iugo matrimo∣nii estis: deū ti∣mete, fidē et di∣lectionē imma¦culatam inuicē custodite. Filios vestros & filias et familiam ve∣stram in timor domini et casti∣monia enutrte. Decima domini et merces mer∣cenarii non mo¦retur apud vos, beneficentie in pauperes nolite obliisci, et caete¦ra quae in sermo∣ne salubriū acti∣onum à domino obseruare cura∣te. Haec est viae vestrae
habet, occulte vxorē proximi polluit, & versa vice mulier alte∣ri{us} maritū suo su¦{per}ducit: Haec est iniq̲tas maxima et maxim{us} est eo¦rū numerus qui offendunt in ea, fornicationis au¦tem immūditia plenus est mun∣dus, omnes qua∣si scientes festi∣nant ad eam, & vix īuenitur quī nō se praecipitet in foueam cius. Cum exarserint in concupiscen∣tia expectationē vix sustinent, vt in opus eam per¦ducant, & cum impleuerint do∣sideria pessima non quiescant, sed iterum at{que} iterum redeunt
in idipsum, & nun quam satu∣rati se posse arbi¦trantur, sed & priusquam ma∣turescant, vt ex∣ercere possint prauitatem hāc: pluribus modis innocētiam suā commaculant, propter hoc au¦tem in increpa∣tione coniuga¦torum, fornica∣tionis nomē ad∣ieci, quia & ipsi ante{quam} coniugri legem assumant super modumin ea fedantur, et prouocant iram Dei in se. Hinc est {quam} ad matri∣monia legittima accedentes: fru∣ctu generationis priuantur à do∣mino, & miran¦tur vnde accidat
eis, ignorātes ste¦rilitatis suae cau∣sam. Quibus au¦tē generatio cō∣ceditur, aut in ip¦sa prole, aut in a∣liis reb{us} necessa∣riis, plurib{us} mo∣dis diuino iudi∣tio feriuntur, et omnia eis infoe∣liciter {pro}ueniūt. Rursus cū de no¦mine blasphe∣mie interrogassē ait: Hoc dixi, propter eos qui turpibus conui∣tiis proximos su¦os dehonestant: Sed & hoc scisci¦tata sum quaenā essent dubieta∣tes, quas in eodē sermone reprae∣hendere videba¦tur: Ad quod ita respōdit. Multi sūt ī ecclesia for¦mā habētes chri¦stianorū,
dubii tn̄ in fide christi¦ana: inter catho¦licos manifestè cōuetsantur, do∣mū orationis in trant, sacramen∣ta ad fidem per∣tinentia cū caete∣ris percipiunt: et tamen nullā fidē eis exhibēt: ne{que} ad salutem vtilia esse arbitrantur. hoc aūt operib{us} pessimis quae a∣gunt, manifestè cōprobant. Si e∣nim in eis vera esset fides, à mul¦tis iniquitatibus quas operantur abstinerēt, et ad∣iecit, dicēs: Mul¦tae haereses sunt in diebus istis, sed occultè: et haeretici multi qui fidem catho¦licā latenter op∣pugnant,
et mul¦tos ab ea auertūt Tunc interroga¦ui eū: dicēs. Do∣minemi quid di∣cis de illis quos catharos vocāt: qui vitā cōiuga∣torū omnino re∣{pro}bare dicūtur & respondit: dicēs. Ipsorū dequibus interrogas: vita abominabilis est coram domino, vitam illorū cul∣pare nō possunt qui legitime cō∣iugium contra∣hunt: & secundū legē domini co∣habitant, custo∣dientes in timo∣re dei sacras feri as & ieiunia, & necessitatib{us} pau¦perū misericor∣diam exhibētes. Iterū autem allo cuta sū eum: di∣cens:
Dn̄e vt au∣diui quidā ex eis asserunt {quod} legi∣timum esse non potest coniugiū nisi inter eos qui vs{que} ad tempus legitime cōiūcti¦onis virginitatē ambo custodie∣rūt, quid ad hoc dicis? & respon∣dens: ait vbi tale coniugium esse potest: gratū est domino, sed ra∣rum est valde vt ita cōtingat, ve∣runtamen & ex iis qui non con∣tinuerunt: multi sunt acceptabi∣les domino, le∣gitima habentes coniugia, & in mādatis domini ambulantes, ali∣oqui nimis con∣traheretur nume¦rus populi dei,
non habent re∣prehēdere quic∣{quam} in ecclesia dei isti dequibus lo∣queris: quia per viam reprehen∣siōe digni sunt, pro certo noue∣ris: quia ministri sunt sathane, cu∣us opera praua exercēt, ipse dux illorū est: & om∣nis nequicie ex∣emplis eos pre∣cedit, & sequun∣tureū per omnia operib{us} pessimis Et dixi. Domine que vel qualis est fidis eorum aut vita? Respondit, Praua est fides e∣orum: & opera peiora. Rursus dixi videnturta∣menin cōspectu hominum iusti: & laudātur qua∣si sint bonorum
operum, ita est inquit, facies su∣as simulant qua∣si iuste & inno∣centis vite sint: ac per hoc mul∣tos ad se trahunt & seducunt, in∣trinsec{us} autē pes∣sima fanie pleni¦sunt. ¶ De via conti∣nentium. Sermo. CElebranti¦bus nobis solennita¦tem beati Ioan∣nis euangeliste: intenta eram o∣rationi post vigi¦lias matutinas, ac deprecabar do∣minū valida in∣tētione cordis: vt secundum so∣litam benignita∣tem suam, disci∣plinā viae cōtinē
ciū quā inspiritu viderā, mihi apo¦rire dignaretur. Sed & diuinū e∣uangelistā & an¦gelū doctorē me¦um, vt mihi ad∣iutores essēt in∣uocabā, cū{que} o∣rādo lassata fuis∣sē, remisi paulu∣lū oculos ad so∣porē: & post pu∣sillū repente ex{per}¦gefacta sū, & ec∣ce āgel{us} mihi as∣sistens: sermonē quē desiderabā īcoauir his vbis. Dico vobis, O filii dei, O filii lu¦cis: ītuemini viā vestrāquomodo floreat, & quā de¦lectabile est cur∣rere in ea, curri∣te ergo & prope¦rate obuiā spōso vestro: qui vos expectat. Diligi∣te
castitatem: & seruate illi inte∣gritatem virgini¦tatis vestrae. Vir∣go ornata casti∣tate, charitate, prudēcia, humi∣litate: bene cur∣rit, haec cum dix∣et, amplius nō adecit, sequenti vero die cum de beatis innocen∣tib{us} officiū misse ageretur: ego sū¦pta occasione ex¦lectione Apoca¦lipsis quae legeba¦tur, deprecata sū¦dn̄m meum, qui iterū mihi assiste¦bat: dicens. Dn̄e si inueni gratiā corāte, dic obse¦cro mihi, quale est hoc canticū quod de cantant isti beati marty∣res ante sedem dei & agni, sicut
praesēs lectio te∣stat{ur}, aut quo mo∣do sequunt{ur} agnū quocū{que} ierit? Et respondens ait: Quid me inter∣rogas: nun{quam} lin¦gua su{per} terrā no uit hoc canticū, nichil inde tibi enarra bo. Quia autē interrogas, quid est {quod} sequū¦tur agnū quo cū∣{que} ierit: hoc est {quod} in oīb{us} virtutib{us} que{que} cōsiderari possūt ī agno, eū imitātur, ī virgi∣nitate eūseqūnt{ur}: quae ī illis est sine macula, sicut & fāctus ille agnus sine omni macu¦la est, humiles et simplices & sine dolo fuerūt sicut et agn{us} patientiā in martirio habu¦erunt in similitu¦dinem
agni qui ni¦hil vn{quam} impati∣entiae demōstra∣uit in passiōe sua qua peccatū mū¦di extinxit. Non virgines ne{que} sūt martyres vlli: qui tā propriè a∣gni vestigia se∣quuntur, vt isti, excepta regina nr̄a, quae prima virginitatē suā mundā & imma¦culatā dn̄o custo¦diunt, ipsa virgo egregia, & beati isti martyres spe¦culū sunt omni∣bus sacris virgi∣nibus, et multie∣os secuti sūt, qui sāguinē suū pro vginitate sua fu∣derunt, & prop∣terea coronati sunt & glorifica¦ti in cōspectu do¦mini. Hos intue ri de∣tē
calotē in ma∣nu. Vnde ait: Ca¦lidū est, et quāto magis calidū fue¦rit tanto maiorē adhiberi oportet laborē vt abluat{ur} ita quo magis se inquinat homo ī immūditiis con¦cupiscētiae, eo la∣boriosius purifi∣catur ab eis. Po∣test tn̄ emundari ī dolore salubris poenitētiae, & la∣chrymiset bonis operibus: ita vt fiat acceptabili∣or deo {quam} fuisset, nōne intrinsec{us} mūda et pulchra est man{us} tua, Sic est virginitas, dū non vsque ad in∣teriora eius per∣tingat operis pra¦ui immunditia, & mundari po∣test à pollutione ita
vt ita nihil dam∣ni patiatur inte∣gritas eius, sicut facile mundatur manus tua tantū foris polluta, si autem per effe∣ctum operis ad interiora descen¦derit immundi∣tia, impossibile erit ita eam mun¦dari, vt omnino ad pristinum re∣deat decorem, sunt tamen mul∣ti qui quāuis nō ad opus commi∣xtionis libidinē suam perducāt: multis tamē mo¦dis integritatem virginitatis suae polluunt: & non animaduertunt, neque cor appo∣nunt, vt reme∣diis poenitentiae ad plenum emū¦dentur, ac deo sa¦tisfaciant,
& ita vs{que} ad finē per∣manēt. Horū vir¦ginitas deo acce¦pta nō est: & de∣bita mercede pri¦uatur. Haec cū di¦xisset: metuebā¦ne forte à memo¦ria excideret or∣do vborū. Ideo∣{que} postulaui ab eo: vt iterū eadē loqueretur, & in hoc quo{que} beni∣gne me exaudi∣uit. Cū aūt in o∣ctaua beati Iohā¦nis iterū se mihi praesentasset, prae¦uenit vba mea i∣ta me hilarit{ur} allo quēs. Interroga∣re me vis, inter∣roga & respōde∣bo tibi. Et dixi si cut à doctoreprae monita fueram: Dn̄e quod scrip∣tum est: Volūtas
pro facto reputa¦bitur, nunquid aduersari potest sermoni tuo quē proxime dixisti? Et respōdit: Ne∣qua{quam} idē{que} sub∣iunxit. Verū est certe quod scrip¦tum esse testaris, cuius operis per ficiēdi voluntatē habuerit homo, ita vt nequaquā remaneat in ipso quin ad perfectū {per}ducat quod cu¦pit: & sic vs{que} in finem permanet hoc quasi factū coram dn̄o repu¦tatut. Et si malū quid fuerit quod peragere deside∣rat, deleri potest in virtute verae poenitētiae. quid∣quid enim cogi∣tatione aut volū¦tate fecerit ho∣mo,
ita anullari potest coram do¦mino, ac si nun∣quam fuerit, re∣cordare quia di∣xi tibi secundo, vt emergeres ma¦num tuā ceno: & tunc difficili∣us eā posse mun∣dari affirmaui. i∣ta primo pollui∣turhomo sola co¦gitatione, postea vero etiām vo∣luntate, & tunc maiore difficul∣tate mundatur, & permanet a∣men integritas. Tunc protulit scripturā, de qua interrogare co∣gitaueram, di∣cens: Etiam scri∣ptum est: Qui viderit mulie rē ad concupiscen∣dam eam: iā me∣chatos est eam
in corde suo. hoc ita est: si perma∣net homo in vo∣luntate exercen∣dae libidinis, & à desiderio suo nō recedit, sed quā∣tū in ipso est, rē ad effectum du∣cit, & voluntatē prauā fructu poe¦nitentiae non di∣luit, huius inte∣gritas {quam}uis per∣maneat: inutilis & nullum conse¦quitur fructum. iterū subiunxi di¦cens: Dn̄e, sunt qui non sponte stimulos carnis experiūtur in tē∣tatione, & mole∣ste ferunt ardorē qui aduersatur munditie corpo¦ris sui, nulla ta∣men repugnatio¦ne enitare eum praeualent, nun∣quid
hoc eis re∣putabitur in pec¦catum? Qui ait: Si molestè ferūt tentamenta hu∣iusmodi, ne{que} a∣nimo eis con∣sentiunt: leuiore poenitentia, cul∣pae suae quam sic contrahunt, ve∣niam consequen¦tur et mercedem magnam adipi∣scentur. Indica∣uit autem michi esse hominem in Christo familia∣re, quis aut quae sit deus scit, susti¦nētem ab aduer∣sario impugnati¦onē castitatis, & nimiis ob hoc a∣nimā suam mole¦stiis affligentem & ait: Cōsolatio¦nem ei annūcia, dices{que} ei vt par∣cat afflictioni: re¦uocet
in memo∣riam quod scrip∣tū est de electis domini. Tanquā aurum in forna∣ce probauit eos. gaudium sit ei, non tamen sine tristitia gaudiū, pro eo quod tale aliquid dominus ei imponere di∣gnatus est, per quod tale aliquid dominus ei im∣ponere dignatus est, per quod ad mercedem mag∣nam praeparatus non sit tamen si∣ne tristitia, quia in tali tentatione non omnino cul¦pa euitatur. Et di¦xi, Domine qua liter debet resi∣stere aduersario suo: & quibus ar¦mis eum supera∣bit? Qui ait: ora∣tione
& confes∣sione & flagellis carnis pugnet & superabit. Non autem insistat to¦gare dominum, vt ab hoc stimu∣lo liberetur, sed hoc oret vt mi∣sereatur ei Do∣minus in tempo¦re tentationis, si in loco secretio∣ri fuerit, flectat genua ter coram domino, si au∣tem oportunitas loci ei defuerit, signet cor suum ter signaculo cru¦cis, ac dicat. Sal∣uator muudi, sal¦ua nos, qui per crucem & san∣guinem tuum re¦demisti nos: au∣xiliare nobis te deprecamur de∣us noster. Post haec vna di¦dierum
suscita∣uit linguā suam in haec verba. O virgines: ecce ad vos clamat vox diuina, vox sponsi vestri pul¦sat ad aures ve∣stras: Aperite illi, & introdu∣cite eum ad pa∣latium cordis ve¦stri, & ample∣ctimini eū, quia pulcrior & ama¦bilior est omni creatura. Rursus adiecit. Domin{us} maiestatis vnige¦nitus altissimi, rex diuinorum exercituum, re∣plens coelum & terram, magnifi∣ca gloria sua, ma¦gnus & tremen¦dus in omnipo∣tēti fortitudine, suauis & amabi∣lis in incōparabi¦li
benignitate, & totus deside∣rabilis in clarita te perfecti deco¦ris sui, in cumsa mabilem vultū cū incessabili de¦siderio {pro}spicere delectatur. Che¦rubī & Seraphī & vniuersa soda¦litas nostra: ipse (O virgines) ipse est q̲ cōcupiscit decorē vr̄m, ipse vos ad castos ā∣plexus suos inui¦tat, ipfe à vobis gloriosa lilia vir¦ginitatis vestrae exposcit: vt suū secretiorē thala∣mū ex eis exor∣net. Nescit ille thalamus pudici¦tiae labē, & om∣ne corruptū nō īgreditur in eū, non illic narces∣cūt ne{que} defluūt
sed incorruptibi¦li decore perma¦nent preciosi flo¦res virginitatis, & agnus imma∣culatus gratāter cubat in eis: & spirāt ei suauita∣tis odorē tanquā margaritae electae & visu desidera∣biles: sic resplen¦dent in thalamo sponsi sui virgi∣nes sacrae, & ipse q̲ lauit eas in san guine lateris sui, & faciē earū, sig¦nauit virgo spe∣ciosus: letatur in aspectu earū, & occulta pulchri∣tudinis suae cha¦rissimis suis dig¦nāter reuelat, or¦gana electionis ibi sonāt concor¦dantiā in spiritu pacis & cātatur cāticū desidera∣bile
auditu, cāti∣cū singulari le∣titiae, quod solis virginib{us} cātabi le est, & familia ribus thalami su¦pernis spititib{us}, ducit chorūs pō∣sus in voce prae∣clara et excellēti & nō adaequatur ei in milibus ca∣uentiū vn{us}. Vox eius, vox dulcis in plenitudine gr̄ae: quae oēs coe∣los replet iocūdi¦tate: Beati qui au¦diunt eā: beati ni¦mis qui cōcinūt ei, in quibus pri∣matū obtinuit, princeps nr̄a vir¦go theothocos: cui solidatum est supra omnes tu∣bas angelicas vo¦cē exaltare. ani∣maduertire filiae verba ministerii
mei: et signate ea in abscōdito mē¦tis vestrae, si est cor vestrum ad spōsum nobilē et speciosū, & qui amari dignus sit quare negligitis? quid tardatis to∣ta virtute vos in illum speciosum extēdere, quo n¦hil clarius, nihil amabilius est in coelo aut in terra et si gloriā diligi¦tis: quid est glori¦osius quā talem sponsum habere & oīa possidere in ipso? si habere delitias ergaudia cōcupiscitis, ad thalamū iocun∣ditatis qui vobis praeparatus est, fe¦stinate, cuius io∣cuditati & sua∣uitati omne qd oculus vidit, vel
auris audiuit, ve∣in cor hominis ascēdit, cōparari nō potest. Haec cū dixisset, posu¦erā incorde meo verba, quae de vir¦ginali cātico fue¦rat locutus, & ad hoc interro∣gationē aptā, di∣cens, Ita ne est dn̄e mi, etiā an∣geli canunt hoc cāticum? Et nun quid oēs virgi∣nes? Qui ait vere angelic inūt hoc cāticū & omnes qui de hac vita sine macula ad regnū caelorū trāsmigrāt. Rursus adieci. Quomo∣do ergo intelli∣gēda est scriptu∣ra quae dicit: Et nem, poterat di¦cere canticū nisi cētū quadragīta
quatuor millia? nūquid nō sub il¦lo numero om∣nes virgines cō∣prehendātur? ita est inquit nume∣rus iste perfectus est: & significat perfectionē corū qui se immacula tos custodierūt, sicut sine macu∣la est infantia in¦nocentū quae aūt amplius de hoc numero locutus est, sēsus mei im¦becillitas portare nō potuit. Rurs{us} assumpto exhor¦tationis vbo, lo∣cutus est, dicens: ecce aduenit spō¦sus vester, praepa¦rate vos O virgi¦nes, ite & emite vobis vestes nup¦tiales, et introite cū eo ad nuptias alioqui dicetur
vobis, quomodo huc ītrastis nōha bētes vestes nup¦tiales? et ne forte cū reprobis depu¦temini: cogitate cū omni solicitu¦dine mentis quo mode placeatis spōso vr̄o cū ve∣nerit Vigilate ita{que}: ne forte inue∣niat vos dormiē∣tes cū fatuis virgi¦nibus: iterū subiū¦gēs: ait: Audite er¦go O virgines: et aperite cords ve¦stri, & intelligite quo modo inuitat vos spōsus uester {quod} si agnouissetis {quam} pulcher & {quam} a∣mabilis ē ip̄e quē oīs multitudo cae¦lestis intuetur: sē¦per cū omni desi¦derio proculdu∣bio sperneretis mundum cū vni∣uerso
ornamēto eius & omnē glo¦riā saeculi proiice retis retrorsū & omne studiū ap poneretis ad ple¦ne diligendū san¦ctum spōsum ve¦strum & corpus vestrū mundū & immaculatū post haec interrogau∣eū: dicens. Do∣mine quae sunt ve¦stes ille nuptiales de quib{us} dixisti? Et respondit: Iste debent virgine ad interiora cor¦dis sui: & emer illic tria gener ornamentorum. Vnum eas habe∣re oportet vesti∣mentu cādidum & immaculatum quod est innocē∣tia carnis: Neces∣sarium illis est & operimentū quo
debent esse circū amicte, quod est charitas, qua ab illis diligēdus est Christus spōsus. Tertiū ornamen¦tū earum est, tor∣ques aurea. quod est pudicitia, qua debet seipsā vir∣go constringere, vt sit verecunda ad loquendū, ad audiēdū, ad ridē¦dū, ad faciēdum omne quod im∣pudicū est. Hoc est signū, de quo dictū est: Posuit signum in faciē meam: hoc vt e∣stimo adiecit pro eo {quod} in festo bea¦te Agnetis ipsam de hoc verbo in∣terrogaueram, et nullū tunc michi super hoc dedit responsum. iterū dixi: Dn̄e, quali
precio emenda sunt virginibus haec ornamēta? Et ait castigatio∣ne corporis pro∣prii, ac denatio vno, quod est cō¦templatio pudi∣citiae sponsi, quā reponere debent in medio cordis sui. Hic denarius signatus est ima∣gine regia: quo∣niam ipse est rex omnium regum, benedictus in sa¦cla. Rusus in∣terrogaui, dicē: Memento D̄e verbi illius quod dixisti: v{er}go orn¦ta, castitate, cha¦ritate, prudētia, humilitate, bene currit, ibi ergo .iiii. ornamena distinxisti. et nūc ī hac distinctiōe posteriori, duo
quidē priora as∣signasti, duo vero posteriora prae∣termissae videris. Et ait, Vir deside riorū dici potest: qui tam diligen∣ter hoc inquirit. Tunc respondit interrogationi meae: dicens: duo quae praetermissa tibi vidētur, sub nomine torques cōprehensa sunt: vt enim constrin¦gat virgo cor suū aduersus omne quod inuerecun dum est, non si∣ne magna prudē¦tia fieri potest, es¦se aūt nō potest, vt desit et humili¦tas, si affuerit pru¦dētia vera. Et rur¦sum post aliquot dies: interroga∣tionē praefato ser¦moni subieci: do¦mine
cū constet {quod} ad nuptias cū spōso ingressurae nō sunt virgines ille, quae absque nuptialib{us} vesti∣mentis, inuente fuerīt: qua ratiōe ei poteritis, quo∣modo huc intra∣stis non habētes vestes nuptiales? At ille respōdēs ait: hic sermo ad nouissimū iudici¦um pertinet: Ibi congregabuntur ante faciē Chri∣sti electae sponsae ei{us} oēs adornate nupcialibus vesti¦mētis secūdū o∣pera bona, que e∣gerū in hoc mū∣do. Erūt et ibi re¦{pro}bi nō habētes a¦liquē decorē ad nuptias pertinet: quia neglexerunt operari bona in
vita sua. Propter quod dicetur eis à sponso. Ite ma∣ledicti in ignem aeternum. In hac voce increpatio∣nem illam accep¦turisunt, quomo do huc intrastis non habentes ve¦stes nuptiales. Iterum autem ex¦hortatus est di∣cens. Ausculta & inclina cortu∣um michi, virgo simplex & amabi¦lis domini, noli emulari in filiab{us} seculi: quae {pro}spe∣re gradiuntur in delitiis suis & pla¦cere querunt in o¦culis hominū & non dei composi¦te circumornate esse studēt vt lau¦dem accipiāt ab ore spectātiū, et fiāt in laqueū &
subuer¦sionē multorum. Sed sicut sermo laudātium, ita & pulchritudo ea∣rū momēti vnius est, tanquam spu¦ma aquefacile dis¦soluitur, tanquā scintilla de igne consurgens, cito extinguitur car∣nis decor, & om¦nis gloria eius: sic est vt flos arboris qui sub vna hora comparet, & sta∣tim à venti com∣motione excuti∣tur: Tu antē filia cor appone vt cō¦posita et spectabi¦lis ambules in cō¦spectu casti emu∣latoris tui regis nostri: qui è coe∣lo te intuetur, & omnes vias tuas dinumerat, illum decorem appre∣hēde, qui neque
mobo emerces∣sit, ne{que} senio pe¦rit, & quem peri∣ture substantiae i∣nopia non obfus∣cat, quanto pul∣chrior es facie, tā¦to amplius inuigi¦la & speciosa sis mente, fallax gra¦tia faciei, sit glo∣ria tua ab intus vt placeas spōso tuo qui intuetur cor. A spice viam casti¦tatis, & attende: {quod} ex vtra{que} parte viriditatem habet graminis, & foris decorem, & ad locum castitati: nō solum in car∣ne, sed & in spiri∣tu, quia vana est castitas carnis, v∣bi regnat incon∣tinentia spirit{us}, et caetera quae coin∣quin anta nimam, Intēde quae dico,
sicut lucere non potest lāpas abs∣que alimēto pin guedinis, ita splē¦dere non potest coram coelesti sponso continen¦cia carnis sine spi¦ritus castitate. Et subiect his ver∣bis interrogatio∣nem huiuscemo¦di. Domine via nostra in visione arcta apparuit: & quid est qd scrip∣tura dicit. Et am¦bulabam in lati∣tudiue: quia man data tua exquisi∣ui, quae est illa la∣titudo: et quomo¦do eam conside∣rare possum ī via ista? Ad haec, ita respondit, latitu∣do haec est: valida intentio cordis, & charitas ardes intrinsecus, qua
animae caste ar∣dent ad spon∣snum suum Chir¦stum dominum quae est latitudo & plenitudo o∣mnium viarum dei, considera li¦bertatem huius viae, {quod} abs{que} spi∣nis & impedi∣mentis, hoc est effectus charita¦tis quam opera¦tur maxime in virginibus, dū foras mittit spi∣nas curarum, et omnis malitiae vt vacare pos∣sint: & cogitare quae Dei sunt, quomodo pla∣ceant ei, quem super omnia a∣māt Et cum de angustia viae rur¦sum interrogas∣sem: ait, Hoc est {quod} coarctare se
debēt virgines, vt in nullo a se∣ipsis possunt ex¦cedant, cui di∣xi. Nun quid do¦mine à seipsis possunt excede¦re. Possunt, in qut, et dixi, quae sūt per quae excedunt à scip¦sis? Qui ait. Haec sunt ociositas et fabulatio, & o∣mnia quae à me∣moria earū spō¦sum coelestem abduct. Et ad∣ieci: Angustia vie & angustie torquis quā {pro}∣posui vobis, sub vna significatio¦ne pronunciār, {quod} sponso Chri∣sto semper in ar¦cto ambulandū est, in iis quae pertinēt ad huc mundum.
Et factū est cōple¦tis sermonib{us} his in secūda domi∣nica sacri ieiunii die festo▪ beati Mathiae apostoli in tēpote diuini officii vel sacrifi∣cii: apparuit mi∣chi benedict{us} do¦mini angel{us} san∣ct{us}, dixi{que} ad eū. Obsecro domīe mi, si nūc tēp{us} est & si bonū est ī cō¦spectu tuo: vt ser¦moni tuo quem hactenus prose∣cutus es ad virgi¦nes dn̄i (cōpeten¦tem iā finem īpo¦nas) vix orationē impleui: & conti¦nuo aperuit os suum in hac ver∣ba. Ecce adii∣ciam vltrā amo∣nere vos fili dele¦ctissimi domino. Abstinete vos ab
illecebris vicio∣rum, quae militāt aduersis spiritum iactare cogitatū cordis vestri in domino. & ipse e¦nutriet vos sicut placitum est an∣te ipsum, et intro¦ducet vos ad cō∣uiuia vitae aeternae quae vobis praesta re dignetur Iesus Christus filius dei viui, qui cum patre & spiritu sancto viuit & re¦gnat Deus per o∣mnia saecula sae∣culorum. Amen. ¶ De via praela∣torum. Sermo sextus & ca. 14. SErmone prae¦cedēti ad fi∣nē deducto, distulit solito di∣tius me visitate
angelus domini, quod ego deli∣ctis meis impu∣tans, an xiabar in¦tra me, ac diligen¦tius lachrymis et orationibus ope¦ram dedi, & ad∣iuuabit me con∣uentus nosterora¦tione cōmuni, & consumatis decē & septem diebus ab eo quo iam di¦cta verba cōple∣uerat, stabam sola in oratoria circa horam tertiā ef∣fundens corā do¦mino cor meum ac dicens: Non mea merita do∣mine aspexisti in omnibus quae ha∣ctenus mecū ope¦rat{us} es, sed in tua misericordia fe∣cisti omnia haec. Propterea obse∣cro ne compesca¦ris
delictis meis, aut cuiusquā alte¦ri{us}, quin haec quae nūc apud me ini¦tiare dignat{us} es, propter bonitatē tuā ad bonā cōsu¦mationē {per}ducas Devia rectorū ec¦clesiae quā mihi ī ministerio demō¦strasti, congruen¦tem disciplinam nobis aperire di∣gnare, ex qua ali∣quis fructus cor∣rectionis proue∣niat, sicut neces∣sarium esse nosci populo tuo. Ad∣huc ista & his si∣milia inoratione loquēte, ecce an∣gel{us} desiderii mei subito aparuit co¦rā me: & sermo¦nem quē desidera¦bā: his verbis ini¦ciauit, dicēs: haec dicit dn̄s: Ecce,
ego mitto ange¦lū meū, vt annu∣ciet vobis qui in sublimi potesta∣te irriratores e∣stis. Dico aūt vo¦bis, quod iniqui∣tas teriae quā ab∣scōdiris propter aurū & argentū, ascēdit corā me sicut fum{us} de ig∣ne: Nūquid nō a∣nimae sunt plus {quam} aurum et argētū? quas suffocatis in ignē aeternū prop¦ter auaritiā vr̄am Idcirco accusat vos religio vestra corā me: Ecce. n. fetere fecistis sā∣ctificationē vr̄ā ī cōspectu popu∣li, et versa est ī ab hominatione mi chi: occupastis principatū sācto¦rū meorū: & ne∣sciui: maculastis
stratū meū, & si∣l. quid mihi & vobis exaspera∣tores māsuetudi¦nis meae? vnde a∣scendistis turba¦re ouile meum, & aggrauare cor meum super fili∣os meos quos ge¦nui in amaritu∣dine animae meae in die laboris & angustiarum me¦arum? Et adiecit iterum loqui ad me, dicens: Nō∣ne pastores me quasi in graui sō no obdurati sun & quomodo eu¦gilare eos faciā Iuper greges me¦os qui dispargun¦tur, sicut oues quādo pascuntur in virentibus pas¦cuis? vgi facti sunt populi mei, vnusquis{que} sequi¦tur
eor suum, & discurrunt in im¦petucordi sui, sin¦guli post concu∣piscencias suas: & nō est vox ne∣que sens{us} pastori¦b{us} meis ad incre¦pandum & col∣ligendū dissipa∣tos, michi obmu¦tuerunt dicit do¦min{us}: michi insi piētes facti sūt, si¦bi autem sapien∣tes sunt & diser∣ti, os eorum pa∣tens est: lingua e¦orū versatilis & acuta ad vinde∣miādam vineā in qua nō laboraue¦rūt, velox pes eo∣rum: & discur∣runt in tumultu, vt euellant & ab¦sorbeant carna∣lia plebis meae, qui spiritualia nō ministrant, qui
digitum mouere pigri sunt ad eru¦diendum ab ini∣quitate animas meas: pro quibus mortem gustaui quasi gēs que ig¦norat nomē me∣um: ita me perse qui non formi∣dant, qui ambu∣lant sub nomine meo, et iniqua  actione corpopu¦li mei contristāt, & nō apponunt auferre ob oculis meis, iniquitatē adulteri, & forni¦catoris, et percu∣soris, & violen¦ti in proximum suum, & furis, & malefici, et periu¦ri, & fenerantis, & fallentis in pē¦so & mensura, & pollunts sabba¦ta mea, in tup¦tudinis lusu, &
praeuaricantis pa¦ctum sanctimo∣niae & incircun∣cisi in honoran∣tis altare meum, nec diiudicantis quod est mun∣dum mundissi∣mum, & venden¦tis & emētis san¦ctifiationē me∣am, et superbiam exercentis in hae¦reditate sanctua∣rii mei: haec & a∣lia quae legibus meis prohibui, quasi flamma de solationis domū meam deuastāt, & taedere me fa∣ciunt super filios hominum, & pa¦stores mei in mo¦ribus eorum ob∣mutescūt: & qui escuut in deside∣riis animae suae, be¦ne secundum plā¦rationem suā gra¦diuntur:
& gres∣sus eorum dignā retributionē in∣ueniēt, dicit do∣minus. Haec ita prosequente an∣gelo, qui mecum per interualla tē∣porum loqueba∣tur: dixi ad eum: Dn̄e quae est illa euigilatio quam dn̄s cōminat{us} est pastorib{us} suis? at ille rursus, quasi ī ira verbū cōmi¦nationis assumēs ait: Vos qui dor¦mitis in increpa∣tionibus meis, & cor vestrum ob∣caecatū est in dor¦mitione sua: ego euigilare vos fa∣ciā, quando veni et su{per} vos mors antiqua, & inue∣teratus ille serpēs & deuorabit vos en̄ magno impe∣tu,
qm̄ thesaurisa¦stis vobis the sau∣rosin infernalib{us} penis, Infoelices et insesati aperi∣te oculos vestros et legite scriptu∣ras, & recorda∣mini qua religio¦ne praecesserunt vos antecessores vestri: iterum fa∣cta intermissio∣ne parui tempo∣ris, addidit dicēs Videte pontificē magnū & excel∣sum su{per} oīa dn̄m Iesū, quomodo in dieb{us} obediē∣tiae suae ābulauit ī medio discipulo¦rū suorū, non in altitudine domi∣nantis, sed in hu¦militate ministrā¦tis, tanquā pi{us} e∣mulator gregis sui vs{que} in cōsum¦mationē mortis
{pro} eo. Respicite semem ei{us} quod est benedictū, mi¦nistros vocatiōis vr̄ae beatos apo∣stolos et successo¦res eorū: in quo∣rū cetibus gloria mini: & pascitis voluntatē cordis vestri inlaborib{us} eorū, nunquid si cut viae vestrae viae illorū fuerūt: no∣lite arbitrari ita: quia viae illorum viae pulchrae & re¦ctae: vestrae autem contaminatae & nullius ordo est in eis, nō ambula uerūt in altitudi∣ne spiritus sui, ne¦{que} in tumultu su∣perbi comitatus, nō in cupiditate questus, nō in ma¦gnificētia vesti mēti, ne{que} in dis∣solutiōe cords,
nō in crapula & ebrietate, & īma¦culis carnis, non in vanitate ludē∣tiū, ne{que} post ca∣nem & auem dis¦curs{us} eorū. Inom ni aūt sinceritate vestigiis magni pastoris adhaese∣runt, vigilantes vigilias fideles su¦per gregem do∣mini die ac no∣cte in laboribus & erumnis, in pe¦nuria necessita∣tum, & quasi an∣gustia parientis ministerium suū impleuerunt su∣stinentes abiecti¦onem et cōtume hā ab hominibus et persecutiones quas dinumera∣re nemo potest, & dederunt ani. mas suas in mor∣tem, vt implerēt
terram euāgelio dei, & lucriface∣rent animas ele∣ctorū. Celebran∣tibus nobis diem festum pasche, in tēpore diuini sa∣crificii, post lecti¦onem euangelii, apparuit mihi an¦gelus dn̄i stans corā me, cū{que} pe¦tissem ab eo, vt hoc procurare di¦gnaretur, nequid negligentie in il∣la sacra cōmuni∣one quam expe∣ctabamus accide¦ret. Adieci postu¦lare, vt sermo¦nem suum de re∣ctoribus ecclesiae secundū {quod} inuo∣cauerar, prosequi dignaretur. Ad quod mihi breue respōsum, reddi∣dit, dicens. Si di∣gni essent, multa
magna decis dn̄s reuelaret: quo di¦cto statī ad altare cū festinatiōe ac∣cessit: & cū duo∣b{us} āgelis q̲ in prī¦cipio missae adue¦nerāt cū magna diligētia, donec oē, cōmunicasse m{us} astabat: sequē¦ti vero die circa idē tēpus adueni¦ens, ita exors{us} est dicens: Caput ec¦clesiae clamat, & mēbra illi{us} mor∣tua qm̄ sedos apo¦stolica obsessa est su{per}bia, & colitur auaritia, & reple¦ta est iniq̲tate & īpietate, & scāda lizāt oues meas, & errare eas faci¦unt, quas custodi re et regere debu¦erūt. Verbum est dn̄o eū potentia sua. Nūquid hoc obliuiscetur dex
tera mea? nequa∣quā proculdubio nisi cōuersi fuerīt & correxerīt vi∣as suas pessimas: ego dn̄s conterā eos. rursus de al∣tero addidit, di∣cens: Haec dicit dn̄s magnis prae∣latis ecclesiae: Re¦cordamin quam rationem reddi∣turi estis in tre∣mēdo iuditio de cuib{us} meis, quas suscepistis rege∣re & custodire, quando appreci∣ati estis dona spi¦ritualia populi mei precio infoe∣licitatis: Nunc et gomitto ad vos paternas admoni¦nitiones: Videre ne forte iudice∣mini, sed conuer¦tamini à vitiis ve¦stris pessimis, &
mundate consci∣entias vestras, & reconciliabor vo∣bis, alioqui ego Dominus delebo memoriam vestrā de terra viuentiū. Post haec quasi in spiritu lenitatis: verbum dei annū∣cians, ait: Ego do∣min{us} clamo & ad moneo pastores meos, & quare nō audiuit vocem ad monitionis meae: sto et pulso ad ho∣stium cordis eorū & nō aperiunt mi¦chi. Audite & in∣telligire verba ad∣monitiones meae, & delectamini in dilectione mea, quoniā admoneo pastores & oues meas admonitio∣ne paterna: sunt e∣nim inter pastores meos qui mihi vi∣dentur
boni et pa∣cifici: heu {quam} pauci sunt, & alii multi mali & peruersi qui me prouocant ad iracundiā pro∣pter quod opor∣tet admoneri bo∣nos vt in melius proficiant, ma∣los autem & per∣uersos vt conuer∣tantur ne pereant de via iusta. Et cum me iterum vi¦sitasset, adiunxit: Ecce adiecit do∣minus pastoribus suis adhuc, dicens Attendite cum o∣mni solicitudine mentis viam ve∣stram viam re∣ctam, & nolite er∣rate in ea. Vigilate & custodite vigi∣lias noctis super gregem meum, si∣cut boni emulato¦es, ne forte super
neniat grex ca∣prarum, qui sunt spiritus maligni, à quibus disper∣guntur greges o∣uium mearum. Gaudete cum le∣titia vos qui pa∣cifici mei estis di¦cit dominus: & recordamini ver¦borum meorum quae in praesenti sermone inueni∣stis, & custodite vos ab illicitis hu¦ius mundi, & di∣ligite adonitio nē meā. Diligen∣dus enim sum {pro} tali admonitiōe, {quod} & si me diligi∣tis, & nole meo honorem praebe∣tis, qm̄ de me eū accepistis, hono∣rificabo vos co∣rā sāctis angelis meis. Adhuc lo∣quente ad me an
āgelo sermōes is∣stos de pastorib{us} ecclesie: visū est quibusdā oportu¦nū, vt interroga¦rē deus, ī quib{us} er¦rors sui occasio∣nē acc piūt dubri quidā interroga∣ui igitur, nō qua∣si in fide hesitās▪ sed quasi cupis fi¦dē nostrā ex an∣gelica authorita∣te firmari, & di∣cebā. Nq̲ d dn̄e ī ecclesiasticis sa∣cramētis parē ha¦bēt veritatē, offi∣cia eorū pōtificū qui sinistre & nō secūdū deō ad pō¦tificatū suū intrci¦erūt, & eorū quo¦rū, bon{us} introit{us} est. Qui respōdēs ait. Multi dum ta¦lia profunde scru¦tāturmagis depra¦uātur {quam} emendē¦tur,
& talia dn̄i reuelaret, si non eo liberius pecca rent illi, ad quos pertinēt ista: his dictis confestim ablatus est ab o∣culis meis. Iterū autem die alia cū rediisset ad me, interrogaui eum repetens eūdem sermonē qui prae scriptus est: & il∣le, Habēt, inquit, parem virtutem, sed beneplacitū est deo magis in officils eorū qui bene introierunt Iterū subieci di∣cēs: Ita ne est dn̄e mi, vt {quod} praesby∣teri ordinati ab il¦lis ouorū mal{us} in troitus eadem ha¦beāt potestatē cō¦secrandi corp{us} & sāgun si in altar; quā habēt qui or¦dinati sūt ab illis
qui legittime in∣troierūt? Qui ait: Nō ascēdat vn{quam} dubitatio in cor¦tuū de hac re, sed certū habeto {quod} oēs qui in eccle∣siastica ordinati∣one praesbyteratū acceperunt, eādē potestatem habēt in consecratione dn̄ici sacramenti siue bene siue ma¦le introierunt or¦dinatores eorum verba illa diuina quae in sacro ca∣none dicūtur, tā∣tae virtutis sunt corā domino, vt verae in illorum pronunciatione corpus et sāguis domini fiat à quo cunque praesby∣terorum pronun∣cientur, non e∣nim vel meritis bonorū efficitur,
vel peccatis ma∣lorum praepedi∣tur consecratio illa: quamuis au¦tem in diuinis sa¦cramentis inef∣ficaces non sint, tam praesbyteri quàm ordinato∣res eorum, nichi lominus damna¦biles sunt, sed tā∣to grauiore dam¦natione punien∣tur in futuro. Quia apud pa∣ties nostros spi∣ritualia iuditia in ecclesia habē∣tes, totus hic ser∣mo pertinere vi∣sus est, rogam an¦gelū domini, di∣cens: Oro do∣mine, vt sicut spi¦ritualibus recto∣ribus verba ad∣monitionis ha∣ctenus ministra∣sti, ita illis quo{que}
qui secularia iu∣ditia habent, ali quas admonitio∣nes, ex quibus et ipsi corrigi pos∣sint à domino an nunciare digne∣ris. Qui confe∣stim petitiōi meae consensum prae∣bens, his verbis sermonem ad il¦los pertinentem exorsus est dicēs Ecce constituit dominus su{per} po¦pulum suū prin∣cipes & iudices vt facerent iud∣ditium et iustiti & confirmarent veritatem & pa¦cem inter virum & virum, vt este omnis populus beneplacens co¦ram deo uiuente Nūc autem sunt principes & iudi¦  dicit do∣minus,
quasi e∣quus & mulus, quibus nō est in∣telect{us}: & anibu¦lāt corā me extē∣to collo et inflati superbia, nō red∣dētes gloriā deo, à quo est omnis potestas in coelo & in terra, sed in suis virtutib{us} glo¦riantur: exaltaui & honorificaui eos sup terrā, & ecce contemnūt scire & gloriā da¦re mihi Si enī si¦rent nomen me quod est magnā et metuēdum, e dexterā meā for∣tē quā extēdi su{per} eos, forsitā humi¦liarentur sub ma¦nu & retraherēt ad seipsos cerui∣cē suā quā erexe∣runt in cōtume∣liam mei, & de∣clinatēt
vultū in terrā, de qua sum p eos & patres  Vobis dico regibus terrae qui regiminiin excel¦sum, & clamore iniquitatis vestrae ascendit in coelū corā me: audite vocem increpa∣tionis meae, & di¦sceptabo vobiscū in aurib{us} populi mei. An nescitis quoniā mea sunt vniuersa regna mundi, et omnis gloria eorum, & quia potestatē ha¦beo dandi ea cui voluero, & iterū qua horavoluero tollēdi ea? Nesci∣tis {quod} ad imperiū¦oris mei subsistūt cuncti viuētes, et quia potens est sermo meus diui¦dere inter spiritū meum
vestrum, & car∣nem in ictu ocu∣li: & quare elat est cor vestrum  iis quae mea ordi∣natiōe acceptis & non magis s∣liciti estis mini∣strare michi, ī gra¦du sublimitatis vestrae, et gratias agere michi pro multitudine be∣neficenciae meae? Redite ad cor vestrum, & vide∣te quid fecerim vobis, & reddi de ritis michi. Ego dominus do¦minator vester, ī¦ueni vos abs{que} me¦ritis gratiarū me∣arū coram me: & tamē assūpsi vos sicut volui ex oī numero populo∣rū multorū, & ex¦tuli vos super al∣titudinem princi
& iu∣dicium terre, & fudi super vos vnctionē sancti∣ mee, & po∣ diadema glo∣r in capite vr̄o & porrexi virgā regni dextrae ve∣strae, & gladio vl∣tionis meae accin¦xi vos, glorifica∣ni vos corā omni populo meo, ī di¦uitiis & potenta∣tu excelso, de di∣que vobis robur grande ad conte∣rendam virtutem rebellium vestro¦rum, & famam nominis vestri di¦lataui secundum latitudinem ter∣tae. Ego Domi∣nus feci vobis o∣mnia haec: vt ma∣gnificaretis lau∣dē nominis mei, super terram, &
iustitias meas ex∣erceretis, in iis qous subieci vo∣bis, maioribus et pusillis & coad∣unaretis omnem populum meum, in vinculis pacis & equitatis, & daretis vosmet∣ipsos fideles re∣fugium omni op¦presso, & iniu∣riam patienti, & essetis vindices mei contra vio∣latores pacis & iustitiae, & qui∣escere faceretis terram ab iis qui conturbant eam, & desolatam eam faciunt, in gladio & igne, at violen¦ta praedacione, & deuorant labores alienos, et vagos, ac mendicos faci¦unt cultores ter∣re, & inhonorant
nomē meum san¦ctum, quo signa∣ui eos, et segrega¦tur in heredita∣tem michi. Hoc erat iugum serui∣tutis mee: quod posui super vos ī die quo exaltaui vos super altissi∣mos populi mei, vos autem excus∣sistis illud a serui¦tutibus vestris: & reddidistis michi pro omni gloria, quam dedi vobis non timorem, & honorem, sed cō¦temptum, et irti∣racionem, clausi¦stis oculos men∣tis vestrae vt non respiciatis ad iudi¦cem vestrum, qui est in celis, et sub¦uertistis quod iu∣stum est, propter auaritiam, et ela∣tionem cordis
vestri: et confir∣mastis iniquitatē in terra, et statu∣istis eam in ex∣celso, per ambu∣lātibus vobis ter¦ram: audio plora¦tionem et genu∣tum plobis mei post vos, & que∣rela multa accu∣sat superbiam ve¦stram: quia intol¦lerabilis est equi∣tatus vester, et nō est numerus ini∣quitatis, ambulā¦tium in circuitu vestri, onerosi e∣stis populo meo: et hoc vobis pu∣sillum: nisi et do¦mino deo vestro graues, et abho∣minabiles sitis, ab inquinamen∣tis impudicitiae vestre quibus me ad indignationē prouocare non ti
muistis, et in ho∣norastis oleum sanctum, quo vn xi vos, et honora¦bile nomen me¦um, quid posui super vos, pollui∣stis, & blasphema¦re fecistis in mul¦titudine populi pro infaciabili peccato, quod do¦minatu in vobis propter hoc iura ut in fortitudine dexterae meae, di∣cit dominus: qui a ecce in proxi∣mo reddam vltio¦nem meam duris¦simam in capita vestra, & sicut p∣tēter cruciari vos faciam, & con∣culcari ab immū¦dis spiritibus qui¦bus ministrastis, et nō recedit fla∣gellū a vobis in oc tempore: si
non egeretis pe∣nitentiam, ne{que} recesseritis a viis iniquis quibus i∣ram meam in reg¦na vestra adduci∣tis: poenitemini ta{que}, et nolite tar dare: et cum om¦ni vigilantia mi∣nisterium vestrū in quod vocati e¦stis ame, implere studete, et recor¦dabor miseratio∣nū mearū ātiqua¦rum in vobis: & propitius ero ini¦quitatibus vestris multis, et magni ficabo secūdum magnitudinem seruorum meo∣rum regum qui fuerunt ante vos: et adiiciam vobis gloriae coronam ī regno meo, que nō{per}ibit de capite vestro vs{que} insem
piternum. Intue∣mini vniuersi prī¦cipes & iudices mei vba mea hec q̲ portatis iniqui¦tatē regū vestro∣rum: & corrigite vias vestras pra∣uas in increpatio¦nibus meis, qui∣bus obiurgaui il¦los. Recedite ab auaritia et dolo, qui suffocatis iu∣stitias meas pro¦muneribus, et fa¦uore hominū & subleuatis ad ini∣quitatē corda po¦pulorū meorū, vt noceāt alterutrū, cōfidētes in iniu¦stitia vestra. Ego dominū subieci plebes meas do∣minationi vestre vt essetis illis ī po¦testatē a facie vio¦lēti & praedātis et ecce ī superbiā e¦leuatū
est cor ve∣strū, & tan{quam} lutū platearū cōculca¦tis eos, per quos stis gloriosi, & tā¦quā lupi rapaces in {pro}prio grege in saniā exerceris: as¦similaui vos prī∣cipatib{us} meis, qui praesūt militiae ce∣li: & intelligere noluistis honorē vestrum & indu∣istis similitudinē principum & in∣fernorum, in mul¦titudine maliciae qua affligitis po∣pulū meum, & in tumore spirit{us} ve¦stri, et in maculis intēperātiae vestre quibus in honora¦stis faciem meā: que de celo vos ī tuēt, propterea vi¦uo ego dicit dn̄s, & viuit fortitudo dexteraemeae, sinō audieritis vocem
admonitiōis me ae, et cōnersi fue∣ritis ad me: De∣trahā vos ab alti¦tudine vr̄a, qua male vsi estis in profundū infer∣ni, & eritis con∣sortes illorū, qui¦b{us} vosipsos assi∣milastis in incē∣dio viuēti in sē∣piternum. In die sancto Penteco∣stes in hora pri∣ma ante celebra¦tionē diuini offi¦cii, cum essem in oratione, appa∣ruit angelus co∣rā me, & hacte∣nus dictū sermo¦nem, verborum istorū a diectiōe compleuit. Haec dicit dn̄s: Rex regū & domin{us} dominantiū vni¦uersae terrae: Au∣dite et intelligite
verba oris mei, et emendate vias vestras in cōspe∣ctu meo, {quod} si me placare studueri tis, quāto māgis altiores estis in hoc tanto magis dabo vobis altio¦rē locū nomina∣tū in regno meo, vt mecū viuatis & regnetis sine sine. Amen. ¶ De via viduato¦rū. Sermo. 8. IN FESTI∣uitate Sancti Martini inter Silentia missae al¦locutus sum an∣gelū dicens: Pla∣ceat nunc domi∣ne{us}, vt exhibeas nobis disciplinā congruentē ille vie, cuius vna via vepribus occupa¦tum
ta apparuit, alte∣ra vero florib{us} a∣moena & scruta nihil habēs vt ve prium & impedi¦mentorū. Vix pe¦titionis meae ver¦ba cōpleui, et {pro}ti¦n{us} ait: Ecce dico vobis q̲ in seculo viduati estis, vi∣uētes in carne in laboribus & an∣gustiis multis, ab¦stinete vos à vi∣tiis huius saeculi, & ābulate in via continentiū de∣lectabiliter orna¦ta, viuentes se∣cundum spiritū: Egredimini de medio spinarum quae sunt in circu¦itu vestri, quia ec¦ce dissolutus est laqueus vester, quo allegati fui∣stis huic mundo, & quasi captiui
ducebamini ad seruiēdum volun¦tati alienae, & nō eratis vestri quan¦do faciebatis vo∣luntatem carnis, iuxta omnia desi¦deria cordis ve∣stri, excusationē à necessitate con¦rugii accepistis. et si iterum carni obedite volueri∣tis, quam excusa¦tionem habebitis quid vltra concu¦piscitis humano aspectu in super∣bo amictu & or∣namento faciei vestrae? cui vltra carnem vestram iam in parte mor¦tuam emitis inde litiis huius saeculi & desideriis quae aduersantur spiri¦tui vestro, & coa¦ceruatis vobis so¦licitudines super
uacuas? Audite magis consilium diuinū: et discedi¦te à voluptatibus vitae huius quia fallaces sunt, ne forte peoccu-pemini ab eis, et fiant nouissima vestra peiora pri∣oribus, apprehē∣dite quietu dinē mentis, & spiritu¦ales delitias, quas offert vobis deus et agiteresiduum annorum vestro¦rum, in obsecra∣tionibus, & vigi¦lus, & castigatio¦ne carnis, & ope¦ribus pietatis. Et adiecit in vigilia apostolorum di∣cens, & quid ad∣dam vos admo∣nere? ecce osten∣di viam, instruxi vos doctrina, pl¦pate huc & illuc,
cōsiderate verba rtinete exempla diligite castitatē, currte ad clarita¦tē dei, & dn̄i no∣stri Iesu Christi, quā vobis praesta re dignet{ur}, qui vi∣uit & regnat per oīa secula seculo rū. amē. Cupiebā octaui sermonis iniciū accipere in die translationis sācti patris nostri Benedicti, sed im¦pedite sunt die il¦lo, oratiōes meae ab hospitū praesen¦tia, & translatum est desideriu meū vs{que} ī proximū di¦em. Tūc enim stā¦te mē in oratione post horam capi∣tuli: presētauit se michi angel{us} do∣mini, & postula∣ui vt sermonē or∣diret{ur} ad eos. quo¦rū
in vita visione quasi glebis occu¦pata apparuerat, & cōfestim aperi¦ens os suū: haec verba locutus est ¶ De via Eremita¦rum & solitari¦orū. Sermo 8. cap. xvi. ATtendite vos qui in eremo vitā ducere elegistis, quā discretionem habeatis: discre∣tio enī est mater omniū virtutum, glebis aspera est. via vestra: prop∣ter duriciā vite vi¦dete ne forte offē¦dat pes vester, {quod} & si offenderit ca¦uete ne lumē {quod} in vobis est euacuet{ur} propterea autem necessaria vobis est discrecio: vt
nō cito sequami∣ni omnē impetū zeli vestri qui vos ad altitudinē per¦fectionis impel∣lit ne{que} su{per} gradi amini mēsuram virtutis vestrae, la¦borib{us} immode∣ratis, multi in pre¦sumptione spiri∣tus sui ambulan∣tes: vitam suam nimia afflictione extinxerunt, & perierūt in adin∣uentionib{us} suis, multi mensurāsu¦am excedētes hu¦manum intelle∣ctum seipsis sub∣uerterunt et inu∣ties facti sunt, & similes iumētis ī sipientib{us}. multi per immodera∣tas fatigationes, in tedium addu∣cti sunt, & elan∣guit virtus eorū
et abierunt re∣trorsum & reuo∣luti sunt advolup¦tates carnales fa¦cti{que} sunt in deri¦sionem spiritibus nequam, bona est vexatio car∣nis, quia aduer∣satur cōcupiscen¦cus immund tiae sed si mensuram exuperet, inutilis est, quia suffocat deuotionem con¦templationis, & lumen eius extin¦guit: Propter hoc memento homo fragilitatis tuae vt caute gradiaris in via dura quam inressus es, & pacienter agas in festinatione tua, ne ruinam pacia∣ris, dirige in con¦siliis sapientium cunctos labores tuos non in pro∣prio
sensu: & nō confundeis in exitu tuo. Do∣minatorem coe∣lin tentes sicut qui incaute sucu am abiiciunt, & habent fiduciam quod mirificetur in eis potentiado mini secundum dies antiquos. Ad hec sume ti∣bi eruditionem & disciplinam cō¦tēplationis▪ qā annun aui à do¦mino, & conso∣lare abectionē tuam īn ea Con¦sedentibus no∣bis in capitulo ad audiendam lecti¦onem: regule: in fest nirate sancte Marie Magdele∣ne astitit corā me dominus meus, et presentem ser¦monem, cōgruo
fine cōpleuit, di∣cens. Nūc atten∣dite, O homo qui insolitudine vitā ducere elegisti et voluptatibus se∣culi renunciasti: qualē fructū affe∣ras sunt enim ali¦qui hoīm qui pl{us} amant solitudinē propter libertatē proprie volunta¦tis quam propter fructū boni ope∣ris. quod si in bo¦noperseueraueris condonabit tibi dominus, quod oculus non vidit nec auris audiu t nec in cor homi∣nis ascēdit quod vobis prestaredig¦netur: qui viut et regnat deus {per} infinita secula s¦culorum Amen. ¶ Cum adsset fe∣stiuitas beati la∣cobi
apostoli: in prima vespera, ap¦paruit angelus do¦mini coram me, feci ita{que} sicutsug gesserat michi cō¦scriptor sermonū istorum: ac pecii ab eo, vt titulum qui ī capite libri huius scribendus esset, pronuncia∣re dignare. Qui continuo peticio¦ni me assentiens ait. Hic est liber viarum dei: qui annunciatus est ab āgelo dei altis¦simi, Eiizabeth ancillae Christi et dei viui, in quin∣to anno visitatio¦nis eius, quo visi tauit eam spiritus domini, ad salu∣tem omnium qui paternas admo∣nitiones dei, gra¦ta benedictione
& erat annus dominice Incarnaattonis millesimus cen∣tesimus qninqua gesimus sextus. ¶ De via adoles∣centū. Sermo ix. caxvii. MEnse au∣gusto quī¦ta die mē∣sis, mane post vi¦gilias matutinas cū essem cubans in lectulo meo, ne{que} adhuc som¦num cepisse, su bito apparuit o¦ram me anglus domini, & prae¦sentis libri nonū sermonem initi¦auit his verbis: Ecce ego habeo aliquid ad vos di¦cēdum qui in iu∣uentute positi e¦stis,
quasi lilium quod ante solis ortū clausum e∣rat, & quādo tol splender in virtu¦te sua aperit se, et delectatur in ar∣dore solis, sic est homo & fic flo∣ret caro cius in inuentute sua, et delectat mētem suam multis mo¦dis cactus, ac re∣soluitur ab inna∣ti caoris blandi mento. Audite ita{que} filii, & per∣cipite in verbis ministerii mei, vocationem op∣timi patris vestri de coelo, qui da∣bit vobis locum dulcissime amoe¦nitatis ante soliū gloriae suae, si cle geritis ambulare in consiliis eus. Discite impri∣mis
timere domi¦nū coeli, et assue∣scite īcuruari sub iugo timoriseius ab initio adoles∣centiae vestrae. Ecce praeparauit in inferno crude¦li ignem & sul∣phur, & flagella multa nimis, & morsus amarissi∣mos horrēdotū spirituum facien¦tibus mala pusil∣lis & magnis, & nulli pacit aetati: {pro}pterea dico vo¦bis, Discite conti¦nere vos ab om∣ni opere malo, et custodite innocē¦tiā vestram tan{quam} aurum electū cu¦ius praeciū in de∣corē adhuc igno¦ratis. cum autem senuerit intelle∣ctus vestet, tunc cognoscetis &
gustabitis ex ea fructum letitiae, quam nemo no∣uit nisi qui acci∣pit, consilium do¦mini est filioli, quod dico: ecce in sinu vestro est thesaurus deside rabilis & precio∣sus super omnes diuitias mundi: hoc est virginita¦tis gemma. Beati eritis, si custodic∣titis eam, rētam preciosam nolite proiicere in lutū, ne{que} pro vili de∣lectamēto quod est vnius momē∣ti cōmutetis eam quia semel abie∣cta, amplius inuo niri non potest ipsa est fraternita¦tis nostrae in coe∣lo proprium sig∣nū, & propterea singulariterin eis
delectamur inter¦ra, quos titulo no¦stro signatos ess videmus. quod si placuerit animae vrae custodire eam: Attendite vobis vt non in quinetis eam in negligentiis leu¦tatis vestrae deci∣nate cum pauore cordis ab irrita∣mentis immun∣ditiae, et fugite cō¦fbulationes & collusiones ado∣lescentularum, et cotruptoribus e∣arum nolite soci¦ari Custodite os vestrū ab impu∣dco sermone, & declinate aurem vestram ab eo, & ab omni turpitu∣dine oculos ve¦stros & manus abtinete: audite & intelligite scri¦pturā
sapiētis quae dicit felix sterilis & īcoinquinata: quae nesciuit tho¦rū in delicto, ha∣bebit fructū in re¦spectione anima¦rum sanctarū, & spado qui non o∣perat{us} est perma∣n{us} suas iniquita∣tatē: dabit ei fidei donu electū, & sors in tēplo dn̄i acceptissima. De hac scriptura cū requisissem ab eo cui{us} esset' ait, Spi¦ritus sanctus per os sapientis, locu¦tus est, statimque ab oculis meis ab¦latus est, ne{que} am¦plius interrogarī sese concessit. Post haec rursus adiecit, & dixit: Ad huc addam loqui fratribus et conseruis meis
admonitiones pa¦tris orum. Filii adducite vobis in consuetudinē mores sanctitatis in floribunda ae∣tate vestra, quos in tempore ma∣turitatis vestrae possitis exercere aptate in hoc mo¦res vestros, vt si∣tis verecundi, mi¦tes & sobrii, hu∣miles & miseri cordes, & paciē¦tes estote ad cor¦rectionem & do¦ctrinā sapientiū diligite & inue¦stigate, fugite ver¦ba mēdatii & me¦litiae, furta, comes¦sationes, & rixas & ludos, quos a∣uaritie adinuenit et eos qui praestāt occasionem im∣munde voluptati expedit & vobis
orationi frequen¦ter intēdere, quia tanquam suauita¦tis incensum est in caelo, oratio de immaculata con¦scientia proce∣dens: supplicate creatori vestro, vt emaculatotes vos custodiat ab hoc saeculo, & nolite sperare in longiturnitate vi¦tae praesentis, quia incertus est exit{us} vester: haec est viae vestrae pulchritu∣do. O adolescen¦tes & inuenes im¦maculati, ambu∣late in ea, & eri∣tis filii amabiles domino, & simi∣les angelis dei in caelo, ad quorum societatem duce∣re vos dignetur Iesus Christ{us} dn̄a noster, qui est be¦nedictus
& lau¦dabilis cumpatre & spiritu sancto in sempiterna sae∣cula. Amen. De via infantiū. Sermo decimus. Cap. xviii. CVM esset completus per angelū sermo praecedēs in vigilia assump¦tionis sancte de genitricis Mariae rursus in ipso di∣festo in tempore diuini officii vi∣sitauit me, & ait Ecce adhuc vol cōsumare sermo¦nes meos, quom am adhuc locu est, et habeo ali¦quid breuiter di∣cere ad infantes▪ qui nesciūt se cu∣stodire propter
ignorantiā. pro∣pter quod opor∣tet admoneri ma¦tres eorum, vt cu¦stodiant eos cum timore dei castos et immaculatos, ne forte pereant. Ad haec ego sub∣iunxi, interrogās & dicens: Quid est dn̄e {quod} dixisti castos & imma∣culatos? quid fa∣cere possunt in∣fātes, vnde casti∣tatē suā cōmacu∣lent? nōne et si q̲d delinquūt, igno∣rātia eos excusat. Et ait: Castitatē suā verbis immū¦dis sepe coinqui∣nant & operibus qualia & ipsi per ficere possunt: et quamuis per ig∣norātiā faciāt, ta∣mē sine reatu nō sunt, & poenam
omnino nō eua∣dere possunt de hac vita migrātes quia ne{que} ab ali∣quo sunt castiga∣ti, ne{que} per seip∣sos poenitētiā de∣licti habere scie∣bāt. propterea ca¦stigari debēt à pa¦rentibus pro de∣lictis suis, quia si∣cut mala facere assuescunt, ita & bona facere disce¦rent, si per castita¦tem ad hoc nutr¦rentur, {quod} autē di∣xi vt īmaculatos, pro ipsis dixi qui cū paululū de sep¦tennio ecierint, tunc amplius se cōmaculant pra¦uis operibus quia plus nouerūt co∣gitare de malo, quoniā non sint prohibiti ab eo,  & ipsi inquan¦tum
possunt ope∣rātur opus impu∣dicitiae, ita vt ger¦manitate coniun¦cti saepe copulen turnesciētes quid saciunt Tales igi¦tur si de hac vita migrant, magnas poenas sustinent, quous{que} purificē ur, quia ula o∣mnino maculain reguū dei potest intraro. Hoc er∣go est illorū peri∣re, de quo supra dixi, tanto autem grauius ac diuti∣us puniūtur, quo minus orationi∣bus etelemosinis amicorū adiuuā∣tur pro eo {quod} eis indigere nō cre∣dantur. dico vo∣bis parentibus et quicun{que} paruu∣lorū custodiam habetis: attēdite
quomodo in ma¦gna cautela eos custodiatis, quia in vos redunda∣būt delicta eorū, sine glexeritis eos prona est per se omnis caro ī ma¦lū, et idcirco noli te enutrire eos in vanitatibus ve∣stris, ne{que} incline tis eos ad ebrieta¦tem, et fabulatio∣nes vanas & pra∣uas, ne{que} ad super¦biā inducatis eos per delicatā edu∣cationem. prohi∣bete eos à verbis impudicis et con¦uitiosis, et obsce∣no cantu, & lusi∣bu malis, & rixa & vagatione in∣cauta, ne rideatis super delictis eo∣rum, sed magisin virga mansuetu∣dinis & verbis
correctionis ab∣steirete eos, quia contumaces erūt si proprie volun¦tate relinquātur. ncipite autē ab ipsa aurora aeta∣tis eorum, flecte∣re eos ad timorē domini & initia sacrae fidei, & o∣rationes dei, & omne quod ad¦mores bonos per¦tinet, auribus eo∣rum frequenter instillare curate. Consumauit au∣tem hunc sermo¦nem in octaua as¦sumptionis, ad∣iectionē verborū istorū. Nunc au∣tem filii charissi∣mi {quam} pulchta est via vestra, curri∣te in ea. O quam amabilis est pa∣ter vester, quam praeciosū est prae¦miū
vestrum & rehnum aliorum quod vobis prae∣stare dignetur, fi¦lius qui manet patre & pater in filio manēs cu spiritu sancto in secula saeculorū. Amen. Protestatio ange¦li de annuncia∣tione libri via∣arum dei. CVM essē poene con¦sumati h sermones in fesi¦uitate apostolo¦rum Petri & Pau¦li, ante horam d¦uini officit, fuo¦rans in secreto & apparuit in con∣spectu meo ange¦lus domini, et lo¦cutus est audien∣te me: verba haec.
Treuerensi epis∣copo, et Colonie et Magunc e epis¦copis, annūciatū sit vobis a domi∣no deo magno & tremēdo, et ab an¦gelo testamēt: li¦bri hlius: vt haec verba que inue∣neritis ī presnti libro, annūcietis Romane eccle∣sie, toti popu¦l, & oī ecclesiae d mendate vo sipsos, et conuer¦timini ab erroti∣bus vestris: et no¦lite indigne acci¦pere admonitio∣ne sacram et di¦uinam, quia non sunt hec ab homi¦nibus inuentae di co autem vobis ex nomine: quo∣niam in ista pro∣uincia nomen re¦ligionis habetis,
legite & audite monitiones di  et suscipi¦  placida m  nolite arbi  hec figmen¦ se mulierum  nō sunt. sed unt a deo patre omnipotente, qui est fons & o∣rigo omnis boni¦tatis, quud autem vobis dico, cete∣ris omnib{us} dico. HEC adiura¦to conscri¦ptores ser∣monum istorum Adiuro per do∣minū et per ange¦lum eius, omnem qui transcripserit lum istum: vt diligenter eum e¦mendet, et hanc adiuracionem co¦dici suo ascribat. FINIS.
