7840 33151087 28915
¶ A proclamacion set furth by the Kinges Maīestie with the aduise of his highnes most honorable counsail, for the shortening of a day, limited in another proclamation, concerning the abacing of the value of Shi∣linges and Grotes. WHereas the Kinges maiestie, very lately by proclamation did ordeine vpon diuers great and profitable considerations that the pece of siluer coine, called the shilling, shoulde after the last day of August next, be currant for. ix. d. and not aboue, and the peece of siluer coine called the grote, should likewise after the same day be currant for. iii, d. and not a∣boue: His maiestie now vnderstandeth, vpon the aduertisement of his priuie Counsaill, that although his meaning was muche fauourable to his people, in the setting so long a daye, not minding that the sodynes therof should be ouer greuous: Yet neuerthelesse, the couetousnes of certeine kinde of people, is so insati∣able, that by the craft vsed in this behalf, the goodnes of his maiesty towardes his people, is muche a∣bused, by the excessiue raising of the prices of victual and other thinges, in the handes of Grasters, great Fermours, Merchauntes and suche like, that it appeareth now very nedefull, to shorten the former day. Wherefore his maiestie, with the good aduise of the Lordes, and others of his priuey counsail, doth or∣deine, determine and publish, his most royal pleasor to be, that the said peece of siluer coine, named the shilling, shall at and immediately, after this present proclamation published, be curtaunt, paide and re∣ceaued but onely for. ix. d. and not aboue. And likewise, the peece of siluer called the grote, shal at and im∣mediately after this proclamation published, be curtaunt, paide and receaued, for iii. d. and not aboue: Willing and straightly commaunding all maner of persones, so to receaue and pay the same, neither for more nor lesse, vpon like peines conteined in the former proclamation, any thing in the saied former pro∣clamation notwithstanding. At Grenewiche the of Iune. The fift yere of the reigne of the kinges maiestie. God saue the King. RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. LI. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
