8015.5 24350591 27553
¶ By the Queene. A proclamation to represse all piracies and depredations vpon the Seas FOrasmuch as it is come to the Queenes Maiesties vnderstanding, by meanes of certayne complaintes, aswell by her owne subiects as others, that there are sundry persons vpon the narowe Seas, of diuers nations, and some borne within her Maiesties dominions, hauyng shippes armed in warlike maner, who partly at the first went manifestly to the Seas in ma∣ner of marchaunts, and haue afterward by sinister meanes chaunged their trade, and armed themselues for the warre: some others haue secretly stollen out of obscure places, with a pretence in these troublesome tymes, that are seen aswell eastward betwixt the kingdome of Denmake and Sweden, and their adherentes, as westwarde in the dominions of Fraunce, both lamentable to behold, to serue on the Seas either on the on part or the other, and yet indeede haue at length directed themselues from all lefull seruice of warres, to lyue as pirats, robbing and spoylyng all maner of honest marchauntes of euery nation without difference, whom they are able to subdue. For remedy whereof, although her Maiestie hath of late tyme geuen certayne strayt orders through all her portes, that no maner of persons other then knowen marchauntes, shoulde be suffered to sell or distribute any maner of wares or marchaundises in any her portes, nor that any within her Realme should vittayle, or otherwise relieue any maner of person any wise to be suspected of piracie. Yet now vpon these new complaintes, her Maiestie finding that thereby hath followed no such full remedy as was looked for: for that purpose her Maiestie hath thought meet to deuise and publish by her proclamation some further effectuall remedy. And therefore doth straytly charge and command all maner her subiects, to forbeare from ayding or receauing of any pirate, or any person hauing not lefull aucthoritie from her Maiestie, or not being a knowen marchaunt, by contractyng, bying, sel∣lyng or exchaungyng, or by vittaylying of them or any of their company, whereby they or any of them shalbe the more enhabled to returne to the Seas to commit any piracie or disorder, vpon payne for so do∣ing to be punished presently, as the principall offendours and pirates ought to be. And furthermore, whoso∣euer shal hereafter arme or prepare any vessel to the sea, except it be such as shal by her Maiesties auctority, be specially appointed to kepe the Seas, as her Maiestie now is occasioned to do for some other respects, or such as shall haue expresse licence and permission by her Maiestie: the same shall geue knowledge to the of∣ficers of the portes of their whole furniture, who shall duely search and visite the same, to the intent to stay such persons as apparauntly shalbe so furnished for the warres, and not for marchaundise or fishing. And if there shalbe any maner of suspitition, that the said person though he shal pretende to trade for marchaun∣dise, or fishing, hath or may haue any intent by his prouisions or furniture, otherwise then to vse the trade of marchaundise, or fishing: that in such case of suspition, the officers of the ports shall stay, and no wise suf∣fer the same to passe to the Seas, without good bands by sufficient sureties first had, to vse nothing but a le∣ful trade of Marchaundise or fishing. And if the officers shall suffer any person otherwise to repaire to the Seas then aboue is mentioned, they shall not onely aunswere for any piracies which any such person shall chaunce thereafter to do vpon the Sea: but shall suffer imprisonment vntill the offenders may bee appre∣hended, if they shall be liuing. And generally her Maiestie declareth and denounceth all such pirates and rouers vpon the Seas to be out of her protection, and lefully to be by any person taken, punished, and sup∣pressed with extremitie. Geuen at her Maiesties Pallaice of Westminster, the xxvii. day of April, the xi. yeere of her Maiesties most noble xaigne. God saue the Queene. ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
