A1022 08038068 40751
THE OPERATOR For The TEETH: SHEWING How to Preserve the Teeth and Gums from all the Accidents they are subject to: With par∣ticular Directions for Childrens Teeth. As also the Description and Use of the POLICAN, Never Published before. By CHARLES ALLEN; Professor of the same. To which is Annexed A Physical Discourse, wherein the reasons of the Beating of the Pulse, or Pulsation of the Arteries, together with those of the circulation of the Blood, are mechanically Explained; which was never done before. By an Unknown Hand. DƲBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham for the Author, and are to be Sold by Robert Thornton Bookseller, at the Leather-Bottel in Skinner-Row, and by the Author at his own Lodging at Mr. Banister's at the Smiths-Arms in Essex-street.
IMPRIMATUR,  Christo P. D. Franc.  Dom.
TO THE MOST HONOURABLE AND TRULY LEARNED The Physitians, Chirurgions and Apothecaries Of the City of DUBLIN. GENTLEMEN, VVHen I see your INDEFATIGABLE Care in procuring men (that without which all the World is nothing) HEALTH, the PRIMARY cause, sole Foundation and Prop of Humane FELICITY; and how the experience of so many years manifests to all men, by the happy success of your Undertakings, and your great Charity to the Poor, that your private in∣tentions do correspond admirably well with your external actions; and that all your indeavours are real and unfeigned: I am perswaded, that whatever can in any wise contribute to the pro∣moting of your most Noble and Generous De∣sign, can't but be acceptable to you. Where∣fore having with the same passion, for the pub∣lick
Advantage, composed the following small Treatise, I take the liberty most humbly to pre∣sent it You; that (as You are the best JUDGES of the thing) so You may by Your Judicious and Impartial Censure of it, inform the World of its worth; that no person may be deceiv'd in it. For my intentions in publishing it, being to advance the common Good; if I thought it did contain any thing contrary to that DESIGN, I shou'd be the first that wou'd indeavour its suppression. But, GENTLEMEN, besides the foregoing reasons, which I had of offering You this first Essay of mine, I did it also to acquit my self in some measure of my Duty towards You; and to assure You further, that I am in all respects, GENTLEMEN, Your Most Humble, Most Obedient, And Most Obliged Servant CHARLES ALLEN.
THE OPERATOR FOR THE TEETH. The PROEM. KNowing that it is the duty of every man, and especially of su h as live under a Civil Government, (where the general Interest always includes the particular) to contribute as much as he can (in his own station) to the publick Good▪ and also of what Importance it is to all men to be informed of those Benefits which by my Art they may enjoy; I am resol∣ved to set down here what I think most convenient for every one to understand concerning the preservation, and melioration of his own Teeth; A thing indeed of little esteem among most people, but in truth, of inestimable value for its many and impor∣tant consequences. However, in so doing, I shall acquit my self of my duty towards God and Man: And provided my Indeavors prove but beneficial to others, (as certainly they will, if put in practice) it is all I desire, caring very little what opinion the Criticks of Words and artificial Logick may have of me. Of what Ʋtility this Ʋndertaking of mine may be to every body, will appear by the sequel of this Discourse; whereof the
scope is to prevent the loss of Teeth; the use of which is so necessary in the preparing of food, that the want of such a help (if not supplied by strong dissolvents) hinders a true concoction of the Aliments in the Stomach; whence do proceed Indi∣gestions, and abundance of Crudities very noxious to the body of man; as being the seed of most of those innumerable Diseases and Infirmities, whereby life is not only made trouble∣some to us, but also considerably shorter than it would otherwise be, which is so consonant to truth, that vulgar observation it self has turned it into a common Proverb: For they use to say of one whose Teeth are naturally thin, that he is short-lv'd, whereof the reason is, that such persons do not chew their meat well. Moreover, the loss of Teeth renders the pronounciation both troublesome to ones self, and unintelligible to others. In a word, the corruption, and want of them, is as great a defor∣mity, and of as much prejudice to one, as any thing whatsoever can be.
SECTION I. Of the Nature of the TEETH. WHat men are wont to call Science, or the Cog∣nition of any being, is by them commonly di∣vided into two several parts: one whereof is termed Theoretical, and the other Practical. The first includes the reasons and causes of things, with the order and manner of their progress in coming to be what they are. The second regards only their Properties and Effects, and what they are actually in themselves, without inquiring how they come to be so made, or thus qualify'd. As for example of those two branches of Humane Learning, (in respect to Physical matters) when Philosophers go about to inspect the nature of the Loadstone, they search into its Origine, tracing out the several causes of its Formation, even to their source or spring-head; from whence they draw arguments for the solution of all the Phenomena thereof; where∣as Mariners consider it only as a certain Stone that draws Iron to it self, having the power of communi∣cating its properties to the said Iron; and which, if not hindred (by its own gravity, or any other impe∣diment) will always turn one of its sides towards the North, and another diametrically opposite to the first towards the South; which sufficeth them for the use they make on't, in directing their courses through the Sea, without caring what may be the cause of so ad∣mirable
vertues in the Magnet. Either of which con∣stituent parts of Knowledge being separated from the other, cannot afford a full and satisfactory account of a thing: And therefore being about to treat of my Art, I should by consequence begin with its Theory, and discourse of the Elements, Principles, and first Rudi∣ments of the Teeth; which make the Subject thereof, unfolding the reasons of their constitution and frame, and how they come to have several Roots, and to grow above the Gums; with what ever else may be the cause of their specifical being; and thence pass to the Pra∣ctice. But some Considerations obliging me to defer treating of the former Part, or Theorick, till a better opportunity, I design only to lay down in this Paper some of the most principal Points relating to the other; namely, the Practical part of my Profession. In doing which, although it would be enough for us to speak of things, as in the state wherein we find them: yet for the satisfaction of the Reader, and out of a real desire to serve him; we shall not destitute our Discourse of such Reasons as are necessary for the well understand∣ing of what we shall say. So that although this Tra∣ctate will be imperfect, as wanting many things, yet what it shall contain, will be as useful and advanta∣geous as if it were accompanied with all the rest. However, according to the method we have prescri∣bed our selves here, we are to proceed next to the consideration of the Structure, and constitution or nature of the Tooth. In Analysing the Tooth, its substance is not found to
be uniform every where, but manifestly distinguish∣able into two different sorts of make: one of them being harder, whiter, and of a finer texture; and the other softer, more obscure, and of a courser compo∣sition. The first makes up the head of the Tooth, or that part of it that stands out naked above the Gums▪ and the other its stump, or that part on't which is hidden within the said Gums. The exposed part of the Tooth consists also of two different Parts: To wit, its stony Cover or Case, and its inward substance▪ the first is as it were an hard Periosteum, that invests the head of the Tooth on all sides, lying on it much after the same manner that Enamel does upon Gold, or any other thing. This natural Enamel which I call the gloss of the Tooth, is of a far harder, whiter, more dense and lucid nature than the inward sub∣stance lying under it: which for its several uses may properly be compared to the Cuticula, or Scarf-skin, for like unto this it is bloodless, and altogether de∣stitute of sense, serving to cover and defend the ex∣tremities of the Vessels, contained within the inward substance, from external injuries, and to render the Tooth more beautiful and strong. It has pores for the perspiration of the excrements of the Tooth, which pores are not always of the same figure, nor magni∣tude, but vary almost in every body. The said gloss or stony substance is likewise very various in point of thickness: from which differences, do arise the di∣versity of its colour in several men. The inward part of the head of the Tooth, though
inferior to its cover or gloss in brightness and solidi∣ty, yet its substance is nevertheless much more com∣pact, and clearer than that of the stump: and con∣tains two several sorts of pores, or small channels, both of a conical figure, having their Bases in the con∣cave superficies of the Tooth, and their Apexes in the convex superficies of the inward substance, immediately under its glassy integument. Through some of which channels the blood is carried by many and very small Arterial Sprigs, from the middle of the Tooth to its extremity: and through the others the same blood is sent back again from the said extremity towards its middle, by some capillary veins, as shall be said here∣after. As to the root or stump of the Tooth, it is the dark∣est, most soft, and porous portion of its whole sub∣stance; and yet is closer and harder than any other bone of the body, having also two sorts of channels, but of different situation from one another: for some of them have their Bases (like those above described) towards the cavity of the Tooth, and contain the branches of the Artery, that carry the blood quite through the substance of the Tooth, to the Gums, as shall be explained in its place; but the others con∣trary to any of those already mentioned, have their Bases towards the external superficies of the Tooth; the use of which last conduits, is to transmit to the Gums the blood that is returned to the heart from the membrane that invests the cavity of the Tooth. This rooty part of the Tooth consists in the small Teeth
of a single body, and in the big ones is divided into two, three, or four branches, called roots or fangs: a∣long the middle of each of these fangs, there is a little channel that goes up to the head of the Tooth, where they are united together, and make but a single ca∣vity, whereinto are carried the vessels of the Tooth, passing first through the hollowness of the stumps. Every Tooth has its particular cell or socket within the Mandible, distinct from all the rest (by a thin pro∣duction of the jaw-bone passing between the Teeth, from one side of the said bone to the other) wherein most of its stump is comprehended, the rest being in∣compassed about with the Gums. SECT. II. Of the Alteration of the Teeth, with their Remedies. FRom the consideration of the nature of the Teeth, let us now pass to that of the first step of their degenerating, or mutation. For the better understand∣ing of which, we shall take notice, that as our body is so made by nature, that it wasts continually by the dissipation of some Particles, separating themselves from its Mass, without intermission; (transpiring for the most part through the pores of the skin) and that if these particles (which being divided from the whole, become Excrementitious) are kept too long within the body, (by reason of the Opilation of the said pores) it causes Fevors, and great disorders in our blood, and vital as well as animal Functions: So likewise from
the substance of the Teeth are emitted certain Efflu∣viums through their pores, the transpiration of which being hindred, (by the obstruction of those invisible passages) the Teeth become liable to all those infirmi∣ties hereafter to be mentioned. The substance of the Tooth being rigid and inflex∣ible, it cannot be Opilated by contraction, or astriction: as the skin usually is but only by the intrusion of some extraneous matter into its pores, or the incrustation of some slimy stuff upon its superficies; which is done when we eat any thing of a glutinous nature, for then some of its most viscous parts do stick, and cleave a∣bout the Teeth; and by the mixture of some tartarious particles coming from the Lungs, the heat of the mouth, and a certain petrifick juice distilling into the mouth, out of the Salival Ducts, is turned into a stone-like substance, commonly called the scales or scurf of the Teeth: these scales grow thicker and thick∣er continually, and if let alone, will cover the Teeth all over, except just at the top were they grind one against another. Having thus taken notice of the production of those scales, let us now consider of what ill consequences they may be to the Teeth. The first whereof is the Opilation of their pores, from whence proceed all the rest: for by that the exit of those Excrementitious par∣ticles before mentitioned being hindred, it causes them to stagnate within the body of the Tooth, and there corrupting, do corrode it by degrees; beginning first by the alteration of its colour from white to yellow,
and from yellow to black; and then follows the real decay of its substance, &c. The said humor is not only destructive to the Teeth, but extends also its malignity to the Gums; some of its particles being subtil enough (after a due fermenta∣tion) to pass through the scales, and thence sliding be∣tween the Gums and the Teeth, they eat clear away the ligaments that tye them together, dividing them one from another to the very jaw-bone: which is suf∣ficiently proved by the excoriation and rawness of the Gums, and their being so tender and loose from the Teeth where ever such scales are found; and especially if they be grown to a considerable thickness. It happens sometimes that the usual passages of this corrupted humor being stopt by the scales, (when they are hard, and close enough) is thereby repercus∣sed, and made to take its course towards the middle of the Tooth, discharging it self therein between the Concave supersicies of the Tooth, and the Tunicle invest∣ing the same; where it occasions very great pains, and at last by its fretting, and corrosive quality, gnaws and consumes quite away the said membrane, as also the vessels of the Tooth; and then passing out of the said Tooth, it diffuses it self through the Alveolus or socket, where exerting its dangerous faculty, it destroys utter∣ly whatever causes any connexion between the Teeth, the jaw-bone and the Gums, as the Periosteum, &c. Af∣ter which the Teeth do consequently fall out for the most part sound, and unaltered, except only in their colour, (which becomes yellowish) by reason that the
aforesaid Excrementitious Humour being at first diver∣ted another way, did not stay long enough under the scales to occasion in them a greater detriment: All which incommodities to obviate, keep only your Teeth clean from scurf, or any foulness; and if they be al∣ready clean, you need but to preserve them as they are; but if not, get them to be made so by some Ar∣tist in that Function; for otherwise if you employ a∣ny body that is unskilful in it, you may chance to find the Remedy worse than the Disease; by reason that not knowing the dangers attending such an Opera∣tion, he may commit a great many and pernicious Er∣rors, as the breaking of the Film that unites the Gums to the Teeth, the taking away of the gloss of the Teeth, &c. Soon after which, the Tooth will lose its natural lustre, and become yellowish, subject to ake, and at last wholly perish away, the Gums being loose and broken, will likewise decay, and fall away from the Teeth, &c. Your Teeth being once clean, you may preserve them with this composition; Take Magistery of Pearls, Powder of Coral, and Dragons-Blood, of each equal quan∣tity, and as much Red-Rose-water as will incorporate them together; and make the Compound of a mean consistence, between hard and soft. I have to that ef∣fect a very excellent Dentifrice, which being used only once a week will keep the Teeth clean and white; and by the constant using of it, fetch up their colour, if lost; (tho in a considerable measure) this is the same that in my Bills (to keep my Masters term, tho improper,
as he well knows himself,) I call an Opiat▪ SECT. III. Of the Corruption of the Teeth, with their Remedies▪ Where∣to is Annexed the Description and Ʋse of the Polican. HAving in the former Section considered the Teeth, as at the beginning of their decay, in such a con∣dition as tho they suffer some light change in their accidents, yet their substance, form and proportion remaining still the same, is only called alteration; that is, in a state wherein indeed they are invironed, and assaulted by their greatest enemies, but yet in a capacity of being rescued and preserved from their harms. But now we shall consider them as overcome by all those threatning evils, and really corrupted; in which case, all that can be done, is to prevent their total ruine. And as there are some not so far gone, but that they may still do good service, if timely helped, we are to use our utmost indeavours to do it; which to effect, we shall in the first place clear their outside from all foulness, and then with a proper Instrument scrape off whatever is rotten within, washing them very well afterwards with some convenient liquid, to scour and smooth away what the Instrument may leave behind: and then if the Tooth be so hollow that it may be stopt, it must be fill'd up with such ingre∣dients as are neither corrosive, nor ill tasted, and of a consistence firm enough to be used in the same man∣ner
as the Teeth are, and to keep from wasting for a considerable time; but if the Tooth rots every way equally, so that there is no cavity left, wherein any thing can keep fast, it must only be kept clean, ta∣king care after every meal to pick out any meat that may get into it, and then wash it very well with fair water; for if you neglect so to do, the corruption of the rotten Tooth will fall upon the others, and so infect all the rest. With these precautions, I would advise every one to keep his Teeth as long as he can, although they were rotten to the very Gums, provided only they do not ake, by reason that their stumps filling up their sock∣ets, serve (like so many wedges) to keep the others streight and firm in their places; but if they are very bad, and withal subject to ake, it is better to have them out, lest they should occasion an ill habit in the Gums, that might be hurtful to the sound ones. The Drawing out of Teeth is practised by a great many, but perhaps understood but of very few; and I am sure that there is a great deal more danger in the Drawing of a Tooth, (especially out of the lower Jaw, than most people are commonly aware of. It is an Operation that requires to be performed with great care and circumspection, and not so rashly as it is commonly done. But as the greatest difficulty of this Business lies in understanding the make, and application of the In∣struments that are imploy'd about the Drawing of Teeth; I shall (for the benefit of Practitioners, as well
as of those that will be their Patients) subjoyn here, the description and use of the Polican; which is one of the best of them. The Description and Ʋse of the Polican. THe Construction, and usual shape of the Polican, is a thing so well known by every body, that it wou'd be needless to insist at all upon it. And there∣fore, without losing time in such superfluous Discour∣ses, we shall here take notice of some other things ap∣pertaining to the said Instrument, more material and useful: as the due proportion that its parts ought to have, considered in themselves, and in respect of each other. In the first place then, (supposing that you know the stuff wherewithal it must be made, which ought to be a tough steel, or steel and iron together) let the tree of the Polican be about four inches long, and so perforated, that the distance betwixt the centre of the hole (wherein goes the pin▪ upon which are fast∣ned the two branches) and one of the extremities, be a line greater than the other. Let one of the two bran∣ches be two lines longer than the other; let also each claw be three lines long. And finally, let the distance between the bolster, or semicircle of the longest side of the tree, be two lines. And you will have four di∣stances between the claws and the bolsters, which is sufficient to draw all sorts of Teeth. For with the first, which is of two lines, you may draw the Incisores▪
With the second, of three lines, you may draw the Ganini. With the third, of four lines, the Double and Treble Teeth. And with the fourth, of five lines, the Quadruple ones. Your Polican being thus made, if you have a mind to use it, you must so apply the Claw to the inside of the Tooth you intend to pull out, that its branch may stand exactly upon the middle of the said Tooth, gent∣ly leaning your Bolster upon the next to it, the better to take your measures; and then draw the Tooth out. But take heed you do not draw obliquely, but in a di∣rect line from the Tooth outwardly; for in drawing laterally, you might chance so to force the Tooth to be drawn, upon the next to it, that you wou'd draw them both together, or at least loosen very much the sound one, and put a far greater force upon the other in drawing it, than is necessary. Which wou'd occa∣sion an infinitely greater pain to the Patient, than if you had done it rightly. Thus much have I thought fit to tell you concern∣ing the nature and use of the Polican; which if you observe punctually, you need never fear the Draw∣ing well of any Tooth. As for the rest of the Instru∣ments now in use, with several others of my own In∣vention, I shall give you the particular Description, and use of every one of them in the next Impression of this Discourse; if you think this worthy of your acceptance▪
SECT. IV. Of the Restauration of the Teeth. WHen our decay'd Teeth are so far gone before we think of any Remedy for their preserva∣tion, that whatever we can do, proves but fruitless▪ And that notwithstanding all our best indeavours, they perish, and rot quite away; or that some into∣lerable pain has made us to draw them; we are not yet to despair, and esteem our selves toothless for all the rest of our life: the loss indeed is great, but not irreparable; there is still some help for it, the natu∣ral want may be supplied artificially, and herein Art imitates Nature so naifly, that when the succedaneous Teeth (if I may so speak) are well set in, they cannot be distinguished from the natural ones, (neither in colour, firmness, nor proportion) but by them that know of it. Being thus exactly fitted to their place, they will keep the next to them, and by consequence all the rest of that Jaw abundantly firmer and stron∣ger than they would otherwise be. The Advantages that may be attributed to the ar∣tificial Teeth, are many; as that they keep the others fast, as we said just now, that they are of a great orna∣ment, and help pronounciation extremely, &c. But all that is with a Proviso, that they be well made, and according to the best Art; for otherwise they might prove quite contrary. Besides this Artificial way of repairing the loss of
Teeth, there is another that may be called Natural; which is done by taking out the rotten Teeth or stumps, and putting in their places some sound ones, drawn immediately after out of some poor body's head: which thing (tho difficult) I know to be feasi∣ble enough, not only by my own reason that tells me so, but by experience it self, as (to say no more at pre∣sent) may be instanced in the case of a certain Lady, who thinking to have two Teeth growing one on the top of another, came one day to my Master to have one of them Drawn: my Master told her that they were not two distinct Teeth, but only a double one; but the La∣dy being not satisfied with this, desired him to take out the Tooth she had told him of, let it be what it would. The Tooth being drawn out, and proving as my Master had said, it was quickly set again into the Jaw; and with the use of some convenient and pro∣per Remedies, became in few weeks to be as firm again▪ as any of the rest. And yet although the event of this particular had not proved so prosperous as it did; its ill success would not destroy in me the possibility of such a transplant∣ing, or Inoculation of Teeth: (if I may be permitted to use such terms) that was not the only motive I had to believe it; and I have not inserted the Story of it here as an Argument to prove invincibly what I say, but only as a proper Example to render probable to others what I know to be true. However, I do not like that method of drawing Teeth out of some folks heads, to put them into others, both for its being too
inhumane, and attended with too many difficulties; and then neither could this be called the restaurati∣on of Teeth, since the reparation of one, is the ruine of another; it is only robbing of Peter to pay Paul. But if instead of humane Teeth, there is use made of those of some Brutes, as Dogs, Sheep, &c. In such case I do not only approve of it as lawful and facile, but do also esteem it as very profitable and advantageous; only care is to be had, that the thing be undertaken, and carried on by one that at least knows something of Anatomy, and has a right sense of the thing to be done, being furnished with whatever is necessary in an Operation of that nature. And that (if my Opinion may be any wise service∣able in such an Attempt) I may contribute something towards the improvement of so useful an Invention; I think one is, to proceed in it somewhat after this manner. First, I would chuse an Animal whose Teeth should come nearest to those of the Patient; as a Dog, a Sheep, a Goat, or a Baboon, &c. and having tied his legs together, I would fasten his head in some con∣venient place, so that he might not stir in the least, and by some proper means keep his mouth open as long as I should have occasion: that done, I would open the Gums round about the Tooth to be taken out of his head, not only to the very Jaw-bone, but as far between the said Bone and the Tooth, as the finest In∣strument could go, leaving a very little portion of the Gums about it; and then having used the same cir∣cumspection, in dividing the Patients Tooth from the
Gums, and the Jaw-bone, I would draw it forth, and put immediately in its place that of of the Brute; fastning it very well and streight between the other Teeth: and then with the use of suitable Remedies, I do not question in the least but that it would unite to the Gums and Jaw-bone, and in a little time be∣come as fast as any of the others: which performance might properly be termed the natural Restauration, or Renovation of Humane Teeth. SECT. V. Of the Tooth-ake, Looseness of the Teeth, and decay of the Gums; with their Remedies. THe Tooth-Ake is occasioned many and very dif∣ferent ways, but that I may render what I have to say upon it, as perspicuous and intelligible as I can; I think it very convenient we should take a special no∣tice of the vessels that come into the Tooth, and of their respective Functions. The first and chiefest whereof is an Artery, whose Office is to bring dire∣ctly from the heart that hot and spirituous blood, out of which (although it is not the general Opinion) the Tooth is at first made, (as well as the rest of the whole body) and ever after preserved and repaired by the supply of nourishment, and vital principles it af∣fords continually: To this effect the whole Artery divides it self into an infinity of small branches, which being disseminated throughout the whole substance of the Tooth, distribute to each part as much of their
blood as is necessary to make up the incessant loss they are subject to; and the rest is returned through innu∣merable hair-like veins into the great ones, and thence to the heart again, but in two different manners: for the superfluous part of that portion of the blood, that is carried by the Capillary Arteries to that part of the Tooth standing above the Gums, is sent back again through some Capillary veins towards the middle of the Tooth; where uniting together, they make but a single channel; and this is it we commonly call the vein of the Tooth, which we shall here take for its se∣cond vessel. But the remainder of the blood, that goes to the relief of that part of the Tooth that is within the Gums, passing quite through the substance of the Tooth, is carried by the Capillary veins to the veins of the Gums, Checks, and Lips; and hence it is that whatever pain is at any time occasioned in any of those parts, (either by bruise, excessive heat, or cold, &c.) comes to be soon after communicated to the Teeth. The Third and Last Vessel of the Teeth is a Nerve, one of the extremities whereof is ex∣panded through the Membrane that invests the cavity of the Tooth, and that, that contains its Vessels; and the other is rooted in the Brain, from whence it takes its Origine, and where the Animal Spi∣rits being elaborated, are thence sent by the Nerves to all the parts of the body, to administer sense, and the cause of motion to them, &c. although in some, (as the Teeth) the faculty of motion is not exercised.
From this consideration of the Vessels of the Tooth, we may gather the following reasons of its Dolour; As first, that if either through the too great quanti∣ty, or ebulition of the blood, the Artery is so dilated and swoln, that it fills up the hole at the end of the stumps where it enters the Tooth, and consequently so compresses the vein going out the same way, that the circulation of the Blood is thereby hindred; the continual flowing in of the blood will extremely puff up, and distend the membrane that contains the vessels, and consequently cause a great pain in the Tooth, which will last till either the preternatural state of the Blood be changed, or that the Arteriols which we have said to pass quite through the rooty part of the Tooth be so stretched and widened, that by them the Blood may be discharged into the Gums, Cheeks and Lips; where it will then cause a swelling, greater or lesser, according to the quantity of the superfluous Blood. And if at the beginning of this disorder, when the Vein is first impeded in its Function, the motion of the Blood is so rapid, and its influx into the Tooth so im∣petuous, that before it can make its way through the small Arterial Twigs into the Gums, it does extremely extend the coats of the Artery, the Interstices between their Fibres will thereby become wide enough to give passage to some of the thinnest parts of the Blood; which gathering at the end of the root, between the outside of the Artery, and the common Coat investing all the Vessels, will there putrifie, and cause a great and very lasting pain in the Tooth; during which,
if the Tooth be drawn, the said gathering will appear at the end of its stump like a little Bladder. You shall know this sort of Tooth-Ake by the high beating of your Pulse, the fulness of the Veins, and an often beating in the affected Tooth; with a continu∣al, tho not very extreme pain. And then for the Cure of it, you must first bleed the Gums, and sometimes open a Vein in the Arm also, and wash your mouth with Rose-water and Vinegar, of each equal quantities mixt together; putting a little Cotton dipt in Oyl of Box into the Tooth, if it be hollow. Furthermore, if that portion of the Blood, which is diffused through the substance of the Brain for the production of the Animal Spirits, is so depraved, that all the sifting it receives, through the hidden meanders, and recesses of the Brain cannot clear it from its im∣purities; and that notwithstanding all the contri∣vances of Nature it is deposited into the ventricles of the Brain, (tho under another form yet) still impreg∣nated with its ill qualities: such sort of Animal Spirits being compounded of Heterogeneous parts, if not time∣ly discharged of their malignant and offensive Cor∣puscles, (through the usual Emunctories) will either by their fermentation in the Ventricles of the Brain, cause an Head-ake; or by the oppilation of its pores, cause a giddiness; or else passing out of the Brain into the Nerves, will by their irregular motion, and preter∣natural extention of the coats of the Nerves, and other Tunicles, breed a disturbance in all the parts they go to; but more particularly in the Teeth, in which they
always excite very great pains. For discharging the peccant humour, between the membrane that invests the inside of the Tooth, and that that incloses its ves∣sels, it occasions a perpetual torment in them, till it be expelled from thence by transpiration. This second kind of Tooth-ake will be known by a disturbance in the head, which precedes it most com∣monly; a soreness in the joynts, and a certain drousi∣ness, and lingring pain all over the body, as if one were inclined to an Ague, with a sharp and very ex∣cessive pain in the distempered Tooth, which comes by fits, soon ceasing, and often beginning a-new. As for its Cure, it may be effected by Sternutation, the friction of the nape of the Neck with warm clothes, and the ap∣plication of aperitive Remedies, to open the pores of the Tooth: and if it be hollow, you shall put in't a drop of Oyl of Camphire, whereinto has been infused some Henbane-root. These are the two general causes of the Tooth-ake; all the rest proceeding from them, some few excepted. There is what I had a mind to say at this present concerning the Tooth-ake. But you must note fur∣ther, that as it is not enough for one that intends to travel a Countrey over, to understand the Map of that Countrey; but he must also inquire often of the people he meets with as he goes on his journey, for the way to such and such a place: so although I have given you a true account of the Tooth-ake, and have deli∣vered here the right method for the curing of it, yet that Disease is for the most part accompanied with
several circumstances, that can't be learnt but from experience it self. Thus sometimes the Gums will be livid, sometimes pale, and sometimes red, and inflamed. Sometimes the Tooth is loose, and risen above the others. And sometimes its root is discovered, and bare of flesh. Sometimes its rotten, and otherwhile sound, as to its substance. In fine, sometimes the pain is accom∣panied with a great fluxion of Rhume, and sometimes with a dryness of the mouth, &c. Each of which con∣comitants requires a particular consideration, and pe∣culiar Remedies: considering always these things, with reference to the age, constitution and habit of the Pa∣tient. Again, it is but rarely, that a Tooth-ake is found simple, or uncompound: (as we have supposed to be, those of which we have treated above) that is, occasioned by one cause only: but it proceeds most commonly from several; and especially if the pain be inveterate, or of a long standing. And then, the symptoms of this complicated Disease, are mixt in the same proportion as their causes; which renders the Cure much more dif∣ficult, and subject to more observations. And there∣fore, if any one has a mind to render himself perfect in these things, he must not only follow our method, that directs him to the true knowledge of them, but the dictates of his own senses also; by which he will avoid all the obstacles he may meet with by the way. Not∣withstanding all which, people being commonly un∣willing to undergo all the trouble attending a metho∣dical Cure, and withal apt to think, that one does them
no good at all, unless he gives them ease presently; I have been forced to abandon the Art in my practice, and to invent certain general Remedies; which never∣theless applying with circumspection, and as I think oc∣casion requires, hardly ever fail of producing the in∣tended effect: sometimes in an instant, but most com∣monly within less than half an hour. True it is, that were it not for my former practice, and long habit in those things, I neither cou'd have, nor expect so good a success. And yet I will not deny, but that the said remedies happen sometimes to operate a great deal slower than ordinary. But that comes to pass by reason of some unexpected, or unobserv'd accidents: and I think it ought to suffice, that the Cure be at last performed. Yet this does not satisfy every body. If the Re∣medy does not immediately Cure such as are Im∣patient or incapable of reasoning, they strait condemn it as a thing ineffectual, and altogether void of any Virtue. Upon which, believing the Stories of some impertinent (tho perhaps well affectioned) friend, they make use of such things, as commonly hinder the effect of the Remedy. And if it happens some∣times that notwithstanding those impediments, our remedy produces its effect; they never fail of attri∣buting the Cure to their own indeavours. However, I must ingenuously confess, that my Re∣medies do not take effect always. And that there are some sorts of Tooth-ake almost incurable, unless it be pulliatively; and that it self, not without a great
deal of trouble, and a tedious while. The reasons of which, I shall take occasion to explain some other time. The looseness of the Teeth, comes most commonly from the decay of the Gums, which are subject to many infimities, proceeding for the most part from those things that occasion the Tooth-ake, and putrefa∣ction of the Teeth; for sometimes there will be such an affluence of blood from the Teeth into the Gums, that their veins being not able to contain it, are there∣upon broken; shedding the blood between the Gums and the Teeth: where gathering together, it corrupts, rotting away all the flesh from about the Teeth: other∣whiles the excrementitious humour, that exsudates out of the Teeth, falling upon the Gums, eats them away by degrees, &c. But above all other things, the scales, and foulness of the Teeth are very prejudicial to them. All which infirmities to avoid, you need but to keep your Teeth and Gums neat and clean from any foul∣ness whatsoever; as has been already said in the fore∣going Sections: preventing any preternatural colle∣ction of Blood, or any other humours within the Gums. But if the mischief is already done, that is, if your Teeth be really loose, and your Gums wasted, you must have recourse for their recovery to one well versed in those things. For to prescribe you here any form of Remedies, would be to no purpose, since the same thing cannot be equally good in all cases, and that without the perfect knowledge of the cause of the Disease, and a right method in applying suitable Me∣dicaments, (which commonly is understood only by
Practitioners in those concerns) it is impossible ever to perform the Cure of any Distemper. Yet, that you may not think me remiss in any thing belonging to my Profession, that may concern your welfare; and by reason that you may chance to find your selves in a place where there will be no Artist to help you; I will here communicate to you a general Remedy against the decay of the Gums, and looseness of the Teeth; which I am sure, if you use carefully, will often answer your expectations: At least it will be such, that it shall always do you some good, and never any harm. But I must tell you before-hand, that if your body be Scorbutick, and full of ill humours, you must first be Blooded, and Purg'd, according to the di∣rections of a good Physitian: and then you may use the said Remedy as followeth. Take of Mastick, Myrrh, Pine-Apple, Dragons-blood, in drops, all reduced into Powder, of each equal quan∣tity, red Coral prepared, flowers of Pomgranats, of each double the quantity of the other Ingredients; and steep them all in a proportionable quantity of Spring-water upon warm Embers, for the space of a natural day; and then filtrate the Infusion through a woollen-cloth, and keep it close in some convenient vessel. And when you have a mind to use it, you shall take two or three spoonfuls on't a day, keeping it in your mouth a quar∣ter of an hour every time: which you must continue to do while necessity shall require it. I might have told you at the beginning of this Se∣ction, where I spoke of the vessels of the Teeth, that
their Artery comes from the Carotids; the vein  the Jugular, and the sinew from the fifth pair of Nerves: but if you are skilled in Anatomy, you know it better than I, and if not, my telling of it to you would signify nothing at all, unless I should in the same time, give you an accurate description of all those vessels; tracing them from their Origine, even to the very last of their Divisions, and furthest extremi∣ties; which would be improper in this place. SECT. VI. Of Childrens Teeth. HAving hitherto spoken of the Teeth in reference to adult persons, and such as are past childhood: we shall explain in this Section, as succinctly, and withal as clearly as we can, what is necessary to be known touching their growth, and change in chil∣dren; a thing of no small consequence, since the life of Infants is therein so often concern'd. The Child being born, remains Toothless, till he is about five or six Months old: at which time his two foremost Teeth in each Jaw begin to appear, without keeping any constant order of Precedence: sometimes those above coming out first, and sometimes those be∣low. After them follow all the rest successively in both Mandibles: so next to these come the four other Incisores, the four Canin or Dog-Teeth, and the first eight Molares, (which are properly the double Teeth) and then come the four biggest Teeth of all, which may be
called Quadruple Teeth, as being about three times big∣ger than the small ones: and after that the eight last Teeth do follow; which in respect to the Incisores may be termed treble Teeth. But these treble ones usually vary very much in time of growth, for it is but rare∣ly that they all come forth in the same year, the four last of them seldom coming out before the one or two and twentieth year of our age; for which reason such Teeth are called by some, Teeth of Wisdom; because that by that time, we should have a full use of our rational Faculty, though God knows how often it proves to be true. The eight Incisores, and the four Dog-Teeth come the first year; the eight double Teeth the second▪ year; and the four Quadruples, with the four first Treble ones, the third. During the time of their eruption, and especially when the four Quadruple ones break forth out of their Sockets, children are subject to Fevers, and great alterations, which weakens them extreme∣ly, and often puts an end to their days; which comes to pass most commonly, for want of help to facilitate their issue out of the Gums. And as I look upon the knowledge of Childrens Teeth, as a subject properly belonging to my Profes∣sion; so I think my self oblig'd to amend, amplifie, and render it as conducive to the preservation of the life, and health of Children, and to the preventing of all those Infirmities wherewith they are afflicted, (upon the account of the first coming, and shedding of their Teeth) as my weak indeavours can make it.
And therefore I will to that end deliver here in few words, what reason and experience have taught me concerning the same; Proceeding thus, In the first place, I would advise such as may be concerned in this Affair, to take a special care in ob∣serving when the Child's Teeth begin to trouble him: which (besides his frowardness, and excessive crying) may be known by his salivation or drivelling (as Nur∣ses are wont to stile it,) and the inflammation and swelling of his Gums; and as soon as you perceive it to be so, you are to wash his mouth now and then with the following mixture: Take seven or eight as new Figs as you can get, and boyl them in a pint or more of Whey, till they grow very soft, and then squeeze the Whey, and as much of the substance of the Figs as you can through a cloth; of which liquor take half a pint; of Honey of Roses, and Syrup of Violets, of each half an ounce; and three or four spoonfuls of Plantain-water: mix all together, and keep it close in a Bottel. The best way to use it, is with a stick of Liquorish beaten at one end into small threads like a Comb-brush, or little Broom, with which, being dipt in some of the said Liquor, you shall wash and rub the Childs Gums, (especially where they are tumified) at least five or six times a day, continuing so to do, till you perceive the Gums to grow white above the Tooth: (which is a sign of great pain in that part, and that the young Tooth will in a little time break through the Gums) and then take a Lancet, or a very sharp Pen-knife, and divide the white place, cutting it
down to the head of the subjacent Tooth, with two Incisions crossing one another at the centre of the white spot, continuing to use the mixture as is aforesaid, till the Tooth appears above the Gums; observing to use the same method at the coming out of every Tooth, which you may know by the foregoing tokens. Now the Teeth being all come out (except only such as remain latent within the Jaw, till about the two and twentieth year of ones age) they keep firm and strong till the child is a matter of six or seven years old, and then most of them grow loose, and a while after are cast clear out. The treble Teeth never change, the Quadruples very rarely, but the Incisores, the Dog-Teeth, and the double ones always do; sometimes whole, (and then the second Teeth, or those that are to succeed them, are a long time before they grow up again;) but most commonly their head only comes off, the other part remaining still for the making up of the next Tooth; like unto the first production of a Vegetable Seed, or tender Sprig of a young Plant; for as the up∣per part of this being withered in the Winter follow∣ing, by the rigorous cold of that Season, drops off in the next Spring: (by reason that its texture being yet loose, and less firm, the pores or sap carrying vessels, are over much dilated by the great affluence of the nutritive juice, and so give admittance to some indige∣sted and grosser particles than is convenient for the nourishment of the Vegetable: which particles being irregular, and unactive, their motion is soon stopt; when-as a great cold intervening, compresses a little
the young Plant round about, so that they are con∣geal'd, and become fixt in their Ducts, or leading pipes, whereby that part being deprived of its due nourish∣ment, fades away, and dries up,) and is succeeded by a new Sprout shooting out of the stump, or remain∣ing part. So likewise the young Teeth coming into the cold air, when they are yet tender, and less solid: those of them that are more susceptible of alteration, and more exposed to the inclemency of the weather; (as must be those before, which by reason of their smal∣ness and situation, cannot but be more subject to ad∣ventitious accidents,) are thereby chill'd and repressed, and their parts thrust near one another, and driven back towards their centre, from whence the substance of the Tooth becoming closer, and the intervals between its parts narrower, and interrupted in several places, by the irregular motion of some of the minutest of those parts, (which by reason of their unstableness, and fluxibility, being disposed to advance and obey the action of external Agents more than the others, do move disorderly, and spoil the structure of the rest:) the small Veins and Arteries therein dispersed, will become so extremely compressed, that the bloud they contain (which in Children is most commonly gross and impure, as is apparent by their stupidity, and fil∣thy scabs; as well as by that Feverish disposition they are always inclined to; which argues a great dispa∣rity between the parts of their bloud,) is thereby stopt in its course, and detained in them; where the gross∣ness of its parts, and their incumbring figures will
soon dispose them to rest, and remain intangled and coagulated together. If you chance to reflect upon what I say, when I ascribe the great agitation of Childrens Bloud, and its being quiet and fixt in their Teeth, to the same cause, viz. its foulness, and the incongruity of its parts; you will perhaps be as angry with me, as the Satyr was a∣gainst the Traveller of the Fables, for his blowing hot and cold with the same breath. But if you consider it a little more attentively, you shall find that this, as well as the said Apologue, may easily be reconciled with Reason. Furthermore, the Bloud coming from the live part of the Tooth, to enter the other; and being hindred thereof by the narrowness of the passages, and the re∣sistance of the condensed bloud, is upon that necessa∣rily determined to imploy the force of its motion round about, against the parts lying immediately be∣tween the dead portion of the Tooth, and that which is alive; the which it consequently loosens by degrees, and at last breaks them all asunder; separating thus the live body of the Tooth quite from its dead head; and the space left between them permitting the trunk to grow, it shoots a new head; which rising above the Gums, thrusts out the old one, becoming a perfect Tooth in its room. But if in the mean while, through the too great adherence of the dead part to the Gums, the other is depressed, or retarded from growing, and by conse∣quence is detained under the former too long; some
of the broken particles remaining between them▪ will corrode, and eat holes in the new head of the Tooth, and so it comes out already perished: which to pre∣vent, the first Teeth must be drawn out as soon as they appear any thing loose. Moreover, it happens sometimes, that the new head of the Tooth is nourished, and increases so fast, that being obstructed by the too great connexion of the old one, to the adjacent parts, from advancing in its right course; it turns aside, and makes its way through either the inside, or outside of the Gums; and so it grows biassing, and out of rank. This defect is remedied by drawing out the superfluous Tooth, and the use of some convenient means to bring the new Tooth into its place; which is very easy to do, if un∣dertaken at first, but otherwise a great deal more dif∣ficult; and especially if the two next Teeth are ap∣proached so near one another, that it cannot be con∣tained between them, without being lessened, or the others put further off from each other. Note, That in drawing out the old, or sucking Tooth, a great care is to be taken not to hurt the new one, lying under it. SECT. VII. Of the Acceleration of the Teeth. THe five first of the foregoing Sections have been imploy'd about mens Teeth, and the sixth about those of Children: but this seventh and last Section
of our Discourse shall respect both men and children; for it will not only teach how to hasten the growth of Childrens second Teeth, when it happens to be de∣lay'd, or retarded too long; but also how to Accelerate the coming out of those in Men, that are called Teeth of Wisdom. Which last, without the help of Art, hardly ever appear before almost half of our life is al∣ready past away; And when the time of our growth is over: during which, we have the greatest occasion for them. But because the bare saying or asserting of any thing without proofs, or some reasons to render it probable, has no force to perswade any man of its truth, nor to make him sensible of what utility it is of; We will elucidate the matter in hand, by an ex∣ample drown from the motion of Seeds sown in the Earth. Now the quick or slow germinating of Seeds after they have been sown, depends upon their being buried shallow, or deep in the ground; the lightsom∣ness or heaviness of the Earth, and its good or ill ma∣nuring, and the proportion of humidity that dilutes it, as well as the heat or coldness of the season: the se∣veral proportions of either of which accidents, alter and vary the progress of the Seed, according to their prevalency in respect of each other. For in a well prepar'd Soil, being cherished by the warmth of the Sun, and duly diluted with water, the Seed will budd a great deal sooner; the lightsome Earth easily yielding to the expansion of the Semen, when it imbibes that Succus Nutritious, which Transcolating through the coats of the Seed, and impregnating its
Parenchyma, causes by its fermentation therein, a gentle shake, and a vital motion in the Radicle, and Plume; (as the Learned Doctor Grer calls the Seminal Root, and Trunck of a Plant in Embryo) whereby they are impow∣red to Extricate themselves out of their Integuments, and Parenchyma; and begin to vegetate, and grow like a Plant. But the Seed being buried deep in a cold, cloggy earth; will, by the stubborn Cohesion, and lumpishness of the said earth, be kept from dilating it self, and con∣sequently from receiving those particles that are alto∣gether necessary for its vivifying, and augmentation. From whence it follows, that its growth (if not hel∣ped by Art) will be check'd, and obstructed till the heat of the Sun has opened the ground, and set its particles in such motion as they ought to be, to enter the Seed, and protrude the earth upwards. So likewise Childrens Gums, being yet tender, shal∣low, and loose, and withal prepar'd, as we have taught heretofore in its place, their first Teeth come out, and grow very easily; as also do their second, if in shed∣ding of the first, their heads only come off; for the others do grow up so soon, that the Gums have hard∣ly any time to close up again. But if the sucking-Teeth do shed root and all, the matter out of which the next (which I call Novel-Teeth) are to be made, will not only be a considerable time in disposing it self into the requisite form, but when the first linea∣ments are drawn, and Nature has accomplished her first work, the Gums will be re-united together, and
grown so hard by that time, that their resistance will oppose it self to the growth of these Teeth, till a stron∣ger nourishment produces more and hotter Bloud, and a greater quantity of Animal Spirits; by which the Gums being made hotter, and more spungy, and the nutritive juice increased, the issue of the said Teeth will then be facilitated, and their growth perfected. To the consideration of these Novel-Teeth, may part∣ly be referred that of the last treble ones, or dentes sa∣pientiae. It's true, these are stay'd a great deal longer under the Gums than the others; but also they have more causes that impede their growth. For, besides that, the Gums are more sinewy, and membranous about them than any where else, and therefore much more difficult to penetrate: That part of the Jaw-bone that contains them, is likewise much thicker, and stron∣ger than any other; and consequently, harder to be divided by the included Teeth; which being inca∣pable of making their way through it, are forced to stay therein till such time that Nature having per∣fected our growth, the bloud becomes hotter, stronger, and its energy more powerful by the firmness of the Heart, (which is the Sun of our Microcosm, or little∣world) and other principal parts, and increase of those particles that were wont to be imployed in making up, and augmenting the body; most of which remain then in the mass of the Bloud: whereby the said bloud, being able to surmount the resistance of the Jaw and Gums, forces the said Teeth to come out of their cells, and grow up.
To the efficacy of this new strength of the Bloud upon the arrival of Nature to its highest Period, may be attributed the causes of those alterations that usu∣ally happen in mens bodies about that time: many looking pale, and being troubled with divers infirmi∣ties till then, of which they are afterwards delivered. But leaving off Digressions, let us return to our Sub∣ject. We have already observed, that the Novel-Teeth in Children, and Dentes Supientiae in Men, cou'd not ar∣rive to their perfection, nor therefore become ser∣viceable to us without a long time, and a great Effort of Nature. It remains now, that (pursuant to our design, as we have declar'd it at the beginning of this Section) we indeavor to find out some means, where∣by we may remedy those defects; in facilitating Na∣ture's work, and rendring those tardy Teeth above∣mentioned, serviceable to us as soon as we can. And as I find none more proper and expeditious, than the Rarifaction, and Dilatation of the Gums, so that they may lose their greatest stubbornness, and become more yielding to the Teeth: I conclude that all the difficul∣ty lies in knowing how such an effect can be produ∣ced: which (after a due consideration) I think may be performed after this manner. In the first place, there is need of an Instrument made of Gold, or Silver, about a foot long, as big as a Tobacco-pipe, and like a Syringe; being so bored, that a perfectly Cilindrical embolus, or sucker, may fill ex∣actly nine inches of its Cavity; the rest being made a good
deal smaller, and bow'd like the Blowing-pipe of Watch-makers; which ought to end into an head re∣sembling the cup of an Acorn; and so contriv'd, that it may imbrace the Gums exactly. Your Instrument being ready, if you have a mind to perform the Ope∣ration, you must in the next place (concerning the Dentes Sapientiae) tie all the Teeth together, (which may be done without any trouble) so that the two fore∣most of them may draw the last of all towards the fore-part of the mouth. By this the included Teeth will be freed from being compressed between the others, and the extremity of the Jaw-bone. And then the Gums being prepar'd by Emollients, and relaxing things, apply the end of your Syringe close upon the Gums, under which the imperfect Tooth lies; and then draw the Embolus, and the top of the Gums will follow, and rise within the little Acorn-cup-like end of the Pipe, as the flesh usually doth under Cupping-Glasses. Keep it a while so, and then take away the Syringe, and sca∣rifie that part of the Gums that was drawn within the Pipe, in several places; reiterating the same Operation twice a day, for about a fortnight, omitting only the Scarification, which is to be used the first time only. By this means it appears probable to me, that the Gums yielding, the force of the Blood will compel the fibres or minute parts of the imperfect Tooth, to advance according to their natural order, and situation; and so cause the said Tooth to grow. As to the Novel-Teeth, you shall follow the same method, and use the same means in facilitating their
coming out, that you have done to the others; omit∣ting only the tying of the Teeth, which would be superfluous here. Note, that every thing is not capable of the same perfection, and that as there is no rule without some exception; so when I have asserted such and such things to be improvable to such a degree, it is to be understood for the most part, and in general; not denying but that it may happen otherwise in some particular cases: but I shall always deal candidly with every body, never undertaking any thing but what I shall be able to do according to agreement. And if any one will be pleased to come to my Cham∣ber, he may have my Advice (concerning any thing that belongs to my Profession) gratis at any time.
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READERS. GENTLEMEN, ALthough I have offered nothing in this Paper, but what is according to my own Experience, and the best of my knowledge; yet I will not say but that I have been deficient in many things, and have committed a great many Errors in the management of my Subject; but if you consider that I am the first (as far as I know) that ever wrote any thing of this nature; and withal, what is to be expected from one in my Circumstances, I hope you will be the more ready to excuse my faults. However, if what I have done be acceptable to you, I intend in a second Impression of this small Treatise, to Correct, Illustrate, and augment it, to its full proportion. In the mean while I would advise you, to make use of what is here pre∣sented you, by Your very Humble Servant, CHARLES ALLEN. Printed in the Year 1686.
A Physical Discourse WHEREIN The Reasons of the Beating of the PULSE, or Pulsation of the Arteries; Together with those of the Circulation of the Bloud, are Mechanically Ex∣plain'd: Which was never done before. THe Beating of the Pulse being one of those Phe∣nomena, that deserve mans consideration the best, it has excited the most Learned in all Ages to search out what might be the cause of it. The best Physitians and greatest Philosophers of former times, being ignorant of the Circulation of the Bloud, did ascribe it to their occult qualities, and unknown powers. Galen, an Eminent Physitian, searching the natural cause of the Beating of the Pulse, thought upon the making of that famous Experiment of his; by which, having put a Quill into an Artery, and tied the Artery upon it, he found that the said Artery ceased from beating betwixt the ligature and the extremity, tho it continued still beating betwixt the same ligature and the heart: And then seeing also, that the Artery
being untied from about the Quill, the Pulse would immediately pass beyond the place where the liga∣ture had been made, and beat all along the Artery; altho the capacity of the Quill remained still the same, he concluded, that the Pulse was caused by a Pulsisick faculty residing in the coats of the Artery. Gassendus, a Modern and most Learned Philosopher, attributed the said effect, to the Pulsifick Faculty of the heart; which, in his opinion, communicates it self to the Arteries. Both which opinions (altho propos'd by extraordinary men, yet) are so inconsiderable, that they need no refutation. The most Learned and most Profound Cartesius was of opinion, that the Beating of the Pulse proceeded from the motion of the Bloud, which coming out of the lest Ventricle of the Heart into the Aorta, in a tumultuous manner, extends it self forcibly, and thereby drives all the mass of the Bloud, from the heart to the heart a∣gain, according to the Circulation of the Bloud. After which this great Man (who would always give natu∣ral and intelligible reasons for every thing, as he has done for most;) coming (at the instigation of a Physitian of Louvaine) to examine Galen's Experiment, he attributed the cessation of the Pulse, that happens be∣low the ligature, to the narrowness of the passage of the Bloud through the Quill; which Bloud, according to the principles of the Philotopher, coming out of the said Quill into a wider space, cannot communi∣cate its action to the sides of the Artery, but is disposed to imploy the force of its motion forwards, according to the length of the Artery.
But the said Physitian alledging against this, that if one takes an Artery without Quill, or any Incision, and ties its sides so close together, that there be left a far smaller passage for the Bloud in that place, than in the Quill; the Artery will nevertheless continue still to Beat on both sides of the ligature, as it did before: (the contrary of which wou'd necessarily follow▪ if it were so, that the straitness of the passage of the Bloud did occasion the loss of the Pulse) Cartesius was here forced to recede somewhat from his former Sentiment, and to confess, that the motion of the Arteries depends partly upon the free continuation of their coats; which totally overthrows his opinion. For, let the power of the said continuation be what it will; supposing, as the Philosopher did, that its action may be stopt by the compression of the sides of the Artery: It is certain, that altho the Quill in the Artery were of equal, or, if you will, greater capacity than the Artery; yet if the said Artery were tied upon it, the Pulse would, notwith∣standing all that, cease below the ligature. But Car∣tesius said, that such a Quill as that we were speak∣ing of just now, being in an Artery either tied, or un∣tied; wou'd never hinder any part of the Artery from Beating: And therefore, &c. Doctor Lower says, after many Disquisitions on this Subject, that the knowledge of those things was left to God alone. Doctor Willis ascribes the Beating of the Pulse to the contraction of the circular Fibres of the muscular coat of the Artery: But it is absurd to think so; for its impos∣sible
to imagine that those Fibres cou'd contract them∣selves of their own accord; neither does the Doctor give any reason for what he says. Besides, he's incon∣sistent with himself, when he ascribes the same mo∣tions to the circular Fibres of the muscular coat of the veins; which are notwithstanding wholly destitute of any Pulsation, &c. All which considering, and how these and other great men had (through the difficulty of the thing, and not out of any insufficiency in them) fallen into so gross and so erroneous opinions concerning the Point in Question; I concluded, that it was as good as impossible ever to solve the difficulty. Yet, recolle∣cting my self, and seeing that the said Effect must have a cause, whatever it be, which probably cannot reside any where else, but either in the Heart, Bloud, or coats of the Artery; or finally, in them all together; I made a resolution to examine carefully each one of these things separately, as possibly containing alone the cause sought after; and then all together, as be∣ing possibly Coadjutors in the production of the known Effect. And after as exact an Inquiry into the matter as I am capable of, my Reasons (which wou'd be too tedious to tell you now) perswade me, that all the Mystery consists in the three following things. The First is, the Structure of the Artery; which is made up of four Coats. (We shall examine in another place how they are generated at first) The first of them, which contains the Bloud immediately, seems to be nervous, and made of strait Fibres; which take
their Origine from the heart; or rather are a continu∣ation of those that immediately invest the cavity of the heart. As soon as they are arriv'd at the orifice of the heart, they rank themselves by one another; form∣ing a certain Cartilagineous Ring; from the circum∣ference of which, they run almost parallel along the Artery; but yet with such an inclination towards one another, that going from the heart to the extreme parts, they form a kind of Cone; (for that we may render our Discourse more intelligible; we shall con∣sider here one of the trunks of the great Artery, (sup∣pose the ascending one,) as a continued right Conical Pipe, abstracting from all its divisions and branches; to every one of which may easily be apply'd, what we are going to say of one of them,) a little below the Apex of which, those Fibres unite themselves together; and do compose a little tendinous ring, called Anastomo∣sis: to which is affix'd the extremity of the vena cava: which vein we shall suppose here to be a single coni∣cal channel, or pipe, disposed, as we have taken the Artery to be. Within this Anastomosis there is a little Valve so dispos'd, that it permits the bloud to pass from the Artery into the vein, but hinders it from returning back again from the vein into the Artery. Between every one of those nervous Fibres, there is a thin mem∣brane that joyns them together; (as the skin in a Goose's∣foot ties its toes to one another,) which permits the said Fibres to open, and go further from one another, when the Artery is dilated: And which do continually increase in breath, as they go from the Anastomosis to
the basis of the Artery: so that they become so conspi∣cuous near the heart, that Doctor Willis took them for some large fleshy Fibres; to which he assign'd the fa∣culty of shortning the Artery, in order to promote the circulation of the Bloud. The second coat is the Mus∣cular, and the third the Glandulous: but the considera∣tion of these middle coats, being not necessary to our present purpose, we shall speak of them another time. As to the fourth, or outmost Coat, it is that which we have most need to take notice of here; as being the principal Instrument of the Systole and Diastole of the Artery. This Coat is made up of two orders, or ranks of spiral Fibres; which proceed from the oblique Fibres of the heart; from whence they go twisting and wind∣ing themselves about the body of the Artery, as Ivy does about Trees; some running upon it from the left to the right, and the others from the right to the left; intersecting thus one another obliquely, as they go from the heart to the anastomosis; whereby they form a sort of Net, or Sieve-like-woof upon the outside of the Artery. At their coming out of the heart, they are knitted together by a cartilagineous substance, that incompasses the root of the Artery round about, as an iron-ring does the end of a handle: from the circumference of which cartilagineous Ring, they run Helix-wise upon the superficies of the artery: at the ex∣tremity of which, being arriv'd, they insert themselves into the tendinous small ring, or anastomosis. These spiral Fibres are tied so loosely on the body of the ar∣tery, and so slightly between themselves, at the places
where they intersect one another, that they may run very easily to and fro upon the artery. The second thing conducive to the production of those stated turns of Systole's and Diastole's of the artery, is, that the bloud contains a certain subtil matter, or vital spirit, which can move it self, and pass between its parts very easily. And in fine, that the bloud coming out of the heart (where it acquires an ex∣treme agitation) into the arteria magna, expands it self with great violence, and strongly dilates that part of the said artery that lies contiguous to the heart, (forcing in the same time the bloud to advance from the heart towards the extremity,) whereby the spiral Fibres be∣ing necessarily drawn towards the dilating place, do compress the artery round about all along, & so squeeze the subtil matter, from between the parts of the com∣pressed bloud, into that which is not; forcing it thus to pass from the extremity towards the heart, which makes the ebbing or systole of the artery. And then the spiral Fibres having been extended violently, and on a sudden, upon the dilatation of the artery, do (by the Elastick faculty of some of their parts) come back a∣gain, and restitute themselves into their former situa∣tion, and state; forcing thereby the subtil matter to fly through the bloud, from the dilated place of the great Artery, towards the extremity of the capillary ones, &c. which makes the flowing or Diastole of the Ar∣tery.
THE EXPLICATION. WE have already supposed the Artery to be of a right Conical figure; let us further, for greater evidence, imagine it to be mentally divided into four parts of equal capacity: so that as much as the first shall exceed the second in bredth, the second will ex∣ceed the first in length, &c. Let besides, the places of the suppos'd divisions be marked with several letters, as A, B, C, and let A, denote the first division; (proceed∣ing from the heart to the extremity;) B, the second; and C, the third: let us also mark the Basis of the Cylindrical artery, which is inserted into the basis of the heart, by X; and its capillary end inserted into the cir∣cumference of the annular anastomosis, by Y. And now, suppose that a certain portion of bloud, as a dram for example, passes out of the heart into the aorta, where it swells, and dilates it self very con∣siderably, (by reason of a very intense degree of heat, it acquires in the ventricles of the heart; and of its being mixed therein with a certain leaven, or fer∣mentative juice, (it being the residue of that portion of bloud, that had past immediately before through the heart,) which necessarily causes a great commotion and strife amongst its parts;) it must follow according to true Philosophy, that the said portion of bloud coming out of the heart, does in the same time thrust the bloud already in the artery, forwards, and dilates that part of the artery that lies contiguous to the heart.
It thrusts the bloud, I say, towards the extremity; be∣cause that it must occupy a space in the artery equal to its natural bulk, neither greater nor smaller; by reason that a like quantity of the bloud to that, that comes out of the heart into the artery, is poured out of the vein into the heart; so that there is only room left in the vein to admit just as much bloud, as comes out of the heart at each Diastole. And if we suppose the space X A, to contain a dram of bloud, (whether more, or less, makes no matter here) as we have also sup∣posed, that the same quantity comes out of the heart at every Diastole, (or Systole, as some would have it) it is an invincible truth, that this bloud coming out of the heart, must exactly occupy the space X A; and that therefore, it thrusts in the same time, the bloud that occupied it before, into the space A B; that in A B, into the space B C; that in the space B C, into the space C Y; and that in C Y, into the capillary end of the vein, &c. And altho (according to our Hypothesis) the passage from the artery into the vein be much smaller, than that of the heart into the artery; yet if the mo∣tion of the bloud through the anastomosis, is to the mo∣tion of the bloud at the orifice of the heart, as the ori∣fice of the heart is to the anastomosis; that is, as X is to Y, (as it may easily be so, altho it is naturally otherwise: the rest of the anastomoses, from which we have abstra∣cted here, being together at least as capacious, as the orifice of the heart,) it is plain, that a dram of bloud will as soon pass from the artery into the vein, as ano∣ther shall from the heart into the artery.
And as the bloud coming out of the heart into the great artery, cannot possibly occupy a greater space, than such as is adequate to its volume in a condensed state; and that nevertheless it dilates it self, it must ne∣cessarily extend and dilate X A, the part of the artery that contains it, as much beyond its natural tone, or reach, as the rarefaction of the bloud increases its vo∣lume; which cannot come to pass, but these two things must necessarily follow. First, that when the bloud dilates it self, it leaves some intervals between its parts; which intervals (because there is no vacuum in nature) must in the same time be filled up with some other fluid matter: (which ought to be thinner than the bloud; for otherwise it cou'd not pass between its parts.) And as this subtil matter can't come from the heart, because that then it's empty; and that be∣sides its orifice is shut close by its three valves; it can neither come through the coats of the artery, by reason of their thickness, and close texture; neither is there any such matter about them. It remains then only, that it must come from the bloud contained in the artery. Secondly, that the spiral Fibres must be drawn to∣wards the dilated place, and the rest of the artery made as much narrower than ordinary, as X A, becomes wider than it uses to be. Whereby the artery being com∣pressed round about, the vital spirit is squeezed from between the compressed parts of the bloud, and forced to advance towards the dilated place; in such man∣ner, that as much of the spirit, as is necessary to fill
up the spaces left between the parts of the dilated bloud, is sent thither from between the parts of that, which is compressed; the remnant of the spirit being equally distributed through the rest of the artery; so that if every one of the four parts, or divisions of the artery, contains a certain quantity of vital spirit, distin∣guished into three parts, and that three of those parts, do pass from A B, into X A, two of them will in the same instant pass from B C, into A B; and one from C Y, into B C; in which action consists the ebbing, or systole of the artery. And as a rope, (or more sensibly, a gut-string) which is fixed to any place, being pulled with a jerk, will draw back again him that drew it at first; so likewise the spiral Fibres being extended vio∣lently, and on a sudden, upon the dilatation of the ar∣tery, do come back again instantaneously, (by reason that some of the parts of each Fibre, being strongly thru∣sted towards its middle, and somewhat bent from its circumference towards its centre, do presently spring back again, extending themselves according to the bredth of the Fibre; whereby the said Fibre is necessa∣rily as much shortned, as it had been stretch'd before) and restitute themselves into their former situation & tone; (which they are facilitated to do by the exte∣nuation of that extraordinary agitation of the bloud; which it communicates in an instant to the yielding sides of the artery) forcing thereby three parts of the vital spirit, or subtil matter, to repass from X A, to A B; and the two parts, that were already in A B, to pass into B C; from whence another will pass into C Y, &c.
which makes the flowing, or Diastole of the artery. I foresee an Objection, that some may make against what we have said, that that portion of the bloud, that comes out of the heart in its Diastole, is dilated, and yet occupies no more of the artery, than if it were condensed; only that part of the artery which con∣tains it, is a little more extended than the rest: for, they will say, this supposes, that both the artery and the vein are always full of bloud; being certain, that if the bloud, in coming out of the heart into the great artery, did find there any empty space, where it might expand it self freely, it would start forwards into it, and then it wou'd not dilate the artery, nor by conse∣quence draw the spiral Fibres; and therefore there wou'd neither be Systole nor Diastole in the artery: But it is most certain, they will continue, that men have sometimes more, and sometimes less bloud in their bodies: and that if a man has, for example, fifteen oun∣ces of bloud drawn, it will follow; that there being a vacuity in the Sanguiducts, till the same quantity of bloud be regenerated a-new, the Beating of the Pulse must also cease till then; which being contradicted by daily experience, they will conclude, that the motion of the spiral Fibres, with whatever else we have taught concerning the Beating of the Pulse, is altogether chime∣rical. To which I answer in few words, that for the Beating of the Pulse, and Circulation of the Bloud, it matters not at all, whether or no, the artery and vein be quite full of bloud; since that as the bloud decrea∣ses in them, the muscles of the limbs, and other ad∣jacent
parts, do proportionably compress them round about; so that their internal superficies touches the bloud continually every way; which has the same effect, as if the artery and vein were exactly full of bloud: for the bloud coming out of the heart, and finding as much difficulty in lifting up the adjacent parts, as to drive on the bloud of the artery and vein, when they are full on't; it's forced to keep the same order and method in that case, as it does in this, con∣cerning its dilatation and place in the artery. Now, these being the true and genuine reasons of the Diastole, and Systole of the arteries, it's very easy thereby to explain all the Phenomena relating to Galen's experiment. For the Quill being put into the artery, and left there without being tied, the artery will ne∣vertheless beat still above and below the Quill, as it did before; because that the spiral Fibres can still play to and fro from one end of the artery to the other, without impediment. But if you bind the sides of the artery upon the Quill, the motion of the same spiral Fibres will be intercopted by the ligature; so that it must necessarily follow, (by the foregoing reasons,) that the artery being not alternatively compressed, and dilated betwixt the said ligature and the extremi∣ty, the Pulse must also cease in that part of the said artery, &c. Many things may easily be explained by this Do∣ctrine, tho impossible to be interpreted any otherwise; which therefore become as many proofs of its verity: as namely, the difference which is between the arte∣rial
and venal bloud. For (having demonstrated above, that when the bloud advances in the great artery from the heart towards the anastomosis, and from thence in∣to the vein, the vital spirit goes in the very same time from the anastomosis towards the heart; whereby the said spirit is necessarily kept within the artery;) it is certain, that this disparity proceeds from the want of spirit in the venal to keep its parts in agitation; which abounding in the arterial, keeps it in a conti∣nual effervency, &c. I cou'd add many other things to authorize what we have said concerning the Beat∣ing of the Pulse, and Circulation of the Bloud: but I hope this will suffice to rational men, and such as are of a Mechanical Genius. As for those that attribute all things to final causes, and have recourse upon every occasion, to the designs and intentions of Nature; (as when they say, that the Eye-brows are made to hin∣der the Sweat from falling into the eyes, &c.) if, not∣withstanding all that we can do, they remain still in∣sensible to our reasons, it matters not much; and, in my opinion, such persons had a great deal better stu∣dy Astrology; or, if they are big with devotion, go and comment upon Job, or Paraphrase some Psalms, than meddle with Physical matters. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS. Section I. Of the Nature of the Teeth Page 7 Sect. II. Of the Alteration of the Teeth p. 11 Sect. III. Of the Corruption of the Teeth, with their Reme∣dies p. 15 The Description and Ʋse of the Polican p. 17 Sect. IV. Of the Restauration of the Teeth p. 19 Sect. V. Of the Tooth-ake, Looseness of the Teeth, and de∣cay of the Gums, with their Remedies p. 22 Sect. VI. Of Childrens Teeth p. 31 Sect. VII. Of the Acceleration of the Teeth p. 37 Advertisement to the Readers p. 44 A Physical Dicourse concerning the Beating of the Pulse, and Circulation of the Bloud p. 45 The Explication p. 52
