A4084 R5939 12192091 55889
Astronomy's Advancement, or, News for the Curious; BEING A TREATISE OF Telescopes: AND An Account of the Marvelous Astronomical Discoveries of late years made throughout Europe; With the Figures of the Sun, Moon, and Planets; with Coper∣nicus his System, in twelve Copper Plates. ALSO, An Abstract touching the Distance, Faces, Bulks, and Orbs of the Heavenly Bodies, the best way of using Instruments for satisfaction, &c. out of the best Astro∣nomers, Ancient and Modern, viz. Mr. Hook, Mr. Bouilleau, Mr. Hevelius, Father Kircher, &c. A Piece containing great Curiosities. Done out of French by Jos. Walker. LONDON, Printed for Philip Lea, Globe-Maker, at the Atlas and Hercules in the Poultry, right against the Old-Jury. 1684.
TO THE HONOURABLE Sir William Portman Baronet, And Knight of the Bath. IT may truly be af∣firm'd that Nature made an equal Par∣tition of all her Goods amongst her Children, the Eagle and Hawk for Sight, the Hound for Sent, the Lilly and Peacock for gay Cloathing;
Birds, Beasts, and Fishes went away alike satisfi'd and pleas'd with their Sate and Condition. Man in this Distribution (whilst he retain'd his Innocency) was Gods Vicegerent upon Earth, and besides the Enjoyment of the World, and the Command of all Creatures, he had also Fellowship with Angels; but failing of his Allegiance, he was soon degraded of his Dig∣nity, and became subject unto manifold Miseries, and even to Death it self; yet in his fallen Estate there is to be seen some Marks of his Divine Original. The Heathen Poet sings of him, Os homini sublime dedit Coelum∣que
tueri. That he is not a Child of Earth like other Crea∣tures, but chiefly made to Con∣template Heavenly things, of an erect Countenance, fitly fram'd with two Eyes, won∣derfully made to view the Works of God's Hands. It is true, the Natural Imbecillity, as of others, so of our Visive Or∣gans, doth not permit us to take so full a view as we could wish of Bodies that are always at great distances, therefore Men by their Industry have invent∣ed arts to supply this defect, and amongst many, the Tele∣scope (which occasion'd the ensuing Treatise) is one of the
most useful and curious Instru∣ments that has hitherto been discover'd. By the help of it, Men are in some measure re∣stor'd unto their first Dignity, and somewhat enabled to see and Contemplate the wonderful frame and disposition of the Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, and thereby raise their thoughts and affections from Earthly gross and mean Objects, to such, which from a Primum Mo∣bile, may advance them to the first Mover and Creator of all things. But as the Eye of nature carries us but a little part of this way, so also this Artificial Eye falls very far
short of the Mark; and though it communicates unto us some imperfect glimmerings of the Stars, Firmament, and Lower Heavens, yet it there leaves us at a loss; so that 'tis absolutely necessary to take some other help to gaide us to the sight and fruition of the Supream Hap∣piness, and that is the Eye of Faith, purely abstracted from all Sensitive Matter, which alone can penetrate through the Fogs and thick Vapours of the Air, and can like the Eagle stedfastly (through the Veil of the Firmament) behold the Sun of Righteousness. This Eye is only to be obtain'd by
the constant and Conscionable hearing and reading the Word of God, which by some years Experience I observ'd you to perform, and question not your perseverance therein, having receiv'd as many and great Blessings from His Liberal Hand as any Heart can reason∣ably wish. A Person of Quality, unto whom I have a thousand Obli∣gations, was pleas'd lately to shew me the following Colle∣ctions of Discoveries, made by many famous Astronomers of Europe touching the Planets and some others Stars, intimating
that the time would not be ill spent to render it into English. I being very sensible of his great Wisdom and Judgment, readily contributed my weak Endeavours to communicate it unto all that are Well Wishers unto these Sublime Speculations; And having for an Age past been ambitious to give some publick Demonstration unto the World (as I have done in se∣veral particular Rencounters unto your self) of my Grati∣tude for the many Favours you have been pleas'd on all occa∣sions to confer upon me both in City and Country; Although
I cannot with a D'Avenant or Cowley fix your Illustrious Name amongst the Stars, by the Rol∣ling Measures of Pindarick or Heroick Odes; yet I do with no less hearty Resentments, ac∣cording to my slender ability, here fitly place your great Name (as a Member of the most famous Society in the World) in the Front of the choicest part of the most Emi∣nent of the Heavenly Stars and Planets; And that it may for many Lusters of Ages, flourish and shine with them above, as you have done here below, and convey their hap∣py
TO THE READER. THey must be very great Strangers to be Genius of our Nation, that will go about to deny them to have made as great progress in Astronomical Speculations, as any others what∣soever. Yet knowing the active mind of Men is inquisitive after new things, meeting accidentally with this small Treatise of Tele∣scopes, and finding it to have been received beyond Sea with a gene∣ral
Applause and Approbation, and Printed at Paris, Avec privilege Du Roy, and supposing it as fit as other Subjects to make a pro∣gress into England, I thought it would be no disservice to the Curious to lend it my help and assistance in putting it into an English Garb, and in recommending its Fate un∣to all Well-Wishers of the Ma∣thematicks.
An Account of the Marvelous Astronomical Discoveries of late years made throughout Europe by the help of Tele∣scopes, &c. SECT. 1. Of Telescopes. THe Telescope or great Prospective-Glass was invented in the begin∣ning of this Age, before which time none in the World had know∣ledge of it. Formerly it was made very little and short, but sinding that it repre∣sentede Objects much better being made in a larger form, it is now made 20, 30, and unto 60, or 80 foot long, whereby Object; at great distance are clearly and more di∣stinctly seen and discovered. Some do judge
they may be made of such a capacity, or improv'd to such form, that by them may be seen the Inhabitants or Animals, which by some are pretended to be in the Moon; Wherefore according to the Opinion of Mr. Azout, the matters hereafter mentioned, appear but as Objects of 60, or 70 Leagues distant. We will here report the Testimo∣ny of several famous Artists and Astrono∣mers, who by the means of this Instrument have made their Observations upon the Stars and Heavens, each in their own Country, viz. some at Paris, others at Rome, others at London, and others in several other places of Europe. SECT. II. General Discoveries made by the help of Telescopes. 1. BY means of this curious Instrument, it hath been observed, that all the Planets and Stars, excepting the Sun, are so many Opaque and Dense Bodys, without any light whatever, but only what they borrow of the Sun. 2. That every one of the Planets, ex∣cept the Sun, change their Faces like the Moon; so that Venus and Mercury do some∣times
appear like a half Moon, and some∣times quite round, according as these Pla∣nets are found more or less opposite unto the Sun. That Mars sometimes appears in a Curvy Lin'd Figure. That Saturn shews himself as encompassed with a Ring. Tou∣ching Jupiter it is very marvelous, That there are discovered four little Stars that continually move Circularly about his Body, and which by that means cast a shade upon his Superficies. These things are undeniable Testimonies, that all these Planets have no other Light, but that which the Sun com∣municates unto them. 3. This Telescope doth also inform us, that each of these Planets, except the Sun, have spots in their Superficies, just as the Moon hath, and of the same kind of black∣ness. 4. The same Instrument hath also in∣form'd us, that each of these Planets, and the Sun also, together with the daily and Natural Motions, do besides, move them∣selves upon their Centers, some by the mo∣tion of Revolution, and others by that of Libration.
SECT. III. Discoveries in the fixed Stars. TOuching the fixed Stars, it is mar∣velous that the same Four things which we have observed to be in the Pla∣nets, are also found to meet in them. Here∣upon it is to be observed, that from time to time by help of the same Instrument, there is discovered new Stars in the Firmament, the which having appeared a certain time, do so decrease of their bigness, that they cannot any longer be discerned; and then afterwards, after the revolution of Months, Years, or Ages, do appear again, as if they were newly come into being. This Wonder hath given occasion unto Astronomers and Modern Optists to conclude, that it is the same with the Stars, as with the Psanets; and that at least some of them, have Spots and Blemishes, and that they also move as those do, on their Centers; From whence it proceeds, that when their Spects are turn'd towards the Earth, they do not appear unto us; and when the Spots are turn'd t'other way behind, then they do appear by means ports an evident decision of the Question unto this day controverted, to wit, whe∣ther
these Stars shine of their own proper Light, or of the Light borrowed from the Sun-Beams, and we must hold it in favour of the Affirmative, that they shine by vir∣tue of the Illumination of this great Planet; which is the point we have Established in the first part of our Anticopernicus; There be a great many observable and curious things to be seen in this first Part. As for the Stars which are permanent, or do al∣ways shine, it may probably be said, that they always continue such, because that by their moving upon their Center, they have little or no Spots. Moreover this Prospe∣ctive discovers unto us in the Heavens, a far greater number of Stars than what we can discern with the naked Eye. It discovers unto us in the Pleiades, in a Circle of one degree of Diameter which encompasseth them, the number of 46 Stars, whereas we can perceive in that little company but six, the seventh having disappeared a long time agone. Behold here also another great marvel in the fixed Stars, which is, that when they are beheld with th Telescope, the appea∣so prodigiously small, that whereas Tycho B. tells us that those of the first Magnitude appear unto the naked sight about two Mi∣ents Diameter; they appear not unto us, according unto Galilco, but five Seconds of a
Diameter, which is twenty four times less. And whereas Tycho B. makes these Stars to be 60 or 70 times bigger than the Earth; at this time, on the contrary, they are found to be 200 time less than the Earth. Where∣upon Kepler warns us, that with the Tele∣scope the greatness of any fixed Star cannot be determined, because by how much the better the Glass is, by so much the lesser the Stars appear. It is a matter of surprise to hear, that all the Planets do appear greater in the Glass than they are, especially the lowest; and then again these fixed Stars on the contrary, with the same Glass, do ap∣pear smaller. I adhere unto this Opinion of the prodigious smallness of fixed Stars; Nevertheless at present I judge, that as to this matter, there is some kind of fallacy in our sight. Hereafter we will make a far∣ther Demonstration. Lastly, The Telescope has discover'd and decided the Question which hath been so long agitated amongst the ancient Philoso∣phers, namely, what the is which we call the Milky Way, vulgarly in French the Way of St. James; for it has given us to under∣stand, that 'tis nothing but an infinite mul∣titude of small Stars, which by their near∣ness one to another, make up all that white Tract which we behold in the Heavens.
SECT. IV. Of what has been Observed in the Sun. BY help of the abovesaid Instrument, there has been observed upon the Convexity of the Body of the Sun, black Spots which are moveable, variable, and subject to change, and which do move re∣gularly towards the West, finishing their Revolution in 26 or 27 days. Neverthe∣less Hevelius here traces these ways by bend∣ings, sometimes Convex, and sometimes Hollow. The motions of these Solar Spots testifie unto us, that the Body of the Sun truns upon this Center, with that motion. These Spots are not Celestial Bodies, as J. Tarde would make us believe, but rather Eva∣porations which rise from the Body of the Sun, after the manner of Vapours arising from the Earth, and forming themselves in∣to Clouds; which doth appear, inasmuch as these Spots are always chageable in their form, bulk, and configuration. Sometimes there appears a great number in the Face of this Star: sometimes but a few, and some∣times none at all. Some of these Spots shine and become lightsom, and others that shined become dark. To this purpose Ma∣lapert at Arras did dayly observe these Spots,
from the year 1618. unto the year 1627. and never found them return unto the same Configuration they had in all that time. Scheiner on the other hand observed them at Rome at the same time, and found them no otherwise than the former had done. It were to be wished that some of these. Solar Spots had remained fixed in the Body of the Sun, for that would have decided the great Question, to wit, if it be the Earth, or the Sun, which is immovable in the Center of the Universe. Father Kirker with the help of this same Telescope, in his Description of the Subter∣raneous World, Lib. 2. finds and tells us, that this great Star is a Body of Fire, un∣equal in its surface, and compos'd of several parts, of a different nature, some whereof is fluid, and others solid; that it appears that his Disque is a Sea of Fire, wherein is perceived a perpetual agitation of Waves of Flame. That in some parts may as it were be seen Burnings, and in others Spots, much like unto thick Smoak; that these Burnings, and these Spots are not without the Sun, but that they seem to proceed forth from his Disque, appearing and disappear∣ing, increasing and decreasing, the Fire shew∣ing it self casually amongst those black Smoaks, which are the Spots that we per∣ceive in this great Luminary; In short they
THE SUN ACCORDING TO EA. KIRCHER
are the foams or froth of the Fire which the Sun exhales and evaporates out of its Body. Nevertheless Mr. Azout and Mr. Hugens do think, that these foams of Fire are only appearances occasioned by the un∣dulation or waving of the Air. Some do e∣steem that these Solar Spots are the Seed and Matter whereof Comets are formed, which is not improbable. Moreover these same Spots of the Sun discover unto us, the rea∣son wherefore in Charlemain's time, there was discover'd a Spot in this great Lumi∣nary. Also, Wherefore at certain times it was, that this Star appeared not in his wonted brightness, as it happened in the year 1547. from the 24th of August unto the 28th. that the Sun appeared reddish, and not as bright as the Moon in her total Eclips, so that se∣veral Stars were visible at Noon-Day. It happened to be the same for a whole year together at the time when Caesar was Murdered, insomuch that it was so dark∣ned, that it could scarce ripen the Fruits of the Earth, Virg. Geor. Lib. 1. & Ovid. Metam. Lib. 15. It was then by reason of Evaporations of the Sun which cover'd its shining face, and darkned its light, and diminished its heat.
SECT. V. Of what hath been Observed in the Moon. BEsides what is commonly to be seen in the Moon by the naked Eye, to wit, that she changeth her Face according as she turns towards the Sun, and that together with what Light she hath, she hath also black Irregular Spots; the same Instrument hath farther inform'd us, that the Lucid parts of her Body are Rugged and Protube∣rant, and as some conjecture, is like the Earth; and the rest which consists in Spots, as the same Authors say, resembles the Sea. Also that the Surface of this Planet is set all over with certain round hollows like Pits or Wells, of several Magnitudes, all and every of which, some unadvisedly take to be so many Mountains; but that they are rather a kind of Cavities, and liker Wells or Pits than Mountains, is apparent, in regard their shade is towards the Sun and not opposite, that is to say, beyond these Concavities or Wells. And these be all the Shades which is re∣markable in the Disque of the Moon, for to imagine as a great many do, that these Spots are so many Shadows produced by the Sun, by reason of Hills and Valleys, which
all Antiquity supposed to be in the Moon, is not true; for when the Moon is full and opposite to the Sun, these pretended Shades in this Planet should by consequence disap∣pear, which yet is not so. Note, That in our Figure, all the abovesaid hollows, are represented without shade, because being a Figure of the Full Moon, the Sun doth throughly enlighten them at other times, as at the Quarters, they shew themselves sha∣ded in the part towards the Sun. And although the Face of the Moon is full of Wrinkles, yet nevertheless there ap∣pears no Shadow, whether it be that the Shades of these Wrinkles are insensible for their smalness, or else that they be transpa∣rent to the Sun Beams, which is the Opinion of Galileo, who esteems the Moon to be like the Mother of Pearl, shewing knobs and red∣ness where there is none. It is true that some of these Wells or Hol∣lows seem to be all black in the Full Moon, but that is without doubt, because that these Cavities are of the nature of the Spots whereof we speak. The Diameter of these Wells or Pits con∣sider'd in regard of the Moon, which con∣tains about 650 French Leagues, contain some more some less; the greatest of all is that of A. B. which by computation con∣tains about 20 Leagues.
Let us farther observe in this Planet the admirable mixture of its Lucidities and Spots, those surprising Varieties, those Re∣semblanoes of Forests of Forests of Rushes which seem scatter'd here and there: those kinds of Spiders Legs: those kinds of Polygones, and especially the appearances of Beams of Light arising out of these profound Wells, as of the abovesaid A. B. To conclude, all the great variety of these things cannot seem to happen by chance, but that they were so disposed by the Soveraign Creator, for some end and reason unknown unto us; And indeed the Eighth Psalm informs us, that this Planet, as also the Stars, is the work of Gods Fingers. Mark the word, Fingers. All which being consider'd, and for o∣ther Reasons, we cannot say that the Moon is a World filled with Inhabitants, Ani∣mals, and Plants, as many ancient Philoso∣phers have imagin'd; but rather a certain Vapour or Cloud, probably condensed with Cold, which is evident, inasmuch as this Star by day appears as a common Cloud; which Cloud were it raised to the height of the Moon, and that it were as big, it would shine in the Night after the same manner. Add hereunto, that the Pillar of the Cloud which conducted the Israelites in the Wil∣derness, was a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar
of Fire by Night. We judge that all the Stars of Heaven, except the Sun, are of the same substance the Moon is of. It is moreover a great wonder that this Nocturnal Light, appears unto us here be∣low, to have borrow'd the likeness of a Wo∣mans Face in her Disque. Plutarch hath writ a Treatise expressly, wherein he saith this Figure of a Human Face, was in the Mouth and Hands of all the World; al∣though it is certain that some of great Wit and exquisit Judgment, do protest they do not perceive any Image of a Womans Face in this Planet. But Plutarch himself gives a Reason of this mistake, saying, that it is be∣cause those People have the sight low and weak, uncapable of well perceiving the Li∣neaments of this Face; or rather, it is because their thoughts are not intent upon the De∣sign, Picture, or Portraicture. For my part before I attained to be Six years of Age, I al∣ready fancy'd the form of a Face in this Pla∣net, which also most People in the World think they do. Besides let us observe this Face in the Moon with the Telescope, and let us consi∣der it altogether, and severally; then you will say, this Human Face will no more be seen, but only certain Irregular Vapours without any order, which have no likeness unto any Representation whatsoever.
1. Our Telescope hath also inform'd us, that there is first an Atmosphere, or Orb, which is supposed to be of a very thin Va∣porous Air, which encompasseth all the Su∣perficies of the Moon; as round the Earth there consists the like Orb of Vaporous and Cloudy Air, which containeth the first Re∣gions of the Air. 2. The Telescope hath farther given us to understand a thing very surprising in the Moon, which is, that in her Eclipse, when it is Eclipsed a Fingers breadth or two, to the Naked Eye, it is not at all Eclipsed if you look on it with the Telescope; and when it is quite freed from the Eclipse in the Telescope, it yet appears to be Eclipsed a Finger or two's breadth to the naked Eye. Upon this matter see the Hydrogr. of Father Fournier, wherein are given some Examples of this Phenomenon. 3. This Telescope hath farther given us the knowledge of a thing more strange and wonderful, to wit, that although the Moon being low near the Horizon, appears greater unto the naked Eye, and being mounted towards the Zenith appears less; it is found, that when its Visual Diameter comes to be measured in both these places, the quite contrary doth appear; to wit, that she is less when she is low near the Horizon, and greater when she is mounted towards the Zenith.
THE FULL MOON ACCORDING TO Mr. HEVELIUS
4. Let us instance in a fourth thing which relates unto the Moon, which is, that although for time out of mind, it hath been believed that the Longitudes of the World may be obtained by means of the Eclipses of this Planet; nevertheless Ob∣servations do not thereto agree, and do very much disagree from the Longitudes of our Maps of the World; whereupon see the Hydrogr. of Father Fournier, which gives a greater number of Examples. Let us add another point no less surprising, which is, that although that which is Il∣luminated in the Moon proceeds from the Rays of the Sun darted directly upon her; When this brightness comes to be examin'd, it is found that in all likelihood it is not car∣ry'd in a direct Line, but in a crooked, and seems not to proceed from the Sun as from its Source, but ordinarily from another Prin∣ciple higher and more eminent. God wil∣ling we will give full satisfaction of all these Phenomena's in a particular Treatise.
SECT. VI. Of what hath been discover'd in Saturn. TIme out of mind it hath been conceived that this Planet Saturn, consisted in one entire round Globe; but now by help of this Telescope, we discover that it is composed of two parts, and that indeed it is round in respect of its Body, but doth besides consist of a Ring, which is Lumi∣nous by means of the enlightning of the Sun, as Saturn himself is Luminous by the same means; which Ring encompasseth him all round after the same manner that the Horizon of our Artificial Globes encom∣passeth their Globes, and is flat upon the Verge as they be. Moreover this Ring shews not it self round, as a Circle seen di∣rect, but shews it self in an Oval, as a Circle seen Obliquely. Some have at cer∣tain times found it twice and an half longer than it is broad; others have found it de∣cline from the Ecliptick 31 Degrees; whereupon see here what is strange, which is, that upon certain Occurrences and Times this Ring disappears, so that at that time Saturn is alone and quite deprived of his Ring, just as the Figures here do represent, whereof the 1, 2, and 3, do shew the
Fig. 3. SATVRN According to Mr. Hook Aspect SATVRN According to Mr. Azout SATVRN According Mrs. Hugens & Picart SATVRN According to Mrs. Hugens & others
manner that this Planet doth commonly shew himself with his Ring, and the 4th when he shews himself without a Ring, and quite round. Upon this change of Figure, wherein Saturn at certain times appears, Astronomers have well concluded, that in effect he moves in himself, and that it was necessary this Circle should be flat like a Bourlet; and that the reason wherefore he disappeared at certain times, proceeded, that at that time, he was as to us, turned Prosil, and shewed us the side, and was not enlightned with the Sun on the side turned towards us. Moreover, Observations have given us to understand, that this Planet moves upon his own Center, and upon his Own Ax, to wit, under the East, to the West, as has been observ'd by Hugens, Cas∣siny, and others. Touching the Motion of this Planet Mr. Hugens has observed, that when it arrives at the 20th Degree and an half of Pisces and Libra, it appears round and without Arms. To this purpose in the year 1671. at the end of May, it appeared all round; and also in like maner it will appear all round in the year 1685. which is about fifteen years afterwards, which will also continue from fifteen to fifteen years, which is the moiety of the Natural Motion of this Planet, which 'tis known compleats his course in about thirty years.
Besides there is farther observed in this Pla∣net a little Moon, which like the Satellites of Jupiter continually runs round his Body, and finisheth their course in the space of fifteen days thirteen Minutes. Mr. Azout thinks that in a few years the shadow of this same Moon may be seen upon this Planet. SECT. VII. Of what hath been Observ'd in the Planet of Jupiter. WIth the help of the same Instru∣ment there is observed in the Face of Jupiter, and overthwart his Luminous part, three darkish Belts, like unto the Spots which appear in the Moon; These Belts or Girdles which encompass or begirt this Planet, shew themselves all streight and pa∣rallel, and extend from East to West, near after the manner of the Ecliptick; and do make as it were a kind of Equinoctial and Tropicks, of an Artificial Sphere; Of his Belts the more Southern is a little larger than the Northern, besides that it is a little nearer the South than the other is unto the North. Mr. Hooke hath particularly ob∣served also a little dark Filament, and where
Fig. 4. Jupiter according to Mrs. Azout & Cassini Jupiter according to Mr. Hook the Satilites of Jupiter discouer'd by G. Galileus
these Girdles or Belts draw nearer the Poles, the Zones grow darker, as in A. B. Fig. 2. Some Observators remark these Belts with some Curvity, but its border appears per∣fectly round, and without radiation. Moreover this Planet hath four little Stars or Moons, which are not visible unto the naked Eye, which do continually move round his Body, and which do rise in the East of him, and set to the West. These four wonderful little Stars are called the Satellites, or the Guards of this Planet; they are diversly distant from Jupiter, and those nearest his Body finish their Revolu∣tions with greater expedition than those that are farthest off. 1. The nearest of the Satellites is distant from Jupiter three minutes, and finisheth his course in eighteen hours, twenty eight minutes, thirty S. 2. The second Satellite is distant from Jupiter five minutes, and endeth his Revo∣lution in three days, thirteen hours, eigh∣teen minutes. 3. The third is distant eight minutes, and finisheth his Revolution in seven days, three hours, thirty five S. and is greater and brighter than the others. 4. The fourth Satellite is distant from Jupiter thirteen minutes, and endeth his
Course in sixteen days, eighteen hours, nine minutes, fifteen S. It is to be observed that these Satellites do give a shadow upon the Body of Jupiter, when they are found interposed betwixt the Sun and him. Moreover Mr. Cassiny of late hath observed two moveable Spots upon the Face of this Jupiter, which do make their Revolution upon the Center of the same, tending towards the West in nine hours, fifty nine minutes; The which by Consequence doth testifie, that this same Planet moveth upon his Center from the same part likewise in nine hours, fifty six minutes. This Period is the shortest of all those that is made in the Firmament. SECT. VIII. Of what hath been Observ'd in the Planet of Mars. ACcording to Mr. Cassiny, Mars doth move upon his Center and upon his Ax, under the East, towards the West, and with a Direction very like that of the E∣cliptick, that is about twenty four hours, forty minutes each Revolution; the which he discover'd by means of two notable in∣herent moveable Spots upon the Superficies
Fig. 5. 1. Fate of MARS according to Mr. Cassini 2. Fate of MARS according to Mr. Cassini MARS in his qua¦drat according to Herelius
of this Planet, and which do both finish their Course in the same space of time. It is to be observed that Mars in his Oppo∣sition doth always appear round; but when he is betwixt the Conjunction and Opposi∣tion, he appears in a Curvy Line Figure; like the Moon when she is near her Opposi∣tion, before or after him. SECT. IX. Of what hath been Observ'd in Venus. THis Planet Venus appears sometimes round, sometimes half round, and sometimes like a Cressent. Mr. Cassiny took notice of it, and did not sufficiently, nor scarce at all understand it, until the year 1666. which he did not then neither, saith he, without much difficulty. He found that it had Spots upon its Surface just as the Moon has; to wit, two, which are very thi, long, and uncertainly terminated; amongst which at the seventh place marked 7, appears a shining part. He found by means of these Spots, that the motion of this Planet and of its Spots, was made up∣on its own Center, and upon an Ax which carry'd it from South to North, which is a motion wholly unknown in the Heavens;
and that this motion was accomplisht in one day, whether it be, saith he, of Revolution or Libration. SECT. X. Of what hath been Observ'd in Mercury. TOuching Mercury we have no Observa∣tions can say that he hath Spots, as the other aforesaid Planets, nor can we deter∣mine whether he turns or not on his Center or on some Ax; Nevertheless it is probable to believe, that it hath all things just as the other Heavenly Bodies. Moreover, heve∣lius in the year 1644. observed, that he changed his Face, just as the Moon and Ve∣nus; and that he appeared sometimes round, sometimes half round, and sometimes like a Cressent. The reason wherefore this Planet is not discerned like the others is because of his smalness, and for its being commonly darkned by the Sun Beams. The 7th of November 1631. this Mercury was seen in the Disque of the Sun, as it were to Eclipse it; and there appeared like a Spot of the eightieth or ninetieth part of the Diameter of this great Star; It had its Center very black, and the Extremities something red.
Fig 6 1 Face of VENVS according ta Mr. Cassini 2 another Face of VENVS according to Massini 3 another Face of VENVS accoring to Mr. Cassini
SECT. XI. Of new Stars which appear for a time, and then idsappear at another time. And First, Of the first which came to our knowledge, and of the Notable One which appeared in the Chair of Cassiopea, Anno 1572. THe first new Star come unto our know∣ledge, is that which appeared in the time of Hypparcus, about 125 years before the Birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ; Since which time some others have also been discovered; to wit, one in the year 388. whereof Claudian makes mention: and one in the fifteenth Degree of Scorpio, spoken of by Albumazar Haly, the which conti∣nued four Months. Since which time, in the year 1571. the Ninth of November, there appeared in the Firmament in the Chair of Cassiopea, that notable Star of the first Magnitude, which in its Course go∣verned it self like the other Stars, as hold∣ing place amongst them, and had no Para∣lax. The Astronomers of those times well observed it, for Instance Tycho B. it con∣tinued sixteen Months, after which time
decreasing very much, it grew quite in∣visible. Upon the Consideration of this Star or Comet, is remarkable unto our purpose, what the Marquess of Villenes hath left in Writing in his Book upon the Centiloqui of Ptolemey; to wit, that there remained a black Spot in the same place where this Star appeared; which, if so, it would the more confirm what we have said, that the Stars have Spots just as the Planets have, the which makes them disappear at such times as they turn from wards the Earth. Never∣theless seeing the Assertion of this Marquess is not seconded by other Authors, we will refer our selves unto farther Experience. It is doubtful if this same Star will not come and appear again. All we can con∣clude of this Question is, that if it be a real fixed Star, it will not fail appearing some other time; but if it be only a Cornet, or that it is in the Firmament it self, or a little below it, then it will never appear again.
Fig. 7. The new STARR or Comet in the Constellation of Cassiopea observed by Tycho Br
SECT. XII. Of the Star in the Swan's Breast. NIne and twenty years after the Appa∣rition of the Star in Cassiopea, viz. in the year 1601. there appeared in the Hea∣vens a new Star of the third Magnitude, in the Swan's Breast, which continued vi∣sible unto the year 1626. and then totally disappeared. Kepler observed it very dili∣gently. After it had disappeared, and in the space of thirty three years, to wit, in the year 1659. Mr. Hevelius at Dantzick observed it to appear again in the same place where Kepler first saw it, and of the same Magni∣tude, but in the year 1660. it seemed plainly to diminish, and quite disappeared soon af∣ter. Again in the year 1666. Mr. Hevelius saw it re-appear, and it continues at pre∣sent to be seen, but so small, that it is but of the sixth or seventh Magnitude. It is supposed that it is no less than fourteen years in finsh its Revolution; We have here represented in in Tab. 8.
Of the Star near the Swan's Bill. This Star was first discovered by Dom. Adthelm, Chartreux of Dijon; to wit, in the year 1671. it appear'd unto him of the third Magnitude; It is not mentioned in any of the Catalogues of Stars, although a great many much more inconsiderable ones be therein mentioned. The same Father, and Mr. Cassiny have observed it as well in its in∣crease as in its decrease; It hath twice ap∣peared unto them in its greatest Luster: the first time the fourth of April, and the second time the first of May; it is about a Month in its return to its first state. SECT. XIII. Of the Star in the Whales's Neck. THis admirable Star in the Whale's Neck is of this sort also which appear some∣times, then hide themselves, and then dis∣appear again to appear at another time. At first it appears to be but of the sixth Magnitude, then it increaseth by little and little for 120 days together, after which time it arrives at its full period and greatest brightness and eminency, which is, to be
Fig. 9. The new STARR in the Whales Neck discover'd by Mr. Bouillau and Cassini
of the third Magnitude, wherein it conti∣nues fifteen days together, then it decreaseth until it becomes invisible. It doth appear every year in this greatest brightness, thirty two or thirty three days sooner than the precedent year, and com∣pleats its Revolution in about three hun∣dred and thirty three days. Mr. Bouilleau Astronomer hath very diligently observ'd it; he thinks it moveth upon its own Cen∣ter and Ax; and presupposeth as we do, that it is composed of two different parts, the greater obscure, and the less bright; re∣maining invisible when the obscure part is turned towards us, and shewing it self when the bright part is towards us. Astro∣nomers have judged that its motion is Irre∣gular and inscrutable; nevertheless the said Mr. Bouilleau has invented a very ingenuous Hypothesis, whereby he makes its motion to be Regular.
SECT. XIV. Of the Cloudy Star of the Girdle of Andromeda. FAther Fabry and Mr. Bouilleau above∣said, have taken notice of this Star; it appeared in the years 1612, and 1613. and then disappeared until the year 1664. that it appeared again anew. SECT. XV. Of the Star betwixt Eridanus and those of the Hare. MR. Cassiny has discover'd another new Star situate betwixt Eridanus and the Hare, the which also shews it self, and then withdraws it self as the others above∣mentioned, and is in the passage whereby the Comet in 1664. went. No body has spoken of this Star, although it be one of the fourth Magnitude.
Fig. 10. The Cloudy STARR newly disco∣ver'd in ye Girdle of Andromeda diserrd by father Fabri and Mr. Bouillau Another new STARR betwixt cridanus and ye Hare discover'd by Mr. Cassini
SECT. XVI. Of other Stars, of which it is very probable that they are new Stars. THere is one of the fourth Magnitude and two of the fifth in Cassiopea, which in all likelihood be new Stars, for several Astronomers having given an exact Account of far lesser Stars of this Constellation, yet have made no mention of these three. Moreover there is one of the fourth and one of the fifth Magnitude at the beginning of the Constellation of Eridanus, of which it is certain they were not there in 1664. be∣cause in that part of the Heavens the Comet of that year passed; and the very smallest Stars were diligently observed, whereas these which were far more considerable, were not observed. Mr. Cassiny hath also observed four Stars towards the Artick Pole, which are of the fifth and sixth Magnitude, which the Astro∣nomers which have their Eyes always fixed on this part of the Heavens, would not have omitted to have inserted in their Ca∣talogues, if they had ever appeared here∣tofore.
SECT. XVII. Of Stars which have appeared heretofore, and now disappear. TIme out of mind there has seven Stars been observed in the Pleiades; The sacred Text, Amos 8. v. 5. seems to speak of this number, and probably also Revel. 1. and at present there is to be seen but six, a very probable sign, that one of them is re∣tired and become invisible, after the manner of these abovementioned. One of these of the Constellation of the Little Bear, which was formerly visible, doth not now appear. Another also in the Constellation of An∣dromeda hath also disappeared. That also in the Extremity of the Chain of Andromeda, in like manner hath disap∣peared, or at least is become so very small, that it is in a manner impossible to discern it. Another which Tycho B. has inserted in his Catalogue for the twentieth of Pisces, hath also disappeared. Now some may imagine that the above∣said Stars may become invisible for a certain time, that the Sky in the place where they are, is thicker than ordinary, but that is
not it, because when these Stars become in∣visible, nevertheless the neighbouring Stars, although much smaller, and as it were im∣perceptible, yet are seen and discover'd; The new Star abovementioned which was in the passage of the last Cornet, disappeared, whilst other less Stars in the same passage continued constantly to be seen.
An Abstract touching the Di∣stance, Bulk, and Orbs of the heavenly Bodies; The best way of using Instruments, &c. for satisfaction in the truth of the foregoing and like Disco∣veries; Out of the best Astro∣nomers ancient and modern. SECT. I. A Brief Method to satisfaction in the truth of the foregoing and all like Discoveries. IN order to make a true Estimat of the certainty, or at least probability of the former Discoveries, I know no better way than to consider first the Distances of these Heavenly Bodies; then their Bulk and Bigness; next, their
Spheres, or the Circumference of their Orbs; and lastly, the best means and times of making use of such Instruments by which exactest Discoveries may be made. All which we will set down according to the best and most usually received Accounts amongst the Learned, both ancient and modern, with all possible perspicuity and brevity. SECT. II. ALbategnius and Alphraganus, with o∣thers who have improved Ptolemey's Doctrine and Observations, adjust the di∣stances of the Planets and Stars from us, by the Semidiameter of the Earth, taking that as the first and best common Measure; and the same measure have our Modern Astro∣nomers take up from them, or Reasons which may be touched hereafter. Now the Semidiameter of the Earth we cannot but think may be in a very tolerable sort computed and ascertained by reason of the great Improvements of Navigation, and the frequency of passing to and fro in a manner from Pole to Pole; I mean within few Degrees of each, and from the East and West-Indies, and back again, &c.
Now though there have been divers Opi∣nions of the Compass of the Earth, yet it is now in a manner agreed upon that it is of 20255 Italian Miles; and that the Dia∣meter thereof is 8354 such Miles; There∣fore the half Diameter, or Semidiameter must be 4177 such miles. Note, That the Italian Mile consists of 1000 Geometrical Passes; Now a Geometrical Pass contains five Foot, and must not be confounded, as by some Ignorant People it is, with our common Yard. SECT. III. Of the distance of the Moon from the Earth, the compass of her Orb, and bigness of her Body. ACCording to those forementioned Ara∣bians, the mean distance of the Moon (that is taking her when she is neither far∣thest off from, nor nearest to the Earth, but in a middle motion) is forty nine half Dia∣meters of the Earth: that is about 1103881 Italian Miles. This it is plain Copernicus thought too little, and therefore went not about any particular Calculation of her distance, but only in general has told the World, he looks
upon the compass of the great Orb to be so vast, that the Earth compared thereto is only as a Point; But Tycho Brahe having made stricter Observations and Calculati∣ons, affirms the distance of the Moon from the Earth to be 56½ of the Earths Semidia∣meters; And Philippus Lansbergius yet more, namely, of fifty nine Semidiameters. So that should we compute at the lowest rate, taking Ptolemey's Measures, the com∣pass of the Moons Orb must be upwards of 6645348 Italian Miles, for its Diameter made up of the Moons distance from the Earth twice taken, and of the Diameter of the Earth will be 2215116 Miles, which multiplied by three (the round number, to avoid Fractions) gives the forementioned Sum; A vast Orb indeed, yet far the least of any of the Planetary ones. Now as to the bulk or bigness of the Moons Body, it is estimated commonly by the proportion it bears to the Body of the Earth. Those that follow Ptolomey account it thirty nine times less than the Earth; But Copernicus tells us roundly 'tis about forty three times less; Lansbergius forty five times and an half; And Tycho Brahe forty two. Ʋtrum horum mavis accipe. There is another Measure which Astro∣nomers apply to Heavenly Bodies, which they call a Degree; by that they mean an
Arch of a supposed Circle in the Heavens answerable to a Line of 60 Miles on the Surface of the Earth, which will be best understood by the following Figure. Let the small Arch intercepted between A and B be supposed to be 60 Miles in the Surface of the Earth, the Arch which an∣swers it in a supposed and very far distant Circle in the Heaven will be the Arch in∣tercepted betwixt C and D vastly larger, yet bearing a proportion to the lesser Arch in the Earth. The Arch then C. D. is a De∣gree in the Heavens as A. B. is a Degree on the Surface of the Earth. Now these De∣grees they ordinarily subdivide into sixty parts, which they call Minutes or Scruples, and these again into Seconds and Thirds as they please. Thus measuring, the appa∣rent Diameter of the Moon is esteemed to be thirty three Minutes and one third. And thus much of the Moon.
SECT. IV. Of the distance of Mercury and Venus from the Earth, the compass of their Orbs, and the bigness of their Bodies. AFter what has been said of the Moon, all will be much plainer touching both the other Planets and fixed Stars, of which we will first consider Mercury and Venus, whom we thus put together, be∣cause they also, as the Moon, are com∣monly thought less than the Earth, though far more distant than the Moon. Mercury is by the Ptolomaicks thought to be 115 half Diameters of the Earth distant from the Earth; but by Tycho Brahe 1150; and by Lansbergius 1500. Now if we will reckon according to Pto∣lomey, Mercury will be 480355 Miles di∣stant from the Earth, whichnumber if we double, and add thereto the Diameter of the Earth, viz. 8354, we have the Dia∣meter of his Orb, viz. 969064 — Miles; which number if we treble, we have near about the compass of his Orb, viz. 2907192 — but if we take the other Ac∣counts 'tis vastly bigger.
As to his Body, Ptolomey supposed him 19000 times less than the Earth, (a prodi∣gious mistake certainly) Tycho Brahe, who is more herein to be credited, only nineteen times less, (by which he should be above as big again as the Moon) and Lansbergius only twice less. His apparent Diameter is judged only of two minutes or thereabouts, but Martinus Hortensius, a Disciple of Lans∣bergius, making use of his Telescope, ad∣mits Mercury's Body to be only nineteen Se∣conds; which Computation may be a∣mongst others a good reason for his being so seldom seen. Venus comes next; By the Ptolomaick System distant from the Earth 618 Semidia∣meters of the Earth; By the Tychonick 1150; By Lansbergius's 1500. Now if we will reckon again according to the lowest rate, which is that of Pto∣lomey's, Venus will be 2581386 — Miles distant from the Earth; which number of we double, and add thereto the Diameter of the Earth, viz. 8354, as above, we have the Diameter of her Orb; and that num∣ber if we treble, as before, we have (nearly) the Compass of her Orb, viz. 15513378 — which yet it is apparent others would make vastly larger.
As to the bulk of this glorious Star, Pto∣tomey makes it twenty eight times less than the Earth, Tycho only six times less, and Lansbergius but three and a third part. Her apparent Diameter according to the first is of three Minutes; according to the second of three and a quarter; but Martinus Hor∣tinsius, a Disciple and Assistant of Lans∣bergius, observing her by good Telescopes, supposes her Diameter only of fifty nine Se∣conds. SECT. V. Of the distance of the Sun from the Earth, the compass of her Orb, and bulk of his Body. THe mean distance (for of that all along we would be understood to speak) of the Sun from the Earth, the Ptolomeans reckon to be 1165 Semidiame∣ters of the Earth; The Tychonians but 1150; (the samne as of Venus and Mercury) Lans∣bergius, &c. 1500. as he also had judged of these two last Planets. Whence, if we should compute at our former rate, it would follow that the Sun is distant from the Earth about 4866205 — Miles; which number, if, as before, we
double, and add thereto the Diameter of the Earth, we have for the Diameter of the Solar Orb 9740764 Miles; and that if we multiply by the round number of Three to avoid Fractions, as before, we have for the compass of that Orb 29222292 Miles. The Body of the Sun, which is the greatest of all the Heavenly Bodies, is by the Ptolo∣means judged to be 167 times greater than the Globe of the Earth and Sea; yet do they reckon his apparent Diameter only thirty one Minutes and one third, that is just two Mi∣nutes less than the Moon appears to us. Co∣pernicus esteemed it only 162 times bigger than the Earth. But Lansbergius 434. And Tycho Brahe much less than either, only 139 times bigger than the Earth, and his apparent Diameter of thirty one Minutes still less than the apparent Diameter of the Moon; however his Body in it self be so vastly bigger. SECT. VI. Of the distances of the other Planets from the Earth, th compass of their Orbs, and bulks of Body. WE will now cease to compute the di∣stance of the Planets by Miles, as
being too small a measure, and running Fi∣gures to too great a length; The method is open enough, and any who have the curio∣sity to know the distance by Miles may be supposed to have the industry also, if they please, to calculate it themselves. Mars's mean distance from the Earth ac∣cording to Ptolomey is Four thousand five hundred eighty four half Diameters of the Earth; his apparent Diameter of one Mi∣nute and an half; and his Body once and an half bigger than the Earth. According to Tycho he is only One thousand seven hun∣dred and forty five Semidiameters of the Earth distant, and his apparent Diameter of one Minute and three quarters, and his Body thirteen times less than the Earth. Which last point of his Opinion Lansbergius fa∣vours so far as to allow him to be eight times less than the Earth, but distant from it Two thousand two hundred and seventy five of its Semidiameters. Now M. Hor∣tensius runs him so low as to reckon his Body to be One thousand five hundred and thirty four times less than the Earth, and his ap∣parent Diameter only of thirty six S. And according to our former rate and method, we shall have for the Diameter of his Orb Nine thousand one hundred and seventy Se∣midiameters of the Earth, and for the com∣pass of his Orb 27410 of the Same.
Jupiter's mean distance is according to Ptolomey Ten thousand four hundred and twenty three Semidiameters of the Earth; his apparent Diameter two Minutes and an half; and his Body eighty one times bigger than the Earth. According to Tycho he is only Three thousand nine hundred and nine∣ty Semidiameters of the Earth distant from it; his apparent Diameter much at the same rate as the Ptolomeans judge it; but his Body only fourteen times bigger than the Earth. Lansbergius makes him Eight thou∣sand and ninety one Semidiameters of the Earth distant from it; his Body but twenty five and two fifth parts bigger than the Earth. Hortensius but one and one fourth big∣ger, and his apparent Diameter only of fifty Seconds. And following still our for∣mer Computation upon Ptolemey's Doctrine (the proportions of his System being a mean between the vast one which Copernicus, and the narrower which Ty. Brahe introduced) we shall have for the Diameter of his Orb Twenty thousand eight hundred and forty eight Semidiameters of the Earth, and for the Compass or Circumference thereof up∣wards of Sixty two thousand five hundred and forty four of the same. Saturn the highest of the Planets comes last, whom Ptolomey placed Fifteen thou∣sand and eight hundred Semidiameters of
the Earth, distant from it; Tycho but Ten thousand five hundred and fifty; yet Lans∣bergius allows the distance to be Fourteen thousand eight hundred and eighty of the Earths Semidiameters. His apparent Dia∣meter is judged by none, above one Mi∣nute and some odd parts, however his Bo∣dy is according to Ptolomey seventy nine times, according to Lansbergius forty six, according to Tycho but twenty two times bigger than the Earth. And at our old rate, the Diameter of his Orb will be about Thirty one thousand six hundred and two Semidiameters of the Earth, and the com∣pass of his Orb about Ninety four thousand eight hundred and six of them. Thus far then of the Planets, their mean distance from us, their bulk, and Orbits. SECT. VII. Of the fixed Stars, their Magnitude and Sphere. BEcause some have judged certain Co∣mets to have mounted as high as the Sphere of the fixed Stars, being that they were not able to observe they had any Paral∣lax, we will therefore here consider those Stars as we have done the Planets.
Ptolomey (at least the forementioned Ara∣bians deducing it from his Principles) have placed the fixed Stars Nineteen thousand Se∣midiameters of the Earth distant from it. Tycho honestly telling us, that no exact or certain measures can be taken in this case, conjectures them to be near about Fourteen thousand such Semidiameters distant. As to the Copernicans they have another way of measuring, of which anon. The fixed Stars are judged very far from being all of a bigness; And since the invention of Telescopes, it is certain there are a multitude of them either so small, or so far off us, that they cannot be seen by our naked Eye; however according to the usual estimate, they are taken to be of six several Magnitudes. Those of the first rate are conceived One hundred and eight times bigger than the Earth; such are, the big∣ger Dog-Star, the Bulls-Eye, &c. Those of the sixth and least rate only eighteen times bigger than it, according to Alphraganus his Account; but Albategnius, his Brother Ptolomaick, varies a little, not very much worth insisting on. However behold his whole estimate of all the Mundane Bodies. If we compare (says he) all the Mundane Bodies as to their bigness, we must acknowledge the Sun to take the first place, as biggest of them all; next him the fixt Stars of the first
Magnitude; in the third place Jupiter, in the fourth Saturn, in the fifth the rest of the five Orders of the fixt Stars, according to their Magnitudes of 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6th Rate, in the sixth place Mars, in the seventh the Earth, in the eighth Venus, in the ninth the Moon, in the tenth and last Mercury. This is also generally the Ptolomeans Opinion of the several Bodies in this Systeme of the World. But I suppose it must be understood only of such fixt Stars as they knew; for before the invention of Telescopes, that infinite number of Stars, which makes up the Ga∣laxy, or Milky Way, that great number also in the Constellation of the Pleiades, not seen to the naked Eye, as also the innume∣rable number scattered through the Heavens, discoverable by the help of our Glasses, were not known, nor therefore estimated. The Diameter of the Sphere of fixt Stars, if taken according to our old Rule, is about Thirty eight thousand and two Semidia∣meters of the Earth: and therefore its compass upwards of One hundred seventy four thousand and six such Semidiameters.
SECT. VIII. Of the Opinion of the Copernicans in these points, and the advantage of their Systeme. NOw Copernicus and his Followers placing the Sun in the Center of the World, and supposing the Earth to be mo∣ved both upon her own Center daily, and annually about the Sun, (which is far the most probable of any of the Mundane Sy∣stemes) measure the distance of the Sphere of fixed Stars by the Semidiameters of the great Orb; And the great Orb they call the Sphere of the Earths annual motion a∣bout the Sun. For the full understanding hereof, behold here the Systeme (or Fa∣brick of the World) according to the Co∣pernican supposal. The outermost Circle is the Sphere of the fixt Stars: The second is the Orb of Saturn, marked ♄: The third of Jupiter, who is placed in the four less Circles, A. B. C. D. in each of which Circles is a little Star (called one of his Satellites, or Life-guard-Men) moving round him: The fourth great Circle is the Orb of Mars, marked ♂: The fifth is the Orb of the Earth, marked 4; about whom in a little Circle, the Moon is by them supposed to move Monthly: the
Fig 11
sixth is the Orb of Venus, marked ☿: The seventh of Mercury: In the midst of all stands the Pavillion of the Sun, whom they suppose only to move about his own Center in twenty seven days or thereabouts, which is proved by the Spots observed in his Face by the help of our Glasses, which Spots make their returns to the same point in about that time. The advantages this Hypothesis has above the other, is too long here to in∣sist on; Only I will say there are some very Learn'd Men, who no more doubt that the motion of the Earth will be receive gene∣rally within a small compass of years, than that now Men believe the Antipodes, or the Circulation of Blood, and think it as much demonstrable as either of them. Supposing then the Earth to be moved round, the Sun in the Circle here assigned to it, that Circle they call the great Orb, and suppose the Semidiameter of it to be equal to 1500 Semidiameters of the Earth, and the Sphere of the fixt Stars to be distant from the Earth 28000 Semidiameters of the great Orb, or which is much about the same, forty two millions of the Earths Se∣midiameters. This distance indeed is vastly greater than either that assigned by Ptolomey or Tycho, but yet admitting the distances assigned by either of the two later, and measuring
the compass of the Orb of fixed Stars there∣by, it is in a manner unconceivable that that Orb can be carry'd round the Earth in twenty four hours, or in a natural day; for in such case its motion must be many hun∣dred times more rapid or swifter than the Shot out of any Gun. For according to due Computation, the very Sun it self, by the Ptolomaick Hypothesis, must move in one minute 13095 English Miles, and in an hour 783715 Miles; but the fixed Stars most vast∣ly more, namely 13513686 English Miles in one hour, and in one minute not less than 225228 Miles, which I think no one can well believe. Yet this I say would inevi∣tably follow upon that distance at which Ptolomey places both Sun and Fixed Stars from the Earth; and much more upon the distance assigned by the Copernicans, only those indeed help themselves, by supposing the Earths daily motion upon its own Ax. SECT. IX. Of the bost way and times of using Instruments to satisfie our selves in these Curiosities. THat the Quadrant (or where a large Quadrant cannot be managed, a Sex∣tant) and Telescopes are the most useful
Instruments for both making and satisfying our selves in Discoveries of this Nature, I think will not be doubted. But certainly the best way to use them is in conjunction. Its true there may be several cases in which we respect not much the height or place of a Star; it may be all we design is to view its Colour, Form, Spots, or the like, and then the Telescope it self may suffice. But because Stars appear of different Diameters or sizes, according to their different height or position above the Horizon, therefore we shall be able to make the exactest Ob∣servations and truest Judgment, if we have to the side of a large Quadrant (or Sextant) duely fixed a proportionable Te∣lescope joyned and fastned. The way of fixing both it is scarce possible in words so to describe as that it will be plainly under∣stood. But these things may easily be seen, and then most readily understood, if we go to any Artists. And being furnished with such a Machin or Instrument, the best time to use it is not in the lightest Nights, or when the Moon is at Full, (except on some parti∣cular occasions) for then the Luminous Raies too much confound one another. It is much best viewing the Moon at or near its Quarters. But if we will see a Full Moon, we must have larger and longer Te∣lescopes than such as can be fixt to Quad∣rants:
and there are little Devices to draw the Raies closer by putting a Paper with a Pin-hole in it betwixt our Eye and the Glass, and the like with a little use will easily di∣rect and teach us to contrive. Then for the Stars, the best time to view any of them is in clear Nights, when there is little or no Moon. A Telescope of six or eight foot will for these, and indeed for the Moon or Sun also, do in a manner as well as one of twenty four or twenty five. The disadvantage of cumbersomness in these large ones is such as scarce countervails the advantages which they have; the chiefest of which is, that they take in a greater part of the Heaven than our lesser Glasses. But all Persons must be advised how they venture to look on the Sun with Telescopes. For in due position the whole Instrument is but as one violent Burning-Glass, and a Man may easily take such a look in an in∣stant as never to see more with that Eye. Therefore some use to smoak their Glass over a Candle; but the best way is to have a small piece of red or purple Glass to interpose betwixt your Eye and the Glass of the Telescope, and by this means you may view that glorious Body with little or no prejudice. But as to these points, those
who sell these Instruments will certainly, if desired, shew their Customers the truest and safest way to use them, more plainly than I can speak. I will only here add, that if we design a clear sight of the face or bigness of any of the Heavenly Bodies, the worst time to view any of them is when they are not far from the Horizon; for then the refraction of the Raies is so great, that their Bodies appear much larger proportionably than at other times, and in other positions, and the sight of them too is much more confused; By which one note, any Person may be able to direct himself what Stars are in a most convenient condi∣tion for him to view at any time, when his Curiosity leads him to such Entertainments, And truly these are Entertainments so noble and glorious, as well as ravishing and trans∣porting, that it is to be wondred how Per∣sons whose Parts and Fortunes qualifie them for them, are able to temperate them∣selves from them. But perhaps it will be said the uncertainty of the truth of them discourages. Of that therefore we will consider in the next place.
SECT. X. What certainty there may be concluded in these Curiosities and Discoveries. To come to a perfect and exact know∣ledge of the distance of the Heavenly Bodies, (by Miles or such known measures) of their bigness, substance, frame, and contexture is not to be expected: nor will any, except Madmen, pretend to have made such Discoveries. There are very few things which Wise Men will say they tho∣roughly understand, even amongst these Sublunary Bodies. But there is as great a difference betwixt the knowledge which Artists and Speculative Men have of the Heavens, Stars, and Orbs, and that which the Common People have, as there is be∣twixt the Common Peoples and Brutes no∣tices of them. To come to particulars. The Parallax of the Moon is very sen∣sibly discoverable. Its Horizontal Parallax is above a whole Degree. Therefore the distance of the Moon may be more certain∣ly concluded upon, and more firmly cre∣dited. In the other Stars I confess the Case is more difficult, and the Work finer, so
that the Result exceeds not probability. For in Mercury, Venus, the Sun, and Mars, we cannot without great difficulty observe any Parallax, and that which we can at length observe is very small. In Jupiter and Sa∣turn there is scarce any. And as to the fixed Stars they are so vastly above us, that we are to expect none in them. The rea∣son hereof is, that the Semidiameter of the Earth, which is taken in these Cases for the common Measure, and as the interstice be∣tween the two supposed Dimensory Sta∣tions, bears some sensible proportion to the distance of the Moon; but as to the distance of those other Bodies, its proportion is so very small, as almost to vanish when ap∣plied thereto. As if the Earth were but in comparison of them as a Point, and there were no difference whether we beheld them from the Surface of the Earth, or from its Center. By which ingenuous dealing the Reader will be able easily to gather what kind of belief he is to give to the foregoing Calculations or Accounts of the distances and Magnitudes of these Bodies. They are mostly but the Conjectures of Men very learned, knowing, and industrious in this kind.
And as to those Discoveries mentioned in the first part of this Book, it may perhaps be suspected they are also as uncertain, be∣cause of the diversity of Refractions and Mediums, the vast distance and other like Points. But it is to be said hereto; Those Objects which constantly through divers Glasses, at divers times, and by divers Spectators observed, still generally, or most commonly appear the same, are certainly as they appear. Saturn therefore most surely has such Ansulae of Light as he is re∣presented. Jupiter has such Obscurer Tracts as those termed his Belts or Girdle. Mars such Features as I may call them as above described. The Sun and Moon such Spots. And Venus her different Phases, sometimes as an Half, Quarter, or Full Moon. And there are none of these but are far a more glorious Light than they can be conceived, when seen only in such Figures, as we have been able to represent them in. The seeing them as near as we can by the help of our Glasses, in themselves fills the Fancy with delightful news Idea's, and the Under∣standing with new curious Contemplations, and prepares and raises the Mind to most Noble, Curious, and Divine Speculations, as well as Wonder and Content. Then as to those New Stars, (as I may call them)
that is, such Stars as we cannot espy with our naked Eye, but do plainly see, and can count with the help of our Glasses; (such as are not only very many little ones, but one larger of the seven Stars in the Pleiades, that infinite multitude in the Gallaxy or Milky Way, &c.) These are most certain things, and not meer appearances: because if an hundred People look at them, and have one hundred Telescopes, they shall all see the same Stars, and be able to count them, and describe their Position, or the Figures they make as they stand all along in the Tracts of the Heavens. These there∣fore can be no sparklings of Light, or false appearances in the Glasses, but must be real and proper Stars: some of them cer∣tainly very vastly above the others, and having different Centers of motion, or dif∣ferent Orbs from the others. Most of these things therefore cannot be doubted. And de facto, it is not now doubted, I think, by any who have used Telescopes in viewing the Heavens, that in the Firma∣ment, as it is usually called, or Sphere of fixed Stars, there are several Stars which have a peculiar motion of their own, and are as it were Suns too, and illuminate others, as our Sun does the Moon and other Planets.
But the Theory of these things would lead us into heights as far beyond our Conce∣ption and Comprehension, as above our Sight. We will therefore here sit down a while and wonder, and put a stop to our thoughts of the Stars. Soli Deo Gloria.
