A4240 10830541 46046
A TREATISE OF FRUIT-TREES, SHEWING The manner of Planting, Grafting, Pruning and ordering of them in all respects, according to Rules of Experience. Gathered in the space of Thirty seven Years. Whereunto is Annexed, Observations upon Sr. Fran. Bacons Natural History, as it concerns Fruit-trees, Fruits, and Flowers. ALSO, Directions for Planting of Wood for Building, Fuel, and other uses; whereby the Value of Lands may be much Improved in a short time, with small Cost and little Labour. The Third Impression, Revised, with Additions, By R A. AVSTEN, Practiser in the Art of Planting. Deut. 20.10. Thou shalt not destroy the Trees, being Trees for meat; for the Tree of the Field is mans life. Amos 4.4. They shall Plant Gardens, and eat the fruits of them. OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, for Amos Curteyne, 1665.
IMPRIMATUR ISTE LIBER ROBER. SAY, VICE-CANCEL. OXON. Iune the 9th 1665.
TO THE HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE Esq The Worthy PATRON and EXAMPLE Of all VERTUE. Honoured Sir, AMong other of your ma∣ny Learned and Profi∣table Labours, (which have much Inlightned the World) You have been pleased (together with the Ho∣nourable
and Royal Society, whereof You are a Worthy Mem∣ber) to take into Consideration the Work of Planting and Preserving all sorts of Trees; not onely of Forrest-trees for Building, Fuel, and other uses, but also of Fruit-trees, especially in Relation to (the most wholsome Drink) Cider; which hath (together with many o∣ther of Your undeserved Favours towards me) imboldned me to make this humble Address unto You, in∣treating Your Favour and further Help in this good and profitable Work. And conceiving that I have so much Interest in Your Honours Favour, as to have liberty to make such Proposals unto You, as con∣cern the Profit of the Publique (not
doubting of Your good acceptance of them) I do humbly submit these fol∣lowing particulars to Consideration, which I judge to be material, if not necessary, as to many persons. 1. First, That there be a Law made to enjoyne the Work, as we have in other Cases of far less con∣cernment then this; and according to the Example of other Nations in the same thing: For although ma∣ny that are Ingenious Persons, will not need such an Excitement, yet the Common vulgar People (which are the greatest part of the Nation) will do but little without it. 2. Secondly, That there be Overseers or Officers appointed to look after the Work, from year to year, (without which, some Laws
will have but a feeble Execution) and these Overseers to have due Encouragement one way or other: This is no more then what is done in other Cases of far smaller ad∣vantage then this would be. 3. Thirdly, That there be Books Printed and Published for instruction in this business, which may have these Characters. 1. First, That they be of small Bulk and Price; Because great Volumns (as many are upon this Subject) are of too great a Price for mean Husbandmen to buy; as also take up more time to peruse then they can spare from other La∣bours. 2. Secondly, That the Stile and Expressions be plaine, and
suited to the Vulgar (even to the Capacities of the meanest, for these (Generally) must be the Workmen and Labourers thereabout. Now, we know that many Pieces upon this Subject, are in Latine, French, and other Tongues; yea, and some that are in English; being the Works of some Learned and E∣minent Persons, (whose Faculties are raised by Study and Education, far above the reach of common Ca∣pacities) their Expressions are answerable, and therefore not so profitable to the Vulgar, though Excellent in themselves, and very useful unto those that understand them: But when Men are spoken to, and taught in any Art in their own Language, (in their common
familiar stile) things are more easi∣ly received, and take the deeper Impression in their minds, and are better remembred. 3. Thirdly, That these Books for Instruction, be Experimen∣tal; according to what is tried and practised from year to year. Many that have Written upon this Subject (especially some An∣tient Authours) have been meer∣ly Contemplative men; and have presented us with little else but their Notions and Apprehen∣sions: And though some things may be rational and useful, yet many are not so, which when they come to be tryed by the Touch∣stone of Experience, fall off and deceive men, to their loss of Time,
Cost, and Labour, with discou∣ragement; and discover them∣selves (as Sir Francis Bacon observes in his Advancement of Learning) to be but meer Puta∣tive things: And hereunto he adds, That it were to be wish∣ed, (as that which would make Learning indeed solid and fruit∣full) that Active or Experi∣mental men, would, or could, become Writers: And the oft∣ner Experience in things is renew∣ed and repeated, from year to year, the more it is Confirmed, and so fit∣test to be Communicated and Practised. Now, how that which is here done (in the ensuing work) answers to these things, I leave to others to
Iudge, not doubting but that You [Honoured Sir] will continue your Endeavours for the carrying on this good and profitable Work of Planting. A Work wherein not onely the most Learned Philoso∣pher, and Exquisite Indaga∣tour into the Mysteries of Nature, may exercise his Judgment, and please his Mind; but also a work Pregnant with Profits, Real and Substantial to all people all their life long, from the Cradle to the Grave: A Work that (instead of empty and fruitless specula∣tions) will fill the Belly and cloath the Back. A Work that will en∣rich the Poor, and adorn the Rich: A Work that will Encrease the Kings Revenues, and the Sub∣stance
of all his Subjects: A Work Praised and Practised by the Greatest and most Eminent Persons in all Ages. In a word, It is a Royal Work, and worthy the most serious Considerations and Endeavours of the Royal Society; whereby those Worthies may raise to themselves perpetual Honour, as being Instrumental to promote and carry on the same, to a greater and more general pro∣fit. Wherefore [Worthy Sir] You being a principal Wheel in this great and famous Engin, [framed on purpose for great and profita∣ble Works] are able to move it strongly and effectually to that end; which that you would be pleased to
do, is earnestly desired; whereby you may engage, not onely the pre∣sent Age, but also many Gene∣rations to come; to be acknowledg∣ed by many, but especially SIR, By Your already greatly obliged Servant, RA: AVSTEN.
TO THE READER▪ THe Art of Planting fruit-trees is (among Antient Authors) called Hus∣bandry,Quid sit A∣gricultura. vid. p. 11. being it is one part of the Husband∣mans work, though in many parts of this Na∣tion Husbandmen have little skill in it, their labour being chiefly Tillage of the ground for Corn. But this is a part of the Husbandmans work as well as that; yea, and the chiefest and worthy∣est part. Adam in time of his Innocency was imployed in this part of Husbandry about Fruit-trees, as is shewed pag. 22. But when he had sinned, he was put a∣way from this work to Till the ground, a lower and inferior labour. Gen. 3.23. The
Lord God sent him from the Garden of Eden to Till the ground. We see likewise the Scripture calls it Husbandry: Noah is called an Husband∣man when he Planted a Vineyard, Gen. 9.20. God (blessed for ever) is called an Husbandman, for that he Pruneth, Purg∣eth, and ordereth his Mystical Vine-tree the Church, Joh. 15.1. So that I shall keep the phrase throughout the Work. I have seen (I suppose) the best Works, both of antient and late Writers upon this Subject, and have learned from them what I could, for the accomplishing of this Art, and have observed the practise and expe∣riments of many from time to time, con∣cerning it, and have improved them to my own advantage. And likewise I have set my self to the Practise of this work about Thirty and se∣ven years, endeavouring to find out things of use and profit, by Practice and Experi∣ence, that I might speak upon better and surer grounds, than some others who have written upon this Subject; for Experience guides, and informs Reason in many things in which (without Experience) it would often erre. Some who have taught this Art of Planting Fruit-trees, have been in it only Contemplative men, having little or no
Experience in it; so that in many things they have erred, and that grosly, as shall appear in due place; See pag. 165, 166, &c. A Learned Author sayes,. Ba. Ad∣vanc. Lea. The writings of speculative men upon active matter, (for the most part) seems to men of Experience to be but as dreams and dotage: Study and Practise (by degrees) frame new Arts, and add to the old: Per varies usus Meditando extunderet Artes:Virg. Geor. paulatim. Experience is called the Perfecter of Arts, and the most sure and best teacher in any Art: Contemplation and Action are the two legs whereon Arts run steedily and strongly, and the one without the other can but hop, or go amely: They are the two Eyes wherewith men see Natures secrets clearly, but the one alone discerns but dimly. And hence it follows, that some who were only Contemplators of nature without experience, and would needs ad∣venture to write, and give instructions touching the Practique part of Planting Fruit-trees, have in many things (as the a∣foresaid Author sayes) presented us with
smoak, instead of the lucide flames of light: They have indeed shewed us a comly and beautiful body, Painted according to Art, but yet lifeless and without a spirit, and have offered us shells and husks instead of kernels. But now, speculation and action, are as Soul and Body united, which labouring together, work out both Profit and Plea∣sure, many advantages to our selves and others. Experience (as a Philosopher says) is the Root of Art, and it may well be so called, from which springs a numerous multitude of new Experiments: for from one Root, or single Experiment, (though perhaps a poor and mean one in it self) if throughly weighed with reason and judg∣ment, may arise many rich and rare inven∣tions: And its most true, which the Lord Bacon sayes to this purpose: As through a small hole or cranny, a man may see great Objects; so through small and contemptible instances, men may see great Axioms, singu∣lar secrets of nature. Men will labour hard, and a long time in some labours full of hazard and danger, and perhaps unjust too, and all for a little profit; but here, in this employment, men may with a little labour, in a short time, without hazard or danger, and that justly, obtain great and
many profits, and those with pleasures su∣peradded. Works, and labours, which have in them but a vain and unprofitable pleasure, are approved but onely of some sensual per∣sons; and such labours as have but onely Profit, and do not ease the Pains with some pleasantness in them, are yet harsh, and disliked of many, but such as yield both Profit and Pleasure, are universally liked, and allowed of all, according to the Poet, Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. Either of these is the better, because of the other joyned with it, when they run along hand in hand; the Profit is the more, because of the Pleasure; and the Pleasure is more▪ because of the Profit. Now therefore, That men may obtain yearly, a plentiful Harvest of Profits and Pleasures, I have endeavoured to remove whatsoever might hinder; and have laid down some Arguments of Encouragement to set upon, and prosecute the means to obtain them; discovering the best way I can find out, how they may be gotten with most speed, and kept with most se∣curity. If any man think the Divine and Hu∣mane
Arguments (preceeding the work) to be needless, because generally men know, that Planting Fruit-trees is a very profita∣ble work, none doubt it. I Answer; Some know it by Experi∣ence, many others do not. And although men are convinced of the profitableness of the work, yet there is need of some quickning Motives to it, as to some persons; And I know none more prevalent than those taken from Profits and Pleasures, considered in so great and so many respects. Accept of what is made ready at pre∣sent, which as it may be profitable to some in respect of Encouragements and Directi∣ons in the practise of the Work, so also I desire it may be a means to stir up others to do something in the like kind for Pub∣lique profit. There are many good Wits exercised about Toys and Trifles: some men be∣stow excessive Time, Cost, and Labour, a∣bout meer shadows, empty speculations; and well deserve Martials Motto. Turpe est difficiles habere nugas. Et stultus labor est ineptiarum. While they might in the mean time, by
the Study and Practise of this Art, (in searching out many hidden secrets of nature and experiments) much advantage them∣selves, and many others, both in respect of Temporals and Spirituals. An Antient Authour sayes, Not he that knoweth many things, but he that knoweth things Fruitful is Wise. This Art is a full Store house, out of which may be brought both Meat, Drink, and Money: It is a Rich Mine, without bounds or bottome, out of which we may dig profits and pleasures, great and many, and worthy the study and labour of the most Wise and Learned, and may be cal∣led the Philosophers-stone, (virtually and ef∣fectually (though not properly) for it turns, by the help of nature (though not Metals, yet) Trees and Fruits, yea, Earth and Water, into Gold and Silver in a short time. The good of this Imployment, both in the Theorique and Practique part, spreads it self over all places in the world, to all persons in the world, from the Cradle to the Grave, from the beginning of the world, to the end of it; so that no work can be more universal∣ly good than this. Now therefore, seeing there is so much profit and advantage to be received from
this imployment of Planting Fruit-trees, both in Temporal and Spiritual respects, Let us set about it, and labour in it, either with body or mind, or both, That there∣by the Glory of God, and publique profit (to∣gether with our own advantages) may be promoted. The blessing of God go along with us, and give the increase in all our labours, and prosper the works of our hands. This is my advice to men, and Prayer to God. Who am Thine in the best Services RA: AVSTEN.
THE ANALYSIS. PRofits of Planting Fruit-trees in Corne and Pasture grounds, the best way of Improve∣ment of Lands. p. 1. Objections concerning Planting Answered. 1. Coldnesse of the Country. p. 6. 2. Robbing of Fruit-trees. p. 7. 3. Long expectation of Fruits. p. 9. The praises of Fruit-trees and Art of Planting. 1. From An∣cient Authors. p. 11▪ 12, &c. 2. From Mo∣derne Authors. p. 11▪ 12, &c.
Eight Di∣vine Argu∣ments of the dignity & value of Fruit-trees and Art of Planting. pag. 21. 1. Argument; Adams Imploymen in Innocency. pag. 22. 2. Argument; Fruits were the first Food given to Man. p. 23. 3. Argu∣ment; from Examples pag. 23, 24, &c. 1. God blessed for e∣ver. 2. Noah. 3. Abraham. 4. King Uzziah. 5. King Solomon. 6. Susanna. 7. The Jewes. 8. Our Saviour Christ. 4. Argu∣ment; from similitudes pag. 26. 27, &c. 1. Esay  1, 2. My be∣loved had a Vine∣yard in a fruitfull hill. 2. Psal. 1.2. Like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Wa∣ters, &c. 3. Ioh. 15.1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Hus∣bandman. 4. Rom. 11.17. If some of the branches were broken off, &c. 5. Cant. 4.12, 13. A gar∣den inclosed, is my Sister, my Spouse. 6. Rev. 22.2. There was the tree of Life.
5. Divine Argument; from Gods withholding them in dis∣pleasure. p. 29. Instances. 1. Exod. 9.25. Haile brake every Tree of the Field, &c. 2. Amos 4.9. I have smitten your fruit trees, &c. 3. Ioel 1.12. The Vine is dried up, the Fig-tree lan∣guisheth, &c. 4. Deut. 28.39. Thou shalt Plant, but shalt neither drink of the Wine nor gather the Grapes. 6. Divine Argument; from Gods promising, and giving them in Mer¦cy. p. 31. Instances. 1. Ier. 29.5. Plant Gardens, and eat the fruits of them 2. Amos 9.4. They shall Plant Gar∣dens, and eat the Fruits of them. 3. Neh. 9.25. They took strong Ci∣ties, Vineyards, and Olive-yards, and Fruit-trees in abundance. 4. Ezek. 34.27. And the Tree of the Field shall yield her Fruit, &c.
7. Divine Argument from two Com∣mands. 1. Tit. 3.4. Let ours also learn to maintain good Works for neces∣sary uses. p. 33. 2. Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are lovely, of good Report, &c. pag. 33. 8. Divine Argument from Gods special Charge to preserve fruit trees above all other Trees. Deut. 20.19. Thou shalt not destroy the Trees, being Trees for Meat; for the Tree of the Field is mans life. p. 35. 4. Humane Arguments of the dig∣nity of Fruit trees and Plant∣ing from the 1. Presidents of the great∣est Persons. pag. 36. Cyrus King of Persia Philometrus, Heroni∣us, Archelaus, Atta∣lus, Kings of Asia. Evax, Avicen, Kings of Arabia. Telaphanus Antonius Pius. Elizeus. Numa. Sprtanus. Alcinous. Mithridates the great, Alexander the Great. Solomon King of Israel. And many others. 2. Praises of all peo∣ple. p. 39. See Instances of many, pag. 6, 7, 8, &c.
The Third Humane Argument from Profits. 1. To the Estate 1. In re∣spect of House-keeping 1. In Meats. pag. 40. 2. In drinks. pag. 40. 2. In re∣spect of Sale. 1. Fruits in their kinds p. 40. 2. Wins made of them. p. 40. 2. To the body 1. In respect of health, pag. 40. 1. By Moderate Exer∣cises. p. 41. 2. Fresh Aires. p. 41. 3. Pleasant odors. p. 42. 4. Wholesome Meats. p. 44. 2. In re∣spect of long life, pag. 44. 1. By opera∣tion upon the spirits, through the Organs of the body. Eare pag 61, 62, 63, &c. Touch pag 61, 62, 63, &c. Smell pag 61, 62, 63, &c. Sight pag 61, 62, 63, &c. Taste pag 61, 62, 63, &c. 2. Through the affecti∣ons of the Mind. Hope. p. 44. Joy. p. 48. Admiration▪ p. 49, &c. 3. To the Mind. 1. In respect of know∣ledge. Natural p. 50. Moral p. 50. Spiritual p. 50. 2. In respect of Meditations▪ pag. 57.
4. To the Name. 1. In this Life, by Gifts and Benefits. 2. After Death; by Fruit-trees, as living Monuments. pag. 56. 5. To others 1. To the Poor Friends or Ene∣mies. p. 60. 2. To the Rich. Friends or Ene∣mies. p. 60. The Fourth Humane Argument from Pleasures. 1. To the Eare. 1. By sweet tunes of Singing Birds. p. 60. 2. By gentle Motion of boughs and leaves. p. 60. 2. To the Touch. 1. By cool Fruits, boughs and leaves. pag. 61. 2. By cool fresh Airs. p. 61. 3. To the Eye. 1. By decent forms of Trees, Allies, Walks, Seats and Ar∣bours. pag. 64. 2. By curious colours of blos∣soms, leaves, and fruits. p. 65. 4. To the Smell. 1. By fresh Earth digged up. pag. 66. 2. From blossoms and leaves. pag. 67. 5. To the Taste. 1. From Ripe and Raw Fruits. pag. 69. 2. From Dishes and Drinks made of them. p. 70.
A Cauton in the use of Earthly blessings. No Earthly thing to be enjoyed properly, but used only. pag. 74. Difference between u∣sing and enjoying of a thing. pag. 75. The Nursery; in it consider, 1. Sowing 1. Seeds of Fruits 1. The time▪ pag. 79. 2. The man∣ner. p. 80. 2. Stones of Fruits 1. The time▪ pag. 79. 2. The man∣ner. p. 80. 2. Weeding and Watering the young Plants. pag. 81. 3. Transplanting them in Autumne. pag. 83. 4. Inoculating or Ingrafting them▪ pag. 45. In Grafting observe. 1. Time of Grafting. 1. General time▪ the Spring. p. 45. 2. More special, in respect of different kinds. p. 45. 2. Instruments for the Work. 46▪ 3. Manner of the Works 3. ways. 1. Of small Stocks. p. 46.47▪ 2. Of great Stocks. p. 46.47▪ 3. A midle sort of Stocks. p. 46.47▪ 4. Choice of Grafts. 1. As they fit seve∣ral stocks. p. 92. 2. In respect of good bearing kinds. p. 93.
In Inocula∣ting, observe 1. The time. pag. 96. 2. The Buds 1. In respect of growth. p. 51. 2. In respect of kinds. p. 97. 3. The Stocks 1. The small and young. p. 97. 2. Those full of sap. p. 98. 4. Unbinding the Buds, some sooner, some later▪ 99. In Trans¦planting, observe 1. The time: Early removing best. pag. 117. 2. Pruning 1. The Roots. of Plants pag. 120. 2. The Branches of Plants pag. 120. 3. Man∣ner of setting. 1. Stan∣dards. In respect of 1. Deep∣ness. p. 120 2. Distance p. 122. 3. Order. p. 128. 2. Wall trees. In respect of 1. Deep∣ness. p. 120 2. Distance p. 122. 3. Order. p. 128.
In Pruning, cut 1. Wall-trees 1. In Sommer. pag. 131. 2. In Winter. pag. 132. 2. Standards 1. All dead boughs. p. 133. 2. All superfluous living boughs pag. 133. Order the Roots 1. In opening them. p. 134. 2. In laying fit soyls to them. pag. 134, &c. Diseases incident to fruit trees. 1. Mossi∣ness. 1. Causes pag. 137.138. 2. Cur pag. 137.138. 2. Bark-bound 1. Causes pag. 137.138. 2. Cur pag. 137.138. 3. Canker 1. Causes pag. 137.138. 2. Cur pag. 137.138. 4. Worms 1. Causes pag. 137.138. 2. Cur pag. 137.138. Mischiefs incident to fruits 1. Caterpillers Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c. 2. Ants. Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c. 3. Earwigs Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c. 4. Snails Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c. 5. Wasps Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c. 6. Birds Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c. 7. Winds Remedies thereof▪ pag 139, 140, &c.
The use of fruits 1. The Alimental Use of 1. Apples. p. 144.145 2. Pears. pag. 154. 3. Quinces. pag. 155. 4. Cherries pag. 156▪ 5. Plums. pag. 158. 6. Aprecots pag 159. 7. Peahes. pag. 160. 8. Mulber∣ries. p. 160. 9. Figgs. pag. 161. 10. Grapes. pag 111. 11. Medlers pag. 162. 12. Wall∣nuts. p. 163 2. The Physical Use of 1. Apples. p. 144.145 2. Pears. pag. 154. 3. Quinces. pag. 155. 4. Cherries pag. 156. 5. Plums. pag. 158. 6. Aprecots pag 159. 7. Peahes. pag. 160. 8. Mulber∣ries. p. 160. 9. Figgs. pag. 161. 10. Grapes. pag 111. 11. Medlers pag 162. 12 Wall∣nuts. p. 163 Errors Disco∣vered in the 1. Theory Of the Art of Plan∣ting. pag. 165. 2. Practise Of the Art of Plan∣ting. pag. 165.
In the Theory are three sorts. 1. Instructi∣ons hurtful and dange∣rous 1. To Graft the first Spring. pag. 167. 2. Not to Prune Roots pag. 168. 3. To use Treble Grafts. pag. 169. 4. To use Grafts swelling. pag. 168. 5. To remove the Clay. 169. 6. To underprop Grafts. 169. 7. To mixt things in Graft∣ing. pag. 170. 8. Not to Plant against a Wall. pag. 170. 9. To remove after Winter▪ pag. 171. 10. To Plant on Hills. pag. 171. 11. To set Stones a foot deep. pag. 172. 12. To set buds on knobs of Stocks. pag. 172. 13. To set Apple-trees 20 foot a sunder. p. 173. 14. To cut away the shoots of the last year. p. 174.
2. Instructions for effect∣ing things impossible to be effected by the means prescribed▪ and other things impossible to be effected by any means. 1. To mix divers kinds of Fruits, pag. 174. 2. To change the species of fruits, pag. 176. 3. To make fruits have good tasts, pag. 176. 4. To make fruits have good Co∣lours, pag. 180. 5. To have Nuts without Husks, pag. 183. 6. To have early and late Fruits, pag. 184. 7. To have Fruits with Inscripti∣os on them, pag. 185. 3. Affiguing wrong causes to effects. 1. That Grafting causeth early bearing, and maketh Fruits better. pag. 187. 2. That Grafting in the Old of the Moon, causeth barrenness many years, pag. 190. 3. That Sap descendeth from the Branches to the Roots, and worketh several effects, pag. 191, 192, &c.
Errors in Practise of the Art of Planting, Are 1. Planting Trees too near toge∣ther, pag. 205. 2. Planting Trees unfit for the Country, pag. 205. 3. Choosing the greatest Plants, pag. 206. 4. Setting Trees without disbran∣ching, pag. 206. 5. Planting Trees in worse mould, pag, 207. 6. Setting the Graft and Stock smooth on the outside, p. 207. 7. Grafting long, or forked Grafts, pag. 208. 8 Suffering Fruit trees to grow like Timber-trees, pag. 208. 9. Giving too much nourishment to Fruit-trees▪ pag. 209. 10. Pruning off too many shoots from Wall-trees, pag 210. 11. Grafting Seed-plants before removing, pag. 210. 12. Not Pruning the Roots of Plants. pag. 210. 13. Breaking off Buds before grafts grow, pag. 211. 14. Grafting Great Trees in the Cleft, 211.
A TABLE, Shewing the Principal things contained in the Ensuing Work. HOw to prepare ground for a Nursery; and to Sow and Set Seeds, Stones, Kernels, &c. Page 78, 79 Preserve Seeds from Mice, and weed them pag. 80 Remove the biggest Seed-plants by them∣selves, and the least by themselves, and re∣move all Seed-plants p. 82, 83 Ianuary, the best Month to graft Cherry, and Plum-grafts p. 85 Grafts may be kept in Mould many weeks p. 85 Necessary Instruments for Grafting p. 86 Several wayes of Grafting; that of Packing on is more sure and easie, less hurt to the
grafts and stocks, then in the cleft. The Reasons p. 87 To joyn the inner sides of the stock and graft, is a special Rule in Grafting p. 91 The thickest grafts are (for the most part) the best p. 92 Cut off the tops of Grafts p. 92 Choose Grafts from the best bearing Trees p. 93 Vnbind Grafts in due season, and strengthen the grafted place p. 93 Prune off all side branches of Grafts that are for Standards, and preserve only one strait shoot p. 95 Time to Inoculate is about Midsommer, yet some Buds sooner than others p. 96 Inoculate Buds into fit stocks p. 97 Vnbind Buds in due time p. 99 How to carry Buds many Miles p. 100 Mark stocks to know the kinds p. 101 To chuse right kinds of grafts and buds, and to set them on fit stocks, is (above all things most necessary in this Art p 101, 102 Iuice of the black hart, and great bearing Cherry, special good to make Cherry-wine, or to colour Cider to make it as Clarret-wine p. 106 The driest Plums, (as the Musle, Damazeen, &c.) are the best p. 108
Aprecot-trees, and Peaches, are propagated by the bud only, not by grafting p. 109 The great Blew Fig comes to perfect ripeness with us, if set against a South wall p. 111 Vineyards formerly in England p. 112 The Parsly Vine, and white Muskadine, bear store of good fruits p. 112 Portugal Quince the best kind p. 113 Black Mulberry trees bear abundantly p. 114 Chuse the fairest Walnuts of thinnest shells, and good bearers, to set p. 115 Graft old Trees, if bad bearers, or bad fruits p. 115 Arbors of Fruit-trees, better than of Privet, &c. p. 116 Begin to Transplant betime; divers advan∣tages by it p. 117 The largest plants not best p. 119 Set not below the soyle p. 120 Prune the branches and Roots p. 120 Lay Dung or Weeds about new set Plants p. 121 How to prepare Trees for carriage p. 122 In setting Trees observe a fit distance, see the advantages p. 123 Distance of Wall trees p. 125 How to set and order Cherry and Quodling hedges p. 125 Nearness of trees best in some respects p. 127 Order in setting p. 128
Put some good Mould next the roots of Plants in setting p. 129 Ordering Plants the first year of setting, is of special concernment p. 130 Suffer not the main branches of Wall-trees to rise upwards, but spread them on the sides of the wall p. 131 Wall-trees must be pruned and ordered, both in Sommer and Winter p. 131 Errour in Pruning Wall-trees; Cutting off too many shoots p. 133 An Observation in Pruning p. 133 Bare old Trees at the Roots about October, and lay some good soyls to them p. 134 Piggeons-dung, Hens dung, Blood of Cattle, or the like, is special good to cause Trees to bear well p. 134 Mowing of Orchards is exceeding hurtful to Fruit-trees, but suffering Cattle to lie a∣mong them, is very profitable p. 135 Moss on Fruit-trees, caused by coldness and barrenness of the ground p. 137 Cut off the branches of Trees Bark-bound p. 138 Cut out the Canker of Fruit-trees p. 139 Cut worms out of the bark of Trees p. 139 Destroy Catterpillers in breeding p. 140 Preserve the fruits from Ants, Erewigs, Snails Wasps, Birds, and Winds as much as may be p. 141, 142
Apples best for Cider p. 144 Increase the best kinds for Cider p. 145 Some Cider sooner ready then other kinds p. 145 How to make Cider and Perry p. 146 Of Botling Cider p. 147 How to keep Bottles of Cider p. 147 Of the healthfulness of Cider p. 148 How to keep Apples p. 151 Apples are singular good to cure the Stran∣gury, and other diseases proceeding of the difficulty of making water; see how or∣dered p. 153 Pears are more nourishing than Apples p. 154 A Wine of Pears, not inferior to French-Wines p. 154 Quinces, Cordial Fruits, and of manifold uses p. 155 How to keep Quinces a year or two p. 156 Cherries breed good blood in the body p. 156 A pleasant refreshing Wine made of Cher∣ries, more fit for Sommer than hot Wines p. 157 Cherries boyled in broths and drinks, good for hot and feaverish bodies p. 158 Kernels of Cherry-stones break the bladder stone p. 158 Plums cast out chollerick humours, and are good in hot diseases p. 158
The infusion of dried Aprecots, is profitable in sharp feavers p. 159 Peaches cool, and keep the belly soluble, eat them (as all other fruits) moderately, and drink a cup of Wine after p. 160 Wine of Mulberries, a small quantity of juice will colour White-wine, Cider, Perry, &c. and makes a pleasant sauce p. 10 Iuice of Mulberries, good against a sore mouth or throat, they stir up a languishing appetite p. 161 Figs nourish much, and breed store of blood; are accounted restorative; they help an old cough (boyled with Isop) are for many o∣ther purposes p. 161 Medlers fortifie digestion, stay vomiting and loosness of the belly; kernels (with parsly roots, &c.) mightily drive out stones and gravel from the kidnies p. 162 Walnuts help digestion, with other things they resist Poyson; green Walnuts distilled, preserve against the Pestilence p. 163 Errors discovered concerning the Art of Planting: First, in the writings of some: Secondly, in the practise of others; see the particulars p. 165, 166, 167, &c. Scituation of an Orchard p. 212 Soyle of an Orchard p. 213 Cold and moist grounds p. 215 Hot and dry grounds p. 215
Cold clay grounds p. 215 Stony gravel grounds p. 216 Low bottome grounds p. 216 Shelters for an Orchard p. 217 Walnut-trees good shelters p. 218 Quantity of ground for an Orchard p. 220 Such as begin to Plant soonest, will have most profit p. 220 Great profits, with little cost and pains p. 221 Orchard and garden on the South side p. 221 Build the House in the midst of the Orchard p. 222 Sweet fresh Air, conduceth to health and long life more than diet p. 222 Many stocks of Bees may be kept in a great Ochard p. 223 Plant Fruit-trees in the Fields and Hedges p. 224 Observe right kinds of Trees p. 224 Plant high Trees in Fields p. 225 Manner of Planting in the Fields p. 226 Shade and droppings, no considerable pre∣judice p. 227 Great profit of Fruit-trees by Cider and Perry p. 227 Cider more healthy than other liquors p. 228 Long Experience proves the healthfulness of Cider p. 228 Windiness of Cider only at first p. 229 Cider of some Apples is cordial p. 230
Apprehensions of good, makes men seek after it p. 231 Health and Long-life p. 231 Riches and Profits p. 231 The Philosophers stone p. 232 Let Landlords and Tenants agree to Plant p. 233 An increase manifold p. 233 Husbandry the end of mens other endeavours p. 234 Nations subsist by Husbandry p. 234 Plant Oak, Ash, Elme, and all sorts of Wood p. 235 Land not worth Twenty shillings an Acre, is made worth five pound in few years p. 236 Wood on good Land worth Sixty pounds an Acre p. 236 One hundred Ashes sold for five hundred pounds p. 237 Fifty thousand pounds worth of Wood raised in an Age, by one man p. 237 A necessity of planting Wood p 237 It is desired the Higher Powers would enjoyn this work p. 238 Reasons for it p. 238 Other nations look more after planting p. 239 How to have great store of young Oaks, Ashes, &c. p. 240
How to get Elme Plants p. 240 Cut not the Tops p 241 Draw many Plants, and leave the rest p. 241 Willow, Osier, Withy, Sally, &c. p. 241 Soyle best for a Plantation p. 242 Of Vine yards in England p. 243 Camdens Testimony of Vineyards in England p. 243 Mr. Parkinsons judgement of Vineyards in England p. 244 A Vine-yard must have all advantages with us p. 245 An Experienced way for good Wines p. 245 Various things Promiscuously. 1 MAke some Wall-trees, Dwarf-trees p. 246 2 Keep the ground bare, under and about them p. 247 3 Wet grounds bad for Trees p. 247 4 Helps to Fruit-trees in bearing p. 247 5 Take heed that Pismires, Efts, and such like, be not about the Roots of Trees p. 248 6 Fruit-trees advantage Grass some wayes p. 248 7 Fruit-trees profitable many ways p. 248 8 Helps for barren Vines p. 249 9 How to keep Grapes p. 249
10 Much profit by planting in one Age p. 249 11 Remedies against Coneyes, Mice, &c. p. 250 12 To have Cherries and other Fruits late p. 250 13 Destroy Snails in Gardens p. 251 14 To have fruit grow within doors p. 251 15 Apples that have lain a certain time, make the best Cider p. 252 16 Tun up Cider as soon as may be p. 252 17 What flags are best to bind withal p. 252 18 Fit grafts and stocks in bigness p. 253 19 Cut grafts in due Season p. 253 20 Seed-stocks better than wood-stocks p. 254 21 Weed the Nursery p. 255 22 Cut not off side-branches too soon p. 255 23 How to get great boughes, with Roots from Trees p. 255 24 Look that seeds lie not above ground p. 257 25 Lay dung upon the Roots of new set Plants p. 257 26 Leave a Bud on the outside p. 258 27 Preserve some ungrafted Trees for Cider; Sow Acornes, Ashkeyes, and other Seeds p. 159
A Table shewing the Principal things con∣tained in these Experiments and Observations. ACceleration of Germination, by sowing seed upon a hot bed Page 2 Steeping of seeds, kernels, stones, &c. in Liquors be∣fore sowing, to make them spring up the sooner p. 3 Watring of Strawberries, to hasten ripening p. 4 Blood, and other things applied to the Roots of Trees p. 4 Fruits upon the south and east sun, ripen soonest p 5 Digging about the Roots of some Trees is profi∣table p. 6 Rose-trees bud forth in the house p. 6 Flowers with Bulbous Roots, grow a time in wa∣ter p. 7. Pease, Radish, &c. Early p. 7 Water necessary to fruit-trees but not over much p. 8 Plants housed seasonably, bud soonest p. 8 To make Roses come late, several means p. 9, 10▪ 11 Stones, Weeds, Muck, &c. laid about the Roots of new set Trees, makes them prosper better p. 11 Keep Trees stedy at first setting p. 1 Cut away suckers and side branches at need is p. 13 How to take off the boughs of some Trees with Roots p. 14 No descention of sap in Trees, di∣vers Arguments against it p 14, 15 How to make barren Trees fruitful p. 15 Trees against a South-wall, bear fruits ripe soon∣est p. 16 Pull not off leaves too soon p. 17 Fruits on low boughs, ripe soonest p. 17 Graft Trees that bear not, or bear not good fruits, with grafts of good bearing kinds p 19
Digging about the Roots of Trees, profitable to some p. 19 Opening the Roots of old Trees, and putting in good mould, is necessary in barren ground p. 20 Transplant Trees from bad ground, to better p. 21 Cutting, or scoring the bark of Trees, sometimes profitable p 21 Shade good for some Trees p. 22 Pull off blossomes in some cases p 22 Grafting helpeth not Trees, except the Grafts are of good kinds p. 23 Grafts do govern, yet partake somewhat of the stock p. 24 Fruit-trees of some kernels, bear good fruits p. 26 Remove flowers into fresh earth p. 26 Regrafting the same graft, makes not fruits grea∣ter p. 27 Cut not off the tops of young fig-trees p. 28 Black Mulberry-trees great bearers p. 28 Lees of Wine, Blood, &c. good especially to old Yrees p 29 Terebration of Trees, good for some Trees p. 29 Pricking, or scoring of Trees profitable p 29 Swines dung good for trees, if moderately used p. 30 Simply grafting doth not meliorate fruits p. 30 Chuse the best Grafts and Stocks p. 30 Rouen dung best for Trees p. 31 Fruit growing in Pots p. 32 Set not any Trees below the soyle p. 33 Fruits upon warm walls ripen soonest p. 33 Graft upon the best stocks p. 34 The Causes of Barrenness of Trees p. 35 Of Compounding fruits, making of several kinds, one new kind p. 37 Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants p. 40 Several kinds drawing the same juice or sap, con∣vert it into their own Natures p. 42 Of making herbs and fruits Medicinable p. 42 Curiosities about Fruits and Plants p. 44 Fruits of several shapes p. 45
Fruits and Trees with Inscriptions or Ingravings upon them p. 45 Set Letters on Fruit trees, to know the kinds p. 46 Trees apparelled with flowers p. 4 Remove flowers into fresh mold p. 47 Lay flowers to multiply them, see how p 48 Clve gilly flowers, the most useful p 49 White colours more inodorate p. 50 White fruits commonly best p 51 Different colours from one kind of seed p. 52 Gather seed from the best flowers p. 54 How to have flowers fair and dou∣ble p. 54 Roses multiplied by Inoculating p. 55 Fruits without core or stone p. 55 Grafts upon the sweetest stocks, bear the sweetest fruits p. 57 Degenerating of Plants p. 57 Some flowers dege∣rate & change through barrenness of the soyl p. 58 Seed of some fruits degenerate, see the Cause p. 59 Peaches come not better of stones then grafting p. 60 Dwarf trees bear great fruits and many p. 61 Help barren soyls, and such as are too moist, la them dryer p. 63 Some trees bear twice a year p. 6 Cutting fruit-trees conduceth to their lasting in some cases p. 65 How to keep fruits long p. 66 Wine of Cherries, and other fruits p 68 An excellent drink made of Plms p. 70 Plant the best bearing Trees p. 70 Most fruits com∣monly on the lowest boughs, the Cause p. 71 Good bearing kinds bear betime, and last long p. 73 Get the best kinds upon any rates p. 73 Graft a∣gain old Trees, if bad fruits, or bad bearer p. 74 Some Trees grow deeper then others, the cause p. 75 Some Trees take Root of slips p. 76 Vines take not with grafting, lay the branches in the earth p. 77 Heat hastneth Maturation of Fruits p. 78 How to keep Cider, and other Liquors, long p. 79 Bottles of Liquor, in Sand, Earth, &c. p. 80 Fruits cannot be made without cores or stones p. 81 Artificial heat may help to ripen fruits sooner p. 82
Planting of Fruit-Trees, The best way of improvement of Lands. THE Profits of Orc∣hards and Gardens, and also of planting Fruit-trees in the Fields and Hedges, (especially by Cider and Pery) are very well know to many in this Nation, so that the things I here speak of to men, are not doubtfull and questionable, whether advantages will arise or no, when they have bestowed their time, & labours about them, but Profits are as certaine (by the blessing of, God) as a harvest of Corne in Autumne when the husbandman hath plowed, and sowed, in the spring or other season.
Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Glocester∣shire, Kent, and many other parts in this Nation, can sufficiently evidence the Profits of Orchards and fruit-trees in the fields and hedges▪ And those good Com∣mon-wealths-men, who have written of the Improvement of lands, have all agreed, that this is the highest way of improvement of any other. Mr. Blith in his Book intituled, The Improver improved, hath asserted, That Planting Fruit trees at such a distance as they cannot reach, when they have at∣tained largest growth, they do advantage the Land, even in respect of Grasse, (al∣though the common prejudice against Fruit-trees in fields is, that they spoyle Grasse) so that some Land not being worth above 10s, or 13s 4d. an Acre, the Grasse (by planting Fruit-trees regularly upon it) was afterwards worth 30s, on 40s, or 50s an Acre. And the Fruits upon the Trees may yeild some 3l, some 5l▪ Or some 6 or 8l an Acre, See Pag. 262 of his Book. And that in Kent, Essex, Surrey, Middle∣sex, and those parts, some Land that was not worth above 6 or 8s the Acre, was by Nurseries of young Trees, planting and ordering of them, in certaine years
brought to be worth 20l an Acre, and some 40 or more. And further, he affirmeth, that some Orchards in those parts a worth to grase Forty, or fifty shillings,  an Acre, and are so let to Tenants: And the fruits of those Trees seldome yeild so little, as Double or treble the worth of the Grasse, many times five or sixfold, or more, see Pag. 263. of his Book. It may (perhaps) be objected: That Fruit-trees so planted make grasse (un∣der, and about them) sower, that it is not so pleasant, and good for Cattle, as some other, where no Trees are. It is Answered: Although it be not so pleasant altogether, as that where ther's no shade of trees, yet other advantages doe more then make amends. It's obser∣v'd that such Grasse is earlier in the spring then upon other grounds, and that such grounds beare more, when it is cut for hay, or if pastured it keeps more Cattle, then Lands of like quantity not so plant∣ed: And besides, in a hot and dry summer, ther's grasse under, and about Trees, when its burnt up in other grounds. My advice is therefore (all these Pro∣fits and advantages considered) that men set themselves diligently to this work of
Planting Fruit-trees, for improvement of their Lands and Estates. Not only, that they plant good Orchards and Gardens, but also that they Plant round about their fields, and in th elds, and in their Corne, Pasture, & hay grounds, (as in Kent) the fruit-trees at a large distance one from another, 20 or 30 yards asunder, and that they suffer no branches to spread, within two yards from the ground, that so they may be out of the reach of Cattle & may not be troublesome to workmen in plowing, sowing, reaping, and other works. If the Plants are faire straight ones, of two yards high, or thereabouts, & senced about to preserve them from Cattle at the first, (with some stakes or the like) they will in a few years preserve them∣selves, and will need but little labour about them afterwards as long as they live, And hereby men may reape every yeare two harvests, (from one and the same piece of land) the one of Corne, the other of fruits of trees, and the latter (when trees are growne large) probably will be the greater. And in this respect this way of improve∣ment of Lands, is much better then other
wayes of profit; because in getting Corne, or raising profits by any other wayes of improvement, men must of necessity be∣stow much money, time, and paines about them every yeare, which eats up a great part of their profits, but in Planting fruit-trees, the worst is at first, after a few yeares they yield great profits, with little cost and labour. So that as was said fruit-trees in a few years with small cost and labour; will double and treble the value of Lands, and after many years, the advance of Profit will be manyfold. But it may be Objected, That if all should plant,Ob. then such great profits could not be made, every man would have of his own. I answer: that if all should plant fruit-trees that may conveniently plant; yet would there be multitudes every where to buy for all that.Ans. For consider, in a great Citty or Town, what a number of people there are, who have no Lands at all, not so much as a piece of ground be∣longing to their house, and many others but very small quantities, these will be buyers of the husbandmans fruits, and the Cider and Wines that he makes of them. And let us say what we will or can, ther's many that have Lands which they
might Plant, and improve to an exceed∣ing great value, who will yet be idle, and sloathfull, and object with Solomons sluggard ther's a Lyon in the may, some∣thing or other that hinders: yet these men when they see fruits, will be as eager for them as any others, and therefore will be very good Chapmen to buy the Fruits of the diligent husbandman. Objections and Discouragements Con∣cerning Planting; answered. BEfore I enter upon the work it selfe, it will be convenient in the first place, to Answer some maine Objections, to remove discouragements about this work of Planting Fruit-trees, that have kept off many from this profitable imploy∣ment, and may still hinder them, unlesse remov'd. And then I will give some encouragements to it from Diuine, and Humane Arguments and Testimonies. 1. Ob.This is an Objection amongst many in the North parts: they say the Northern Countries are so cold, that Fruit-trees will not prosper nor beare fruits there. Ans.To this I Answer: That although it be true that the Northern Countries lye in a
more cold Climate then Worcestershire, Herefordshire and those Fruit Countries, yet I doubt not but that if they were as diligent in planting Fruit-trees in the North parts, as men are in these, they might have store of good fruits: so that some Cautions be observed in the nature of Trees. Its true: Cold Countries are not so fit for choice and tender fruits▪ as warmer Climates; but there are diverse kinds of hardy fruits, both Apples, Pears Cherries, which yearely experience shewes endure cold, and come to perfection in cold springs, when many other kinds are spoy∣led. Procure Grafts, or Young trees ready grafted of the best bearing kinds, such as are found by experience to beare well, even in cold springs. See pag. 53, 54, &c. Let such kinds therefore be sought for and Planted. Those good husbands in those parts, who are diligent in Planting Fruit-trees, have Fruits answerable. Others say,2: Ob. that if they should plant Fruit-trees, and bestow much labour and cost about them, when they come to per∣fection and bearing fruits they should be robd of all, or most, and the Trees would be spoiled, and who would Plant to be so serv'd. To this I Answer:Ans. That if there were
no remedy against this mischeife, it might indeed be a just discouragement: but this feare may be removed diverse waies. And First: I advise, that having made a good fence about the Orchard, you keep therein a lusty Mastiffe or two; that will not be charmed in the night time, and the terrour of them will keep men from ad∣venturing upon such an Occasion. Secondly: some that have good Orc∣hards watch their fruits. If a man keep 2, or 3, or more servants, they may watch in their turns, its no great matter, if you con∣sider for what time only it is necessary, which is but from the time that fruits come to be worth getting, till they be ripe, and that's not long. And consider, it is in a pleasant season of the yeare, the paines and charge would be but little to the profit: we see men are vigilant & diligent much more then this would require upon far lesse advantages. 3. But there is a third means to keep Orchards from being rob'd, which I estee∣me best of any other, it is this: I would have every man (that hath land) to plant some Fruit-trees for himselfe, that so they may not be theeves to their neighbours: and let those that have much fruit spare a part to the that have but little, or none
of their own, and be no niggards but liberall to their neighbours: And this bounty will bring a double blessing, first from God, to increase the fruits; secondly from men, not to diminish them. But I heartily wish that such as make but a sport of robbing an Orchard,See the se∣cond Book of his Confessi∣ons. Chap. 4. would but consider the affliction and terrors of con∣science that seised upon good St. Austen, for this very sin of robbing an Orchard, which he was guilty of before his Con∣version: he confesseth it with much greife, and aggravates it with no lesse then ten circumstances, crying earnestly for mercy and pardon: Ecce Cor meum Deus meus, ecce Cor meum, quod miseratus es in imo abyssi. &c. When God lets loose the least sin to fight against a man, and but to shew it selfe in its proper shape, it will terrifie the stoutest heart: A wounded spirit who can beare? But there is another Objection greater then the former:3. Ob. Men usually say, should we plant Fruit-trees it would be so long ere they come to perfection, and bearing fruits, that out hopes would faint before we could see profit of our labours, per∣haps they would not beare fruits of Six∣teen, or Twenty yeares growth. I Answer first,Ans. that though the Objecti∣on
on were true, that trees Planted would be long ere they come to bearing fruits, perhaps 20 yeares or more, yet this should not discourage us; especially such as may have good hopes to enjoy the pro∣fits and pleasures of them many yeares after, and then leave them to their Chil∣dren and to posterity after them. But secondly, men are generally mistaken upon this Accompt, Fruit-trees rightly ordered, will not be so long ere they beare fruits as they suppose: I shall shew a way, that by Planting Fruit trees, and ordering of them as I give directions (by the blessing of a divine hand that still at∣tends honest labours) we may receive Profits from them in halfe Twenty years yea in halfe that halfe, yea in lesse then in five yeares: sometimes the third, sometime the second yeare, (of many kinds of fruit-trees) after Grafting: Experience prove it, though we must know, the fruit cannot be much, while the trees are so small, o particulars: yet a multitude of such tree will afford a multitude of fruits: A Cistern of water is but a multitude of drops. So then; that Fruit-trees may be plant∣ed and come to bearing fruits in 5, 4, or 3 years, or sooner, the meanes is shew'd a large in the ensuing worke. So that I hope
his grand discouragement (which hath o long and so generally kept men from his profitable work) will be remov'd. Now (as I promis'd) I will lay down ome Excitements, and Encouragements to he worke of Planting fruit-trees. Many large workes have been com∣posed by Ancient Authors, for the Instru∣tion of the husbandman in this his princi∣all worke: And they have given this im∣ployment many and great commendations and praises, and it is accounted by them the cheifest of all earthly imployments, because of the many Profits and Pleasures, that come by it. And because it shall appeare what pinion and esteeme they have had of this course of life, and with what Praises they have set it forth, I will give you the particular expressions of some of them in their owne words; And then give the mme of what they have said to the plain husbandman,The praises of the An∣cients and some late writers con∣cerning the Husband∣man scours of life in Planting Fruittrees. and others, that else could not understand them. Agricultura quid sit. MIHI videtur nihil aliud esse Agri∣culturam quam inspectâ Plantae na∣urâ & Coeli & terrae ei idoneum cultum ribuere, & (ut ita dicam) coelum cum erra maritare, vel societatem perquirere
Coeli & terrae ad Arbores: Sed quum Coelu nullo modo queat flecti, oportet ut sedu Agricola situs varietate utatur, ut C facilè Planta associetur. Agricoloe ad dus∣metas intendere debent, ad utilitatem, &  lptatem. Agricultura est Ars quae do usuram cum terra facere. Inter omnia en quae utilitatem simul & jucunditatem par∣unt, ut ambiguum sit utilitatisue an amaen∣tatis plus habeat. Variis fructibus delecte non tempore uno sed diversis, alio renascen alio decidente, ut unusquisque ex industriây cunditate te afficere sataget: Rami fructib onerati pondere incurvantur, ac se iu decumbenti offerunt. Aspice curvatos Pomorum pondere ramo Ut sua quod peperit vix ferat Arbor onu O quam dulcissimum est fructus ex Arbor bus quas sevisti, inseruisti, & coluisti, pr priis manibus colligere, & Amicis, agati que jactabundus largiri. Est & alia Arboribus delectatio, Avium scilicet modi∣latio, ac ex variorum multitudine dulcissin us efficitur concentus: Auresque cantib demulcent suis, Aves canoros garrulae fundunt sonos: Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis. Theophrastus Hortum juxta aedes colloc vit, quem moriens testamento Philosophant bus reliquit: Democritus Abderites pro
hortum Cellam habuit. Palemon Atheniensis n hortis docebat. Laidis Cyrenei in hortis chola fuit, quos Attalus Rex aedificavit. Quid enim hoc opere innocentius vacantibus,August. & quid plenius magnâ consideratione pru∣entibus;Reges & Imperatores sum mos que magistratus non puduit Hortensia colere: pro∣pris mani∣bus. quid majus mirabilùsque spectacu∣um est, quam cm positis seminibus, Plan atis surculis, translatis Arbusculis, insitis alleolis, tanquam interrogatur quaeque (vis adicis & germinis) quid possit, quidve non ossit, unde possit, unde non possit; cum rerum atura humana ratio quodammodo loqui otest, quid in ea valeat numerorum invi∣bilis interiorque potentia: quid extrinsecus dhibita diligentia, & in ipsa considerati∣one perspicere: quia neque qui plantat est ali∣quid, neque qui rigat, sed Deus qui dat in rementum. Mira est & inexplicabilis horti ommoditas: nam si necessitatem considero, Agricutura tanto est humano generi emolu∣ento; ut eâ carere nullo modo possis; si tilitatem, inter primas non postrema, aut uaenam illi poterit comparari: si voluptatem ignitati commistam, ea est excellentia &c. Much, more they speake in praise of his worke, which here (for brevity sake) shall omit. Now that the husbandman (and every ue) may understand what has been said y these Authors, and others, I will give more plainly the summe of all.
They define husbandry to be an Ar teaching men lawfull usury with the earth And that it seemes cheifly to be the searching, and finding out the nature Plants and Trees, and of the Heavens an the Earth, and then to give unto Plan fit place and ordering; according to the nature of the Soyle and Climate; And (a they say) to marry and match together Heaven, and Earth, or to procure a soci∣ety, and neere fellowship between heaven and earth, for the increase and benefit o Trees and Plants: But seeing that the heavens can by no meanes be bowed, o brought neerer to us, therefore it mu be the skill, and diligence of the hubandman to place and set his Trees in such sort that the heavens may give their in∣fluence and warmth, for encrease and refreshing of them. Husbandmen ough to make Accompt of two harvests yearly the one of Profit the other of Pleasure for when a man hath done what is neces∣sary for his life, and thence proceeds profit besides all that, great Pleasure springs from the Profit: and what greater pleasure can there be then that which is Accompanie with Profit. Now of all estates of life the husbandman may chiefly challenge this t himselfe, yea it is questionable whether
the Profit or Pleasure of his life be the greater: God when he would make the life of man Pleasant unto him, he put him into an Orchard or Garden of delights, that he might labour therein with pleasure of mind: There a man is delighted with variety of Fruits of Trees, not in one sea, son only, but in diverse seasons of the yeare, some young and springing forth, while diverse other kinds are ready to fall with ripenesse. So that a man doth even busy himselfe with the choice of such varieties. The Boughs burthened with the weight of Fruits do bow to thee, and in a lowly manner offer their Fruits, as the Poet notes. Behold the bending Boughs, with store of Fruits they teare. And what they have brought forth, (for weight) they scarce can beare. Oh how sweet and pleasant is the fruit of those Trees which a man hath Planted and ordered with his owne hand, to gather it, and largly and freely to bestow and distribute it among his kindred and friends. Yea it is a delight to heare the pleasant tunes, and singing of Birds, which with their variety of notes, make a sweet har∣mony and concent, and much please and
allure the sence So the Poet, Melodious Ditties chirping Birds indite whose pleasant songs our ravisht eares invite. Theophrastus planted an Orchard close to his dwelling house, which when he died, he left to students and lovers of Philosophy, and wisdome. Democritus had his Chamber neer to a garden. Many Philosophers have taught their schollers in Orchards and Gardens. Augustine.What worke is more innocent then Planting of Fruit-trees, and what more full of high speculations to wise men then it is: What is more wonderfull to behold then (in sowing seeds, in planting sprigs, in removing young Trees, in grafing new shoots or grafts) as it were to aske and demand with a mans selfe, what, by the nature and virtue of the Roots and Bran∣ches may be done, or what may not be done, for what reason it may be done, or not done (seeing the nature of things may after a sort be declared by reason) what of many things is of force, and effect, by an invisible and inward power, and nature, what diligence is outwardly to be used, &c. In which consideration and search, we may see and understand these things. Yet for all that, neither he that Plants is any thing, nor he that waters, but
God that gives the encrease. They accompt this course of life free from many mischeifes, and vexations, that necesarily atend other affaires: great and many cares, and troubles are found in honours, and high places, but this course of life about Orchards and Gardens, is full of sweet rest, honest busi∣nesse, and modest pleasures, which many famous & learned men have had recourse unto for refreshment after study, and other labours: It is full of honest profit and gaine, and brings and administers all ne∣cessaries: here a man enjoyes pleasant quietnesse and tranquillity of mind, which is seldome attained by those that follow State Imployments: This is worthy the ex∣ercise of wise men, of good men, of learn∣ed men, of Kings and Emperours: they have taken great delight in the study and practice of these things: This course of life is far off from covetousnesse, & even tied and married to all Offices of love and friendship: This is a quiet & pleasant life, worthy to be preferred before all hono∣urs & dignities: This culture of the ground, and planting and ordering of Fruit-trees, Occasions search and enquiry into many secrets profitable to men, which bring unto them ample satisfaction: yea the ex∣cellency
and worthinesse of Husbandry is surpassing, it excells all other Arts, and appeares as the Lady or Mistris, they as Servants attending her. Many of the Ancients have largely declared unto us the nature and use of Plants and Trees before all other living creatures. The profit of a Garden of Fruit-trees is wonder∣full, and cannot well be declared. And if Antiquity can adde any noblenesse, and worth to a thing, what imployment then before this? what more ancient then the labour of the Husbandman. Husbandmen are called Honest and good men, because of their innocent and just life. Cicero esteem∣de it best of all other labours, nothing more rich and profitable, nothing more delightfull, nothing more worthy a gen∣erous spirit then it. In former times those that were honoured & carried in triumph, they were not honoured with Gold, Pearles, and other such pretious things, but with the Boughs and Branches of Trees: And in their Games and exercises, who so got the Prize were crowned with th branches of certaine Trees, as the Oliv, Palme, &c. Such as got the Conquest and Victory of their enemies were crowned with the Lawrell which was to them a signe of Victory. And in their feasts they
gave Crowns and Garlands of Leaves, and Branches of Trees, in token of mirth and pleasure. Besides, if this labour receive honour from the persons that have beene conversant in it, then it is a Kingly Art, and chiefest of all other;See the worthie Acts of Cyrus king of Persia. Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. &c. Cyrus King of Persia (who had all the Kindomes of the earth given to him) was diligent, and most exact in the handling of it: He plant∣ed Orchards and Gardens of Fruit-tree. with his owne hand, which when Lysan∣der saw, he admired to see the excellen and singular order & disposition of them, saying, O Cyrus, right blessed shall all men call thee, because to thy dignity and Crowne thou hast joyned this care, and course of life. Telephanes tilled the ground and planted Trees among his subjects. Elizeus Sparta∣nus planted spacious and large Orchards, and used therein to Feast and Banquet with his children and friends, Kings, Em∣perours, & highest powers were not ash∣amed to perform the workes belonging to an Orchard with their own hands: Divers Emperours of Rome had Gardens of Fruit-trees,Of this See, Sir Rich Barkley of the felicity of man pag 162. and performed the workes therein with delight: Dioclesian Emperour of Rome after he had reigned twenty years, betooke himselfe to a private life, and
Planted Orchards and Gardens with his owne hand, wherein he took such delight, that he could not be intreated to take upon him again the Government of the Empire: Solomon (the wisest of all Kings) had Orchards and Gardens of Fruit-trees, took pleasure in them, and spake of all Trees from the Cedar even to the Shrub. Mascali sets out this Art with admirable praises, he saies, among all sciences, and goodly exercises for men, there is none do more refresh the spirits, nor cause more admiration in the effects of Nature, or is more profitable for mans life then is the skill of Planting and Grafting. Many great Lords and Noble Personages have left their Theaters and goodly exercises, and have given themselves to Planing and Grafting, and such like imployments, and have commended nothing more then this imployment. The Senators, Dictators, and Consuls of the Romans have commended Planting and Grafting to be one of the flourishing labours in the world for the Commonwealth. Yea they did so much esteeme it, that they did hang Tables there▪ of in divers places, never thinking the time more aptly spent, then in Planting and Grafting. Many worthy & learned men, both ancient and of late daies, have writ∣ten
for their Country and Common∣wealth of the fruitfull Art of Grafting and Planting. M. Bolton saies, Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens, and such inclosed Plats, are (as it were) the Flowers, Starres, & Paradises of the Earth. And the Lord Bacon (in his Essaies, pag. 266.) saies, Gardens are the purest of humane pleasures, the greatest refreshments of the spirits of man, without which Buildings and Pallaces are but grosse handy works. THus have I shewed (briefly) what some of the Ancients, and some late Writers have said, and esteemed of Fruit-trees, and of the Husbandmns course of life, and imployments about them. I will now say something more of the dignity and value of Fruit-trees, and of the Art of Planting from Divine & Humane Arguments and Testimonies, and after that I shall enter upon the work it selfe. Though it be absurd for a man to commend himselfe, yet he may commend his Calling and profession: Paul would not boast of himselfe' yet faith he, Rom. 11.13. I magnifie mine Office. Suffer me there∣fore (for Encouragement to all in the work,) to say something in praise of
Fruit-trees, and of the employment about them, it being a worke so full of Profit and Pleasure in the life of man: The workes of God are laudable, and have a dignity upon them, and ought to be taken notice of, praised, and admired, not for themselves, but for the Author, that he through, & by them, may have the more praise Psalm. 111.3. His worke is worthy to be praised, and had in honour. Arguments of the dignity of Fruit-trees, and Art of Planting. 1 Argument.ONE Divine Argument of the dig∣nity, and value of Plants, Fruit-trees, and the Art of Planting may be this. It was Adams imployment in his innocency to keepe and order the Garden of Fruit-trees, Gen. 2.15. And the Lord God put him in∣to the Garden of Eden to dresse it, and to keep it. God, who, is wisdome it selfe, saw that a Garden of Fruit-trees was the meetest place upon all the Earth, for Adam to dwell in, even in his state of perfection: And therein assigned him an imployment for his greater delight, and pleasure: so that this imployment, as it is ancient, so it is honourable. De Gen. ad Lit: Li. 8,Augustin is of opinion, that this dressing
of the Garden, was as well an exercise of the hand, as of the mind, not with toyle-somenesse & trouble, but with delight, and pleasure, Non erat laboris afflictio, sed exhileratio voluntatis, quum ea quae Deus creaverat, humani operis adjutorio, laetius, feraciusque provenirent, Creator ipse uberi∣us laudaretur. That things created in the Garden, by his labour, might be made more fruitfull, and God thereby have the more glory.2 Argument. The second Divine Argument is this. Plants were the first animate bodies that God created: And fruits of Trees was the first food that was given to man, his food appoint∣ed by God, even in his perfect Condition. And God said▪ behold I have given you every hearb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the Earth, & every Tree in which is the fruit of a Tree yeelding seed, to you it shall be for meat, Gen. 1.29. Another Divine Argument is from exam∣ples in Scripture of Planting Fruit-trees, & of the use of Orchards and Gardens. First.3 Argument. God (blessed for ever) planted an Orchard,Example. or Garden of Fruit-trees,Diodat. exp Sir W. Raw¦ley Hist. part. 1. Ch. 3. Gen. 2.8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had formed.
Au de Civit Dei lib. 13. c. 24.God planted a Fruit-garden; That is, He caused a parcell of ground to bring forth Plants and Trees most exquisite and usefull for man, and enriched that place with more fruit-fulnesse and beauty, then any other part of the Earth, and called it EDEN, that is, a place of Pleasures. Sir W Rawly 1. Book, 1. part, Chap. 9.And at this day, this Region of Eden (afterwards called Mesopotamia) is ex∣ceeding fruitfull, being in the best Climate 35 degrees from the Equinoctiall, and 55. from the North-pole, in which Climate the most excellent fruits, Oyles. Graines, &c. are found.2 Example. Secondly, we have for our example herein that good, & holy man, who found grace in the sight of God, when all the world (save a few with him) perish, Gen. 9.20. And Noah began to bee an husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard. Or as some conceive, he began to prune and dresse the plants that were set before the Flood, and to order them that they might yeeld their fruits. 3 Example.Thirdly, We have for our example here∣in the friend of God, faithful Abraham, Gen. 21.33. And Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God. Of the fitnesse of these shades by
Arbours, Seats, and close walks in Orchards for contemplation, and private exercises, I shall speak hereafter. Fourthly,4 Example.King Vzziah delighted in this imployment, 2 Chro. 26.10. Vzziah had husbandmen and dressers of Vines in the Mountaines and in Carmell, for he loved husbandry. This King raigned a long time in Ieru∣salem over Iuda, fifty and two yeares.5 Example. Fiftly, King Solomon, a great and wise King, Eccl 2.4. tooke pleasure herein, (and though we may not follow him in any immoderation, and excesse, yet thee s a lawfull, and warrantable use of these delights) Vers. 4.5. I made me great workes, I builded me houses, I planted me Vineyards, I made me gardens, and Orc∣hards, and I planted in them Trees of all kind of fruits.6 Example. Sixtly, For the use of an Orchard and Garden, we have the example of the Mirror of Chastity, Virtuous Susanna. It was her custome to walke in a garden, as we see in the History vers. 7▪8. Susanna went into her husbands garden to walke, the wo Elders saw her going in every day, and walking. Seventhly,7 Example. The people of Israel (by a peciall command from God) made use of
Arbours and shady places, in their great Feasts: Nehem. 8.14.15. It was publishe and proclaimed in all their cities, and i Ierusalem, saying, Goe forth unto the Moun and fetch Olive Branches, & Pine Branches and Mirtle Branches, and Branches of thick Trees, to make Boothes: So they mad these Boothes upon the Roofs of their houses and in their Courts, and in the court of th house of God, and in the streets; and the sate under these Boothes, and there was ver great gladnesse.8 Example. Eightly, For the use of an Orchard,  Garden, we have the example of our blessed Saviour whose custome it was to wa in a Garden, Io. 18.1. when Iesus ha spoken these words he went over the Broo Cedron, where was a Garden, into which  entred with his Disciples: We see he often came to this Garden, for Iudas observed i was his custome to goe to it. v. 2. Iudas knew the place, for Iesus often times resorted thither with his Disciples. 4 Argument.Another Divine Argument of the Dignity and value of Fruit-trees, and art  Planting,Hos. 12.10. I have used Similitudes by the Mini¦stry of the Prophets. is from the frequent use of Sim∣litudes betweene the Church of God an Fruit-trees, and betweene our Saviour and Fruit-trees. Fruit-trees beare the figure and resem∣blance
of many high and great Mysteries held forth to us in Parables, Tropes, and Allegories, which represent Morall, and Spirituall things, under the shape and figure of these Corporeall things. One Similitude is betweene the Church and a Vineyard:1 Similitude Esay. 5.1, 2, My beloved had a Vineyard in a very fruitfull Hill vers: 2. And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choice Vine, &c: And he looked that it should bring forth grapes &c. Secondly,2 Similitude the Prophet David useth the Similitude of a fruitfull tree to expresse the Condition of a Godly man. Psal: 1.3. He shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters, that bringeth forth his fruit in due season, his Leafe also shall not wither, and looke whatsoever he doth it shall prosper. So againe, Ier. 17.8. He shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her Roots by the River, and shall not see when Heate commeth, but her Leafe shall be greene, and shall not be carefull in the yeare of Drought, neither shall cease from yeelding fruit. Another Similitude our Saviour useth to expresse the Condition of his Church drawne from the Vine.3 Similitude Io. 15.1. I am the true Vine and my Father is the husbandman:
every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away, and every branch that beareth fruit he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. As the Branch cannot beare fruit of it selfe, except it abide in the Vine, no more can yee except yee abide in me. Vers. 4. 4 SimilitudeAnother Similitude is between Natur∣all and Mysticall Grafting, Rom: 11.17. Concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and rejection of the Iewes for a time. If some of the Branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive tree wert grafted in amongst them, & with them partakest of the root and fatnesse of the Olive tree, Ver. 23. And they also if they abide not still in unbeliefe shall be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in againe, Vers. 24. For if thou wert cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and wert grafted (contrary to nature) into a good Olive tree, how much more shall these, which bee the naturall branches, be grafted into their owne Olive tree?5 Similitude Fiftly, The condition of the Church is figuratively, & by Allegories described by Solomon in his Songs, Chap. 4.12, 13. And amongst other figures and resemblances there us'd, one is taken from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees. A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse. Thy Plants are an or∣chard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits.
Likewise Cant: 2:3: like the Apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sonnes; I Sate downe vnder his shadow with great delight, & his fruit was sweet to my tast. Sixtly,6 Similitude A Fruit-tree beares the figure and resembance of our Saviour Christ in the description of Spirituall Paradise Revel. 22.2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the River was there the tree of life, which bore twelve manner of fruits, and yeelded her fruits every month & the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations. And againe Chap. 2.7. To him that overcommeth I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Concerning Similitudes between Mate∣riall and Mysticall Fruit-trees, see the Observations following in the second part.5 Aagumen. Another Divine Argument may be this. God hath threatned to withhold his blessing in these things, if we do not obey him, and hath in displeasure often depriv∣ed men of the same for their disobedience, which proves them to be of value and worth: For when God is displeased with a people, or particular persons, and will shew it by some correction, that he may bring them to repentance, he doth it not
by withholding, or taking from them some small matters, that they can easily spare without griefe or trouble, for that would worke no effect, but by withholding or depriving them of something that's preci∣ous, and deare to them, the want or losse of which, will sad the heart: which course God hath observed with people, concern∣ing these particular blessings. As appeares. 1. This was part of two of the ten Plagues, wherewith Aegypt was punished, Exod. 9.55. The haile brake every tree of the field. And as the Prophet David hath it, Psalm. 78.48 He destroyed their Vines with haile, and their Mulbery trees with frost: & Psalm: 105.33. He smote their Vines also, and Fig-trees: and Ex. 10.5. Locusts did eat all the trees which the haile had left. 2. Secondly, among the signes of Gods displeasure against Israell: this is one. Amo 4.9. I have smitten your Fruit-trees, &c. yet have you not returned unto me, saith the Lord. 3. Thirdly: the Prophet calls to mourn∣ing, Joel. 1.12. For, The Vine is dried up, the Fig-tree languisheth, the Pomegranate tree, the Palme tree also, and the Apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered, be∣cause joy is withered from among the sons of men.
4. Fourthly: God in displeasure for sin ells them, Deut. 28.39.40. Thou shalt plant Vineyards and dresse them, but shalt neither drinke of the wine, nor gather the grapes, for the wormes shall eat them. Thou halt have Olive trees throughout all thy oasts, but shalt not anoint thy selfe with Oyle: For thine Olive shall cast her fruits. And God ids Moses tell the people, if they would not obey, their land should not yeild their increase, neither should the trees of the land eild their fruits. The like againe, Zeph. 1.13. Amos 5.11. Esay, 17, 10. Hosea .12. Another Divine Argument may be this:6 Argument▪ God hath promised these things as blessings to such as obey him, and from time to time performed it: Not to be lookt upon as things of light, and triviall consequence, ut to be considered as strong engage∣ments to obedience. When God hath beene well pleased with a Nation, or particular persons he hath often shewed it (among other tokens of his love) by mul∣iplying the fruits of their trees, encouraging them to plant Fruit-gardens, and promising his blessing thereon. As we see. 1. God (by his Prophet) encourages his people in Babylon to build, & to plant, er. 29.5. Build ye houses▪ & dwell in them, nd plant gardens and eat fruits of them.
2. And in the promise of their returne this was one of the blessings God would bestow on them, Amos. 9.14. And I wil bring againe the captivitie of my people Israell, and they shall build the wast citties and inhabite them, & they shall plant Vine∣yards, and drink the wine thereof, they shal also make gardens and eat the fruit of them. 3. Thirdly, When they came into Ca∣naan that pleasant land, this is mentioned as one of the blessings, Neh. 9.25. They pos∣sessed houses full of all goods, wells digged, Vineyards and Oliveyards, and fruit-trees in abundance. 4. And among the showers of blessing (as the Prophet calls them) this is one, Ezek: 34.27. The tree of the field shall yeel her fruit. And Ezek: 36.29. I will multiply the fruit of the Tree. The like of many other places, Mal. 3.10.11. Joel. 2.21.22. Levit: 26.3, 4. Esay 65.21, 22. Levit. 19.23. &c. And thus much of the sixt Divine Ar∣gument from the promises of God, and perfor∣mance of them, in these things to his people. 7 Argument.Another Divine Argument of the Digni∣tie and value of Fruit-trees, and the art of planting, is from two generall commands given by the Apostle Pavl, which though they mention not these things in explicite
and plaine tearmes, yet they are com∣mended to us by plaine and cleare implica∣tion, and deduction▪ for as out of generall promises we may draw, and deduct perti∣culars, & make applications from them; so also from generall commands and directions. The first Command is that of Paul in his Epistle to Titus Chap. 3. v. 14. Let ours also learne to maintaine good works for necessary uses, that they be not un∣fruitfull: here's a generall Command, out of which one particular may be derived for the present purpose. The Apostle here, by Good workes, meane good works as they are towards the maintenance of the Commonwealth, or a particular Family with necessary commodities and usefull things, as Honest Trades, and Imployments, as the Margint renders it. Now it is clear, this work & imployment of Planting Fruit-trees, is a good worke for ne∣cessary uses, seeing the life of man may by it be maintained with so many necessaies belonging to it: See Profits of an Orchard, . This being so, the Apostle (the) bids us learne to do it, as if he should say, get some skill in it, and be doing then uphold and maintaine it. The second generall Command is that which the Apostle writes to the Philip∣pians,
Chap. 4.8. Whatsoever things are True: whatsoever things are Honest: what∣soever things are Iust: whatsoever things are Pure: whatsoever things are Lovely: whatsoever things are of Good Report: if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, thinke on these things. Now it is easy for a man to speake of many particular Imployments, which have upon them the Characters and Marks here mentioned: but of them all, I know not one (except Divine Imployments) that hath these Marks so clearely stampt upon it, as this Imployment of the husbandman in Planting Fruit-trees. This Imployment answers exactly to the Apostles Rule, as it were face answering face in the glasse: for what particular labour is more honest, more just more pure, more lovely, of better re∣port? what hth moe Virtue? what hath more Praise then it? ee what hath been said in the Praise and good report of it, and the rest of the rperties, at large already mentioned, pag. 11, 12, 13, 14 &c. Now this being so, then we ought to follow the Apostles Command: If there be any Virtue, if thee be any Praise (saith he) think on these things. The words are very Emhaicall: whatsoever, and if there be any praise. His meaning is, whatsoever
the work be, though mean in the eye of the world, yet, if there be but any one of these Characters and Marks upon it, it is worthy to be followed, then how much more when it has them All, and that so eminently, as that every eye sees them. Thinke on these things, saith he, first to search out what works and imployments are markt with these Characters: and then, think on such to like, chuse them, to set a∣bout them, to follow them, & make such things our professions for the praise of God, and profit of men. And so much for the seaventh Divine Argument.8 Argum: Another Divine Argument, is from Gods command for the preservation of fruit-trees: He layes a speciall charge upon men for their safety and preservation, as we see, Deut. 20.19.20. When thou shalt besiege a city a long time in making war against it. to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees there∣of, by forcing an Axe against them, for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them downe, to further thee in the siege, for the tree of the field is mans life, Vers: 20. Only the trees which thou knowest that they be ot trees for meat, thou shalt destroy, and cut hem downe, and thou shalt build Bulwarks gainst the city that maketh war with thee
untill it be subdued. Although this Scrip∣ture may be taken in an Allegoricall sence, as signifying to us Gods care of Mysticall Fruit-trees, his people: being Trees of righteousnesse of the Lords planting: yet the same may also be taken in a litterall sence, & as some Godly men conceive, is a positive binding Law even at this day. We see God ingeminates, and repeats his charge to preserve the Fruit-trees, be∣ing trees for food, and nourishment of mans life, they must not be destroyed, though it were on so great an occasion as to further the siege against their enemies. He leaves other trees, such as are not trees for meat, such as beare no fruits, to be cut down and de∣stroyed, as they have use for them in the war, but they must not spoyle, nor meddle with the Fruit trees. I have discovered these Divine Argu∣ments of the dignity and value of Fruit-trees and the art of Planting, to stir up and en∣courage men to so good a work, to  work of so great and many advantages to the Commonweale 1. Humane Argument.And because Humane Arguments, ar likewise prevalent which men, observ them also for further encouragement. The first Humane Argument of the dignty and value of Fruittrees, and the ar
Planting is from Presidents, or Examples of wise and learned men, of great and good men in former ages, who have practised this Art. Examples either in Vrtue or Vice, are powerfull with men, (especially Examples of great ones) Brevius iter per exempla, quàm per praecepta Its much easier to prevaile with people by Examples, then by Precepts or Rules. And if Examples of great ones, even in things evill, are so powerfull, as they are with most men, how much more then should they be prevalent in honest, and vertuous things: so that herein is a double inducement, the Example, and the Vertue: here is a twofold Argument concurrent and met in this imployment of planting fruit-trees: Presidents, and those of the highest; Philosophers, Kings, & Emperours. Secondly, Vertue, and that of the chiefest Nature that secular Imployments have in them. So then observe some Examples record∣ed by antient Athors in this imployment of planting Fruit-trees. Plures excellentis doctrine viri,Pog. Floren & Philosophandi studio, &c. Many famous and learned men (saith he) studious in Philosophy, have delighted in this
course of life, and found therein abundance of pleasure, and contentment. Si dignitas Agriculturae accedit ex iis qui eam tractaverint, Regalis Ars & digni∣ssima erit. If the dignity and esteeme of this Art may be drawne from those who have beene conversant in it, then it is a Kingly Art, and chiefest of all others. Reges & Imperatores summosque Magistratus. &c. Cyrus King of Persia. Philometrus King of Asia. Heronus King of Asia. Archelaus King of Asia. Attalus King of Asia. Evax and Avicen: Kings of Arabia. Solomon King of Israel Telaphanus. Antonius Pius. Elizeus. Numa. Sportanus. Alcinous, Mithridates the great. Alexander the great. Dioclesian, Emperour of Rome, And many others. Kings, Princes, Roman Emperours and the highest powers on earth, have not disdained to performe the works of an Orchard with their owne hands, and taken delight therein. Mascall saies: Many great Lords and Noble persona∣ges, have left their Thea∣ters, goodly exercises, and have given themselves to Planting and Grafting, & have accounted nothing of higher commendation.
The second humane Argument of the dig∣nity and vale of Fruit-trees, and the art of planting,2. Humane Argument. is from the praises of ancient and late Writers, and the suffrage, or general consent of all people. Works and imployments that have the praise but of some persons only, we cannot conclude the worth and dignity thereof from such praises, because selfe and sinister ends may sway in the minds of such▪ but those imployments that have the praise of all, and where there is a concurene, & consent of minds in all people in the praise thereof, (of the Good, as well as the bad▪ of the Learned as well as the unlearned of the Wise, as well as the unwise) these proba∣bly are good and vertuous. Now this art and imployment of planting Fruit-trees, hath the joynt & unanimous consent, not onely of greatest persons of the world, but likewise of all persons in the world, ther's none hath ill will towards it, none hath any thing to say against it, but all without exception, give it their good word and speake in the praise of it. If men doe but seake of it, they'l com∣mend it, and say, its a goodly imployment, its both a pleasant and profitable worke, its good for a Commonwealth, it enriches whole Countries, to this purpose men of usally
speake of it what ancient and late writers have said in the praise of it, may be seen, pag. 14, 15, 16. &c. And for the second Humane Argument thus much, The third Humane Argument of the dig∣nity and value of Fruit-trees and the art of planting is,3. Humane Argument. Argumentum ab utili, from the Profits that are receiv'd thereby. Let us see then what Profits may be had from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit trees. Profits arise from an Orchard many waies: one way is to mans Estate: and that in two respects: first, in respect of house keeping, and provision for his family all the yeare. In house Keeping.Secondly in respect of sale. Such as have good Orchards know by experience that they are very profitable for meat, and drink, all the yeare long, many good dishes they make of Fruits, & many wholsome & pleasant drinks, Sider, perry, Cherry Wines, &c. Which are not barely nourishing but have other speciall properties, they moderately coole and re∣fresh the spirits in heate of Sommer; and besides they keep the body from grosse and superfluous humours, & carry downe the seed of diseases, which else would lodg and grow in the body, and at length
spring out to the prejudice of health. Of the healthfullnesse of thee Liquors, See the use of Fruits. pag. 100, &c. Secondly,For Sale. Fruit trees are profitable to the Husbandman in respect of sale of the fruits, when a man has more then he can spend in his house; especially to such as live neare some great Towne or City, where they have ent at pleasure. The poet saw the profits of an Orchard, when he said. Non illi deerat, quod pauperis exigit usus, Interdum locuples a paupre multa petebat. The Orchard doth with fruit the poore supply With which he doth the wealthie gratify, The Profits of an Orchard once come to good perfection (doth exceed the pro∣fits of Corne (upon like quantity of ground) many times over. As hath been computed and set downe by those that (I suppose) well knew the value of both. And touching Profits to the Estate thus much. Secondly,Profitable to the body. An Orchard or garden of Fruit-trees (and Imployments about the same) is profitable to the body, first in re∣spect of health: secondly in respect of long life. What is a greater earthly blessing then perfect health of body?In respect of Health. some have said vale∣tudo
est summum bonum: Health is the chief∣est earthly good thing: what will not me doe for health they will set body and mind and all on work for health: they will part with friends, house and lands, silver and gold, and all for health. Now health is preerved: first, by mode∣rate and seasonable exercise, in the Orchard, the labour that preserves health must not be too violent, it must be but ad ruborem, non ad sudorem, as some advise: to bring the body to a temperate and gentle heat, not to immoderate sweating. Hist. Life and Death. p. 412. & 169.The Lord Bacon adviseth to exercise causing rather perspiration then sweating, and saies further, that an idle life doth manifestly make the flesh soft and disipa∣ble, but robust exercise, (so it be with∣out overmuch sweating, and wearinesse) maketh it hard and compact, which ad∣vanceth health. Secondly, Health is preserved by fresh and wholsome Ayres, which in heat of som∣mer is found in Arbours, Seats, and Walks in the garden of Fruit-trees. The aforesaid Author tells us the ayre in sommer is pre∣datory and hurtfull through the heat of the sun, and therefore ought (as much as may be) to be excluded from the body. Now there is no fresh wholsome ayres, and
coole shades to be found any where in som∣mer season, better then these in the Or∣chard, or garden of Fruit-trees so the Poet. Opaca prebent arbores umbracula, Prohibent{que} densis fervidum solem comis. Green Canopies the shady trees us lend Gainst scorching sun, boughs thick, whilst they extend. Thirdly, Health is preserved, by pleasant and wholsome Odours, and perfumes found in the Garden of Fruit-trees, all the spring & sommer, by digging the Earth, & from the Leaves and blossomes of Trees: Lo: Ba: tells us,Hist. Life and Death p. 207. & 208. the vapours of fresh earth by digging, condense and refresh the spirits. And that Leaves of trees falling towards the middle of Autumne, yeild a good refresh∣ing to the spirits But the most pleasant and wholsome Odours, are from the blossomes of all the Fruit-trees, which having in them a con∣densing and cooling property are there∣ore, not simply Healthfull, but are accun∣ted Cordiall; chearing and refreshing the Heart and vitall spirits. Now the spirits (as this Author obser∣es) are the Masterworkmen in the body, nd as the uppermost Wheele which turneth bout the other wheeles in the body; and
therefore whatsoever is Healthfull and refreshing to the spirits, works (powerfully good effects in the body: And that speedly & suddenly: as the Author saies, Vapour and Affections worke compendiously upon the spirits. Hist. Life, and Death, p, 236.Of the Healthfulness of Odours see more at Large, in the tide Pleasure of the senses smelling in a Garden: Fourthly: Health is preserved by who some meats and drinks all the yeare from the Garden of Fruit-trees. The spirits of the body in sommer stan in need of cooling and condensing, an what meats and drinks more proper fo that purpose then dishes and drinks of th fruits an Orchard. They are both Al∣mentall and Physicall: they cure diseases and preserve health: discharging the bod of the beginning, and seeds of many di∣seases. In respect of long life.Secondly: A Garden of Fruit-tree  profitable to the body in respect of Long life. How much have men valued long life in all ages of the world, what strange courses have some taken to extend their life to a great length: some have liv'd is Caves and Rocks, and sequestred them∣selves from society with men, and be∣ken
themselves to a strict Monasticall course, that they might stretch out their life, and be said to live. Yea amongst Christians who though they desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Yet in some respects long life is to be accounted a blessing, and is set before us as an encouragement to obedience: as we see Deut. 32.47. The feare of the Lord is your life,Deu. 32.47 Prov. 10.27 Prov. 9.11. Ps. 91.16. & through this ye shall prolong your daies. And Prov. 3.1, 2. My sonne keep my Commandments for length of daies, and long life shall they add to thee: the like in many other places. Now I say: An Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees is profitable to the bo∣dy for Long life: and that in severall re∣spects. All these four last mentioned means for Health, the same likewise condue and are profitable to long life: wherein lies an∣other part of their excellency and worth:Hist L D, pag. 179, & 180. for as the Lord Bacon observes: some things are profitable for an healthfull, but are not good for long life, but all these conduce as well to long life, as to health: so that Moderate exercise. 2. Fresh Ayres. 3. Pleasant Odours. 4. Wholsome meats and drinks, (which are all had in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees, are (also) all pro∣fitable to long life.
Hist. L. D. pag. 183. & 414.The foresaid Author saies: The spirit are the master workmen of all the effects in the body, and therefore in the intention of long life ought to be first placed. So then: whatsoever worketh upon the spirits for their refreshing and vigour. Is profitable to long life. Hist. L. D. pag. 235.The operation upon the spirits, and their waxing fresh and vigorous, is the most ready and compendious way to Long life. Now an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees, and imployments therein, work upon the spirits for their refreshing two waies. First by the Organs of the Body. Secondly by the Affections of the mind. Touching the first, viz. The operation upon the spirits through the Organs of the body, see at large in the pleasure of the five senses. pag. 48, 49, &c. Concerning the operation upon the spirits by the Affections of the mind, I shall here speak and mention only three Affecti∣ons of the mind which work powerfully upon the spirits, conducing to long life. Affecti∣on Hope.One Affection of the Mind which works effectually upon the spirits for Long life is Hope. Hist. L. D. pag. 224.The Lord Bacon saies, Hope is most be∣neficiall of all the Affections and doth much to the prolongation of life, if it be not too
often frustrated, but entertaineth the fancy with an expectation of good: therefore (saith he) they whih fix and propound to themselves something as the marke and scope of their life, and continually, and by degrees goe forward in the same, are for the most part long liv'd; & Hope is as a Leaf-joy which may be beaten out to a great extension, like gold. Now the diligent Husbandman in this art of Planting Fruit-trees, has good and sure grounds for Hope, not only from ma∣ny Promises in the word, but likewise sub∣ordinate grounds from Reason and Expe∣rience. This Hope is sown with the seeds of his fruits, and springs up with them, and so from yeare to yeare his Hope grows and increaseth with his Fruit-trees. He laies before him, and considers what great Profits and Pleasures are comming towards him, he sees by experience what a plentifull harvest of Profits and pleasures others receive from Orchards or Gardens of Fruit-trees, which are as fuel, or food to nourish and feed Hope, and hold it in strength and vigour; and when he begins to receive Profits and Pleasures from his Fruit-trees, these refresh Hope, and make it grow from strength to strength with his Fruit-trees: and thus from yeare to yeare
Hope is continued and increased, and all this while the spirits are refreshed, and Hope is refreshed and are ket thereby vi∣gorous and strong, and in a pleased tem∣per and condition, and being the Master-workmen in the body, or first wheele (a the Author saies) they work upon all the parts of the body, for Prolongation of life. And so much concerning the operation upon the spirits by Hope. Affe∣ction, Ioy.Another Affection of the mind which in this imployment works upon the spirits for long-life, is joy. Hist. L. D. pag. 221.The foresaid Author saies: That this Affection of Ioy works so powerfully on the spirits, that some great Ioyes comming sud∣denly, and unexpectedly, do overmuch atte∣nuate, and diffuse the spirits. But now theres no danger of the suddenness of Ioy in these things, whereby to raise and over much diffuse the spirits; for such things at cause Ioy in the imployment of planting Fruit-trees, are expected, and waited for, and Hope prepares the way for Ioy. Ioy is a cleare, shining, beautifull affection, and ri∣ses some degrees higher then Hope: Ioy in the use of earthly things is lawfull in its season; theres a time to rejoyce, as well as a time to mourne: And there is a lawfull
joy in harvest in gathering in the fruits of the Earth, Esay 9.3. It is commanded and allowed of God, Deut. 12.16. Thou shalt rejoyce before the Lord thy God in all that thou puttest thine hand unto. And a∣gaine, Deut. 16.15. Because the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thine hands there∣fore thou shalt surely rejoyce. A Chri∣stian may rejoyce in the Lord in the use of earthly blessings. And in this imploy∣ment of Planting Fruit-trees there are many grounds and occasions of rejoy∣cing: The joy of the Husbandman is not a flash and so away, but it is a setled and habituall joy, and is renewed from time to time: which is the very thing the aforesaid Author speaks of in giving instructions concerning Long life. This life (saies he) (as much as may be) is so to be ordered that it may have many renovations,Hist. L. D. p. 228. p. 232. p. 164. and the spirit by continuall conversing in the same actions may not wax dull. And againe One thing above all is gratefull to the spirits, that there be a con∣tinuall progress to the more benigne: and no doubt (saith he) it furthereth Long life, to have all things from our youth to our elder age mend, and grow to the better. Now this imployment of Planting Fruit-trees
is above all humane arts, most suit∣able to these Rules whereby this Affe∣ction of joy is kept fresh and vigorous, which also keeps the spirits cheerfull and lively: for herein are many renova∣tions, and a continual progresse to the more benigne, and things mending and growing to the better. Ioy is continually renewed from year to year, yea, in divers seasons of the yeare there are fresh and new joyes. In the spring of the year joy springs a fresh in beholding the seeds and young grafts and plants spring forth vigorously and strongly. And the buds and blos∣somes breathing forth pretious and pleasant Odours rejoyce and delight the in∣ward and outward senses, promising a plentifull Harvest of fruits in Autume; and all the Sommer long joy is cherished, with cool fresh ayres, singing of Birds, sight of abundance of Fruits, burd'ning all the the Trees, delighting the Eye with their beautifull formes and colours; and in Au∣tumne joy is renewed againe with a rich and plentifull Harvest of Fruits; and all the Winter long joy is nourished and fed with a free use of all the Fruits, and Wines, and Delicates made of them. So here's a succession of joys, one follow∣ing on the neck of another, whereby
the spirits are still kept in a cheerfull tem∣per and condition, and work powerful∣ly on the grosser parts of the body, condu∣cing to Long-life. Concerning the lawfulness of rejoy∣cing in earthly blessings, with a Caution: See afterwards. Another Affection of the Mind which (in this imployment) works powerfully up∣on the spirits for Long life,Affecti∣on, Admi∣ration. Hist. L. D. pag. 225. is Admiration. The Lord Bacon saies: Admi∣ration and light Contemplation, are very powerfull to the Prolongation of lefe. This affection a∣scends a step higher then the other two, for as joy rises higher then Hope, so Admi∣ration higher then Ioy. It is our duty to Admire God in his works, which is a step higher then simply to praise him. When we look upon the works of a skilfull Artificer, and com∣mend it, it is for his credit; but when we admire and wonder at it, this is a higher commendation. The Holy Prophet would have us search out and wonder at the the works of God, Ps. 111, 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. Vers. 3. His work is honourable and glorious: and he calls us to this duty of Admiration, O come hither and behold the works of God
how wonderful he is in his doings! Ps. 111.4. He hath so done his Marveilous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance. Now in this Imployment of planting Fruit-trees, are many things to be seen, and understood to cause admiration, which works effectually upon the spirits for long-life. Baptist: Port: speaking of the wonderful ef∣fects of Grafting,Lib. de Cult. & In∣sitione. Ch. 17. says, it is an ádmirable Art, and the chiefest part of the husbandman work. Artem insitionis admirabilem esse ac toti∣us Agriculturae nobilissimam partem, voluptuosam, utilem, &c. When he considers tha strange effects of Grafting, he falls a won∣dering, O mira insitionis potestas! &c. And Mizaldus speaking of grafting, says, Insiti∣onis ope artificiosâ, multa ad stuporem usqu miranda firi, many things may be done even to admiration. Austin wonders at these things. Qui majus mirabilius{que} spectaculum est, quàm cu positis seminibus, plantatis surculis, &c?  exiguo grano mirabilior, praestantior que vi est &c. What more strange things are to  seen in Nature, then to be sowing seeds, set∣ting and grafting young plants, and su like works? In a small seed there is a woderful and admirable power and vertue.
Many strange things may be found in this imployment. Will it not cause Admiration, to con∣sider  that a huge and mighty body, (the biggest of all bodies whatsoever that have life) doth arise of a small kernel or seed, that that seed should contain in it (vertual∣ly or potentially) a great Tree, with all the properties of it, and retain its nature exact∣ly in every particular? Will it not cause Admiration, to see  goodly, wholesome, and beautiful fruits, come forth of rough and crooked Trees? especially to observe the manner of their coming forth, the care that Nature takes to secure and preserve the seed of the Fruit, by covering it with the Buds, Blossomes, Skin and Substance of the Fruits, with the Core, Stones, or Shells, and also with the leaves of the Trees. Will it not cause Admiration, to con∣sider  that the nature and properties of a great Tree, are inclosed, and lye in every small twig, yea, in every bud of the Tree, even in the least Bud, yea, in the Root of that least Bud, (in some no bigger then a pins point) which Bud being set on a small plant (according to Art) will grow to a Tree, in all respects like to that whence it was taken?
Will it not cause Admiration to con∣sider how many severall substances are made of one simple substance? for of the Sap of Trees is made the Bark, Wood, Pith, Leaves, Buds, Blossomes, Stalks, Fruit and Seed. Will it not cause Admiration to con∣sider that Grafts and Buds set upon Wild stocks (such as naturally bring forth sower, harsh and noughty fruits) that though the Grafts and Buds be nouri∣shed by that harsh and different sap, and receive all their substance and growth from it, that yet these Grafts, and Buds should retaine their own natures, and not be altered into the nature of the Stock whereon they grow, but have power to digest, change, and assimilate this harsh and sower sap, into their own sweet and pleasant natures, and bring forth fruits accordingly? Will it not cause Admiration to see little small Plants of but two years old (and some but of one year, if grafted) to hang full of fruits and to be able to beare them forth to their naturall bignesse and goodnesse, and notwithstanding to make a large and sufficient growth the same yeare? Will it not cause Admiration to see the
busie and industrious bees to gather Hny, evenfrom the flowers, or blossomes of bit∣ter Almond-trees, and other flower and Plants, that to our sense are bitter and un∣pleasant? Will it not cause Admiration to see very  many,L. B. Hist. L. D. pag. 85. and very great fruits hang upon one∣ly one small and slender twig? A great Au∣thor notes it for a strange thing, that all the nourishment which produceth (somtime.) such great fruits, should be forced to pass through so narrow necks, as the stalk of the Fruit. But may it not be accounted a more strange thing, to see five or six, or more, fair and large fruits, to hang upon a slender twig, little bigger then the stalke of each particular fruit growing on it! Will it not cause Admiration to see one  Tree hang full of different and several kinds of fruits, as an Apple-tree with all, or may kinds of Apples, or a Cherry-tree, with ll, or many kinds of Cherries? So of other kinds of trees: to see one tree hang full of fruits, different in their Forms, Colours, Leaves, and lossomes, which may be done by Grafting, or Inoculating so many se∣veral kinds of Buds, or Grafts upon one tree. Will it not cause Admiration to stand
upon a Mount in the midst of a fair large Orchard in the spring time, and to be∣hold round about a multitude of several sorts of Fruit-trees, full of beautiful Blos∣somes, different in their shapes and colours, ravishing the sense with their sweet Odours, and within a while, turned into faire and goodly fruits of divers Colours and Kinds; the Fruit-trees gorgeously arrayed with green leaves, and various colour'd fruits, as with so many precious Iewels & Pearls. And thus much touching the operation upon the spirits in order to Long-life, by these three affections, Hope, Ioy, Admiration. Profita∣ble to the mind.Thirdly, This▪ imployment of planting Fruit-trees, is profitable to the mind. First in respect of Knowledge. Secondly, in re∣spect of Meditations. In know∣ledge.This work is profitable to the Mind, by storing it with variety of objects, and profita∣ble notions, both natural, moral, and spiritual How variously does Nature discover it self in Planting, Grafting, Budding, Blos∣soming, and bearing Fruits. So that such as are studious in the search of the secrets of Nature, may observe the process and course thereof in manifold respects about these things. And multitudes of Experiments may be drawn out for use and profit. If men will
but joyn Contemplation and Action, Study and Practise together, they shall find (even in this one Volumn or Book of the Or∣chard) many useful and fruitful Lessons, for temporal and spiritual advantage. And as the imployment is profitable to the mind in respect of knowledge:In Me∣ditation. so also in respect of Meditation, by occasion where∣of the affections of the soul may (with the help of the spirit) be raised, and turned in∣to a spiritual temper. How fitly does the Garden of Fruit-trees offer unto us that most profitable and fruit∣ful Meditation of our first fall, and original sin, whereof we were all guilty, in such a Place; even in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees: in which Meditation our af∣fections should work to lay our selves low in our own eyes, to abhor ourselves: and to exalt God, and abundantly to joy in the infinite and boundless mercy of God in Christ, in that he took pity on poor Man when he was fallen, and passed by the An∣gels when they were fallen, (Creatures by creation more exce'lent then Man) and left them in an irrecoverable state of mi∣sery. But in the same place, even as soon as we had sinned, promised us a Saviour,
and when the fulness of time was come, sent him into the world. In consideration of these things, our Affection of Love to, joy in, and Admiration of God, should be inlarged and boundless. O the height and depth of the Mercy and Justice of God, towards the Angels Justice, but towards us Mercy. What can we render unto the Lord for this his infinite mercy? Now seeing he looks for nothing but Love and Praise, let us begin it here, that we may hold on to all eternity. Profi∣table to the name.Fourthly, Planting Fruit-trees, is profita∣ble to the name of the Planter. Fruit-trees, are living, lasting monuments, and bear up, and perpetuate the Name of him that Plan∣ted and Laboured about them, both while he lives, and in generations after. A late Author Lawson: a Planter of forty or fifty years experience; in his Book, pag. 47. says, that Apple-trees and Pear-trees (and some other kinds of Fruit-trees) on good Land, and duly ordered, will last 800 or 900 years. What earthly thing is better then a good Name? Solomon tells us, Eccl. 7.1. A good name is better then precious oyntment: And again, Prov. 22.1. A good name is to be cho∣sen before great riches, and loving favour is above silver,L. B. Nat. Hist. pag. 258. and above gold. One says, The best temper of minds desire a good name, and the lighter popularity and applause. A good name is not onely to be desired,
but to be highly prized, and to be reckoned the chief of earthly blessings, not only for the beauty of it, but for the permanency of it, it abides when friends, riches, life and all is lost. Now one way to gain and keep a good name, is by gifts and benefits: The worst temper of minds are won, and held by gifts and good turns: it's natural to all creatures, to love those that do them good; and who can so easily give so great, so many, and so ac∣ceptable gifts, as the husbandman, that yearly nurseth up multitudes of fruit-trees, and hath store of pleasant fruits, wines, and delicates made of them? While he lives, he bestows young fruit-trees, fruits, and many acceptable gifts out of his Orchard, and be∣ing dead, his Orchards, Gardens, and Fruit-trees, live & flourish, and occasion a remem∣brance of his Name for many ages after him. And secondly, as gifts and good turnes, gaine a good name, so also to be conversant and imployed about works for the Publick and general profit of a Commonweal: such works produce the same effect. We know all labours and imployments, that bring both Profit and Pleasure, are ap∣proved & praised of all, though the advan∣tage be but to a private family, how much more when they are for a Commonweal? And besides this Moral consideration, God
hath promised the great blessing of a good name to them that are conversant in good imployments, Rom. 13.3. Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. Rom 2.10. Glory, honour, and peace, to e∣very one that worketh good, upon the Jew first, and also on the Gentile. So then, the work of Planting fruit-trees is profitable to the name of the Husband∣man, both while he lives, and in Genera∣tions after him. Profitable to others.Fifthly, An Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees, and the employment about them in∣profitable to others: First, in the present times; Secondly, in the time to come. This profit to others, is by bestowing our fruits on friends and neighbours, and such as want. For though God require not to himself (as formerly) the first of all the fruit of all trees, year by year, Nehem. 10.35. Yet God requires year by year, when he be∣stowes all upon us, that we should give part to himself again; that is, to his poor members that want them. This is the way to obtain a blessing upon all our labours. Deut. 15.10. Thou shalt sure∣ly give unto him (that is, unto thy poor Bro∣ther) & thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him, because that for this thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in al
thy works, and in all thou puttest thy hand unto. A Gift to the Poor is a gainful gift, for by it a man becomes Creditor to his Creator, Prov. 19.17. He that giveth to the poor, len∣deth to the Lord, and the Lord will recom∣pence him. Eccles. 35.11. The Lord recom∣penceth, & will give thee seven times as much. Likewise, the fruits of an Orchard are profitable to others that buy them: the Buyer having good and profitable Commo∣dities for his money, has profit thereby as well as the Seller. Yea, this labour is profitable to others in time to come, Qui serunt Arbores, alteri seculo prosunt. After ages receive much pro∣fit also: When our selves and others have received our full portion of profit, then Fruit-trees are left to children, and poste∣rity to receive Profit many Generations after. And thus much touching the Third hu∣mane Argument, from the Profits that are received from a Garden of Fruit-trees. The fourth humane Argument of the dig∣nity and value of Fruit-trees and the Art of Planting,Hu∣mane Ar∣gument. is, Argumentum a voluptate, from the Pleasures that are receiv'd thereby. Pleasure is called, sal & condimentum vitae. The salt that seasons all things to us. In
all that a man hath pleasure in, it is that which makes it acceptable. Pleasure (as one says) is the good of every thing, and a pattern of Heaven. Now, we find pleasure in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees, suitable to all the Sen∣ses of the body. And here's a mixture of pleasures with profits: for divers objects of the senses, are both pleasant and profita∣ble: this imployment is richly furnish'd with both. And as I have shew'd some particulars wherein profit consis, so likewise I will shew some particulars wherein pleasure consists, in the use of a Garden of Fruit-trees. Each sense hath its particular pleasure. First for the sense of hearing. Pleasure of the sense of hearing.It is a pleasure to the Ear to hear the sweet notes and tunes of singing Birds, whose com∣pany a man shall be sure to have in an Or∣chard, which is more pleasant there, then elsewhere, because of other concurrent pleasures there: a Consort of Musick is more pleasant them upon a single Instrument. The Poet took notice of this pleasure. Aves Canoros garrulae fundunt sonos, Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis. Melodious ditties, chirping Birds indite, Whose pleasant songs, our ravisht ars invite
And besides, something more this sense may receive from an Orchard (though it have least share of pleasure therein of any of the senses) by hearing the slow motion of Boughs and Leaves, by soft and gentle Airs, sometimes (as it were) with a kind of singing or whistling noise, which will easily induce a sweet and pleasant sleep in summer time (if a man be dispos'd) in some close cool Arbour, or shady seat. Secondly,Pleasure of the sense of Touch. the sense of Touch may have Pleasure in an Orchard from the cool fruits and leaves of Trees, smoothing and brush∣ing the face therewith, which is refresh∣ing and cooling in heat of Summer. But this sense receives Pleasure, chiefly by the shade of trees in sommer time. Cool refresh∣ing Ayres are found in close Walks, Seats, and Arbours under and about the Trees, which keep off the burning heat of the Sun. Opaca prebent arbores umbracula, prohi∣bentque densis fervidum, solem comis, Green Canopies the shady Trees us lend 'Gainst scorching sun, boughs thick whilst they extend. Yea, they do not simply keep off the heat of the Sun, but likewise much cool the ayre by its contact of these cool bodies,
Trees, Fruits, and Leaves; coole fresh aires in heat of sommer are sought for, and are not onely pleasant, but exceeding profitable, and healthful to the body. Here Profit and Pleasure mee and imbrace each other. And hereto agrees the L. Bacon, who says, Exclusion of aire is profitable to long life;Hist. L. D. pag. 241. for aire is pre∣datory to long-life through the heat of the sun▪ and ought (as much as is possible) to be ex∣cluded from the body. Now, what better place is there, to exclude the heat of the Sun from the body in sommer season, the amongst the shady trees, Arbours and Walk in the Orchard? L. B. Hist. L. D. p. Ca. 11. Pag. 425.It's laid for a ground, That condensing the spirits in their substance is available t long-life, which (he tells us) is done most ef∣fectually by cool aires. Refrigeration, or cool∣ing of the body from without, is above al things necessary to long-life. So then, the pleasure this sense receive from a Garden of Fruit-trees, is to be much esteem'd. Pleasure of the sight. Nat. Hist. p. 225.Thirdly, The sense of sight, partakes o Pleasure in an Orchard, in beholding the exact Order in Planting of the Trees, their decent forms, the well composed Allies, Walks, Seats, and Arbours therein: for Or∣der and curious forms of things, much de∣light
the sight: of this, see L. Bacon at large. Likewise, the sight is delighted with pleasant and delicate Colours of the Leaves, Blossomes, and Fruits, that shew themselves in great variety, curious Colours, especial∣ly the Colour green, is accounted helpful to the sight. Fons, speculum, Gramen, Oculis sunt al∣leviamen: Green grass, clear grass, and fountaines pure Refresh Eye-sight, long to endure. Here again Profit and Pleasure meet. And as foul and odious objects presen∣ted to the sight,See L. B. Nat. Hist. pag. 199. cause dislike in the spirits, that they retire and shun such objects, so ê contrario verum, the contrary holds in delightful and pleasant objects of the sight,Nat. Hist. p. 224. the spirits thereby are delighted. He says, Objects of the sight, as comming into a faire Garden, or into a fair Room richly furnished, and the like, do delight and exhilerate the spirits much. The beautiful flowers of various colours, amongst the lovely Blooms of Trees and Plants, what a glorious shew will they make. Flores nitescunt, discolore gramine, Pinguntque terras gemmeis honoribus.
Gay flowers woven with discoloured grass, With rich imbroidered Robes the earth compass. Is it not a pleasant sight to behold a mul∣titude of Trees round about: in decent form and order, bespangled, and gorgeous∣ly apparelled with green Leaves, Blooms, and goodly Fruits, as with a rich Robe of imbroidered work, or as hanging with some pretious and costly Jewels or Pearls; the Boughs laden and burdened, bowing down to you, and freely offering their ripe fruits, as a large satisfaction of all your la∣bours? Aspice curvatos pomorum pondere ramos, Ovid.Vt sua, quod peperit, vix ferat Arbor on The laden boughs, with weight of Ap∣ples, crack; And Trees to bear their burthens strength do lack. Plea∣sure of the smell.Fourthly, the sense of smell, may like∣wise have its share of pleasure in a Garden of Fruit-trees. L. Bacon says, The sme of new and pure earth,Hist. L. D. p 207. p. 208. excellently refreshet the spirits; he says, A certain great Lord who lived long, had every morning, imme∣diately after sleep, a clod of fresh earth lai
under his nose, that he might take the smell thereof;Nat. Hist. Cent. 9. p. 210. and again, Good earth, newly▪ tur∣ned up, hath a freshness and good sent. And that the leaves and branches of some Trees, are odorous and sweet. He says likewise,Nat. hist. Cent. 6. p. 136. That the leaves of Trees falling towards the middle of the Autumn, yield a good refreshing to the spirits. And that the Moss of some Appletrees hath an excellent sent, and is used of Perfumers. But chiefly, The pleasure this sense meets with, is from the sweet smelling blossomes of all the fruit-trees, which from the time of their breaking sorth, till their fall, breath out a most precious and pleasant odour; perfuming the Aire throughout all the Orchard. The same Author observes,Nat. hist. Cent. 4. p. 102. That the most Delicate Smells, are from those Plants whose Leaves smell not, and amongst o∣ther things, he mentions Blooms of Apple-trees. And in another of his Experiments,Nat. hist. Cent. 9. p. 210. Hist. L. D. pag. 295. he sayes, That generally those smells are most grateful and pleasant, where the degree of heat is small: for those things do rather woe the sense then satiate it. And prefers cool smells before hot, for comforting of the heart. Now, The Blooms of Apple-trees, Pear-trees,
Cherry-trees, and such like, have small degrees of heat, and therefore the Odour is pleasant and wholsome. And besides the pleasure of this perfu∣med Aire, it is also very profitable, and healthful to the body. Here again, Profit and Pleasure meet together and imbrace. An Odores nutriunt, is a question amongst Philosophers: some hold sweet perfumes nourishing, doubtless they give a great re∣freshing to the spirits, and whatsoever de∣lights and cheers, the spirits is without controversie very advantagious to the health of the body; for the spirits are the chief workers in the body, from which proceed all, or most of the effects wrought in the body, good or bad, according to the temper of the spirits. Sweet Perfumes work immediately upon the spirits for their refreshing, but meat and drink, by ambages and length of time: sweet and healthful Aires are special pre∣servatives to health, and therefore much to be prised. Is the Curative part of Physick so wor∣thy and excellent, as the preservative part? Its better to stand fast, then to fall and rise again. Now, a sweet perfumed, fresh▪ wholsome Aire (which is chiefly found in Gardens
of Fruit-trees) is greatly available to that purpose, as well as pleasant to the sense. Fifthly,Pleasure of the Taste. The Sense of Taste hath its plea∣sure in an Orchard. This sense meets with pleasure at all times of the year, from the fruits of an Orchard. The pleasure of the other senses are to be had but at some sea∣sons of the year onely. This sense hath pleasure from all sorts of ripe, and raw fruits, besides meats and drinks, and many dainties made of them. The ordinary food they afford all the year, and the more de∣licate for Banques, are also good and healthful to the body, as well as pleasant to the taste. Here again, pleasure and profit meet and imbrace, so the Poet: Hortus salubres praebet corpori cibos, Oblecitat Hortus, avocat, pascit, tenet. The garden to the body, gives sound and healthful meats, The garden pleases most, draws, holds, and feeds with delicates. In the heat of Sommer, what place is fitter for the table, then some sweet, shady, cool Arbour in the Garden? And what meats better befitting that time of the year, then some dainty dishes made of the cool fruits
of the Orchard? At which time cooling and refreshing the spirits from within and with out by cool Aires, and cool meats, is most advantagious for health and long life: for these are the chief means (at that season) to keep the spirits in a fine, plea∣sant, equall temper; yea some fruits have higher vertues ascribed to them then barely to nourish, some Apples are ac∣counted Cordials: Avicen sayes, That both the tart and pleasant Apples,Lib. 6. cap. 569. strengthen the heart, and to such as are troubled with hot infirmities, they are a singular help. Confortant Cor, proprie odorifera, dulcia, & acetosa, &c. Hist. L. D. pag. 298.L. Bacon, reckons Pear-mains among cool Cordials. So then, when fruits are not onely healthful, but also pleasant to the taste, there is a double worth in them. Consider now what hath been said for the Pleasure of the Senses; And if it be so acceptable to have the pleasure, though but of one Sense, what will it be when there is a concurrence, and meeting of all together, which may be had in a Garden of Fruit-trees? so the Poet.
Non desit Hortis, & voluptas maxima, Multis{que} commixta modis jucunditas: Tribuit colenti multiforme gaudium. There wants not in Gardens great pleasure to the mind, And outward senses many mixt plea∣sures find, They yield unto the Artist joyes of divers kind. We see what a plentiful and joyful Har∣vest of Profits and Pleasures may be yearly reaped from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees.Profits. Here's Profit of divers kinds. First to a mans Estate: and that in two respects. First, in respect of housekeeping, with meats and drinks all the year. Secondly, in respect of Sale, either the fruits in their kinds, or Cider, Perry, and Wines, made of them. Secondly, Here's Profit to the body, and that in two respects. First, in respect of Health, by moderate exercise, fresh-Aires, pleasant Odours, and wholsome meats and drinks. Secondly, in respect of Long-life, by ope∣ration  upon the spirits, through the Organs of the body, the Eare, Touch, Smell, Sight,
Taste, and through the Affections of the mind, Hope, Ioy, Admiration. Thirdly, Here's profit to the Mind. And that in two respects; First, in respect of know∣ledge, Natural, Moral, Spiritual; Second∣ly, in respect of Affections. Fourthly, Here's profit to the Name, and that in two respects; First, in this life, by Gifts and Benefits; Secondly, after death, by Fruit-trees as living Monuments. Here's Profit to others, and that in two respects, First, to the Poor, and the Rich Friends, or Enemies, in the present times; Secondly, to posterity or future ages. Pleasures.Here's likewise Pleasures of divers kinds. First to the Ear, and that in two respects; First, by sweet tunes of Singing-birds; Se∣condly, by gentle motion of Boghes, and Leaves. Secondly, Here's Pleasure to the Touch, and that in two respects; First, by cool fruits, boughs and leaves, Secondly, by cool fresh Aires. Thirdly, Here's Pleasure to the Eye, and that in two respects; First, by exact and de∣cent forms of Trees, Alleys, Walks, Seats, and Arbours; Secondly, by curious colours of the blossomes, leaves, and fruits. Fourthly, Here's Pleasure to the smell,
and that in two respects; First, from fresh Earth digged up; Secondly, from the leaves and blssomes. Fifthly, Here's Pleasure to the Taste, and  that in two respects; First, from ripe and raw fruits: Secondly, from dishes and drinks made of them. Some employments, as they are profita∣ble in one respect, yet they are unprofitable in another: yea, perhaps are full of hazard and danger, either to the state, body, mind, or name; but this imployment preserves, and is profitable to all these. Some im∣ployments are pleasant to one sense, but not to another, perhaps unpleasant, and hurtful: but in this there's an Agreement and consent of Pleasures to all the senses. And as there is a mutual consent and concurrence of all the profits among them∣selves, and of all the pleasures among them∣selves, so likewise there is a mutual con∣sent and concaenation of the Profits, with the Pleasures, one imbracing ano∣ther, one supporting and upholding each other. Five ways of Profit, each of them in two respects, And five ways of Pleasure, each of them in two respects!
Here's Profit and Pleasure running along hand in hand, meetly matched together, being the most rich and beautiful King and Queen in all the world. Thus having shew'd the great Praises that are given to this Art of Planting Fruit-trees, and some Divine and Humane Argu∣ments of the dignity and value thereof, and likewise the profits and pleasures that are received from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-trees, I think it meet to give a cauti∣on concerning temporal profits & pleasures. It's true; We have liberty to seek earthly Profits and Pleasures in our Cal∣lings, and to rejoyce in them,A Caution in the use of Earthly things. but yet with care and circumspection, and with due re∣gard to circumstances. There is a Rejoycing in Earthly bles∣sings which God allows to us, Deut. 26.11. Thou shalt rejoyce in every good thing which the Lord thy God hath given thee. And Deut. 12.16. Thou shalt rejoyce before the Lord thy God in all that thou puttest thine hand unto: And again, Deut. 16.15. Be∣cause the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thy hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoyce▪ And when our ways please God, he sayes, Go, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy win with a merry heart. Eccles. 9.7. Solomon
says, Eccles. 5.18. Behold, that which I have seen, it is good and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour he takes under the sun, all the dayes of his life, which God giveth him, for it is his portion: And Chap. 2.24. This I saw, That it was from the hand of God. No doubt we may use these and other earthly blessings with Rejoycing: but all the danger is, lest we take too much liber∣ty herein, and break beyond our bounds. These Profits and Pleasures being multi∣plied in the Garden of Fruit-trees, we had best beware of reaching after them too earnestly. Latet Anguis in Herba, A sub∣tle Serpent lies hid among these pleasant flowers, and seeks to bite us by his temp∣tations, who has as much (or more) malice and policy now, as formerly against our first Parents, whom he deceived in a Gar∣den of Fruit-trees. Men may become Idolaters ere they be aware, and so are many, even among Chri∣stians: in worshipping profit and pleasure; letting up these two for their house-hold Gods. The Prophet tells us, Ezek. 14.3. Men set up their Idols in their hearts, and give that to them, which is due onely to God. The diffe∣rence be∣tween using and enjoy∣ing a thing. We may easily mistake between the use
of earthly blessings, and the enjoyment o them. De Doctrinâ Christi. l. 1.Austin tells us, no earthly blessings are properly to be Enjoy'd, but used onely: Res aliae sunt, quibus fruendum est, aliae qui∣bus utendum; illae quibus fruendum est, beatnos faciunt, istis quibus utendum est, tenden∣tes ad be atitudinem adjuvamur, & quasi ad∣miniculamur, ut ad illas, quae nos beatos faci∣unt, proveniamus. There are some thing (saith he) which are to be enjoyed, others t b used; those which we ought to enjoy, make us happy, such as we ought to use onely, are those whereby we are furthered, and are  succors, aids, and helps, to bring us to those things which may be enjoyed, & make us hapy. He tells us, whom, and what we may enjoy, Fruendum est Patre, & Filio, & Spi∣ritu Sancto. Beatum est ad tale bonum pro∣venisse, quo amplius non potest. The Father▪ the Son, and blessed Spirit, are to be enjoyed▪ And its true blessedness to attain to that good which is the highest. So then, God only is to be enjoyed, and the good things of this life only to be used, as helps and furtherances unto God▪ We had need therefore take heed of falling in love with earthly things: The foresaid Author tells us the danger of it.De Doct. Christ. l. 1. Si eis quibus uten∣dum est frui voluerimus, impeditur cursu∣noster,
& aliquando etiam defiecitur, ut ab his rebus quibus fruendum est, obtinendis vel retardemur, vel etiam revocemur inferiore a∣more praepedir: Et si amoenitutes itineris, & ipsa gestatio vehiculorum nos delectarent, conversi ad fruendum his quibus uti debui∣mus: nollemus citò viam finire, & perver∣sâ suavitate implicati alienremur à Ptria, cujus suavitas faceret beatos. That is, if we fall to enjoying of such things as we ought but onely to use, we are thereby hindered in our course, and many times even turn'd out of it. And as to the ob∣taining of those things which we ought to enjoy (by the love of earthly things) we are call'd back from them, and much retarded, and stopt in our way to them. And if the Pleasures and Contentments of the journey and the carriage, by which we are conveyed, over-much please and delight us, then we turn to enjoying of those things which we ought but only to use, and therefore are unwilling to come to our journys end, and are intangled in cor∣rupt delights, and brought thereby to be estranged from the Country, the sweetness and pleasure whereof, maketh blessed. We see then, when God gives us bles∣sings largely, and gives us leave to use them freely, we are in danger to forget him:
We had need therefore to set a watch, o guard upon our hearts, lest profit and plea∣sure steal it, and keep it to themselves. But what a shame is it we should have fewes thoughts of God, when he is most mind∣ful of us. And that we should fall so much in love with the Token, that we forget him that sent it. And now, having answered the doubts and discouragements that have hindered some from entring upon this part of the Hus∣bandmans work, The Art of Planting Fruit-trees; and shew'd the great esteem that all men have of it, and the value and dignity thereof from Divine and Humane Arguments, what a rich confluence of pro∣fits and pleasures, are (from time to time) brought unto us by it, with a Caution in the use of these things. What remains, but that I also discover how we may obtain our desires herein by what means the work may be done, with most speed, and best effect? Which I shall now endeavour to do. Of the Nursery.I shall first speak of a Nursery of young Plants, and shew the manner of sowing of Kernels, or Seeds of Fruits, and their
preparation and ordering (by Grafting and Inoculating) for transplanting into Or∣chards, Gardens, or Fields: (although some may plant an Orchard a more speedy way, to buy young trees ready grafted, or to plant stocks of divers years growth, and after they have grown a year or two, to graft them.) I shall set down all these things as brief∣ly as I can, so that withal, I make them plain to the intelligent Reader, laying down the most material, and essential things concerning this Art: For long and tedious discourses (about things that may be comprehended in few words, (as many use) they do often mislead men, so as it is not easie to see the most material things concerning their subject, or what they drive at; whereas, a brief and plain disco∣very of them may better be comprehen∣ded and remembred. 1. First then: Let there be a plot of ground (more or less) digged up about the time when Fruits are ripe, and let all the Grass, Weeds, Roots, Stones, &c. be clean picked out, and the ground cast into Beds about a yard broad, and spaces be∣tween, about a foot in breadth, to pass be∣tween them, to Sow, Set, Weed, &c. And then procure Kernels of Apples, Pears, Crabs,
Cherry stones, But as for Apre∣cott-stones it is best to keep them (in sand) till October, before we set them; because if they be set early, when the fruit is ripe, they commonly spring up before Winter, and then being very tender, the frost kills them: some Peach-stones, and other Plum-stones, will lie in the ground, until the spring come Twelvemonth, and then come up: therefore conclude not they will never spring up, though not the first year. Plum-stones, and the seeds of divers kinds of Fruits, and these may be set, and sowed, from the time that the Fruits are ripe, until the spring (except in frost) in this manner. Having made the Beds level with a Rake, sprinkle the seeds upon them all o∣ver, each kind by themselves, and set, or sow the stones by themselves, then take a spade, and turne in the seeds and stones a∣bout a handful deep or less, and after rake them all over, and (that none may be left uncovered) sift some small mould with a Sive, or besprinkle it with a spade all over them, and so let them rest all Winter. Preserve seeds from Mice.And carefully observe that Mice devour not the seeds in Winter, if you perceive it, set Traps, and lay Rats-bane to destroy them. Though you cannot see the Mice, yet if they have been there (as commonly they are) it may be perceived by divers small holes up and down the seed-beeds, where they have devoured the seeds, and some husks will lie above ground.
In the Spring and Sommer, let them be weeded, from time to time, clean, and if the weather be dry, let them be wa∣tred now and then, and they will make a growth the same year, according to the strength and goodnesse of the ground wherein they grow. Plants comming of seeds or stones, are far better then Suckers from Roots of Trees, although such are good and useful for stocks also if they have good Roots. In weeding the young Seed-plants, some will come up with the weeds; set them again almost to the top, then water them, and all the rest. In Autumne, when they have done grow∣ing, let them be transplanted into other Beds of ground prepared for that purpose, thus: Let the ground be digged, and cast into square Plots, or long Plots, as you will, and laid level with a Rake, then set the young Seed-plants therein in this manner. Having cast up the Borders handsomely on each side, stretch a Line from one side to the other, then take a Setting-stick (that is, a hard piece of wood about a yard long, with a handle at the top, and made sharp at the end, or pointed with Iron) and thrust it into the ground half a foot deep, (or according to the length of the Roots)
close to the line and make holes all along, from one end of the line to the other, a∣bout half a foot or more, as you will in distance: And having prepared the Seed-plants, by cutting of all the side Twigs, and the ends or bottome of the Roots, set them in order in the holes to the top of their Roots, and close the mould about them: Draw the biggest first, and set them by themselves, and the least by themselves. Then take up the line, and stretch it again about a foot from the other Plants, and make holes, and prune more Seed-plants, and set them as before. Let not the Roots be too long; about a handful in length (or less) is sufficient; for if their Roots be long, and set deep, the Trees afterwards are taken up with more difficulty. Then take up the line, and stretch it a∣gain, a foot and half from the Plants last set, that there may be a convenient space of ground to pass between to weed the Plants, and to Graft and Inoculate them (being grown fit) And having made holes, and pruned the Plants, set them as be∣fore. And thus set the Nursery throughout, and many of these will be ready after one year to Inoculate, and after two years, or
three, to Graft. Yea, many may be fit to Graft after the first year, and some fit to inoculate the first sommer. Be sure to transplant all young Seed-plants,Remove all Seed-plants for by that means they get good Roots, which of themselves, thrust down one single Root, for the most part. And being grown two or three years after In∣oculating or Grafting, they are fit to trans∣plant, to make Orchards, or into Fields and Hedges, at a competent distance, as shall be shewed when I speak of setting Trees. Thus men may in a few years, prepare multitudes of Young Trees for themselves and others, to give or sell as they please. Some procure Crab-stocks from the woods, and set them to graft on, having grown a year or two; but these stocks are not so good as those that come of seed. We see by continual experience, many are deceived by them, though some may do well. And further observe,Remove seed Plants after the Sommer. not only to re∣move all Seed-plants, as before, but let it be done the next Autumne or Winter, let them have but one sommers growth from the seed, before they be removed to be prepared in the Nursery, unless they be very small; for there is advantage in it, a∣bove those that grow where they are sown
two or three years before removing: for these small Seed-plants are not only easily drawn up, and easily set againe, (with a small Setting-Instrument) but also (their Roots being but short) they taking Root, and spreading their Roots near the top of the ground they are easily taken up, and removed (after Grafting) having growen three or four,Besides, the top of the earth is the best soyle, as having the Sun and Raine all the year. or more years, whereas such as grow two or three years upon the Seed bed before removing, they thrust their Roots very deep in the earth, and are not onely hard to be drawn up, but likewise their Roots when set again, must of necessity (though a great part be cut off,) be thrust down very deep into the earth, and then such spread their Roots deep, for they thrust their young Roots from the lowest part, where the Root was cut off, and so they neither have so good nourishment from the earth (as spreading below the best soyle) nor are they so easi∣ly to be transplanted when they are ready, as those other which are drawn the first year, and set very small as before. This is very considerable, and therefore observe it: I underwent great inconve∣niencies when I came to Remove some, before I found out this observation.
NOw for the manner of Inoculating and Grafting these Plants, being thus prepared, and grown fit. First, concerning Grafting:The time of Grafting. wherein we must consider the time: February and March (usually with most) are the two cheif Months for Grafting, but we may be∣gin sooner, and its best so to do, especially with Cherry and Plum grafts: If the wea∣ther be open, without Frost in the begin∣ing of Ianuary, or in December. Yea, I have grafted some (with good success) in No∣vember, and sooner, but in the beginning of Ianuary we may begin, if Frost hinder not. And such as have multitudes to engraft must needs begin early, else they'l want time Grafts of Cherry and Plum-trees, must be grafted soonest, because they bud soone. And begin with them, ere they begin to Bud forth, and then with Pear-trees and Apple-trees. Grafts of any kind may be gotten and kept many dayes,How to keep Grafs. or many weeks, the one half in length, being covered with mould; bind not many together, for if so, those in the middle will dry, and be spoyled, in certaine dayes: but lay them thin in
the mould; or they may be grafted im∣mediately, so soon as they are gotten Graft none but those of one years growth, onely the last years sprout, the fairest and thickest are best: They may be carried many miles, being bound up close (from end to end) in a hay-band, or better in a Box of Mould, or their ends stuck in clay, and wrapped about that they bruis not. Instruments for graftingThat this work may the more effectual∣ly be done, we must have fit Tools, and Instruments for that purpose: First, a good sharp knif, and strong, to cut off the top of stocks. A neat sharp saw, to cut off the head of some stocks which are grown too big for the knife: also a little Mallet and Wedg, to cleave the big stocks, a small Pen-knife, to cut the Grafts, (as I shall shew you anon) and keep it very sharp for this purpose onely: There must be likewise Clay prepared with horse-dung, well mixed together, as Morter, about two parts Clay. And Rushes,What flags are best. or strong, soft Flags, to bind together the Graft, and the Stock. With a small hand-basket to carry the Grafts in, with all the Instruments for the work. Manner of the Work.Having these things in a readiness, the time being come, go to the Stocks that are ready (small or great) And those that are small (about the bigness of ones little fin∣ger
(which are of a competent bignesse, and we loose no time in making use of them) Graft them in this manner. If they be Cherry-stocks, or Plum-stocks, to make Wall-trees of, graft them low, with∣in half a foot (or less) of the ground, but if they be for Standards, then Graft them an ell, or yard and half high: if the stocks are of a convenient bigness of that height, else graft them lower, where they are of a competent bigness. 1. Cut off the top of the stock in some smooth,The first way of grafting, called, slic∣sing or back∣ing on. straight place, that may be an∣swerable to the straightness of the Graft, when set on: Then prepare the Graft thus: observe which side is straightest at the bottom, or biggest end, that so it may fit the straight part of the stock when set on: Then cut one side only of the Graft, down aslope, about an inch long, or little more; either from the knot or seam, Which is a circle round about the graft di∣stinguishing the last sommers growth from the former. (if the part below it be smooth, and straight) or else from a Bud or from any part: and cut through the Barke, at the top of the cut place, and make it like a shouldier, that it may rest just upon the top of the Stock, but cut not this shoulder too deep, (onely through the Bark or little more) but cut the graft thin at the bottome of the cut place, yet leave on all the Bark
on the opposite side, make this cut smooth and even, from the top of it to the bot∣tome, without dints or ridges, (which is of special concernment) that so it may be sure to joyn close to the Stock. The Graft, being thus prepared, then go on to prepare the Stick further, lay the cut part of the Graft upon the straight side of the Stock: and measure just the length of the cut part of the Graft. And (with a knife) take away so much of the bark of the Stock,If it may be upon the West, or South-west side of the stock; be∣cause if so, these winds (which are most dange∣rous cannot so soon break off the grafts, as on the other side. I have lost many before I observed this course. but cut not any of the wood of the Stock, then lay the cut side of the Graft, upon the cut part of the Stock, and let the shoulder of the Graft, ret directly upon the top of the Stock, so that the cut parts of both may joyne even and smooth all along, and so bind them together close, with some strong Rushes or Flaggs: then Clay them, lay on every side, and an inch above, and as much below, some of the Clay pre∣pared as before, close it above, and below, and on every side, that no rain get in: and that's all needs to be done for that time. This I account the best way of Grafting for divers Reasons: 1. First, ecause in this way of Grafting we may make use of the Stocks divers years before they will be ready to graft in the Cleft: by this way of Grafting, the trees
will be ready to bear, before they will be ready to graft the other way. 2. Secondly, This kind of grafting is less hurt, both to the stock and graft; for cleaving the stock is danger, and hurt to it, being cloven (as it must) in the middle to the very heart: whereas in this way of grafting, it remains whole and entire, save onely a small part of the Barke taken off. And as for the Graft, in Cleft-grafting, it must be cut on both sides, to the heart, and made thin, but in slicing or packing on, it must be cut onely on one side, and so less hurtfl to the Graft. 3. Thirdly, When stocks are cloven, if they be somewhat great, commonly the Rain and Aire gets into the cleft, and rots the middle of the stock, before the Graft can grow over to cover the head of it, which is not incident in this way of Graf∣ting. 4. Fourthly, This way of Grafting is much more easie to do, and more sure to take and grow, then grafting in the cleft, for the graft & stock joyn more close and exactly, then can be in cleaving the stock. 5. As this way is easily done, and more sure, so also is it more speedily done, then any other kind of Grafting.
Second way of grafting, call'd whip-Grafting.Secondly, There is another way of Grafting small stocks, such as are but just as big as the Grafts you mean to set on. And those Stocks are prepared thus: The top being cut off over against a smooth straight place, as before; the Bark of it must not onely be cut, but also the Wood, quite through to the back side of it at the top, directly like as the Graft is cut (as was said) in length as much as the cut part of the Graft; the manner of cutting the Graft for this, is the same with the former then lay the cut part of the Graft, upon the cut part of the Stock, and let the top of the Stock (even the very bark of the outside) be directly under the shoulder of the Graft, that so the cut parts both of Graft and Stock, may joyn, and answer one another from the top to the bottome, and so bind and clay them as before Thirdly, There is another way of Graf∣ting generally practised,Third way of Grafting though not so sure away as the two former, and yet a better way for great stocks, for none but small stocks are capable of the two former ways, it is thus: Those stocks that are large (three or four inches in compass) must be cloven, the tops being cut off in a straight smooth place, cut the roughness of the top smooth with a sharp knife, then knock
in a strong knife or chissel, a very little be∣side the pith, and if it be capable but of one graft, then be sure to cleave it on that side that is smooth and straight, if it be fit for two as it is, if it be about an Ell high, and a strong stock, then he careful to chuse both sides smooth, being cloven with the knife, and a wedg of Box, or other hard wood knockt in to keep it open, then pre∣pare the Graft or Grafts you mean to put in, cut both sides of the Graft aslope down from the knot or seam, if it be straight, or else from a Bud, about an inch or little more, shoulder both sides of the Graft, as was said of one side, for the other sort of grafting, and make it thin at the bottome. Let the outside of the Graft be somewhat thicker then the inner-side, unless the stock be very big, if it be so great to pinch the Graft much, then make the inner-side of the Graft thicker, a very little, that so it may preserve the outside from being pin∣ched too much. And in setting in all Grafts into the cleft,A special Rule. observe this for a most special Rule, to joyne the inner-side of the bark of the Graft, to the inner-side of the bark of the stock, that the sap may more easily come out of the Stock into the Graft to feed it, for the main cur∣rent of the sap, is between the bark and the wood.
Some take care to set the out-sides e∣ven and smooth, but that is an error in pra∣ctice; for we know the Bark of a big stock is much thicker then the Bark of a slender graft, and if the outsides be smooth and e∣ven, the insides must needs be uneven. But I say, to joyn the inner sides of both barks together, all along the cleft, is the principal thing in grafting of such big stocks The Grafts being thus placed in the Stocks, and the wedg pulled out, then Clay them close on every side, an inch a∣bove the top of the stock, to the bottome of the Cleft. Choice of Grafts.In chusing Grafts, chuse not those that are very small, and slender, they common∣ly fail; but take the fairest upon the tree, and especially those that are fullest of Buds. Cut off the tops of Grafts.The tops of long Grafts, are to be cut, that they may spread the better: and of such as are but short; if there be blossom buds on the top, as it's commonly seen in Pearmains, and many other good bear∣ing kinds. Ioyn right kinds toge∣ther in Grafting.Graft every Cyence into its own kind, as all kind of Apples together, and also on Crabstocks, (which is the wild Apple) Pear-grafts on wild Pear-stocks, and the like of other kinds: joyn not contrary or diffe∣rent kinds, they never come to perfection:
as Cherry-grafts, or Plum-grafts, or the like: Experience makes it manifest to be but lost labour, they'l grow (it may be) a year, or two, and then die. And in choice of Grafts,Observe the best bearing trees. be sure to consi∣der what Trees (of all kinds) are the best bearers, some kinds seldom miss, and some other kinds (though good fruits) seldom hit, and therefore take information from those persons, that know (by experience) the nature of the trees in this regard, and accordingly choose, or refuse grafts from them. Observe the like in choice of Vines. Such Grafts as are bound (as is said of the two first wayes of Grafting) must be unbound after a certain time,Vnbinde Grafts. when they have well closed with the Stock: about Midsommer they will be fast enough upon the Stock, so that they may without dan∣ger be unbound: but if they be not un∣bound, the band sometimes girds and dints in too much, unless of some, where the band rots or breaks: and besides the winds (when the grafts are grown big and bushy) will indanger the breaking of divers of them, unless they be unbound, and also by some means supported, and strengthened in the grafted place, which may be done, by tying a small stick to them a little above, and as much below the place where it
is engrafted; but before you thus bind the stick to strengthen the Graft, put a little clay round about the engrafted place (being unbound) it will cause the sap sooner to cover the head of the stock. But if the Grafts be Grafted near unto the ground, or not above half a yard high, they will not be so much in danger of breaking by the winds especially such whose growth is most into one single shoot or two; and such as grow but upon small, or weak stocks: as to such, this labour (in tying the Graft, to strengthen it in the grafted place) may be spared: Those that are high stocks, and of strong growth, and shoot forth their Grafts vigorously, and in∣to a great head of many branches, are most indanger of winds, especially the West∣winds, (which are commonly strongest) for the first year, and more, a week or fortnight before and after Midsommer; be∣ing they are yet tender, and not well clo∣sed with the stock; so that these especial∣ly must be taken care of in this regard, on∣ly for the first year, after there's no dan∣ger at all of breaking by the winds. Some kinds of Flags (wherewith we bind Grafts are so tough and strong, that they will not yield a jot, nor break with the growth and swelling of the Stock and Graft (as some
other Bands do) and therefore there is the more need to look to such, to cut them, or unbind them, as before is said, else they cause dints or circles in the place where they bind, the barke swelling on both sides of the binding, and this makes the Graft more in danger of breaking, un∣less unbound, and strengthened in that part, as before. After Grafts have had their full growth the first year,Prune some young grafts they must be Pruned, such as need Pruning: as for wall Plants, it's no matter of how many Branches they spread, more the better: but for those that are Grafted low, and yet must be made standards, leave only one shoot, the strongest and biggest shoot, and cut off all the rest, and let not that straight shoot begin to spread, till it be an Ell long at least, ra∣ther more, and then let the Branches spread, and enlarge themselves. But herein observe, that unless these young Grafts put forth a strong and lusty shoot, do not prune off the side Branches, left the body of the plant be too small, and limber to bear his head; as is often seen in a Nursery where plants grow close, and neer together: if the body be very slen∣der, then suffer some of the side twigs to grow until the body be of a sufficient strength to bear the top.
And from year to year, prune off those shoots and branches as are superfluous, and grow too near one another, and pre∣serve onely such as are fit to make the Tree of a comely form. And if any spice up, and shoot too strongly upwards in the middle of the Tree onely, and spread not sufficiently (as is often seen in Peare trees, and some other trees) cut off from time to time those strong shoots in the middle, and still preserve the outmost branches, for all Fruit-trees, ought to spread as much as may be, so that the branches hang not too near the ground. And so much concerning Grafting, and also pruning while they are young Plants. I shall now speak of the other work whereby Fruit-trees are increased. Inocu∣lating, or putting a small Bud into a Stock, which (as to the effects of it) is the same with Grafting, but differs much in the season, and in the manner of the work. Inoculating Buds.The time for Inoculating Buds is about Midsommer, a fortnight before, and a fort∣night after is the chief season, though some Plants (full of Sap) may be done after∣wards with good success upon young frim stocks, even so long as the bark will rise. And take heed of beginning too soon with
any Buds; before they have attained a sufficient strength and growth; some will not be fit to Inoculate until August, and so all▪ that Month upon some frim sappy stocks. That this business may be done to good purpose, it must be considered whether the Buds we mean to get, are sufficiently grown or not, they must not be too young & tender: and we shall find that some kinds of Trees have buds ready sooner then o∣thers. As the Aprecott especially, and those that shoot strongly. Let then the biggest and strongest shoots be cut from the Tree, that have grown since the spring to that time, and cut off the top of the shoot (all those Buds that are too small and tender) and also cut off the leaves of the other, about a quarter of an inch from the Bud, and by that part left, we hold the Bud, be∣ing taken off the branch: but leave not on the whole leaf and stalk, as some do, for the aire (by means of the leaf) ex∣tracts and draws out the sap of the Bud in a short time, and so spoils it. Then go to the Plants you intend to Inoculate,Observe the kinds. which must be like (as to the general kinds) with the Buds that you in∣tend to set on: as Aprecott-buds, and o∣ther Plum-buds, on Plum-stocks that are
wild stocks: the white Pearl-plum-stock is accounted the best to Inoculate Aprecott-buds on, or other choice Plums, it being a Plant full of sap: and in chusing Buds, or Grafts, be sure always to cut them from those kinds that (experience shews) are good bearing Trees, as well as good fruits. Now in setting on the Bud, first make a cross cut upon some smooth place of the stock, (if it be for a wall-tree, then half a foot or a foot, or thereabouts from the ground) and from the middle of the cross cut, make another straight down, about an Inch long, only through the Bark, and with the end of a Pen-knife, raise up the Bark on both sides, as much as to let in the small Bud, then make hast to prepare the bud (for a man must be quick at this work, else the Aire, by sudden drying the Bud, and the cut-part of the stock will much hurt:) Cut the bark on both side the Bud, and about a quarter of an inch a∣bove, and as much below the Bud, let that end which is to be downwards, be a little sharp, that it may more easily go down, between the Bark, and wood of the stock▪ and throw away the Bark on the opposite side of the Bud, then with a Quill, the one half cut away, or a Pen of steel (made this for the purpose, like the one half of
Goose-quil) take off the Bud and Bark, by putting it between the Bark and wood: and be sure there be the root of the Bud in it, if there be a little hole in the middle of the Bud within, then the root is not there, throw away that bud, such will not grow, but the Bud being well taken off, then hold it by the stalk of the leaf, as before was said, and put it carefully between the bark and the wood of the small Plant prepared as before, and let the top of the bud joyne close to the cross cut, in the upper end: then bind the bud with a soft Rush, or Flag that is strong, bind it close to the stock, e∣specially in the middle where the Root of the bud lies, but not just upon the Bud. After a certain time,Vnbind buds in due time. the Buds must be unbound, and some sooner then others; some stocks grow more in a week, then some others in a month. Now, if this work be done early in the year, before Midsommer, upon young stocks very full of sap, these may be unbound a∣bout twenty days after, or a General Rule may be this, when a stock is so grown, as that the band about the Bud does much straighten the Bud, which may be seen by the swelling of the Plant above and below the Buds, then the band must be cut and taken off. But those that are near the end
of Iuly or after, will not need unbinding so soon. But take heed of making too much hast to unbind buds; there's less danger in suffering them to be long bound, then the contrary. Now after unbinding, you may se which Buds take hold of the stock▪ and which do not; those that are good, are fast upon the stock, and appear in their natural colours as when they were set on▪ those that do not hold, will have lost their colour, and (it may be) be withered and dried. Cut off stocks above the Buds.Such as are good, meddle no more till the Spring, then cut off the stocks an inch or two above the Buds, so the Buds will spring out and grow according to the strength of the stocks. And in Autumne af∣ter they may be transplanted, or if you please, such Buds may be transplanted the next Autumne after Inoculating, which is the surer way for growing. And when these Buds have grown one year or two, then cut off the stock close to the Buds, and they wll cover the head as Grafts. How to carry Buds.If Buds be not ready at hand, but must be fetcht many Miles in that hot time, then secal care must be taken in the carriage of them. Thus, being cut from the Tree, cut off the tops of the Branches, and the
leaves near the Buds as before, then bind them together, and wrap them in fresh leaves or grass to keep them cool, and they will keep good two or three dayes, but yet make all the hast that may be to Inocu∣late them. Buds of App trees, Pear, Cherry, or Plum▪ may be Inocula∣ted as Apre∣cots, and Peaches, if the shoots be strong and large. Having Grafted or Inoculated stocks, make one Letter or two, or write the name of the Fruit at length upon the stock below the Graft or Bud (whereby to know the kind of the Fruit) and if any be stolen, they may thereby be known,Mark the Stocks. being found again. It's done with the point of a Pen-knife, cutting through the Bark, the form of a Letter, or any other Figure or Cha∣racter, whereby to know the kinds of fruits. And so much for Inoculating Buds of Fruit trees. THe choice of right kinds of Grafts,Directions in the choce of Grafts and Stocks. and Stocks, and the joyning of them together according to their natures, is so necessary, and some observations about them are so essential to the work of profi∣table planting, that except they be known, and practised, men loose much of the pro∣fit they might have, if rightly observed. A few special directions in any Art, though consisting but of few lines, containing he Principles, and essential parts, are better,
and more to the advancement of the Art, then great Volumes upon the same Subject, when men (as many do) rove about upon unnecessary things, and strange fancies, without any solid grounds, beside the life of the business. If men miss the Princi∣ples, and essentials of an Art, they discourse of it to little purpose. So also in the practise: and therefore it has many times fallen out, that some men having laboured much, and spent much time and cost in Planting Fruit-trees, yet their labours have not succeeded well, be∣cause there has been mistakes in some prin∣cipal, and very material things; either the Trees have not grown well, or if prospe∣red, and come to a large growth, yet they have not born Fruit well, or if growen; and born fruit, and store of fruit, yet if the fruit hath not been right good, and of the best, it hath been a great discourage∣ment, not onely to themselves, but to o∣thers who have seen it. Now, among all Observations about this Art of Planting Fruit-trees, I know none of greater moment, or more essential to the profitable proceeding in it, then the choice of right kinds, and the joyning of Grafts, Buds, and Stocks fit for each other. I shall therefore mention some particulars of the
Twelve kinds of Fruit-trees, which I have made choice to speak of, and shew which I account most profitable, and best to pro∣pagate and increase, and how they fit seve∣ral stocks when the Cyences are to be En∣grafted, or buds Inoculated. First,Of Apples Chuse the best bearing kinds. concerning Apples: In the choice of Apple-Grafts, we must consider not on∣ly the goodness of the Fruit, but also, whe∣ther the Trees be good bearing Trees natu∣rally: whether such as have known them divers years, can say by experience, they bear well, but many look not after this so much, as what kind of fruit it is, in respect of goodness. And thence it comes to pass, that some men having store of faire, large Fruit-trees, they have but little fruit from them. Therefore let the generality of Fruit-trees (both in the Orchards and in the Fields) be of right kinds in respect of bear∣ing, as well as in respect of goodness of the fruit; and then for variety, there may be some of other kinds of good and choice fruits, though they bear but few and sel∣dome. And for particular kinds of Apples, I commend the Sommer Pearmain, and the Winter Pearmain, not onely for special fruits, but also for good bearing kinds. So likewise the small spice Pippin, a good Ap∣ple,
and great bearer; The Harvey Apple is a very choice fruit, and the Trees bear well. The Queen Apple is a great bearing fruit, and good, so the Gilloflour. The Gol∣den Pippin, a very spe∣cial Apple, and great baer, great Russeting, Kerton Pip∣pin, Holland Pippin, as some call it. Many other kinds might be named, that are spe∣cial good fruits, & great bearing kinds, and some prefer one kind, and some another. But the great and general Rule in this, and all other kinds of fruits, is, to take Grafts from those Trees which are known by experi∣ence to bear store of fruits, and good, and to multiply these as much as may be. As for Stocks fit for Apple Grafts, I ac∣count Crab-trees better then sweeter Ap∣ple-trees to graft on, because they are usu∣ally free from the Canker, and will become very large Trees, and will last longer then Stocks of sweeter Apple-trees, and will make fruits more strong, and hardy to en∣dure Frosts, and cold weather in the spring: yet it is good to chuse stocks of some pleasant Apples, to graft some choice fruit upon; Because that the stock hath some small influence upon the fruits, to make them more delicate, if grafted upon a choice stock. Although notwithstanding the graft may be said to Governe, as is shew'd at large. Of Pears.As for Pears, there are multitudes of kinds, as well as of Apples, some preferring
one kind and some another, and one and the same fruit is called by several names, in several places. A late Author sayes, he is perswaded there are 400. or 500. se∣veral kinds of Pears. Now therefore, it is a point of wisdom to chuse Grafts from the best bearing kinds, although (it may be) not so delicate to eat as some others. I know none but they are very useful and profitable. The Windsor Pear is accounted one of the best with us, some kinds bear not well, but some others do, therefore observe the former Rule. The Sommer Burgamet is a choice fruit, and the Trees bear well; so also the Winter Burgamet. But for a constant bearing kind.The Winter Boncriten is an excellent fruit, so the sommer, but bears not so well as the winter kind. I know none better then the Catherine Pear, both the Russet and the Red; but they must be quickly spent, for they are no lasting fruits. The Greenfield Pear, is an excellent Pear, and a great bearer. There is a Pear they call a Choke-Pear, which is accounted a special kind for Perry, although the Pear to eat, is stark naught, and therefore men may adventure to plant the Trees in the fields and hedges, and need not fear stealing of the fruits. I advise (for that reason) to plant many of the Trees, on purpose
to grind the fruits for Perry. Mr. Parkin∣son says, the Perry of these Pears, is scarce discerned from Wine, neither by tast nor co∣lour, after it hath been kept certain months. The best kind of stocks to graft Pear-grafts upon, are such as come of the Seeds or Kernels of Pears. I know no difference among these, but all good to graft upon▪ And I utterly dislike grafting these Fruits upon White-thorne, or upon any kinde of stocks beside Pear-stocks. The fruits are naught (having a hard and stony core) if grafted upon a Thorne-tree. Of CherriesThere are many kind of Cherries. The Flanders-cherry is most generally planted here in England, and is a great bearing fruit. Some of them (if planted against a south-wall) are almost as soon as the May-Cherry, they follow close after: The May-Cherries are tender, the Trees must be set in a warm place, upon some smooth south-wall, or morning sun, but the Flanders hear well in Orchards, and Fields at large. The black Hart-Cherry, is a very special fruit, and a great bearing-fruit; and doubt∣less exceeding proper to press for Wine, either to drink of it self, or to mix the juice with Cider to give it a colour, as Clarret-wine. It being of a deep red, & a small quan∣tity of it, will colour a gallon of Cider or
white-wine. There is a Cherry we call the great bearing cherry, of Mr. Millen. It may very well be called the great bearer, for the Trees seldome fail of great store of fruits, although in a cold, and sharp spring. It is something a tart fruit, of a very deep red, almost blackish, when full ripe. The juice is very proper to colour Cider, Perry, White-wine, or the like. These kinds are not ripe so soon as they are red, as the Flanders are, but should grow 10 dayes, or a fortnight after, until they become a very deep red: These (be∣ing somewhat late ere they be ripe) will hang upon the Trees until October, or after, especially if the Trees grow in the shade, and then they are rarities as much, or more then those in May: the White-cherry (the right kind) is a delicate fruit, there are many more kinds, I have above twen∣ty several kinds of Cherries in my Garden. The great bearing Cherry aforementio∣ned, is most fit for cold Countries in the North-parts, and although it be not alto∣gether so pleasant as some other Cherries, by reason of the tartness of the juice, yet let men know, that sharp Cherries are more wholsome then the sweet. And such as plant Trees of this kind, may have good store of Fruits, when others (it may be) want, who have none of these Trees.
Concerning Stocks fit for Cherry-trees,  account the Black-Cherry-stock the best to graft any kind of Cherry upon. Yet some hold the Red-Cherry-stock is best for May-Cherries. But the Black-Cherry-stocks are goodly straight Plants and full of Sap, and become greater Trees then the Red-Cherry-trees. Of Plums.There are very many kinds of Plums, many more then of Cherries. I esteem the Mustle-Plum one of the best, being a faire large Purple-plush, and of an excel∣lent rellish, and the Trees bear abundantly. The Damazeene also is an excellent fruit. The Violet, and Premorden Plum-trees, are very great bearing Trees, and the fruits pleasant and good. The Damasco-Plum, is a good Fruit, and the Trees bear well. Many other kinds might be named, very good Plums; some approve of one kind, and some of another, but the driest plums which part from the stones, are accounted best. Plum-Grafts must be grafted upon Plum-stocks, not upon Cherry-stocks, or any o∣ther kind of stocks, that I know. The White Pear-plum-stocks are accounted the best and the Damson-stocks the worst, being dry stocks: so that Grafts can∣not so well take, nor thrive upon them.
Those stocks of Plums which have large leaves and full shoots, I account the best, as being fullest of sap. Graft not Plum-grafts upon Cherry stocks, nor Cherries upon Plums, as some prescribe: different kinds will not agree together. Theyl grow (it may be) a year, or two, & then die. Though Aprecocks are (in the general) accounted Plums,Of Apre∣cocks. yet because of the ex∣cellency of the fruit, they may be spoken of by themselves. I know but few kinds of them, but some I know to be far better bearers, some are larger then others, and some sooner ripe then others; all good fruits. There's one kind that is a very great bearer and a faire large fruit, observe then those Trees that usually bear well, and get Buds from them at the season to Inoculate, as is shew'd pag. 50. for these must be propaga∣ted only by the bud, not by grafting. I ac∣count the White-pear-plum-stocks the best to Inoculate Aprecock buds upon, although they may be done upon other Plum-stocks with good success, if they be good juicy stocks, able to give a large nourishment, for Aprecock-trees require much nourishment. I shall joyn the Nectrine with the Aprecock, although another kind of fruit. The best kind that I know is the Roman red Nectrine. But it is very hard to be propagated: as
for Grafting, none take that way, and but few with Inoculating, which I conceive is the reason it is the dearest of all Plants with us. The Yellow and Green Nectrines, are much short of it in goodness. The White Pear-Plum-stock (though ac∣counted the best for any plum, yet I finde) is scarce good enough, for this fruit to be Inoculated upon it, though some do indiffe∣rent well. But I hold it best to Inoculate the Roman red Nectrine upon the Branch of an Apre∣cock, which before hath been Inoculated upon a good Plum-stock, that it may give not only a larger, but a finer nourishment then ordinary Plum-stocks can do: upon these stocks they take and hold exceeding well, and also upon Peach-stocks. Of PeachesOf Peaches there are divers kinds: I know by experience, the Nutmeg, and Newington Peaches, to be excellent tasted fruits, and very good bearers, especially the Nutmeg-Peach, which makes amends for the smallness of the fruit: but the Newington-Peach, is a very large and gal∣lant fruit. These require choice Plum-stocks to be Inoculated upon, as the White Pear-plum-stock, or else stocks comming of Peach-stones.
I know but one kind of Figs that come to ripeness with us in England.Of Figs. The great Blew fig, as large as a Catherine-Pear. The Trees grow in divers Gardens in Oxford, and bear their fruits to perfect ripeness: The trees must be set against a South-wall, and be spread up with nailes, and Leathers; or if Planted upon warm land, and in a warm place, they will bear well on Standards. These Trees are increased from the Root of the old Tree; draw up the small suckers, and plant them; These need nei∣ther Inoculating, nor Grafting: also bend the boughs (that are lowest) down into the earth, and they'l take root, as Vines, which may be cut off, and transplanted. Some Authors affirm that there have been Vine-yards in England in former times,Of Grapes. though they be all destroyed long since. Divers places retaine the name of Vine-yards still. At Bromwel-Abby in Nor∣folke, and at Elie in Cambridg-shire, which afforded wine: what else is the meaning of these old Rimes? Quatuor sunt Eliae; Lanterna, Capella, Mariae Et Molendinum, nec non dans Vinea vinum.
Englished thus: Foure things of Elie Towne much spo∣ken are, The Leaden Lanthorne, Maries Chappel rare. The mighty Mil-hill in the Minster field, And fruitful Vineyards which sweet wine doe yield. And doubtless men might Plant Vines with good success, to make good wine e∣ven with us. There are many kinds of Vines,See more at large in the Table. but I know none so good, and fit for our Climate as the Parsley Vine, with the white and red muskcadine, we see by experience yearely these beare abundance of fruits unto perfection.Or Canada Grape. And whosoe∣ver will plant Vines in England, I think he cannot meet with better kinds than these, both for bearing and goodness. The Frantiniack Grape is of great Ac∣count with many, and is a special fruit, where it comes to perfect ripeness, which it hardly does, except the Vine be set up∣on the South-wall, where it may have much sun. The Red, and white Muskcadine Grape
are special fruits, and bear very well, and come to perfect ripeness, if the Vines grow upon the South-wall, or upon the East-wall, which is best next. There is the Curran Grape, Cluster Grape, and many other kinds of good Grapes; and the fruits are better or worse, accor∣ding to the place they grow in; If they have much sunne, and be well ordered, the fruit will be better and sooner ripe. Vines are increased by laying down branches into the earth, in the winter, or spring, letting them grow still upon the Tree, until removing time the year after; and then they may be cut off, and the Roots taken up, and planted elsewhere: Also the Cuttings will grown laid in the ground in the winter, or spring, though they grow but weakly & slowly for a year, or two. We have in these parts the English,Quinces: and the Portugal Quinces; the Portugal I e∣steem as the better, both for bearing, and use; These are increased by suckers from the Roots of the trees; and the boughes also cut off, and cut in pieces a yard long, or more, or less, and layd in the ground, will grow (as Vines and Mulberry cut∣tings) and bear the same fruits; These kind of trees are commonly long ere they bear fruits.
It is observed that Qince-trees bear much better in fat moist ground, than in dryer grounds, as is seen upon som Ditch sides, and ranck soyles about London Of Mulber∣ries.There are two kinds of Mulberry-trees with us in England, the Black, and the White. As for the White I never saw any of its fruit, they very seldome bear well with us. But the Black Mulberry-tree never failes of fruit after it is grown up. These trees are not increased by Grafting or In∣oculating, but by Cuttings from the Bran∣ches, or sides of the trees: Cut a bow off as big as a mans arme, and after cut it in small Truncheons, or pieces a yard long or less, lay these small and great, in the ground a foot deep, only the one end out of the ground a hands bredth or two, or there abouts in good fat ground some∣what moist, and after a year, or two, di∣divers young springs may be drawn from the Roots, and Planted at a fit distance, and the old Roots will yearly send out more, also the branches may be bowed down and layd in the earth, on one, or several sides, which will take root and multiply abudantly, and be fit to be trans∣planted. Of Medlers.Medlers may be grafted, (and they take well upon a White thorne, but I much ra∣ther
approve the Grafting or Inoculating of them upon Pear-stocks: and the fruit will be much better, and the trees much larger then upon White-thorne. Walnut-trees are propagated from the Nuts,Of Walnuts. which may be set from the time of ripeness, until the spring, an inch deep or little more, and afterwards transplanted, and set at a very great distance, 24. or 30. yards asunder, for they are very large spreading trees. But if they are planted on the North or East-sides for shelter, then set them nearer. Be sure to chuse of the best Nuts to set, the fairest Nuts, and thinnest shells, and good bearers. Thus much (briefly) concerning the best bearing Trees, and how they are propa∣gated. As for those Fruit-trees which bear but little or no fruits,Graft old trees, if bad bearers. by reason that Grafts and Buds were not chosen from good bearing kinds, wherewith they were engrafted, I advise (by all means) to Graft or Inoculate such again, though great, and old Trees, such whose boughs are as big as a mans hand wrist, or smaller, may be cut off, and grafted in the Cleft with a couple of good Grafts, of good bearing kinds; but such Branches as are very great, I should
rather cut off a convenient height from the ground, slope-wise, that no wet may rest on the top, and then after a year or two, to graft the small shoots or branches that are put forth, or some of them; this is a better course then to graft such great Branches, for that moisture will get into the top, and rot the Branches, and per∣haps the Body too, ere the grafts can co∣ver such great heads. Make Ar∣bours of fruit trees.As concerning Arbors, Seats, &c. in Orchards and Gardens, I advise men to make them of Fruit-trees rather then of Privet, or other rambling stuffe, which yields no profit, but onely for shade. If you make them of Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, or the like, there will be the same advantage for shade, and all the Fruits superadded. All that can be objected, is, that Fruit-trees are longer in growing up, then Privet, Virgin-Bower, or the like, whereof Arbors are commonly made. It is answered, Though Fruit trees are something longer▪ in covering an Arbor, then some other things, yet they make sufficient amends in their lasting and bearing fruits: And besides, such Cherry-trees, and o∣ther kinds, may be set about the Arbors, as will reach and cover even the first year.
I Shall now give some Rules concerning Transplanting young plants,Of Trans∣planting Trees. after a years growth, or more, whether Inoculated or Grafted. The time for this work (in general) is in Autumne, when Trees have done grow∣ing, and that is divers weeks before the Leaves fall. Stay not (as the custome is) till November or after, before you Trans∣plant, for the best time is about the latter end of September to begin; and so on, all the Winter. It's a great advantage to remove plants betime,Early re∣moving best. for such grow a while after in their Roots before Winter, and thereby not on∣ly preserve themselves in Winter, but also make some preparation against the Spring; which those removed in Winter cannot do. Stay not therefore till the Leaves fall ere you remove, although they may be re∣mov'd then with good success, but it is not so good at that time as before. The ancient proverb is, If a growing Tree would have, Let him carry his green Leaves to his grave. Yet notwithstanding,Trees may be trans∣planted all the Winter. those that have many to Transplant, and cannot finish
(or have no leasure) in this season which is best, they may go on, and be doing even all Winter, until the very Spring, unless Frost shut up the ground: And notwith∣standing Frost or Snow all the while, if we can get into the ground, and find the mould mellow, so as that it will fall well between and about the Roots, it's then good re∣moving Trees, although the best time is to be prefer'd. The time of removing being come, and the place prepared for setting them again, then be careful in taking up the Plants, dig round about them, and take off the mould from their Roots, if it be a small plant, it may be drawn up easily, the mould being taken away; if it be great, and the Roots spread much, then they may be cut about half a yard from the body of the Plant, and the greater it is, the further off cut the Roots, and so draw it up: and break off all the leaves the first thing you do, if they be not then fallen off, for the Sun and Aire (by means of them) extract the sap of the branches. The largest Plants not best.And here observe; That the Great Plants are not alwayes best to transplant out of Nurseries into Orchards, though most men are for the greatest, when they may chuse, and they think the bigger they
are, the sooner they will make an Orchard: but herein they are much mistaken, for in removing great trees, there is great hazard, and many of them fail and die, and others grow very poorly, putting out only leaves the first year, or little more, though some few, in special good soyle) may do well. I account young grafted Trees fit to re∣move,Of what bigness to remove young Trees. when they are about two inches in compass in the body, and about a yard and half, or two yards high; those about this bigness, I judge to be better then such as are five or six inches (or more) in com∣pass, with a proportionable height; because these cannot possibly be transplanted, but their Roots must be cut very much in the taking up, and then how can those Roots (so much cut) be able to nourish so great a body, with so many branches: whereas young trees, of a smaller size, (as before is mentioned) these may be removed even with all their Roots, (which are young and small) and may be spread in the earth every way, when set again, save onely the ends of the roots, must be a little cut, and these young and tender roots will sooner shoot forth in the earth then the greater sort, especially (also) because the body and branches are young and ender; the bark being thin, does more easily extend
and enlarg by the rising of the sap, then the bark of Elder Trees. For which causes, young trees (when removed) do not only grow surer, but they also make a larger growth at first planting, then the greater and elder Trees can do; and are thereore best. Prune the Branches and Roots.But if it be so that such large trees must be set, then some of the Branches must be cut, and say not as many do, here's a fair tree already, why should we cut away any part of it? But they must be content to loose some of the branches, else they are in danger to loose all: for removing of great plants, is a great check to nature, and if a few roots cut short (as they must be when removed) be put to feed many and large branches, they'l have but slender and poor nourishment, not sufficient many times to preserve life, much less to make a large growth. But if plants be of the lesser size, you need not cut the branches, except such as cross one another, or grow too nigh together, or run up two high without spreading: but cut off the ends of the roots of all, because if cut, many small fibra's or strings shoot out at the cut place, which draw nourishment for the plant, which without cutting would not. Set not Plants too deep.Plants being thus prepared, the next thing is to set them again in the ground: take heed of setting below the good soyl.
The hole for the Plant being digged, set in the root prepared as before, and cast in the smallest and best mould next to the roots, and see that the small mould run be∣tween all the roots; to that end, stir and shake the Plant, that there may not be any hollow place where the mould falls not, and with your hand draw up the upper∣most roots and part them, that they may spread in the mould every way, and so fill it up. The young trees being thus set into the ground,Lay rotten dung, horse∣litter, or the like, about Trees newly set. and the holes fild up, it will be very advantagious to them to lay a Barrow∣full of Rotten Muck, round about each of them, close to the body of the Plant, the fatness whereof will soke in among the roots, and make the soyle special good, whereby the Trees will thrive the better: Or else to lay (instead thereof) store of Weeds, Litter, Ferne, or the like, two or three handfulls thick, this will keep the roots warm all Winter, and moist and cool in the Sommer following, and makes the soyle fatter, and also preserves the Trees from weeds growing about them. Trees thus ordered (by laying stuff about their roots) may be set very shallow, and thereby will be much advantaged, and prove better then such as are set deep,
because in the top of the earth is the best mould, and also every shower of rain rea∣ches the Roots and feeds them. If the Plants are faire large Plants, in danger to be shaken by the winds, then knock down a stake close to every one, and tye the Plant to it with a hayband, or some other soft band. How to pre∣pare trees for carriageIf young Trees are to be carried many Miles to be Planted, then (being taken up carefully) lay the Roots all one way, the smallest and tenderest in the middle of the bundle, and bind them close from the roots to their tops, with a soft band, and then stuffe the roots round about with straw, ay, moss, or the like, afterwards bind the bundle all over, from the roots to the very top, with hay, or straw bands, or something else, to preserve them from brusing; and withal, wrap something a∣bout the Roots, a thin Mat, or a piece of an old sack-cloth, or any thing that will preserve the Roots from the Wind, and Sun, and from brusing: And they may be carried many hundred Miles (if need be) in Winter, without hurt. Distance of setting.As concerning distance in setting young Trees, I conceive 8. or 10. yards is little enough between Apple-trees and Pear-trees, in ordinary soyle, yet Pear-trees need not
be planted so far asunder, as Apple-trees. And if men have ground enough to plant, and good soyle, I should rather prescribe to Plant them 14 or 16 yards asunder; for both Trees and Fruits have many great advantages, if planted a good distance one from another. Such are freed from frettings and gal∣lings,The 1 Ad∣vantage. that happens to Trees that thrust, and croud one another, whereby not only the Buds, Blossomes, and Fruits, are rub'd and broken off, but also sometimes the Canker thereby breeds and destroys boughs, and branches.The 2 Ad∣vantage. Secondly, (when Trees are planted a fair distance asunder) the Sun refreshes e∣very Tree, the Roots, Body, and Branches, with the Blossomes and Fruits, whereby Trees bring forth more fruits, and those fairer and better.The 3 Ad∣vantage. Thirdly, If Apple-trees and Pear-trees are planted at a large distance, much pro∣fit may be made of the ground, under and about the Trees. Ye may plant Goose∣berries, Rasberries, Currans, Strawberries, Roses, Flowers, and all sorts of Garden∣stuffe, commodious as well for sale, as hous∣keeping, which cannot be if Trees be plan∣ted near together, as the custome is in most places, the ground being cold and shady
by the Trees. Besides the Trees would have advantage by frequent digging and stirring the earth about their Roots from time to time in setting these things. The 4 Ad∣vantage.|Fourthly, When Trees have room to spread as before, they will grow very large and great, and the consequences of that will be, not only multitudes of Fruits, but also long lasting; and these two are no small advantages, besides all the former. And men are mistaken, when they say, The more Trees in an Orchard, the more Fruits; for one or two faire large Trees, which have room to spread, will bear more fruits then six or ten (it may be) of those that grow near together, and crow'd one another. Let men but observe, ad take notice of some Apple-trees that grow a great di∣stance from other Trees, (and have room enough to spread both in the Roots and Branches) and they shall see that one of those Trees (being come to full growth) hath a larger head, and more boughs and branches, then (it may be) 4 or 6 or more of those which grow near together, al∣though of the same age. Yea, I advise if men have ground e∣nough, to Plant Apple-trees 20 yards asun∣der: Now Trees so planted, will not reach of a long time, if ever, therefore
much profit may be made of Trees Plan∣ted between, for many years, which may (when they begin to reach one another) be taken away, and disposed of for the best advantage to Plant abroad in the Fields. It is a very great, and almost a general Errour, the Planting of Fruit-trees too near together, especially as to Apple-trees and Pear-trees, as for standard Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, and the like, they need not be planted half the distance I speak off, 5 or 6 yards in distance is usually enough, and 7 or 8 yards, if the ground be special good: for all Trees grow much larger in some soyles, then in other. As concerning the distance of Wal trees,Distance of Wal-trees. they may be planted, 2, 3, 4, 6, or more yards asunder; More or less, according to the nature of the Trees and soyle. For Aprecots, and some other kinds of Plums, grow much larger then some other Trees: some Aprecot-trees in good soyle will spread 7 or 8 yards wide, or more; whereas the May Cherry-tree, is but small, at biggest; (it may be) 2 yards wide, or scarce above 3. It is the custome (of late);Cherry-hed∣ges, and of Quodlings, Vines, &c. to make Cherry-hedges in Gardens and Orchards; and hedges of Quodlings, Nurs-gardens, Plums, Vines, and such like Trees, that
may be kept (by cutting and plaishing one branch within another) from growing ve∣ry large: These are usually made along the side of walks, or round about a Garden-plot▪ and such a hedg is a very great Ornament to a Garden, being ordered and kept hand∣somely: Now Trees set to this purpose, need the least distance of any other,Distance of Trees in a Cherryhedg a yard asunder, or an Ell, or more or less accor∣ding to the bigness, and spreading of the young trees; for these should meet (or near it) the first year; which should be ordered thus. How to set and order a Cherryhedg or of Quod∣lings, &c.Stretch a line from one end to the o∣ther, where the hedge is to be made, and set the Trees straight at the distance a∣foresaid: Afterwards, knock down a stake be∣tween each Tree,Or its (in some re∣spects) best to let the staking, and Poling of it alone until the spring. The stakes and Rods (if done then) will be fresh all Sommer. then having straight, long Rods, or Poles of Ash, or the like: tye a row of them along from one end to the other, (about a foot from the ground) fast to the stakes with Osiers, or such like; or else naile them, which is better; and another row of Rods a foot above them, and so a third (if need be) according to the height of the young Plants; having thus done, spread and tye the branches, and twigs of the Trees (in order) to the Poles, but not too hard, and draw, and
fasten some of them down close to the ground, that so there may be blossomes and fruit from the bottome to the top, which will be a most beautiful sight to be∣hold in Spring and Sommer: then after a few years, the Stakes and Poles may be ta∣ken away, and the branches platted and woven one within another, from year to year, and the superfluous ones cut off. Yet, notwithstanding what hath been said for a more then ordinary distance be∣tween Apple-trees,Nearness best in some respects. and Pear-trees; this may be said for neerness of setting; That it is best for present profit; for if Apple-trees, Pear-trees, &c. be set 4 or 5 yards asunder, there will be room enough for them for divers years, perhaps it may be a dozen, 16 or 20 yeas ere they meet, and all that time a man have the fruits of them, and then when they meet, he may (and it will be best to) cut down each other: or (if they be not too great) to remove them to some other place. These Trees are the best to be set at large in Pastures and other Field lands: taken up with large Roots and disbranched; and set with 3 or 4 stakes about them, that Cattle rub not upon them. And although they be for nothing but the fire, yet for that they will be more worth then they cost at first,
and all the fruits they have born to that time, are superadded; as for standard Cherry-trees, 4 or 5 yards distance is con∣venient. As for those who have but small quan∣tities of ground to plant, it will be most pro∣fitable to plant near together, as may con∣veniently be, not onely for the advantage of the quantity of fruit of each other tree, which may afterwards be taken away; but also, that they may have variety of fruits, even in a small compass of ground. But those that have room enough, I say (as before) let the Trees be Planted at a large distance one from another, for the Reasons alledged, pag. 65. Order in setting treesConcerning Order in setting Trees, though it be not essential to a good Or∣chard, yet if men stand upon it, they may measure out a square plot of ground (more or less) by a line, and then measure the distance that must be between every tree; according to the kinds that are to be plan∣ted, and according to the goodness, or na∣ture of the soyle as hath been said. And having measured exactly the square plot, and the distance of the Trees, set a stake or pole in the place where every tree must stand, and dig the soile round about it, a foot deep, and three foot broad, then set
the four corners first, then fill up the square plot; on all the four sides with plants, or∣dered as before, and so go on to fill up all the other places in the Plot, exactly by the line, or by the eye, if there be four or five persons to assist in the work. And by this means the Trees will stand in Rowes e∣very way. This square once planted, though but small at first, may be enlarged every way as the ground permits, or else the Orchard may be drawn out in length, and yet the Trees stand in a right line e∣very way by this means; and if the Trees are set at a great distance, one may be planted in the midst, at equal distance from each one in the Qnincunx. In setting all sorts of Trees,A special Rule in transplan∣ting. consider what soyle they come out of, whether a fat and forced soyle, (as divers of the Nur∣series about London) or some ordinary na∣tural soyle. If they come out of very good ground, then procure as good or better, if it may be had, (though but a little) to lay next to their roots when they are set again. Weeds, Dung, and such like, laid on a heap, will become good mould in a short time, but such heaps lying together divers years, are then special mould for the roots of young Trees at their first setting.
This should alwayes be observed, To plant Trees in as good or better soyle, being removed, as that out of which they were ta∣ken. For every thing in nature, advan∣ced to the better, it is grateful and bene∣ficial to it, but if it be carried to the worse, it is a check and repulse to nature; and such a one as that, if it be in any great de∣gree, it either much weakens it, or quite destroys it. Therefore chuse Trees out of poor soiles, but if they must be had out of rich soiles, then be sure to procure some (more or less) of as good, or better then that out of which they are removed, to lay to their Roots, when set again. For want of observing this course, many hundreds of good plants have been lost from time to time. The ordering of young Plants, the first and second year of planting, has an influence upon them many years, which if neglected then, the labour and diligence of many years after, cannot countervaile it; the ordering of Cattle while they are young, either makes or marrs them; so of Trees, and other things in some proportion; but after they have well taken Root the first and second year, they will then grow in ordinary soiles, the great danger is at first planting. Wall-trees.Concerning Wall-trees: the Aprecot,
Peach, Nectarine, Vine-tree, &c. these and such choice fruits, must be planted upon a South-wal, if it may be: The best next that, I account the East-wall, and the West not so good, on the North-wall, fruits will be late ripe; thence they may be got when others are gone. So that its best to plant the North-wall, not onely to have fruits thence late ripe, but also for the beauty, and comeliness of the Garden, all the walls being covered with fruit-trees. These trees being set, (as before is said) they must be plaisht, or spread upon the Wall, being young, (and so from year to year as they grow greater) with Nails and Leathers. And as they grow larger, cut not the utmost sides or top branches, un∣til they be spread as large as they should spread; and be sure to lead the main and biggest branches along the sides of the wall both wayes, and suffer them not to rise straight up, as naturally they will, but correct nature by art; be sure to furnish the bottom of the wall first. Wall-trees must be pruned from year to year,Prune Wall-trees. first in Sommer, secondly in Winter. About the end of Iune, or middle of Iuly, the Aprecot-trees (especially) will have put out many large shoots, some of which must be cut off, and others spread up to
the wall, where there is room for them. Tye up as many as you can conveniently with Leathers and Nails, and cut the rest off, which will not so well spread to the Wall; and spread the branches as that the fruits (which by that time will be growen towards their bigness) may have the Sun to refresh and ripen them,In Sommer. but yet pluck not off the leaves as some do, for if a hot time come after, the Sun may even spoile the Fruits. In Winter.Secondly, So soon as the leaves are fal∣len off, the branches that cross one ano∣ther, or are not well placed, must be recti∣fied; or any of the great boughs which are growen old, and have but few small branches upon them, may be cut off, which must not be cut off in Sommer time, lest that too great and sudden obstruction of Sap, kill the whole Tree. But the cutting of the small branches in Sommer, is some small check and stop to the Sap, and hin∣ders the excessive rising of it at that time, which else would spend it self in large su∣perfluous branches, and so rob the fruits. This Winter Pruning, is chiefly for the well-ordering of the branches that could not be well placed (by reason of the fruits and leaves) in Sommer-time, and for the cut∣ting off of great branches, when need is.
It is a great errour amongst some, who suffer all the young and large shoots to grow as much as they will, all Sommer without cutting,Errour in Pruning. and then in Winter they usually cut all, or most of them quite off from the trees, and preserve only the old stumps, or biggest branches of the Trees, and by this means in the middle part of the Tree, and near the Root, there are few, or no young branches to be seen: Whereas they should preserve all the young branches to spread up against the Wall, until it be full of small boughs. And then some young shoots eve∣ry year, may be cut off as before. And in cutting away branches,Observati∣on in Pru∣ning. be sure to take those away that grow the straight∣est out, and will not so easily be bowed to the wall as the other: And preserve bran∣ches as low, and as near the ground as may be, and cause them to bend, and grow strait along the sides of the wall both ways; and suffer not the biggest branches to rise straight upward, (as commonly most do) but naile them downwards, to furnish the bottome of the Wall. As for great Trees in the Orchards,Pruning old standard-trees. Fields, Hedges, &c. they must be Pruned from year to year, as need is, in October, No∣vember, or afterwards observe to cut off the superfluous branches, such as
cross one another, and such as grow too close, so as the Sun cannot well come a∣bout the bearing branches: Leave no dead Twigs or Branches, and scrape off the Moss that is upon the Body and great Branches. Ordering the Roots of old Trees.Opening the Roots once in two or three years is profitable to some Trees, especi∣ally such as grow upon dry and barren grounds. In November (or there abouts) take away the Earth round about the Roots, a yard broad or more, and so leave the Roots bare and open all Winter; that the Rain, Snow, beams of the Sun, &c. may refresh the bottome Roots, and make the ground beter: At Spring fill up the holes again with some good fresh mould, or rot∣ten muck, to feed and refresh the Trees. In blossoming and knitting time water the Trees, (especially those on dry ground) this makes them hold their Fruit the better. So also of Lees of Wine, the washing of strong Bear-barrels, Blood of Cattle, dead Dogs, Carrion, or the like, laid, or put to the Roots of Trees, when opened (as be∣fore) is found very profitable unto fruit-bearing, and exceedingly revives old de∣caying Trees. And it is very necessary (in order to the thriving, and well bearing of Fruit-trees)
that they have some good fresh mould or soyle laid to their Roots once in three or four years, except they grow in special good ground: for great and large Trees, do suck and draw the fertility of the ground exceedingly: such great and vast bodies cannot be nourished to thrive well, with a little; therefore help them as they have need: it may be perceived when they have need by the poorness of their shoots and fruits. As opening them, and putting in soyle is good; so also take a Bar of Iron (in Winter time) and make many holes among their Roots, and poure in Beasts blood, wash∣ings of Beer vessels, Fat-water, or the like: These very much refresh the Trees. But in case the soyle about the Roots be over fat and fertil,Abate the over-fatness of soyle. this may hinder bearing, for it will cause Trees to shoot forth great large shoots, and to send forth broad leaves, and but little fruit: if so, then take away some of the fertil soyle, and put in instead, sand or cole-ashes, or any stuff that is bar∣ren, that it may dry up, and abate some of the too full feeding that the Trees had, and so cause fruitfulness. Though meat and drink be never so good and wholesome, yet excess hurts, the body. And further observe: That Mowing of
grounds yearly,Pasturing Orchards, better then Mowing. where Fruit-trees grow, is exceeding prejudicial to Trees (unless the soyle be very fertile). But pasturing of Orchards and Grounds where Fruit-trees grow, is observed to be of great advantage to their prospering, and bearing fruits. When Cattle are suffered to lie and Pasture under and about the Trees, they much benefit the Roots by their warmth in sit∣ting, and by their soyle, which soaks down among the Roots, and is a great refreshing to them, as hath been found by clear Experience. Therefore permit Cattle (if it may be convenient) to lie and Pasture, under and among Fruit-trees, (after they are grown strong, and out of their reach) save oely at those seasons when Fruits are ripe, be∣cause rubbing against the Tres, would shake down the Fruits, and spoile them. And it were better they did not rub a∣gainst the Trees at any time, for in that respect they may do hurt, therefore set stakes or posts about the Trees for the Cat∣tle to rub against, whereby the Trees may be preserved. Concerning Transplanting, Pruning, and ordering the Roots of Trees, thus much. See further, Errors in Practise.
Diseases Incident to Fruit-trees. FRuit-trees are subject to divers Di∣seases Baptist. Port. sayes,De cultu & insit. l c. 35. Affliguntur Plantae omnes, veluti Animalia, diversis mor∣bis. All Trees or Plants are afflicted with divers Diseases as sensible creatures. And therefore we should apply our selves to cure them, not for pity to the Trees (as the indulgent compassionate Manichees) but for our own profit. I shall (at present) mention only four di∣seases that sometimes happen to Fruit-trees. Mossiness, Bark-bound, Canker, and Worms. Concerning Mossiness of Fruit-trees, the way to cure that (and other diseases) is to take away the Cause,Mossiness. sublatâ causâ, tollitur effectus. if the Spring be stopt, the streams cannot runne. Some to cure this, onely scrape off the Moss, not endeavouring to take away the Cause, so that in few years they are as bad again; that's but like endeavours for cure of the Tooth∣ach, or Gout, or the like, with some out∣ward applications, which, although they may give some ease for a while, yet they strike not at the Root, they remove not the
Cause, and therefore they returne again. So that it must be considered what the Cause of Mossiness is, sometimes it is caused by over coldness of the ground, as in wate∣rish and clay grounds, likewise by Barren∣ness of the soyle. If it be Coldness through moysture, then use all means to lay it dryer, by trenching the ground: or if it be clay ground, then bring in some warmer soyles to mix with it, as Sand, Ashes, Sheeps-dung, Pigeons, or Hens-dung, or the like: If the soyle be too barren, then help it by mixture of good soyles round about the Roots. But withal, take away the Moss that is already upon the Trees, in this manner; after Raine, rub it off with a Hair-cloth; else scrape it off with a piece of hard wood in the form of a knife. Bark-boundAnother is the Bark-bound disease: This exceedingly hinders the growth of Trees: it makes them live lingringly and poorly: This happens, when there is but a dull, and slow passage up of sap, and in small quantity, either by reason of barrenness of soyle, or want of due culture to the Branches, therefore if the soyle be barren, it must be mended, and likewise some of the branches cut off, and the rest scored down all along to the Root, through the
ark, on each side, with some cross cuts and icks in the bark: let this be done in the pring time, and the Sap will arise more lentifully. Another disease is the Canker,Canker. natural o some, but accidentally hapening to o∣thers by bruises, &c. This hurts many, nd spoils some. To cure it, cut it out, if  be upon the body, or great boughs of rees, and wash the place with Cow-dung nd Urine mixt; and then cover the place with clay mixed with Horse-dung, and ut off the small branches that are dead, out withal, endeavour to stop the foun∣aine, and cause of it, (being a sharp and vi∣ulent sap) by laying Cole ashes, or ashes of urnt-wood, Nettles, Ferne, and such like vegetables, to the roots; but if the Trees grow upon gravel ground, they'l hardly be cured without altering the soile in a great measure. Some Trees are hurt with small worms that breed between the bark and the wood;Worms. which cause the Bark (in that part) to rise nd swell sometimes: this being perceiv∣ed, the worms must be cut out, and the place washed with Urin and Cow-dung. Secondly,Mischiefs incident to fruits. concerning Mischiefs inci∣dent to Fruits: by Caterpillers, Ants, Ear∣wigs, Snails, Wasps, Birds, and cold, and trong Winds.
CaterpillersIn the Spring-time, Caterpillers breed (and devour many buds, blossomes, and young fruits, especially in a dry season:) of the Dew and Leaves (as one says) when the East-wind blow's much,L. Bac. nat. hist. p. 148. which causeth that moist and slimy matter to vivifie. They breed also (as is observed) of the Spawn of Butterflies. Now, how to destroy them. I know no better way then to pluck off those leaves which have the Cobwebs made upon them, (in which they breed) and tread them under foot, for one of them contains multitudes. And for those that escape, being upon the Trees, some smoake them with straw or such like, which makes them fall off. They may be destroyed also by squirting water up into the Trees among the boughs, which washeth them off. Ants.Secondly, Ants and Pismires hurt fruits, multitudes creep up into some Trees, and eat the fruits. Therefore seek out their hils where they breed and lie, and poure in scalding water among them till they be destroyed. Yea, sometimes they be under, or near the roots of Trees, and do very great hurt, and almost kill some Trees, these must be dig'd out, and destroyed by hot water, or some other way.
Also, anoint the bottom of the Trees near the Root with Tar round about, that so these little Thieves may be taken Pri∣soners by sticking in it. Thirdly,Earwigs. Fruits (growing ripe) are sometimes eaten with Ear-wigs. One way to destroy them, is by setting Oxe-hoofs, Canes, or any hollow thing near the Roots of the Trees, and among the Boughs, upon the ends of sticks, and they'l creep in, and lie there, then take off these hoofs quickly, and shake them into a boule of water, or crush them with your foot upon the ground. These Creatures do most mischiefe to Wall-trees,Snailes. especially upon old walls. Pick them off betime in the morning, and de∣stroy them. But if you keep the wall well pointed with lime, that they have no har∣bour there, and the Roots clean from weeds you'l not be much troubled with them. To keep them from some choice Trees and Fruits, strew ashes round about. Another mischief incident to fruit, is by Wasps and Hornets sometimes;Wasps. some find out their nests, and are so bold as to de∣stroy them there by scalding water, or some other way. Another way to de∣stroy them, is by hanging Earthen Pots
half full of water in Trees, dawbed in the innerside with hony, & they will leave the fruits, and fall to the honey, and having suckt of it, they fall into the water and perish. This way destroyes multitudes. Birds.Birds also spoile buds and fruits: the Bulfinch and Lennet, in the Winter time and Spring, eat up multitudes of buds of Cherry-trees, Aprecot-trees, and Plum-trees, which are prepared for blossoms and fruits, and being ripe, they peck and eat many: you may destroy them, by setting Lime-twigs (with baits) in the Trees, and kill some with a Cross-bow, and hang them in the Trees. And Clack-Mills may be set in divers places in the Orchard, which will affright them: also bruise Ratsba very small, and mix it with Oatmeal, and lay it in small percells in divers places, and the birds eating of it will die. This is a sure way to kill many. Winds.But the greatest mischief incident to fruits, is by cold winds: and Frosts in the Spring time, and by strong winds in Sommer and Autumne: which shake off the fruits: against the hurt of cold winds, and frost Wall-trees may be covered for a certaine time while they are knitting (being ex∣ceeding tender) and great standard Trees may be smoaked in knitting time, setting
on fire some moist straw, (or any thing that will make a smoak) under and among the Trees. Likewise, Plant such Trees as will grow high upon the North or East, that may be a good shelter continually against these cold winds, which is the best course: the Orchard must be defended (if it be possi∣ble) with some high Trees on the North, East, and West sides, or so planted, that they may have houses, hills, or something or other, to break off these winds from the Fruit-trees. So much concerning Diseases and Mis∣chiefs, incident to Fruit-trees, and Fruits: with their Cures and Remedies.
The Alimental and Physical use of Fruits. FRuit-trees being Planted, and duly ordered to Fruit-bearing, then comes the joyful Harvest, the End of all our la∣bours; then we make use of Fruits as may be most for our profit: I shall speak of the use of Fruits, in respect both of their Ali∣mental and Physical use. First concerning the use of Apples. Of Apples.When Apples are ready, they may be disposed of divers ways, some for Cider, others for sale, others for daily dishes to the Table, ordered many ways. Apples best for Cider.Some prefer one sort, as best for Cider, and some another: In Herefordshire, and some other parts, the Redstreak is general∣ly prefer'd for Cider, before Pippins, Pearmains, or any other kinds: yet some others, prefer Pippins, Pearmains, Gilli-flower-Apples, as best for Cider, as having in them a more Cordial juice then other Apples: And some differ from these, and
say the Apples known by the name of Elliots, make the best Cider, and call it the Sack of Cider: Others cry up the Stoken Apple, as best of all for Cider. I shall not stand to dispute which is best for Cider;Increase the best kinds for Cider. but seeing they are all so good, as that an Argument is raised, which are best for Cider? My advice therefore is, that men propagate, and increase great store of Trees of all these kinds, and o∣ther sorts of Fruits, which (by experi∣ence) are found to be good for Cider: And then every man may take where he likes, and please his Palate, with that that suits best with it. But without doubt, the Redtreak (which is a kind of Wilding, and some∣what hard and briske) and generally all hard Apples and Wildings, which have a lively, pert, brisk juice, (so that they come not too near the degree of stark Crabs) All these kinds, I say, make excellent Ci∣der, which experience shews, and con∣firms from year to year. Cider made of hard,Some Cider sooner ready then other kinds, harsh fruits, is not so soon ready for drinking, as that of som∣mer fruits, and those more pleasant: That made a Table-fruit, being earliest ripe, is ready to drink, even so soon as its well set∣led and cleared; but that of hard Apples,
not till Sommer following, and will con∣tinue good for two or three years, or lon∣ger: and if well kept in good vessels, well stopt, and in a good cool Celler, will som∣what improve in keeping. How to make Cider and Perry.Now, for the making of these Liquors of Cider and Perry, I shall onely mention it briefly, for their sakes that know it not; Some have Cider-Mills on purpose, wherein they grind the Apples, as Tanners do their Bark, and then bring them to the Press; others Pownd them in Troughs, till they be small; it comes all to one: The Liquor being strained out, carry it to the Vessels prepared for that purpose, and tunne it up: The Vessel being full, let it rest certain days, till the Barme begin to fall, then put in a handful of Bay-salt (this makes it draw fresh, even to the bottome) so stop it up very close with a Cork, yet leave a little Venthole in the top near the Tunhole, with a peg in it, and once in a day or two, give vent there, while it fer∣ments, and works strongly, lest it break the Vessel: afterwards stop up the Ven∣hole very close also. Or else lay ravel upon and round about the Tunhole.Then mix Clay and Bay-salt together, and lay it upon, and round about the Tun∣hole, that so no Aire may get in, nor Spi∣rits of the Liquor get out; make the Clay
hollow in the midst, and lay on it some Bay-salt, this keeps it moist all Sommer, o∣therwise it may chap, and let in Aire, to the prejudice of the Liquor; the close stopping of Vessels, is of great advantage to the Cider. When Cider is well cleared,Of botling of Cider. towards the Spring, (and so afterwards) some may be Botled, if we would improve it to the utmost: Stone-bottles, or Glas-bottles, both are good, into each bottle, put a quantity, (more or less, as each one pleaseth) of white lump sugar, which I prefer before Lofe-sugar, it being sophisticated with Lime, Allome, and other things) then fill the bottle with the Liquor, yet not alto∣gether full, but let be the space of an inch or two between the Liquor and the Cork: then Cork it well; let not the Cork be too little, so as to go in easily; but take a full Cork, that must be knockt in about half way: for the well Corking of Bottles, (though the direction may seem trivial) is of great concernment to the goodness of the Liquor. The liquor being thus well Botled,How to keep bottels of Cider. may be kept in several places, either in Gravel or Sand, in a Celler up to the neck, and some may be sunk down into water, in some secure, convenient place; or other∣wise
wise to keep them cool, and exclude the Aire, especially in the heat of Sommer. And in this season, let the Corks be bound down close with a Packthred, else some of them will be thrown out by the liquor, especially if they be carried abroad, or laid in a Chamber where the Aire is warm. Many things more might be said con∣cerning the ordering of Cider, according to several mens opinions and experiences: these things (briefly mentioned) are plain and practical, and comprehend many o∣ther particulars. Of the healthful∣ness of Ci∣der.Cider that is made of good Fruits, and well ordered, is the most wholesome drink, and so it is accounted by Learned and Iu∣dicious Physitians, they do much magni∣fie Syrupum de Pomis, the juice of Apples. See London Dispensatory: composed by a whole Colledg of Physitians, pag. 38. Julius Pal∣marius lib. de morbis. pag. 248.A Famous Physitian in his time, gives it this Commendation; Pomaceum e succo Malorum dulci. m quae maturitatatem con∣sequuta sunt, satis defaecatum, maturum, te∣nue, subflavum melancholicis adeò salubre el, & omne Potionis genus bonitate vincat: That is, Cider of pleasant Apples, which are full Ripe, being well setled, cleared, and fer∣mented, is the most wholesome drink for me∣lancholick
persons; and excels all other Li∣quors in goodness. And the Cider of Pippins, and Pear∣mains is most commended by some, as con∣taining in them more of the Balsamum of nature, then other Apples; Et humidum radicale oleosum, spiritus vitalis vigore im∣pregnatum: preserving the radical moi∣sture, and vital spirits of the body, which does singularly preserve health, Ad extre∣mum usque senium, to very old Age. Secondly, As Learned Physitians do ap∣prove of it, for the most wholesome drink; so also experience speaks, and proves the same, not only of many persons, but even of many Generations, in Hereford shire, Worcester-shire, and other Fruit Countries, where it hath been, and is of continual use. Thirdly, And besides the Opinion and Iudgment of Physitians herein, and conti∣nual experience in the use of it for many years; this also is a convincing Argument thereof. God hath been pleased in his Wisdom, Bounty, and Goodness to mankind, to create, and give such Commodities in every Coun∣try and Nation as are most useful, and best for the Inhabitants of each particular Cly∣mate: for instance, in Spain, Italy, and
those hot Countries, they have Oringes Lemmons, and Pome-Citrons, which have in them the most cool refreshing juice, and liquor of any Fruits, which are most neces∣sary, for the cooling and refreshing the Blood, Spirits, and Bodies of the Inhabi∣bitants. And in the Northerne cold Countries, God hath given them great store of Coles and Wood, for Fuel, which is not in so great plenty in hotter Countries: So also for Fruit-trees; some parts of Worcester-shire, Gloucester-shire, &c. The ground does naturally bring forth Fruit-trees; (be∣sides the labour and diligence of men in Planting) the soyle is naturally fit to re∣ceive, cherish, & increase all sorts of Apple-trees, Pear-trees, &c. which bring forth a¦bundance of Fruits, whereof to make this wholsome and best drink, Cider and Perry. And England affords the greatest store of Apples, and the best of any other Coun∣try; which is an Argument (I say) of the profitableness, and healthfulness of this Li∣quor, for the Inhabitants of these Climates. So then, if health and long life, be in e∣steem with men, they must needs also va∣lue this means thereof; the seasonable and moderate use of Cider; and consequently Fruit-trees, and the works and labours
about them, as conducing to those great and desirable ends. Before you gather Apples to keep,How to keep Apples. let them be ripe, which may be known by the colour, and by the seed; cut some of them, and if the seed be turned brown, or some∣what black, such may be gathered; gather them in a dry day, pull them one by one, and put them into Baskets lined with Woollen cloath, that they brise not. Car∣ry them into a loft, or upper Chamber, and lay them on Mats or Boards, not on Plaister or Clay floors, they will be moist. Lay them thin, not on heaps as some do; let the windows and holes be open, espe∣cially upon the North-side, in dry dayes, that the Aire and Winds may dry up their superfluous moysture. Lay every kind by themselves, and pick out all the leaves, and such as rot, from time to time. Turne them sometimes, and in Frost, cover them with Mats, Straw, or the like. If Apples offend any through wind,Hist. stirp. l. 3. p. 777. eat with them Ginger, or other hot Spices, or Carroway-seeds, Fennel-seeds, or the like. So Dodonaeus: Quorum malignitas vel aro∣matis, vel aliis corrigi potest. Apples are prepared for the Table, all the year long, many wayes, (I shall not need to speak of particulars) and
are pleasant and healthful to the body▪ Dodon. hist. l. 3. pag. ibid.Dulcia poma minus frigida sunt ac humi∣da, alimentum conferunt amplius quam cae∣tera poma. He sayes, pleasant Apples are less cold and moist, and afford more nou∣rishment then others. Concerning their Physical Vse. Dealiment. facul l. 2. p. 20▪Galen ascribes heat to some kind of Apples, he speaks of their Physical proper∣tie, in relaxing the belly, and sayes, the acid & acrid perform this: but with some difference. Haec cum calefactione, Illa au∣tem cum refrigeratione. The Acrid do it with heat, the other with cold. Sweet Apples relax the belly more then other kinds. A good Author says, every sweet thing detergeth and relaxeth; and there∣fore Pears (which are generally more sweet then Apples) loosen the body more then Apples. D. Alim facult. l. 2. L. 2. c. 569.Apples also help Concoction. So Galen, Post cibum, statim, dare ipsa, &c. taken af∣ter meat. Nonnunquam autem cum pane, ad ventriculum & stomachum roborandum, eaten with bread, they strengthen the stomack. So Avicen: confortant debilita∣tem stomachi. Galen says, pleasant Apples are profi∣table
in hot diseases.In Com. pr. l. Dioscor. Saepe in morbis af∣ferunt praesidium: So Matth: Pomum co∣ctivum non solum sanis competit, sed etiam agris: He says they are Cordial to per∣sons in hot diseases: Calidis cordis affecti∣bus succurrunt. Being rosted, and eaten with osewater and Sugar: and that the pleasanter kinds are helpful against Melan∣choly, and are good against the Plurisie, if roasted and eaten Glycyrrhizae succo, & sac∣charo, irifice juvant. With juice of Li∣quorice and Sugar, morning and evening, two hours before meat, they wonderfully help. Observe one special Physical propertie more of Apples, set down by a Learned and Experienced Author. These be his words. The pulp of rosted Apples,Ger. Herh. pag. 1270. four or five (if Pomewaters) mixed in a wine quart of faire water, laboured together, and drunk at night last, within an hour, doth in one night cure those that piss by drops, with great anguish and dolour; the Strangury, and all other diseases, proceeding of the difficulty of mak∣ing water, but in twice taking, it never fail∣eth in any: also the running of the Reines: which I have often proved, and gained there∣by both Crownes and Credit. So the Author.
Of Pears.Concerning Pears: Lib. 2. de aliment. a p. 20.Gallen sayes▪ they have like properties with Apples and what is said of Apples, if we attribute the same to Pears, there needs nothing anew to be said of them. Quae de Mali diximus, si ad Pira transtuleris, nihil erit quod nos de ipsis novum dicere oportet. Lib. 2. ch. 548. Avicen says, Sedant Choleram, they mitigate Choler. Hist. stirp. 3. Dodonaeus com∣mends them above Apples, for their nou∣rishing propertie: Alimenta Pira omnia, amplius & copiosius, quam Mala conferunt. So Lib. 2. Ch. 548. Avicen; Humor eorum plurimus, & laudabilior est humore pomorum. Pears make an excellent Wine, being well ordered. A late Author sayes, we might have Wine of Pears, and other of our Fruits, not inferior to French Wines. And another tells us,Ma. Rust. that a famous Physi∣tian of his time was not content to equal them with Wine of Grapes, but preferred them before it in every thing. Crabs, or Wildings, mixt with Pears, make an ex∣cellent Liquor, better then Pears alone. I need not tell Herefordshire, and Wor∣cestershire men, the good properties of Per∣ry and Cider; they know by experience it is both Alimental and Physical; that it is not only for health, but also for long-life; and that Wines made of the best kind of
Apples and Pears, is a special Cordial, hearing and reviving the spirits, making he heart glad, as Wine of Grapes. And it has been observ'd, that those who drink Cider and Perry daily, or fre∣quently, as their common drink, are gene∣rally healthy persons, and long-lived. And that it will begger a Physitian, to live where Cider and Perry are of ge∣neral use. Quinces are special fruits,Of Quinces. and of mani∣fold uses, not only for daily nourishment, but also for Physical respects, either of themselves, or mixed with other Fruits. Matthiolus commends them both for meat and medicine, boyled with hony.Com. in lib. Dioscor p. 201. Ex melle tantum & Cotoneorum carne confecta, tam ad cibi quàm medicamenti commodum. So Rovilius: And that many dainties for Banquets are prepared of them:Hist. plant. lib 3. pag. 290. Mul∣ta ex Cydoniis malis parata ex iis sectis & & diutius in aqua elixis donec tabescant, &c. There are divers wayes of making Marmalade of Quinces, which is known to be a good Cordial, strengthening the Stomack and Heart, both of the sick and sound. Gallen says, being made with hony, it will last seven years,Deliment. sacul. lib. 2. pag. 20. and loose none of
its properties, diu duret, si quis ipsum c∣melle cocium asservare velit, post annos se∣tem invenimus nihil in qualitate imm∣tatum. Hist. stirp. lib. 3. pag. 784.Dodonaeus sayes, they bind strongly o their own nature, and stay Vomiting Valde astringunt, ventriculum roborant, vi∣mitum sedant. Quinces may be kept good a year, or (as some have said) two years, thus, put them in a Barrel, cover them with penny Ale, and once in 10 or 12 dayes draw it off, but stir not the Quinces, then put in fresh Ale again from time to time, this is account∣ed far better then usual Pickle. Others keep them thus, boyle the Parings and Cores of Quinces, with Salt and Ginger, and in this Pickle they will keep divers Months. A late Author sayes, there's no Fruit in this Land of so manifold use as Quinces. Of Cherries De Nat. stirp. c. 64. lib. 1.Cherries are a healthful and pleasant Fruit: Ruelius says, Cerasa bonum succum creant, they breed good humours in the body; so another, Bonum sanguinem ge∣nerant. Dodonaeus, accounts the tart and sharp Cherries best; Inter Cerasa optima sunt acidula.
There is a pleasant and refreshing Wine, made of Cherries, in Coun∣tries where they have great store,I have heard it from a Gentleman of very good credit, that he drank Cher∣ry Wine of above a Twelve-month old, which was ve∣ry good Wine; whereas it was thought it would not have lasted half so long: The Morello Cherry, and other deep coloured plea∣sant Cherries, will make a special good Wine; the Liquor of it self, or mixed with Cider. both in their Liquor onely, and the same mixed with Grapes. Vvis maturis admiscentur, & deinde vinum ex his paratur gustatu gratis∣simum: Doubtless Cherry-wine in Sommer, is a pleasant and healthful Liquor, more proper for that Season then hot Wines. Cherries boyled in brothes and drinks, give a pleasant relish, and are good for hot and feverish bodies. And in Countries where there is great store, their custome is (as is credibly reported) to eat their Breakfasts of Bread, Butter, and Cherries. The School or Vniversity of Salern, gives them great commendations, and tells us, divers commodities they afford: Cerasa si comedas tibi consert grandia dona, Expurgant Stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi tollit, Et de carne suâ sanguis eritque bonus.
By eating Cherries great good doth arise, To such as use them, for the Learned wise, Say, that they purge the stomack, and beside The broken stones and kernels have, been try'd To break the bladder-stone, breed wholesom blood, To fat and feed the body they be good. Another says, they increase and com∣fort the Liver, and that the tart and sharp close the mouth of the stomack, and make the better and speedier digestion. Com. in l. 1. Dioscor p. 198.Matthiolus says, Omnia refrigerant, rob∣rant, & tibi appetentiam exitant, ideoqu febricitantibus, ac sitientibus, facile conce duntur à medicis Germanis. All Cherries do cool, strengthen, and stir up appetite to meat, and therefore they are (as is Recorded) readily allow∣ed by the Germane Physitians, to such as have feverish, hot, and thirsty diseases; other Authours say the like, which for brevities sake I omit. Of Plums. Com in l. 1. Dios. p. 216Matthiolus sayes, Prunabilem dejiciunt, preinde ea utiliter medici ad febres, aliosque biliosos affectus reddant. Plums cast out Cholerick humours, and are good in fe∣vers, and other Cholerick and hot Di∣seases.
A late Author sayes, out of Damsons, and other sweet Plums, may be made a drink not inferiour to some good Wines, and abundance of Aquavitae. Schol. Sal. sayes: Infrigidant, laxant, multum prosunt tibi Prunae. Plums cool, and loose the belly very kindly: No way offensive, but to health are friendly. Many good dishes for the Table, and delicates for Banquets, are made of Plums with hony and sugar, to use all the year, and profitable both for the sick and healthful. Gallen accounts Aprecocks,Of Apre∣cocks. De Facult. Ali∣men. l. 2. p. 20. better then Peaches; Non in ventriculo, ut illa, cor∣rumpuntur: because they are not so soon corrupted in the stomack. Avicen sayes, Infusio siccorum confert fobribus acutis. The infusion of dried Aprecocks, is profitable in sharp feavers.Can. l. 2. c. 146. Matt. tells us, that the Oyle of the stones, is very profitable to anoint the heat, and swelling of Vlcers and Sores, and pains in the Ears. And that the Oyle mix∣ed with Wine, and drunk, drives stones and gravel out of the bladder and kidneys: and helps the Collick. They are ordered many wayes, and
all pleasant to the body,Of Peaches. L. p. 80.&c. and healthful. Dioscor sayes, Persica mala stomacho uti∣lia sunt, alvum quoque bonum praestant. Peaches are good for the Stomack,L. 2. 571. Nat. Hist. p. 15. and keep the belly soluble: so Avicen, Matu∣ra sunt bona stomacho. L. 15. . 12. & l. 23. c. 7.Lonicerus sayes, Persica mala in ardenti∣bus faebribus sumi possunt. Peaches may be eaten in barning fevers. Pliny commends Peaches as much as any fruit, even for the sick, with Wine or Vine∣ger; Poma Persica innocua expeti aegris, utilioraque, cum vino aut aceto, &c. Peaches eaten moderately, (for so we are to use all Fruits) are no doubt profi∣table to cool and loosen the belly, especi∣ally for hot constitutions; but withal take the advice of Schol. Sal. Persica cum musto, vobis datur ordine justo; Take a cup of Wine, or strong drink with them. Of Mulber∣ries.Some make a drink of Wine of Mul∣berries, as Albert. Magnus tells us▪ De mo∣ris fit potus,De veget, & Plant. qui Morētum vocetur. A spoon∣ful or two of this, will colour a quart of White Wine or Cider. Ruel says, Succus siccato pomo expressus, multum obsoniorum sapori confert, & miram gratiam commen∣dat:
the juice of Mulberries,De nat. stirp. c. 102. p. 265. prest out and dried, and put into meats, gives them a very pleasant taste and relish. The Iuice of Mulberries is known by experience to be a good remedy for a sore mouth or throat, such as are perfectly ripe, relax the belly, but the unripe (especially dried) are said to bind exeedingly, and therefore are gi∣ven to such as have Lasks and Fluxes. Do∣doneus sayes, they stir up a languishing ap∣petite, especially in hot bodies, appetenti∣am calore languentem excitant. So Avicen:Cant. l. 2. c. 498. Appetitum cibi faciunt. They are used by Apothecaries or many other purposes. Figs are said to nourish much,Of Figs. Nat. Hist. l. 3. p. 800. Com in l. pr. Dios. p. 230. and to breed store of blood. Dodonaeus prefers them above other Fruits, in resect they nourish very much: Alimentum amplius quam caeteri praebent: So Mat. Ficus & uae inter fructus autumnales principatum obtinent. We have a sort of blew Figs that come to perfect ripeness in England, which are eaten (being newly gathered) with Pep∣per, Salt, and Bread, and may be dried to last all the year. And (doubtless) nourish exceedingly: Some make excellent Tarts of them. Lonicerus sayes: Naram confortant.
Dioscor, commends them as profitable to those who have lost their colour by long sickness. Li. 23. c 7.Figs, according to Pliny, are restora∣tive, and the best thing that they can eat, who are brought low by languishing sick∣ness, and on the mending hand: they help (as another sayes) an old continual Cough, (being boyled with Hysop, and drunk) also Obstructions, and other faults of the Lungs. Schol. Salern▪ commends them for divers things: Scrofa, tumor, Glandes, Ficus cataplas∣mata sedet. Iunge papaver ei, confracta foris tene ossa. Swines▪ Evil, Swellings, Kernels, Figs by a Plaister cure: Adde Poppie to't, Then broken bones it sets them sure. Of Medlers. Hist. stirp. l. 3. p. 789.Condiuntur hi cum saccharo; aut mello (as Dodonaeus) quo modo apparati ori ac palato grati sunt. Ordered with hony or sugar, they are acceptable and pleasant to the tast, they fortifie digestion, and pre∣serve the humours from putrefaction. They stay vomitings and looseness of th stomack or bel Valentius astringunt,De l. facul. l. 2. p. 21.
proinde ventri fluenti cibus est utilissimus: as Gallen: Another says, Mespilorum os∣sicula in pulverem contrita calculos è renibus valenter pellunt. The kernels bruised to dust, and drunk in liquor (especially where Parsly roots have been steeped) do migh∣tily drive out stones and gravel from the Kidneys. A late Author says, Medlers are singular good for Women with Child, seeing they strengthen the stomack and stay the loose∣ness thereof. Another sayes, They are very effe∣ctual for Women with Child against a∣bortion. A late Author says,Of Walnuts. the profit of Wall∣nuts is infinite: They are usually eaten af∣ter meals to close up the stomack, and help digestion. And according to Avicen, Recentes sunt meliores stomacho.Can. l. 2. c. 501. Bread or Bisket may be mde of the meal being dri∣ed. The young Nuts pealed, are preser∣ved, and Candied for Banqueting-stuff; and being ripe, the Kernels may be crust∣ed over with Sugar, and kept long. Avicen sayes,Can. l. 2. c. 501. Iuglans ficubus, & Rutâ medicina omnibus venenis: Wallnuts, with Figs and Rue, is a preservative against all Poison.
Schol. Sal. Reckons Wallnuts for one of the six things that resist poyson. Allia; Nux, Ruta, Pyra, Raphanus cum Theriaca: Haec sunt Antidotum contra mortale vene∣num. Garlick, Rue, Pears, Radish, Treacle, and Nuts: Take these, and then no deadly poyson hurts. Plin. nat. hist. l. 23. c. 18.Mithridates the great: his preservative was (as is recorded) Two Wallnuts, two Figs, Twenty leaves of Rue, and a grain of Salt stamped together: which taken no poyson that day could hurt him. Green Wallnuts about Midsommer, di∣stilled and drunk with Vinegar, are accoun∣ted a certain preservative against the Pe∣stilence. The milk of the Kernels (as Almond-milk) doth cool and refresh the Appetite of the languishing sick body. So much for the Alimental, and Physi∣cal use of Fruits.
Errors Discovered. HAving shewed some profitable Instru∣ctions in this Art of Planting Fruit-trees, I think it convenient likewise to dis∣cover some Errors that I find both in the Theory and Practise of it, that men may take heed of them. Let not men think that Ancient and Learned Authors have discovered all Truths: or that all they have said is Truth: they are but men and have their Errors:August de civ. Dei. l. 19. Humanum est errare; quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, as one says, Non est pro magno habendum quid homines sense∣rint, sed quae sit rei veritas. It's not any great matter what men have thought, but what is the Truth of the matter. Quid ad nos, qui potius de rebus ipsis judicare debe∣mus? What is it to us what men say, who ought rather to judge of the things that are spoken? Oporvet edoctum judicare: as L. Bacon says.Adv. of Learn l. 1. p. 45. Men that are taught, must not resign up their Reason to their Tea∣chers, but judge of what's said. Some great and Learned Authors have asserted very weak things, and altogether untrue. L. Bacon sayes concerning them, That the Writings of speculative men upon
active matter, seems to be men of experience, but as dreams and dotage. Indeed they go about to build Castles in the Aire, (as the Proverb is) for as a building cannot be set up without a foundation, so neither can ef∣fests be produced without causes: Nullus effectus datur sine causa. They tell us of many great and desirable things, but when they come to discover the causes and means, whereby they must be effected, these are (many of them) weak and child∣ish, and which (I suppose) proceeded from them upon their first apprehensions, with∣out washing them in the scale of Reason,Adv. Learn. l. 1. p. 145. or trying of them by the Touchstone of Ex∣perience. And as the L. Bac. sayes, Those high and vaporous Imaginations, instead of a laborious and sober enquiry of truth, do be∣get hopes ond beliefs in themselves, of strange and impossible shapes. Nat. Hist. p. 165.And elsewhere he says, The Causes and Axioms of some ancient and modern writers, are so full of imagination, and so infected with old receiued Theories, as they are mear Inquinatious, (or defilements) of experi∣ence. Advan. Lear. l. 1. p. 32.And these he ranks amongst the discre∣dits of Learning, he says, Many things have been rashly (or with little choice or judge∣ment) received, and registred, as appears in
the writings of divers Authors, which are e∣very where fraught with forged and fabulous reports, and those not only uncertain, and un∣tried, but notoriously untrue, to the great de∣rogation of Natural Phylosophy, with grave and sober men. I shall therefore discover some of these Errors, as they concern this Art of Plant∣ing Fruit-trees, that inexperienced persons may not be deceived by them. And afterwards shew some Errors in the practice of this Art, that they may be a∣voided. I shall divide the Errors in the Theorie (or contemplative part) of this Art, into three sorts. The first sort are, Instructions hurtful and  dangerous. The second are, Instructions for effecting  of some things impossible to be done by the means prescribed: and others impossible to be effected by any means. The third sort are, Assigning wrong cau∣ses  to Effects. For the first. A late Author, giving Instructions for  Grafting, says, Graft the next Spring after remove. This, I say, is a dangerous Instruction, because Stocks removed, have so great a
wound and repulse by removing only, that they cannot so well bear another so soon after so great, as Grafting would be, if in, the cleft: Therefore let stocks removed, grow a year or two before Grafting; Rea∣son and Experience is clear enough in this. Secondly, Theophrastus giving instructi∣ons for Planting, sayes, Nullâ radiculorum parte detractâ, stultum est enim amittere ra∣dices quas habemus, ut acquiramus novas. Take away none of the Roots, for it is a foolish thing to loose those Roots we have, that we may get new. This is a hurtful and dangerous Instruction, for except some of the small strings, and roots be cut away, if there be many, and all the ends of the great ones, they will not put forth new Roots, as they will if cut: and multitude of Roots hinder the mould from closing on every side of every Root, as it ought to do, therefore some must be cut away, and the ends of all that are left; Experience proves this suf∣ficiently. Thirdly, Columella giving instructions for choice of Grafts,Columel. lib. de Ar∣botibus. cap. 29. this is one, surculi sint bisulci. Let Grafts be double or forked. So Ruelius. This is a dangerous and hurtful instructi∣on, because forked, or double or treble
Grafts, most of them die, and those that live, grow poorly, not a fift or sixt part (it may be) so much as single and short grafts. Fourthly, Bapt. Port. giving Instructions  for choice of Grafts, says, we must take sur∣culos pregnantes & turgentes: Grafts full and swelling with Sap. This is a bad instru∣tion: for Grafts should be taken before they swell with Sap, for it is a repulse to Nature to cut them after sap stirs in them: neither will such take hold on the stock so soon as those which are indigent, and needy of sap: therefore let Grafts be cut from the Tree, before sap stir in them. Another says When Grafts put forth, take  away the Clay, for Clay rather keeps moisture then drought, save a little in the hole. This is a hurtful Instruction; for sap will not cover the head of the stock, nor close up the clefts on both sides so soon without Clay, as with it: Clay is as a salve to a wound, which heals it up, and it rather keeps out moysture, then otherwise, if well closed; and also preserves from dry Winds, Sun, and other annoyances; therefore keep on the Clay a year or two, till the head of the Stock be covered, and the Cleft healed up. Another says, When the Grafts have well  put forth, underprop them, else wrap them
one within another, and tye them with wood amongst, for fear winds break them. This is a very hurtful and dangerous in∣struction, for all these wayes do fret, and gall the bark, and (it may be) breed the Canker: And besides, it hinders the young grafts that they cannot spread into an hand∣some form: this course brings a certaine mischief to prevent an uncertain: winds hurt but few, except they be very top-heavy; if so, then cut some of the bran∣ches till they be grown stronger below, able to bear the Top. Some Authors counsil us to cast glew in∣to the place of Grafting, to glew together the two substances, or sprinkle Sugar, Cinamon, or sweet liquor, that the fruits may retain the taste. This is a hurtful instruction, because liquor (or any other substance) put between the stock and the graft, do hinder (if not spoyle) the joyning of stock and graft, but if this might be done without hurt, either to stock or graft, yet would it be no way effectual for the End proposed. Of this further, see pag. 84. &c. A late Author say, Plant not against a wall, because a Tree cannot be so long lived, nor grow to the bigness it else would do. This is a hurtful Instruction, because ma∣ny kinds of Fruit-trees, as the Aprecock,
Peach, Nectarine, and divers other Trees, will bear little or no fruit, except they be planted against a wall: And though it be granted, that Trees planted against a Wall, will not be so large as if planted from the Wall: Yet I suppose it's better to have a few small trees, that bear store of great fruits; then store of great Trees, that bear but a few small fruits. Columella, giving Instructions for remo∣ving  Plants,L. 1. de Ar. p. 490 says, Mala aestiva, Cydonia, sor∣be pruna, post mediam hyemem usque in Idus Febr. serito: Pyros Autumno, ante bruman serito: Plant the Sommer Apple, Quince, service-tree, and Plum-tree, after Winter, in February, but Pear-trees before Win∣ter. This is a hurtful instruction, as to the first part: for Trees should be planted in Autumne, as has beene said, and there is the same Reason why the Sommer Apple-tree, and the rest, should be planted before Winter, as is for Pear-trees. See at large, pag. 60, &c. One adviseth thus: Let the Orchard be seated on some Hill-top, rather then on plain  grounds, for they have better Aire, and better prospects, and also contain a greater number of Trees then plain grounds. This is no good Instruction: for Orchards
on low and plain grounds, have many ad∣vantages of those on high grounds, for the soyle of plaine and low grounds, is com∣monly more fertil then hill tops. Second∣ly, low grounds are more safe from Winds then hills, by reason of other Trees plan∣ted to secure the Orchard, and by hills, houses or other shelters; hill tops can have no defence. As for prospects on hill tops, men do not plant Orchards for Prospects, but for Fruits. And as for good Aire, I suppose there is better Aire (especially at some seasons) in the Orchard on plain grounds, then on hills; for in Blooming time, winds would deprive us of the sweet Aire on hill tops, but on plain grounds the Aire is more calme, and the perfume of the blossomes stays with∣in the Walls, as within a perfumed Cham∣ber. Another Author says, Set the stones of the Pear-plum a foot deep in cold ground. This is a hurtful and dangerous Instru∣ction. For stones of any Fruits in any ground, put a foot deep, are rather buri∣ed then set, for a man shall ne'er see more of them. But set stones of any Fruits, not above two inches deep, rather some∣thing less. One giving Instructions for Inoculating:
sayes, Take off the bark just upon some bud knob, and set the other bark thereon. This is a hurtful Instruction; for if the Bud to be Inoculated be set upon another Bud of the Stock, then the Inoculated bud cannot possibly close, unless the Root of it be out, and if the root be out, it's spoyled that way: The Author that talks thus, had never any experience in the Art of In∣oculating. For buds must be set upon the smoothest part of the Stock; that they may be sure to close. Another sayes, Set Apple-trees Twenty  foot asunder. This is a very hurtful and dangerous In∣struction, and the practise of it hinders men of Multitudes of Fruits: We see that in many Orchards, Trees are planted too near together, it may be 4 or 5 or but 6 yards asunder, which is too near together: I conceive 8 or 10 yards, or there abouts little enough for the distance of Apple-trees in ordinary soyle: but if very good ground, 14 or 16 yards or more, if men have room enough; for we see by expe∣rience that upon good ground, and well-or∣dered, they will touch one another at a greater distance: And that a few Apple-trees having room to spread, will bear more Fruits then 5 times so many, being crouded
one upon another, where they have no room to spread. And besides, those fruits they bear cannot come to perfection, nei∣ther in bigness nor ripeness, for want of the Sun, which cannot come about them, when the Trees are planted so near toge∣ther, as the Author speaks of. Of this, see more largely; with divers Resons, pag. 65. Another Author says, Cut away all the idle shoots of the last year, in your Aprecot and Cherry-trees to make your fruit the fairer. This is a very hurtful Instruction; for the last years shoots are not idle shoots, for many of them bear the next year after or the second year without fail: some ig∣norantly practise according to this instru∣ction, which is a great hurt to Trees. Thus much for the first sort of Errours; Instructions hurtful and dangerous. The second sort are, Instructions for ef∣fecting of things impossible to be done by the means prescribed; and others impossible to be done by any means There is a Book, call'd The Country mans Recre∣ation, or, the Art of Plan∣ting; which is full of these sam∣oies. Prin∣ted in the year 1640.. Didymus tells us how we may mix di∣vers kinds of Fruits, and therefore make one new kind: Accipienda sunt duo diversi ge∣neris
sarmenta, eaque scindenda per medi∣um &c. The instruction is too large to shew it verbatim; this is the summe. Two grafts of divers kinds must be cut through the midst, and the two halves bound together, which must be set in the earth, and watered till they bud forth. Another to the like purpose. Bind the Grafts of a Peach-tree and of a Nut-tree to∣gether, and the Fruit will be half Peaches, and half Nuts; and again he says, Bind the Grafts of a white Fig-tree and a black toge∣ther, and plant them, and the Figs thereof will have the flesh on the one side white, the other black. Rera avis in terris, nigro{que} similima Cygno. If men can but make the Swan and the Raven breed together, they may have a strange kind of Fowl; a black Swan it may be, which may as soon be done, as to make these Fruits mix. These and the like instructions, are ri∣diculous, fit to be passed over with a Jest, but if men require a serious answer, it is given (truly) by Sir Fr. Bacon, in his Nat. Hist. besides clear experience confirms it. He says,Cent. 5. p. 119, 120. Such grafts will put forth their se∣veral Fruits without any commixture in the
fruit.Cent. 5. p. 119, 120. No doubt they will, if it be possi∣ble for two half grafts (so used) to grow. We see by continual experience, a small Bud of a Graft (no bigger then a grain of Wheat) will keep it's own nature against a fair large stock of another kind, being▪ in∣oculated upon it. Lib. cept▪ veget. c. 1.Secondly, Another of this kind is laid down by Albert. Mag. he sayes, Laetamen est unum eorum quae praecipue Plantam muta∣tur à sylvestritate in domesticationem. Ma∣nure (or good soyle) is one of those things which changes wild plants, into a mild and pleasant nature. This cannot be done by any means. Different kinds of Fruits, as they will not mix one with another, by the means newly mentioned: so neither will they change into another kind. Lord Bacon tells us, It is the seed (of any kind of creature) and the nature of it, that locketh and boundeth in the creature, that it doth not expatiate, or change from one kind to another. The seed of every Fruit retaineth strictly, the nature of the Fruit of which it came, which will not be changed by any means. Another of the second sort of Errors is this. De Natura & viribus Ar. Fol. 7.Lonicerus gives an Instruction for pro∣curing fruits with an excellent Aromatique
and spicy taste: it is this, Arborem ad me∣dullam usque scindito, & ligni parte exectâ, aromata quae volueris inserito, &c. he says, Cut a Tree to the pith, and part of the wood being cut out, put in such sweet spices as you think good, then dawb the whole with clay, af∣ter lay the branches of the young plant in the earth, that by its moysture and fatness, the branches may unite, then bind together the young twigs that spring from them, so that there may be made one fruit or branch of di∣vers, and the fruits coming thereof, retaine the taste of the spices. Another, whose Book (he says) is pub∣lished by Authority, gives this Instruction. To have coloured Apples, with what colour you shall think good: Ye shall bore a slope with an Auger in the biggest part of the body of the Tree unto the midst thereof, and then look what colour ye will have them of, first ye shall take water, and mingle your colour therewith, then stop it up again with a Pin: and wax it round about. Ye may mingle with the said colour what spice ye list to make them tast thereafter: Thus ye may change the tast or colour of any Apples. Another says, To have Peaches of savor like Musk; In grafting, put into the Cleft a grain of Musk: and to have the taste like Roses, put into the Cleft dried leaves of sweet Roses.
Another late Author, says With a Chi∣sel cut up the bark of a Tree round about, and anoynt the bark within with Powder of Cloves, or Nutmegs, then set it on againe, and stop it close with wax round about, and within thrice bearing, it shall bring a fair Muscadel Fruit which ye may Graft, and they shall be all after Muscadel fruits. This Author sayes further, To have all stone fruits taste as ye shall think good, lay the stones to soak in such liquor as ye would have them taste of. Divers Amongst many other Authours who speak of these things; See the Coun∣try Farme, pag. 360, 361, 392, 363, 364, &c. where there are very many odd conceits; about changing the nature of fruits in shape colour, taste, &c. To mix Nuts, Plums, and Almonds, Peaches and Qinces: And to have fruits without stones See pag 365. of the Coun∣try-Farme. others speak to the like purpose. These are strange fancies, meerly imaginary things; neither Reason nor Experi∣ence, dictate any such. They are not onely invalid, or of no power at all to effect what they propose, but are also hurtful and dangerous to the Trees and Grafts; but if they might be done with∣out danger, yet are they not able to work any such effects as are promised; For it is not possible such small pro∣portions as they speak of, should com∣municate and transferre their vertues,
through all the parts of the huge and vast bodies of Trees, and to multitudes of Fruits, much less that they should do this for many years, and least of all, that the Grafts (cut from these Trees) should re∣taine these vertues, being set on other stocks. May it reasonably be said, That a Mess of sweet and pleasant meat, nay, onely a bt of such meat given to a Child of tender years, the same will retaine the vertues, and strength of such meat all his life time; yea, will transfer the vertues of it to his children after him; when every one knows the strength and vertue of the best meat and drink (though taken in great quantity) is soon over and spent, and that it is a con∣tinued daily supply, that does uphold and maintaine the body in good state and con∣dition. We have no reason to believe that the vertues and strength of any dainty dish will contiue so long with us, as Eliah's Morsel of Meat did with him, which yet was but forty days, and that was a Mirac too: how much less reason have we to think it will last many years. Is there not I say, as much reason for this as the other. Admit it were possible that a small quantity of sweet spices should
transfuse, and communicate its properties to all the parts of a Tree, yet it would not continue long in it, but it must be a con∣tinued, and daily supply of such sweet things as must work that effect, if possibly such a thing may be by any means. Creatures retain those properties that are fixed, and radicated in them by nature, according to their innate and intrinsical form, but easily and quickly cast off such as are adventiti∣ous and accidental, as these things are. Another of the second sort of Errors, is this. Nat. Hist. fol. 6.Lonicerus gives an Instruction to procure coloured fruits: Ramo Cerasi (sive alterius Arboris) scisso ad medullam, Lazurium a∣liumve colorem inserito, sic eundem fructus resert; that is, Put into the bough of a Cher∣ry tree (or any other Tree) cut to the pith, the Azure-stone, (which is partly green, and partly blew) or any other colour, which are means to colour the fruits of such trees. Puelius says, Non desunt qui sub Arbores Rosas serunt, sic rubra Poma dari promit∣tunt. Some set Roses under fruit-trees, and say by that means the Trees will bring forth Red fruits. So Democritus, Si voles ru∣brum habere, obtinebis, Rosis purpureis sub abore See also the Country farm, p. 365 that we may have Red fruits, we must set red Rose trees under other Trees, or near them. consitis.
The same instruction is given by a late English Author. Another says, to have coloured Peaches, we should colour the kernels within the stones, and the fruits will be of the same colour. The same Authour sayes, To have Red Apples, put the Grafs into Pikes-blood. We see their prescriptions for rare co∣loured fruits; which are as far off from Truth or Reason, as the former concern∣ing fruits of an aromatique or spicy taste, for the things are not onely dangerous (some of them if tried, but if it were not so, yet are weak, and invalid towards the work∣ing of any such effects. Because colour is an accident, cleaving to some substance, and as the substance is dissolved, and con∣verted into another body, it looseth its accidents which it had before, as colour, shape, &c. as a piece of cloth, wood, or the like, being burned, rotten, or otherwise dissolved, does loose its colour, or other ac∣cidents that it had before its change. And coloured Meats, eaten and turned into flesh, blood, and spirits, loose their colours, taste, &c. We well know, that if we drink Red Wine, or liquor of any other colour, or what coloured meats soever we eat, the , and the substance
changed, the tasts and colours, are also changed, even to contraries. So the juyce of the earth, if it be white, black, brown, or any other colour, yet when it is drawn by Roots, for instance, Carrots, then it is turned into a Yellow, or Reddish colour, or if drawn by Turneps, it is then converted into a white colour, though it were quite contrary before. So also of Liquors, (or other things of delicate colours) being converted into the substance of Trees, Fruits, and Leaves, they loose their former colours, though never so glorious and beautiful. And if great quantities of coloured liquors, or other substances, cannot produce coloured fruits, how much more impossible is it that a drop or two, of any coloured thing, should do it, or only colouring kernels (as he speaks of) which could not become Trees of ma∣ny years after. It's clear, that Fruits con∣vert the substances they draw into their own natures, and receive thereby little or no alteration, unless by a constant and con∣tinual supply from year to year; and then so small and inconsiderable (as to these things of taste and colour) that it is not to be regarded. Indeed, when a Tree grows continually in a wet foggy place (or the like continued cause) the fruits may be
tainted therewith; but a small quantity thereof, a few drops or spoonfuls, (the ver∣tue whereof is suddenly gone) cannot do it. Concerning etting Rose-trees under o∣ther Trees, to produce coloured fruits, it is one of the most ridiculous conceits that I have read, what is it that should work the effect: may it be imagined that the Trees can see the Red Roses,Gen. 30.20. as Iacobs sheep did the Rods in the water, and so bring forth fruits according to the same colour; can any man apprehend so much as a colour, or shadow of a Reason for it? Another of the second sort of Errors is this. Affricanus gives an instruction to pro∣cure  Walnuts without husks: So the Countrey-farm, p. 362 Nuces nudas & sine putaminibus edent Iuglandes, &c. Walnut-trees (he says) do bring sorth bae Nuts without husks, if the husk and shell be broken, and the kernel taken out without hurt, and wrapped in wool, or fresh Vine-leaves, that the kernels may be preserved from Ants, or other things, and then set in the earth again. Florentine affirms the like of Almonds, if ashes be sprinkled in the holes where they
are set. So another late Author, not on∣ly of Walnuts and Almonds, but of all other shell fruits. Were it not a wonderful sight, to see Walnuts, and all Nuts, to grow without husks, we know the Nuts of themselves have no stalk, and how then should they grow upon the Tree without husks to in∣close them. What is it that should work this strange effect? Is it because the ker∣nels are put into the ground without shels, and for that the Tree springs from the kernels onely? Do not all Trees spring from the kernels onely, though set with their shells? the husk and shell contribute nothing at all towards the Tree, they o∣pen for the kernel to spring out, and then rot themselves. Another of this second sort is this. A late Author gives Instructions about early fruits, and late; and change of fruits by Grafting; he sayes, If you graft a late fruit upon an early Stock, the fruit will be early; and if you graft an early fruit upon a late stock, the fruit will be late. As if (saith he) you graft Apples on Mulberry trees,See Country farm, p. 363 you shall have fruit all sommer, even till Novem∣ber. And that if you graft a Plumtree on
the Nut-tree, the husk will be like the Nut-husk, but within it will be a Plum. Or if you graft a Plum (or any other fruit) on the Fig-tree, the fruit will grow without Blos∣soming. These things cannot be; for first, con∣trary kinds will not grow together, as the Plum-tree, and Fig-tree, or Plum-tree, and Nut-tree; but if different sorts would a∣gree, and grow together, yet these effects would not be, because Grafts do alwayes rule, and keep their own natures, or alter very little. L. B. in his Nat. Hist. sayes painly;Pag. 100. these are imaginations and untrue, because (saith he) the Cions overrule the stock quite. So again, pag. 97. which expe∣rience confirms. Another of the second sort of Errors is this. Democritus (as one affirms) gives an In∣struction for procuring fruits with Inscrip∣tions, and ingravings upon them, in any fi∣gure or shape. To this purpose: Open the shell of an Almond, and write upon the kernel what you will, and wrap it in paper, and set it in Clay mingled with Swines dung. A late Author sayes, Steep the stones of Peaches two or three dayes, and then open
them, and with a brass Pen write on the rinde of the kernels, after put them again into the stones, and wrap them about with paper, or parchment, and plant them, and the fruit will be written and engraven. Is not this an odd conceit, that writing upon the The Authors of the Country farm, affirm that write what you will on the eylet of the Fig-tree which you mean to Graft, and the Figs growing thereof, wil contain the said writing p. 363. of the third Book. kernel, should produce fruits written or engraven? A man (no doubt) with as good success may ingrave, or write upon the shell or huske of an Almond, or o∣ther fruit, as upon the kernel; or if he will upon the paper or parchment, in which it is inwrapt: for the Rind of the Kernel contributes nothing to the Tree or Fruit, but opens (as the Husk or shell) to let out the inner part of the kernel, the vegetative vertue, or internal form. But if a man desires to have fruits with Inscriptions and Engravings, he must take another course, prescribed by a Learned L. Bacon Nat. Hist. p. 128. Author (upon better grounds) which is, by writing upon the fruits with a needle or bodkin, when the fruits are young, and as they grow bigger, so the Letters will grow more large and graphical. Concerning the second sort of Errors thus much. It were easie to mention many more as idle as these, but I shall not trouble my
self, nor the Reader with them at present: onely I say in the general, let men take eed of such things asserted by Authours,  have neither Reason nor Experience to uphold them, lest they spend their money, labour, and time about them, and instead of profits and pleasures, find discourage∣ments and trouble, The third sort of Errors are, Assigning wrong causes to effects. One of these Errors is this, some have conceived,Lib. 5. c. 8. de veget, & Plant. that Grafting is the cause of early bearing of fruits, and doth much bet∣ter all fruit. Albert. Mag. says, it's better, Propter digestionem Succi in nodo factam: because of the digestion of the sap in the knot. So also Cressentius:De Nat. Plant. Li. 2. pag. 87. and addes, Et iste nodus facit diversitatem omnem, quae est in Malis, & Pyris, & caeteris fructibus: The knot (which is between the Graft and the Stock) makes all the difference which is found in Pears, Apples, and other fruits: Bapt. Port. likewie ascribes all to grafting:Li. de Cult. & Insit. Nat. Hist. p. 97. He says, Trees coming of seed, Longa est expectatio ad fructuum productionem: Insi∣tio vero in aliquibus eodem Anno producit. Trees coming of seed, are long ere they
bear fruit, but being Grafted, some kind bear in a year or two. So also Columell Lib. de Arbor. pag. 490. Lo. Bac. wanted some experience in this point, who sayes There is no doubt, but that Grafting (for the most part) doth meliorate fruit: and again, Grafting doth generally advance, and melio∣rate fruits above that which they would be, if they were set of kernels or stones. The cause (saith he) is manifest, for that the nourish∣ment is better prepared in the stock then in the crude earth. I say herein these Authors assign a wrong Cause to an effest; for simply grafting con∣tributes nothing at all to the early bearing of Fruit, nor to its goodness. But the Cause is in the Nature of the Grafts: if they be Grafts cut from bearing Trees, and of good kinds, they bear good fruits in a year or two; but if they be Grafts from young unbearing Trees, coming of seed, such Grafts will not bear the sooner for Grafting; it is not simply Grafting, I say, nor the knot (as the Authors speak of) that makes Trees bear one year, one day the sooner: for if so, then grafts from young unbearing trees, coming of seed, grafted in the same manner, and upon as good stocks as other grafts from old bearing Trees, they would bear Fruits the one sort as soon as the
other, but it is otherwise: so that the Cause lies not simply in Grafting, but in the Nature of the Grafts. Neither doth Grafting make Fruits (at ll) the better, otherwise then as you chose grafts of a good kind, for we know Grafts rule, and keep their own Natures: onely with some small advantage from the stock, f special stocks, or prejudice if a very bad stock. And the Cause is not well assign'd by the Author, who says, It is for that the nou∣rishment is better prepared in the stock, then in the crude earth: for we know the bran∣ches of an ungrafted tree, receive sap not im∣mediately from the crude Earth, but from a stock or body, as well as the branches of the Grafted-tree: the stock of the Grafted-tree, is a wild stock, and of the same Nature, as is the stock or body of the ungrafted-tree: they are both alike, and the concoction and nourishment in both, is alike, and the Cause being a like, why is not the effect alike. It's plaine, this is not the Cause; but the Cause is in the Graft,Nat. Hist. p. 109. and p. 115. not in the stock, though the nourishment be never so well concocted in the stock: and the Fruit is not made better or worse, simply by Grafting: The Authour asserts this Truth plainely elsewhere: The Graft (saith he) over∣ruleth
the Stock: and again, the graft will govern; that is, they keep the Nature and properties of the Trees from which they were gotten. Another of the third sort of Errors, is this. Of this, see also Mason Rustique, or the Country Farme, where the same is as∣serted, pag. 362.A late Author sayes: the Cause why Trees bear not fruit in a few years after Grafting, is, because they were grafted in the old of the Moon: for (saith he) so many dayes as the Moou is old when you Graft, so many years will the graft be ere it bear fruit. The Cause is here mistaken; for the Moon hath no such influence upon fruit-trees, as to withhold their fruits in this manner: Men (we see by experience) graft in all seasons of the Moon, and find no such difference in the bearing of the Trees: The chief Causes of unfruitfulness of Trees, are, when they are not fit for the Country where they are planted. Secondly, When the Grafts are chosen from young, wild, unbearing Trees; or such as naturally bear little or seldome. Thirdly, Repletion, or overmuch nourish∣ment. Fourthly, Coldness or overmoistness of the ground. Fifthly, Frosts or cold winds in the spring.
Thirdly. Another of the third sort of Errors, is this. Many conceive that Sap in Trees doth descend from the Branches, to the Roots, which causeth several effects; as falling of the leaves, goodness of the Roots of divers Plants for use, &c. but the Cause of these Effects is mista∣ken, for Sap in Trees never descends, but al∣ways ascends: And leaves of Trees fall in Au∣tumne, not because Sap descends from them▪ but because Sap ascends not to them, suffici∣ent to nourish, or feed them any longer. And if Roots are best in Autumne, that is not Caused by descent of Sap, but for that the Body and Branches of a Tree in Au∣tumne, draw but a small quantity of Sap from the Roots, and the Roots even then, draw sap from the Earth, and increase up∣on it, and are well stored with sap after the branches have done increasing: and there the sap rests chiefly at that season. Some who hold descending of Sap, may (perhaps) confirme their Opinion from small springs of the Roots of Plants when they are removed in Autumne. It's true, The Roots of Plants set in the beginning of September (or about that time) do spring forth a little at the cut ends of the Roots,
before Winter, not because Sap descend from the Branches to them, for though all the Branches are cut off before setting, (as sometimes they are) yet the Roots will spring then, because some degree of heat, (proportionable to that purpose) is, at that season, in the top of the earth, by reason of the immediate foregoing Sommer, so that Plants set while this heat lasteth, they will germinate, & spring forth in their roots before Winter: (the husbandman knows in this season it is best to sow his Wheat and Rye:) And also because the Sun (as yet) hath an influence sufficient to make seeds, and Plants to spring forth, which towards December it hath not, being then too remote from us, so that it is not descending of Sap that causeth these effects. Nat. hist. p. 111. & 94.The learned Lord Bacon did not well consider this point, who supposed a de∣scention of Sap in Autumne, speaking con∣cerning setting a Bough in the ground prepared by disbarking for that purpose, sayes, The Cause why it will soon after be a faire Tree, may be this, the baring of the Barke keepeth the Sap from descending to∣wards Winter: here's a wrong Cause assign∣ed to an effect, for it is not the supposed keeping up of the Sap (by that means he speaks of) that Causeth such a Bough to
grow the better, but the cause is, for that such a bough by disbarking, hath got some small Roots or strings, (or at least, some roughness or knobs capable of Roots) in the passage up of the Sap, whereby (being set) it will become a Tree in certaine years. This Opinion of descention of Sap in Trees,Woodmen and others are gene∣rally of this opinion, as having re∣ceived it from their fore fathers for an un∣question∣able thing. is an old Error of many years stan∣ding, and is radicated in the minds of most men: yea, many using it as a similitude to illustrate some spiritual matter, as if it were a real and undoubted truth, whereas it is but a weak and groundless conceit, and contrary both to reason and experience, ta∣ken up by men from hand to hand, with∣out consideration, or weighing of it with reason and judgment. I will therefore lay it open more plainly, and demonstrate and prove the Truth concerning the motion of Sap in Trees. The first Argument against descention of Sap. Sap in Trees always moves upwards, and it is contrary to the Law and course of Nature for sap to descend: Natura nil agit frustra, Nature does nothing in vain. Now it were a vain work in Nature to cause sap
to ascend up in the branches, to descend again to the Roots; the Roots send Sap to the Branches, and not the Branches to the Roots. When it once comes into the Branches, it is converted into Wood, Bark, Leaves, Fruits, &c. Whence is all that great Bulk and Body which we see a Tree arise to in a few years; if Sap should descend one while, as it ascends another, it would follow, that as a Tree increaseth by ascen∣sion of Sap, so it would descrease by its descen∣sion. This may be more clear if we consider the cause why Sap in trees stirs and ascends, and also why it riseth not after such a time to make any growth. When the Sun in the Spring of the year by degrees drawes nearer to us, then Sap in Trees begins (by its heat and influence) to move, to swell, and open the Buds, and to cause the bran∣ches to shoot forth, which increase by it all the Summer: and as the Sun (by de∣grees) draws nearer, and grows hotter, so the Sap (by degrees) increaseth, and ri∣seth more plentifully, and when the Sun is nearest, then Trees are fullest of Sap. Now observe, as by the vicinity and nearness of the Sun (which is by degrees) the sap is increased by degrees, so likewise by the Sunnes remoteness and absence,
(which is also by degrees) in his going back again; the Sap is also diminished by degrees, that is, ascending less and less in quantity, until the Sun be gone so far from us, and the heat and influence of it be so weak, that it works not to cause sap to rise up, whereby the branches may increase any longer, and then the Branches and Buds of Trees are all at a stand, and grow no more until the next Spring. And at that time the leaves loose their beauty, and fall off, because Sap riseth not up suffi∣cient to feed them any longer, but onely so much as to preserve life in the Tree. The second Argument. There is no cause to produce such an effect. I would fain know (of those who hold descention of Sap) what should cause it to descend, for, Nullus effectus datur sine causa: there can be no effect without a cause; they cannot say that as heat causeth it to ascend, so cold causeth it to descend: Cold never causeth sap to stir, but to stand or move slowly. Cold is of a condensing nature, and does constipate, and fix rare & fluid bodies; if cold should cause sap to descend, then as the cold increaseth, sap would descend more & more in quantity; as on the contrary,
as heat increaseth in the Spring and Som∣mer, the sap in Trees also increaseth in quantity; and if so, what would become of the Trees? But if sap of its own na∣ture would descend, yet there is none in the Branches at that season of the year, that they can spare, but all that has ascended in the Sommer, is converted into the sub∣stance of the Tree, its Leaves, and Fruits. Concerning that Objection that is made against this, and brought as an Ar∣gument that sap descends, viz. That if we disbarke a bough or branch when sap is up, an inch round about, and lay, and keep up mould about the disbarked place, there will be small Roots in the upper part of the place so disbarked, which (say they) are caused by the descension of Sap out of the bough to that part. To this I Answer, That such Roots are not made by any descension of Sap, but by the ascension of Sap; for sap ascends up into such a bough, notwithstanding the disbarked part, through the pith and pores of the wood, though in smaller quantity then it would do if the bark were on. This is plain, because such a bough does grow and shoot forth, and bear fruit after dis∣barking, which could not be, but by the rising up of Sap. Now I say, sap in its ri∣sing
up, some part of it is pendulous about that place, and does somewhat hang or rest at the upper part of the disbarked place, in the very edge of the bark; having recourse to this Sap has recourse to this part especially, be∣cause it is wounded: as blood and humours in the body, flie to the part that is cut or hurt, to succour it, and so do abound there. This is so by the Law of Nature, as well in Trees, as other Creatures. wound∣ed part, in greater quantity then to any other part, and so by reason of the Earth, and moisture about it, breaks forth into some small Roots in some kinds of Trees, or into some roughness, and small knubs like Roots, but this cannot be caused by descension of Sap, if any were: for such as hold descension of Sap, pretend not to it until Autue, or about the end of Sep∣tember; Now these Roots are made long before that time, in Upon Midsommer day I have taken off the earth, and looked upon the place disbarked, and Roots were come out well nigh an inch long. Sommer, by the ri∣sing up of Sap, as was said, (especially if the bough be disbarked in May.) Can the effect be before the Cause? can Roots be made in Sommer, by Sap that de∣scends in Autumne? if any such thing were; so that this Argument for descension of Sap, is of no weight, but is weak and childish.
The third Argument against descension, and also Circulation of Sap: It is contrary to its Nature. As concerning Circulation of sap in Som∣mer, which some also hold; I apprehend no more ground for that, then for descen∣sion in Autumne? For as there is no cause to work such an effect, so neither is it na∣tural to sap to have such a motion of it self. For, sap riseth in Plants n some sort like a thin airy vapour from some moist substance partly caused by the heat of the Sun:Deut. 33.14. Preti∣ous fruits brought forth by the Sun. the Sun is the efficient cause of the rising up of Sap, though also (and principally) the ve∣getative spirit (excited by th un) carries it up, and disperseth it to all the parts for nourishment and growth:) Now, we know there is no descending of Vapors, in the same manner as they ascended. Vapors come not down again to the Earth, until they be condensed, and thickned into Rain, Snow, Hail, &c. When they are become a ponderous and weighty substance, then they naturally tend downwards, not whil'st they are a leight airy substance: so is it concer∣ning Sap in Trees, it ascends (partly by at∣traction of the Sun, and partly by the Na∣tive spirit) as a thin airy substance, subtile,
light spirituous, as well through the pores of the wood, as between the bark and the wood, where it rises more plentifully, and is more condensed. Now, while it is thus light and vaporous, it can neither descend nor Circulate, for every leight body, (as flame, aire, smoak, vapors, &c. ascends up∣wards, (omne leve sursum) and cannot de∣scend or fall downwards, no more then an heavy thing (as such) can rise or ascend up∣wards by its own natural motion. Indeed when sap is turned into wood, leaves, buds, blossomes and fruits, these things have some ponderosity or weght in them, and so natu∣rally discend, Omne grave deorsum, As aire and vapors, being condensed, and become water in the Clouds, do naturally fall down∣wards; but whatsoever is a thin, aerious, light body, ascends upwards, and cannot (as such) neither descend nor See Mr. Grbr. Plats hidden treasure, p. 78. wher he asserts, That all Trees, Plants, and Fruits, are made of Vapors con∣densed. circulate, and such a substance is Sap in Trees. Fourthly, The Appetite of the Spirit in all Vegetables is upwards. There is an innate spirit in Trees and all Vegetables,4 Argument against de∣scention & Ciculation of Sap. (which some call the Soul of Plants) yea, in all bodies animate and in∣animate; this Sir Fran. Bacon hath abun∣dantly set forth: This Spirit (as he
shews) is (as it were) a compound of flame and aire, is of a flammeous and aerious Na∣ture. Now, this being the Vehicle or means of conveyance of the Sap unto all the parts of the Tree, (every Twig and bud of it) its appetite is upwards, because it is a light body, and all light things natu∣rally ascend upwards,Nat. Hist. p. 26.1 6. & Hist. of L. & d. p. 387. as was said, and not downwards, unless it be to observe a Law in Nature in avoiding a Vacuum at any time. The greater quantity of Spirit there is in any creature, the leighter it is, either ani∣mate, or inanimate, especially if it be the lively spirit. If it be said this spirit in Trees exerts it self downwards in the Roots, as well as upwards, it is true, so much▪ and so farre as is necessary to make a foundation to sup∣port the body and branches, and to draw nourishment for feeding & increase there∣of, which it doth but only in a subserviency to the body and branches, and though the Roots spread wide, yet depth is but little to the height of a Tree; the Roots spread, and run as near the superficies and top of the Earth, as may be, as having still an appetite upwards, as near the Sun as may be; and all the sap and moisture which this spirit car∣ries upwards, (which is by far the greatest part) it never carries down again; being against its nature to descend, as it is a leight body.
The Fifth Argument. And further as another Argument from Experience, and that which is obvious to our very sence; we see, and know, that when we bend down a bough of a Tree upon a wall, towards the ground, to cause it to grow and spread as near the bottome of the wall as may be, we find (I say) how poorly such boughs do grow, shooting forth but a very little, and sometimes a part dies, and some∣times all; and this shews its against the Na∣ture of Sap to descend or circulate; for o∣therwise why are not such boughs (so ben∣ded downwards) as plentifully fed with sap as those that grow straight up, or straight out, and not so much bowed as the other: so it is in plasht hedges, if boughs be laid too low, they die, or grow poorly; but we see the Sap presses upwards, with vi∣gor and violence; the boughs and bran∣ches that grow upwards, shoot forth strongly, and are full fed, but such as bow down low, are almost starved: so that its plain, its as much against the nature of Sap to descend, or to circulate, as it is for water to ascend; which yet we know by Art, may be made to ascend in Pipes, from below, as high as the fountaine or spring,
but no higher; for its natural motion is to descend; so sap, though its natural motion be upwards, yet by Art, (being ascended up into a branch) it may be somewhat forced downwards, and yet very hardly, slowly, and weakly, although to the nou∣rishment & keeping life in any of its parts, or branches so bowed down, which plainly shews how much against its nature this motion of descension, or that of Circulati∣on is. The Sixth Argument against descention of Sap. And lastly, to prove this more fully and clearly by a plain undeniable Argument. If there be a continual ascension of Sap in Trees, then there is no descention, but there is a continual ascension, therefore no descen∣sion. To prove the Minor Proposition: That there is a continual ascension of sap in Trees▪ The Sun and Aire continually draw sap and moisture out of Trees and other Vege∣tables,Nat. Hist. & Hist. of L. and D. as the Lord Bacon and others con∣clude, and as may be made appear by rea∣son and experience: We know, if Bran∣ches and Twigs of Trees, being cut off, and laid aside in the Sun and Aire but a
few dayes, they will be contracted and wrinckled; the aire draws out the Sap and moisture, and such having no supply of sap from the Root, they quickly wi∣ther. Now, know also, that the sun and aire have the same operation upon the li∣ing Branches and Twigs; drawing sap and moisture continually out of them likewise, but they are not contracted and wrinkled as the other, because there is a continual supply of Sap from the Root, as well in Winter as in Sommer, which keeps them in their full dimensions without wrinkling or contracting. Further observe, to prove this. If we remove Plants in September, or about that time, (the pretended season of descention of Sap) and let them lie out of the earth a day or two, we shall find, that the Sun and Aire will (in that short time) have rockt and drawn out sap and moisture from the branches, so that they will be appa∣rently shrunk and contracted. (I have seen some branches so much wrinkled, that I questioned whether they were dead or a∣live.) But after the Plants have been set certain days, so much sap will be ascended, u will again have filled up the wrinkled or contracted bark, so that it is evident and apparent hereby, that some small quantity
of sap hath (even then) ascended into the branches since their setting; and if so, th it's clear there's no decension of sap: for c any thing move contrary ways at one lime. And if we graft in November and December as I have done with good success (the very dead time of Winter) the grafts have some small supply of sap even then, else the Sun and Aire would spoyle them, by daily suc∣king out their moisture, were there not supply of Sap from the Root, sufficient t keep them alive until the spring. It's mani∣fest then from what hath been said, that s in Trees ascends as well in Autumn and Win∣ter, as in Sommer, so much as to preserve life in Trees, by supplying what is extract by the Sun and Aire: so that upon this also it may be concluded there is no descention of sap; unless men will hold that a thin may move several ways, upwards and down∣wards, at one and the same time, which i a contradiction, and impossible in nature. Thus much concerning the three sorts of Errors in the Theory of this Art. First, Instructions hurtful and dangerous. Secondly, Instructions for effecting some∣things impossible to be effected by the mean prescribed, and others impossible to be effected by any means. Thirdly, Assigning wrong Causes to effects
will now discover some Errors that I find in the practise of this Art of Planting Fruit-trees, that they may be avoided. One Error in Practise, is this. Planting Trees too near together:Planting Trees too near toge∣ther. This is a great and general Error, many think the more Trees they have, the more fruit: but a few having room enough to spread, will bear more fruits then many crouded e upon another, as the custome is, and fruits will also be better when the Sunne may come round about the Trees. I ac∣count 8 or 10 yards a competent distance for Apple-trees and Pear-trees upon ordi∣nary soyle, but if the ground be special good, then give them the more room; for standard Cherry trees, Plum-trees, and such like, 5 or 6 yards is a convenient distance. Another Error is this. Many Plant Fruit trees unfit for the Coun∣try where they Plant them:Planting Trees unfit for the Country. Their care is chiefly to chuse grafts of the best kinds, and fair Plants to look upon, not considering so much, whether such kinds will prosper,
and bear fruits well in those Clymates, and places where they plant them. And hence it is often, that many who have faire and goodly fruit-trees, have very little fruit from them. It is an excellent rule to chuse those kinds of fruits, which we (or others) find by many years experience, to be good bearing Trees in those parts nearest to us although the fruits be not altogether so good as some others. This is another Error. Chusing the greatest Trees.Many men when they procure Fruit-trees to plant an Orchard, they (most commonly) desire the greatest and fairest Plants, hoping such will be Trees the soon∣est; whereas great Trees many of them die, and others live very poorly, but small Plants removed, live generally, and thrive more in two or three years, then great ones in six or seven; for removing great Trees is a very great check to nature, such as many times its not able to recover. Another Error in practise is this. Setting trees with∣out disbran∣ing.Men generally leave too many branches on the Trees they Plant, and will by no means have Branches cut off, whereas for want of
disbranching Trees, they loose branches, body, roots, and all. If they will Plant great Trees, they must disbranch them, small ones need not, or very little. Another is this. For the most part men neglect to Plant their young Trees in as good or better soyle,Planting Trees in worse mould. then that from which they are removed. They fetch them from Nurseries about London, (which are generally of very (fer∣til soyle) and plant them (it may be) in or∣dinary or poor soyle, and thence it is that many of them die, or grow weakly: Whereas they ought to lay special soyle (the best they can get) next to the Roots, which having taken hold, and being well rooted in the ground, they will by de∣grees, thrust their roots, and grow well in that which is worse. Another is this. Some in Grafting,Setting Grafts and stock smoth on the out-side. take care to set the Graft and Stock even and smooth on the out∣side, not considering that the bark of the stocks are (for the most part) thicker then the bark of the grafts. Whereas they ought to take special care to set the inner∣sides
of the Barks together, (which is the chiefest Rule in Grafting) because there is the chief current of the Sap. Another Error is this. Grafting long, or for∣ked Grafts.Grafting long or forked Grafts: com∣monly, the longer grafts are, the less they grow; and the shorter they are cut, the longer they grow in a year. As for fork∣ed Grafts, either they take not, or else grow but poorly. Another is this. Suffering Fruit-trees to grow like Timber trees.Many let their Fruit-trees grow straight up very high, before they spread into boughs, and they are rather like Timber-trees for building, then Fruit-trees for bearing Fruits. Whereas they ought to cut off the Top while the Plant is young, about an Ell, or a yard and half from the ground, that so the Plant may spread and enlarge it self: and one Tree well ordered in this respect for spreading, will have as many small boughs (and consequently will bear as much fruit) as three or four (it may be) of such Trees as runne spiring up a great height without spreading.
Another Error is this. Some give too much nourishment to some Fruit-trees,Giving too much nou∣rishment to fruit-trees. Letting some fat water (it may be) run to the Roots, or lie too near them, or else by powring, or laying some fertil substance to their Roots, when there is (sometimes) more need to deprive them of their too fat feeding, which causeth them to luxuriate, and spend their strength in great and large shoots, and broad leaves and blossomes, and leave off bearing fruits: Nourishment to Fruit-trees ought to be moderate, as to other creatures. Another Error in practise, is this. Many in pruning Aprecot-trees,Pruning off too many shoots from Wal-trees. and o∣ther Wall-trees, they prune off most of the fresh young branches of the last years shoot, and preserve the old and big branches, suf∣fering them to run up a great part of the wall without, or with very few small twigs or branches. Whereas they should still from year to year, preserve the small shoots, nailing them up to the wall yearly, (all or most) from the lowest part of the Tree to the top, and leave no part of the wall void of branches; and cause the
branches to spread along the sides of the wall both ways, and not suffer them to run upwards too much. Another Error amongst some, is this. Grafting seed Plants before re∣moving.They Graft young Plants that came of seed, in the place where they were sowed, (be∣fore they have been removed, whereby they would get good Roots.) And hence it follows, That such thrust down a single Root, or two (commonly) into Clay, Gra∣vel or moist ground, &c. which root or roots, draw bad nourishment below the good soyle, and thereby hurt the Trees and Fruits, and in case any of them be re∣moved afterwards (being grafted) they want good Roots, for that they were never removed, being young, to get good Roots. See how to order them, pag. 83. Another is this. Not Pru∣ning the Roots of Plants.Some also when they Transplant young Trees, they usuall set them with all their Roots, whereas the Roots of all Trees Transplanted, ought to be pruned. See how pag. 83.
Another Error is this. Many break off all the Buds upon the stocks that are engrafted,Breaking off Buds be∣fore Grafts grow. before the grafts put forth, which endangers both Stock and Graft. For Buds upon the stocks should be let alone, all or most, until the Grafts have put forth, and be able to draw up sap, and then break off all the buds below the Grafts, that they may have all the sap. Another Error in practise is this. Many when they Graft great Trees (which are unfruitful,Grafting great bodies of Trees. or bear bad fruits) they graft upon their bodies round about, between the bark and the wood. Now Trees thus grafted, will not of many years, (and some never) cover the head in the grafted place, but water gets in and rots the Tree, whereas its much better to graft the small branches, or if those be too high, then to cut off the body two yards high slopewise, and to cut it smooth, that no rain or wet may rest on the head, and the next year after to graft the small shoots, which will in a few years be a large head again.
Situation of an Orchard. HAving before spoken of sowing, set∣ting, Grafting, and ordering of fruit-trees; I think good now to speak some∣what of the site, soyle, shelters, and some o∣ther advantages of an Orchard and Gar∣den, and also of planting Fruit-trees in the fields, and in the hedges and mounds about the fields; whereby double, treble, or ma∣nifold profit may be made of Lands to what is usually (in most places) made, e∣specially by ider and Perry, to the great advantage of the owners, and of the Com∣mon-wealth, with planting of wood for buildng, fed and other uses. And also of divers other things (promiscuously) in reference to Fruit-trees and Fruits. And alhough some of the ensuing particulars are touch upon already, yet I thought good to mention them again, with some addiion, seeing they are very material; yet all very briefly.
What Situation is best for an Orchard. Concerning the Site, or Situation of an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit-trees; the best and fittest situation is upon a ground some∣what shelving or declining upon the South-East Sun; for as the South-side is the warmest and hottest, so also it is obser∣ved by Experience, that the Morning or East Sun, is better then the West Sun: it does cherish and ripen fruits sooner then the Afternoon Sun, though that be good also: And if the ground somewhat shelve, or hang towards the South-East, it has an advantage of level or plain ground (though that be good too:) for the Sun-beames are more direct, and so more strong upon such a ground, then upon a level: such a ground is fitted to the Aspect of the Sun: which is, Coelum cum terra maritare, vel societatem perquirere coeli & terre ad arbo∣res:Bapt. Port. Li. 1. p. 16. To Marry Heaven and Earth together, or to obtain a mutual Society of Heaven and Earth for the benefit of Fruit-trees. What Soyle is best for an Orchard. As for the soyle of an Orchard, the best is a deep sound land, either a black, or
brown mould, if with a mixture of sand so much the better: In such ground, so ly∣ing as before, Fruit-trees will attain to a very great bigness, and consequently will last much longer then the same kinds of Trees, upon a shallow gravelly ground; or upon a clay, cold, or wet ground. Fruit-trees where they grow upon a warm ground, and upon the South-East Sunne, as the Trees grow great, and live-long, so also the fruit is greater and better, and much more in quantity, then upon poor, gravel, wet, cold, or clay grounds. Howsoever, men that have not the best, must be content to Plant upon what they have, and endeavour to amend it as they can: Cold and moist ground. Grounds that are overmoist and cold, must be not onely trenched in several places, to draw the water into the Trenches from the Roots of the Trees; but also it will be convenient to mix sand, ashes, or such like hot and dry soyls with such ground: if these or some such means be not used, the Roots of the Trees (upon this kind of ground) will be chil'd, and lie cold, and cause the Trees to be Mossy, and the fruit to be more spongy and waterish; not so good tasted
Fruit, as if the Trees grew upon warmer and dryer ground. Hot and dry grounds. Fruit-trees upon hot, dry, sandy, shallow grounds, have need of some current of wa∣ter now and then, to runne over such grounds, if it be possible to have it so; or else paines must be taken to bring water some other way: water out of Pools, or Ponds, that runs from dunghills, is special good for this purpose, which does not only moisten, but makes the ground fertil also. Cold Clay grounds. If the Land whereon Fruit-trees are, or shall be planted, be Clay grounds, a shallow crust of indifferent good soyle (it may be) on the top, and Clay, barren soyle under∣neath (as is often seen) then there is need of some Composts of contrary natures to be mixt among, with this stiff, cold, barren ground; as Sand, Ashes of all kinds, a con∣venient quantity of Lime, Cbalk, or any thing that is of an hot and opening nature: Yea, and let men do what they can to mend this kind of land, yet the Trees will still be mossy, and but small Trees, in comparison
of the same kind of Trees, upon good, sound, deep, fertil soyle. Stony gravel ground. As for gravel grounds, they are as bad as any, in some respects; for a tree cannot root to any great bigness in such grounds; and if muck, and other soyles, be laid to the Trees, the Gravel will eat it up, and turn it into its own nature in certain years. But if the ground be but somewhat stony, with a mixture of Mould between and a∣mong the stones, the fruit-trees will root indifferent well in such grounds; all that can well be done, is to dig up, and loosen the stones as much as may be, and to pick out some of the biggest, and cast in some good soyles in their sted. Low bottome grounds. Land that lies below, towards the bot∣tome of the Hill, or near a River, which sometimes over-flowes; This generally is exceeding good for fruit-trees; it hath many advantages of some other grounds; for it not only keeps and retains what rain and moisture falls upon it from the Clouds, but also moisture descends from the higher
grounds to these, and withal, if the River overflow, it adds much to the fatness of the ground: But yet this is to be considered, That land may have overmuch moisture (as before is observed) That is, when it stands, and rests all the year long in, and upon the ground, as some wall springs, and boggy low grounds, where the superfluity of water cannot descend from it to any other place, but where much water comes, and rests for a certaine time only; and then the su∣perfluity runnes off, and leaves onely the strength & fatness of the water behind, there the land is good and fertil: and fruit-trees will grow large there, and the fruit great. And so much for the ground fit for fruit-trees. Concerning shelters or defences for Or∣chards and Gardens. ALthough it be not absolutely neces∣sary that fruit-trees be sheltred, or de∣fended from the cold North, East and West winds, yet it will be very convenient and profitable so to do, as much as may be; for we know, and see by yearly experience, how dangerous the East, or Northeast winds (e∣specially) are in the spring time, as in bligh∣ting and spoyling of blossomes, fruits, and
sometimes the very boughs, branches, and the Trees themselves. And the West winds are commonly strong towards Autumne, and throw down abun∣dance of Fruits, when ripe, or near ripe, wherein is losse: so that if the Or∣chard be planted where it may have Hills, Houses, or such like, to burrow, or shelter it from the North, East, and West-winds, it will be a special advantage to it. Walnut-trees good shelters for Orchards. But if there be no such shelters, it will be very profitable to Plant Walnut-trees, (or some other kinds of Trees that natu∣rally grow great and high (upon these three sides of the Orchard. The Walnut-tree is profitable very many ways, not only as to shade and shelter, but also the wood is of manifold use, and much dearer then Oak, Ash, Elm, or such like: the Fruit The fruit is accounted a special remedy against Poyson and Pestilence: Avicen says, Lib. 2. Can. C. 501. Iuglans ficubus & Rta Medicina omni∣bus venenis. Walnuts with Figs and Re, is a medi∣cine against all poyson. is use∣ful and profitable, both green and ripe; so the leaves, bark, juice, &c. in many Physical re∣spects. Mr. Parkinson sayes, the profit of Walnut-trees is infinite. It is a good encourage∣ment to Plant these trees also,
because (as they are so many wayes pro∣profitable, so also) they endure exceeding long, and will prosper well almost in any kind of soyle, or in any Country: this was observed long since, Bap. Port. says, in for∣mer times, it was accounted an excellent, and singular Fruit-tree: Iuglandes egre∣giam existimarent.L. 2. de Arb. Nat. Pag. 248. And Cressentius gives a good encouragement to Plant this tree: Hc arbor nullum recusat aerem, neque genus terr; (he says) This Tree refuseth no kind of aire nor earth. Now, seeing it prospers well in all pla∣ces, and is so many ways profitable above many other kinds of Trees, and so fit and proper for the sheltring of the Orchard, in regard of the exceeding great height and bigness that these Trees attain, and the long time that they last, let there be (therefore) many of them planted with∣out the Orchard to shelter it, as before is said, so many as may be convenient for that purpose. Set many of the best thin-sheld Nuts in the Nursery, when they are fully ripe, and preserve them there three or four years, until they be a competent bigness to re∣move for this purpose: if they be set with the green husk on, it is so much the bet∣ter to preserve them from worms, &c.
Quantity of grounds for an Orchard. Having considered of, and found out fit place for an Orchard, in respect of th lying of the ground, soyle, and shelters for it the next thing is to designe the Quantity And herein let not men be niggards to themselves▪ their posterity, and the Common weal, in allotting a small quantity, Whe they may take much: For the Fruit trees will yield (after certain years) many time more profit, then the Corne or Grass of so much land: Especially if converted into Cider and Perry. Of the Profits of Fruit-trees; see Mr. Blith, his Improver Improved, pag. 262, 263, &c. Where he shews Land may be improved, by Planting 8 or 10 times the value, and more. Such as begin soonest will have most profit. And they that begin, and first set on this work of planting large Orchards, and fruit-trees in the fields and hedges, will have not onely the speediest, but the greatest profit: because now, as yet, there are but few, or no great Orchards in some Countries; and while so great a commodity is in the hands of a few men, it will be exceeding advantagious
them; but when it is more common, e advantage will be less. Therefore, if en be but willing to make 20 l. worth 0 l. or 50 l; or to make 100 l. a year, orth 2, or 3, or more, this is the way, ith little labour and charge. Great Profits, with little Cost or Pains. What work is of so much profit, with so tle cost and pains? Corn and Cattle must have renewed charges and labours every ear: But as for planting Fruit-trees, there he charge is at the first, and little or no∣hing ever after, and the profit still increas∣ng more and more for many years. Fruit-trees have an advantage, and ex∣cellency above other Commodities, which (for the most part) are best at first, and worse and worse, till nothing worth: (As Meat, Drink, Apparel, &c.) but Fruit trees increase in worth and goodness; are least and worst at first, and of the mending and in∣creasing hand for many Years or Ages. Orchard and Garden on the South-side. In Planting the Orchard let it be on the South-side the house, rather then on any other side; the house will be a shelter to it
from the North; and beside, into the South is the sweetest and most pleasan prospect, and much the better for the Orchard: And if it may be (as in some pla∣ces it may) plant Fruit-trees round abou the house. Build the House in the midst of the Orchard. Men that are to build the house, as wel as to plant the Orchard, were best to build the house in the midst of the Orchard▪ and so they may live in a sweet, perfumed, wholsome Aire, all their days, which will not be a little conducing to health and long life; besides all the pleasure and delight superadded. Sweet fresh Aire, conduceth to health and long life, more then diet, as an Au∣thour of great esteem affirmeth. How healthful it is to live in a sweet fresh Aire; not onely learned and judicious men tell us, but also Experience. Of this, see Lord Bac. Hist. L. D. pag. 207.208. Nat. hist. Cent. 6. pag. 210. Cent. 6. pag. 136. Nat. hist. Cent. 4. pag. 102. and divers o∣ther places: so also a whole Colledge of Physitians: See Scho. Sal. pag. 51.
Many stocks of Bees may be kept in a great Orchard. Now, besides all the profit and plea∣sure that may be made of an Orchard in an ordinary way, by Cider, Perry, sale of the fruits, and use of them all the year in the house: there may be another profit made of them, by the labour of the industrious Bees, which may be kept in or about the Orchard, which will gather store of Hony all the blossoming time from the fruit-trees, and the more, and sooner, because they (In such a place) need not labour far for Honey, as having it near hand: I have read of an eminent Bee-master, who yearly, set many stocks of Bees by, or in a great Field of Pease and Beans in blooming-time, out of which the Bees did store, and fill their Hives with Hony in a very short time, as having it so near at hand; the like they will do in an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit-trees, having great store of provision ready at hand in an Orchard. Also, unto all this provision for Bees, Ciccamore-trees may be planted, on the North, East, and West of the Orchard; and Sallies, Withies, &c. which bear Palms early: all these yield abun∣dance of provision for Bees: Now, the
nearer they have their hony and wax, the earlier and oftner they will swarm. Plant Fruit-trees in the Fields and Hedges. As much profit may be made of Fruit-trees in Orchards and Gardens, so also by planting Fruit-trees in the felds and hedges of inclosed grounds: multitudes of Fruit-trees may be planted abroad in the fields and hedges, whereof great profit may be made, and yet without any considerable hindrance in any other respect, either of Corne, Hay, or Pasture; so that men may have a double or treble profit (or more) by this means, to what otherwise they have; after one Harvest is over, they may have a second, and that as great, or great∣er then the first; perhaps twice or thrice as good: That this may be, it is to be considered what Trees are fittest to be plan∣ted there, and in what manner. Observe right kinds. As to the kinds of Trees fit for flelds and hedges; it will be best, especially now at first (until there be more store of fruits) to plant the courser and harder kinds of fruits, that so people may not be eager of them to steal them.
The courser fruits very profitable. There are many kinds of Fruits very course and hard at first gathering, which yet are exceeding useful and profitable, e∣specially for Cider and Perry; some wild hard Peares, (as Mr. Parkinson observes) though no one will touch them to eat, yet they will make exceeding good Perry, scarce to be discerned from Wine, when it hath lien divers years, and is throughly ripened; and so of divers kinds of wild hard Apples. Let such therefore be planted in the hedges, on purpose for Cider and Perry. Plant high Trees in Fields. And as the kinds are to be thus obser∣ved, so also the substance and bigness of them: such Trees should be larger then ordinary, two yards high, or more at first planting, that so they may spread high, out of the reach of Cattle, and may not be troublesome to workmen about Hay and Corn in sommer time.
Defend them from spoyle. Such being Planted, must have two or three stakes set about each of them; to pre∣serve them from the rubbing of the Cattle, and other annoyances; or else must have a small hedge of Thorns round about them, for some years at the first planting. Manner of Planting in the Fields. Fruit-trees in the fields, should be Plan∣ted a large distance asunder, not onely be∣cause this course will take up multitudes; but also (and chiefly) in regard they may not overmuch shade the Land whereon they are Planted, so as to prejudice Hay and Corne, Pasture, or other profits to be made thereof; so that these Trees should be planted 30 or 40 yards in distance, e∣specially those in the middle of the fields, and also in Roes or Ranks throughout, that so the Plough may continue a straight fur∣row all along, from one end to the other; as we see in Herefordshire, Kent, and other FruitCountries; and Trees so planted (as we see by experience) will grow exceeding large, as great as three or four, or more of those that grow near together in Or∣chards.
Shade and droppings, no considerable prejudice. If it be objected; That Fruit-trees so planted, will spoyle much Corne and Grass under and about them, by their droppings and shade: It is answered, that it hath been observed, that good Corn hath grown very near the roots of such Trees, almost as good as any where in the field, where no Trees are: and grass as much, or more under Trees, as where none are, although (perhaps) not altogether so sweet. Mr. Blith doth affirm it plainly, that fruit-trees regularly planted, do advantage the ground, even in respect of grass: See pag. 262. of the Improver Improved. And al∣though it were granted, that neither Grass nor Corn would (at all) grow under fruit-trees; yet how weak an objection is this, when the profits by the Trees may be an hundred, or perhaps two hundred fold, to what can be expected (rationally) upon such a quantity of Land (as they shade) in Corn or Grass. Profit of Fruit-trees by Cider and Perry. Multitudes of Fruit-trees planted in Or∣chards and Gardens, and in the Fields, and
bringing forth much fruit, the next thing is to make use of them to the best advan∣tage; which is by Cider and Perry; espe∣cially by Cider. Men may not onely store themselves for their own use in their Fa∣milies, all the year, but also much for sale: they may sell the fruits to those who con∣vert them into Cider for advantage. Cider more healthy then other Liquors. Cider is more conducing to health and long-life, then Beer and Ale, (though these are also good Liquors, especially for some persons) for Cider is a clear Liquor with∣out dregs, and doth not onely not leave any dregs in the body of its own substance, but it hath a property to cleanse the body, and open obstructions carry down super∣fluities and hurtful humours in the body, which other Liquors and Meats have in∣gendred and left in the body, which are as the Seeds of many distempers and diseases. Long Experience, proves the healthful∣ness of Cider. That it is very much conducing to health and long-life, (besides the Judgement of learned Physitians) Experience doth fully prove it in those places where it is much
used: The story of a Rich Landlord, who would never let leases for lives to any that were Cider drinkers, is somewhat to the purpose: he concluded such were like to live too long, so was not willing to med∣dle with them upon such terms. Mason Rust. says, that a famous Physitian in his time, was not content to equal Cider and Perry, with Wine of Grapes, but pre∣ferred them before it in every things. In Normandy,Legacy of Husbandry pag. 19. there is abundance of Cider and Perry, where they esteem of it equal to Wine. Windiness of Cider, only at first▪ As to the windiness that some finde in drinking this Liquor, that is found to be only at first, until the body be used to it, after a time that ceaseth▪ An Authour of good credit sayes, that Beer and Ale have the like operation to those who have not been accustomed to them, which after∣wards ceaseth: we know Tobacco will make a man dizze, and somewhat di∣stempered at the first taking, to one who hath not been used to it, but af∣terwards no such thing: so also in re∣spect of Cider.
Cider of some Apples is Cordial. But especially it will be less windy, and much more pleasant, healthful, and cordial, if it be made of the best kinds of Fruits: Physitians ascribe some degree of heat to some Apples,Galen. de Aliment. facul. l. 2. pag. 20. In Com pr. Li. Dioscor. as Pearmains, and some kinds of Pippins. Matth. says, they are Cordial to persons in hot diseases: Calidis cordis af∣fectibus succurrunt. Pearmains, Pippins, Moyles, Redstreaks, best for Cider. Therefore, let the greatest number of Fruit-trees, not only in the Orchards, but also in the Fields, be of Pearmains, Pippins, Gennet-moyles, Redstreaks, and such kinds as are known by much experience, to be secial good for Cider, and then the hedges and outmost bounds, may be of some cour∣ser and harder kinds, which also will make good Cider. Cider of the best Fruits, is not only healthful, but very cordial, is found to refresh the heart, and exhilerate and chear the spirits, is special good against Melancholly distempers, against the stone, and straight passage of the water, carrying down gravel, and clearing obstructions in
the body: it cleanses the stomack, and pro∣cures a good appetite to meat, and makes a good digestion; which is fundamental to health and long-life. Apprehensions of Good, makes men seek after it. Were men but acquainted with the benefits and advantages of this Liquor, they would labour more for it: But we know, bonum non desideratur, nisi cognitum: Men can never desire a thing, unless first they know it, or have some apprehensions of the good of it. Health and long-life. Health, and long-life, are two of the greatest earthly blessings that all the world looks after; and what will they not do, or give, for the attaining of them? As Naaman servant said to his Master, so it may be said here, if they should be required to do some great matter, for the attainment of health and long-life, would they not do it? Yea certainly, me thinks then they should not neglect such easie tearms as are here proposed, when once they know them. Now it is concluded,
That exercise in the work of planting fruit-trees, with moderate use of Cider and Perry, are the most effectual Natural means for these ends. See at large pag. 40, 41, &c. Riches and Profits. But besides, many other profits and ad∣vantages come by this labour in Planting fruit-tree, in sale of the fruit-rees, cider, Per∣ry, and other commodities in the Orchard all the year long; so that why may not this Art be called the Philosophers-stone, which, though it turn not common Mettals into Gold,The Philo∣sophers stone yet it turns Trees and Fruits, yea, earth and dung into gold and silver in a cer∣taine time? Many men have laboured ma∣ny years, and spent much gold and silver in seeking the Philosophers-stone, that so they might have gold enough, but all to little purpose. I think they were best to make use of this, till they find out a better; this will help to bear charges in the seeking of it. But though this Art be not the Philoso∣phers-stone, yet it hath the properties of it, or some like it, if not above it; for is it not more to turn wood, earth, (and the like) into gold, than to turn Brass, Tin, and such mettals into gold, which have some likeness to it already?
Let Landlords and Tennants agree to Plant. So then, Let men that have Lands, or any considerable Estate in them, be perswa∣ded to improve them for their own and others advantage; and herein Landlords might greatly benefit themselves, their heirs, and successors, if they would encourage their If Landlords Covenant with their Tenants in their Lea∣ses, to plant Trees, their livings will thereby be much im∣proved in certaine years. Tenants to plant fruit Trees and other Trees upon their Lands, by assuring them, that so doing, they should enjoy the same so long, or have such other recompence, as might be a sufficient encouragement to them to labour there about; but when Tenants fear, and suspect that the more they labour herein, and improve their Livings by such means, the sooner they shall remove out of it, they have little reason to stirre a foot to∣wards such a work. An increase manifold. Hereby mens Estates might be increased manifold, by many and great profits to them and theirs, for many Generations. Sir Rich. Weston, in his Legacy, sayes, It is a thing much celebrated by Antiquity, and thought the noblest way to gather wealth, for to imploy ones wit and mony upon his Land, and by that means to Augment his Estate.
Husbandry the end of mens other endeavours. One sayes, If you observe the common course of things, you will find, that Husban∣dry is the end, which men of all estates in the world do point at: for to what end do Soul∣diers, Schollars, Lawyers, Merchants, and Men of all Occupations and Trades, toyl and labour with great affection, but to get mony, and with that mony, to purchase Land; and to what end do they buy Land, but to receiv the fruits to live upon? Now, this being the most profitable, and pleasant piece of Hus∣bandry, doth especially challenge our la∣bours in it, not only that we may live, but (as a means) that we may live in health, and live long, to the praise of God, and ser∣vice of our generation. Nations subsist by Husbandry. Though Husbandry (in all the parts of it) is but a mean imployment, in the ac∣count of many, yet we know by Husban∣dry, a Land or Country is maintained, even the greatest and highest persons in a Nation, generally; Lesser and smaller matters, fa∣cilitate and help forward the greatest: so that if the higher powers would please to
enjoyne, or encourage the people to Planting Fruit-trees, and all sorts of wood, they would be better able to bear all bur∣thens and taxes (whatsoever) that are im∣posed from time to time by Authority: and the greatest, and most important affairs of the Nation, will be much furthered thereby. Cider and Perry are of great use in long voyages at Sea; and store of Timber might in certain years be raised for building of Ships of the best kinds of Oak, Beach, Ches∣nut-tree, and other kinds of Trees, where∣by there might be a continual supply thereof, to this, and succeeding generati∣ons. Plant Oak, Ash, Elme, and all sorts of Wood. ANd now I shall make some small digression, and step a little aside out of the Orchard and Garden, to give a word of encouragement, and direction, for the planting of several sorts of Wood and Tim∣ber, especially Oak, Ash, Elme, and other useful wood for building, fire, and other purposes; (I have planted and ordered these kinds of Trees as well as Fruit-trees)
Hereby men may (by the blessing of God) exceedingly advantage themselves, their posterity, and the whole Nation: Besides the usefulness of the Wood and Timber, store of Hogs might be kept with the Mast (which makes their flesh very sweet, fat, and good) and some say Sheep and Poultry, will feed upon the Mast. Land not worth 28. an Acre, made worth 4 or 5 l. in few years. The charge and labour is but small, but the profit in time, (yea, in few years) will be exceeding great. Mr. Blith in his Improver, Improved, affirms, that even boggy land, not worth above two shillings an Acre, by planting it with Willow, Sallow, and such like Wood, and draining of it deep, may be worth near five pounds an Acre, and that in 7 or 8 years. See pag. 160. of his Book. Wood on good Land, worth 60 l. an Acre. But upon better land, the advance and profit would be much more: Upon some warm good land, wood being planted, may be worth threescore pounds an Acre; and that in 11 or 12 years, and as much in few∣er years afterwards: see the proof and ex∣periment
hereof, heretofore made by Mr. Cartwright at Billing in Northamptonshire, Improver Improved, pag. 157, 158, &c. An 100 Ashes sold for 500 l. See the experiment of a Gentleman that planted an hundred Ashes, and lived to see them grow to that bigness, that he sold them for five hundred pounds, at fifty years growth: Improver Improved, pag. 163. Fifty thousand pounds worth of Wood in an Age, by one man. It is Recorded, that another Gentle∣man (together with his workmen) planted so much Wood in his life time, that he would not take fifty thousand pounds for it. See Improver Improved, pag. 163. A necessity of Planting Wood. Many more particular instances of Ex∣periments might be brought of the great profits of Planting Wood, and but few men but see, and hear of advantages this way, so that we have encouragements enough to this work, especially if we consider the great necessity there is of planting all sorts
of Wood in this Nation; Wood and Timber being destroyed and wasted every where, and grows very scarce and dear, and so will be more and more every year, unless men set in good earnest to this work. It is desired the higher Powers would enjoyn this work. And because men generally have been, and will be negligent in this great and im∣portant business, (through misapprehensi∣ons of it, and carnal selfish Principles, for that they cannot reap all the benefit them∣selves) it is much to be desired that the Higher Powers would by a Law, or Injun∣ction, set men to this work, which would be of exceeding advantage, to the present and future Generations. Reasons for it. 1. First, because Timber, and all sorts of Wood, hath been of late times very much wasted and destroyed: and unless men set to this work, succeeding Ages will very much want timber for building ships, houses, and other necessarie uses. 2. Secondly, by reason of the great waste of Wood, and no care to Plant more,
fuel is grown scarce and dear, especially in many places, so that the poorer sort of people make lamentable mone for want of fire in cold long Winters, whereas by diligent planting, there would be fuel enough for all people. 3. Thirdly, except there be more plan∣ting, the Tanners trade (so necessary in the Commonweal) is like to fail very much: Bark is at a very great rate already, and grows yearly dearer, because scarce. 4. Fourthly, By planting Trees in the Mounds, the fields would be much warmer in Winter, and cooler in Sommer; and con∣sequently Cattle, and all commodities there, would prosper and come on the better. Other Nations look more after Planting. It is Recorded, That the Romans did in Ancient time, (and Venice at this day) appoint Officers on purpose to take care of the Woods, that there be Planting as there is cutting down, and so a supply continually for all purposes. There is a Law in Spain, that he that uts down own Tree, shall plant three for it.
How to have great store of young Oakes, Ashes, &c. Now, that men may have great store of young Sets and Plants to make Woods and Groves, or to plant in the fields and mounds, They must (in Autumne, when the Seed is ripe) gather abundance of Mast or Acorns, from the best and straightest Oake Trees: And also great store of Ash keyes, Cycamore, and Mast of the Beach-tree, and other seeds, See how, pag. 79, 80, &c. and sow these in ground Plowed, or dug up for that purpose, and keep them with weeding; and some may be drawn the first year, (others as they grow fit) to transplant abroad, and by this means, a world of goodly young Trees may be rai∣sed: Most Ash-keys will lie in the ground until the second Spring, and then come up abundantly. Elme Plants. As for young sets of the Elme, many come up from the roots of Trees of them∣selves: But that we may have abundance, this must be done, Bare the Roots of some Elme-trees, and cut some of the roots (about a foot, or half a yard from the body) quite
asunder, and the same will shoot forth multitudes of young Plants (having small Roots) which may be cut off with a Chisel or Knife, and planted in a piece of ground, as a Nursery, until they be grown big e∣nough to Transplant abroad into the Fields. Cut not the Tops. Cut none of the tops of any young Tree that you intend for Timber; for cutting the top, will make it spread too much: and besides, Ashes, Cycamores, and some other kinds, have wide great piths, and wet get∣ting in, rots some part of the Tree, and hinders its growth. Draw many, and leave the rest. Out of a piece of ground sowed with Mast and other Seeds, abundance of young Plants may be drawn, and enough left, which need not at all be removed, but are to be pruned up for Timber, or other purposes. Willow, Osier, Withy, Sally, &c. As for Willowes, Osiers, Sallies, &c. and such like, they will grow of cuttings,
long or short:Set in the Spring of the year. The Willow (especially) is a very profitable Wood, and is of as speedy a growth as any whatsoever, it is profita∣ble for firing, and divers other purposes. This must be planted on moist land: The worst boggy land (especially if Treched) will become very profitable by this means. Sallies, and such as bear Palms early in the year, are not only profitable in the Wood, but also for Bees, in hony and wax; from which they have their first provision in the Spring. Soyle best for a Plantation. Concerning the Soyle, or ground for a Plantation of Oak, Elm, Beach, Ash, &c. We see by experience they will grow and thrive, upon almost any Land, but a loose warm soyle is accounted best, if it be shel∣ving upon the Sun; upon such a ground they will thrive much faster, and the pro∣fits will be greater than on cold clay moist ground. Howsoever, plant any ground that may be planted, the profits will be great and many, to the present Age, and to Posterity.
And now I return again into the Orchard and Garden, and shall also speak somewhat further concerning Vine-yards, which (some are very confident) may be made here in England, with very good success and advantage. IT is Recorded, that many Vineyards have been formerly in England,Of Vine∣yards in England. and that Tithes have been paid (in some part of Gloucester-shire) of Wine, made of the Vineyards there. See Mr. Hartlibs Legacy of Husbandry, pag. 23, and 24. And that a Gentleman in the Wild of Kent, maketh six or eight Hogsheds yearly of his own Vines: that he hath one old Vine upon the sides and tiles of his House, that yieldeth nigh an Hogshed of Wine in a year, p. 26. Camdens Testimony of Vineyards in England. Camden in his Britannia, pag. 357. says, That William of Malmesbery writes, That there is no Country in all England, so thick set with Vineyards, as Gloucester-shire, nor so plentiful in increase; the Wines thereof made affect not their mouths that drink them, with any unpleasant tartness, as being little infe∣riour
in sweetness and odor, to the French Wines. And Mr. Camden adds, That this is the Reason why many places in that Coun∣trey, and elsewhere in England, are called Vineyards; And that it may seem to be the sloathfulness of the People, rather then any indisposition of the Aire, that this Nation yieldeth not Wine at this day. Mr. Parkinsons Iudgement of Vine∣yards in England. Howsoever, Mr. Parkinson in his Para∣disus Terrestris, pag. 553. tells us, he thinks it would be a fruitless labour to strive in these dayes, to make a good Vineyard in England, for that years are not now so hot as formerly; And he brings experience in¦to witness the thing: That divers, both Nobles and Gentlemen, of late times, have endeavoured to plant Vineyards, and brought over Frenchmen to do it, but could never make any Wine that was worth the drinking, being so small and heartless, that they soon gave over their practise. And also, One says in Camdens Brit. pag. 269. That we have had Vines in Britan since Probus the Emperours time, rather for shade than fruit. Now men have heard the Judgement
of Writers, and what is Recorded con∣cerning Vineyards in England, they may do as they see cause. A Vineyard must have all advantages with us It is very probable, that if some special Vines, that ripens their Fruits early (as some do with us) were planted with all the advantages that may be (as upon the side of an hill, upon the South-East Sun, up∣on on a hot sandy soyle, the Vines kept short and low, within a yard of the ground, and the ground kept bare without weeds or grass; it's likely, I say, (thus planted and ordered) they would afford good Wines, even with us in England. Or if Vines (some early kinds) be planted upon the South-sides of houses, or Morning Sun, and spread upon the Tiles, no doubt the Grapes will make good Wine: but I verily believe, that Vines upon level ground, without the ad∣vantages before mentioned, will not bring forth Grapes to perfection; it's likely such would make very good Vineger or Ver∣juice, better then that of Crabs. An experienced way for good Wines. But seeing we have such a known Expe∣rienced way, to make good wine in England
of Pearmains, Pippins, Moyles, Redstreaks, and other Fruits, we need care the less for Wine of Grapes: the best that is said of the Wine that hath been made in England of Grapes, is, That is hath been little inferior in sweetness and odor to the French Wines: but the commendation of Wine made of the best Apples, is far higher; viz. That it hath been esteemed by good pallates, not infe∣rior to the best Wine of Grapes, all things considered) yea, hath been preferred be∣fore it. See pag. 145. Hereafter follow divers Experiments and Observations (promiscuously) without de∣pendance one upon another. Make some Wall-trees, DwarftreesIT is good to Plant some Aprecot-trees, Peach-trees, Fig-trees, and other kinds of Trees (which we use to Plant against a wall) upon Standards, to grow somewhat low, as Dwarf-trees, if it may be upon the side of a South-hill, Experience shews the Fruit will come to ripeness, but be some∣what later and smaller: however, this saves abundance of labour and time, and some cost in pruning, and nailing the bran∣ches to the wall yearly. The Fig-tree bears an excellent cordial fruit, it doth sensibly refresh the Spirits after eating, but eat
moderately, lest they make the blood to abound overmuch. If the ground be kept bare with diging,Keep the grond bare under and about them. or paring often, the fruit will be the fairer and sooner ripe, the reflection of the Sun from the bare earth, will be almost as strong as from a wall, especially if beaten down hard after digging. Moist,Wet ground bad for Trees. waterish grounds, are bad for Fruit-trees, they chill the Roots, and cause Moss upon the Trees, and make the Fruits more cold, and on a worse taste, then the same kinds on drier grounds: but if Trees must be planted on such grounds, lay them as dry as may be, by ditches and trenches, in several places. It will advantage Trees in bearing (old Trees especially) to put Pigeons dung,Helps in Fruit-trees in bearing. Lees of Wine, with some Ashes, Brimstone, or the like, to kill worms about the Roots; or to put some blood, or pieces of flesh, to their Roots: also state Urin mixed, is very good for them, but yet beware of using too great a quantity of these hot things at one time, some Trees have been quite spoiled with blood, and such like, in not observing therein a meet quantity and season: Wine and hot waters refresh our bodies used mo∣derately, but otherwise are hurtful: a man may be killed with Cordials, if immode∣rately
taken, so of all other Creatures. Also to water Trees in blossoming and knitting time, makes them hold their fruit better. Take heed that Pis∣mires, Efts, and such like, be not about the Roots.If Trees thrive not, nor bear well, one cause (among many others, and not so much observed) may be, for that some hurtful creatures may breed, and lie about their Roots; as Pismires, Toads, Efts, and such like. One digging about the Roots of a Tree that did not thrive well, found a very great multitude of Efts, a great neast of them lying at the Roots, which undoub∣tedly was the cause of the poorness of the Tree: so of other such like creatures, there∣fore once in 3 or 4 years, it's good to dig and turn up the earth about the Roots, e∣specially of old Trees; and withal, to put in some dung throughly rotten, or fresh earth. Fruit-trees advantage Grass some wayes.Fruit-trees planted in the fields, make Grass to spring earlier in the year, by rea∣son they cause warmth, and in a hot sommer they shade the grass, when it is burnt up in some other places: also, they cause much grass under and about the Trees, which be∣nefits and advantages, do more then re∣compence for the sowerness of such grass, as some suppose it to be. Fruit-trees profitable many ways.The profits of Fruit-trees, are in many respects, not only by the fruits, to be eaten all the year long, with Cider, Perry, &c.
but much fuel for the fire may be had from them in the Prunings, and by old trees past bearing; besides, the wood may be sold at a great rate to Ioyners and other work∣men, to make Chairs, Tables, and many o∣ther Commodities. Some Vines shoot forth exceeding large branches yearly,Helps for barren Vines. but bear little: in such a case, bare the Roots, and cut off a Mr. Root or two from the Tree, then lay some Sand, Ashes, or any hot barren soyle to the Roots, this will abate the redundancy of the Sap, and conduce to bearing Fruits. Grapes may be kept many weeks after the usual time of lasting,How to keep Grapes. if a Branch of a Vine be drawn into the house (especially where a fire is kept usually) and nailed up with the Bunches of Grapes upon it; or if Bunches (when ripe) be cut off with some of the wood, and hang'd up in a warm room where a fire is kept, with papers about them, to keep them from dust. If School boys and others,Much profit by Planting in one Age. while they are young, set upon planting Oaks, Ashes, Elms, and other Trees, they may probably (as o∣thers have done) make use of them for building, sale, &c. even themselves in their own persons, unto exceeding great profit. See the Experiment of a Gentleman that planted a certaine number of Ashes,
and at 50 years growth sold them for 5 l. a Tree, pag. 126. Remedies against Conies, Mice, &c.If young set Trees are in danger to be bark't, or hurt by Conies, then stick round about the bottome of the Plants, some Furz, (three or four branches) as high as a Cony can reach, and they can never touch those Trees: And if Mice anoy, or hurt any Seed-beds, or the like, then stick, or lay down Branches of Furz round about the Bed, as close as can be to the ground, and the seed will be safe; else lay Ratsbane for them, mixed with bread and butter. To have Cherries & fruits late.Cherries, Plums, and other fruits, may be had after their ordinary times many weeks, when others of the same kind are gone, if means be used to keep them back; as covering a Dwarf-tree, with a piece of rough Canvas, or other Cloth in Sommer, and wetting of it, to keep the Tree and fruits cool in a hot day. Or Secondly, to Plant a Fruit-tree, (that naturally bears fruit late, as the great bearing Cherry, and some others) upon the North-wall, where the Sun beams come not: Trees thus ordered, will bring forth their fruits very late, when all others are gone; and such will be as rare, and ac∣ceptable, as those that were extraordi∣nary early: I have known Cherries on a
Tree,Cherries in November, about the middle of October, and some in the next Month, about the mid∣dle of November: Also compass a small Tree, or bough full of Cherries, with a Net; this preserves them from Birds and from Snails, which otherwise can hardly be kept long. Snails do much mischief to Trees and Fruits,Destroy Snails in Gardens. in the Spring and Sommer, so that as a remedy, care must be taken (besides picking up, and killing many of them) to keep the Garden clean, as may be from weeds, under and about which they har∣bour, and also all the holes and chinks in the walls must be stopt, and poynted with Lime, that they cannot get in to lie in the day time: And withal, (to save some spe∣cial Trees or Flowers from Snails) strow round about some sifted Ashes, the snails cannot creep over it, especially when the Ashes have been lately strawed. We may have Fruits grow within the house,To have fruit grow within doors. if a branch of a Vine, Cherry, Aprecot-tree, &c. be drawn in at a window, and nailed up upon the seeling of the house, or other place, where it may be preserved from breaking. Or to set a small Cherry-tree, or other kind of Fruit-trees in an Earthen Pot or Box (with a hole or two in the bottome,
that overmuch Rain or moisture may not rest in the mould about the roots) this may be set in any place of the Garden, and ta∣ken into the house at pleasure, with blos∣somes, or fruits upon the young Tree. Apples that have lyen a certain time make the most plea∣sant Cider.If Apples be suffered to lie a certain time after gathering (being ful ripe) before we make them into Cider, the liquor will be more pleasant and delicate, then if the Ci∣der were made immediately after the fruit is gathered (though that be a good way too) because in lying, (and somewhat heat∣ing together) the more waterish part flies out, and that which remains, is better con∣cocted, and so more pleasant. Tun up Ci∣der as soon as may be.After the Liquor is pressed out into Ves∣sels, let it not stand, but tun it up with all speed, for the Aire in a little time, draws out much of the spirits of the Liquor, and dulls the rest. We know Wine, or Beer, or any Liquor, if it stand open in a Cup, or Glass, though but half an hour, (or a short space) they loose their best spirits, and be∣come deadish or flat; and so of any other Liquor according to the time it is expo∣sed to the open Aire, though not so much while it is new, as afterwards. What flags are best to bind withalThose Flags are best to use for binding of Grafts and Buds inoculated, which are three-square, of a brown colour, of a middle
size: the bigest are too hollow and spungy, and the least are somewhat too small and weak: They are to be had at the Mat∣makers at all times of the year, or else they may be cut out of the ditches, and dried in Sommer, and laid up to use as oc∣casion is: In hot and dry weather in graf∣ting time, cut them a convenient length, and tie many of them close together, so moisten them, and thus they will keep moist, and bind well in grafting. It is very succesful that we proportion Grafts and Stocks in Grafting:Fit Grafts and stocks in bigness. That is, to graft the bigest Grafts upon the bigest Stocks; and the lower we Graft-stocks, (if they be for Standard-trees, as Apple-trees, &c.) the shorter the Grafts need to be, becavse all must be cut off, except on∣ly one shoot to grow up, to make the body of the Tree, so that a short Graft, of 2, 3, or 4 buds for such low stocks is sufficient, unless we intend those low Trees for the Wall, or for a Fruit-hedge, as is shewed before: if so, it's better to graft upon such low stocks, longer grafts, of 6 or 8 buds, that so it may have many shoots and branches to spread. Such as have many to graft,Cut Grafts in due season. and can∣not do all the work in the best Season, may cut as many as they will, and keep
them in the ground, laid half way or more in the mould, (in a shady place is best) and so we may be grafting till the end of April; and afterwards, when it is too late to cut Grafts. Seed-stocks better then Wood-stocksMany get Crab-stocks out of the Woods to graft upon for an Orchard, but those kind of stocks are not (by far) so good, as such as come of seed or kernels, for many Rea∣sons that might be shewed: they for the most part, grow poorly, if they grow at all (for very many die out right) whereas Plants coming of Seed (and ordered as is shewed, pag. 83.) grow vigorously, and seldome fail, as having better and more Roots then the other; and besides, they have an innate Spirit (from the Seed whereof they came) which makes them grow better then slip-plants, from Woods or Roots of Trees. And also they are worse then Seed-plants, because they being commonly great ones, must be grafted in the Cleft, which often occasions rotting of the heart by wet getting in before the Graft can co∣ver the head of the stock: whereas Seed-plants being young, may be grafted by packing on, as is shewed pag. 6. and so are sound Trees, without any rotting at all: Also Seed plants are commonly more frim,
straight and handsome, then Wood-stocks, and to be preferred before them in these and other respects. In the Spring and Sommer,Weed the Nursery. keep the Nursery (of young grafted Trees and stocks) clean from weeds; rake up all the weeds on divers heaps, (being pluckt up) and let them lie till they be dead and withered, and then scatter them about again; for as it will be much labour to carry them off the ground, so also it will much impover∣ish it, seeing it must be weeded often in Sommer. Young Trees that are grafted low,Cut not off side bran∣ches too soon and yet are to make Standard-trees, these must be pruned up, all the side branches, a yard or an Ell high, or as high as men please, ac∣cording to the place they are to be after∣wards set in; but in pruning, take heed of cutting off the side twigs or branches too soon, before the body be grown somewhat stiff and strong, able to bear a fair head: for otherwise it will be too top heavy: if the side branches be cut off too soon, the body will be weak and slender, and the head bushie, and too heavy for the body, and so cause the Tree to grow crooked. Boughs of 2,How to get Boughs with Roots from Trees. 3, 4, or more years growth, may be taken from some Trees with Roots, to be planted in other places, as Dwarf-trees,
or in a Fruit-hedge: Thus, some∣time in May or Iune, take off the bark of a bough, about an inch in breadth round a∣bout, cut it above and below, and take off all the bark between the two cuts, then take an old hat, or some old rag or cloth (or any thing that will hold mould) and tie it a handful, or more, below the disbarked place, then fill it up with some good earth or Or otherwise it may be done thus: About Midsommer take a∣way the bark, as before, then put round about the bare place, some Earth, wherewith some Hay or Grass is mixt, to hold it together, then wrap it round a∣bout with a Hayband all over, and in removing time, cut off the bough below, and set it with all the mould and bands, take away nothing of it. mould, as much a∣bove the disbarked place, as below, and let the mould be as much on one side of the branch as the other; afterwards water the mould, and keep it moist all Sommer, by pouring in some water now and then: And in Transplanting time, this bough may be cut off below the dis∣barked place, and set elsewhere in good mould, which will bear in a year or two, it may be in the next Sommer after, if it Root well: Now observe, this cannot be done upon every Tree, no kind of Stone-fruit, neither Aprecots nor Peaches, Plums nor Cherries; nor so well upon many kinds of Apples or Pears, which are of the harder
sort of Fruit trees, but it may be effected upon all kinds of Quodlings, Nurs-gardens, Quinces, Gennet - moyles, and some other kind of Apple-trees that are of more soft and porous barks, which more easily put forth or some knobs or roughness which turn to Roots afterwards. And although there be Fruits upon boughs when they are so disbarked, yet the fruits come to good perfection, and the branches make a convenient growth the same year, for the sap passeth up through the pith and pores of the wood. Those Beds that are sowed with Seeds,Look that seeds lie not above ground. of any kind, (Apple-kernels, Pear-kernels, Plum-stones, Cherry stones, &c.) must be looked unto, not onely that Mice devour them not (as hath been said) but also that they lie not above ground; for though they be all covered when they are first sowed or set; yet we shall find after a certaine time, the Rain that falls, will have wash'd off the mould from some of them, which will lie on the top bare; therefore take a stick, or something else, and thrust those seeds or stones, (that so lie bare above ground) into the mould,Lay dung upon the Roots of new set Plants. an inch or half an inch, otherwise they are in danger to be lost. In setting young Trees (of any kinde) take heed of setting the Roots too deep,
there is advantage in setting shallow, if this course be taken; That is, after the Roots are well placed, and spread every way, and covered with mould, then lay round up∣on the Roots, (close to the body of the Plant) a barrowful of rotten dung, or any fat soyle, or (for want thereof) some Lit∣ter, Straw, Hay, Weeds, or any such like stuff, upon, and round about the Roots; if it be half a foot thick, or more it is better: This, as it keeps the roots warm in Winter, and cool and moist in Sommer following; so also it adds fatness to the soyle where the Trees are set, and preserves them from weeds; or if any weeds grow, pluck them up, and lay them upon and about the Roots of the new set Plants, more the better. This course we see by experience, is exceedingly conducing to the gro∣wing and thriving of Trees newly Planted, many die for want hereof, or grow very poorly. Leave a Bud on the outside.In cutting of Grafts, it is good to leave a bud or two on the outside of the cut place, that in case any of the Grafts hap∣pen to be broken off, such Bud or Buds on the outside, will spring out, and supply the defect, notwithstanding the Graft be bro∣ken off, even to the top of the Stock, as I have often observed; but some Grafts
broken for want of such a Bud, have been utterly spoyl'd. Seeing it is certain (from experience) that many Fruits comming of Seed,Preserv some  ungrafted Trees for Cider. and were never Grafted, do make excellent Cider, and as many judge, the best Cider, (the famous Redreak being such a one, even but a Wilding;) It is good therefore to sow some principal good Seed of Apples, and to Nurse up the Trees to bearing Fruits; whereof we may have several sorts of spe∣cial Cider-fruits: And if any happen to be too near the degree of Crabs, then graft such with other good fruits. By setting or sowing of Acorns or Mast,Sow Acorns Ash keys, and other Seeds. Ash-keys, Cycamore-keys, Chesnuts, Seeds of Maple, Beech, Thorn, and such like, men may (if they will be diligent herein) by the blessing of God, exceedingly advantage themselves, their posterity, and the whole Commonweal: Hereby there would be (in certaine years) Wood and Timber enough for building of Ships, Houses, and also for Fuel and all other purposes: That poor people (as well as others) might have e∣nough in cold long Winters, and not cry out, as being almost starved for want of Fire. Hereby would be sufficient Bark for Tanners at a cheap rate, and consequently all sorts of Leather (which is now exceed∣ing
dear) would become much cheaper. Hereby would be young Trees, suffi∣cient to Plant the Fields round about, not onely to make good Mounds, but also the same would make the Fields much warmer in Winter, and cooler in Sommer, whereby all sorts of Cattle would prosper, and come on the better, and all other Commodities growing therein, to the great advantage of the Owners, and the Common∣weal. So then, the Profits by Planting Fruit-trees, and these other Trees aforementioned, would be many and manifold, more then I am able to declare.
OBSERVATIONS Upon some part of Sr. FRANCIS BACONS NATURAL HISTORY, As it concerns Fruit-trees, Fruits, and Flowers: Especially the FIFTH, SIXTH, and SEVENTH CENTURIES, Improving the Experiments menti∣oned, to the best Advantage. By RA. AVSTEN, Practiser in the Art of Planting. Gen. 2.8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food. Gen. 1 29. And God said, behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the Earth: and every Tree, in which is the fruit of a Tree bearing seed, to you it shall be for meat. OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for Amos Curteyne, 1665.
Good Reader, THE Author of this piece hath alwayes thought sit (I dis∣claime any worth in me that may de∣serve it) to give me leave some time be∣fore every Impression to make a judgement of what in this Nature he hath published. But now bearing Reverence to the Great∣ness and Honour of the Person (without Con∣troversie for that Constellation of Learning and Nobility in him, none of the least credits of our Nation) with whom he is now seen, was desirous, that I should not onely tell him, (which at other times served the turn,) but the Reader also, my thoughts concerning this his adventure. Which are, that no mans ought to judge him presumptuous in this par∣ticular; I take him to be such, who hath more
mind to communicate to the World (for pub∣lique profit) what he has found by tryal cer∣tain, than to make a book; and indeed am Witness my self to the Truth of most of his Experiments; the subjects of which no man dares call too low for the Pen, that remem∣bers the Author whose Writing first gave oc∣casion to these Animadversions. The Nature of things, Causes of their Generation, and of all appearing effects in them, is confest to be a dark Theme, and for ought I know, many questions there abouts are not likely to be concluded, especially to the conviction of Gain-sayers, till Anaxago∣ras, Epicurus, Aristotle rise again: A lit∣tle time by Gods Providence I have been con∣tinued in the world, some small pittance of which hath been laid out in that search: I dare not say that I have been ascertained of the adequate, and true causes, with their manner in Causation of any of those Vulgar appearances which are in all mens Fyes, af∣ter the best state that I can make in this sub∣ject. Fortasse non, if opposed, may put me to a blanck; nor am I confident of any mans Wisdome that concludes affirmatively more than this, That such an effect may proceed in such a manner from such a Cause: Some∣times in many Opinions we have no probable causes assigned, but when many probable,
than 'tis hardest of all to prove which is true: This I speak to take off the exceptions of such who are otherwise perswaded than our Author declares himself, when the question is concer∣ning causes, as in the 481. Experiment: My Lord Bacon seems to maintain Anaxagoras his opinion concerning the way of generation and augmentation, per , Mr. Au∣sten Aristotles, He not be bound that in a se∣vere judgment the Master of our Schools shall have the sentence on his side: Yet we find few better Instances (then Mr. Austen brings) to explain how out of one nature (if indeed there be but one) in the juice drawn through the Roots to serve several Grafts upon the same Stock several natures may be made. Others may likely be offended at his refusal to attri∣bute many effects to the descention of Sap; which whoever does, I give him leave to blame me too; for I have long believed the opinion of descention of Sap in Trees, a vulgar Error, and have always encouraged him to publish his arguments to the contrary. There may be o∣thers ready to stumble at other things, but if it be in matters wherein we are so much in the dark, by my consent for all mistakes we will enterchangably beg, and give pardon: his ar∣guments to me are all especially commendable in this, that they smell more of the Garden, than Library, see p. 100, 101, &c. of his Trea∣tise of Fruit-trees.
If therefore my judgment must be made, I can't but commend him heartily, and his ex∣ample to all, exercised in any like ways, and doubt not but that it would be mightily to the advantage of knowledge in Natural Phi∣losophy, if even all to the lowest of Me∣chaniques would communicate the mysteries of their Arts. Interest indeed hinders most, and so 'tis like to do, from making any thing valuable common. But 'tis Heroical and Noble Charity, when there's nothing but Self-interest hindering, to deny that for the Publique good: I believe the Author ex∣pects to himself no Attributes of so high Qua∣lities. I wish he may alwayes have his due, at least from (Good Reader) His and Thine, to serve thee, R. SHARROCK. L. B. novi Col. Soc.
TO THE READER. COncerning my underta∣king this ensuing work, I give this Account: It may (perhaps) by some be thought too bold an attempt in me, to exa∣mine the Writings, and to Recede (in any thing) from the Judgement of so Eminent and worthy an Author: To which I Answer, For what I have here done, I doubt not, but if the Author himself were nor living, he would approve of it: But more parti∣cularly, let it be considered, that those things which I have to do with herein, are directly within the compass of my Calling and course of life, about which I am daily
conversant: And the Author hath given to my self and others, sufficient encourag∣ment in this: Having said (in his Advance∣ment of Learning) That the Writings of spe∣culative men upon active matter, seems to men of experience, to be but as dreams and dotage: And that it were to be wished, (as that which would make Learning indeed solid and fruit∣ful) that active men would or could become writers: Men that have experience in things, are like to see into the Mysteries & secrets of them, more and further, then such as have notions and apprehensions of them without action and practice, It is concluded, and laid for a ground, That peritis credendum in sua Arte: Men are to give credit to Artists in their own faculty. And further observe, that many of the ensuing particulars, are but on∣ly Queries set down by the Author, where∣in not having experience, he desired fur∣ther light from it: which I have endea∣voured herein to resolve; and wherein I have perceived a manifest mistake, I have (for the Truths sake, and profit of men) dis∣covered it. I hope, without any reflection upon the Worthy and Learned Author, who I verily believe, would have encouraged any Experienced man, in the like underta∣king: not seeking himself, (as he In his Epistle to his Natural History. pro∣fesseth, but the truth in these things, for the good of future Generations.
Let it be observed also, That the Ex∣periments set down by the Author in his Natural History, are of two sorts, as him∣self saith: Experimenta Fructifera, & Ex∣perimenta Lucifera: Experiments of Light and Discovery, (such as serve for the illu∣mination of the understanding, for the find∣ing out, and discovering of Natural things in their Causes and Effects, that so Axioms may be framed more soundly and solidly) And also Experiments of use and profit in the lives of men. Now, the Observations upon these Expe∣riments, tend also to the same ends. I have endeavoured to improve them for most advantage, and therefore have so much en∣larged, especially upon many of them, and where I have been more brief; and the thing required further discovery, I have referred to it in my Treatise of Fruit-trees, where it is spoken too more fully. And that there may be a brief view of what is contained in the ensuing Experi∣ments and Observations, I have set down the chief particulars in the Table following, all which I recommend to thy Use, for thy Profit, R A. AVSTEN.
OBSERVATIONS Upon some part of Sr. FRAN. BACONS NATURAL HISTORY. The V. CENTVRY. WE will now enquire of Plants or Vegetables, And we shall do it with diligence. They are the principal part of the third days work: They are the first Producat, which is the word of Ani∣mation; for the other words are but the words of Essence: And they are of excellent and general use for Food, Medicine, and a number of Mecha∣nical Arts.
Experiments in Consort touching the Acceleration of Germination. Experi∣ment 401.THere were sowen in a Bed, Turnip-seed, Wheat, Cowcumber-seed, and Pease: The Bed we call a Hot-bed: Horse dung (such as will heat when laid together) laid a foot high, supported on the sides, and mould laid thereon two or three fingers deep. The Turnip see and Wheat, came up half an inch above ground, within two days after, the rest the third day: This is a noble Experiment, for without this, they would have been four times as long in coming up. It may be tried also with Cherries, Strawberries, and other Fruits, which are dearest when they come early. Observa∣tion.Though a Hot bed conduce much to the speedy springing up of Seeds, Stones, Roots, &c. yet the end cannot be attained hereby: (they will not come to ripeness earlier the others for profit) unless there be a continuance, and concurrence of Causes from first to last, all along, without intermission: For the hasty and sudden springing up of seed upon a Hot-bed, is but a forcing of Nature for a little while, and serves to excite for the present, while the heat continues in it; but what shall carry on
the springing and growth of these things to perfection, when the heat of the Hot bed is over: surely as the Cause of springing and growth becomes weaker and weaker, until it cease altogether, so also will the ef∣fect of that heat, that is, The growth of the Plants. Steeping of Wheat in fat Waters and o∣ther Liquors,Experi∣ment 402. is a rich Experiment for pro∣fit, if the goodness of the Crop answer the ear∣liness of the coming up, &c. Steeping of Seeds,Observa∣tion. Kernels, Stones, &c. is chiefly to excite the spirit of the kernels or seed, and to make them the sooner and more easily to open, & spring up out of the Earth, which some kinds have much need of; as Aprecots, Almonds, and other thick hard stones. As for Wheat, and such like seeds, steep∣ing will excite the spirits, and oen the grosser parts, and hasten their spinging up; But I conceive the vigour and virtue (got∣ten by such steeping) will be soon gone, it will not be lasting, as the natural proper∣ties of the seed; Whatsoever is natural, in Seeds, Plants, &c. doth continue, aud can∣not fall off, or be lost; but that which is accidental and from Art, is but of short continuance, and soon over; (like the vir∣tue of a Cup of Wine, or a meals Meat to
our bodies) so that the end will not be attained, unless the same help be renewed, and often repeated, by watering of such steeped seeds, with the same Liquors, from time to time till they come to perfection. Experi∣ment. 403.Strawberries watered now and then (as once in three days) with water, wherein hath been steeped Sheeps-dung, or Pigeon-dung, will prevent, and come early. Observa∣tion.This is a good Experiment, and profita∣ble to make the Berries earlier and fairer, so it be seasonably and moderately done. I conceive the morning is best, before the Sun be hot; but water them not too often, nor too much, lest it make the ground too rank and fat, which is not good for Straw∣berries; it makes them commonly run in∣to great leaves and strings, and to bear Fruits less. Experi∣ment. 404.Dung, or Chalk, or Blood, applyed in sub∣stance, (seasonably) to the Roots of Trees, doth set them forwards, &c. Observa∣tion.Too great a quantity of these things, will hurt, especially young Trees; as the best meats and drinks, immoderately and unsea∣sonably taken, hurt men: Blood, or Flesh, or the like, applied to the Roots of old Vines, or other Fruit trees, being decayed or old, will refresh them greatly: Let this be done before Winter, or in Winter time,
that the virtue thereof may soke into the Roots, and the Earth about them before the spring: And also that it may not be noysome or offensive in Spring, or Som∣mer after: Dig up the earth, and bare the Roots as much as may be, and poure in the Blood, or lay the Dung, Flesh, or any fat substance to the Roots, afterwards cover it with the mould all over: Other∣wise take a Barre of Iron, and make many holes among and about the Roots of old Trees (especially where the ground is bad) and poure in blood of Beasts, fat wa∣ter or such like; this will much refresh the Trees. Fruit-trees upon a South,Experi∣ment. 405. or South-east wall, will bring forth their fruits early. It is true,Observa∣tion. that the South wall is best, and the South east next, to Plant choice Trees upon to come early; the Reason why the West-wall is not so good as the East, for early budding, and ripening of fruits, I con∣ceive is mainly, because there is usually more rain and moisture, and greater and more winds out of the West, in Spring and Sommer, then out of the East, which do much cool the Trees and Fruits, and so retard. Also May-Cherries, or other kinds, which naturally bud, and bring fruits early, being planted (as is here said) against the
back of a Chimny where fire is much kept, the same will bud, and bear very early in the year, especially if the wall be of brick, and but a thin wall. Experi∣ment. 406.Digging, and loosening the earth about the Roots of Trees, accelerate Germination. Observa∣tion.This culture is undoubtedly a benefit to Trees, as to their increase and growth: they will thrive the faster hereby; but I con∣ceive not as to accelerate Germination, to hasten early budding; for all Trees bad forth before they draw one jot of Sap out of the earth in the Spring: there is Sap existing in the buds and branches all the Winter, which is excited by the Sunnes drawing near in the Spring time, and breaketh forth into blossome and leaf, and by degrees Sap riseth to carry on springing and growth. Experi∣ment. 407.A Damask-Rose-tree in water, budded in the space of ten days in a Chamber. Obeserva∣tion.I conceive this Acceleration was not for that is was set in water, but because the air was somewhat warmer in the house, then out of dores at that season, it being in Octo∣ber; it would have done as much if it had been set in earth: And as for the diffe∣rence betwixt this, and that with the Horse-dung mixed; it may be that Rose-tree in water onely, had the better and
more Roots, which would certainly cause budding sooner. A Dutch Flower that had a bulbous Root,Experi∣ment. 408. was put under water, and within seven days sprouted, &c. I have tryed several Flowers with Bul∣bous Roots,Observa∣tion. and other kinds of Roots in wa∣ter in the house in Autumne, which kept fresh, and seemed to come on somewhat for a while, but afterwards flag'd and fa∣ded; I know no advantage that may be had hereby at that season, for the Aire (in a while) grows chil and cool, even with∣in dores, and so puts a stop to growth in all vegetables. If Roots,Experi∣ment. 409. or Pease, &c. may be accelera∣ted in their coming, a double profit may be made; in some strong grounds you shall have Radish, &c. in a Month. Pease,Observa∣tion. Radish, &c. are hastened in the Spring and Sommer, and their re∣turns quick, chiefly because they are sowed, and set in a warm place, upon ground sloping upon the South-East Sun; with some special shelters from the North, and cold Winds. For Nourishment,Experi∣ment. 411. water is almost all in all, therefore it is a comfortable Experiment for good drinkers.
Observa∣tion.Simply water affords but a feeble and weak nourishment, crude and cold; and therefore we see, that in low watrish grounds, fruit-trees come on poorly, be∣ing full of Moss by reason of the cold nou∣rishment: and that in dryer, deep, fat soyls, Fruit-trees are three or four times bigger, and consequently longer liv'd then those in waterish grounds: Neither is this a comfortable experiment for good drinkers, but the quite contrary; for Experience shews us, such as live most upon good Li∣quors (eating but little) are more unsound, unhealthy people, and short lived, then those who drink less, and feed upon solid meats. Experi∣ment. 412.Housing of Plants will accelerate Ger∣mination. Observa∣tion.Certainly it will, if the Plants be order∣ed with discretion, to be seasonably set out in the Sunne and Rain in the warmest seasons, and time of the day, (removing the Box of earth in and out, as occasion is) or otherwise Housing may spoil them, and cause the branches and twigs to contract, and become dry; for as the Aire within dores, is warmer then that without, so also it is drier, and does exhaust and dry the Plants more, therefore they have need sometimes, of the moist Aire without.
Experiments touching the putting back, or Retardation of Germination. TO make Roses come late.Experi∣ment. 413. First, cut them after bearing. This may be a means as to some Rose-trees,Observa∣tion. that is, such as are old: I have known some of long standing, perhaps a dozen, six∣teen, or twenty years of age, and some of seven or eight years, (cut newly after bearing) have born Roses again a second time, late in the year, being cut the next full Moon after they have done bearing; but there is a kind I have (amongst many other kinds) which naturally bears a se∣cond time, although the tree be but small and young; besides the Rose called the Monthly Rose. Secondly,Experi∣ment. 414. Pulling off the buds of the Ro∣ses that first spring forth. I have tried this second way,Observa∣tion. which succeeded not, it may be, because the Trees were young; but one affirmed, he pluckt off some buds in the spring, and the Tree bore Roses in November. Thirdly,Experi∣ment. 415. Cutting top Boughs in the Spring. This hath been tried also,Observa∣tion. but was inef∣fectual; but the Tryal was upon young
Trees: as for the Report that followes in this Experiment of Sions perishing if the old top boughs be cut off, it is otherwise, for it is a common Experiment to cut off all the boughs of a Tree, and to graft them, and the grafts will not onely not perish, but grow the better therefore, as having all the Sap to themselves, which naturally ri∣seth (the Sun also drawing it up) without the help of any top bough lef, as conti∣nual Experience shews. Experi∣ment. 416.Fourthly, Laying the Roots bare about the end of December. Observa∣tion.Many hundreds of Trees are thus bared, yet I find no difference at all in the late budding or bearing of such trees from others Experi∣ment. 417.Fifthly, Removing the Tree some Months before it buddeth. Observa∣tion.It is true indeed, removing of Trees (especially so late in the year) must needs retard Germination, if they bud at all, commonly such faile, or grow very poorly. Experi∣ment. 418.Sixthly, Crafting Roses in May. I know one that tried this Experiment: Inoculating (not Grafting) Buds in the Spring,Observa∣tion. which badded for Roses at the same time that others (of the same kind) did; which buds being cut off they bore Roses afterwards, the same year,
when others of the same kind were gone. Seventhly,Experi∣ment. 419. Girding the body of the Tree with some Packthread. This will not do it neither;Observa∣tion. we see commonly, that Grafts tied strait, with strong flags, and some branches of Wall-trees nailed straight to the Wall, so that I have seen the back dinted in with the straitness of the Leather and bands, yet for all that, Sap riseth plentifully through the place (so girded) up into the branch, and buds are as forward on that branch, as on any other. Eightly,Experi∣ment. 420. Planting them in the shade. I have known Rose-trees in a shady place, which have not bore at all;Observa∣tion. it's a tree that loves the Sun. So this Experiment will not hold, I have tried it, and it succeeds not. Experiments touching the Melioration of Fruits, Trees, and Plants. AN heap of Flint,Experi∣ment. 421. or Stone, laid about the bottome of a Tree, upon the first Planting, makes it prosper much. Stones laid to the Roots of Fruit-trees,Observa∣tion. when newly set, is a good Experiment
in some grounds, but not in all: it's true, stones so laid, keep the Root of the Tree somewhat more moist, and warm, and stedy, that winds shake it not, and so are profitable, but there is danger (in some grounds) lest they harbor Ants, or Pis∣mires, about the Tree Root, under the stones, which I have seen, to the hurt and destruction of divers young Trees. But it is a safer and better way to lay a good quantity of rotten dung, or Litter straw, &c. round about the Roots of new set Trees, upon the top of the mould, this keeps them warm in Winter, and cool aud moist in Sommer, and stedy, and the moisture, and fatness of the mock, sokes down to the Roots, and refreshes the Tree very much: or for want thereof, lay a heap of weeds round about the new set Tree Roots, and so all the next Sommer after; these things are special advantages to new set Trees. Experi∣ment. 423.A Tree at first setting should not be sha∣ken, but after a years rooting then shaking is good. Observa∣tion.When young Trees are first planted, it's very convenient to set a stake to each of them, and tie them together with a hay∣band, or some soft band, that winds shake them not: and this not for a year onely, but divers years, until the young Tree be
well rooted in the earth, and also be grown strong, that the winds bow not their bo∣dies, and cause them to grow crooked, which fault I have seen in very many Trees. Cutting away suckers,Experi∣ment. 424. and side boughes, make Trees grow high. All suckers must be cut away from the Roots of Trees;Observa∣tion. and as for side branches, those may be cut as men are minded to have their Trees to spread, nearer, or higher from the ground: but cut not the side branches too soon, before the body be grown strong enough to bear the head, else it will be top heavy, and grow crook∣ed. To have many new Roots of Fruit-trees,Experi∣ment. 426. lay the branches in the ground, &c. The branches of all kinds of Trees will not take Root thus;Observa∣tion. This way of Propa∣gation is only for some kinds, as Mulberries, Figs, Vines, Quadlings, Nurs-gardens, and some other kinds of Trees, whose bran∣ches are soft and porous. As for Aprecots, Peaches, and such like, they will not take Root thus: I have tried, but not one Root could be got, neither will they take with grafting, I have tried many. The way to propagate these kinds, is by Inoculating buds upon young stocks full of sap.
Experi∣ment. 427.From May to July, you may take off th bark of any bough, &c. and set it, and it wil grow to be a fair Tree in one year, the cause may be for that the baring from the bark keep∣eth the Sap from descending towards Win∣ter. Observa∣tion.It is true, that the Boughs of some kinds of Trees will take Root in this manner as is here exprest; that is, such kinds as will take root with laying down in the ground, mentioned in the last experiment; which being cut off and set, may grow to be a fair Tree in certain years, not in one year (as is said) for the Roots (got in this man∣ner) are but small, and very disproportio∣nable to the bough, so that it can come on but very poorly, and slowly, for divers years: As for the baring from the bark, which is supposed to keep Sap from de∣scending towards Winter; I say, the Sap is as far from descending when the bark is on, as when 'tis off; there's no such thing in nature as descention of Sap in any Trees whatsoever. This worthy Author took this upon trust, according to the general opinion of men, for had he but stayed a little to con∣sider it, he would have found it ground∣less, and a meer conceit; For all the Sap that ascends into the body and branches of
Tree, is changed into wood, bark, buds, lossomes, leaves and fruits, it is turned in∣o that body and substance which we see bove ground, and none at all descends at ny time; for there is no Cause, and there∣fore no such effect: sap is continually as∣cending all the year long, more or less, either for the growth of the Tree in Som∣mer, or for the conservation of it in life, and in all its dimensions in Winter; for there is a continual extrastion of Sap out of the bo∣dy, boughs, and branches, by the Sun and Aire, as this Author elsewhere asserts and which Experience proves. Now, if there were at any time a descention also, what then would become of the Tree, it would quickly wither, be contracted, and shrink apparently: whosoever is unsatisfied with what is here said against descention of Sap in Trees, may see (hereof) more largly many Arguments against it in my Treatise of Fruit-trees, pag. 191, 192, &c. If Trees bear not,Experi∣ment. 428. bore a hole through the heart of the Tree, and it will bear. Perhaps this course may do some good in letting out some superflous sap,Observa∣tion. if too much repletion be the cause: But there are divers other causes of barrennesse of
Fruit-trees: As too deep setting, the root running down into Gravel, Clay, Water &c. which must have answerable remedies. And sometimes it is in the nature of the Trees: that all the culture in the world used to the Roots and body, wil not help, without engrafting the branche with Grafts of some good bearing kinds▪ which is the best way I know to have store of good fruits, (and speedily too) from barren Trees. Experi∣ment. 429.To make Trees bear, cleave the chief roots, and put in a small pebble. Observa∣tion.This may be profitable, not onely for that the Root may be barkbound as well as the body and branches, (which must be scored down, and cut to the wood) but also it will cause the Roots to shoot forth many small Roots at the place opened, which will afford more vigour▪ life, and sap to the branches, and so make the Tree stronger and more in heart, and able to bring forth more, and fairer fruits. Experi∣ment. 430.Trees against a South-wall have more of the heat of the Sunne, then when they grow round. Observa∣tion.Aprecots, Peaches, and such like old fruits, will scarce ripen but against a  they have need both of the , and reflex beams of the Sun:  it
were more practised to set some other choice kinds of fruits upon a South-wall, (as the great Burgamet, Sommer Boncriten, Green-fleld Pear, and other special kinds) this would advantage them greatly, not only in bigness, but also in their early rip∣ning and goodness of tast; thus, one or a few, would be worth many ordinary ones. Some pull off the leaves from Wall trees,Experi∣ment. 431. that the Sunne may come the better upon the boughs and fruit. This may hasten ripening,Observa∣tion. but it hinders the bigness of the Fruits, the Sun ripening them before they have attained their na∣tural greatness: in case it prove then very hot weather; so that if leaves be pulled off, it should not be till fruits are at bigest; and then, but where they overmuch shade the fruits; some convenient shade by the leaves is as necessary for the Fruits, (in order to bigness and goodness) as the Sun. The lowness of the bough,Experi∣ment. 432. maketh the fruit greater, and to ripen better, &c. Graft a tree low, and maintain only the lower boughs. Low Trees,Observa∣tion. and the lower boughs of high Trees, have their fruit ripe somewhat soon∣er then the higher, because they have some benefit by the reflection of the Sun from the earth, as well as from the wall; (if they
grow against a wall) but that the fruits are greater on lower, then on higher boughs, I perceive not; I am sure I have seen some∣times fair fruit on the higher boughs, and bt small on the lower, in case the branches of a wall tree have been permitted to grow stright upwards, without bowing down a∣long the wall, as most commonly they be, and the reason is plain, because the most, and greatest quantity of Sap presseh up∣wards, & leaveth the side branches indigent of Sap, whereby they grow poorly, and some die for want of Sap: now according to the quantity of Sap in branches, so are the fruits smaller or greater. It is true indeed, many little and low Trees, if they be vigorous, and shoot well, bear very large fruits, it may be, larger then high Trees of the same kinds: but this is, not because low, but because they are more lively and vigorous then the other. And if we should graft a Tree low, and main∣tain only the lower branches, by continual∣ly cutting off the higher; this would much enseeble the Tree by degrees, by obstra∣cting of the Sap, and the fruit would be accordingly. But the best way to order a Wall tree that shoots upwards strongly, is to bow those strong branches along the wall both ways, and then there will be as
large fruits on the lower, as on the higher boughs, and sooner ripe. To have Fruit in greater plenty,Experi∣ment. 433. the way is, to graft not onely upon young stocks, but upon divers boughs of an old Tree, &c. It is an excellent Experiment to graft the boughs of an old Tree,Observa∣tion. (that is a bad bearer, or bears bad fruits) with Grafts of some special good bearing kinds, for this will have large branches, and bear fruits, even in a year or two: so that it is a very un∣wise course of many who (when some of their Trees bear not as they would have them) cut them down, and set young ones in their Room, which cannot possibly at∣tain the bigness of the former in many years. Digging yearly about the Roots of Trees,Experi∣ment. 434. is a great means, both to the acceleration and melioration of fruits, &c. Old Trees,Observa∣tion. that grow in stiff, cold, clay grounds, have most need to be dug about yearly, that thereby the ground may be more open and mellow; but for young Trees of few years standing, (especiall if in sandy, mellow grounds) these have little or no need at all of digging about: To dig about Roses, and such like, which grow near the top of the ground, I conceive it is needless, for this work is chiefly to open
the earth about old Fruit-trees, (whose Roots are grown great and deep) that the Rain, Snow, and Sun in Winter, may reach the bottome Roots. Experi∣ment. 435.A Fruit-tree almost blown up by the roots, and set up again, the next year bore exceed∣ingly: loosening the earth, comforteth any Tree. Observa∣tion.Trees blown down, and raised up again, and well moulded, may root again if they be not very old: and though digging a∣bout the Roots, sometimes be good, yet o∣vermuch digging, and loosening the earth a∣bout the Roots of Trees, will cause many to be blown down by great winds, which will not fasten again to abide a strong Wind in many years, if ever. Experi∣ment. 6.To revive an old Tree, the digging of it about the Roots, and applying new mould to the Roots, is the way, and change of mould to the better is profitable. Observa∣tion.Digging, (as hath been said) with cau∣tion, is very good; and change of mould, if to the better, is also very advantagious to Fruit-trees, in case the soyl be barren, but if it be very fat, as some is, (especially some particular places by accident) then mould that is more steril and hungry, will do better; for overmuch repletion and fer∣tility, may hinder fruitfulness, and cause the
sap to run most into long shoots, and broad leaves The shifting of ground,Experi∣ment. 439▪ is a means to bet∣ter the Tree and Fruit: and all things do prosper best, when they are advanced to the better. And a Nursery ought to be in a more barren ground then the places whither they are Transplanted. It is true,Observa∣tion. change of soyls sometimes is very good, if to the better: but is true also, that if Trees grow in over ran soyle, then worse, will be better: that is, will help more towards fruitfulness: as a corse and mean fare is better for a at man, thn the more delicious. Without controversie, young Trees out of barren Nurseries, come on faster when Transplanted, then out of fat soyls; but in case the Nursery be fat soyle, then some other as good must be laid to their Roots when set again. Hacking of Trees,Experi¦ment. 44. doth great good to Trees. After eight or ten years growth,Observa∣tion. cut∣ting, or scoring, or hacking the bark of Trees with a knife, is profitable; but while they are young, the Barke is but thin and ten∣der, and enlargeth well enough without this cutting, unless some that through bar∣renness of soyl (or other cause) are bark-bound, and to such, hacking and scoring is profitable.
Experi∣ment. 441.Shade to some Plants, conduceth to make them large and prosperous, more then Sun, as in Strawberries and Bays, &c. Observa∣tion.It is true, Iays and Lawrel prospereth better in the Shade then in the Sun, being hot Plants, but Strawberries do better part∣ly in the Sade, and partly in the Sun, then in Shade nly; as among Bushes and other Plants: I have observed those in the Shade, to bea little or nothing, when others of the same kind and growth, somewhat in the sun, bore very much. Experi∣ment. 447.ulling off many blossomes from a Fruit-tree, doth make the Fruit fairer; and if some blossoms be not pulled off the first time a Tree bloometh, it will blossome it self to death. Observa∣tion.Commonly the fewer blossoms upon a tree the fairer will the fruit be, because (as the Author says) of the plenty of sap: And indeed, in case a Tree newly planted, blos∣some very much, and the Root be but weak, (which may be perceived by the weakness of the buds) then its best to pull off most, if not all the blossoms: but many I have known (the first years planting) take Root so strongly (being in good mould) as that they blossome and shoot forth, and bear fair fruits the same year. Experi∣ment. 450.It were good to try what would be the effect if all the blossomes were pulled from a Fruit-tree, for two years together.
Fruit-trees that bea but every other year,Observa∣tion. they (for the most part) bear that year very plentifully; and te excessive ex∣pence of Sap that year (its le) makes the Tree the more feeble the nex; but if blos∣somes be pulled off a year or tw together, I suppose the Sap would go moe into the shoots, and make them larger ten if it bore fruits; and the issue as to earing more or better fruits, would be nothing worth There is no doubt but that Grafting (for the most part) doth meliorate fruit;Experi∣ment. 452. The cause is manifest, for that the nourishment is better prepared in the stock, then in the crud earth. Grafting doth not at all meliorate the fruit simply in its self;Observa∣tion. for a Tree will not be the better for grafting, unless the grafts be taken from a good Tree. If the Tree from which grafts are cut, be no better then the Tree which is grafted, then graf∣ting will not a jot mend the fruit; which it would, if grafting were any thing to∣wards the bettering of the fruit. The cause why grafted Trees bear better fruits, then wild ungrafted trees, is not because they are grafted, but because the grafts are good, the tree from which the grafts are cut, is of a good kind and nature, and every twig, graft and bud, hath the nature of the Tree in it
perfectly; the poperties of the Tree are in all, and every part, as the Soul in the body, which i tota in toto, & tota in qua∣libet parte; d the grafts retain the na∣ture and poperties being grafted upon wild stocks and bring forth uits accor∣dingly: nd that's the cause that grafting doth meorate the fruit, and not because the nourishment is better prepared in the stock, then n the crude earth, for the branches of an ingrafted Tree, do no more receive nourishment from the crude earth, then the branches of a grafted Tree: but the sap and nourishment, passeth up a body or stock to the branches, in the one, as well as in the other. And as it is true, that the Peach and Mo∣locotone (as the Author says) do bear good fruits coming up of stones, (which is not alwayes so neither, onely here and there one) so it is true also that they bear as good fruits of the bud being Inoculated. Experi∣ment. 453.It hath been received, that a smaller Pear grafted upon a stock that beareth a greater Pear, will become great, &c. Observa∣tion.It is true (as the Author thinks) that this will not succeed, because the Grafts do govern, they always bring forth fruit an∣swerabe to their own natures and kinds, else it were to little purpose to get grafts
from such, or such a good Tree, to have more of the kind. Yet it is true also, that the stock hath some influence upon the graft, so as to make the fruit better or worse, according to the nature of the stock, in some small degree: As if we graft upon a stock that naturally bears a sower, harsh fruit; the fruit of the graft will not be al∣together so pleasant as if it were grafted upon a stock that bears naturally a sweet and pleasant fruit: and hence it is that Pears grafted upon Quince-stocks, will be more delicate then upon Pear-stocks: The Quince-stock gives an excellent taste to it, but these Trees upon Quinces, will never attain to any great bigness, for all Quince-trees are but small in comparison of Pear-trees, and where the stock can be but small▪ the graft cannot be great: yet (as I have seen it) somewhat bigger then the stock: As for a Pear upon a Thorne, (which this Author speaks of) it cannot be good, it makes it a harsh, hard Pear at the core, if it thrive and bear, but most commonly they die in two or three years: we know its natural fruit (Hawes) have stones in them: But for the Apple upon the Crab, that's natural, the Crab being a wild apple, and very proper to graft all sorts of Apples upon, in regard of the soundness of the
stock, its long lasting, and aptness to take with grafts, and also to grow when set in the ground; although it's true, it makes the fruit somewhat more tart, then the same fruit upon sweet Apple-stocks. It is true, that the seeds of some Apples and Pears, brings forth very good fruit: the cause of this (I suppose) is, for that the stocks whereon these fruits were graf∣ted or Inoculated, were good kinds of them∣selves, kinds that came good of seed for∣merly; and if so, no marvel though the seeds bring forth good fruits without Grafting or Inoculating: and upon the Experience, Peach-stones have brought forth a paltry, naughty fruit many of them, though some good: As concerning the Grafting of an Apple Cions upon a Sallow, Poplar, Alder, Elme, or Horse-plum; it is in vain to try, for tryal hath been made upon stocks nearer in kind then these, and it would not come to perfection; they will grow a year or two, (it may be) and then decay and die. Experi∣ment. 452.Flowers removed, wax greater, because the nourishment is more easily come by in the loose earth: It may be that often regrafting of the same Cions, may likewise make fruit greater. Observa∣tion.To remove Flowers (small young Roots) into good fresh earth, will improve them
in growth and bigness; especially if withal some of the side-slips, (and also of the buds which the Root shoots up for flowers) be cut off, and some half a dozen, or half a score of the buds or shoots, be left to grow upon the Roots; the Root then will be able to give plentiful nourishment to them, whereby they will become much larger, then if all the spindle buds were suffered to grow. But as for often regrafting the same graft in order to make a large fruit, this will not do it, for we see it is constantly done from year to year; for what else is the cutting of Grafts from young Trees, (it may be of two or three, or but of one years growth) and grafting them again upon stocks, and repeating this for many years together, and yet we know the grafts hold their own natural properties from one year to another. And though there be (as hath been said) some small alteration according to the kind of the stock, while it grows upon it, yet that alte∣ration is lost, and falls off, when the Graft is engrafted upon another stock, and the Graft retains its own natural properties only: with some small addition of the na∣ture of the stock on which it (at present) grows.
Experi∣ment. 455.It maketh Figs better, if a Fig-tree when it beginneth to put forth leaves, have his top cut off. Observa∣tion.If the Fig-tree be very old, cutting off the top may be profitable; for that such cutting (as in all other Trees) maketh the Sap shoot forth into branches more vigo∣rously then otherwise it would; by which lively rising of Sap, the whole Tree, and the Fruit upon it, fares the better: but if the tops of young Trees be cut off, (Fig-trees or other) there will shoot forth (in the room thereof) such huge strong shoots, that the main stream of Sap will run that way, which great shoots will be for a year or two (it may be) unfruitful. Experi∣ment. 456.It is reported, that Mulberries will be fairer, and the Trees more fruitful, if you bore the Trunk of the Tree thorow in several pla∣ces, and put in wedges of hot Trees, as Ma∣stick, Iuniper, &c. Observa∣tion.As for the black Mulberry-tree, it needs not these things to make it fruitful, for I never knew any of them fail of store of fruits every year; but white Mulberry-trees (with us) have need enough of all helps that may be. Experi∣ment. 457.It is reported that Trees will grow great∣er, and bear better fruit, if you put Salt or Lees of Wine, or Blood, to the Root.
Concerning Lees of Wine,Observa∣ting. washings of trong Beer, or Ale-vessels, Blood, Flesh, or he like; it is certain these are healpful to ruit-trees, both as to their growth and bearing, if seasonably and moderately u∣ed, especially to old Trees. I account it best to be applied to the Roots of Trees in the beginning of Winter, that the virtue ay soak into the Roots and earth about hem before the Spring. Terebration of trees,Experi∣ment. 463. as it makes them pro∣sper better, so also it is found, that it maketh ruit sweeter and better, by causing the cour∣st juice to sweat out, and the rest is better digested. Terebration (or boring holes in the bo∣dies and great Roots) of Fruit trees with a Wimble or Awger,Observa∣tion. is most needful, as I judge for great Trees which grow upon fat Land, and have too rank nourishment, and may be unfruitful, and bear over wa∣trish fruit for that cause; that may help to let out some of the raw, superfluous sap and juice, as an Issue in a mans body: but scoring or cutting the Bark of young Trees under Twenty years may be better for them, and this to be done chiefly in the spring time. As Terebration doth meliorate Fruit,Experi∣ment. 464. so doth letting of Plants blood, as pricking
Vines or other Trees, after they be of som growth. It is reported, that by this Artific bitter Almonds have been turned into sweet. Observa∣tion.This must needs have the like effec (in some proportion) as those particular before mentioned of boring with Wimbles (or the like) and scoring the bark, with  knife in the spring time. Experi∣ment. 426.The Antients for Dulcorating of Fruit do commend Swines dung above all othe dung; which may be for the moisture of tha Beast. Observa∣tion.I have seen divers fair Fruit-trees, quit spoyl'd and deaded by overmuch Swine dung, the Swine lying amongst them, and continually leaving their Excrements, by degrees the Trees withered and died but I doubt not but that a moderate quan∣tity of Swines dung, mixed with mould and laid to the Roots of Trees, will be good for them, and it may be in order to the sweetning of the Fruit. Experi∣ment. 467.As Grafting doth generally advance, and meliorate fruits, so (no doubt) even in graf∣ting, the choice of the stock doth much: they commend much the grafting of Pears, or Ap∣ples upon a Quince. Observa∣tion.Grafting, (simply as grafting) doth not advance or meliorate fruits, as is shewed elsewhere at large; But grafted trees bear
etter fruits, and sooner, then ungrafted trees,See pag. 18: Treatise of Fruit-tree▪ pag. 98. because grafts are usually taken from ood bearing Trees, and of the best kinds, d Grafts (retaining the Nature of the rees from which they are cut) do bring ith the same Fruits; so also do Buds, (though they be much smaller then grafts) when Inoculated upon wild stocks. As concerning the choice of Stocks in grafting, in order to the advancement of ruits; it is certaine, the goodness of the tock in respect of nature and kind, is very considerable: The sweeter and better the stock is, the better will the fruit be that is engrafted thereon: Though it be true, that grafts govern, and bring forth the same fruits, according to their own kinds, yet the stock hath some considerable influence up∣on the fruit of the graft, and thence it is, that Pears upon a Quince (as the Authour speaks of) are better then the same kind upon a wild Pear-stock: (as experience shews) because a Quince is a more excellent fruit, then a wild Pear, so the nourishment of the stock is answerable. It is set down as try'd,Experi∣ment. 468. that a mixture of Bran and Swines dung, or Chaff and Swines dung rotten, is a great nourisher and comfor∣ter to a Fruit-tree. There is no doubt but Swines dung,Observa∣tion. or
any other dung, with other Composts laid together till they be rotten, will nourish and comfort Fruit-trees, and better whe they are throughly rotten, and turned to mould, then before, because new dung may be too hot. Experi∣ment. 470.It is delivered by some, that if one take the bow of a low Tree, newly budded, and draw it gently into an earthen Pot, perforated at the bottome to let in the Plant, and then cover the Pot with Earth, it will yield a very large fruit within ground; the like will be effected by an empty pot, with some few pertusions made in the Pot, hang'd in the Tree. Observa∣tion.Concerning the first of these wayes, I suppose the Fruit growing upon the bough so bowed down into a Pot, will not be so large as the Fruit upon the other boughs; because we see by experience it is against the nature of Sap to run vigorously, (or in any great plenty) into bows bended down∣wards so near the earth, as this must needs be, for sap presseth upwards in greatest plenty; and consequently those fruits will be greatest, which have most sap, I mean such as are of one kind, upon one Tree. And concerning the second means by the perforated Pot, hang'd in the Tree, that is more likely to work the effect, as to the greatness of fruit, not so much (I suppose)
because of the pertusions or holes in the Pot, as by the shade that the fruit hath by the Pot: for although fruit that grows in the Sun, be much better, and more pleasant then that which grows in the shade, (as be∣ing better concocted) yet that in the shade (of the same kind) is commonly the grea∣ter, but more flat, dull, and inconcoct: as we see in Aprecots, Cherries, &c. under the leaves. All Trees in high and sandy grounds,Experi∣ment. 471. are to be set deep, and in watry grounds more shal∣low: And all Trees when they be removed (especially Fruit-trees) care ought to be ta∣ken that the sides of the Trees be coasted (North and South) as they stood before. It is true,Observa∣tion. that Trees on higher grounds are to be set somewhat deeper then in moist grounds; yet beware of setting be∣low the good soyle in any ground.See hereof Treatise of Fruit-trees As for coasting of Trees, that is, (setting the same side to the South, when Transplanted, as was before) the Rule is good, but not ne∣cessary: for many thousands are transplan∣ted with good success, not observing which side grew North or South: howso∣ever, some reasons might be shewed why 'tis best to observe it, if it may convenient∣ly be done. Fruit-trees,Experi∣ment. 472. set upon a wall against the
Sun, between Elbowes or Butteresses of stone, ripen more then upon a plain wall. Observa∣tion.Fruit-trees so set, have their fruits ripe sooner then those upon a plain wall, not so much because they are defended better from winds, but chiefly, because they have a double or treble degree of heat to what those upon a plain Wall have, the heat being pent in by the Elbowes or Butteresses of the wall, and so reflects the stronger up∣on the Fruits and Trees; there is a double reflection of heat upon such. Experi∣ment. 475.Grafting Elms, (or other unfruitful trees) will make their leaves larger: as in Fruit-trees the Graft maketh the greater fruit. Observa∣tion.Grafting, barely considered as grafting, will not do this, it will neither make leaves nor fruits fairer, but as stocks are chosen for the purpose: for though it be true (as hath been elsewhere said) that Grafts go∣vern, and overrule the stocks, bringing forth the same leaves and fruits when grafted, as before, according to their own Natures; yet it is true also, that the stocks have some small influence upon them, in making the fruits better or worse in taste and big∣ness: and so of the leaves in fairness, ac∣cording to the goodness or badness of the stocks: yet notwithstanding Grafts and Buds inoculated, may be said to Rule, and
ring forth the same fruits, else it were in vain to graft. Barrenness of Trees cometh of their over∣growing with Moss,Experi∣ment. 476. or their being Hide∣bound, or planting too deep, or by issuing of the sap too much into the leaves. There are several causes of the barren∣ness of Trees.Observa∣tion. I conceive Mossiness, as Mos∣siness, is not the cause of barrenness, but the causes of Mossiness are the causes of barren∣ness, which are coldness, overmoistness, and barrenness of the soyle where the Trees grow: Therefore such soyles must be a∣mended. See how, Treatise of Fruit trees, pag. 213, 214, &c. Also barrenness is often, by reason of the excessive sap and moisture of Trees, which is manifest by their strong and vigorous shoots, branches, and broad green leaves, as in many young full-fed Trees; for while nature is vigorous, and active, spending it self that way, in the excessive growth of the Trees; it is then weak and feeble in bearing of fruits. Now as to some kinds of Trees, it is not best (for some time) to go about to re∣move the Cause, that is, as to standard Ap∣ple-trees, Pear-trees, and other kinds, which grow in the Orchards and Fields: but let them alone, let them go on in their large and vigorous growths for certaine
years, though they bear but little▪ (provi∣ded that we know they are naturally of good bearing kinds, otherwise it is in vain to wait for store of fruits from such Trees) After that such Trees have grown exceed∣ingly some years, and attained a fair large growth, they will then by degrees, grow less in the branches, and fall to bearing of fruits: But in case the Trees are Wall-trees, and shoot excessively, and bear not, then it will be best to take away the cause as much as we can; that is, First, abate their overful & rank nourish∣ment, by putting in Sand, Gravel, Buck∣ashes, or any thing that is barren, instead of the fat soyle. Secondly, Also cut off, and part one or two of the biggest Roots from the body, that so it may have less nourishment, and that left will turn to fruits. Thirdly, Bend downwards the branches, and fasten them to the wall with their tops as low as may be, this obstructs, and restrains the excessive rising of sap, which rising moderately, turns to fruits: But if the Trees are naturally bad bearers (if bar∣ren upon that account) then there is no remedy for such, but grafting them again, with grafts taken from some good bearing kinds, which are known by yearly experi∣ence to bear fruits well.
It hath been set down by one of the Anci∣ents,Experi∣ment 477, 478, 479. that two twigs of several Fruit-trees, flatted on the sides, and bound together, and set, they will come up in one stock. And that Vines of red and white Grapes,Com∣pounding of Fruits. flatted and bound together, will bear Grapes of several colours upon one branch: Also the shoots of divers seeds, will incorporate: And that young Trees of several kinds, set contiguous, will incorporate. These, and such like, are prescribed in order to the compounding of Fruits. Concerning compounding,Observa∣tion. or mixing of divers kinds of fruits, whereof to make one new kind, these things before mentio∣ned, (and many such like) have been pre∣scribed by Antient Authors, which are of the number of those things Nat. Hist. pag. 165. Sir Francis Bacon accounts meer imaginations and con∣ceits, without any ground or light from Experience. He says Advanc: Lear. l. 1. pag. 32. (elsewhere) That many things have been rashly, (and with little choice or judgment) received and registred, as appears in the writings of divers Authors, which are every where fraught and forged with fabulous reports, and those not only uncertain and un∣tried, but notoriously untrue, to the great de∣rogation of Natural Philosophy with grave and sober men.
As for those things before mentioned, they can never effect what is promised, to produce compound fruits. For we see by continual experience, that grafts and buds, (though never so small) set upon stocks of different kinds, do hold their own, and keep their kinds; and so it would be if two long shoots were united, or three, or many: if it were possible to make them incorporate, and become one body, yet they would retain every one their own nature, and bring forth each its own kind of fruit, without commixture. If any man desire to be set on work a∣bout these things, he may have prescrip∣tions enough out of a certain Book, Enti∣tuled, The Country Farme, pag. 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, &c. For more full satisfaction about which, and all of that na∣ture, see my Treatise of Fruit-trees, p. 174, 176, &c. where these things are spoken to largly. But if the thing be possible in nature, to mix and compound fruits, the likeliest way that I apprehend is this, (which I have up∣on tryal, but is not yet come to an issue) viz. To graft one fruit upon another many times over, every year a different kind, (so that we keep still to those kinds that will grow together.) As first to graft a
Crab-tree near the ground, with some good kind of Apple-graft, and the next year to graft that again a handful or two above where the first was grafted, and the next year to graft that second graft, and the fourth year to graft that third graft, a handful or two above where it was grafted, and thus every year to set graft upon graft for divers years together; this (probably) may make some alteration and commix∣ture in the top branch and its fruit, although it be true, that every graft keeps its own nature, yet so as that it receives some small alteration from the stock (as hath been said) Now the Sap arising, and passing through so many kinds of stocks (as before) up into the top branches, this (if any thing) I con∣ceive will have an influence into the fruit of the last graft, to cause some commixture (more or less) in the fruit; the sap passing through so many kinds of stocks. Thus, as of many kinds of Apples toge∣ther, so also of Pears among themselves, and of Cherries and Plums among them∣selves, but as for mixing contrary kinds, Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plums, &c. all to∣gether, as some prescribe, there is no hope nor possibility of any advantage thereby.
Experi∣ment. 480, 81, &c. Sympathy and Anti∣pathy of Plants.All Plants that draw much nourishment from the earth, and exhaust it, hurt all things that grow by them, as Ash-trees, Coleworts, &c. And where Plants of several natures (which draw several juices) are set together, there the nearness doth good; As Rue by a Fig-tree, Garlick by a Rose-tree, &c. Observa∣tion.It is true indeed, That all Trees and Plants, that draw much nourishment from the Earth, are no good Neighbours to any thing that grows near them, because such make the Earth barren, in which Plants must needs grow poorly: But that several kinds of Plants, draw several kinds of juices, out of one and the same soyl, I much questi∣on: as that bitter Plants, (Pue, Worm-wood, and the like) draw the bitter juice of the earth, and the sweeter kinds, as Roses, Flowers, &c. draw the sweeter juice. For can it be imagined that there are so many kinds of juices in the Earth, as there are several kinds of Trees and Plants; so that every one should draw only its proper and peculiar nourishment? May it not upon better grounds be said, that many Trees and Plants, growing near together in a piece of ground, though they draw all of them one and the same juice, yet they con∣vert and assimilate the same, every one in∣to its own specifique nature. We see that
in a little Garden, where there are (it may be) divers hundreds (or thousands) of distinct Plants, Trees, Flowers, Herbs, and Simples, they growing all upon one and the same soyle, do convert the juice and fat∣ness of it into their several natures: by the same Law in Nature, as several kinds of Grafts upon one Tree, drawing one and the same Sap, do turn that one kind of nourish∣ment into their several natures, whereby they bring forth (as we see by experience) distinct, and several kinds of fruits, made of the same single juice, or sap of the Tree, whereon they all grow: this they would do, if there were all or many kinds of Ap∣ples, grafted upon one great Crab-tree, and so of Pear-trees, Cherry-trees, and the like, upon their own kinds: though mul∣titudes of distinct kinds of grafts, draw one and the same sap, yet every one changes it into its own nature; and why should it not be so also with several Plants, drawing one and the same juice out of the earth? So that I cannot conceive that those things mentioned, (or the like) if try'd, would succeed to the purpose: viz. That Rue set by a Fig-tree, will make Figs taste sweet∣er; or Garlick set by Rose-trees, will make the Roses smell sweeter; or Sorrel set by Rasps, will make the Rasps sweeter, and the
like: because several, or contrary kinds of Plants, meet not with several kinds of juices in the same soyle, (shall we think there are hundreds, or thousands of seve∣ral juices in one Garden) though they draw the same juice, they convert it, and assimilate it into their several natures, ac∣cording to the Innate and Intrinsecal form that every one hath, as was said before of several kinds of grafts upon one Tree. Experi∣ment. 499.The altering of the Sent, Colour, or Taste of Fruit, by infusing, mixing, or letting into the Bark or Roots of the Tree, Herb, or Flow∣er, any Coloured,Making Herbs and Fruits Me∣dicinable. Aromatical, or Medicinal substance; are but Fancies: All alteration of Vegetables in those qualities, must be by somewhat that is apt to go into the nourish∣ment of the Plant. Observa∣tion.Divers Authors (in their Books of Plant∣ing Fruit-trees) have given several directi∣ons for the altering of the Sent, Colour, and Taste of Fruits; but none of them from any well grounded Experience. Many particulars are mentioned, and set down at large, (with Reasons and Experience a∣gainst them; that men may not be deceiv∣ed by them, and loose their time, cost, and labour, about such fancies) See pag. 176, 177, &c. of the Treatise of Fruit-trees.
But as this Author says well, The like∣liest way to make herbs and fruits Medici∣nal, and to give them a good relish, is the often watering of the Tree or Plant with that substance, which we desire they should partake of; for this is certain, (and we see it by manifest experience) that Plants, and fruits of Trees, do somewhat taste, and par∣take of the nature and virtues of that kind of nourishment which they continually draw. As if Trees grow upon a low, moist, watrish ground, the fruits will be more spon∣gy and waterish, then the same kinds of fruits, where the Trees grow upon a dry, sandy soyle: So if Cabbages, Turneps, Car∣rots, and such like, grow in a rank Soyle, full of filth and dung, they have a virtue and relish accordingly, not half so sweet and pleasant, as the same kinds growing upon pure mould, or sweet sandy soyle: so here, if men think it worth the while, if they judge it will answer their labour, cost, and time, to water fruit-trees, herbs, plants and flowers, with Aromatical, and Medici∣nal substances: Infusions of Cinamon, Gin∣ger, Cloves, Mace, and such like spices, to give a pleasant relish, or (for Physical re∣spects) with Hellebore, Opium, Scammony, &c. If they can afford to give them e∣nough from time to time of these things,
(watring their Roots abundantly there∣with) then its probable such Plants, will somewhat partake of their virtues: but as for slitting of their Roots, or perforating the body of the Tree, and infusing the medi∣cine, or steeping the seed or kernel in some Liquor wherein the Medicine is infused; these I account as good as nothing, not only for that the virtues cannot be com∣municated, or transfused by this means, but also because, though they were car∣ried to all the parts of Trees and Plants, yet such small quantities would be indi∣scernable, the effect would be as nothing at all. The VI. CENTURY. Experi∣ment. 401, &c. Curiosities about fruits and plants.IT is a Curiosity to have several fruits upon one Tree, some early, and some late, ripe fruits all Sommer. This is done by Grafting several fruits upon one Tree: But I conceive the diversity of fruits must be such as will graft upon the same stock, not contrary kinds. Observa∣tion.It is true, (as the Author says) that se∣veral fruits may be grafted or Inoculated upon one Tree, some early, and some late; but yet (as he also observes) they must be of such as will take, and grow together, as
many kinds of Apples upon one Tree; so of Pears, and of Cherries among them∣selves, and the like: And it is not true which some Authors have written, that Cherries, and Plums, Figs, Nuts, Peaches, and such like, will grow together upon one Tree. Yet a Book, Intituled the Country farm (composed by some Doctors of Physick, and other inexperienced men) is full of such odde conceits, pag. 360, 361, &c. It is a Curiosity to have fruits of divers shapes and figures;Experi∣ment. 502. This is easily performed by moulding them when the fruit is young, with moulds of earth or wood, of several shapes in the innerside, as it is in mould works of Liquid things: let the moulds be made partible in the middle, that they may be o∣pened. Also Trees or fruits,Experi∣ment. 503. may be with inscrip∣tions and engravings upon them, by writing with a Needle, or Bodkin, or Knife, when the Trees and fruits are young; and as they grow greater, so the letters or figures will be more plaine. If men be not content with the natural form of fruits,Observa∣tion. they may (if they have so much leisure to spare) put them into moulds, as is said, to make them of an Ar∣tificial form: As for inscriptions, figures,
and shapes upon fruit-trees; that is, (as the Author says) performed by scoring through the Bark with the point of a knife, in the Spring or Sommer, what letters, or words, or figures, a man pleaseth; which as the Tree grows, will become more plain and discernable, and that for many years after: I use to make a Letter, or two, or three, or more, upon all young Trees that I grat, whereby to know the several kinds of fruits; and sometimes (if the stock be grafted high) I engrave the Name of the fruit at length, which is a satisfaction to o∣thers also, when removed and sent a∣broad: or if any be stolen and found again, they may thereby be known; And I have perceived the Letters plainly, nine or ten years after, or more. But as for the prescriptions of some Au∣thours, about these things, they are vain and ridiculous: who direct to write upon the kernels of seeds, that we sow and set, and upon the Buds that we Inoculate, what letters or shape we please, and the fruits coming thereof, will have the same upon them; See hereof Treatise of fruit-trees, pag. 185. Experi∣ment. 504.You may have Trees apparelled with flow∣ers or herbs, by boring holes in the bodies of them, and putting into them good mould, and
setting slips, or sowing seeds therein, those Roots of a more Ligneous nature, will perhaps incorporate with the Tree it self. This is a Curiosity indeed,Observa∣tion. which may be done, (as the Authour sayes) by making holes in Trees, and putting in good mould; care must be taken to make them slope∣ways downwards; that so both mould and moisture may keep in them, about the roots of things that are set. But yet I should be loath to spoil a good Tree thus, for it must needs make it rot and perish in a certaine time: howsoever, for one or two of in∣different kinds, it may rather be admitted for satisfaction in this Curiosity. Beauty in flowers,Experi∣ment. 506. is their preheminence: It is observed, that Gilly flowers, Violets, &c. that are coloured, if they be neglected, and not watered, nor new moulded, nor tran∣splanted, will turn white: And it's proba∣ble that the white, with much culture, may turn coloured. I doubt not but that the flowers afore∣mentioned,Observa∣tion. and divers other kinds, will not only loose the beauty of their colours, if they be not sometimes removed into new and better mould, but also, that they will in time, change from double to single; or else be much smaller, then they will be in fresh, strong mould. Therefore, every o∣ther
year at least, let the mould be chang∣ed more or less: lay about all their Roots, some good, fresh, black mould: And that we may have every year new, young Roots, and that the best kinds may be increased, the slips must be laid in Sommer, as I shall here shew how, though it be a common thing, and well known amongst many, yet for the sake of those that know it not, and desire it, I shall briefly speak of it. About the beginning of Iuly, (and for six or seven weaks afterwards) slips may be laid thus. Observe the fairest and biggest slips upon the Roots, and with a sharpe Knife, cut half way through the slip on the outside, near to the bottome, just from a joynt, and cut the slip upwards through the middle of it, about half an inch, (or little more) in length; then with a small hook stick fasten the cut part down into the mould, yet so as that the slip be not broken, or parted from the Root where∣in it grows: so do to the rest of the slips upon the same Root, or to as many as you please: having so done, then mould them all up with fresh mould, that is, cover all the cut parts on every side with mould, then water them, and press the mould close about them, and so let them rest. Afterwards, in a month, or five weeks,
these slips (so laid) will have taken Root, (especially if their mould have been wa∣tered now and then) then they may be cut off from the old Root, and taken up, and so set again in fresh, good mould, pre∣pared in the Garden plat for that purpose: Or else they may be let alone until the Spring after, and then set: These young vigorous Roots, set in good mould, and wa∣tred (now, and then) with fat water, will have large flowers: especially if in Iune we break off most of their buds, and suf∣fer only some few, six, or eight, or tenne flowers upon a Root, these the Root will easily maintain, and each of them will have the more nourishment, then when they are suffered to spindle up as many as na∣ture will; such must needs be smaller flow∣ers, the root being overburdened. The Clove-gllly-flower, is of all other, the best for use; it is well known how use∣ful they are to make Syrups, which are ve∣ry Cordial: they are good for Sallets pre∣pared with Sugar, to use all the year long, and have the best smell of any other; therefore increase these as much as may be, not only of slips (for slips of these will grow without laying, better then of other kind of flowers) but lay many of them al∣so for more certainty, as is shew'd before.
And among these, prefer those which are largest, and of the deepest colour, and those that are without Horns (as they call them) they also are increased of seed, as other kinds. I have been the larger upon this parti∣cular, (and somewhat digressed from the Experiment, which chiefly concerned co∣lour) because hereupon mainly depends the goodness and flourishing of a Garden, as to these kinds of flowers; for if we know, not the best way to propagate flowers, nor to plant and order them, being prepared, the Garden will be but poor. Experi∣ment. 570.Whites are more inodorate (for the most part) then Flowers of the same kind Colour∣ed: we find also that blossomes of Trees that are white, are commonly inodorate, as Cher∣ries, Pears, Plums. Whereas those of Apples, Crabs, Almonds, and Peaches, are blushy and smell sweet. Observa∣tion.I conceive this Experiment was not throughly weighed and tryed; for to my Observation, white Flowers have (general∣ly) as much smell as those coloured: to instance in the white Rose, the ordinary kind, and the white Musk Rose, I suppose they have as much smell (especially the Musk Rose) as Red Roses, or Provosts, or Velvet, or Marble, and some other colou∣red
kinds, yea, and more too: And as for some white flowers, as the white Lilly, and some other kinds, their smell is more full and ranck then many red, or other colour∣ed flowers: And for blossomes of Trees, some that are white, smell as much as some that are red or coloured; for what smell hath the double blossome Peach flower, or the Ne∣ctrine, or any kind of Peach blossomes, which are all coloured excellently, more then the blossomes of Pear-tree, Cherry, or Plum-tree, which are said to be inodorate: So that there must be some other cause found out, why some flowers and blossomes smell not, (or smell not so much as some others) then that which is assigned; viz. the thin∣ness or scantness of that substance which ma∣keth the Flower. The cause why some flow∣ers and blossomes smell not so much as others, the same is the cause why some flowers and fruits are bigger then others, and of a bet∣ter taste then others; which proceeds (un∣doubtedly) from the specifique or distinct intrinsecal Form of each particular Plant, which the God of nature hath fixed in it as a Law, which nature never violates, but keeps in all kinds of Creatures. Contrarywise in Berries,Experi∣ments. 508 and 509. the white is com∣monly more delicate and sweet in taste, then the coloured; as we see in the white Grapes, white Rasps, white Strawberries, Currants,
&c. the Cause is, for that the coloured are more juiced, and courser juiced, and there∣fore not so well and equally concocted. But in fruits, the white commonly is mean∣er, as in Plums, the white harvest Plum is a base Plum, the Musle, Damazeen, and other black Plums, are of the best, &c. Observa∣tion.This proves what was last said to be true, viz. that it is the specifical. Form of every Plant, that causeth the difference of tastes in fruits, and smell in flowers. For we see by experience, that some white kinds of flowers, fruits, berries, &c. are sweeter and better in smell & tast, then others of coloured kinds: and likewise other coloured kinds of flowers, fruits, & berries, are sweeter & better then some white kinds: so that it is a hard matter to find out the particular cause, and give a distinct reason of the differences of particulars, though men may venture at it. Experi∣ment. 510.Gilly-flower seed of one kind, being sowen, will come up of several colours: The cause is (no doubt) that in earth, though it be conti∣guous, and in one bed, there are several juices; and as the seed doth casually meet with them, so it cometh forth. Observa∣tion.It is true, that Gillyflower-seed of one kind sowen, will bring up several kinds, some double and some single: but I much doubt whether it be, for that the seed meet, with several juices in one bed-of earth:
for can it be imagined, that two or three very small seeds, that lie as close together as can be, in the earth, should draw seve∣ral juices from the very self same mould, so as to cause them to vary in the colour of the flowers? May it not rather be said, it is from a Law in Nature, which God of his general bounty to us, hath put into it; though we stand not in absolute necessity of them, yet in that he gives us such va∣riety and choice? But for men to finde out, and shew a particular Cause in Na∣ture, of this variety, will be as hard to do, as to shew a cause why several kinds of grafts upon one Tree,See  481. drawing one and the self same sap, do yet bring forth different fruits; other then to say, they keep their se∣veral Natures, and so convert the same sap into several kinds of fruits, according to the distinct specifique intrinsecal form of each particular kind of fruit. And why may not the same be said of several Seeds and Roots in one Bed, drawing the same juice of the Earth? Concerning sowing of Gillyflower seed, I advise those that sow it, first to gather it from the fairest and best Clove-gilly flower, and that it be full ripe, ere it be gathered, which is, when it is turned black: Also seed may be gathered from other double
flowers; some commend especially the Lon∣don white, others, a flower call'd the old mans head, and say, the greatest varieties come from these: some are for one, and some for another; but so it is, that most will be single flowers from the best seed; but doubtless there is much in the ground in which the seed is sowen; if it be poor soyle they are more like to be more single, then if the ground be special rich mould; for (as was said) barren ground, as it makes flowers small, so sometimes in it, they turn from double to single, so it may be said as to the seed when sowen. Experi∣ment. 513.It is a Curiosity to have flowers double, which is effected by often removing them into new earth, or on the contrary part double flowers, by neglecting, and not removing, prove single. And the way to do it speedily, is to sow, or set seeds, or slips of flowers, and us soon as they come up, to remove them into new ground that is good. Enquire also whe∣ther Inoculating of Flowers, (as Stock gilly-flowers, Roses, Musk-Roses, &c. doth not make them double. Observa∣tion.For the first part of this Experiment, to make Flowers double or firer, it is a good Rule as the Author hath set down, especi∣ally if (withal) we observe the directions given in the Observation to the 506 Ex∣periment,
in breaking off some of the buds and stems, and letting some few grow to be flowers. There are three ways sufficient for the propagation of flowers, which are by Seed, by Slips, and by Layers, but by Laying is by far the best, as is shewed at large in the Observation to the 506 Experiment. But as for Inoculating Roses, (Musk-Rose, and all other kinds) that is very common and sure; yet as to the intent of the Authour, viz. (to make them doble) it succeeds not: and he himself hath given the Rea∣son, truly, upon another occasion: Tha is, all Buds and Grafts, rule and keep their own Natures, and so change not, neither as to the making Roses more double or bet∣ter then they were before, nor as to the bettering of any Fruit: as hath been shew'd heretofore, Experiment 452. The making of Fruits without Core or Stone,Experi∣ment. 541. is likewise a Curiosity; If a Cions or shoot have the Pith finely taken forth, (and not altogether, but some of it left, the better to save the life; it will bear a fruit with lit∣tle or no Core or Stone. The like is said to be of dividing a quick Tree down to the ground, and taking out the Pith, and then binding it up again. These prescriptions for making FruitsObserva∣tion.
without Core or Stone, I cannot think are from this worthy Author, but they are such as are set down by others, which I have seen: And they are as weak and groundless conceits, as many other things asserted by them, about changing the spe∣cies of fruits, and making them of an aro∣matique and pleasant taste, and altering the colour of Fruits, and such like conceits: the vanity of which (I suppose) hath been sufficiently laid open in my Treatise of Fruit-trees; see there Errors Discovered, pag. 165, 166, &c. For, let this thing be a little considered, and it will appear to any man that hath but half an eye, to be vain. Suppose a shoot or graft, as is here said) be cloven, and all, or most of the pith ta∣ken out; and admit such a one be grafted (or any way set in the ground, so as to take root) and grow, yet we know all the bark and buds are as they were before; and ta∣king out the pith, makes no alteration at all, more or less; we know in all the buds that are Inoculated, not onely all the pith, but also all the wood is cast away, and no∣thing made use of but onely the buds and bark of any young shoot; and yet we see, by continual experience, what the effect is, that these buds bring forth the same fruits, as the Trees from which they were taken.
And if a young Tree were divided,Some old Fruit-trees are hollow all along their bo∣dies, having no pith at all, which bring forth fruits with no less Core or Stone for that. and the pith taken out from the top to the Root, (as is said) there is less Reason, (if less can be) that that should work this ef∣fect; because all the side twigs, (if it have any) would have pith still; and if it have none, or if the pith were taken out of all, yet we know the increase of the Tree must be still from the Buds, which have the same nature in them as grafts, or buds Inoculated. It is very probable, that any soure fruit, grafted upon a stock that beareth a sweeter fruit,Experi∣ment. 515. may both make the fruit sweeter and more void of the harsh matter of the kernells or seeds. It is reported,Experi∣ment. 516. that not only taking out the Pith, but the stopping of the juice of the Pith from rising in the midst, and turning it to rise on the outside, will make the fruit without core or stone. The Rule is General;Experi∣ment. 517. that whatsoever will make a wild Tree, a Garden Tree, will make a Garden Tree to have less Core or Stone. It is true,Observa∣tion. that a soure fruit, grafted up∣on a stock of a sweeter kind, will make the fruit somewhat sweeter, yet so as that the graft still governs (as this Author elswhere hath said) and as experience proves; but the fruits will have kernels and seeds as be∣fore.
Of this, see Expe. 514.As for taking out the Pith, or stopping the juice of the Pith, it is all one as to this intention. Concerning the general Rule in the 517 Experiment, know nothing that will make a Wild-tree, a Garden-tree, but grafting it with good kinds of grafts: And I am sure grafting will not make any fruit to have less Core or Stone. Experi∣ment. 518.Plants for want of Culture, degenerate to be baser in the same kind, and sometimes to change into another kind. Degenera∣ting of Plants.1. By standing long unremoved. 2. By drought and dryness of the Earth. 3. By the barrenness of the earth, remo∣ving Plants into worse mould, or forbearing to renew and help the ground with dung, or fresh mould. Observa∣tion.It hath been Expe. 506. said, That Violets and some other flowers, will change from double to single, or change in colour, when the mould wherein they grow, becomes barren and heartless through neglect; which is the same in substance with all the three particulars mentioned in the Experiment. Therefore there is need of some fresh mould from year to year, for the preser∣ving of flowers in their perfection. See hereof at large, Experiment 506 and 510.
Whatsoever Fruit useth to be set upon a root or slip,Experi∣ment. 519. if it be sowen, will degenerate: And most of those fruits that use to be grafted, if they be set of kernels or stones, degenerate. It is true, that Peaches do better upon stones set, then upon grafting: And the Rule of ex∣ception should seem to be this; That whatso∣ever Plant requireth much moisture, prosper∣eth better upon the stone or kernel, then upon the graft; For the stock, though it giveth a finer nourishment, yet it giveth a scanter than the earth at large. The reason why Fruits that come of seed or stones,Observa∣tion. do degenerate, (for the most part) and become worse then the Fruits out of which the seed was taken, I conceive to be this; Fruits that come of seed or stones, do partake both of the graft, and of the stock of that Tree from which they were taken; so that although the graft was of a special good, and choice kind, yet the stock where∣on it was engrafted, being a Crab-tree, or some other wild kind of Fruit-tree, the seed participates of both graft and stock, and so brings forth a mungrel fruit, between them both: For although grafts govern, (as hath been said) and may be said to bring forth the same kinds, yet so as that the stock hath some influence into the fruits, according to the goodness or badness of the stock.
But now, In case the Tree, from which seeds or stones are taken, be an ungrafted Tree, one that came of seed it self, then I doubt not, but that the seed of that Tree, will bring forth the very same kinds again, without any alteration. As to that the Authour sayes concerning Peaches, that they come better of stones then grafting; I know by experience there is a mistake in this; for although it be true, that some Peaches will come good of seed, yet doubtless not better then by Ino∣culating, (they take not with grafting) for we see by constant experience, that Peach-buds set upon good stocks, will bring forth the very same, as the Trees from which they were cut, if the rest of their culture and ordering be the same, or as good. And as for some that have come of stones, I have observ'd they have been none of the best; many that have come of stones have been stark nought, though some have been good, and so it is with flower-seeds, and all other seeds of fruits. And why Peaches, or any other kind of fruit, should be thought to come better of stones or seeds, then by grafting or Inocula∣ting, I apprehend not any reason: as for that which is given, That the stock giveth a scanter nourishment, then the earth at large;
let it be considered: The twigs and bran∣ches of a Peach-tree, (or any other Tree that came of seed or stones) they receive Sap and nourishment from a stem, or body, and root, as well as if the Tree were engraf∣ted: the twigs and branches of an engraf∣ted Tree, have as free, and full nourish∣ment, (without any obstruction) as the branches of an ungrafted Tree; the branches of a grafted tree, have no finer nourishment, nor scanter, then the branches of an ungraf∣ted Tree: for we know the Root and Body of a grafted Tree, and of an ungrafted Tree, are alike: and the earth is as free to the one, as to the other. It is reported,Experi∣ment. 534. that a good strong Canvas spread over a Tree, grafted low, soon after it putteth forth, will dwarf it, and make it spread: The Cause is plaine, for that all things grow as they find room. It is true,Observa∣tion. (as is said) That Cloth some∣times spread over a Tree, grafted low, (and suffered to lie on for a time) will cause it to spread much: And that this may be improved for our use and benefit, this may be done: To plant some few Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, or other kinds, grafted low, and caused to spread much, and kept from rising up by this means; keep the earth bare, clean from weeds, grass, or
any thing growing under or about them: such Trees (if they be good kinds) will bear much and fairer fruits, then high trees: the reflection of heat from the earth, will be almost as strong as from a wall. And the fruits may be keept long, growing up∣on the Tree, even till after September, or October. For if a Cloth be sometimes, in hot weather, spread over them, and moist∣ned, it will keep the fruits from ripening too soon: (yet shade them not too much, lest they come not to full ripeness) After∣wards, the fruits being ripe, some old Can∣vas, hair-cloth, or such like, may be spread over them, to preserve the Fruits from Birds, and may be so kept long; (look that snails eat them not) Or else a Net may be spread over such Trees, to preserve the fruits: I have known faire Cherries upon Trees towards the middle of October. I conceive the great bearing Cherry, or o∣ther late ripe, tart Cherries, to be the best to keep long, in this manner: such are more hardy then other kinds; Cherries very late, are as great Rarieties as those that are early. Experi∣ment. 535.Trees are generally set of Roots or kernels; but if you set them of slips (as the Mulberry, &c.) they will grow, and those (as is repor∣ted) will be dwarf Trees; the cause is, for that
the slip draweth nourishment more weakly, then either a Root or kernel. Mulberry-tree slips,Observa∣tion. and some other kinds of Trees that will grow of slips, may be made dwarf Trees, if we will order them accordingly; that is, if we suffer all the side branches to grow: or such slips (taking Root) may be made high Trees in time, if we cut off all the side branches, and pre∣serve only the middle strait shoot. But in∣deed at first, for certain years, they must needs be dwarf Trees, until they can rise higher, which in time they will do, if they take Root well, and the ground be good. In Clay grounds,Experi∣ment. 544. all Fruit-trees grow full of Moss, both upon body and boughs: which is caused partly by the coldness of the ground, whereby the Plants nourish less, and partly by the toughness of the earth, whereby the sap is shut in, &c. We see by Experience,Observa∣tion. that Trees grow∣ing upon cold and moist grounds, or Clay, Gravel, barren Grounds, do generally breed Moss, which is caused (as the Author says) by the coldness and scantness of the nourish∣ment: And therefore there is need (be∣sides the scraping off of the Moss) to lay the Roots of Fruit-trees as dry as may be in such moist grounds, by trenching or otherwise, and also to bring in some soyles to make
the ground better and warmer, as much as may be: see of this more at large, Trea∣tise of Fruit▪ trees. Experi∣ment. 578.Is is to be noted, that (commonly) Trees that ripen their fruits latest, do blossome soonest. Observa∣tion.Some Fruit-trees indeed which bring forth their fruits to perfection and ripe∣ness, late in the year, do blossome early; as having need of the sun to ripen them, all the sommer: But some other kinds blossome early, and ripen their fruits also early; as May-Cherry-trees, the Premarden plum, also the Mirabilon Plum-tree blos∣somes exceeding early, and the Tree brings forth his Fruit early. I have got ripe plums from this Tree about the beginning of Iuly, which is early for Plums. Experi∣ment. 579.There be fruits, (but rarely) that come twice a year, as some Pears, Strawberries, &c. Roses bear twice, but it is not without cutting. Observa∣tion.The Windsor Pear-tree does blossome and bear fruits twice in the year some years, but the second bearing I could ne∣ver see worth the gathering, for they are poor, small, hard fruits, not worth any thing. I have seen Cherries twice in the year upon one and the same Tree; an early
Flanders, which I set upon a very warm South-wall, bore ripe Cherries about the twentieth of May, and the same Tree bore ripe Cherries afterwards, about the sixth of October. Strawberries ordinarily bear twice a year, though but few the second time. As for Rose-trees, some Damask Roses, and some Provosts, bear a second time the same year, though but few, if cut soon after the first bearing in the full Moon. But be∣sides, there is a Rose-tree call'd the Month∣ly Rose, which bears Roses until the cold∣ness of the Winter stop it, about November. Nothing procureth the lasting of Trees,Experi∣ment. 586. Bushes, and Herbs, so much as often cutting; For every cutting causeth a Renovation of the juice of the Plant, that it neither goeth so far, nor riseth so faintly, as when the Plant is not cut. This is to be considered in cutting of Trees,Observa∣tion. else instead of making them last lon∣ger, we shorten their lives. That is, that we so cut them, that the wet and moisture get not into their bodies▪ which in cer∣tain years will rot and spoil them; as we see in many Pollard-trees, which are hollow all along their bodies: And many Fruit-trees, having had their heads cut off, when they were great Trees, and grafted again;
we see the wet and moisture gets in at the top, before the grafts can cover the head, and rots the Tree, which can never grow great after, nor last long, but rots and de∣cays in few years. Whereas Trees that are sound, Fruit-trees, and all other kinds) must needs last much longer: by cutting off side branches, and all superflu∣ous branches, (which are not great) that conduceth to the lasting of Trees, as giv∣ing the more plentiful and vigorous nourish∣ment to those that are left, and to the whole body. The VII. CENTVRY. Experi∣ment. 624.QVinces or Apples, if you will keep them long, drown them in Hony, but because Hony (perhaps) will give them a taste over∣lushious, it were good to make tryal in powder of Sugar, or in surrup of Wine onely boyled to height. Observa∣tion.As for keeping of Apples, keeping them in Hony or Sugar, would be too costly: some Pippins and Iohn-Apples, will (of themselves) last till new come again: it's good then to get such kinds, that we may have for use all the year long, without charge in keeping.
And for keeping Quinces, they are kept long in pickle, made of the Parings and Cores (of those that are used for Marma∣lade) well boyled in water, with Salt and Ginger. Or a better way (as some ac∣count) is to keep them in small Ale a penny a Gallon, and to draw it off once in ten or twelve days, and put in fresh; thus its said they will last two years. Take Grapes and hang them in an empty Vessel well stopped,Experi∣ment. 627▪ and set the Vessel not in a Celler, but in some dry place, and its said they will last long. Grapes will keep for some short time in this mrnner,Observa∣tion. as hath been said; but when cold moist Aire towards Winter comes on, they will begin to mould and ot: I have kept some in Glass, as close stopt with cork, and wax, as I could, supposing the exclu∣sion of Air had been best, but though they were good certain week, yet afterwards they began to perish: I account it better to hang the bunches in a Kitchin, or some warm Room where fire is much kept, that so some of their superfluous moisture may be a little dried up; I have kept them thus many weeks. For though the Aire be much shut out from them in any Vessel, yet that Aire that is shut in with them, and their own natural moisture, will cause pu∣trefaction;
therefore there is need of some degree of warmth with dryness: Cut off some of the wood with the bunches, and cover them with paper from dust, and hang them up in the Kitchin, or where fire is kept. Also a Vine branch full of ripe Grapes, may be drawn in at a window, and nailed up upon the wall or seeling, letting the branch grow still to the Vine, thus they will keep long. Experi∣ment. 633.The juices of Fruits are either watry, or oylie: I reckon amongst the watry, all the fruits out of which drink is expressed, as the Grape, the Apple, the Pear, the Cherry, the Pomegranate, &c. And there are some others, which though they be not in use for drink, yet they appear to be of the same nature, as Plums, Mulberries, Services, Rasps, &c. And for those juices that are so fleshie, as they cannot make drink by expression, yet perhaps they may make drink by mixture of water. And some of the watry juices, after they have gathered spirit, will burn and inflame as Wine. Observa∣tion.Concerning the juices of Apples, Pears, and Cherries, these are well known, and much in use and esteem; the two former with us in England, and all of them in o∣ther parts: And we might have Wine of
Cherries as plentifully in England, as it is beyond Sea, if men would but plant store of Cherry-trees of the best kinds, such as are fittest for this purpose, as the Morello Cher∣ry, the Charoon, the Black hart, and other kinds which have a pleasant taste, the juice of which is of a deep red colour: These would make a delicate Wine, especially for Sommer time, and which will last also all the year, as I have heard it credibly spoken by a worthy Gentleman, who drank good Cherry Wine of a Twelve month old. As for Cider and Perry, these Liquors (especially Cider) begin to be better known to us, in some parts where they have scarce been heretofore: And doubt∣less when men are better acquainted with them, and know their good properties and virtues, in reference to health and long-life, they will be more diligent in planting Fruit-trees, such as are best and fittest for this purpose, as the Pearmain, Pippin, Gen∣net-moyle, Redstreak, and such like, which make Cider better then French-wine. Concerning the manner of making Cider and Perry, with the keeping and ordering of it, I have spoken at large in my Treatise of Fruit-trees: See the use of Fruits, pag. 144, 145, &c.
See Master Hartlibs Legacy of Husbandry pag. 27.As for Plums, it is affirmed, that there may be made an excellent Wine out of them, and also Aquavitae, of those that are sweet fat Plums, as Musle-plums, Damsons, &c. And though the juice be too thick of it self for that purpose, yet Water, Cider, or some other liquor, may be mixed there∣with, which being put up into the Vessel, some Hony, Yest, (or the like) must be mix∣ed, to cause it to work. Experi∣ment. 634.It hath been noted, that most Trees (and specially those that bear Mast) are fruitful but once in two years. The cause (no doubt) is the expence of sap; for many Orchard Trees well cultured, will bear divers years together. Observa∣tion.Some Fruit-trees bear store of fruits but once in two years, and I conceive it to be as natural for some kinds so to do, as to bear such or such a kind of fruit. And o∣thers are observed to bear store of Fruits every year constantly, unless (perhaps) in some extream blasting spring, which spoils (in a manner) all: But for many years to∣gether every year, some are known to bear Fruits exceeding full in the same ground, and with the same culture, as those that bear but each other year: so that we see the expence of sap, in the bearing year, is not the only cause that Trees bear not the next year after; for some that expend
as much sap, do yet bear the next year af∣ter as full as before: So then, let care be taken, to chuse grafts from those Trees that we see by Experience are the best, and most constant bearers, and best fruits. The greater part of Tres bear most,Experi∣ment. 637. and best on the lower boughs, but some bear best on the top boughs. Those that bear best below, are such as shade doth more good to then hurt; for generally all fruits bear best lowest, because the sap tireth not, having but a short way; and therefore in fruits spread upon walls, the lowest are the greatest. To my observation,Observa∣tion. Apple-trees, Pear-trees, Cherry-trees, &c. that are good bear∣ers, they bear all over alike. And geneal∣ly all Fruit-trees in these parts, have need enough of the Sun, and bear better in the Sun then in the shade; but indeed as to Wall trees, most commonly we see most fruit upon the lower boughs, and side bran∣ches, Therefore observe the directions given in the Treatise of fruit trees, p. 131, 132. &c. in causing the bran∣ches to spread along the wall both ways, which causeth fruit∣bearing. and the Reason I appre∣hend to be this: Not the iring of the sap in its going to the top branches; for the sap is too vi∣gorous, and too plentiful, in the top boughs, and thence it is we always see the fairest and great∣est shoots towards the top of all Wall-trees, and commonly of all
other Trees. But the cause why the low∣er boughs, and side branches, have usual∣ly more fruit then the top branches, I con∣ceive to be for that the sap naturally pres∣seth upwards in greatest plenty, and run∣eth forth into shoots and branches: Now nature being so intent, and vigorously active in one work (viz. the increase of the Tree in those branches) it doth not put forth it self at the same time, in that other effect of bearing fruit upon the same branches. But now, as to the lower boughs, and side branches, there nature is at work, but in a remiss and weaker degree as to the increase of the branches; such grow but little, because the sap is some∣what obstructed, and curbed by bowing the branches downwards, and so does at∣tend to the other work also, viz. the bear∣ing of Fruits. And the truth of this is made more evi∣dent, if we consider the same thing in all young Trees: We know young Apple-trees, Pear-trees, and the like, when and while they grow, and increase exceeding∣ly in all the parts, shooting forth great, large, strong shoots and branches, they bear but little fruit, or none at all: But af∣ter certain years, when they grow not so much, when they shoot less, then they
fall to bearing fruits more abundantly. There be Trees that bear best when they be∣gin to be old, as Almonds,Experi∣ment. 638. Pears, Vines, and all Trees that give Mast. The Cause is, for that all Trees that bear Mast, have an oyly fruit; and young Trees have a more watry juice and less concocted. But the most part of Trees, amongst which are Apples, Plums, &c. bear best when they are young. Pear trees,Observa∣tion. Apple trees, Plum, and Cherry-trees, if they be good bearing kinds natu∣rally, after they are three or four years growth (and some sooner) do all bear store of fruits, until they be extream old, and in a decaying, dying condition: And there∣fore in planting of Fruit-trees, be sure to procure those kinds that are known by ex∣perience to be good bearers and good fruits; and such will bear well, both when they are young, and when they are old, until extream age. Were I to Plant an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit-trees, and might have Trees at hand freely for nothing, of indifferent com∣mon kinds, and but indifferent bearers; I would rather chuse to fetch those that are choice kinds, and special bearers▪ one hun∣dred or two hundred Miles, (if they could not be had nearer) and there pay dear for them too, besides all other charges;
then take those at hand, for when men plant Fruit-trees, it is not for a ew years, but for several Generations: therefore take special care to have the best kinds for bearing, and for relish or taste: that is the foundation of the work, the principal thing in planting. Now, when Fruit-trees are grown to extream old age, and therefore bear but little, this may be done, which will make them (as it were) young again for certain years, and to bear exceeding much fruit yearly: That is, Cut off their heads, or big boughs, not strait over, but a slope, that so rain and moisture may not rest up∣on the top to rot it: These great boughs will (the next Sommer) put forth many young shoots, which may be inoculated the same Sommer, or grafted the Spring after with special bearing kinds: And these old bodies, having young heads, (which draw sap vigorously) will be much refreshed thereby; and such Trees will bea store of fruits many years after. Experi∣ment. 653.The Roots of Trees do (some of them) put downwards, deep into the ground; as the Oak , Firre, &c. some spread more to∣wards the surface of the earth; as the Ash, Cyprels tree, Olive, &c. The cause of this later may be, for that such Trees as love the
Sun, do not willingly descend farre into the Earth. It is true,Observa∣tion. The Roots of Oak-trees, and some other kinds, shoot down deeper into the earth then Ash-trees, and some other Trees: May not the Reason be (why some put their Roots deeper then others) be∣cause those Trees have greater and larger bodies then others; and Nature lays the foundation answerable to what is to be set upon it: Now Oakes being the greatest Trees, Nature is wise enough (according to a Law God hath put into into it) to make the Root or Foundation answerable; Otherwise, I conceive the Roots of all Trees would be as near the top of the ground as may be, as loving the Sun, as having an absolute need of it in order to their growth: And I am perswaded, that the appetite of the spirit, in all Trees whatsoever, (one as well as another) is upwards, and not downwards; and never exerts it self downwards, but upon neces∣sity; and in order, or in subordination, to the growth of the body of the Tree above ground. It hath been observed,Experi∣ment. 654. that a branch of a Tree, being unbarked some space at the bottom, and so set into the ground, even of such Trees as if the bark were set on, they would not
grow; yet contrariwise, we see that a Tree pared round in the body above ground, will die: The cause may be for that the unbarke part draweth the nourishment best, but the bark continueth it only. Observa∣tion.It is true, some branches that are un∣barkt at the bottome, and set in the ground, will grow, of some kinds of Apples, as the Quodling, Nursgarden, Moyle, and some o∣the kinds that have soft barks: Not be∣cause (not the sooner) for that the branch is unbarkt, for such will grow of cuttings of slips, though they be not at all unbarkt; And those that be unbarkt and grow, it is not the unbarkt part that draweth nou∣rishment best, nor that draweth it at all; but the Roots put forth from the bark, e∣ven at the very adge of the cut part, and also some break out of the bark where it is not cut; As we see in those branches of Trees from which we get Roots while they grow upon the Tree, by disbark∣ing of them, an inch round, and tying mould about: See how at large, Treatise of Fruit-trees, pag. 136. Experi∣ment. 668.The grafting of Vines upon Vines (as I take it) is not now in use; the Antients had it, and that three ways, The first was insition, which is the ordinary manner of grafting. The second was Terebration through the mid∣dle
of the stock, and putting in the Cions there. And the third was, paring of two Vines that grow together to the marrow, and binding them close. I have tryed several ways to graft Vines,Observa∣tion. by cleving or insition, (as the Author calls it) and also by paring two Vines, the stock and graft on two sides, which is my usual and best way of grafting other fruit-trees, but neither took effect; so that I am per∣swaded those Fruit-trees that are so easily propagated by other means, as by laying down the branches into the earth, and by cuttings, that these will not take with graf∣ting or inoculating; as Vines, Mulberries, &c. I have tried many exreriments about Mulberries, both for grafting and inocula∣ting upon several kinds of stocks, and yet none succeeded: but Mulberries are in∣creased by laying down the branches, and by cuttings, as Vines are: so that I con∣ceive this grafting, mentioned by some Ancient Authors, is but a conceit of theirs, (a grafting in the brain) instead of a real Experiment,See the observation upon the 477 Expe∣riment. like multitudes of other things, recorded by some who (its pro∣bable by what they say) had no Experi∣mental knowledg in the things they spake. As for Maturation of fruits,Experi∣ment. 316. it is effected by heat, motion, attraction; and by a rudi∣ment
of putrefaction, for the inception of pu∣trefaction, hath in it a maturation. Observa∣tion.Concerning the maturation or speedy ripening or concocting of Fruits, all kinds of heat as the Author sayes) hastneth it faster or slower, according to the degree of heat; as we see by experience, Apples or Pears laid upon a heap together (being newly gathered) they mellow, and ripen faster then if they lay single at distance one from another. Also Apples covered in Lime, Hay, Straw, &c. will be mellow in a short time: But the most speedy way to ripen hard fruits, and to abate the grosse tartness of them, is the common Experi∣ment by a gentle heat before the fire, or in an Oven after bread is drawn. So we see (as the Authour observes) if fruits are eat with Wasps, Hornets, Birds, &c. some part of them, the rest sweeten and ripen sooner; putrefaction beginning, and hastning by reason of solution of con∣tinuity in that part. Experi∣ment. 343.We see that Beer or Wine in Bottles, close stopped, lasts long; and that fruits closed in wax, keep fresh: And likewise bodies put in Hony and Flower, keep more fresh. Observa∣tion.It is true, that Liquors when they are well setled in the Vessel, (after a certaine time) and after drawn out into bottles,
and stopped very close with Cork, and set in a Celler, or buried in sand, or in water, such will be much more fresh and quick then the same Liquor in a great Vessel, e∣specially if any part of it be drawn off: And therefore this is a good way to keep Cider, Perry, White-wine, or the like, and that for a long time together. As for Fruits closed in wax, or put in hony, I find that even Cherries (which are more subject to corruption hen many o∣ther kinds of fruits) will keep fresh many weeks together thus, more then they will do of themselves in the open ▪ exclusion of Aire preserves them for a time, but yet putrefaction at length will work within, because of the superfluous moisture, which had need of drying up▪ I have tried fruits in honey (Aprecots, Plums, Cherries) and they held good two or three Months; af∣terwards putrefaction began. A Bottle of Beer buried four foot deep in the ground,Experi∣ment. 378. became more lively, better tasted, and clearer, then it was; and a Bottle of Wine in like manner: A bottle of Vineger so buried, came forth more lively, and more odoriferous, smelling alm like a Violet af∣ter a Months burial, all three they came forth, as fresh and lively, if not better then be∣fore.
Observa∣tion.This is certain, That Beer, Ale, Cder, and Wine, when well setled, and cleared in the Vessel, and drawn off into Bottles, and well stopt with Cork and Wax; will continue fresh and good, much longer then in the Vessel, and will also improve in goodness. If the bottles are buried in sand, (as was said before) or buried a yard or more in the ground: The reason I con∣ceive is, for that as no Aire can possible pe∣netrate so deep, and through the bottle to the liquor, nor can the spirits of the li∣quor (in the least) get out: so neither can the Liquor suffer any prejudice by altera∣tion of the Aire from heat to cold, as it does in Vessels above ground. Experi∣ment. 385.Tryal hath been made with earthen Bottles well stopped, hang'd in a Well of twenty Fa∣thom deep at the least; and some of the bot∣tles have been let down into the water, some o∣thers have hanged above, within a Fathome of the water: Wine and Beer in these Bot∣tles, have kept better then in a Celler, but those above water were apparently the best. Observa∣tion.The Cause why Beer, Wine, Cider, or the like, will keep better thus, and in Earth, Sand, &c. (as before) then in Vessels or Bottles above ground, I apprehend (as was said) for that the Aire is excluded, and the spirits shut in: also the Aire above ground
is subject to variation, sometimes more hot, and sometimes more cold: which somewhat stirs, and affects the spirits of the Liquor in the Vessel, whereby they be∣come weaker. I have heard it Reported for a Truth, That Bottles of Wine, (or some other Li∣quor) were found in a deep Draw well, which had been many years fill'd up, and afterwards opened, and cleansed again for use; and the Liquor was found to be very fresh and good, notwithstanding it had ly∣en there many years; whereby it is ma∣nifest, that this way of keeping Liquors, will preserve it good along time. The IX. CENTVRY. WE have partly touched before,Experi∣ment. 85. the means of producing fruits without cores or stones: And this we add further, that the cause must be abundance of moisture, for that the core and stone are made of a dry sap; and we see that it is possible to make a Tree put forth only in blossome without fruit, as in Cherries with double flowers, much more in fruit without stone or cores. This hath been spoken too sufficiently before,Observa∣tion. See Experiment 514. It is neither the taking out of the pith, as is there pre∣scribed; nor the abundance of moisture, as
here, that will work this effect: some Tree have too much moisture, and yet the fruit of such have nevertheless cores or stones. As for the Cherry-tree that puts forth double blossomes without Fruits, that is not made to do so by any mans Art or Skill: but it is natural: I know the kind well, it is as natural for it to bear double blossomes, without fruit, as for any other tree to bear such or such a kind of fruit. Experi∣ment. 856.Trees set upon the backs of Chimneys, do ripen Fruits sooner: Vines that have been drawn in at the Window of a Kitchen, have sent forth Grapes ripe a month before others. Observa∣tion.This is certain (as the Author says) such a kind of heat, as is upon the back of Chim∣neys, where fire is continually, or most commonly kept, will much hasten the rip∣ning of fruits. I have seen a thin Brick wall where fire hath been kept on the one side, and fruit-trees have been Planted on the o∣ther side, which have brought forth ripe fruits very early, much sooner then the same kinds without such artificial heat. And Branches of Vines being drawn in at the window of a Kitchen, or room where fire is kept: the fruits will be ripe sooner then those without dores: but let it not be too near the fire, left in wither, or over much dry the branch. FINIS.
