A736 R21482 12616946 64422
AESOP AT Epsom: Or, a few Select Fables In VERSE. By a Cit. London: Printed for, and Sold by John Nut, near Stationers-Hall, 1698.
To his Excellency Charles Mon∣tague Esq; one of the Lord Ju∣stices for the Administration of publick Affairs during the Kings absence, first Lord Commissio∣ner of the Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council. SIR, THO' a Present of Fables to Your Excellency the in∣imitable Author of the COUNTRY MOUSE, and CITY-MOUSE, may at this time seem im∣proper: Yet a Present of Loyalty to
the same Government, which You have been so Studious and successful in the preservation of, cannot but carry its Acceptance with it. That Li∣berty which Your Excellency gave the World so sweet a tst of in Your most incomparable Fable, and which afterwards You was so instrumental in continuing to us, is in part the Sub∣ject of these. And as Aesop at Tun∣bridge, by feign'd and surreptiti∣ous Fables, seems to bewail the change of the late Gevernment, so Aesop at Epsom with real and genuine ryoy∣ceth at the Establishment of this. Sir, Your Excellency's great Example has such a prevailing influence, as to make the meanest Subject solicitous for the Publick Good, and to see that Revo∣lution become the subject of Satyr,
which has giv'n such opportunities for Panegyrick, (and whose Royal Au∣thor has had such immortal Commen∣dations from Your Excellency's the best of Pens) could not but add very much to my Resentments in the follow∣ing Papers. But, Sir, to give no fur∣ther interruption to a Gentleman whose very Leisure is employ'd for the pub∣lick Safety, I shall not encroach upon Your time any further than to beg Your Acceptance of this poor Entertain∣ment, which shall make me add to my Endeavours of approving my self in a more substantial way, Sir, Your Excellency's most Obedient Servant.
AESOP AT Epsom. FAB. I. Of the Fox, and the Stork. A Subtil Fox well practis'd in design, Invites a Stork, that He with him will dine, A match, says Stork, Sir Reynard it's agreed, And home He goes, and much resolv'd to feed,
Nothing will serve, but that He's sure the Beast Will soon repent He'd brought Him for a Guest, His Stomach was so empty, and so great, Zounds! He himself should finish all the treat. Fox smiles, and in his Cubs the Dinner bring, Soop, and Pottage, a Banquet for a King. Fall on, my guest, said Fox, and down he pour's The liquid Feast which He himself devours. Dear Stork, He crys, 'Slife Child, why dost not Peck, The Stork he Stretches, and extends his neck. But nothing can get up within His Bill, Whilst Reynard licks it up, and Eats his fill; At length perceiving how he had been serv'd, He homeward Stalks, or He must else have Starv'd, But Mindfull of the Fox his empty Treat, Sends to Invite Him to a dish of Meat. The Fox not thinking Storks had had the sense To mind affronts, or take the least offence,
Took him at's word, and said, Sir Stork content, I'll see what House you keep, and Home wi'him went. The Table Spread, and every thing compleat, That might put Fox in mind He was to eat: Two servant Storks upon the Table plac'd A Narrow long-neck'd Glass which held the Feast; Lampreys and Eels within it might be seen, The Glass was so transparent and so clean, When Stork, Sans ceremony, Sir, begin, You see your entertainment here within, I'll shew the way; and in his Beak he thrust Whil'st Reynard try'd in vain, and trying curs'd. Lord, said the Stork, are you a Beast of thought, And yet no Broth, or Soop, or Pottage brought? I'd e'en fetch some, and fill the Vessel up, You then, although You could not eat, might sup.
MORAL. The Application soon is made By any that's a Reader, One in his turn the Fool has play'd, And whose turn's now consider: The Tunbridge Aesop first has given The Town a Dish of Meat, And faith, to make the Talli'es even, Epsom should also treat. FAB. II. Of the Lamb and the Wolf. A Wolf as He look'd out for prey, And went in search of food, Perceiv'd a Lamb and Goat in's way Come jogging on the Road.
Mutton He lov'd, but did not dare Fasten on that He Spy'd, Whilst Hircus with his horns was there, And thus to part them try'd. Home from this beast, for shame, Sir Lamb, It greives my very Soul, To See You leave a Noble Dam, And walk with Goat so foul. A Goat! fye on't, the very worst Of all the Brutal Race; A Stinking Animal and curs'd, The woods, and fields disgrace. Heark you, said Lamb, I plainly know Whom You Your tricks would put on, And what You mean by gaping so, Poor Wolf! he wants some Mutton. I thank you for th' Advice you lend, And wonder not you shou'd
Like me much better than my friend, Since I am better Food. MORAL. So when the Wars broke out at first, And France prepar'd for fighting, Lord! how her Mighty Monarch curs'd The Dutch and us uniting! Per Dieu, said he, the British Race Of Heroes once the chief Joyn with a Land so cursed Base, And ask of them relief! But had his aim successful been And us from them remov'd, We then the sad Effects had seen, And Fables moral prov'd.
FAB. III. Of the Sun and the North-wind. BEtwixt the Sun and Wind, arose A quarrel like to end in blows If both of 'm had not rather chose A fitting Mediator: It seems that this contention grew From which was Strongest of the two And down their VVagers strait they threw Thus to decide the matter. By chance a Traveller came by, And both with one united cry, On Him let us our forces try To finish the dispute: He that the first a way could find To make him leave his Cloak behind
Should win; it's done, agreed, said Wind, Said Sun, content, I'll do't. VVhen Boreas summon'd every blast, And at Him all his fury cast, But flinging round his Cloak, he pass'd And forwarded his journey: Sol smiles, and gath'ring all his Rays, Sure of the conquest and the Bays, I'll make You quit your Cloak, he says, Or else by God I'll burn ye. Straight Passinger began to sweary Enrag'd and troubled with the heat, And in a most confounded Pett, At last flung off the Garment Boreas, said Sol, See yonder Cloak, The Wagers Won and Thou art broke, And up in hast The Stakes He took, And that was all the harm in't.
MORAL. Thus blustring Kings like Boreas often fail; Whilst others like the Conqu'ring Sun prevail: Numbers may fright, and dismal fancies raise, But what can Numbers in improper ways? Whilst at Compeign Extended armies Shine, And France her infant Princes fight, and dine, Whilst Boufflers treats the Ladies with a Song, And Duke de Berry learns the Spanish Tongue, A Prince at Cell, who Seemingly appears Thoughtless of Arms since now releas'd from Wars: Amid'st his Sports, shall fit Expedients find To cheat the dangers by their Arms design'd, And one poor Hunting Match perhaps may break The Measures which their fam'd Encampments take.
FAB. IV. Of the Trumpeter. A Trumpeter in time of VVar VVas in the Battle taken; And Dead almost with very fear, Try'd thus to save his Bacon. Dear Sirs, if guiltless Actions save, Or Innocence secures, From you the grant of Life I crave, Who ne'er endanger'd yours. Nor Sword, nor Musquet have I born, Or any other Weapon worn Than what is in my hand: This Trumpet never gave a wound, Or utter'd any thing but empty sound, And that too by command.
Off with the Dog, and fetch the Rope, Said Enemy, and tye Him up, A Villain! never spare him. Zounds! That same Instrument is worse Than Sword, and Gun, and every Curse; And we've most cause to fear him, Since from his blasts, those wounds at first proceed, By which so many Thousands of us bleed. MORAL. So crys an Author who has spent his spleen, VVhat harm can silly Fables mean? Or how can Faction takes its birth, From a few Tales, and unprovoking Mirth? They may perhaps delight, But rest assur'd they'll never fight, The Beasts I treat of cannot plot Or traffick in Sedition: what of that?
VVhen if he rail'd like O—ts, like S— fought, Curs'd like a Man at Sam's, like M— thought, All join'd together ne'er was able To shew the malice of one single Fable. FAB. V. Of the Apple and the Horse-Turd. AN Apple falling from a Tree Which near a River stood, With Horse-Turd in his Company Was sailing down the Flood. When Turd ambitious to discourse A thing so much above it, VVould into Conversation force As down the River drove it. Lord! Madam, what a pleasant Stream Is this in which we ride?
Sister! How we two Apples swim? The foul Sirrev'rence cry'd. MORAL. A Threadbare VVriter who per chance Has not one Farthing paid, To carry on the VVar with France, Towards the Royal Aid. Crys, Damn this curs'd confounded Peace, It Forty Millions cost, And we could not procure our Ease Till All our VVealth was lost.
FAB. VI. Of the Covetous, and the Envious Man. TWO men to Jove their prayers made For some kind Earthly blessing, One never satisfy'd with what he had, Tho' rich beyond Expressing. Th' other was envious, nor car'd What mischief e're befell Him, So that His Comrade was not Spar'd, And what should kill Him, kill him: Jove Teaz'd with their Petitions, sent His Son Apollo to 'em, To try to give 'em both content, And know what service He could do 'em. Ask, said Apollo, friends what e're You want th'out further trouble,
And what is ask'd from eithers pray'r T' other Shall bave it double. With that, the parsimonious Cuff, For Wealth did loudly call, Which downward fell, but ne'r enough For his desires could fall. Still as he ask'd, the Riches came, And doubled on the other, Tho' Still his prayer was the same Which Still enrich'd his Brother, Next in his turn, Sir Envy kneel'd, And with a bale-ful Eye, Dear Phoebus to my prayer yield And Hearken to my cry, Now oh! just now thou Pow'r divine This favour let me find, Put out this single Eye of mine, That his may both be blind▪
FAB. VII. Of the Beaver, and the Hunters. A Beaver being close pursu'd By Hunters, Horse, and Hounds; And neither safe, within the Wood Nor in the open Grounds 'I know full well (and step'd aside) 'The reasons why I'm chas'd, he cry'd, 'And much lament the Cause, 'My Stones are what they want, and I 'Must either part with them, or die 'And glut the Beagles jaws: With that, though he was loath to part With things as precious as his heart, Or with a quiet mind Surrender up the pride of all his kind, Yet life was sweet, and utt'ring forth some groans,
Off went his dear beloved Stones, Which in the Hunters way The Melancholy beast did lay, Call in the Hounds, the fierce pursuers said, We've caught the game, and have our markets made; And taking up the Prize they went All homeward with content. Whilst the Enervate beast return'd, To graze in quiet on the plain: And never after this misfortune mourn'd, Or fled from Hunters or from Hounds again. MORAL. If a certain great Prince, had but done as this Beast, And instead of each Stone gotten rid of each Priest, He had still bin a King, whom his People had bless'd. But since He had rather keep in with Ned Petre
And likes Fryers, and Monks for his company fitter: Let him now keep his Stones, for there's none but has better. FAB. VIII. The Lion and the Fox. A Fox, a Lyons Chaplain, when The Beasts began to cry, And gather round their Monarchs Den For Antient Liberty; Said, may it please my sov'raign Lord, Your Subjects are your Slaves, And if they dare to Speak a word, Your Throat may be their Graves. With that the Monarch Wisely smil'd At good Sir Crapes advice, And said, go fetch your youngest child, My Stomach's something nice.
Sir, said the Fox, You'r in the wrong, I must your pardon crave, Parsons alone to Jove belong, And no Controulers have. MORAL. So in late times the pulpits rung, With passive non resistance, And all the burthen of their song Was Duty and Assistance: Life, Wealth, and every thing was due To Him, who or'e us rul'd, And VVhilst that Cant they would pursue, VVe'd All of's E'en been fool'd, Had not their Churche's Lands been thought Belonging to the Throne: And made 'em change their former note, And what they, said disown.
FAB. IX. Of Jupiter, and the Monkey. JOVE was desirous once to know VVhat Animal did bear The handsom'st off-spring, or could show A little one most fair. He summon'd every living thing Unto a certain place, To come before him, and to bring A Pattern of it's Race. Forthwith each female creature came, VVhich Air, or Sea, or Earth, Could for it's proper Tenant claim, And each produc'd a Sample of it's birth. When as the Pow'rful God was just Deciding the dispute,
Up to the Throne a Monkey thrust, A most deformed Brute! And with her Young one in her hand (VVhilst All the company smil'd) 'Vouchsafe great Jove to understand 'Mine is the Finest child: 'Please you my Liege to view this face, 'How regular and sweet! 'How well proportion'd every grace! 'And how exact the features meet! 'Surely my Lord can ne're refuse 'My Child and Me the Bays. VVhen Jove for laughing could not choose: And all of 'em went their ways.
MORAL. So young Aesop from Bath, or Old Aesop from Whitehall, May amuse Town, and Country with a fab'lous recital, And in love with themselves think their own things the best, Whilst the Clergy, they laugh at, escape the dull Jest: And all the success of each Fable and story Is to lay down their own faults like the Monkey before ye. FAB. X. Of the Hares, and the Frogs. A Time was fix'd when Hares should meet, And for dispatch of Business sit, Without the least delays,
To remedy their present State, Or else anticipate their Fate By proper means and ways. Strait every Puss the Form forsook, Which He or She for shelter took, And hasten'd to the place Which by appointment was design'd, To heal the mischiefs of their Kind, Or make extinct their Race. The SPEAKER chose, and Members plac'd, The House resolv'd it self at last Into a grand Committee: But what a pother, Lord! they kept? One sigh'd, another trembling wept, 'Twould move us all to pity. At length a Chief of high Renown, And Ranger of some mighty Down, First ask'd the House's leave:
And then stood up, whilst all the rest With sorrows, and with grief oppress'd Could nothing else but grieve. 'Brethren, said he, a wretched Race, 'Whom Men, and Dogs, and Eagles chase, 'The Sport of the Creation, 'In vain we're thinking to redress 'Our Grievances, or make 'em less, 'While in this living Station. 'Hounds will for ever be pursuing, 'And Hunters meditating ruine, 'Whilst we must still be flying; 'We'd better (Friends) if I might give 'Advice, this moment cease to live, 'Than always be a dying. Tho' Death is not a thing which suits With constitutions of such Brutes
As Hares are of, 'tis certain: Yet they resolv'd, with much ado, To bid the Groves, and Hills adieu, Tho' not 'thout tears at parting. By chance there was a River near The place, where these Assemblers were Debating how to die, Wherefore to put off all delays, They fix'd in that to end their days The sooner, 'cause so nigh. But Lord! how Puss would backward shrink, When almost at the very brink, And sigh she was so near! Then tell her Beads, and wish some Saint Would help her from this damn'd restraint, And ease her of her fear! At last the leading Hares were come,
Prepar'd and ready for their Doom, And at the Flood arriving, A Frog or two into it skip'd, Which made 'em look before they leap'd, And think of longer living. 'Hark ye, (said Puss who bore the sway) 'Fair and softly wins the Day, 'There's no such need to die yet, 'I'll Home again, and e'en submit 'To what my Destiny thinks fit, 'And keep my Form in quiet. 'Troth Sirs, the fate of Frogs is worse 'Than ours, which we at present curse, 'And are so much afraid at: 'For we who fear most things beside 'Are fear'd by them, and that's my Pride 'Since these are us dismay'd at.
'Sirs, it would be a pretty Jest 'If since our life is not the best 'It should be made our loathing. 'Faith, tho' I cannot be the Chief, 'I have this comfort and relief, 'I'm better far than nothing.
MORAL. Hence let the Male-contented mind Instructive Lessons draw; Nor be uneasy, when confin'd Within the bounds of Law. What tho' his Purse is something drein'd, For Peace he ne'er desir'd, And has in part that Prince maintain'd Who might have all requir'd? A Neighb'ring King's best Subjects paid Thrice more than William's worst,
And without Mony Laws obey'd, When His with Mony curs'd. If therefore He like Hare should grieve Since small respect we show Him, Like Hare in Fable let Him live, Since He has Frogs below Him. FINIS.
