A921 R22399 12488324 62319
THE CHURCH Triumphant. OR, A Comfortable Treatise, of the Amplitude and Large∣ness of the Kingdom of CHRIST; Wherein is proved, by Scriptures and Reason, That the number of the Damned is inferiour to that of the Elect. Nè Redarguas ea falsitatis de quorum contrariis non est demonstratio. Rabbi Mos. By JOSEPH ALFORD, M. A. sometime of Oriell Col∣ledge in Oxford. Exercere nos Deus vult diffiultate Quaestionis, Non decipere falsitate sententiae. Augustin. Printed by W. Bentley, for J. William at the Crown in S. Pauls Church-yard. Anno Domini 1649.
with that usefull observation of Irenaeus: who speaking of Pro∣phecies, and some other abstruse points in Religion saith, Ante∣quam effectum habent aenigma∣ta sunt, & ambiguitates homi∣nibus; they are clouds in the eyes, and riddles in the understandings of men, until they be explained. I humbly intreat you therefore to accept my indeavours, and to su∣spend your judgement till you have weighed the Reasons on both sides. Let not the seeming novel∣ty of the opinion retard your en∣quiry, for although Truth be the daughter of the most High, and therefore there can be no new Truth: yet many Errours are an∣cient, embraced, reverenced un∣sifted and uncontroverted, meerly in regard of their Antiquity: when
notwithstanding some doctrines of great consolation may languish and be suppressed under those er∣rours. The treasures of Divine knowledge are inexhaustible, and to the dissolution of the World, the Oracles of God will suppeditate new matter, wherewith to recreate a holy diligence, to confirm a doubting spirit, and to confound a sawcy curiosity. If I have deli∣vered a truth unto the world, which hath lien as an Embrion buried in the womb of errour, it is a wealthy blessing upon my poor endeavours. If I doe hallucinate in the prosecution of it, I am wil∣ling to be confuted without obsti∣nacy. I am not less desirous to de∣molish an errour, than I am sol∣licitous to hearken to a corrected judgement. Sir, I wish you feli∣cities
both temporal and eternal, that when you have finished the progress of faith and hope, you may be translated into this Church Triumphant together, Sir, with Your most devoted servant JOS. ALFORD.
OF THE LARGENESSE OF THE Church Triumphant. IN the Misteries of Theolo∣gy some questions are not yet un-muffled from their obscurity: This Doctrine concerning the Paucity or Multitude of the Elect, fruit∣ful of consolation, and conducible to the knowledge of God, hath seemed not one∣ly difficult, but inexplicable. The opinion of the Learned asserting the Paucity, hath augmented the Difficulty, as if the bare au∣thority of men were sufficient to prevail with after Ages without the concurrence of their reasons. It hath been inveloped with obscurity, by a surmize, that the knowledge of it is hid in the secret councel of God, and is to us unrevealed: neither hath it
appeared what reasons can be raised from the Doctrine of Faith and good Works, which might greatly perswade us to a belief of the greater number to be saved. But the clouds of erroneous prejudice being dissipated, truth will be manfested in a more vigo∣rous excellency. What tidings can arrive more acceptable to a consternated spirit, labouring under sin and an apprehension of eternal tor∣ments, than to receive an assurance, that between the exhaustible mercy of his God, and his iniquities, there is no proportion. That the goodness of God is not circum∣scribed in the salvation of some few men, just, and perfect, and eminent for sanctity; but that he will beautifie innumerable o∣thers, lame, and infirm, and dislocated mem∣bers: On the other side, what can more en∣cline the hearts of men to desperation, than to feign God to be some severe and impor∣tunate Exactor, who will admit none into his Heavenly Kingdom, but Enoch, Elias, Prophets, and Apostles, and some few men of Angelical holiness. For as in the body all the members are not Eyes, but the Ears, the Nose, the Hands, the Feet, and other more ignoble parts, have their distinct and proper functions: So in the Body of the Church Triumphant, whereof our Lord Christ is the Head, the members are divers
and subordinate, some being dignified a∣bove others: and as in a well constituted City, there are the chief Magistrates, men of middle ranks, and the poorer sort: so in the City of God, which through his benig∣nity is congregated, and constituted by de∣grees in this world, there will be found not onely Prophets and Apostles, but also ma∣ny inferior persons out of all Kingdoms, People, and Nations. In the Tabernacle of Moses, and upon the building and beauti∣fying of that illustrious Temple of Solomon, they did not onely bestow gold, silver, and jewels, but they made use also of brass, wood, stones, Badgers-skins, and Goat-skins: to let us understand no doubt, that into this Heavenly Temple, whereof that was a shadow, some shall be received, who in the judgement of men, want the austere con∣versation, and refined piety. But if any man object, Nothing that is defiled and impure shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and that God hath commanded us to be holy, even as He is holy: Let that man also know, that he, who upon the Cross purified the thief, in the fire of his own sacrifice and torments, will in like manner deal with all those that are ordained to sal∣vation. It is the commandement of God that we should be perfect, but imperfect is that charity that refuseth salvation to those
that have not fulfilled that commandment he commandeth what we are unable to per∣form, that the riches of his mercy might abound, to make the whole world obnoxi∣ous to his benignity: for by the fulfilling of the law, or the accumulation of good works, no man can be perfectly just before him. For this cause I have framed this Dispu∣tation of the Amplitude of the Kingdom of God, conceiving it no less profitable than if it had consisted of the Mercy, Good∣ness, Wisdom, Power, or in a word, of the Nature of God. For these things are so con∣catenated, knit, and interwoven, that unless the confines of it exceed the territories of the devil, we can neither truly apprehend his mercy, nor those other attributes that declare his nature. But such is the peevishness of some spi∣rits, they choose rather to defend an opi∣nion with obstinacy which they dote upon, than to enquire what may be stedfastly maintained without contumacy; but we who defend the better Cause, to wit, the magnifying of the Mercy of God in the sal∣vation of Mankind (for beyond these we shall not proceed) are prepared to refute without pertinacity, and to be convinced without passion. I have not enterprised this Disputation with any secret end divided from the glory
of God, not to anticipate more able pens, nor to introduce any superannuated Here∣sie; not to tyrannize over the judgements of men by an upstart Opinion, nor to im∣pose a necessity of belief upon the meanest capacity: but to unbosom my Meditations to the Pious and the Learned, and to have this liberty judged by the Church of Christ according to the Divine Oracles of Truth; for in this case I wish not to hear the opini∣on of this or that man, but, if it could be accomplished, of all men. If in the appli∣cation of Scriptures, mine seem discrepant from the understanding of another man, let him not rashly reject it, but remember that all Christian Commonwealths have indul∣ged this priviledeg to a Writer, to produce his own perswasion without the contumely of anothers judgement. For why should that liberty be prejudged by him, who is at liberty to exercise it? Let them consider whether any thing be alleadged against the Analogy of Faith, or the precepts of good Life: any thing inconsistent with the high∣est and most undoubted principles of Chri∣stian Religion, or derogatory from the Ma∣jesty and glory of the Kingdom of Christ, of Allegories and mistical Interpretations. I shall speak little, knowing with what free∣dom all Writers have made use of them, provided they have not been repugnant to
the Doctrine of Christ. It was my desire to attempt whether this Argument might not be published as a Paradox, and after the custom of the ancient Schools discussed on both sides, that so from the success of rea∣soning, there might out of things obscure and wonderful, flow matter probable and common. Whereas I said in the beginning, that some things in the secrets of Divinity are not yet explained, this perhaps will not escape reprehension: for it may be reinfor∣ced, That not onely all things necessary to salvation are contained in the Scriptures, but that all those things are unfolded and made plain both by ancient and modern Writers: and therefore it appears a need∣less thing to enquire after new lights. I say therefore, that nothing more un∣changeably ought to be believed, than that God by the pens of his Prophets, Evange∣lists, and Prophets, hath delivered unto us in their writings, whatsoever it was his good pleasure we should know, and observe: but I say also I have (I believe) reason to pawse upon the consequence, that because there they are contained, they are therefore ex∣plained, for this I suppose no judgement that is at leasure can believe; for if there be a perfect Declaration of all those things, wherefore are our precious hours punished
with so many Commentaries? why are so many books written to work down, smooth, and explicate the knotty questions in Reli∣gion? why so many disputations, conferen∣ces, and controversies among the learned? for whilest they emit Explications, Obser∣vations, Annotations, and Animadversions, do they not discipline reason to preponder some things as yet intricate and perplexed? and instruct a consideration that they labour to propagate belief to things doubtful, and authority to things contemned? if any man will be so licentious as to reply, that such polemical disceptations are spent for the most part about matters of indifferency, besides the untruth of it, certainly learned and wise men have reason to resent it as a horrible indignity to hear themselves char∣ged to wast their time in unnecessary alter∣cations. But what age may not make the same ob∣jection, that all things are abundantly re∣vealed? Antiquity might plead it, and then it had been a needless undertaking to illu∣strate and declare the meaning of the Scri∣ptures. Future generations also that shall succeed us even to the worlds dissolution, may affirm the same thing, so that by such a restraint all means of interpreting the my∣stical places of Scripture, would be ever∣more precluded. That the sense of divers
places of Scripture, hath not been suffici∣ently declared in any age, is sufficiently de∣clared by the words of S. Paul to the Co∣rinthians, where he hath ordained prophesie to continue in the Church for ever: by this means to inform our understandings, that the enucleation of some abstruse matters hath the preheminence amongst Spiritual gifts. In his first Epistle also to the Thessa∣lonians he gives it in precept, That we quench not the Spirit, neither despise pro∣phecyings, but exhorteth us to examine all things, and to hold fast that which is good. Peter also doth not deny, but that some things in the Epistles of Paul are hard to be understood. Thus it is evident, I wanted not reason to affirm, that some questions in the Sacred Monuments of Christian Religion, are still complicated and involved: neither is the Spring-head of this holy Fountain so to be shut or dammed up, that it may not be lawful for any to convey the streams to wa∣ter this Celestial Eden the Kingdom of Christ. Some perhaps may fancy that this Que∣stion might have been stifled in the birth, or overlaid by second thoughts, because it seems to graduate men in dissoluteness; lea∣ding them from an awful reverence into se∣curity, from security to contempt, and from
contempt, to an unrestrained course of life. Errours proceeding from a good intention are the more excusable; and that they doe ere through a misunderstanding of the pro∣gress of piety, I shall now demonstrate. Fear never made good Tutour to duty, but love and a consideration of benefi∣cence. 'Tis the method of slavery to act un∣der compulsion; but it is the glorie of obe∣dience when affection extorteth a filial re∣spect. Thus when Moses in the sixth of Deuter. had set down all the laws, solici∣tous as is were of our observing them, he brings in the law of Charitie, command∣ing us to love God above all things, and our neighbour as our selves. Our Lord Christ also brought no other com∣mandment but this of Love, making it the epitome of the Law and the Prophets. From hence St. Paul also in the 13 to the Rom. saith, Love is the fulfilling of the Law. St. John also that bosom-friend of his Lord and Master, when he would describe unto us the perfection of it, by the nature of God, telleth us, God is Love, insinuating that he that abideth in Love abideth in God, and God in him. Seing therefore the Law, the Prophets, the Lord, and his Apostles, do unanimously invite to love; considering al∣so that love floweth not from fear (for fear and love are never consociated, love still
expelling fear) but from the love of some∣other towards us, which also is known by indulgence and conferring of favours and benefits: it follows that the essence of pie∣ty and sanctity is rooted in the assurance of the Divine love to us, and quickened by the consideration, and estimation of Gods great benefits unto us: which apprehen∣sions enflame our souls to reaflect and obey him. That our Lord Christ held this to be the path of true piety the Scriptures doe wit∣ness; and therefore David saith unto the Lord, righteousness thou hast loved, but wic∣kdness thou hast hated. For there is no∣thing more virtuous and effectual to pro∣move the mind to an exaltation of piety, and to keep it at that pitch, than Love, and a continual remembrance of the Divine clemency and goodness. But this is undiscernable in the salvation of a few men, and the condemnation of many. In this rather was the mercy of God manifested, that when in Justice he might have damned all, hee destinated some to punishment, but more to salvation: for when the soul springeth, and culminateth in the contemplation of such a love, unless it be doomed to the left-hand distribution, that man must needs abhor vice, when he knoweth it is so displeasing to so loving a
father. And it will also forcibly allure him to the love of virtue, and piety, because he remembreth the indulgence of his God, doth require it of, and expect it from him. Lastly he will continually endeavour to be holy, innocent, and just, because he know∣eth his God, and his Saviour is holy, pure, innocent, and just. Nor doth the objected security hinder at all the jouney of piety, but may rather be accounted the life of good actions, and a happy being: but such a condition of life cannot possibly be espou∣sed to a perpetual fear of evil, and torment. Neither doe I understand and mean by se∣curity, that carnal habit, which ariseth from a contempt of Gods laws, and an in∣cogitancy of the day of judgement: but a privation of anxiety, and a tranquillity of spirit, germinating and budding from a confidence of the Divine goodness to man∣kind, which our Lord and his Apostles have called Peace. In this security and affiance, I say, felicity is placed, and I term it the fountain of ho∣liness, and good works. What good things can he imagine, what laudable action can he meditate, or what great matters worthy of a Christian resolution can he perform, that alwayes doubts his own salvation? that thinketh God is angry with the greater part of mankind? and entertaineth such narrow
conceptions of the kingdom of Christ, as if it were open but to some few men, I know not who in some angle and nook of the World? This is not to extol his Majesty, but to obscure it; this is not to advance his glorie, but to diminish it; not to magnifie his goodness, but to disparage it; not to admire his wisdom, but to despise it; not to stand amazed at his omnipotence, but to mock it: whereas they who think highly and Honourably (as it is meet they should) of the Largeness of his Kingdom, their con∣templations are devout, pious, and the more congruous to the essence of God. Of which most blessed kingdom what my concepti∣ons are, I shall comprehend in two books, or Dialogues; in the last I shall variously, and plainly demonstrate the largeness of this Kingdom, having in the first cleared all those places of Scripture which seem to oppose the magnitude of it. For distinction sake I name the Prolocu∣tours Caelius, and Maynardus, and every at∣tentive Reader may make himself a Mode∣ratour. Caelius. I come accompanied (my dear Maynardus) with early desires to renew our last conference; and if it be no interrupti∣on to your studies, I should desire satis∣faction in a scruple, by some words of yours injected.
Maynardus. I account it (my Caelius) the noblest end of my studies, if by that ad∣vantage I can in any matter benefit a friend. C. You may remember, that after you had discoursed of the goodness and mercy of God to mankind in Christ, you added that his kingdom, which was built upon, and established in mercy, was set open to more men, than many men have hitherto conjectured. I have ruminated upon these words, being doubtfull whither they might tend: and many things coming to my re∣memberance I remain unresolved. M. Speak, I pray, your thoughts. C. First I thought of Oigen, who (as it is said) was of Opinion that not onely the damned Souls of men, but also the Devils themselves at last should be received unto mercy. I thought also upon their opinion who believed, that although not all men, yet such as were matriculated into Christ by Baptism, and did eat of his mystical bread, should obtain eternal life. Lastly I pondered whether you might not insi∣nuate that the number of the Elect was not inferiour to that of the Damned, but ra∣ther greater. M. And which of these did you find most agreeable. C. The last, but that the Scriptures teach us otherwise, seems the more probable. But
because nothing falleth unadvisedly from you, I expect the reason of your words: and whether you intended them in any of these senses which I have delivered. M. First I conceive that opinion to be falsly imposed upon Orig n, and that it is an emulous invention of such men that would obscure his eminence, which unworthy practice those times (so well as these) were very prone too. For my part, I conceive that most learned man to have advanced the Kingdom of Christ, and the mercy of God, by no reproveable or vulgar amplifications, which saying being maliciously detorted through envy, and perversly understood by ignorance, that devout Father was slander∣ed to affirm that the devil should be transla∣ted to glorious immortality: But this opi∣nion, whether held by Origen or any other man, is sufficiently refuted by Christ himself the Master of Truth. The second opinion, which doth invest all those with eternal happiness, which are initiated by Baptism into, and have partici∣pated the Body and Blood of Christ, is ut∣terly to be rejected and dis-allowed; for that imputeth salvation to the efficacy of outward signs and elements: but this is so super-abundantly overthrown by S. Paul, that it were waste of time to urge any thing in confutation of it: for it would fol∣low
by unavoidable consequence, if that O∣pinion should be granted, that Hymeneus and Philetus, and Alexander, of whom Paul makes mention; that Ananias and Sapphira, and Simon Magus, that Julian the Apostat, nay that Sergius the Monk, who by some hath been reputed Antichrist, are now par∣takers of Beatitude. But the third opinion, that the City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, the Church Triumphant, should be larger than the exe∣crable synagogue of the devil, doth not seem to my judgement to contain the least absurdity. Wherefore I shall not conceal my preconceptions of it, unless you other∣wise conceive of it. C. I should (as I said before) embrace this perswasion, did not the word of God restrain my consent. M. Doth neither the authority of the ancient Fathers, nor the consent of former ages, nor the newness and greatness of a matter then prevail with you? C. Not at all. For first, in disputation, not the authority of men, but the power of reason should be of most importance. Se∣condly, the Fathers claim not the least as∣sent to their writings, further than they are confirmed by the testimonies of the Scri∣ptures. Then, for the consent of many ages and customs, what is it, if it be not support∣ed
by reason, and the authentical authority of Gods word, but a decrepit and a blind errour? For there is no novelty in Truth, than which nothing is more ancient, for she is the Daughter of the Most High. But if there be a truth newly explorated, the greatness and the newness of it, should ra∣ther allure, than affright me, or any other man. M. You would then, did not the Scri∣ptures over-rule you, joyn your consent to this Opinion? C. I would. M. Verily I applaud your judgement, as holy, and worthy of a Christian. But what places are those which (as you say) contra∣dict this Opinion? C. The first is, because at the Deluge onely eight persons were saved, and if the salvation of the Elect were typified by this deliverance, doubtless the number of the Elect is very small: but this seems confirm∣ed by S. Peter in his first Epistle, chap. 3. where speaking of the Ark, he saith, In which very few, that is eight Souls were de∣livered. The like Figure whereunto even Baptism doth now also save us. M. These words of S. Peter rightly un∣derstood, do unfold the mystery of that a∣ction. First he saith, that the waters of the floud, were shadows or figures of Baptism,
and the destruction of sin; therefore Noah did typifie Christ the Publisher and Preach∣er of Righteousness, and by the Ark is sig∣nified the faith of the Kingdom of Christ: for as none were preserved from the waters, but those who hearkening to Noah, took sanctuary in the Ark; so now also none en∣ter at the door of Salvation, but such as ha∣ving heard the Gospel preached, believing, repent: and following Christ Jesus the Pi∣lot of his Heavenly Ark the Church, are wasted by faith as in a ship through the ra∣ging waves and whirlpits of death and hell. Whereas Peter subjoyns that very few were saved from the deluge, those words may ve∣ry aptly be referred to the paucity of be∣lieving Jews at his first manifestation in the flesh. For James also writing to the Jews scattered about all the coasts of Asi, com∣forteth them, that they be not dejected through various tribulations, nor discoura∣ged through the paucity of believers: and sheweth them also that the sufferings of Christ, the persecutions of the Godly, and the scarcity of those Jews that should free themselves from that hallucination, and blindness of mind, was foretold by the Prophets, and prefigured by types: and as that inundation destroyed not them that took shelter in the Ark, neither can crosses, calamities, nor death it self endamage those
that trust in Christ, but be rather wholly converted to the advantage of a believing soul. Peter therefore, as I have shewed, speak∣eth not of the universality of the Elect, but his words must be restrained to those con∣temporary Jews, to whom, as he was an A∣postle of the Circumcision, he directed that Epistle. C. I confess with joy my Maynardus, thou hast enlightned a very dark passage in S. Pe∣ter; but what can you answer to this argu∣ment, that of that vast multitude of Israe∣lites which God brought out of Egypt, onely two, Calb and Josuah, were admitted into the Land of Promise? M. The best and safest rule to unvail the mysteries of the Old Testament, is to consult the Apostolical sense of those pla∣ces. Paul handling that place in the tenth chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthi∣ans, draweth it into example, thereby to warn and deter them from sinning by the sad president of those Israelites that fell in the Wilderness: And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that he may discover the root of all iniquity, he saith that they to whom the Land of the Canaanites was promised, and they who fled out of Egypt through unbelief should not possess that land, which God al∣so there called his Rest, because it doth de∣clare
the peace and unity of the Kingdom and Church of Christ, in which we shall live secure, trusting in the good will of God towards us in Jesus Christ. Of which rest the Prophet Isaiah maketh mention in the two and thirtieth chapter, saying: And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting pla∣ces. Behold here the sense of the Apostle upon the words, where there is not a sylla∣ble of the paucity of such as shall be saved, and doubtless it were an act of great teme∣rity to bow or wrest the Text further than the very matter doth declare, or wider than the Prophets and Apostles have conceived of it. C. But can you shew by some other pas∣sages of Scripture, (for without this autho∣rity I know you attempt nothing) what must be understood by Josuah and Caleb, and why onely the little ones, the rest being ex∣cluded, should possess the Land of Canaan? M. There is no doubt but these two were preserved to be witnesses of those wonderful deliverances, which God had vouchsafed to that unthankful people, be∣cause they onely had the courage amongst all the Spies, to undertake the extirpation of the Canaanites; but if we raise the mat∣ter into a higher consideration, seeing that those transactions pointed to the times of
the Messiah, it will be no impropriety to af∣firm, that Josuah and Caleb were Types and adumbrations of the paucity of those, who upon the first coming of our Saviour, should believe in him, notwithstanding the maje∣sty of God was refulgent in him by the fre∣quent attestation of miracles: which very thing, those severe comminations against that stubborn and contumacious people do seem to import: For, saith God in the four∣teenth of Numbers, all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearken∣ed to my voice: surely they shall not see the Land which I swore unto their fathers, nei∣ther shall any of them that provoked me see it. And a little after, he excepteth Josuah and Caleb, and all those under the age of twen∣ty years. Of which thing God complaineth in Isaiah (which place also S. Paul citeth in the tenth to the Romanes) I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people. S. John also in the beginning of his Gospel saith, He came unto his own, but his own re∣ceived him not. C. I perceive by these two (for as it is written, In the mouth of two or three wit∣nesses every truth shall be established) the A∣postles and Disciples of our Lord are pre∣signified, who as they did testifie of his
wonders and miracles, so did they chiefly bear record of his Resurrection. For so our Lord himself saith to his Apostles, Ye shall bear witness of me through the utmost parts of the earth. But now I expect to hear what you can say concerning the posterity of them that sell in the wilderness, for cer∣tainly in this also is comprehended a great mystery. M. I should indeed have little to answer to this matter, had not S. Paul, that great Revealer of hidden things, opened a way un∣to it. For the Apostle in the eleventh to the Romanes, doth plainly prophesie that, Those branches which were cut off through unbelief, shall through Faith be reingrafted. What else doth this signifie but that the po∣sterity of them that perished in the desart, shall have access into the Land of Promise? was not all Judea after the death of our Sa∣viour turned into a solitude? were not al∣most all them that had seen Christ, destroy∣ed by war, famine, or pestilence? yet their generations, as Paul witnesses, shall be re∣ceived into his Kingdom. In confirmation whereof, he doth accomodate the predicti∣ons of the Prophets, and thus unfoldeth them to the preconsolation of the Gentiles. For I would not, Brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery (lest you should be wise in your own concei) that blindeness in
part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written: There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. For this is my coenant with them when I shall take away their sins. Which words in the original are somewhat different; but it seems the Apo∣stle followed the translation of the Septua∣gint, in which translation the words are not so much considered as the sense. These things also Moss, Jeremiah, and Ezechiel, do promise to the Israelites, that he will ga∣ther them out of all Nations, and from the ends of the earth, that he will cleanse them with pure water and purge them from all their ini∣quities, and give them a new heart, and a new spirit. C. To the other things I readily assent, but I do not sufficiently understand what is meant by the Deliverer. M. I will shew you my Caelius: This place is diversly expounded, but the words of the Apostle are plain enough; for when he saith, he shall come, it is liquid he speak∣eth of somewhat yet to come: and when he saith, the Deliverer shall come, whom can you suppose to be meant, but Jesus Christ the onely Saviour and Redeemer of mankind? especially when he addeth, out of Sion, that is, out of the very Nation of the Jews, to
whom this Prophecie doth belong. But be∣cause some Holy and great man was to be sent from God, for the instauration of a collapsed Church, and the replantation of an extinguished Religion, this doth not at all seem different from the custom of God. For when things are even despaired of, and grown desperate, he then useth (as the Prophet Malachie speaks) to raise up some Elias before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, and he shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the Children, and the heart of the Children to their Fathers: that is, he will congregate and convert the hearts of those Children to the Messiah, whose Fathers have worshipped him in Spi∣rit. And that this should be performed by Elias was the opinion of Orig n, Theodoret, Chrysostom, and Austin also, which they con∣firm by that saying of our Saviour, When Elias comes he shall restore all things. How∣soever in my judgement, Paul in that place means none other but Christ Jesus. C. But was not Christ already come when Paul wrote? wherefore then doth he say, he shall come? What coming doth he de∣scribe? his first appearing to suffer death for us, or his last coming to judgement? M. Paul in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, when he purposeth to describe unto us by whom Antichrist should be re∣vealed,
and by what weapons he should be overcome, after that for a time, he had proudly advanced himself against Christ un∣der the name of Christ, he thus writeth: Then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his co∣ming. In which words four things are decla∣red unto us. That Antichrist shall be dete∣cted, by whom he shall be brought to destru∣ction, by what weapons, and lastly that the Lord himself shall come in Person against this enemy, shall subdue him, and scatter all his forces; & this shall be the means of that accomplishment. Whatsoever is made ma∣nifest, was first hidden, and whatsoever is brought to light is made manifest: Antichrist for a long time hath lyen hid like a wolf in sheeps cloathing: and still had been unmani∣fested, had not the appearance of Christ be∣gun to reveal him: by whose coming again also he shall be utterly overthrown. But in the mean time, it behoves us to fight man∣fully under Christ our King and leader, a∣gainst this adversary and all his adherents: and least we should faint or be discouraged, St. John assureth us he shall be delivered into our hands, And the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords and King of kings, and they that are with him, are called, and cho∣sen, and faithful. But with what weapons?
with those wherewith men go out to bat∣tel? No, but with the Spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming. C. I apprehend you, with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, that is, with arguments taken out of the Do∣ctrine of the Scriptures, which he shall ne∣ver be able to answer. M. I deny not but the adversaries of Christ may be fought withall, and brought to destruction by other weapons, but Paul telleth us, that Antichrist shall be put to flight by the Spirit of his mouth, to exag∣gerate the power of Christ, who is able to vanquish his enemies by the breath of his nostrels. For his Spirit, as the Prophet I∣saiah saith, is an over flowing stream, he is also a consuming fire, and Christ Jesus is the brightness of this fire, at whose appearance the enemies vanish, as the night and dark∣ness is dispersed by the approch of the sun. Now if the tyranny of Antichrist, must be abolished by the Spirit of the mouth of our Saviour before his last coming to judge∣ment, (which St. John foretelleth, saying, And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire.) That the Go∣spel may be preached in all the Kingdoms of the earth; another coming of Christ must yet
be enquired after: and this is that coming by which he hath begun to restore the preaching of the Gospel, to enlighten the understandings of them that sate in dark∣ness, & to confirm them by his Spirit. We know well under how much blindness and ignorance the whole world, in former ages, hath been kept, contiguous almost to the very times of the Apostles. For as soon as their embassage was ended, the ravenous wolves begun to enter into the fold of Christ (as Paul saith) not sparing the flock. Thus by degrees the true Christ was taken out of the world, and a supposititious Christ laid in his room, in the holy place, the Tem∣ple of God established in faith, not founded upon any material basis. In which temple he sitteth, and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deeaveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. For they who shut their ears that they may not hear the truth, it is no wonder that they delight in lies. And when salvation is pro∣mised to them that believe the truth, they that delight in lies may justly fear damnatiō. C. If I understand you rightly, you inti∣mate that as the absence of the Gospel doth
signifie the absence of Christ, (for where his word is preached, where his voice is heard there is Christ) so by the return and resto∣ring of the Gospel is to be understood an∣other coming of Christ. M. Rightly taken; but I proceed to de∣clare this middle coming▪ In the 18. of Luke, Christ having propounded the simili∣tude of the unjust Judge and the importu∣nate Widdow, saith of himself, When the Son of mn cometh, shall he find saith upon the earth? which cannot be understood of his last appearance, when the Gospel being preached over all the earth, there will be an infinite multitude of believers. But that I may no longer detain your expectation, he then foretold this coming (if you heed the mysterie) when by his denouncing of judgement and destruction upon the Jews, he comforted and confirmed the minds of those amongst them who did or should be∣lieve, saying, so reckon, that ye shall see me no more hencforth, until you shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. Seeing therefore so much blindness is brought into the world, so many shadows of falss Religion, and vails of false Doctrine: first into the Church by the decretals of the Popes, then by the fabulous stories of the Talmud, lastly into other Nations by the lies of Mahomet in the Alchoran; it is alto∣gether
necessary, that Christ our King, by his most glorious coming, should re-esta∣blish all things in unity, that the learned may be directed to true wisdom, and the ignorant instructed in true Religion. C. One thing remaineth, which seemeth to me yet improved, you said our Lord Christ had respect to his second coming, when he told the Jews they should see him no more, until with joyful acclamations they should receive him as their Lord and King; which I conceive was then accomplished, when riding upon an Ass towards Jerusalem, they entertained him with that great ap∣plause. M. Two things are diligently to be con∣sidered: First, whether our Saviour spake these words before those acclamations, or afterwards: but let any man confer the cir∣cumstances and he shall find they were af∣terwards spoken. Secondly, to whom these words were spoken. St. Luke attesteth that these words were spoken to the Pharisees; but let any man consult the other Evange∣lists, and he shall find, that he was afterward seen by the Pharisees; but he shall not find that ever they said, blessed is he that co∣meth in the name of the Lord. Nay they were so far from approoving these jubila∣tions, that it filled them with murmuring and objurgations, for in that day when the
multitude followed him, St. John sheweth in the 12. Chap. of his Gospel, that the Pha∣risees said within themselves, do you not see that we prevail nothing? behold the whole world is gone after him. We must therefore seek after another Advent, and it will be that which we mentioned from the prophetical saying in St. Paul, which shall be then accomplished, when the stragling and vagabond Jews shall infold themselves into the Church of Christ, and when those words of the people shall be fulfilled in their signification, Hosanna to the son of Da∣vid, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest; for then according to the words of St. Paul, all Israel shall be saved. C. I now plainly perceive that that place of St. Paul, is to be understood in a Spiri∣tual sense, and that upon the second com∣ming of Christ the Jews shall be restored; and that I may briefly declare my mind, I suppose that all those destructions that have happened to that people, and that won∣derful blindness in which they have been captivated, did portend the universal cala∣mity, which the world was to suffer under Antichrist; and that this coming of our Sa∣viour shall be as a resurrection from sin, a dereliction of our errours, and a conversion to the true Faith of Jesus Christ, and ha∣ving
received delightful satisfaction in these doubts, I shall now propound some places in the New Testament, which make against this Opinion; and first these do occur the words of Christ himself: Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are which enter in, but strait is the door that leadeth to eternal life, and narrow is the way, and few there are that find it. Here Christ not obscurely doth seem to signifie, that few shall be saved, but many shall be damned. M. It is very excellently, and modest∣ly spoken my Caelius, for indeed all things are not as they seem, neither are all things proved which appear to be so: some things are indeed such as they seem to be as gold and silver, but other things though they appear true to the judgement of the sence, yet are improperly so called, as tin and lytarge of gold mingled with gall and quick-silver have a semblance of true gold. Hypocrites which we call dissem∣bler doe not they appear true, devout, and Holy? yet they are so far seperated and di∣stinguished from piety and true sanctity by our Saviour Himself, that he called them painted sepulchers, which are of beautiful outsides, but full of filth, and stink and rottennes within. He saith also
by their habit and behaviour they seem to be sheep, but within they are ravening wolves. So on the other side most men are accounted irreligious and prophane, wicked and reprobated; are pointed at, hissed at, scoffed at, plundered, sequester∣ed, murthered as enemies to God and good∣ness, and unworthy to injoy any share in Gods creatures, yet these persecuted men hold fast the true Religion, and Faith in Christ. Our Saviour therefore in the 7. of John exhorteth us, not to judge by appear∣ance but to judge righteous judgement. And in the 8. Chap. he reprehendeth the Pharisees that they judged after the manner of men, all is not gold that glisters, the same thing may I say of this place by you alleadged; and perhaps they that extenuate the num∣ber of the blessed, and lessen the Church Triumphant, doe more oppose God, than they which amplifie and augment it. For if we search into some things with a holy curiosity, the first appearances of them will vanish, from this very place this truth will be sufficiently proved: For when a cer∣tain man asked our Saviour, whether few or many should be saved? Christ makes this an∣swer, Strive to entr in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will strive to enter in, and shall not be able. When once the Master of the house is risen up, and hath shut the
door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are; then shall ye be∣gin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets: but he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are; depart from me all ye workers of iniquitie, there shall be weeping and gnash∣ing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye your selves thrust out: and they shall come from the East and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God, and behold, there are last, which shall be first, and fist which shall be last. I suppose you doubt not, but these words must be under∣stood of the Jews, yet if you should scruple it, these words would resolve you, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. As if this must ad∣vantage them, and entitle them to the king∣dom of heaven, because the Master of the house is of their own nation, and chiefly sent to them: Which words some imagine to relate to the day of judgement; but to me they seem to refer to the first coming of Christ: and this will be manifest, to any man, that with diligence will examin the particulars, spoken of by our Saviour,
wherefore Christ being asked about the paucity of the elect, answers not to the question, but directs his discourse another way, least he should breed a remisness, a negligence, a laziness in them to seek after the kingdom of God; and therefore he ex∣horteth them to strive to enter in at the strait-gate, before the Master of the house be risen up, and shut it against them. C. What is this gate? and how to be shut? M. You will plainly understand, what is meant by the gate, when I have shewed you, what it is to have the gate shut. C. Proceed then to the handling of that. M. When we read that the Master of the house doth rise, and shut the gate, we must understand thereby, the secret counsel of God upon the Jews, to blind them and harden them for a time, that they should not confess him, and in a word, the shut∣ting of the gate, is the rejection of the Jews for a season, that the Gentiles might be re∣ceived into the Church of Christ. Which opinion is confirmed by those words, by which he foretelleth, they shall come from all the four crners of the earth, and sit down in the kingdom of God. And from the 14. of the Acts also, where Paul and Barnabas when they were come, and had gathered
the Church together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of Faith unto the Gen∣tiles. Also by that which Luke said before, that the door should be shut after that the Master of the house was risen up; but he rose when Christ (who is that Master of the house, and Lord of the house of God his Church) had delivered himself from the power of death, from whence you see it follows that nothing else is understood by the streight gate, but that short intervail of time from the coming of Christ to the be∣sieging, destruction, and desolation of Je∣rusalem, this also was foretold by the Pro∣phet Daniel in the 9. Chap. And he shall con∣firm the covenant with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease: and for the over-spreading of abominations he shall make it dsolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be powred upon the deso∣late. Again, our Saviour hath explained these words of the Prophet, saying, When you shall see Jerusalem compassed about on every side, then know that her destruction is at hand: and a little after, This nation shall be greatly oppressed, and shall perish by the edge of the sword, till the times of the other nations be fulfilled. C. But what are those times?
M. I shall tell you, though perhaps o∣therwise than most men conceive: for Christ doth here intimate that the Jews shall re∣main under that blindness and calamity, tiil the other Nations of the world have belie∣ved and embraced the Gospel; which limi∣tation of time, is determined in the secret will of God: nor is it any other than what the words of S. Paul import: That blind∣ness in part is happened to Israel, till the ful∣ness of the Gentiles become in. Now weigh the words, and observe whether this sense of them be strained, or detorted, or rather be not proper and genuine. C. They are indeed, onely the Apostle handleth them more at large. M. Let us therefore revolve and perpend the answer of Christ to the question. You demand of me, whether few shall be saved? but I admonish you not to trifle away time in such questions, but let there be a stri∣ving, a holy contention amongst you with all celerity, to enter in at this door of my Gospel: for the time is very short, and when the hour of your rejection, the im∣minence of your calamity approacheth, your complaints will become unprofitable, and your desires to enter, frustrate and re∣pulsed: for the gate of Salvation shall be barred up, and the faculties of faith cum∣bred and stifled. Seek not, O ye Jews, with
anxiety to know how few of you belong to the Church Triumphant, but with a wise e∣mulation run the race of Faith, that ye may belong to that Church, and it behooves you also to set out early, if ye believe these words of mine, by which I provoke and ex∣hort you to newness of life, and publike∣ly denounce and declare unto you the ap∣proach of the Kingdom of God. Now if we believe the sense of these words to be the same with those of S. Matthew, which you objected to me, which cannot be deni∣ed, seeing in both places there is mention of the narrowness of the gate, there that place in Matthew cannot reasonably be understood of the number of the Elect, for if in that passage of Luke, nothing be in∣tended but a premonition of that short pe∣riod of time, in which the Jews had a ca∣pacitie by Faith, to attain the Kingdom of Christ, although the number of them was very small which then should believe, yet you must needs grant me, that those things mentioned by our Saviour in the other Go∣spel, must onely be referred to the Nation of the Jews: of which people few indeed did enter by the True Gate Christ Jsus, and very many by the secret purpose of God being excluded, remained without. C. The force of your reasons doth in∣cline me to assent; and the rather, because
it hath been observed of S. Luke, that it is his peculiarity to deliver those things clear∣ly and distinctly, which in the other Evan∣gelists are related more obscurely, and in∣deed this is the gift of an elegant, and the duty of a perspicuous Writer. I will in∣stance for brevity sake but in one example: Matthew writeth that the two theeves be∣tween whom our Lord was crucified, used the same exprobations towards him, as did the Chief Priests, Scribes and Elders; but Luke saith onely one of them used contu∣melious language against him; And one of the malefactours which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us: but the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? and we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man hath done nothing amiss. And although this be manifest, yet I would know if there be not another ex∣plication of those words of the narrovv vvay, and the narrow gate, if peradventure some man should remain unsatisfied with this? M. There is indeed Caelius; for when a place of Scripture is assumed to the proof of some false opinion, it may rather admit of any sense, than that whereby it is ap∣plied to the confirmation of that errour?
will therefore redeem this place from the countenancing of an erroneous opinion, and accomodate it to the illustration and e∣stablishment of truth. First it is a matter acknowledged and requires no proof, that by the contumacie and fall of Adam, we are all conceived and born in original sin, that confession which David maketh of himself, is appliable to all the sons of Adam; Be∣hold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And it is no less evi∣dent, that if any man be just, if any man be holy, he ought thankfully to confess that these streams of sanctitie, these divinations of righteousness, do slow from that Foun∣tain of Goodness Christ Jesus, by a new and divine regeneration: For of his fulness have we received (that are members of his body) even grace for grace. Our Saviour in the words doth propound unto us two doors and two ways, one broad and wide, the o∣ther strait and narrow; that, as leading to destruction; this unto eternal happiness. But what else can we imagine this way of destruction to be, but the corrupt nature of mankind, and the proclivity of our wills to all errour and unrighteousness? and what can be meant by the narrow way to Life, but the observation of the Commandments, and a sincere imitation of our Lord Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life?
for he saith, If ye will have life, keep my Commandments. Also in another place, If any man will come after me, let him deny him∣slf, and let him take up his cross and fol∣low me. C. It is a very religious interpretation which you have given of these two ways, yet one thing doth not a little move me, that Christ saith, Many enter in at the gate which adeth to destruction, but few find that way which leadeth to Life: which argueth, that a small number onely shall be saved, and the greater number shall incur everla∣sting condemnation. M. Let me Caelius for a while interrogate thee, and do thou make answer, this way perhaps may facilitate the issue of this Di∣sputation. C. With much willingness, for this hath been a custom in disputation deduced even from Socrates. M. You have already granted that (un∣less I be mistaken) this broad way doth signifie and imply, the depraved nature of lapsed man. C. I do confess it. M. And that by this narrow gate, this difficult passage is meant, the precepts of God, the way of tribulation and calamitie, which was the path our Lord Jesus Christ did walk in.
C. To this also you have had my con∣cession. M. I desire you now to tell me, what can enter in at this broad gate, or rather, what you suppose it is to enter in at this broad and wide gate, but as I said before, to be made and born of the corrupt matter of the old Adam? C. That truly is my Opinion. M. Do you conceive that all men none excepted, or some men onely are obnoxi∣ous to this necessitie of sinning? C. All men, Christ Jesus the Authour and Finisher of our salvation excepted, who is therefore by S. Paul called the Second A∣dam, and the New man: For as by the disobe∣bedience of one man, sin was propagated unto all men, so by the righteousness of one man, all they that believe shall be made perfect, Rom. 5. Our Saviour also in S. John telleth us, What∣soever is born of the flesh, is flesh. S. Paul al∣so saith, I know that nothing in me, that is, in my nature, is good; for by nature we are all the sons of wrath. Which places, with in∣numerable others, do perspicuously con∣vince the impuritie of the nature of man: that I may say nothing of all those inordi∣nate affections, violent concupiscences, fa∣cinorous actions, & hainous offences which are produced as the deadly poisonous fruit of this corrupt tree.
M. Your answer, Caelius, is very ingeni∣ous and opposite. What is it, think you, to find out this way, and this gate that leadeth to Life? C. Doubtless to find out Christ, who is the Way, and the Door, and the Life, and de∣spising all other transitorie pleasures, and fugitive comforts, to flie to him, and to ho∣nour him by right believing and well living. M. But who entreth at this gate having nature onely for his guide, or how many follow Christ onely by the light of reason? C. None alas, not one. For nature, as I have said, being the way to death, whither can it lead us but to destruction? M. Do all men therefore, following the conduct of nature, slide into death, and tumble into condemnation? C. This I have already granted without any hesitation. M. Our Lord Christ, then, when he said many, understood all, and when he spake of a few, he meant none. C. I cannot gainsay it, I have granted the antecedent, and the consequence is irre∣fragable: but why did our Saviour rather say many and few, than all and none? M. In this we may contemplate the wis∣dom and lenity of our ever blessed Saviour, who did so apportion and contemperate his sayings, that neither these should sink into
desperation, nor they be lifted and puffed up to arrogance and ostentation: it pleased him therefore to say many, not all, that he might qualifie the rigour and severity of the matter, by the gentleness and mildness of speech (for if he had said all, he had preci∣pitated infirm and timorous consciences in∣to desperation) and with the same holy mo∣deration he pronounced few should find the narrow way: For had he said none, he would have seemed to preclude and antici∣pate all hope of all Salvation: thus by a most wise temperance and disposition of speech, he reflecteth to us our pravity and misery, when he saith many, and when he saith few, he leaveth us not altogether de∣stitute of hope, which is our heavenly via∣ticum. C. Who then shall be saved? M. When the Master himself had affirm∣ed that it was more easie for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, presently the Disciples felt within them∣selves a consternation of mind, and being suddenly struck with an inward conflict of fear and wonder, they enquired as you now do, who then shall be saved? to which que∣stion he returned this consolatory answer: To man this is impossible, but to God nothing is impossible: and thus he taught, that one
and the same thing might be, and might not be: by the Divine assistance it might be accomplished, by the powers of nature it could not be effected. And this is it of which S. Paul so glorifieth, through Christ, (of whom I receive my strength) I am able to do all things: and in this sense also we must understand the yoke of Christ to be easie, and his burthen light: light and easie to grace, grievous and burthensom to na∣ture. C. You conjoyn and expound these things most aptly, and as I apprehend, our Saviour in these sayings made use of those figures which the Grecians do call an Hypocorism, and an Hyperbole, the one speaking of a thing with divination and ex∣tenuation; the other with incredible in∣largement and amplification. M. Rightly observed: for such extenua∣tions are very much used in ordinary con∣versation, and sometimes also in the Holy Scriptures: as for example, when Paul wri∣ting to the Romanes of the contumacy of the Jews: What (saith he) if some of them have not believed? he saith some of them; when some of them onely had believed (a remnant selected out of the rest) and all the other, as Paul witnesseth, were blinded. The same figure he also useth in the fifth to the Romanes: For as by one mans disobedience
many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. I doubt not but you perceive in both these places, a ma∣nifest extenuation, when he saith, some of them did not believe, and many are dead; for he had said before, that all were dead in A∣dam. These things being thus clearly pro∣ved, it is plain to all understanding, that our Saviour in this similitude of ways and gates, understood nothing of the Multitude or Paucity of such as should be saved. And that you may more fully perceive, that our Lord in that place of S. Matthew, spake not of the life to come simply and absolutely, or meant any thing of the last end of men, suppose him to have said thus, many shall come to destruction, but few shall find life, or many shall walk in that way which leads to everlasting death, but few shall find the way to eternal life, here the way we see is not the end: And having made mention of the way, he doth admonish us of our humane imbecillity, and reduceth to memory our present misery: that despairing of, and de∣spising our own weaknesses, we might have recourse to the refuge of his goodness and clemency. For who that is grown to ma∣turity of years (not to speak any thing of our impure beginnings) unless afflictions compel him, grace regenerate him, and the Spirit of God renew him, doth turn into
that troublesom and unpleasant way of the cross? who hath an affiance in, and who is so inflamed with the love of God, as being secure of the life present and that to come, doubteth of nothing, is solicitous after no∣thing? who is careful of his neighbours good and goods, as of his own, and who is equally sensible of his losses, crosses, and afflictions, as of his own? who is so careful to honour God in the riches of his Mercy, as he is industrious and plotting and toyling to inrich his own family, and to enamil o∣ver a fugitive felicity? yet this the Law, this the Prophets, this the Lord himself with strict severitie hath commanded us: Thou shalt love God above all things, and thy neighbour as thy self. What shall I say then? Is the whole Mass of mankind created to destruction? and are we all excluded Hea∣ven through the infirmitie of our nature? God forbid! for our Heavenly Father to all our spiritual evils, languishings, and relap∣ses, hath applied the medicine of his infi∣nite Mercy, for he himself testifieth of him∣self, He sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him should be saved. From hence Paul also proclaimeth it, He sht up all mn under un∣belief, that he might have mercy upon all. Let us therefore  out with the same A∣postle, Miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? and let us subjoyn also our acknowledgement with thanksgiving to him who doth deliver us, saying, I give thanks unto God through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. You see now my Caelius, the perverseness of their conclusion who thus argue, Few nter in at the strait gate, therefore few sh ll be saved. And now you apprehend the safetie and sweetness of this conclusion, Few find the way which leadeth to Eternal Life, therefore God doth spread, dilate, and diffuse his grace, otherwise mor∣tal man must altogether inherit corruption, as David saith, If thou shouldst be extream to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who is able to stand before thee. Here now is the door opened into that large field of the mercy of God, when through his benigni∣ty and their faith, he conserveth the guilty. That is a true saying, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the Lavv, to do them; But this is no less true, That Christ Jesus died for the ungodly, and vvas made a curse for us, that vve should be freed from the curse of the Lavv: so that we are both accursed and blessed, execra∣ble by nature, but sanctified by grace; ac∣cursed in Adam, but holy and happy in Christ, to whom he honour and adoration for evermore. C. To the Lord Christ the Authour and
Life of our life be all praise and glory, that by his wisdom hath brought to pass, that thou hast so clearly illustrated this most dif∣ficult place, that there remaineth no doubt, no scruple, no hesitation. Now I perceive how aptly one truth agreeth with another, and what a hollow and unsound reconcile∣ment is made between truth and falshood. M. If any other places of Scripture con∣tain any appearing contrariety to this asser∣tion, name them Caelius, that before dinner I may give answer unto, and vindicate them. C. I shall perform it with great willing∣ness, and with the best aid of my memory, I shall choose such places as are most wor∣thy of explication in this matter. And first I will instance in that Parable of the Sower, whereby our Lord doth insinuate unto us that a remnant onely shall be saved, for as it is written in the thirteenth of Matthevv, the fourth part onely of the seed did fructi∣fie, the rest perishing by divers accidents. Wherefore I covet to hear what you can produce in answer to this allegation. M. It is the truest and the justest office of an Interpreter to expend, and consi∣der the end, purpose, and intent of the Speaker. This observation is necessary in all emergencies, but then especially useful when we examine the sayings, and Parables of our Saviour, because not all can answer
in every respect to the purpose of the spea∣ker. This some have attempted but with small success. Let us therefore content our selves to enquire out the meaning and scope of the place, for in that is contained all the doctrine and instruction that can be ex∣pected from the speaker. For the similitude it self, and the explication of it must be applied to the scope and intent, not the intent to the similitude, for by such a pre∣posterous accomodation, many absurdities would follow. In this collation therefore our Lord Christ intending to shew us all those impediments, by which we are chiefly withdrawn from the worship of God, (the principal part whereof is the hearing and the practising of the Word preached) bor∣roweth a similitude from the Sower, rec∣koneth up those things that retard and hin∣der the growth of the seed, and doth acco∣modate them to the Heavenly seed, which is the word of God. Then he nameth three general impediments; the devil, tribula∣tions, and the cares of this life; and at least with one of these is every man tormented and persecuted, yet doth the word of God take root, and bring forth fruit in a plenti∣ful manner. C. In what place? M. In the good and fertile ground. C. But which is that good ground, if
three parts be scattered, one by the way, another upon a rock, and a third part falleth among thorns? M. Even that ground by the way side, that rock, and that thorny place, when that Spiritual Husbandman shall have driven a∣way the fowls of the air, shall have removed that rock, and burnt up those thorns. Did not Paul fall by the way? did not Peter dash upon this rock? and was not Matthevv choaked with these thorns? yet Paul be∣came an elect Vessel, and the Apostle of the Gentiles; Peter the chief Pastour to the Jevvs, a Feeder of Christs sheep and lambs; and Matthevv both an Apostle and an E∣vangelist. Therefore the drift of that simi∣litude was onely to teach the success and e∣vent of that Heavenly Doctrine▪ not to im∣ply any thing of the final condition of the Saints or reprobates: although we may ga∣ther from this very similitude, and those things that follow in the same chapter, that the number of the Elect shall be the grea∣ter, because the Paucity hath respect unto the Jevvs, of whom, as we shewed before, were to be gathered out from all parts of the world, and preserved as the seminary of the Kingdom of Christ. This also may be gathered from that most plentiful in∣crease of the good ground (which was the Apostles and the other Disciples.) Also
from the grain of Mustard-seed, which al∣though it be the least of all seeds, when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof: Also from the leaven, which though it be little, yet being hid among many mea∣sures of meal, it leaveneth the whole lump: all which collations and resemblances do lively express the power and energie of the Word of God, and are as so many Decla∣rations and Manifestations of the greatness and largeness of the Church Triumphant; but if any man should reply, that by this simili∣tude sour sorts of hearers are demonstrated unto us, yet were it inconsequent to infer from hence a Paucity of Believers. Let us suppose an hundred Auditours, ten where∣of by the devil snatching away the seed, be∣come unprofitable; Again ten others fall off by a persecution, spring up against the Word; Lastly, ten more revolt through love of riches, now the other seventy bring forth good fruit, some fifty, some sixty, some an hundred fold, some six hundred fold, and by this reason do not all things fitly corre∣spond, and is not the comparison firm? C. It will be firm indeed: but then the division of the hearers are not distributed into equal parts. M. Our Saviour himself hath not so di∣vided
them, nor commanded any such di∣vision, but onely said, thus and thus the seed fell. And what gross malignity would it be in us, to wrest the words of a merciful Saviour, to a rigid interpretation? For if this doth not happen amongst us in ordina∣ry sowing and husbandry, that the greater part of the seed doth utterly perish, certain∣ly we must not imagine so of the Heavenly seed, sowed plentifully in our hearts by the liberal hand of that Spiritual Husbandman. C. Truly Maynardus, according to your premonition, I judge the Scriptures should be interpreted according to the context, scope, and meaning of the speaker: and what you have answered concerning the in∣tent of our Lord in these Parables, I ap∣prove as very proper and genuine. And with the opening of these places, I am so affected, fitted, and enabled to understand others, that I will onely object one or two, and pretermit the rest, yet are they very few. I come then to that place which makes most men of that malignant opinion, con∣cerning the salvation of mankind. I mean the place which is at the conclusion of the two Parables; one of the Vine-yard, the other of the Marriage of the Kings Son, where it is in both places most clearly said, Many are called, but few are chosen. M. You say right, when you call it a ma∣lignant
opinion, I will add an envious and a dangerous opinion, driving men violent∣ly into desperation, and such errours they might soon and easily avoid, if they would observe that Law of interpretation which I mentioned before; for in the Gospel, if all the sayings of our Lord Christ were through∣ly weighed, it would be confessed that the greater part of them had reference to the Jews, for as he himself witnesseth, to them chiefly was he sent; I was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. St. Paul also in the 15. to the Rom. saith, Jesus Christ was a Minister of the circumci∣sion for the truth of God, to confirm the pro∣mises made unto the Fathers. Therefore he was diligent with all care to perform his ministery, in calling them, teaching them, exhorting them, warning them, healing their sick, affecting them with benefits, convincing them with miracles: for all which bowels of compassion towards them, they afflicted him, reviled him, crucified him, killed him, all which things he would undergo: first, that he might accomplish his embassage, then that the benefit of his death and the glorie of his resurrection might redound to all nations and people that should receive with Faith these glad tidings of their Salvation. For I do not deny but the Doctrine of the Son of God
rightly and faithfully received, to be the Doctrine of all times, ages, places, and per∣sons; but this I would, that those Texts and sayings which are accomodated to par∣ticular persons, places, and times, should not be applied to the universality of men, and time. For not all things belong to all men after one and the same manner, as they are commanded, and spoken to some: If you desire an example, take that of the young man, who desired leave to burie his Father, to whom Christ answereth, Follow thou me, and let the dead burie their dead. Therefore hereafter let none take care to see their friends well buried; I will not care for the dead when either the glorie of God, or the necessity of the living command my assistance. Our Saviour bad them that were cured of the Leprosie to shew themselves to the Priests: Therefore must they now that are healed of the itch or Leprosie, re∣pair to the Priests? I know some men from hence would au∣thorise private Confession, or rather confu∣sion, for with such foolish, and impious Alle∣gories they indeavour to obscure the Do∣ctrine of Christ, it was an argument of Divine power, and an evident testimonie of the obedience of Christ, who came not to de∣stroy, but to fulfil the Law, for it was ex∣presly said in the Law, that the Priest should
judge of the leper. The Lord also com∣manded the rich Man to sell all his goods and give them to the poor and to follow him; that saying very much troubled him and made him sad, yet perhaps he afterwarwards put it in execution. And if he did not, he ought to have done it, in obedience to the command of so good and gratious a Master, it will be sufficient for us to have such a preparation of mind, that if the welfare of our brethren, and the glorie of the Lord require it, to part with all things yea life it self, but this being a singular injunction, and commanded onely to one man, doth not bind the generality of men; so that they should neglect their estates, or impend all their wealth upon the poor, any more than they are bound to sacrifice their sons because God commanded Abra∣ham to such an obedience, and therefore because our Lord said unto the Jews, that many are called, but few are chosen, we must not generally extend and stretch these words to all times and persons. C. You mean (if I understand you right) that those sayings were meant of the Jews of those times, and solely to be appropria∣ted unto them, of whom many by the Pro∣phets, and afterwards many were called by the Lord himself, but few were chosen, namely Apostles, Disciples, and some Wo∣men,
as the Holy Scriptures do witness: these were the little flock to whom Christ did Minister that consolation in Luke, say∣ing, Fear not little flock, for it is the will of your Father to give you a Kingdom, this is that remnant of which Paul in the 11, to the Rom. saith, Even so then there is at this time a Remnant, according to the election of grace; these are that seed of whom also Isaiah speaketh, Except the Lord of Sabboth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and been made like unto Gomorrha. In all which places the paucity of the Jews of those times which should be saved is not obscure∣ly signified. M. You take my meaning right, and you have very aptly connumerated those places of Scripture. Those that do detort that say∣ing of our Saviour should observe that all those parables in the 20, 21, and 22. Chap∣ters in Matthew do contain the rejection of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles. In confirmation of this truth weigh those words in the first similitude in the 20 Chap∣ter, they murmured against the good man of the house, saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have born the burthen and the heat of the day. And it is manifest, that after the resurrection of Christ, these Jews did make complaints: and when Paul and
the rest of the Apostles preached the Go∣spel to them that were without, they held it an unjust thing, that the Gentiles should be made equal to them, the ancient, and Holy people of God: this is plain to be seen both in the Acts of the Apostles, and also in the Epistle to the Romanes. In the same parable also these words, Take what is thine, and go thy way, do clearly imply the rejection of the Jews, and what is more manifest than that convertible Text? Those that are last shall be first, and those that are first shall be last. Who (I pray) are those last made first, but the Gentiles alienated from the Common-wealth of Israel, and now preferred before the Jews? and who are those first made last, but the Jews for a time rejected, till the fulness of the Gentiles be come in? Then also those Israelites shall be saved, as we have shewed before. Moreover, the Parable of the 21 Chapter cannot admit of doubt; and that in the 22. Chapter is so perspicuous, that if in the first there possi∣bly were any doubt to be raised, yet this would easily remove and dissolve it, espe∣cially when the same sentence, Many are cal∣led, few are chosen, is found also in the con∣clusion of that parable. Now that this si∣militude was by our Lord appropriated to the Jews, who can make a question when he observes these words? The wedding is
ready but they which were bidden are not wor∣thy: Go ye therefore into the high wayes, and as many as ye shall find bid to the marriage. This is the same which our Lord command∣ed to his Disciples, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures. Mark the last Chapter. This Paul and Barnabas testifie in the Acts, It was necessarie, that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unwothie of everlasting life, See, we turn to the Gentiles; for so hath the Lord commanded us. Now compare this of Paul with that of our Saviour, and you will find that one egge is not more like another. Christ saith, They that were invited, were not worthi; Paul saith, You judge your selves un∣worthie; Christ saith, Go out into the high waies Paul saith, We go out unto the Gentiles, for thus hath the Lord Commanded. But let us rise to dinner, there is an importunate cre∣ditour must also have some satisfaction. That which remaineth (which indeed is the most important matter) we will difer until the afternoon. M. THe serenity of the air, my Caelius, and this pleasant face of heaven doe even invite us to forsake the house. With your allowance therefore we will repair to yon∣der
summer-house, and spin out our di∣scourse. C. It is most agreeable Maynardus for I prefer the benefit of your conversation be∣fore all sublunary contentments. It is now your part to proceed, and as the gravitie of the matter doth require, I shall lend you a very attentive ear. M. I will proceed, conditionally that you will interpose, when you doubt of any thing spoken. C. I shall most willingly. M. Then First I will declare the first rise and beginning of that opinion concerning the paucitie of the Elect. Secondly, I will prove by plain and solid arguments, the am∣plitude and Largeness of the CHURCH TRIUMPHANT. In the beginning, as by the subtle malice of the Devil, death got an enterance into the World; so by his artifice and emulation, this envious and narrow Opinion hath been advanced and disseminated; for this father of lies, this enemy of mankind, saw and collected by indubitable signs, that the Church of God was established in mercy, as upon an unre∣moveable foundation: and that by de∣grees, God would settle his heavenly Kingdom; which should consist of infinite multitudes of Citizens: therefore hath he endeavoured, and doth still contrive by a
thousand deceits, temptations, and treche∣ries to coarctate, straiten, and preclude the passage into that kingdom. Thus by crafty enticement he beguiled our first pa∣rents, and had not the wisdom and great goodness of God intervened, all mankind had perished in their fall. But no violence, no power, no fraudulencie of Hell can nul∣lifie the eternal decrees of God. His pur∣pose therefore hath still taken effect, and in all ages his Church hath been enlarged according to the predetermination of his good pleasure: nor could the seed of God be scattered and lost by all the oppositions of the Devil. That Anti-God considereth this, and applies his malice to new strata∣gems: amongst others, spreads this opinion of the small number of the Elect, and the in∣effable multitude of the damned among those that are commonly called the wiser sort of men. From hence came those verses, Omnibus in terris quae sunt à Gadibus usque Ad Gangen, pauci dignoscere possunt vera bona: — Also, Rari quippe boni numero vix sunt totidem, Quot Thebarum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili. Another Authour also saith, The number of fools is infinite, these words are common∣ly quoted as out of Salomon in his Eccle∣siastes, yet let the Text be rightly weigh∣ed, and Cicero must own the saying; Another
saith, All things are full of folly. Which speeches: fall from such men who think none good, none wise, none happy but themselves. Plato in his book to Phaedon the Philosopher, is more moderate, for he saith, Few men are extreamly good or bad, but most men are of a midling iniquitie: so likewise the extremities of all things are few and rare, as very little or very great, very white or very black, very swift or ve∣ry slow, but the indifferencies, are many and frequent. Now if you compare the number of the best men with that of the tolerably good, this last number will infi∣nitely exceed the other. C. It is even as you say. And verily this Philosopher hath ever seemed to me more Religious than the rest. But those others I take to be such men, as a couple which were lately amongst us, when they met in the street, and had saluted one an∣other; quoth the one, I tell thee John, there are but two honest men in all our Citie: and I assure thee replied the other, I think George thou art one of them, and truly John (saith he) thou art the other. M. They knibbled one another like horses. But I return to that serpent, who by little and little rigled himself, and in∣sinuated into the judgement of wise men, and by subtile extenuations, and malicious
diminutions gave them to understand, that the mercy of God, and the goodness of God to mankind, was not so great as was ima∣gined. That God was good and merciful, was undenyable truth; but withall he was just, and a most severe revenger of offences and transgressions. Two wayes he devised to instil this perswasion; one from witnesses, an∣other from signes and causes. His witnesses were those who wrested the fore-mention∣ed places of Scripture, which by the bles∣sing of God we have so far vindicated, that hereafter they will not be able to alledge the least matter of moment in opposition. His causes are the actions and bad deeds of men, which that experienced deceiver doth use to term so. And these nets he spreadeth with such diligent and cunning artifice, that truely it is no hard matter to fall into them, nay it is a most difficult thing to avoid them, for thus he en∣croacheth upon the understanding; Wilt thou know, O man the truth of thy salvati∣on or damnation, and not onely of thine but of all others? Contemplate the inclinations, the studies, the meditations, the pursuits, the actions of men, which are the causes of eternal happiness, or eternal misery; if the actions be good, of salvation; if bad, of condemnation. Now look about thee, judge the trees by their fruits, and thou
wilt easily discern how few they are that keep the commandments; and observe the multisarious parts of righteousness: how small and contemptible number there is of good men, how vast a multitude of wicked men and unjust. Wherefore dispelling all doubts and hesitations thus conclude: If good works are the inerrable signs of Sal∣vation, and wicked actions the infallible causes of everlasting desolation, it follows by unavoydable consequence, That small is the number of the Elect, infinite the num∣ber of Reprobates. C. O old Serpent, O hellish monster compacted of malice and deceit! I am afraid, too many wise men of this world have been tutord and disciplined by this Sophister, whom I have often heard to knit and interweave thus their Fallacies and Sophismes. M. Do you doubt it? there is nothing more sure than they are taught and instru∣cted by him, who seperate themselves from the Communion and fellowship of other Christians, as if they onely were Religious and Holy, but all other men execrable, profane, and reprobates. For this opi∣nion had its first spring from the Philoso∣phers, afterwards by degrees, it got a slide into the unwarie perswasion of Christians. C. I make no doubt of that. But I
would now know how to be unintangled from these fallacies? M. First, I would grant all those things, that God is most just, that no man perfectly worketh righteousness, or fulfilleth the Law in all its requisites: and therefore that by nature, or the observation of the Command∣ments, no man is justified. Eminent is that saying, There is none that doth good, no not one. Also John saith, There is none good but God onely. But I would remember also that God the Father, hath transferred all our ini∣quities, (which was his goodness) and the universal punishment due to our sins upon the obedience of Christ, as Isaiah teacheth, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastise∣ment of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, and have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. This also the Father him∣self testifieth, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. The Son also at∣tests it, I lay down my life for my sheep. Then I would deny the antecedent of the connexed words. I would answer, That good works are not the causes of Salvation, but the pur∣pose of God, and his everlasting mercy in Jesus Christ, comprehended by faith. I
would also answer, that wicked actions are not simply and absolutely the causes of damnation, but diffidence, unbelief, and pertinacy. As the Lord saith in the 16. of John, The spirit must reprove the world of sin, because they did not believe in him. As Paul also saith, Through unbelief the branches are broken off; also, That God hath shut up all men under unbelief, that he might have mercy up∣on all, both Jews and Gentiles. And because I have faith in God, and embrace his mercy, and am delighted in the Law of the Most High, though the appetite and vitious na∣ture of the outward man, resist and gainsay, yet I would conclude, that neither sin, nor Law, nor the powers of Hell should be able to condemn me. As Paul in many places witnesseth: We believe, saith he, that man is justified by faith, not by the works of the Law. David likewise, in this placeth mans beati∣tude, when God imputes righteousness to him without works: Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven, and whose iniquities are blotted out. Blessed is that man to whom God hath not imputed sin. Lastly, I would con∣clude, that from the appearance of works, no infallible criterium could be grounded of our everlasting condition, because we are not ignorant that those men that have been most dear to God, have collapsed and con∣tinued in most presumptious and dangerous
sins, who afterwards upon repentance, have been restored to eternal happiness. There∣fore we ought not to judge rashly of the final estate of others, but leave them to their ma∣ster, either to stand or fall, Rom. 14. C. I approve your answer brother May∣nordus, for it most rationally confutes the cavils of the adversaries, and their mistaken expositions, and solidly confirmeth our o∣pinion. And hereafter by the assistance of God, I will thus repel the darts of the de∣vil, and elude the subtile arguments of some men. M. The Lord teach thy hands to war that bows of steel may be broken by thine arms, Psal. 18. I conceive I have now sufficiently shewed the first hatching of this barbarous opinion, and all its serpentine turnings and windings. It remains now that we proceed to the confirmation of our most salutiferous perswasion. C. You judge rightly, otherwise you may incur the same censure with Lactantius, who was said very soundly to confute the opi∣nions of his adversaries, but very weakly to maintain and prove his own assertions. But in my judgement, these men seem ignorant of the duty of a prudent Oratour, neither do they fully understand the disposure ued by Lactantius in his Books of Divine Insti∣tutions: For it is the part of a wise Oratour
(as Cicero teacheth us) to endeavour all he can, that that part of his Oration which con∣sisteth in the refutation of his Opponent, be more firm, compact and pithy, than that which concerns his own Defence, to cast all our darts against him; but if our own assertions be easier to be proved, and his harder to be overthrown, then it is an excellent course to endeavour to en∣tice and withdraw the minds of men from the opposite defence, and to convert them to the favouring of our own. Which things being true, I see no reason why it should be objected against him, that he laboured more in refutation, than in proof; for such is the cause of Religion, that it must not be sup∣ported by the infirmity of humane argu∣ments and subministration of reason, but must flourish in the embraces of an active Faith. Go ye into all the world (saith our great Master) and preach the Gospel to every creature: he that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned. Paul also saith, That a Bishop should be able by sound Doctrine, both to ex∣hort and convince the gainsay rs, Tit. 1. For there is no more required, but the sincere and pure word of God, which to them that are ordained to eternal beatitude, is more sure, firm and infallible, than principles and demonstrations are to Geometricians. And
therefore if any man hath detected and con∣futed an erroneous opinion, he hath well performed his undertaking. I speak not this, as though Lactantius had not confirm∣ed true Religion, as it was to be proved a∣gainst them who were ignorant of the Scri∣ptures, or despised them. For when, in the first three Books, he confuted the supersti∣tious errours of his adversaries, then he falls upon the proof of Christian Religion: in the next three Books, and in the seventh, he sets down the true end of our Religion, and sweetly invites men to pursue the reward of immortalitie. M. What you speak of that Father, is very true, that he was to contend against such as denied the authority of the Scri∣ptures, neither did they admit of Proofs deduced from that authority. But we who have to deal with such men as reverence the Sacred Monuments of Truth, must pro∣ceed in a different manner. I will there∣fore demonstrate the Amplitude and Large∣ness of the Church Triumphant, fom four most firm and most clear topick places, and with as much brevity, as the reason of the matter will allow. First, from the power of God: Secondly, from his wisdom: Thirdly, from his mercy and goodness: and Lastly, from Divine Testimonies. To begin there∣fore with the first, I say, Caelius, that if we
should grant the Church and Kingdom of God to be narrower, or less peopled than that miserable Commonwealth of the de∣vil, I fear, we should derogate from the glo∣ry and majesty of our Creatour and King. For the power and greatness of a King, con∣sisteth not so much in wealth and treasure, as in the multitude of his people, the large∣ness of his territories, the extent of his pro∣vinces, and the vast number of his Subjects who pay him tribute, and are subject to his Dominion. How did the people of Rome swell to that greatness, but by the multitude of Kingdoms and variety of Nations which they subdued, and governed? from hence they were stiled the powerful Romanes, and Lords of the world. From hence their Se∣nate was called the Haven of Nations, the Refuge of Kings. For what is greatness, but an abundance of power and majesty? and what is power but a facultie of protecting others, defending themselves, and a deli∣verance of the oppressed from the posses∣sion of an enemy? but if the enemy of God and man be better provided of subjects, than the King of Heaven, he is then more powerfull, and his greatness more wonder∣ful. But who was ever so prodigiously wic∣ked as to affirm the devil to be more pow∣erful than God? the work, than the work∣man? the basest servant, than the most
wealthy Lord? wherefore doth the Lord of Heaven delight himself in these Titles, King of kings, Lord of lords, the Mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, Strong in battel; and the like? C. Although the current of your dis∣course doth very much affect me; nor do I willingly hinder it; yet I cannot forbear for a while to stop it. Some man might here say, this also is a great argument of the pow∣er of the King of Heaven, in that he hath destinated the major part of mankind (who were all his enemies) to everlasting banish∣ment. M. This might be alledged of some Ty∣rant, who leaves no means unattempted, either through justice or oppression, to en∣large his Empire; and such a Tyrant is that old adversary the devil. But to affirm this of our Heavenly King, who is our most law∣ful Soveraign, our common Father, who made us, and hath taken an everlasting care to preserve us, were most injurious, scanda∣lous, and blasphemous. Neither is that any right demonstration of power, that a Prince destroyeth the greater part of his people, but on the contrary it is an invincible evi∣dence of power, when the greater number are by him preserved. For the clearer un∣derstanding of this: Suppose two Princes, one whereof without all Law or provoca∣tion,
save that of his own exorbitant will, sought the ruine of his people, and bent all his intentions to destroy them: the o∣ther used all industry, care, and diligence (though they were ungrateful) to preserve them, should not the greatest power be judged to be in him the Protector? C. Yes indeed. M. What if he preserved but a greater part, would you suppose him to be a more powerful Prince than the other? C. Why not? Truly both the more powerful, and also the more merciful; for if he could have saved all, he would have sa∣ved all. M. I do not think so, where then is his justice? for without it, there can be no ex∣ercise of virtue, for the punishment of, and his severity unto a few, doth exalt and mag∣nifie his clemency to the rest. C. I confess it, but we must be circum∣spect, least whilest we praise his clemency, and augment his power, we diminish his ju∣stice. But if these attributes be equal in God, then the number of the blessed, and the number also of the damned are equal. M. Such an equality is not to be requi∣red, where there is neither debt nor merit, here onely the true bounty, the free mercy of God are discerned: for God oweth to no man, and it is lawful for him to do what he
pleaseth with his own creature, the work of his own hands, and fashioned for his glory; unless that the nature of all men, especially that of a Prince, should be more propense to clemency and pardon, than addicted to punishment and revenge: as God himself witnesseth of himself, saying, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gratious, long-suffr∣ing, and abundant in goodness and truth. Now no motive is so prevalent, as the promise of salvation, to win souls to God; nothing is so magnificent, so princelike, so highly li∣beral, as to succour the afflicted, to pardon the suppliant, and to deliver men from dan∣gers: on the contrary, nothing is more ab∣ject, vile, and deformed, than to make the highest cruelty to cohabite with the great∣est power. C. If God loweth nothing to man, why is it said in the 20. of Matthew, that the Ma∣ster of the house bid his Steward call the labourers, and give to every one their hire? Also our Lord Christ saith to those that suf∣fer reproach and persecution for his Names sake, Rejoyce and be exalted in joy, for I say unto you, great is your reward in Heaven. M. Our Lord out of his meer goodness and benignity, calleth that a reward or re∣compence, which is the effect of his own li∣berality, and this by the sequl of that pa∣rable is manifest; The good man of the
house went out to seek labourers, not they to seek him, as he saith in Isaiah, I am found of them that did not seek me, I was made manifest to them that asked not after me. He calleth them, he hireth them, he send∣eth them, he sendeth for them, and he pay∣eth them. Some acknowledge the good∣ness of the Master, and murmure not; others complain, using many objurgations, taxe him of unjustice, and boast their own works and day-labours, all these the Lord thus satisfieth, Friend, I do thee no wrong, didst thou not agree with me for a penny? take what is thine, and be gone, I will give unto this last even as unto thee, is it not lawful to do what I will with mine own? at thou envious be∣cause I am good and libral? What I pray thee, do all these things import but the bounty of the Master of the house? which is most plainly proved by those words, that it was lawful for him to do with his own, as bst pleased him. For he now calleth those things his, which before he called by the name of a hire, that we might understand his wonderful goodness, for he adorneth his own gifts with the name of a reward, that he might cherish and rowse up our sluggish natures to the lively performance of our duties. For otherwise, hath not the Lord stampt it as a Law, saying, when you have kept all the Commandments, say of your selves,
You are but unprofitable servants, for you have prformed but your duty. C. What is there intended by the word penny? M. The penny signifieth the Covenant which he hath made with us, offering to us life or death, honour or ignominy, felicity or misery. All these things, Life, Honour, Felicity, are by his Fatherly indulgence promised to them that do not attribute them to their own works or merit, but to the proud, and such as boast of their own works (as did the Jews) or those that de∣spaire of the loving kindness of God; no∣thing is due but reproach and confusion. For as Paul saith, The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is everlasting life through Jesus Christ our Lord. C. Can life and death then be called a re∣compence or reward? M. Yea, life in reference to the promise, death in respect of sin may be so called. For reward beareth an indifferent signification, and is appliable in good and bad things, to good and bad men. Of bad men and vain∣boasters, the Lord saith, They have received their reward. And this is the same which the good man of the house saith, Take what is thine, and be gone. Peter also saith, That the wicked find the reward of their unrighte∣ousness.
C. I now plainly perceive that the Do∣ctrine which you raised from that Parable in our morning discourse, is properly to be understood of the calling of the Jews; if you please therefore pursue your purpose. M. My purpose was to declare the infi∣nit power of God, by which we might con∣jecture of the largeness of his Church and Kingdom. For if the Majesty of a King is best conspicuous in the abundance of rich∣es, in the multitude of people, and a great number of Kingdoms, Provinces and Nati∣ons, we must necessarily conclude, That the Kingdom of God, who onely can be truely said to be powerful, great, and wonderful, is much bigger than that tyranny of the devil. For I will never call that Prince great, who hath a great multitude of ene∣mies, but I will term him powerful, to whom many pay subjection; and in this I e Solomon on my side; In the multitude of the people (saith he) is the Kings honour, but in the scarcity of men is the destruction of a Prince. C. This cannot be denyed, when those things are abstracted from persons and lmes: but when I consider them more near∣ly, and look upon them in the lives and cu∣stoms of men, I confess I am puzled what to think, for do you not see that Satan doth possess the greatest part of the world,
which as John saith, is covered with evil: therefore not without cause is the devil cal∣led The Prince of this world, and lord thereof. M. What my CAELIUS? Know you not that John saith, Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgement? do you forget what you confess in the Sym∣bole of your Belief, when you say, I be∣lieve the Holy Catholick Church, which is the Communion of Saints; which had it been subjected to sense, had not been put into our Confession, which consisteth simply and absolutely of the objects of our Faith. Let it not therefore move thee that this King∣dom of Christ, this Commonwealth of the Saints is not visible to the eye; for it is better believed and comprehended in the mind, than discerned by the sense. C. But seeing it consists of men, what is the reason it should be invisible? M. Because God in the administration of his Kingdom, differeth from the conduct of humane reason, or the Methods of that old beguiler. And here now we may con∣template the wonderful and admirable wis∣dom of God. The devil filleth all place with sin, death, and desolation: God dispo∣seth all things in justice, life and healthfu salvation. Now observe with what inex∣pressible art God doth this to deceive tha Deceiver. Under sin he covereth justice, un¦der
death life, under condemnation salva∣tion, under infirmitie strength, under folly wisdom. From hence it is said that all the World is overspread with evil: from hence Satan is said to be the Prince of this world, because he seemeth to govern all things ac∣cording to his own sensualitie as though there were no providence, but it is not so, by no means so; the true and legitimate Prince is he to whom the Father said, Ps. 2. Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. He is the true Lord who conquering death, and the Au∣thour of death saith in the 28 of Matth. All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth. C. You have proved these things very fully, and the matter is strengthened by the nature and definition of faith, for faith is defined by the Divines to be a firm com∣prehending of those things in the under∣standing which are not seen. M. I rejoyce that you have so well pro∣fited by our discourse, that you can assist the cause I maintain. But to make it yet more clear unto you I will propound a simili∣tude: We are in this life as in a Citie, which of right belongeth to some good Prince: but this Citie is usurped and op∣pressed by a certain Tyrant with severe
bondage: as for example Pharaoh oppres∣sed the Israelites in that memorable calami∣ty: now if any man enter this Citie and ob∣serve the Customs of it, he will say it dif∣fers very little from that of Aegypt, which with outward appearance and seeming wil∣lingness followeth and obeyeth the Tyrant, but inwardly consenteth with the true and lawful Lord: and although they can con∣tribute nothing else, yet they sigh and wish for him, expect him, and bewail the burthen of their servitude: and when he shall come with power to chase and subdue the ene∣my, and to restore the Citie to freedom, then the Tyrant shall feel of what force the Faith and Love of this people is to their Lawful and merciful Prince, for in stead of many Subjects, he shall then find many Enemies, for that old saying is a true one; He that hath many servants hath many Ene∣mies. What? are we not all Subject and mancipated to sin even against our wills? Fitly therefore may we say with Paul, With the mind I serve the Law of God, but with my body I am Subject to the dominion of sin. Add also, that many men commit many er∣rours through ignorance, and those will admit excuse and pardon, for a difference must be put between sins of weakness, and sins of malice and presumption. But wher our King Christ Jesus accompanied with
might and Majesty shall come to sight the last battel with the Devil, then that infinite multitude of the Elect, that innumerable company of celestial Citizens shall appear. Now they are not discernable, because as (I have said) either through force or igno∣rance they are compelled to wear the Ty∣rants colours. In the mean time, till the ex∣pectation of that time be satisfied, our pru∣dent and abundantly wise Prince hath some secret and clandestine conferences with them, heartens them and comforts them, and bids them continue faithful to him, and he will accept this their desire of him, this Faith for perfect obedience. And al∣though he can deliver us, he delayeth it, suffers us to undergo the Discipline of affli∣ctions, to kindle in us a greater desire of his coming. These are the Divine strata∣gems, the royal arts, which do deceive both the narrow judgement of men, and also elude the deceits and snares of the Devil; for who would say that in so many sins there should be any righteousness? in such a perturbation, such a trifluctuation of mi∣series any quiet rest or peace? in so much folly any wisdom? in so much servitude any liberty? or in so many dangers any safety? who would ever have thought the thief (who was even buried alive in all wickedness, and brought to be crucified
for his notorious and flagitious offences) had been one of the Sons of God, and of the number of the Elect? On the other side, who would have imagined that Judas Isa∣riot chosen to the Honour of an Apostle∣ship, and daily and hourly a continual hearer of Divine truth, and heavenly wis∣dom, should not have been a Citizen of Heaven: O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how un∣searchable are his judgements and his waies past finding out? Here is the new Art, here are new reasons of heavenly administration; this is the mysterious way of God alone, who onely is wise, powerful and good. Great is our Lord and of great power his un∣derstanding is infinite. Psal. 147. C. By this way of judging according to the shallow judgement of man, I suppose Elias was deceived, when he made his complaint that he onely was left of all those that did worship God: but what an∣swered the oracle of God to him? I have reserved to my self seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal. Rom. 11. M. You gues right; and if in one place in one nation, there were so many (althoug to a definite number be here put for an in¦finite multitude) and those unknown to  greater Prophet, how many may we sup¦pose then to have been, and now to be, i the whole World?
C. Verily I think an innumerable com∣pany. M. Let us then believe that this our heavenly King, is able and knoweth how to purchase to himself a greater kingdom, than the Enemy who hath neither wisdom nor power. C. But upon what reason do you refuse the ascription of wisdom and power to the Enemy, when it seems repugnant to his name to deny him those attributes? for you may call to mind they were termed Daemo∣nes or evil Spirits, from their great power or wisdom by many of the Ancients, for Pla∣to who followed Hesiod and other Poets, doth conceive them to be called Daemones quasi Daimones, which signifieth prudent or intelligent. I am not ignorant, that some of the Grae∣cians have derived the word from , that is to terrifie or make afraid, because strength armed with malice is a terrible thing. But as concerning their power, their opinion who derive the word from the He∣brew liketh me best, for there are many Greek words deduced from the Hebrew tongue. The Hebrews term both Gods and Devils Schadaim and the more ancient Graecians leaving out the first consonant of the word, and reading without prickt-vowels, made it Daim, then Daimones, for
both the Graecians and the Latines of elder times pronounced their dipthongues with distinct vowels and not confusedly as we use to do, now this word signifieth strength, fortitude, and power. And albeit Schada∣im be one of the names of our omnipo∣tent God, yet as Elohim the proper appel∣lation of the mighty Lord, is communi∣cated to great Princes and Potentates, so the word Schadaim is promiscuously attri∣buted to Spirits good and bad, for although there be but one omnipotent Lord God, yet Paul calleth the Devils , that is the worldly Princes. M. You have discoursed Caelius, very learnedly of the appellation of the word, neither will I labour to urge any thing in contradiction of it; for it strongly argueth their power in that they are of a sensible and an indefatigable nature: besides the use and experience of infinite business and occurrences, must needs instruct them with an unspeakable knowledge; for Anti∣quitie and length of dayes joined with ob∣servation, must needs bring forth incredible effects, but as there are two sorts of wis∣dom one Heavenly and Holy, another that descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, Devilish, James the 3. so likewise there are two sorts of power. For as the last is not properly fortitude but boldness,
not power but impotence, and violence; so that is not strictly and truly to be termed wisdom, but malice; that is a crafty and deceitful subtilety to work mischief: for as upon an approch of danger, if the mind be egged on by its own concupiscence and ir∣regular desires, and not by consideration of the publick good, this attempt is rather a vitious audacity than a warrantable va∣lour: so knowledge without charity, and prudence without Justice, is malice and subdolous fraudulencie (as Plato saith) not wisdom. Therefore when the all power∣ful wisdom of God doth frustrate and eva∣cuate the wiles of Satan, tis an impro∣prietie to say that the wisdom of God hath overcome the wisdom of the Devil; but ra∣ther that his malice is subdued by wisdom. Also when we speak of the power of the Enemy, we should say, that audacitie is quelled by valour, sury is vanquished by fortitude, and rashness disappointed by counsel. C. Nothing can be more truly spoken. M. Having therefore spoken of the power and wisdom of our omnipotent God, how shall we speak of the goodness, mercy and clemency of our most indulgent and long suffering Father? So incomprehensible i his mercy, that like an exuberant river, nay a boundles Ocean, it diffuseth it self and
refresheth all the corners of the earth. Here I am struck dumb, and astonished at the wonderful plenty of considerations that roul and flow in upon me; search the Scri∣ptures and we find him not so wealthy in any thing as in mercy; he chiefly delights himself in the publication, the iteration, the exaltation of his mercy; he discloseth him∣self, expresseth himself, manifesteth him∣self, and communicateth himself in mercy. David saith Psalm 33. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, and in another place, the Lord is endued with plentiful mercy, and under the shadow of his wings all people have safety. If I reckon up the testimonies of the Apostles and Evangelists, I find not a word in them but magnifieth the mercy of our God? Let Paul speak for the rest who himself found so great mercy. Ephes. 2. And you hath he quickned who were dead in sins and trespasses, wherein in time past ye walked according to the courss of this world, according to the power of the Prince of the air, the Spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience: among whom we also had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the chil∣dren of wrath, even as others: but God who is rich in mercy, for his great love where∣with he loved us, even when we were dead
in sins hath quickned us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heaven∣ly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness towards us in Christ Jesus: for by grace are ye saved, through saith and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God: not of works least any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath be∣fore ordaned that we should walk in them. Here we may behold, with what magnifi∣cence of expression the Apostle doth di∣vulge, and depredicate the goodness and mercy of God, and how we must disclaime and abandon all our own works and merits, by a stedfast adhesion unto, and a sure de∣pendance upon the eternal Love of God unto us in Christ Jesus. But how is God fa∣mous over all the world for his mercy, and eminent for the riches of his goodnes in the salvation of a few, and the damnation of the rest? C. Wonderful things I confess are re∣vealed unto us of the mercy of God in the Holy Scriptures: yet some men are not backward to say, that his mercy is as con∣spicuous in the Salvation of one individual Soul, as in the preservation of a thousand millions: because to that Soul which the in∣finite
mercy of God hath delivered from death eternal, there was due an infinite punishment for infinite transgressions. M. These are the inventions and vain imaginations of men, which are too much accustomed to measure things Divine by the rule of humane judgement. Suppose there were in this Citie some man exceed∣ing wealthy, and abounding with all kind of outward blessings: suppose, I say, that he should share his munificence to some few, nay bestow all his wealth upon them, lea∣ving abundance of other Citizens in an ab∣ject, wanting, and contemptible condition; would you think this man as truely liberal, as if he had made an equal distribution of all his estate among all the Citizens? C. By no means, but extreamly cruel, and a homicide, for Seneca said very truely, He that seeth a man in miserie, is able to suc∣cour him, and refuseth, that man slayeth and murthereth him. But to say so of God were horrid impiety, because it is Lawfull for him to do what pleaseth him, for his will is the perfect reason of his works. M. But doe you not remember the old saying, that good is of a communicable na∣ture, and that the more it is spread and dif∣fused still the more good it is? C. I have often heard it, and alwayes took it for a rag of Philosophy.
M. Oh brother Caelius it is Divine; for good and true are convertible terms, and of whomsoever predicated whether of Moses or Cicero, Paul or Plato, yet they flow from God whose nature and essence is good and true, and because as you said, whatsoever he willeth is good and just: and that it plea∣seth him to be called rich in mercy, cer∣tainly this must appear in the glorious sal∣vation of many men: otherwise why doth David sing out, the earth is full of the mer∣cies of God; and why is he called the Father of mercies and the God of all consolation? O the blind envy of some men that would abridge, contract and engross this goodness to some few pesons! O the ingratitude of others that indeavour to traduce and ca∣lumniate the benignity of God, as if he were some Tyrant or merciless destroyer! Some perhaps are still diffident and require an indubitable sign that may remove and banish all hesitation, behold the greatest pledge, the firmest security, even Christ Jesus the son of God, upon whose coming God set sorth a Declaration of his Love, for him hath he sent into the world, and upon him hath he cast the burthen of all our iniqui∣ties, Isaiah the 53. and again, behold the Lord shall give you a sign, a Virgin shall con∣ceive and bear a Son, and his name shall be called Emanuel. This is that sign which we
read of in the 12. of Matthew, An evil and an adulterous gneration seeketh a sign, but no sign shall be given them, save onely that of the Prophet Jonas, to wit, the death of Christ, and his rising again the third day. What greater significancy of love could the Lord exhibit to miserable mankind, than to send his Son, his onely Son, to be the reconciliation for our transgressions? or who now can scruple the amplitude, the immensity of this goodness, this Love, this mercy? how shall we be able with the Saints to know and comprehend the height, the depth, the length, the breadth of this mercy? it is ne∣cessarie that the Love of Christ be the greatest of all other, not onely in respect of the magnitude, but also the multitude of sinners, otherwise we should disrobe and denudate it of its proper dimensions, and who now will be so rashly bold to say, that the benefit of so much love, and so great goodness, should be confined to a paucity of men? for my part, I think no man can harbour such a thought without a guilt of sacriledge: what? did he not deliver the greater part of the world from their wic∣kednesses, when he prayed unto his Father upon the Cross to forgive those Jews and Aliens which were the complotters and contrivers of his death? Father, saith he, forgive them for they know not what they do;
and he said rightly they know not what they doe; for had they known saith Paul they had never crucified the Lord of life. 1. Cor. 2. Now if Princes, Magistrates, and many o∣thers, as Peter witnesseth in the 3. of the Acts, killed him through imprudence; what shall we think of all the world beside? of them that had, and have at this day just causes of invincible ignorance? Shall we exclude all these from the kingdom of God? We cannot certainly if we diligently contemplate the nature and goodness of God▪ if we think upon the clemency of our Lord Christ, and what he required of us: for he prayeth for all them that sinned through imprudence and infirmity. Nei∣ther did he pray in vain. Paul who at first was a persecutour and a contumelious sin∣ner, saith, Notwithstanding that he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly, in unbelief. And then he addeth, This is a faithfull say∣ing, and worthie of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of which I am Chief. Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that to me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pa∣tern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. And did not God de∣monstrate this before to Jonas? Who was grieved that he would spare Niniveh, and destroy his Gourd that did shed him from
the violence of the heat: therefore God saith unto him, And hast thou pitty on the Gourd, for which thou hast not laboured, nei∣ther madest it grow, which sprang up in one night, and perished in one night: and should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons tha cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand, and also much cattel? Here we plainly see the most benign and merci∣ful God doth spare a multitude, and avert the present punishment of his severity, be∣cause of their ignorance. And shall we ima∣gine that he, who remitteth a temporal judgement, because of unadvised actions, and involuntary sins, will inflict an eternal mulct? or that he judgeth the death of the body, to be greater than the destruction of the soul? Ignorance doubtless hath some excuse, especially if it be not tainted with fraud or malice. C. This indeed is not denied, yet they say that Christ died indeed for all meritori∣ously, but, for a few onely effectually: be∣cause few onely do expect that advantage and benefit of Salvation by his death, and very few are found worthy of that incom∣parable treasure of his satisfaction. There∣fore he is not blame-worthy, who offered himself liberally for all men, but they are to be condemned, who refused this propitia∣tion.
M. Oh how many errours are contained in those few words! for as Epcurus, that he might not offend the Athenians, outwardly acknowledged a God, but in judgement de∣nied him; so these men in words confess the death of Christ, but deny the power of it. For when the Epicureans durst not de∣ny the Gods, yet they denied a Providence which is inseparably conjoyned to the na∣ture of God, and so by consequence they denied God, but more modestly and co∣vertly: and are not these men guilty of the same prevarication? They teach that Christ died for all men, and affirm at the same time that the benefit of his death doth concern very few men: What is this but to deny the virtue of his passion, the glory of his obe∣dience? to say that men can abolish the energy, force, and effect of his divine love? St. Paul saith far otherwise, when with so much gravity and mellifluous plenty, he doth aver that no force is able to separate us from the love of God, which he hath manife∣sted unto us in Christ Jesus. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifieth; who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen a∣gain, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who shal then separate us from the love in Christ? Rom. 8. Me thinks they that are so perem∣ptory
in the defence of that Opinion that Christs bloud was sprinkled only upon a few, do much resemble that man who made a most magnificent feast, fit in the preparation of it to entertain a whole City, but when the guests came to sit down that were invited, there appeared onely a very thin number, and might not a man demand, wherefore all this preparation? mountains are delivered of a mouse. C. Who will deny this? for to what pur∣pose should he prepare many things with ostentation, which he did not intend to di∣stribute? M. But far otherwise doth our Lord deal by us, for when some had refused to come to his Supper, Luke 14. Go out, saith he (to a servant) into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the lame, the maimed, the halt, and the blind, and when this was done, and yt room was remaining, Go (saith the Lord) into the high-ways and hedg∣es, and compel them to come in, that my house may be full. C. Oh the wonderful benignity of the Lord! to whom it seemeth not enough to invite onely, but to compel men to a frui∣tion of his plenty. But how doth he com∣pel men? for this phrase may sound harsh to some ears, especially seeing our Lord seemeth to be of a different Opinion, say∣ing,
The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth vio∣lence, and is taken by violence. M. First, we may call them violent, who deny themselves in the brideling of their ap∣petites, and moderating their sensualities, who oppose the activity of Faith against the wit of reason, and prefer the Kingdom of God, before all the fugitive pleasures of all the kingdoms of this world. He that will follow me, saith the King himself, let him de∣ny himself, (this is that holy violence) Let him take up his cross and follow me. For the Kingdom of God is not overcome by any man, but by him who hath first overcome himself. He that obtains this conquest, as Plautus saith, is Victor victorum, Conquerour of conquerours; Again God is then said to compel, when of chips of Hell, he makes Cedars of Paradise, Of sons of wrath, sons of God, and coheirs with Christ: when by a kiss of love, and a spiritual embrace, he car∣rieth them up to Heaven, who by nature were concenterd in hell. Thus when St. Paul did precipitate hlmself into blasphe∣mies, and did exagitate the world with per∣secutions, God suddenly wraps him up in∣to the third Heaven. This blessed compul∣sion also did they undergo, that were of the Baptists Auditory, who as soon as the Ser∣mon was at an end, contended in a holy faith, who should first lay hold on Christ;
for our Lord meant nothing else in those words, but to express the vehemency of de∣sire in the multitude, to attain everlasting happiness. This he also shewed in the simi∣litude of a conquered city, into which the Souldiers strive to enter. Of which matter, if any man doubt, let him read the Testi∣mony of St. Luke, in the seventh chapter, who expounding those things which Christ said of John, and of the Kingdom of God, saith, All the people that heard him, and the Publicanes justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. Now God dealeth with us, even as we use to do with tender in∣fants, we hang up a piece of money, or some other thing, and shew it the child; pointing to it, as a reward of his weak en∣deavours to reach it, we invite and allure him to take it, which when he cannot per∣form, then by little and little we let down the money neerer the childs hands, till he have caught it. Then we rejoyce, the child triumpheth that he hath got the gold, and we shout, and praise the child, as if he had done some great matter. But tell me now, what did this little infant perform? You placed the money, you provoked him to take it, you let it down that he might reach it, onely you did not put the money into his hands, and yet you praised him and coc∣kered him, as if he alone had done all. But
God, besides all these things, doth more for us. He doth not onely set a felicity before us, invite us, excite us, and raise us up, but also by the gracious instinct of his Spirit, sweetly allure us, and compel us to like it, to will it, to choose it, to embrace it, and to love it. C. O blessed constraint, O delightful vio∣lence! let us therefore with them congra∣tulate this priviledge, that he hath adopt∣ed us to the participation of the glorious inheritance of the Saints, that he hath re∣scued us from the powers of darkness, and translated us to the Kingdom of his dearest Son. M. We ought indeed to return our thanks to him, but who can offer thanks worthy of so great mercies? Our most libe∣ral Prince will fill his house, will people his Kingdom; but how large can we suppose this house, this Kingdom to be, when it is as capacious as his love, as far extended as his goodness, and as patulous as his mercy, in which there is sound neither measure nor circumscription. And because this house is capable to entertain a multitude of guests, and not a paucity onely, therefore Christ saith, In my Fathrs house are many mansions, John 14. Now compare the words of our Saviour, with the opinion of these men; they say, His house is a narrow house, a small
house, and that it shall also continue above half empty; the Lord witnesseth his desire to have it filled, and as Isaia saith, It shall be even too narow by reason of the inhabi∣tants, chap. 49. Now consider, who is most worthy of belief, God or man, that is, truth or a lie? C. Who will make any doubt of that, when God onely is true, and all men are lyars? M. What then hath our King omitted, wherein hath he been deficient in goodness or wisdom, that his Kingdom should be di∣lated, amplified, and replenished? Moses the Commander of the Isra lites, by the di∣rection of God, appointed them six Cities for Refuge, three on this side, and three on the further side of the River of Jordan, that they who killed a man unawares through errour, might flee thither and escape. Ro∣mulus, the first Founder of Rome, set up a Sanctuary also, unto which any malefactour might flee, and by that means avoid punish∣ment: This was the first beginning and foundation of that stupendious Empire of the Romanes; neither is it worth a wonder, for who is not moved with the names of li∣berty, and freedom, and safety? who doth not chearfully run thither to find it where it is promised? the same Moses consecrated every fiftieth year to liberty and plenty, for in that year the slaves were emancipated,
and the bond-men made free: New tables were instituted, new Ordinances devised, and possessions did revert to the owners, by their former right to the inheritance: the Harvest and the Vintage of that year, was in common; it was proclaimed by the sound of Rams-horns and Trumpets, and from thence called the year of Jubilee. But hath the wisdom and goodness of God been less liberal to us? hath he not sent Christ, or ra∣ther did not he himself in Christ the Lord, come to constitute this Sanctuary, to reveal this Tower of liberty, safety, and refuge? And with what reason, and upon what con∣ditions he did it, will easily be understood: for they that hastened to those Sanctuaries, fled thither with body and goods, and were oftentimes taken or killed, before they escaped thither; But to this Refuge of our Salvation, it is enough to run with faith and unfeigned desires. Their Sanctuaries were limited to a certain place, and a cer∣tain number of years; but to this there may at any time, be a confluence of any people, from any part of the world. Their places of refuge were not capable of all men, and were appointed almost but for one Nation: this Heavenly Tower of De∣fence will receive an infinit multitude of people, and is common to all men. The bo∣dy onely and the goods were there preser∣ved,
here man is invested with glorious im∣mortality, and enfeaffed with eternal li∣berty. Few were there made better, but if they came thither wicked, wicked they there continued: Here upon our first en∣trance, we are transsubstantiated into new creatures, and throughly changed, as if we were new born again, for our gracious King, who hath opened unto us this Sanctuary of Salvation, doth not onely remit unto us the punishment due to our transgressions, but doth also make us just, holy, and inno∣cent. Lastly, they who fled to the places of Succour, appointed by Moses and Romulus, changed their Lord, and were free from all past dangers, but afterwards they were se∣verely punished, if they were found guilty of new delinquency; nor after that relapse was there any Refuge allowed them: But in our Sanctuary, as often as a man offend∣eth, so often is he pardoned, provided that with true repentance he maketh his appeal, and preferreth his petition to the King. And he that runneth to this Holy Asylum, this Heavenly Temple, is no longer a servant, but for ever free, being manumitted by the son of God. For such is the goodness of our King, that he will make us all the sons of God, and coheirs with his Son, Priests, Prophets, and partakers of the Divine Na∣ture, 2. Pet. 1.
C. But what and where is this Asylum, this City of Refuge, and year of Salvation? M. This Caelius, is the Church of the li∣ving, the City of the Saints, the Pillar and Prop of truth: and this year of Jubilee is all that intervention of time, from the Na∣tivity of Christ, to the Day of Judgement: of which time the Apostle saith, Now the acceptable time approacheth, the Day of Sal∣vation draweth neer. This is not more at this time, than at another, not more in this year, than in another, not more in Europe, than in Asia or Africa, not more at London, than at Rome; and therefore is the Church stiled the Catholick Church. For seeing this great City consisteth of such men as believe in, and reverence the living God, where∣soever they are dispersed, there is the Church, and the year of Jubilee, and that sempiternal place of Refuge. C. What is your opinion of those that never heard of these things? or if they have heard of them, it was onely by a scattered report, but they had not the insinuations of them, by the preaching of the Gospel, or any Divine Institutions? For it is certain, that many Nations (as we have lately had experience by the discoveries in America) have lived and died, who never heard of Christ. But to think that all those men for so many ages, were predetermined to dam∣nation,
is not consentaneous to the Divine goodness, and just government of our Hea∣venly King. Although it may appear a dif∣ficult matter to conclude either way of their final condition, yet I conceive no other∣wise of them, then those who lived before the coming of Christ, and the promulgati∣on of the Law of Moses, for if they did, or now do observe he law of nature, worship our God, do nothing to others that they would not have done to themselves, or re∣pent them of such evil doings, my opinion is they may be saved, for they that feared God, were always dear and acceptable to him, as Peter witnesseth in the Acts of the Apostles, such were Abimelech, Melchisedech, Jethro, Joh, and his four friends: Hiram al∣so the King of the Tyrians, the Queen of Sheba, Cyrus and Darius Kings of Persia, and the Wise men at the Nativity of Christ, with innumerable others (as it is highly probable) un-mentioned in the Book of God. For this was the judgement of the most Ancient Fathers Origen and Clemens Alexandrinus, as it is recorded in their wri∣tings, Qui verbum non accepit auditione, (saith Clemens) ei vema dandi propter igno∣rantiam. Who hath not heard the Word preached, his ignorance shall excuse him; for as the Apostle saith Rom. 10. How shall thy believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? The untaught shall not be condem∣ned, but they who have heard the Embassa∣dours of Christ, and despise the offers of his grace. This is the peremptory Sanction of our Lord himself, Go (saith he) preach the Gospel, and teach all Nations, he that belie∣veth shall be saved, but he that believeth not, shall be damned. This is the Law and most just Decree of our King: that as he who heareth the Gospel and believeth, shall be saved, so he that heareth and believeth not, shall be damned. From whence it follows, that he is not condemned by the Gospel, who hath not heard the Gospel; but they are therefore seperated to condemnation, because they contemned the law of nature, and the testimony of conscience, by which they shall be judged, as St. Paul witnesseth in the second to the Romanes, this is the e∣ternal purport of all Laws, that they to whom a law is given, shall, if they transgress that law, be judged by it, but not those who are not bound by that law. And if this be observed in all well-governed Common∣wealths, which are as images of that Hea∣venly Kingdom, much more may we pre∣sume that it is observed by God himself, who is King of kings, and the common Fa∣ther of all mankind. C. Indeed these things seem most wor∣thy of our righteous God, and altogether
agreeable to his gentle nature: thus we see, he would not inflict punishments upon the Ninivites without cause declared, for he first sent his Prophet to them, that by his preaching they might understand the will of God. Yet that saying of Peter in the Acts doth seem to thwart this opinion, for he teacheth, That there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ. Acts. 4. M. That is not otherwise to be under∣stood, than (as we said before) to concern them to whom that name hath been preached: although whosoever is saved, hath salvation by God his Saviour, as he proclaimeth of himself in Isaiah, I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Sa∣viour. But that is Jesus Christ, God to be praised for ever; although explicitly and declaratively he hath not been revealed to them. C. I confess I thought thus within my self, but I was willing to hear your opinion, but when you said a little before, speaking of the Church, that it was wheresoever men did believe, or should believe; wherefore made you that addition, should believe? M. Because at all times, and in all ages, many are elected to this kingdom, which are not yet called, not compelled by faith
to enter, as were Saul, Cornelius the Cen∣turion, and Sergius Paulus the Proconsul, and innumerable others whose vocation and ingress was by the Lord, for some time deserred; who because they were from all eternity appointed to this kingdom, are therefore all Citizens and Members of this heavenly Common-wealth: this is manifest by these and others, who the goodness of God being revealed, are afterwards re∣ceived into this kingdom. C. They say that Cornelius oponed a pas∣sage into this kingdom by his prayers and Alms-deeds, and this they confirm by those words of the Angel to him, Thy prayers and thy Almes are come up for a memorial before God. M. The abettors of such fancies are con∣tumelious to God, and ignorant of the Scri∣ptures; they reproch God, for they rob him of his Honour, and give the glory to man; & they are ignorant of the Scriptures, not dis∣cerning an open truth. Their errour ariseth partly from a non-consideration of the words preceding and subsequent, which if they had perpended, they had never dashed against this Rock. What hath St. Luke writ∣ten in the beginning of this Chapter? That Cornelius was a devour man, and one that feared God, with all his house, which gave much Almes to the people, and prayed to
God alway. Afterwards those men that were sent by Cornelius give him this Chara∣cter, that he was a just man, feared God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews. Who now doth not plainly see that his piety to, and his fear of God are first commended: then his Almes and good deeds are spoken of? he was a Religious and a good man, and therefore gave many Almes to the poor, and prayed to God al∣way, which were the fruits and effects of his piety. Therefore it is said, he was of good report among the Jews. But from whence came these good effects? Not from his good deeds; for the tree must be good before the fruit can be good, as our Lord saith, Matth. 7. For the cause cannot follow the effect any more than a daughter can bring forth her Mother. But who made him Religious and just, and fearing God? Who but he, that circumciseth the fore∣skins of our hearts? That taketh away our stony hearts, and giveth us hearts of flesh, and new Spirits? Ezech. 11. He, I say, made Cornelius both Religious and devout: and were not these things declared unto Pe∣ter by the Divine oracle of God: for when he supposed that all the rest of the Nations were alienated from the benefit of the Go∣spel, the Angel telleth him, Those things which God hath purified, call not thou un∣clean.
Acts 10. Here God witnesseth that he had purged, prepared, and consecrated Cornelius to himself. And although it was spoken because of Cornelius, yet the words concern all those that God hath chosen and adorned with the beautiful knowledge of the Gospel. And whereas it is said that his prayers, and giving of Almes went up to God as a memorial, nothing more is in∣tended, but that God heareth the prayers of the Godly, that their good works are acceptable to him, and that he hath them in remembrance, as flowing from himself the Fountain of all good gifts. And where it is said, that he was frequent in prayer, it is evident that this proceeded from a Di∣vine inspiration. For as Paul saith, We know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self maketh intercession for us with unutterable groans. Rom. 8. Now if he was endued with the Spirit of God, as certainly he was, and that his Almes-deeds and his prayers were accepted, it is as certain that he had saith, without which it is impossible to please God, as St. Paul doth most plainly teach. Rom. 10. And if he had the illustra∣tions of Faith, then his heart was purified and cleansed, as Peter testifieth of Corne∣lius and other Gentiles in St. Luke, saying, That God had enlightened them by his Holy Spirit, and purged their minds by Faith.
C. I perceive that by degrees you have come to the right explication of the truth; but there is yet one thing to be enucleated, for Peter saith, Of a truth I now perceive, that God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation, he that feareth him and worketh righte∣ousness, is accepted by him. Act. 10. Here he sheweth that by good works a man is re∣conciled to God. M. This speech of the Apostle, meaneth nothing else, but what diverse other holy sentences do teach, that God in his election of, and his Love to mankind, hath regard onely to their goodness and glorie, not to their original, their pedigree, their coun∣try, their sex, their age, their merit, or any other personal attributes. This truth is ex∣emplified in the person of Cornelius, whom God called being an alien, and dignified him with a place in his kingdom. The signs of Election are an ingenuous and a reverential fear of God, like to that of obedient children towards their parents, from whence there ariseth in them, a confi∣dence and a stedfast perswasion of the love of God to them, and from thence again groweth a delight in the Law of God, a com∣placency in the works of righteousness, he that is accepted by God, he feareth, he honoureth, loveth, and trusteth in God: for it behoveth that the person of that man
be gracious and acceptable, whose duties or offices of Love are accepted: for no per∣formances are acceptable from him, against whom we entertain a prejudice or aver∣sation, of this we have experience in the common civilities of life, but with God there is no prejudice, for he is the searcher of the heart. And John saith, Whosoever doth work righteousness, is born of God. Also, Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, he is born of God, that is, therefore some men live justly, some man believeth Jesus to be the Christ, because he is justified by God, and endued with holiness and righte∣ousness by him: for unless he thus be born of God, he is unable to perform any thing justly and rightly, or to believe that Jesus is the Christ. This the Lord himself con∣firmeth upon Peters confession, that he was the Son of the Immortal God. Verily (saith our Saviour) flesh and bloud hath not reveal∣ed this unto thee, but my Father, which is in Heaven. Now there is this difference be∣tween Divine and humane justice, he that is not justified by God, may execute hu∣mane justice, for fear of punishment, ex∣pectation of glorie, or hope of other re∣ward; but no man is exercised in heavenly justice, who is not first justified, purged by Faith, and assisted with grace. There∣fore it is no wonder, that whosoever feareth
God, and worketh righteousness, is ac∣cepted of God; because the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and a good under∣standing have all they that keep his Command∣ments. With this fear, as with salt, the Lord doth season their hearts, and preserve from corruption (even whilest they are ignorant of him) those that he purposeth to call in∣to his kingdom. This inchoation of their liberty, is afterwards perfected in the time of their vocation, by the preaching of the Gospel and by Faith. C. I have received full satisfaction, and I hope hereafter that both my self and o∣thers, will give greater credit to the Ora∣cles of God, then to the perverse opinions and interpretations of men. M. Now that we may conclude this di∣gression, I say that wheresoever, or when∣soever such are found, in that moment of time they have attained to this Sanctuary, this propitious year of Jubilee. Onely as it is written, Let us call upon the name of the Lord, and we shall not be disappointed. Al∣so, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall escape. Joel. 2. Also, The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous flyeth unto it, and is safe. Prov. 18. To this tower, this sanctuary, the Lord himself beckneth the poor, the miserable, the wretched, the desperate sinners, in this sweet invitation,
Come unto me all ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will ease you. These are the wayes, the secrets of holy state, and the Di∣vine Policies, which our King useth for the Instanration of his kingdom. And if the kingdoms of the earth are enlarged by such artifice, how much more shall we think the kingdom of Heaven to be dilated, which is far more capacious, more firm, and more easie of access? C. Truly I suppose it will infinitely ex∣ceed the kingdom, or rather the dungeon of the Devil: even as much as there are more who wish and desire ease, impunity, Honour and Salvation, then who are in love with labours, punishments, servitude, igno∣miny, and death eternal, and certainly but few men will precipitate themselves into these calamities, when they may with such facility redeem themselves from the fear of them. And although a small industry one∣ly, seemeth necessarie to the prevention of these endles torments, yet we see but few men that contend to get to this refuge, this most pleasant Citie; and what should be the cause of this slackness, this dulness; this indiligence is to me altogether un∣known. M. The cause is manifest; First that which I named before, to wit that the new reason of state, which our King maketh use
of in the administration of his affairs, de∣ceaveth those that with the judgement of men, seek after this citie as gloriously visi∣ble and conspicuous. Secondly, the Church is congregated and constituted out of this holy Sanctuary, by the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sa∣crament, and these being concealed from the greater part of the World, by this means, this citie for a long time was kept hid, and so little taken notice of; that it was scarce discernable who were the true Citizens. But as soon as the glad tidings of the Gospel have arrived, then we see them flock to this citie as in the time of Christ and his Apostles. For when Christ himself had said that the kingdom of God was at hand, and after that he had exhorted men to bring forth fruit worthie of repentance; he then called them all unto him, with that joy∣ful summons, Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you ease. Of this joyful invitation, this liberal year, the Prophet Isaiah foretold, when speaking in the Person of Christ, he saith, I am endued with the Spirit of the Lord, Je∣hovah hath Anointed me, and sent me to de∣clare joyful tidings: to heal them of broken Spirits, and to give liberty to them that are in bondage, sight to the blind, to deliver the op∣pressed out of their streights, and to preach the
joyful year of the Lord. The Apostles also, those faithful Embassadours of Christ, did invite all mortal men to this great benefit, this most blessed kingdom. Old things are past away, behold all things are become new: and all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself in Christ Jesus, and hath given to us the ministerie of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses un∣to them, and hath committed to us the word of reconciliation. Now then, we are embassa∣dours for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you, in Christs stead, be ye reconciled to God: for he hath made him who knew no sin to be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. But shortly after, false Apostles and coun∣terfeit Embassadours, brought in humane traditions, and began to lay upon mens shoulders the burthen and heavy yoak of the Law, which things did deject, not erect mens minds, did terrifie them, not allure them, did wound them, not heal them: from whence  came to pass that few made their approach to this kingdom, or if they drew near, they soon returned and departed. For the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, is not propagated and advanced by the sword, but by preaching, by the energie of the Spirit, by good example, patience, chari∣tie,
meekness, justice, temperance, constan∣cy, goodness, faith, lenity, long-suffering, and all those blessed and peaceable fruits of the true Spirit of God. So our Lord him∣self; so his Disciples propagated the truth, and sowed the Heavenly Doctrine of Christ in mens hearts. For our Lord as Hilarie told Constantinus; Augustus did rather teach than exact a knowledge and confession of himself; and giving Authority to his pre∣cepts by the frequent attestation of mira∣cles, he despised a will that was any other way compelled to acknowledge him. And full of truth are these words, for nothing so free as the judgement in Religion. For Religion flourisheth by sound reason and strong perswasion, not by fear and threat∣nings. It is defended & preserved by dying, not by killing; by patience, not by cruelty; by justice, not by butchery; by faith, not by fraud & rotten policy. For he that will esta∣blish Religion by imperious ordinances & force, doth not seek to defend it, but to violate and pollute it. But because we see the night approaching Caelius, unless you have ought to interpose, I shall descend to such places of Scripture, as seem to favour this my opinion, of the amplitude of the king∣dome of God. C. I have not the least doubt remaining, and I earnestly intreat you, before the night
prevent us, to hasten to those proofs as the chief end of our meeting. M. In the first place therefore, weigh diligently that magnificent promise of God made to Abraham, so often repeated and in∣culcated. God promiseth, and confirmeth his promise with an oath; that he will make his seed as the dust of the earth, so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall he number the seed of Abraham, Gen. 17. And again in the 22. chapter, he pro∣miseth, In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply thee in thy seed as the Stars of the Heaven, and as the sand which is upon the Sea-shore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Here I would know of any man, whether God in this inimitable (as to us) and inesti∣mable promise, did intend that the multi∣tude of the Elect, (for that they were pre∣signified by the seed of Abraham is plainly shewed in the 4. to the Romanes) should be inferiour to the number of the Reprobate? Who will dare to say so, when he compa∣reth his seed to those things which exceed all other things for number, yea indeed, which are themselves numberless? For al∣though Archimedes, that noble Geometri∣cian, supposed that he could number the sand, not onely about Syracusa, but of all
the habitable and in-habitable parts of the world; and undertook to write a Demon∣stration of this supposal to Gelo, then King of Sicilie: yet the Prophet Isaiah teacheth otherwise. What man (saith he) hath measu∣red the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out the Heavens with a span? or com∣prehended the dust of the earth in a measure? or weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a ballance? Thus comparisons of this nature have been adhibited, to demonstrate such things unto us, which in their kind admit of no comparison. From whence it follows, that the progeny of Abraham is more numerous and copious, than all others. Moreover, all the Faithful being comprehended in the seed of Abraham, there is in the expres∣sions of the Holy Ghost, a kind of tacite contention against that Opinion of the Pau∣city of Believers, for as often, and as much as he amplifies the Kingdom of God, so often, and so much he speaks in diminution of the kingdom of darkness. Neither in this can I accord with S. Austin, who saith these words are uttered in an Hyperbole, yet when he labours to declare the matter, any man may perceive he is mistaken. For in his Book Of the City of God, he saith, That the seed of Abraham is less in number than the multitude of the wicked. Suppose the sand of the Sea-shore, or the dust of the earth do much ex∣ceed
the number of the whole generation of mankind, What then? we do not con∣fess that the number of the Elect, is great∣er than the number of the Sands: but by the comparison this onely is in question, Whether the Holy seed of Abraham do not surmount the number of the wicked? but if it be not implied that the number of the Elect is the greater, why should it be com∣pared to a thing that is infinit? If some man had come, and said, That this compari∣son (so high that it exceeds belief) is more agreeable to the multitude of the wicked, which is much above that of the faithful, would he not hereby secretly insinuate, that here was no relish of Divine wisdom in this comparison? But if to think any such thing, much more to say it, be impious and exe∣crable, it is manifest, and follows undenia∣bly, that the multitude of such as belong to the Kingdom of God, is much the greater. But to this ath not God added this also, That in the seed of Abraham all Nations shall be blessed? Gal. 3. But how shall they all be blessed, if the major part be excluded from eternal happiness? One of these two things is necessary there to be allowed, either (which I abhor to think) that God is a lyar, or else that the number of the blessed is not equiparated by any other number, and which of these two is to be chosen, I leave to the pious Reader to judge.
C. You conclude solidly and truly; for as Fabius sheweth, an Hyperbole is then to be known, when the matter expressed, ex∣ceedeth all natural measure. Now these promises are not vulgar, but so ample, state∣ly and honourable, that the narrow minds of mortal men, should be struck with ad∣miration as often as they contemplate the blessed multitude of the glorious Saints. M. You speak the truth. But that wic∣ked one who is wrapped up in a mantle of piety, hath been always busie and diligent to eclipse this truth. I will now produce an∣other place of Moses, because I know every new argument is a fresh vexation to that fiend. In Exodus God doth wonderfully set forth the goodness of his own nature, for such is his clemency, that he promiseth mer∣cy to a thousand generations in pardoning sins and transgressions, but threatneth ven∣geance onely to the third or fourth genera∣tion; Consider now what proportion there is between one thousand and four, and know that there will be as great an inequality be∣tween the glorious free men of Jesus Christ, and the few and miserable bond-slaves of the devil. C. This is a proportion without proportion, & (to speak like a Geometrician) a compari∣son between a body and the shortest line. M. From Moses let us pass to that Evan∣gelical Prophet Isaiah, by whose authority
we shall learn that this most blessed King∣dom is perspicuously exaggerated. He pour∣eth forth words of great consolation upon the Church, even then Militant, Rejoyce O barren, thou that didst not bear, break forth in∣to singing and cry aloud, thou that didst not tra∣vel with child. For more are the children of the desolate, than the married wif, saith the Lord. Which words are both cited and ex∣plained by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ga∣latians, Many more, saith he, are the children of the desolate, than of her that hath an Hus∣band. Now they that are experienced in knowledge of Divine mysteries, are not ig∣norant, that the Church of God is under∣stood by that desolate and barren, and the kingdom of Satan by the married wife, for in the same place the Apostle distinguisheth them one from the other, by most certain notes. Now we brethren, saith he, we the chil∣dren of the Promise, as Isaac was: but as then, h that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. Nvertheless, cast out the bond-woman and her son, for the son of the bond-woman shall not be Heir with the son of the free-woman. Therefore we are not, my brethren, the chil∣dren of the bond-woman, but of the free. C. I have heard, and as I remember I have read, that that barren was the Church collected out of all nations, & that the mar∣ried wife was the Commonwealth of Israel,
the Synagogue of the Jews, which differ nothing but in Nation and time. M. I know it, and therefore I alleadged this place of the Apostle, that it might plain∣ly appear, that they are not distinguished by reason of Nation and time, but for inward qualifications, for manners, for conditions, and for the end. For first he distributes all mankind into those that are born of the flesh, and those that are born of the Spirit, besides these two, there is no third. Then he saith, Those that are worldly, do continu∣ally vex and persecute those that are Spiritual and Heavenly, yet they are servants, these are free. Therefore in reference to their final condition, he conferreth an everlasting in∣heritance upon the sons of the free-woman, those of the bondwoman being abdicated, forsaken, and rejected. These things being so learnedly and so plainly disjoyned by the Apostle, we ought not to conjoyn, or rather to confound them. And if any man will by that married wife, or by that daughter of the bnd-woman, understand the Nation of the Jews: neither can he by that means detract from the multitude of the Elect: for as he that treads the steps of the faith of Abraham, is the son of Abraham, and belongeth to the number of the Saints; so he that followeth the contumacy, and abideth in the unbelief of the Jews, is deservedly called a Hagaren, and an Ismaelite. Here is therefore no place
for tergiverlation; for he plainly affirmeth that the number of the Citizens of the Hea∣venly Jerusalem, is much greater than that of the earthly Jerusalem, and this is the rea∣son of that great admiration of the celestial Citizens, when they behold their own mul∣titude, as you read at large in the Prophesie of Isaiah. C. It is so; but why is one called barren, and forsaken; & the other the married wife? M. First, because she is not so fruitful, pompous, and illustrious in the ceremonies of the Law as the other: Secondly, because she appeareth little and regardless in the eyes of the world. For she boasteth not of good works and merit: doth not make orna∣ment, magnificence, and splendour, to be in∣seperable notes of her purity; and Lastly, is not celebrated for diversity of Sects, and variety of rites and ceremonies. Therefore she is termed barren, without children, soli∣tary, little, despisable, and forsaken of God, by them that judge according to the speci∣cious outside of things. But on the contra∣ry, the other said to have a husband, because she surpasseth in the pomp of outward wor∣ship, for the Prophet hath opposed the mar∣ried woman to the barren, and her that is forsaken: and speaks of both of them after the manner of men. C. I will not here demand who is the hus∣band of the Church, for I know it is Christ
the Lord: but who besides will they have to be her husband? M. The very Synagogue it self boasts of Moses, but very falsly, as Christ sheweth in the 5. of John, saying, Had ye believed Mo∣ses, ye had also believed me, for he wrote of me: but if ye believe not his writings, how will you believe my words? Also our Lord saith in the 2. of the Apocalypse, that such are not Jews, but blasphemers, and the Synagogue of Satan. Moreover they who ordain and pretend Mo∣ses for their Law-giver, if they seek salvation by any other Law than that of Christ, whe∣ther it be of Moses, or Mahomet, or Pope, or any Seperatist whatsoever, they may be said to have a master & a husband, and they that are such, are all servants & bond-men, and as many as are begotten of them, that is, per∣verted by them: and if they be servants, they shall not abide in the house for ever, but the son abideth ever. But Christ and his Spouse, the Heavenly Jerusalem, have children, and those free from the Law, as our Saviour told the Jews, If the Son shall make you free, then you are free; St. Paul also telleth us, that where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 1 Cor. 3. Therefore these are heirs, not by the observation of the Law, but only as sons, sons of the free-woman, which is the Holy Catholick Church, not the synagogue of the bond-woman, held under fear and servitude. For he that is a son, doth not imagine that
he shall therefore become an heir, because he serves the father & keeps his command∣ments, but because he is born in true and lawful wedlock, or else called into the fa∣mily by adoption. C. These things are so plain, that he is wilfully blind that seeth them not. But can you produce any testimonies out of the New Testament? M. I can; Behold St. Paul, comparing the calamity brought into the world by the transgression of Adam, with the benefit of Christs resurrection, that is, those which were damned in Adam, with those that are justi∣fied, sanctified and saved in Christ, saith thus, But not as the offence, so is the free gift, for if through the offence of one, many be dead: much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, hath abound∣ed unto many, Rom. 5. Now the sense of the words is this, That the gift of one man Jesus Christ, hath abounded to many more, than the fall of Adam, and the offence by that fall did extend. Here you see the Apostle saith in terminis, that more are saved by the advantage of Christ, than are damned by the sin of Adam. C. I do see it, and I understand it; but how in the same place are those words to be un∣derstood? For he saith, As by the offence of one man, judgement came upon all men to con∣demnation; so by the righteousness of one man,
shall all men be absolved. Here he saith all men are damned, and yet all men are saved, and seems to speak things repugnant. For if all be condemned, there is a necessity none can be saved; and there is a necessity none can be damned, if all men be saved. M. You have propounded a question some∣what perplexed and knotty, but by Gods as∣sistance I shall untie it: I know there are some that say, all are condemned, that is, all that are born under original sin, are obno∣xious to condemnation: that all are absolved and set free, that is, that Christ died for all men, and that his death was effectual to ex∣piation of the sins of the whole world, if all men had applied unto themselves the bene∣fit of his death by saith; but this opinion tottereth, in regard that all men are born in original sin; yet all men are not justified, all men are not saved: and by this it would seem that the efficacy of the passion of Christ was not so diffusive, as the transgression of Adam was destructive, whereas if you consider the words onely, the reason should be the same in both. You have not forgotten the old Axiomes, Paria paribus, & contrariis omnibus contraria conveniunt. But this seems more plain to me to affirm, that all which are con∣demned, are condemned for the offence of one man; and so also all that are saved, have salvation by the benefit of one; but it is true that all are condemned that came of the old
Adam, and all which are born of the second Adam, which is Christ, are saved; but they are few, these are many, otherwise the righte∣ousness of Christ, will be found less than the disobedience of Adam. Thus we shall with the Apostle, harbour thoughts correspon∣dent to the Office & Divine virtue of Christ. And whereas it follows, that by the disobe∣dince of one, many were made subject to the curse, we have already shewed that by many, the Apostle means all. C. I remember it, and like very well of your interpretation; but go on, because I see you are ready to make an end. M. To the amplitude of this Divine King∣dom, those places also do concur in the se∣cond Psalm, where the Father saith to his Son, Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Hea∣then for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. And in the 72. Psalm, He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the River unto the ends of the earth: also, All Kings shall worship him, and all Nations shall do him service. These passages of Scripture in the History, belong to Solomon, but in the mystery, to Christ our King, as those that are conversant in the Scriptures, do well understand. Also that place in Joel 2. I will pour forth of my Spirit upon all flesh. Again in the 2. of the Acts, All men shall know me, even from the least to the greatest: Also in the first of Malac. From
the rising of the Sun, even until the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, even a pure offering. Consult also the Prophet, and observe in the seventh chapter, how honourable mention he maketh of the Kingdom of God. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Lan∣guags, should serve him. Again in the 12. of John, our Lord saith of himself, And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me. A∣gain, St. John speaking of Christ, saith, That he doth enlighten all men, chap. 1. St. Paul al∣so affirmeth, that God would have all men to be saved. And in another place, He hath shut up all men under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all men. In these and very many other places, by the word all, is intimated the amplitude of the Kingdom of God. This is that seed, that fruitful off-spring, which I∣saiah fore-seeing, was forced with amaze∣ment to cry out, Who can declare his genera∣tion? This is that multitude declared by St. John in Apoc. 7. After this I beheld, and to a great multitude which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, cloathed with white robes, and palms in their hands: and cryed out with a loud voyce, Salvation unto God, which sitteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb. This multitude, this
majesty and greatness of the Kingdom of God, fu∣ture generations will better comprehend than the ages past; for they shall behold the most happy spreading of the Gospel, they shall see the destru∣ction of the Prince of the Ismaelites, and of that proud Vicar of hell. Antichrist by little and little shall be overcome, and cast into utter darkeness, from whence there is no redemption: and they al∣so who have followed his voice, and obeyed his imaginations, shal participate the same damnation. C. Oh how happy hath this day been unto me, wherein I have learned the explanation of so ma∣ny difficult places of Scripture, so great errours detected and confuted, so many misteries revealed, and so many knotty and involved questions unin∣tangled. The cloud of errour being blown over, I now plainly see, how rash and bold an enter∣prise it is, to judge of the Kingdom of Heaven by appearances, which is not constituted by any thing subjected to our senses, but prepared by the electi∣on of God, and distinguished from the synagogue of the devil, by faith and the fruits of the Holy Spirit, not purchased by any counsel, help, or me∣rit of ours, but obtained meerly by the gratious good pleasure of our God. Wherefore from hence, forth I will forbear all such temerity, and will leave the disposing of his Kingdom, and the regle∣ment of his affairs, to God himself, who enlar∣geth it at several times, and in several places, as best seemeth good unto him. I will know it to be my duty, to worship God in Spirit, perpetually to exalt his mercy, to love and follow Christ, and to help all men, even mine enemies, with my care, my counsel, and all my best assistances. Hic murus aheneus esto. FINIS.
