B1313 13078470 97215
MORE REASONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, AND No Reason Against it. Or a Second Appendix to the Reasons of the Christian Religion, BEING I. An Answer to a Letter from an un∣known Person, Charging the Holy Scriptures with Contradictions. II. Some ANIMADVERSIONS On a Tractate De Veritate, Written by the Noble and Learned Lord Ed∣ward Herbert, Baron of Chizbury, &c. and Printed at Paris 1624. And at London 1633. Resolving Twelve Questions about Christiani∣ty. By Richard Baxter. LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons at the Prin∣ces Arms in St. Pauls Church-Yard, 1672.
TO THE Right Worshipfull Sir Henry Herbert, Kt. &c. SIR, THe reasons are many which induce me to pre∣sume to direct these Pa∣pers first to you, and to tell the world how much I honour you: first my personal ancient obli∣gations to you: secondly, Principal∣ly, your approved wisdom and mo∣deration, and taking part with the waies of Charity and Peace, in your most publick capacity in these try∣ing times: thirdly, your Relation to the Noble Author on whose wri∣ting I here Animadvert; which as it is your honour to be the Brother
of so learned and ingenious a Lord, and the Brother of so excellently ho∣ly as well as learned and ingenious a person, as Mr. George Herbert, Orator to the University of Cam∣bridge, and a faithful Pastor in the English Church; so it obligeth me the more to give you an account of this Animadversion. It is long since I sought after the Book, as pro∣voked by the Title and the honour of the Authors name, and received it from you as your gift. The premi∣sed Letter from an unknown person of the same name, occasioned me to review it: The sad case of many of my acquaintance, and the increase of Infidelity of late, especially a∣mong debauched sensual Gallants, and the danger of England hereby, and the Temptations against which the best of Christians have need of help, were the Reasons of my pre∣sumption, it being my Calling to propagate and vindicate the Chri∣stian
Faith: I am so far from wri∣ting against his whole Book, that I take most of his Rules and Notions de Veritate, to be of singular use. And had so great a wit had but the Internal Conditions due to such an Intellectual apprehension, as his and your holy and excellent Brother had; no doubt but our supernatural Revelations and Verities, would have appeared evident to him, and possest his soul with so sweet a gust, and fervent ascendent holy LOVE, as breatheth in Mr. G. Herbert's Poems, and as would have made them as clear to him in their kind, as some of his Notitiae Communes. The truth is, as he was too low to us, who number not our Divine Re∣velations with the Veresimilia, but with the Certain Verities; so he was too high for the Atheistical Sensualists of this age: And I would they would learn of him, that the Being and Perfections of God,
the duty of worshipping him, and of holy Conformity and Obedi∣ence to him, and particularly all the ten Commandments, the ne∣cessity of true Repentance, and the Rewards and Punishments of the Life to Come, with the Souls Immortality, are all Notitiae Com∣munes and such Natural Certain∣ties, as that the denyal of them doth unman them. To know this and to live accordingly, would make a great alteration in our times: And Christianity could not be disrelished by such, that so know and do. I may well suppose that your approbation of the Cause I plead for, will make it needless to me to Apologize for my boldness in medling with such an Author, while I do it with all ten∣derness of his deserved honour: I remain Your obliged Servant, Richard Baxter. Jan. 17. 1671/2;.
SIR, I Was right glad, when I first heard that you had written, and put to Print, a Book of the Rea∣sons of the Christian Religion; and I did immediately buy the Book, hoping that in the Reading and Perusing of it, I might have re∣ceived satisfaction as to any doubt or scruple, and an answer satisfactory to all Objections, that in Reason may be raised against the Grounds of the said Christian Religion; because I did think you to be as able to say and write as much as any man in that thing, having as I thought studied it as much as any that I had heard of; but in the reading and perusing it, I contrary to my expectation found it to be short of giving me satisfaction. For the greatest occasion of any doubt or scruple in any thing tending or relating to the Christian Religion that I at any time had or have, were from that variousness and contrariety,
if not contradictions, which are, or at least seem to be, in the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists and other Books received for Scripture. But you in answer to that Objecti∣on, page 412. say, Nothing but igno∣rance maketh men think so; under∣stand once the true meaning, and al∣low for the errors of Printers, Tran∣scribers, and Translators; and there will no such thing be found. But you neither tell me which are those errors, nor yet how I may know them. 1. Therefore I humbly pray you (in writing) to tell me, whether that which is written in the first Chapter of Matthews Gospel, verse 8, 9. where Matthew writes, that Joram begat O∣zias and Ozias begat Joatham, be any error of the Transcribers, Translators or Printers, or the contrary to it, which is written in the second book of the Kings, and in the books of the Chro∣nicles; if not, how may they be un∣derstood, for in those books it is writ∣ten that Joram was Father to Ahaziah, and Ahaziah was Father to Joash, and Joash was Father to Amaziah, and A∣maziah
was Father to Azariah, and A zariah was Father to Joatham; by the account of which Books, there is a∣bove an hundred Years between the death of Joram the son of Jehosaphat, and Joatham, 2. And Secondly, Whether that which is written by Luke in his Gos∣pel, Chapter 24. vers. 9, 10. 22, 23. where Luke writes, that Mary Mag∣dalen and other Women, told the Dis∣ciples, that they had seen a Vision of Angels, which said, that Jesus was risen from the dead, and was alive; whether this be any error of the Tran∣scribers, Translators and Printers, or any of them; or the Contrary which is written by St. John in his Gospel, for he writes Chap. 20. verse 2. That Mary Magdalen told two of the Dis∣ciples, and said to them, They (I sup∣pose meaning the Adversaries) have taken away the Lord out of the Sepul∣cher, and we know not where they have laid him. If not how may I understand them to be both true Testimonies or Re∣ports, for it seemeth by Luke, ver. 11, 12. and 23, 24. of his 24. Chapter,
that Mary and the other Women had told those things of their seeing the Angels, which said that Jesus was risen and alive, before that Peter ran or went to the Sepulcher. 3. And Thirdly, Whether that which is written by Matthew, in the 28th. Chapter of his Gospel, that the Angel said to Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was Crucifi∣ed, he is not here, for he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord lay, and go quickly and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead, and behold he goeth before you into Galilee, there shall you see him, so I have told you, And they departed quickly from the Sepulcher with fear and great joy, and did run to bring his Disciples word, and as they went to tell his Dis∣ciples, behold Jesus met them, see Mat. 28. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. v. Whether I say was this which is written in St. Matthews Gospel, that I have here Transcribed, said to the Women, and that the Women re∣turned from the Sepulcher to tell the
Disciples, before that Mary Mgda∣len said to him that she supposed to be the Gardiner, If thou hast born him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away, John 20. 15. or whether there be any error of Transcribers, Translators or Printers in those Texts; if not, how may I understand them to be true re∣ports. Sir, I shall trouble you with no more but these few places which I have pro∣posed in three Questions or Particulars, although there are several other Texts, that I do not understand how they may be reconciled, but if you shall by strength of Argument Grounded upon sound Reason, make appear that it was nothing but Ignorance hath made me to think that those Testi∣monies agree not, but are contrary one to the other; and that they may be so understood as that no such thing will appear in them, then I shall be ready and will with you conclude and say so too, and for the future suppose that other places of those books which are received for Scripture, as seem to be contrary to one another, may be
Reconciled, though I do not under∣stand how; But on the contrary, if you do not endeavour by such sound and plain Arguments to make it appear that these Texts here Transcribed by me, may be understood so as that no con∣tradiction is in them. I must think that it was nothing but Ignorance that made you say that which you have said, in answer to that and some other objections, Therefore I humbly and earnestly pray and beseech you, both in defence of your own writings as also in de∣fence of those Books in which you say you think that no one error or contra∣diction in any matter can be proved, to make it appear in truth and plain∣ness. If you judge I have erred from the truth, I hope you will endeavour to to convert me from the error of my way, if any such be; which if you shall do, no doubt but it will be a good work, see James 5. ult. Sir, It is your advice, that in such kind of Scruples, the doubtful should apply himself for satisfaction to some
Minister; therefore do I write to you, and if you shall not give me a gentle and plain Answer, I shall be discourag∣ed to make my Scruples known to any other; therefore in expectation of your plain Answer, I Remain Your Loving Friend in the Bond of Peace.
SIR, TWo sorts of persons use to trouble me and others, with their Objections against the Christian Religion. First, Some Papists, who profess to believe it, but in designe do act the part of Infidels, that they may loose men from all Religion, in hope to bring them over to theirs, when they have taken them off all other. For he that can make another man believe that he was hitherto totally misled is likest to become the Master of his Faith: For men are apt to think that none can so easily and certainly shew them the truth, as he that hath shewed them their error. And when men once think that according to the Grounds of the Reformed Churches, they can have no certainty of Faith, they will the easilier be brought to the way of those men, who promise them that certainty which they make them believe that others want.
Secondly, The other sort are Infi¦dels, who of late are grown numerous and audacious, and look so big and speak so lowd, as to acquaint us that it is not they that are silenced (in their speaking place) nor driven five miles from every City and Corporation. Which sort you are of, I know not: I read your name, and that you are a Sojourner; but finding that you write not as a tender Doubter, who desireth to be concealed, but as a Confident gain-sayer of the Christian Verity, and not knowing how safely to send a Let∣ter to the place where you say you so∣journ, I have thought that it will be most pleasing to you to come to you by the same way, as the book did which you except against (which was written upon the provocation of a paper Scattered among the Schollars of Oxford, when the Oxford Oath and Act were made in the time of the great Plague, as by one that was un∣satisfied in the Grounds of Christiani∣ty; but I strongly suspected was writ∣ten by a Papist, it was made so suit∣able to their designs.) In two things you have not dealt
righteously and ingeniously with me. 1. In that you have not answered the Grounded Proofs of the Christian Verity which I have laid down, but nibble at the Answer to some Objecti∣ons, which is not the way of a Lover of the truth. 2. In that you take no notice of, or make no answer to, the second part of my answer to that same objection, about supposed Contradictions in the Scri∣ptures; where I shewed you at large, that if that which you object were granted, it would not overthrow the certainty of the Christian Faith. Both those should have been done by an impartial man. The method which the nature of the Cause requireth me now to use, in my answer to you, shall be in the ma∣nifesting these following Propositi∣ons. Prop. 1. That if it could not by us be proved that every word of the Scripture is true, nor the pen men infallible or in∣defectible in every particle, yet might we have a certainty of the Christian Reli∣gion. Prop. 2. That yet all that is in the
Scriptures as the word of God is certainly true; and no error or contradiction can be proved in it, but what is in some Co∣pies by the fault of Printers, Transcribers or Translators. Prop. 3. That he that first proveth the Truth of the Christian Faith by solid evidence, may and ought to be certain of that truth, though he be not able to solve all soeming contradictions in the Scri∣pture, or answer all objections which occurre. Prop. 4. The true method of one that would arrive at certainty, and not de∣ceive himself and others, is to lay first the fundamental proofs, and examine them till he is thereby confirmed, and after∣wards to try the by-objections as he is able; And not to begin first at the answering of such by-objected difficulties, and judging of all the cause thereby. Of these I shall now speak in order. And whereas you bespeak Plainess and Gentleness in the Answer, I shall grant you the first as far as in such hast and brevity I am able; And the second as far as the nature of the cause will bear. But if you account all Christians deceived fools, you must not
expect to be called wise, nor that I should flatter you, and tell you that Apostasie is a state of safety; For I that believe Heb. 6. and 10. must think that this were not Gentleness but Cruelty, and worse than to kill you for fear of displeasing you. Prop. 1. If it could not by us be pro∣ved that every word of the Scriptures is true, nor the Pen men infallible or inde∣fectible in every particle, yet might we have a certainty of the Christian Reli∣gion. The reason is, Because every par∣ticle in the Scripture, is not an essential part of the Christian Religion, (no nor any Integral part, if you take the Chri∣stian Religion strictly, for the Doctrine of necessary Belief, Desire and Pra∣ctice:) And that part which is indeed the essence (yea or Integrity) of Chri∣stianity, may be certainly proved and believed, without our being able to prove the certainty or truth of all the rest which is in the Scriptures. The Holy Scriptures contain all our Religion, and somewhat more; that is, the Accidents and appurtenances of it. As the body of a man, besides the parts
Essential and Integral hath its Acci∣dents; such as are the Hair and the Colour (and some Humours) which are for Beauty and other uses, though not Parts. So far are the Papists from be∣ing in the right, who think that the Christian Religion is not all (but part) contained in the Scriptures, that there is more than all that is necessary to salva∣tion, even the appurtenances which have an aptitude to the adorning and promoting of the rest. To know who was the Father of every person mentioned in the Bibles Genealogies, to know what age each person was of whose age is there men∣tioned; to know the name of every person, and every Town; to know how far each City was from another whose distances are there expressed; with a multitude of such like Historical, Ge∣nealogical, Chronological, Topographi∣cal, Physical, incidental passages, is but an appurtenance, and not strictly a part (Essential or Integral) of the Chri∣stian Faith, of Holiness or Religion. Yet remember that we maintain as certain, that they are all Lyars who accuse God of Lying; And that, what∣ever
some ignorantly talk to the con∣trary, God cannot lie. See the excel∣lent Amesius his Disputation, of this Question, An falsum subesse potest fidei divinae, after his Medulla Theologiae (which book with his Cases of Con∣science, and Alstedius his Encyclopaediae, may (after the Scriptures and Con∣cordance) make a good Divine, and be a better Library than the Fathers of the fourth Council. Carth. were ac∣quainted with.) He that thinketh God can lie, destroyeth the Objectum For∣male fidei divinae, and therefore can have no Faith. If God could lie in one thing, we should never be sure that he revealeth the truth, unless by sense it self and after-experience. All Faith goeth upon such a Syllogism as this [Whatsoever God saith is true: But this God saith, Ergo, it is true] So that who∣soever believeth every word in the Scripture to be Gods word, must be∣lieve it all to be true, or he can believe none of it at all. But yet it is possible for a man to believe one part of the Bible to be Gods Word, and not another part; which needeth no proof.
Because that many of the ancient Churches for a certain time, doubted of, yea, received not the Epistle of James, Peter 2d. the Heb. Apocal. &c. and yet were truly of the Christian Re∣ligion. First, We deny not but that there are many false and wicked sayings hi∣storically recited in the Scripture (as the saying of Cain, Pharaoh, Gehezi, the false Prophets, the Devil (of Job, to Christ, &c.) but the Scripture is never∣theless true: For it is true that all these untruths were spoken. Secondly, The Disciples of Christ were not absolutely and in all things in∣fallible, as all Christians do Confess. They were not as perfect in Know∣ledge as now they are in Heaven. Ei∣ther Paul or Barnab as was mistaken about the fitness of Mark to go with them. Thirdly, There was a greater assist∣ance of the Spirit promised them when two or three of them were assembled in Christs name, than when they pro∣ceeded singly, Mat. 18. 18. But there can be nothing above perfect infallibi∣ity and impeccability to them all.
Fourthly, We confess that Christs Disciples were not indefectible or sin∣less. As their understandings, so their wills and lives, had still some imper∣fections. Marke, Paul and Silas did not all perfectly do their duties, in the case they differed about. Peter did a∣miss in avoiding the Gentile Christi∣ans, when Paul blamed him openly, Gal. 2. And Barnabas and others did not do well in being drawn away to the same isslation. When Paul saith of Timothy, I have no man like minded nd of others, They all seek their own, He took not all Christians that had the Spirit to be perfect: If any man had not the Spirit of Christ, he was none of his, Rom. 8. 9. And the very wrangling deng Galathians, had received the spirit, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. And so had the wrangling Corinthians Christ in them, 2 Cor 8. 5. Fifthly, We confess that he who is either infallible or defectible (lyable to error or sia) is of himself capable of being deceived and of deceiving others. If he were Infallible in respect of the Knowledg of all the Truth, yet while he can sin (of himself considered) he
can be heedless, careless, rash, par∣tial, and for by respects speak too little or too much. It is the Devils last method, to undo by overdoing, and so to destroy the authority of the Apo∣stles by over magnifying them, there∣fore we will not use his methods, nor deny any of this. Sixthly, Moreover, we confess that it is possible for a good Christian to doubt whether those that were but Evangelists (as Marke and Luke) had the same promise of the Spirits infalli∣ble assistance with the Apostles; see∣ing we find not that promise so expres∣ly any where made to them. And thereupon he may possibly think that some errors may consist with their measure of the Spirit, as it did with many Christians who had the same Spirit. Seventhly, And we do not believe that the extraordinary operations of the Spirit were alwaies equally in the Apostles themselves; we suppose the Prophets could not alwaies Prophesie, nor those that spake with tongues, use that gift at their own pleasure, nor yet those that did miracles, healed the
sick, or raised the dead: But that the Spirit wrought, as in various sorts and measures in several persons, (1 Cor. 12.) so also at various times, and in various measures in the same person. Whereupon it is possible for a good Christian to doubt, whether every word in Scripture was written then, when the writer had the gift of infal∣libility and indefectibility. Eighthly, And we do confess our selves, that the Apostles had not the infallible Spirit given them for every use or thing that they had to do; but for those matters about which they had special need of it and use for it, to ful∣fill their office. The Spirit was not so necessary for them to discern those things by, which the common sense and understanding of a man, was sufficient to discern. They could tast sweet from bitter, feel heat from cold, discern light from darkness, without an Infal∣lible extraordinary Spirit. And so being eye and ear witnesses, of what Christ did and said, of his words, his miracles, his resurrection, his ascension, they might infallibly know them by ordina∣ry means. And so a good Christian
may doubt whether they had the Spi∣rit infallibly, to transcribe and cite every passage in the old Testament, visible to all, or to relate the things which they saw done with their eyes; or to report the history of several acti∣ons which were then done: (as what was the place and power of Herod, Archelaus, Pilate, Falix, Festut, &c.) and such other parts of common Hi∣story. Ninethly, And we all confess that the words are but as the Body of the Scripture and the sense as the Soul: And that the words are for the sense. And there is more of the Spirits assist∣ance in the sense and soul of the Scri∣pture than in the words and body: And that there is in the phrase and method somewhat of (blameless) humane im∣perfection: And that as David was not stronger then Goliah, nor his wea∣pons more excellent in themselves, but God would overcome strength by the means of the more weak; so an Aristotle may be more accurate in me∣thod, and a Demosthenes, Varro or Ci∣cro in words and phrase than an Apo∣stle; And they may be left to the im∣perfections
of their several gifts (di∣versified by nature or education) in their stile. And God may hide that from the wise and prudent which he revealeth to babes; And by the fool∣lishness of Preaching may save belie∣vers, and confound the wisdom of the world, and by things that are not, bring to nought things that are, that no flesh may glory in his sight. Nor do we say that no man may seek or attain more Logick, Philosophy or Grammar than he findeth in the Scriptures. Tenthly, As Protestants receive not so many Books as Canonical as the Papists do, so some Protestants have not received so many as the rest: And so many possibly erre in thinking that some part of the Scripture is not the word of God, and consequently may think it of more uncertain credit. Eleventhly, Some have thought that Matthew being at first written in Hebrew or Syriack, and after trans∣lated into Greek, that the Translator being unknown, the credit of the Translation must be the less certain, because they know not whether the translator was one that had a promise
of Infallibility, though doubtless they erre who so conclude. Twelfthly, Some think, that as certainly there are a great number of various Readings, which all prove that some of the Copies erre, so it is uncertain to us, whether all those which we have, may not in some words or particles differ from others which we have not, and from the autographs; seeing each scribe had not a promise of Infallibility. Thirteenthly, If some particular Books of Scripture were not extant, or never known to some men, yet the rest may teach those same men, all the Christian Religion, to their Salvation. Therefore if they may be Christians and saved without knowing of that particular Book, they may possibly be so, without knowing that it is Cano∣nical, or of Divine and certain truth. Fourteenthly, Yea more, no doubt but it is possible to be saved (and to be good Christians) without being cer∣tain what is contained in any one Book of the Bible, totally; for he that cannot Read, may possibly not hear
the whole Book from another, at least so as to understand and remember it: And yet he may hear the same Do∣ctrines out of another Book. Yea more, it is past doubt that a man may (in some cases or circumstances) be a true Christian who knoweth not that there is any Scripture which is Gods In∣fallible word. For first so all the belie∣vers of the old world were saved, be∣fore Moses wrote the Law; And the Christian Churches were gathered and thousands converted to Christ, many years before a word of the New Te∣stament was written. Secondly, And all the thousands and millions of Chri∣stians who cannot read, do know that there is such a Book which hath such words in it, but on the credit of other men. Thirdly, And we know not but the Papists, (who are too great undervaluers of the Scriptures, and lock it up from the Laity, and over magnifie Tradition) may keep thou∣sands among them without the know∣ledge that there is a Book which is Gods word; And yet may teach them the Christian Religion by other means, after to be mentioned: And it seemeth by
the Epist. Jesuit. & Masaeus Histor. Judic. and other writings, that in Ja∣pan, Congo, China, and other Coun∣tries of the East, they did teach them onely by Creeds, Catechismes, and preachings: And I remember no know∣ledge that they gave to most of them of the Scriptures: And yet the most cruel torments and martyrdoms never before heard of, which the Christians in Japan endured (of which see Va∣rentus history) doth put all sober rea∣ders past doubt, that there were ma∣ny excellent Christians. And if other means may make men Christians who are never told of the holy Scriptures, than those same means with the Scri∣ptures, may make them Christians, who are made believe that all Scri∣pture passages are not the infallible dictates of Gods Spirit. I have given you instances enough, to prove that many may be Christians and have a certain faith, who are not certain of all things in the Scriptures: And therefore though all these persons are herein defective or erroneous, yet that Christianity may be otherwise known and proved: Yea though the
case of the Scriptures were as these mistaking persons think. And I told you how many waies, besides Scri∣pture, the summe and necessary sub∣stance of the Christianity is delivered down from the Apostles to the world; Reas. of Christ. Rel. pag. 336, 337. First, in the very successive Being of Christians and Churches, who are the Professors of this Doctrine. Secondly, In a succession of Pastors, whose of∣fice was to preach it. Thirdly, In a succession of Baptism, which is that solemnizing the Christian Covenant, in which the sum of the Gospel is con∣tained. Fourthly, In the three brevi∣ates or symboles of the Christian Reli∣gion, the Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue, which all the Christian Churches still used. Yea every one that was baptized at age (and the Pa∣rent for the Infant) did openly make profession of the Christian faith, and of Religion in all the essential particu∣lars. Fifthly, In the Churches use of Catechising those who were to be bap∣tized, that they might first know that Religion which they were to enter. Sixthly, In that constant Communion
of all the Churches in their solemn As∣semblies, and setting apart the Lords day to that use; where in their wor∣shiping of God, they expressed and excercised their Religion. Seventhly, In the constant preaching of the Gos∣pel by the Pastors. Eightly, In the constant Celebration of the Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood; wherein the summe of the Gospel was recited and expressed. And the custome was also to repeat the profession of their Belief. Ninethly, The frequent dispu∣tations of the Christian Pastors for their Religion against all Heathens, Infidels and Heroticks. Tenthly, The writings of the said Pastors, Apologies, Doctrinal, Historical, Commentaries, Devotional. Eleventhly, The Con∣fession and Sufferings of the Martyrs. Twelfthly, The Decrees, Canons and Epistles of Councils or Assemblies of the Christian Pastors. Thirteenthly, And after these the Decrees and Laws of Christian Princes: in all which we have no need of any peculiar Traditi∣on of the Church of Rome. Four∣teenthly, Yea, we may adde the Con∣fessions of Adversaries, who tell us
part of the Christians Religion; as Pliny, Celsus, Julian, &c. All these waies set together, told men what Christianity was. Fifteenthly, But the fullest and surest discovery of it was, by the holy Scripture of it self, which was constantly read in the As∣semblies of the Christians. In all this I have but told you, by how many waies and means materially the Gos∣pel Doctrine was made known. Now the great Question is, Whe∣ther by all these means we might come to a certainty of the truth of the Christian Faith, in case we could not prove every word or particle of Scripture to be Gods word, and so to be true. They that de∣ny it, say, That he that can mistake or be deceived in one thing, may be so in another, and we cannot take his word as certain, who sometimes speaketh falsly; for we can never be sure that he speak∣eth the truth, But I affirm the thing questioned, and shall shew the mis∣take of this reason of the Adversa∣ries. First, It must be remembred that we ascribe Infallibility Primitive and Absolute to God and no other. There∣fore
we are certain that so much is true as is Gods word. Secondly, We are Certain that all that is the word of God, which he hath set his seal or attestation to, which I have largely opened in the Book which you oppose; All that which hath the Antecedent and Constitutive and Con∣comitant and subsequent Attestation of God there opened, we are certain is of God. Thirdly, We are Certain that the Person of Christ, and his own Doctrine had all this fourfold Divine Testimo∣ny: And therefore that Christ and his Doctrine are of God, and true. And consequently that Christ was the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, the Head of the Church, and what∣ever he affirmeth himself to be. Fourthly, We are certain that the Apostles as Preachers of this Gospel, and performers of the Commission Delivered them by Christ, had the same attestation in kind as Christ himself had: They had the same SPIRIT. Though the antecedent testimony by Prophesie was not so full of them, as it was of Christ, yet the Gospel which they preached and
left in writing First, Hath in it still visibly to the eye of every truly dis∣cerning person, the Image of Gods Power, Wisdome and Goodness. Second∣ly, The same Gospel as preached and delivered by them had the Concomi∣tant Testimony of abundant certain Miracles, Prophesies and holy works. Thirdly, The same Gospel maketh that impression on the souls of true receivers, which is the Image of Gods power, wisdome and goodness, and so proveth it to be of God. The con∣currence of these three is a full and certain proof. Now if there be any doubtfulness in any of this, it must be, First, Either what it is that these Attestations prove, Secondly, Or whether they are really Divine Attestations. Thirdly, Or whe∣ther Divine Attestations are a certain proof of Truth. To begin at the last. First, If Di∣vine Testimony be not a certain proof of Truth, then there is no possible proof in the world. For there is no Veracity in any Creature, but deriva∣tive from God: And then it must be either because a Lie is as perfect and
Good as Truth (which humanity, rea∣son, and all the world contradicteth, and humane society abhorreth, there being no savages so barbarous as to think so) or because God is imperfect, either in wisdome to know what is True and sit, or in Goodness to choose it, or in Power to use it: That is, that God is not God, or that there is no God (and consequently no Being) for an Im∣perfect God, an unwise, an ill, an im∣potent Being, is no God. And verily all our Controversies with the Infidel and the Impious, and the Persecuter, must finally come to this, Whethen there be a God. II. And that these were really Di∣vine Attestations, I have fully proved in the Treatise. First, They are Di∣vine Effects, and the Divine Vestigia or Image. Secondly, And such as none can do but God. None else can give that full Antecedent Testimony of Prophesie: None else could have done what Christ did; in his Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension: None could heal all Diseases, work all Mi∣racles, raise the Dead with a word: None else could do what the Apostles
did; in Tongues, and Miracles, and wonderous gifts, and these wrought by so many, before so many, for so long a time. No other Doctrine could it self bear Gods Image of Power, Wisdome and Goodness so exactly, nor make such an Impresse of the same Image on the souls of men: Nay though this same Doctrine by the Spirit of God be adopted to such an effect, yet would it not do it for want of Powerfull application, if God by the same Spirit did not set it home: so that the sanctification and renova∣tion of souls, is a Divine Attestation of this sacred Gospel. And besides all the past Testimonies (of Christs and his Apostles Miracles) here is a double Testimony from God still vouchsafed to all true Believers to the end of the world; The one is Gods Image on the holy Scriptures; The o∣ther is, The same Image by this Scri∣pture (and the Spirit that indited it) printed on all true Christians souls. Divine, Power, Wisdome and Good∣ness, hath imprinted it self first upon the sacred word, or doctrine, and by that produceth unimitably, holy Life,
Light, and Love in holy souls. True Christians know this: They feel it: They profess it: They have this Spi∣rit in them, illuminating their minds, sanctifying their wills, and quicken∣ing them to vital operation and execu∣tion; And this is Christs Advocate, and Witness still dwelling in all his members. I speak not of an immedi∣ate verbal or impulsive revelation in us, but of a Holy indwelling nature, princi∣ple, operation, conforming the soul to God, and proving us to bear his I∣mage. This is Christs Witness in us, that He is Christ indeed and True; And this is Our Witness, that we are the Children of God: And it is our In∣herent earnest and pledge, first fruits and foretasts of the glory which Christ hath purchased and promised. If you know no such thing in your self as this, you have resisted the Holy Ghost, or Quenched the Spirit. And if you would not have him dwell and operate in your heart, no wonder if you cannot see him in the holy word: And if you would not consent that he Rule your Mind and Life, no wonder if you deny him also in that word which
he did make to Rule you. If you question the Real existence of these several Testimonies of Gods Spirit, First, Those that were given to Christ and his Apostles, I have plain∣ly proved to you in the Treatise, were delivered down to the world three waies. 1. By the most credible humane Testimony, to produce a humane Faith. 2. By such a Connexion and such Cir∣cumstances of those humane Testimonies as amount to a Natural Infallible Cer∣tainty (As we have of the Wars in England, and that there was such a man as K. Charles, K. James, &c. and that our Laws were made by the King and Parliament, that London was burnt, that there is such a City, &c. even to them that see not any of these.) 3. By new Divine Attestations to these Attestations; so that there con∣curreth. First, A full humane Faith. Secondly, A Natural Certainty. Third∣ly, A Divine Faith, to the ascertain∣ing us, that Christ did die, rise, ascend, work miracles, give the Spirit, and by it the Apostles wrought the like. Secondly, And the other two Testi∣monies
still shew themselves: They are yet in Being. The sacred Gospel is among is and on it the Life, Light, Love fore∣described. The Believers sanctified by this Gospel are among us; and have within them the Impressed Life, Light, Love. We see it (where distance, selfishness, prejudice or malignity hin∣dereth not) shining (though as through a Lanthorn) and working (though imperfectly) in others: And they that have it may so feel it in themselves, as will preserve them a∣gainst the Cavils of Unbelievers. As the Great Creator hath his stand∣ing Testimony in the Natural Consci∣ence of mankind, which in despight of the Devil shall keep up some Natural Religion in the world; And they that have not a written Law, are a Law un∣to themselves, shewing that God hath a Law in their hearts; So the Gracious Redeemer hath his standing Witness in the sanctified, even his holy Spirit, the Divine Nature, the New Creature, the Image of God, the Father, Son and Spi∣rit dwelling in them, by Divine Life, Light and Love, so as shall keep up a Church of holy ones to Christ, in de∣spight
of all the powers of Hell, even the spirits of Death, of Darkness, and of Malignity; And so much for the Validity of Gods Attestation. III. All then that remaineth doubt∣ful, or further to be spoken to, is, What it is that God hath thus attested by the Holy Ghost. And First, We are sure it is not no∣thing; It is not nothing that all this is done for: nor nothing that maketh this change on souls. Secondly, We are sure it can be no less than the Truth of the Person, Office and Doctrine of Christ himself: He hath certainly by this proved his own Verity and Vera∣city: for his own Miracles and Resur∣rection were seals affixed hereunto: Thirdly, We are sure that the same Gospel spoken by himself, was con∣firmed also when spoken or written by his Disciples. Else the same should be sure and not sure. Fourthly, We are sure that the Apostles Miracles, &c. confirmed all their Commission∣ed work. I have proved this in my Treatise of the Lords Day. Whatever Christ Promised them the Spirit for, that he gave them the Spirit for. He
that findeth his Promise with the Per∣formance, may know that it was the Promise which was Performed. There∣fore our work is to find out that Pro∣mise. And First, We find their Commis∣sion, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go and Disci∣ple me all Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to ob∣serve all things whatever I have Com∣manded you. And the Promise is, Lo, I am with you alwaies to the end of the world. And Joh. 16. 7, 12, 13, 14, 15. It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Advocate will not come unto you: But if I depart I will send him unto you. I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all the truth: For he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that he shall speak; and he shall shew you things to come: He shall glorifie me; for he shall receive of mine, and shew it unto you, Luk. 24. 49. And behold I send the pro∣mise of my Father upon you: But tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, till ye be en∣dued
with power from on high; so Act. 1. 5. Ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence, Verse 8. But ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses to me, both in Jerusalem and to all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. John 17. 8. I have given to them the words which thou gavest me, and they have received them, Verse 17, 18. Sanctifie them through thy truth: thy word is truth: As thou hast sent me into the world, so I have al∣so sent them into the world: And for their sakes I sanctifie my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth. John 14 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, & bring all things to your remem∣brance whatsoever I have said unto you. Adde to these the Texts which men∣tion the Performance of these Promi∣ses; as John 20. 22. Act. 2. Act. 15. 28. Heb. 2. 3, 4. So great salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him: God also bearing them witness, both with signes and wonders,
and with divers miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will, 1 Pet 1 12. The things which are now reported unto you, by them that have prea∣ched the Gospel unto you, by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven. Rom. 15. 19, 20. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, so that from Jerusalem, and round about by Illyricum, I have fully preach∣ed the Gospel of Christ. Gal. 3. 2. This onely would I learn of you: Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? By all this it is evident, that the Spi∣rit was given them to enable them to understand the Gospel, and to preach it to the world; to remember all that Christ had taught them: to help them to deliver the Covenant of Grace, and draw men into it, and Baptize them; To gather Churches, and to teach them to observe all that Christ had commanded them, and made part of his Laws. To teach them all truth which was Evangelical or part of their Ministerial Office. To enable them to be most certain and full in their Testi∣mony of what they had heard from
Christ, and seen him do, which was part of the Gospel. In a word to to perform all their proper Office. I do not at the present suppose you to take these Texts for the word of God: For I must suppose you to be an Infidel: But I onely offer them as part of the certain historical evidence, concurring with all the forementioned history and evidence of the fact, to prove what it was which the Apostles miracles were used to confirm. This same Gospel they preached every where, when they wrought these mi∣racles. And if they confirmed not the Gospel, or Christian Religion, they confirmed nothing. So that it being certain that this Spirit and Miracles were real, and certain that they were the Testimony of God, and certain that it was the Truth of Christs person, actions, doctrine, sufferings, resurrecti∣on, ascension, and Covenant and Com∣mandments, which they attested, and all that is properly the Gospel or Chri∣stian Religion, what hindereth our certainty of all this. If it were a doubt whether the Spirit attested more, it is never the more doubtful, whether he
attested this much. The Apostles con∣stantly preached this Gospel; They Baptized persons into the New Cove∣nant; They opened the Articles of the Faith to them, and caused them to profess that Faith; They engaged them into the promise, and directed them in the practice of a godly, righ∣teous and sober life: And they confir∣med all this by miracles. And is not all this then made sure? (Yea, before they wrote any of the Scriptures:) And now to the Objection, [He that speaketh falsly in one thing is to be believed certainly or as infallible in no∣thing] I again answer, it is a blind Objection. God onely is absolutely infallible. All men are fallible in some things: We are not to believe that the Apostles could erre in nothing at all. Peter knew not what he said, when he talkt of dwelling on the Mount. They could erre, and they could sin: And he that sinneth, erreth: They were not absolutely perfect; But it is in certain particulars, even in the Decla∣ration of the Gospel, that God would not suffer them to erre or to deceive. Those words which the Holy Ghost did by
inspiration dictate to them, it is cer∣tain that all those words the same Ho∣ly Ghost attested: That is, To all the word of God. And thus much being past doubt, what if we were now at a loss about some Appurtenances of the Gospel, whether they were any of the Spirits dictates, or any part of the word of God: or any proper part of that which the Apostles were Commission∣ed for, and Spiritually Enabled to teach? What if in some points which they could know by common sense in∣fallibly as well as other men, any one should think that they were left meer∣ly to that certainty of sense. What if one be uncertain which are the Parts, and which but the Appurte∣tenances of the Gospel in some things which salvation is not laid on? Or were uncertain whether the Spirit did determine the Speakers tongue or pen about every such Appurtenance? What's this to the invalidating of any of the rest? If indeed when they speak by the Spirits Revelation, they spake falsly at any one time, we could never be sure that they spake true.
But when we are sure that all is true which they speak by the Spirit, and sure that they spake the Gospel, or delivered the Christian Religion by the Spirit, and are onely not sure whether every word in Genealogy, or by circum∣stances were spoken by the Spirit, no∣thing will follow hence, but that eve∣ry word of God is true, and every word of the Apostles which was a word of God: And it is perversness to argue, They▪ may erre when they speak their own words as men: Therefore they may erre when they speak Gods words by the Spirit. First, The Testimony of the In∣ternal sanctifying Spirit, is infallible. And so much as this Spirit attesteth to me is true, And I am sure that this Spirit attesteth the truth of the Gospel in me; for the substance of the Gospel is imprinted on my heart; and by the impression I know the seal. But what if I find on me no part of Gods Image, which was made by the name of Jorams Father or Son; what if I feel no Testimony of the Spirit in me, which tells the age of such or such a man there named; Nor can prove by the Spirit in me, how far Bethany was
from Jerusalem; What if the mention of Pauls Cloak and Parchments did not sanctifie me? Must I be uncertain of that which did? Secondly, What if I read a promise in the Scripture that God will never fail me nor forsake me? but will pre∣serve me in safety to his Kingdome? If I were uncertain whether this pro∣mise extended to every hair of my head, so that none of them should pe∣rish? or to the preservation of my Colour, and such like accidents; Will it follow, that I cannot be sure that I my self, my soul, my person, shall not be forsaken? What if I have a promise that all things shall work together for my good; And I am uncertain whether sins or my own follies, or rashness, or the creeping of every worm in the world, or the shaking of every leaf be num∣bered with those [All things.] Must I be uncertain therefore whether any thing shall work for my good? or whe∣ther sufferings for Christ shall do it? Thirdly, What if I be uncertain whether the vegetative faculties or soul in man, be material or immate∣terial?
Must I be as uncertain whe∣ther man have an immaterial (or in∣corporeal) soul? and whether the in∣tellectual powers be such or not? Fourthly, What if I be in doubt when the Law doth summon a man to any place, or command him any of∣fice, whether it meant that he shall not change his cloaths, or leave them off, nor cut his hair or nails, but bring all with him? Doth it follow that I must be as uncertain whether the per∣son himself must come or not? Fifthly, What if I be disputing whether a Tree be wood? and I can∣not tell whether the leaves, their ribs, or stalkes be truly wood or not? must I therefore be uncertain of all the rest? Sixthly, What if we dispute whe∣ther all the Kings officers are to be obeyed? and it be a doubt to me, whether a Prelate or an Apparator be the Kings Officers? can I therefore be assured of no others? Seventhly, When a witness swear∣eth to any writing, that it is true, or to any interrogatories; If I be uncer∣tain whether it be the true spelling,
or Syntax of the words, or the pro∣priety of every phrase, or every cir∣cumstance of the matter which he at∣testeth, must I therefore be uncertain whether he attest any thing at al? This one consideration may shew the unreasonableness of such conclusi∣ons; That all Systems Physical and Moral, have their great Essential or principal parts, and their smaller Inte∣grals, and their Accidents, which are no proper parts. And the Great and Principal parts are few, plain, discern∣able and necessary to the being or the greatest Ends: The Integrals are nu∣merous, small, hardly discernable, and necessary only to Perfection. The Ac∣cidents are some of them yet of a low∣er nature, lesse necessary, nnd less dis∣cernable. At the master trunks its easie to know which is a vein, and which an Artery, and which a Nerve, and what is their number: But when you go to their extremities, they will appear innumerable, small, and scarce discernable. I can know many grand trunks or boughs a tree hath, when I cannot know the number of the thou∣sands of sprigs at the extreamities,
nor just where the woody nature ceaseth, and the leaves or frutex doth begin. So I can easily know in the frame of Grace, that Faith, H and Love are the fruits of the Spirit, and so is every true part of Holiness. But to know of every particular thought whether it be the fruit of the Spirit, and a real part of holiness or not, is not so easie. Even so in our present case we can easily prove that all that is Gods word and uttered and sealed by his Spirit is true. But to come to a full certainty of every book whether it be truly Canoni∣cal, and every Copy that varieth in some readings from others, or of eve∣ry Genealogical Chronological Topogra∣phical, or Historical word; every phrase, location, order of sentences, citation of the Prophets, whether it were certainly all done by the Infalli∣ble inspiration of the Holy Ghost, is a thing that requireth more knowledg than every true Christian hath, as not having the same clearness and noto∣riety of Evidence as the Gospel or sub∣stance of Christianity hath. No  that all Gods word is True,
Truth is equally Truth, it having not a magis & minus; but all Truth is not equally notorious or evident. 2. Yet all that is in the Scri∣ptures expressed as Gods word, is certainly true; And no error or contra∣diction is in it, but what is in some Co∣pies, by the failing of Preservers, Tran∣scribers, Printer, or Translators. The Reasons why I have premised the former Propositions is, First, For your own sake, Secondly, For the sake of many Infidels that now have the same mis-apprehensions, Thirdly, And for the sake of many thousand weak, dark and tempted Christians: That you may not think that you may renounce Christianity, if you could prove a Contradiction or mistake in the Scriptures; there being greater certainty of our Religion, than of e∣very single word in the Bible. And that every Christian may not think that he must needs doubt as much of Christianity it self, and of all the Gos∣ as he doth whether such a Text  word, or have any contra∣diction
to another; And that he can have no more certainty of the Gospel, than he hath of Jorams son, or whe∣ther Matthew did rightly apply the Prophesie that Christ should be called a Nazarene, Mat. 2. 23. or the name of Jeremy, Mat. 27. 9. or whether Jude be Canonical, and the Epistle to Laodicea, and Clemens Rom. ad Cor. not Canonical; or whether Henochs prophesie cited by Jude be Divine; with many such like. We need not spread the sails so wide to the tempta∣tions of Satan as if we must let go all, if we doubt of the divine autho∣rity of any one word. But yet that indeed every word is Divine and sure, which is delivered as Gods word, I now assert. My meaning in that limitation is this: There are some passages (as I said) spoken only historically, and con∣tain the Narration of some words of the Devil (as to Job, Christ, and as most think, to Saul at Endor &c.) and some words of wicked men, and some words of weak and common persons: And all these are not mentioned as the words of God: As the words of Job's
Friends, which God reproved; The words of the old Prophet that lyed in the name of the Lord to the young Prophet to his destruction: The words of Jonas, I do well to be angry; and the words of Christs Enemies, Perfecutors, &c. Yea the mention of the Old Prophet remembreth me, that all words spoken as in Gods name, and that by a pretended, yea by a real Prophet, are not therefore the words of God; Micheah onely may say true, while Zidkiah and all the rest of A∣habs Prophets may lie, as in the name of the Lord. Balaam and the afore∣said old Prophet, and many such may say true, when Gods Spirit doth in∣spire them, and yet lie at another time in Gods name. And what Paul meaneth by his [not the Lord but I] I leave to consideration. Whether in 1 Cor. 14. all those that he correcteth for a disorderly using even the Mira∣culous gifts of tongues and prophesy∣ing, &c. had their Timeing and order∣ing of their gifts from the same Spirit that gave them the gifts, you may judge. And some Protestant exposi∣tors have doubted, whether James
and the rest were guided by the Spirit, when they perswaded Paul to go into the Temple, to shew the Jews that he observed their Law: Though I think that Counsel was of the Spirit, be∣cause Paul concurred in obeying it. But one instance I more doubt of my self; which is, when Christ and his Apostles do oft use the Septuagint in their Citations out of the old Testa∣ment, whether it be alwaies their meaning to justific each translation, and particle of sense, as the word of God and rightly done; or onely to use that as tolerable, and containing the main truth intended, which was then in use among the Jews, and therefore understood by them: and so best, as suited to the auditors. And so whe∣ther every citation of numbers or Genealogies from the Septuagint, in∣tended an approbation of it in the ve∣ry points in which it differeth from the Hebrew Copies; such plain ex∣ceptions, being promised I assert that All that is said in the Bible as by the spi∣rit of God, by men that had the promise of his Spirit, and especially by the A∣postles, is certain Truth and hath no
Contradiction in its parts. Before I give you my Reasons, I think it meet to remove all ambiguity of the words, [Infallible or Certain] that I may be rightly understood. First, The consent of all sober Di∣vines and Philosophers teacheth us to diftinguith between objective and subjective certainty, that is, The cer∣tain Truth of the Thing, and the Cer∣tainty of our own apprehension of it. Secondly, The word certain, when applyed to the Apprehension, some∣time signifieth an infallible apprehen∣sion, and sometime a clear and strong apprehension, excluding both deceit and doubts; and by some abusively to a strong Apprehension, which excludeth Doubts but not Deceits. Thirdly, In the object Infallibility sometime signifieth nothing but Verity, which whoever believeth is not deceived: And some∣times it signifieth also such clear evi∣dence, as is in its kind sufficient to banish all considerable doubting. And now I conclude. First, Whatever is True, is ob∣jectively certain and Infallibly true;
so far as that no man in Believing it true, is therein deceived or mistaken. All Truth is Certain Infallible Truth in it self. Secondly, Few Truths in the world are so Evident as that a blinded preju∣diced indisposed person, may not be ig∣norant of them, or erre about them. Thirdly, All Truths in the Scri∣pture have not equal evidence, that they are the word of God (though all that is known to be the word of God, if equally so known, have equal evi∣dence in the formal reason of saith, that they are true.) Fourthly, All known Truth is infal∣libly known; that is, He that know∣eth it, is not deceived, nor can possi∣bly be deceived by taking it to be true: so that as Infallibility signifieth [not▪ being deceived] all true knowledge is subjectively infallible and certain; that is, its true. Fifthly, No man can know that Infallibly, which is not objectively cer∣tain: that which is not True, cannot be known to be true. The strongest and most confident belief of a falshood, is a false belief, and more than falli∣ble
or uncertain. Sixthly, All Gods word being e∣qually true and infallible, the belief of it is also equally true and infallible. But being not All equally intelligible, evident (to be his word,) and necessa∣ry, the understanding and belief of eve∣ry part is not equally easie, strong, past doubting, or necessary▪ Seventhly, There is a superficial be∣lief of Divine Revelations (even the Gospel) which a natural man may have by extrinsick means. And there is a more clear apprehension, which a Commoner sort of Grace may pro∣duce: But that Belief which is so clear and powerful as truly to sancti∣fie and save the soul, must be the ef∣fect of the special operation of the Holy Ghost (who yet hath a course of appointed means in which we must receive it.) Eighthly, The reason of this neces∣sity of the Spirits operation of faith, and then by saith, is not because the Gospel wanteth due Ascertaining E∣vidence; or an aptitude to convince and sanctifie a soul: For its highly Rational (though mysterious) and
Good. But because by corruption and pravity the mind of man is so undispo¦sed to know, believe, and love truths of such a nature, as that there is need of a special Internal higher Operator to set home the work as the hand of a man setteth the seal upon the wax, and to do that by it which the bare word alone, with the excellentest preacher, cannot do. Ninethly, Yet is no wicked Infidel excuseable, that saith, If I cannot be∣lieve it, I will not believe it; Because First, It is his pravity which is his dis∣ability; Secondly, He is more able for a common superficial belief, than for a special effectual belief. Thirdly, And if he did by the help of that com∣mon belief, do what he might, and God appointeth him in the use of means, to obtain a special Faith through grace, he should find that God hath commanded no man to la∣bour and seek after grace in vain; and if any man have not that grace and power which is of necessity to his faith and salvation, it is long of himself, who useth not his commoner power and grace as he might use them. And
so much to prevent misunderstand∣ing. Now my Reasons why I take every History, Chronology, Genealogy in Scri∣pture as certainly true, and every other word, which is spoken by a true Pro∣phet and Apostle as by the Spirit, (and not disowned by the Scripture it self) but especially such as you accuse in the Gospel, are these. First, A Priore, Because it seemeth to me that the writing of the whole Books of the New Testament by them, was done in the discharge of the Commis∣sion given them by Christ: And he promised his Apostles his Spirit for the performance of all their Commission∣ed office work. This writing is part of the preaching which Christ sent them for. And no doubt but the Spi∣rit did cause them to write all the sub∣stantial part: And therefore we have reason to think that the smallest parts are from the same Author, and that he assisted them in the least as well as in the greatest. Yea the very accidents may have a perfection in their place, though less perfect in themselves. Though all the Evangelists use not the
same Method, or Order, nor repeat Christs sayings in the same terms; yet in respect to the whole frame, it may be best that there should be that di∣versity of words, and order, to pre∣serve and declare the same sense and things. And even their plain and less accurate stile and method, may be best as fittest to its use and end. Secondly, A Posteriore: There is no Caviller that yet hath proved any falshood or contradiction in any pas∣sages of the Scripture; Though the clearing of some of them require more than vulgar knowledge. Thirdly, Saving the controversies about the few questioned Books and some few sentences, and words, the Church which received the Scriptures as Gods word, did receive the whole as his word, and as certainly true in every part. Fourthly, Because that Spirit of Miracles in the Apostles, and that Spirit of Holiness in us, which attest∣eth the Christian Religion, doth re∣ceive it and attest it as found in the sa∣cred Scripture, (though not as there alone:) And it putteth no exception
against any part of the sacred record: Therefore while it particularly attesteth the chief parts, it inferreth an attesta∣tion to the smallest. (for that word or line which is not strictly a part but an accident of the Christian Religion, is yet a part of the Bible which contain∣eth it.) Fifthly, And though all the reasons which I have given, prove, that the Truth of the Christian Religion may be certainly proved, though we could not prove every by expression in the Scripture to be true; and though we deny not but the Pen-men manifested their humane imperfections in stile and method; yet if each passage were not True, it would be so great a tem∣ptation to the weak, and make it so difficult to know in some points what is true, in comparison of what it would be, if all be true, that we have no reason to imagine this difficulty to our selves, while its unproved. And having said this, I am here in order to answer your objections: which yet you should not have ex∣pected from me, whilst so great a number of books are already written
which have done it: And why should you bid me write that again which is written already, unless you had con∣futed what is written? If you under∣stand Latine, you may find a multi∣tude of such seeming contradictions, reconciled, in Sharpius, Magrius, Al∣thamer, Cumeranus, but most fully in abundance of Commentators: If you understood not Latine, you may read enough in Dr. Hammond, and many other Annotaters and Commentaries, Mr. Cradock's Harmony, &c. And you may have enough that understand La∣tine to translate you the solutions (as out of Spanhemii Dub: Evangel. Grotius, Jansenius, Chemnitius, and such others.) And whereas you tell me that I invite men to go to some Mi∣nister for satisfaction, I do so: But if I had invited all men in England to seek to me, you may imagine how many of them I must fail, though they should never so much resolve to be Infidels and to perish unless I satisfie them. But you greatly encourage me to a particular answer, by promising me, that [you will trouble me with no more but these few places] and that if I clear
these from your imputation of contra∣diction, you [will conclude] as I do, and suppose the other places reconcileable. First, Your first Case is of Mat. 1. 8, 9. Joram begat Ozias, &c. Answ. Here are two difficulties to be resol∣ved; First, whether Joram begat Ozias, (called also Azarias.) Secondly, why Matthew leaveth out Ahazariah, Joas and Amaziah. And for the first is it not strange that you should number this with contra∣dictions? Are we not all called the Children of Adam? and Abraham cal∣led the Father of all the Jews? Is there not a mediate as well as an immediate Generation and Progeny? Is not causa causae, causa cavsati? Did not your Great Grandfather beget you in causa, while he begat him who begat him, who begat you immediately? What more common among the Hebrews, than to call Posterity the Children of their Ancestors. Even Christ is called The son of David? And use is the ma∣ster and expositor of words. And you were born too late, to teach either God or the World, in what sense to use words so many hundred years
ago? This Language was well under∣stood by them that used the like. And Secondly, For the next que∣stion you must understand the scope of an Author and his undertaking, if you will understand his words. Mat∣thews designe was not to name every person in all these periods of time, from whom Christ descended; But first to shew for Memory sake, how the line of Christs Progenitors may be mentioned by three fourteens in three several periods of time: one from A∣braham to David, and one from Da∣vid to the Captivity, and one from thence to Christ: Therein commemo∣rating as many as God was pleased hereby to make memorate, to their honour, and to shew the truth of the descent of Christ from Abraham and David. Secondly, And God is not bound to give us a reason, why he o∣mitteth any of their names: But this probability is obvious, that seeing Matthew would for memory keep himself to the number of fourteen, none were fitter to be left out than the Po∣sterity of Athalia, and so of Ahab and Jezebel; which God hath fortold
should be blotted out or abolished, 1 King. 21. 21, 22. And therefore he that would have the names of the wicked to rot would not here honour them with a place among the Proge∣nitors of Christ: And yet the second Commandment limiting Gods visiting the sins of the Fathers on the Children to the third and fourth Generation, it is no wonder that the omission doth extend no further; And so suitable is Gods word, to his providence, that these three men were all cut off by the sword, whose memory is here cut off by Matthew. II. As to your second pretended contradiction, First, Remember that it was none of the purpose of any of the Evangelists to say all that could be said, even of the sayings and doings of Christ himself; much less of any o∣thers: And therefore if that be said in one which is not said in another it is no wonder: And you must remember what Doctor Hammond hath noted of Luke, that Luk. 1. professing that he received his knowledg from others (though directed by the holy Ghost) he delivered the things themselves,
with less respect to the time and or∣der, when every thing was said and done, than the other did observe, it being not his design to tell the time and order of each. These things premised, set them all together and you will find that, First, Mary Magdalen, Johanna, Ma∣ria Jacobi, and Sallome, having bought spices and going to anoint the body of Jesus, said, [who will roll away the stone for us?] And when they came they found the stone rolled away by an Angel that sate upon it. Secondly, That Angel with another, speaks to the women, saying, Fear not; I know you seek Jesus that was Crucified; why seek ye the living a∣mong the dead; he is not here, he is ri∣sen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord was laid, &c. Thirdly, Then the Women run and tell the Disciples, They have taken away the Lord and we know not where they have laid him. Fourthly, Peter and John run to the Sepulchre, and saw the clothes and returned. Fifthly Mary Magda∣len being come back, stood weeping at the door of the Sepulchre, and look∣ing
in, she saw two Angels, one at the head, another at the feet of the place where Jesus lay; who say, Woman why weepest thou? she said, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Sixthly, Having said this, she looked behind her and saw Jesus, not knowing him, who said Woman why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? she thinking him to be the Gardiner, answered, If thou hast taken him away, tell me where thou hast laid him, &c. Jesus said to her touch me not, for I am not yet ascended, &c. But go to my bre∣thren and say unto them, I ascend to, &c. Seventhly, Mary runs and tells this to the Disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and what he said to her: But they be∣lieved her not. Eighthly, Either at the same time before Mary was gone, or perhaps after she had overgone them to tell the Disciples, Jesus met the rest of the women, and said to them, All hail; and they laid hold up∣on his feet, and worshipped him. And Jesus said to them, fear not, go tell my brethren that that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see me Take all the Evangelists, and tell me. First, Whe∣ther
here be any more than All set to∣gether say? Secondly, Whether in all this there be any Contradiction? But if you should take Dr. Ham∣monds shorter Supposition, First, That Mary and the women came to the Se∣pulchre, and find that before they came the stone was rolled away by an Angel (who had affrighted the Keep∣ers) Secondly, They go in and miss the body. Thirdly, Mary runs and tells Peter and John. Fourthly, They run and satisfie themselves, and return to the rest. Fifthly, The women stay∣ing at the Sepulchre, see the Angels; first one, on the stone, and on the right side of the Monument, and then two, one at the head and another at the feet of it. Sixthly, The Angels speak all that the Evangelists mention; and Mary to them. Seventhly, She turneth back and seeth Jesus, who speaketh to her, and to the rest what is recorded. Eighthly, Then she go∣eth and telleth all to the Disciples. If this order be supposed, what con∣tradiction is here? Where you say in Luke the women told the Disciples of the Angels first, he∣fore
Peter went, I answer, First, whe∣ther we suppose that they first told them of the words of the Angels that were without the Sepulchre before Peter went, and after of the Angels within the Sepulchre (which might be the same Angels, but not the same; apparition) or whether you only sup∣pose Luke, as in Christs Doctrine so in these by-matters of fact, to intend on∣ly to deliver the matter, and not to tell just the time and order, There is no un∣truth nor contradiction in either sup∣position. III. Your third question is fully an∣swered in the answer of the Former. According to the first Harmony or sup∣position, Matthew onely mentioneth one of the Apparitions of the Angels, and one of Maries goings to the Dis∣ciples. And so this written in Mat∣thew, was partly before Maries see∣ing Christ (viz. The Angels first ap∣pearance) and partly after (viz. her going the second time upon the second appearance of the Angels to tell them.) According to the second Harmony, Maries speech to Christ was after the
Angels  And now consider  you deal reasonably with Christ and with your own soul, upon such poor cavils as these to argue against the Christian Faith, and plead for Apostasie? when the Gospel hath all the Divine atte∣stations and evidences which I have opened in my Treatise, and you are not able to confute them? which lead∣eth me to my Third Proposition. Prop. 3. He that first preveth the Truth of the Christian Faith by solid e∣vidence, may and ought to be certain of that Truth, though he be not able to salve all seeming contradictions in the Scri∣ptures, or answer all objections which oc∣cur! Yea certain of EVERY PARTI∣CLE thereof. This I prove by these following Ar∣guments.
Arg. 1. From the consent of all mankind, who are forced thus to con∣clude in all arts and sciences: There being none of them so plain and sure, but somewhat may be said against them, which few, if any man can an∣swer. And incommodum non solvit ar∣gumentum must be their reply. Arg. 2. From the nature of objects and the imperfection of mans knowledg. If we could be sure of nothing till we can answer all objections against it, we must come to Zanchez his Nihil Sci∣tur: Nothing in all the world can be sure: Can no man be sure that there is any such thing as Motion, till he can answer the Objections that would first prove no Vacuity, and then no Penetra∣bility, and then an impossibility till a Cession begin at the extremity of na∣tural beings and continue unto the supposed mobile? Shall we say that a wheel cannot possibly turn round, be∣cause no one part first giveth place to the other to succeed it? Will you be able to answer all the difficulties tossed in the Schools, or but those mentioned in Mr. Glanvils Scepsis Scientifica, be∣fore you will be sure of any thing of
those matters, where these difficulties are found? He that can answer all objections, First, Is supposed not onely to know, but to know the matter in some perfection. And can none know certainly but those (who be they) that know in such per∣fection? 2dly, Yea they are supposed to know all other matters which may any way relate to the matter in hand. And shall no man know any thing certainly till he knoweth all things? For instance. First, What if the Question be whe∣ther there be a God? the Creator of all? Cannot I be sure of this till I can an∣swer Aristotles Objections of the worlds Eternity, and all the rest which every Atheist will alleadge? 2dly, What if the Question be, whe∣ther God be most wise? Cannot I be sure of it by the notorious effects of his wis∣dome, till I can answer him that saith [He that maketh fools and permitteth so much madness and confusion in the world, & leaveth mankind in so great ignorance, is not perfectly wise?] Thirdly, What if the Question be, Whether God be perfectly good? Cannot I be sure of it, till I can answer all
their Objections, who say [perfect goodness would make all things perfect∣ly good: and would not let the world he in so much wickedness, nor so ma∣ny tormenting Diseases to afflict us, nor the innocent Horse and Oxe to be laboured, tired, tormented and killed by us at our pleasure, &c.] Fourthly, What if the Question were, Whether God be Almighty? Cannot I know it, till I can answer them who say, that [He that cannot make an infinite world is not infinite in power? He that hath a will which men can violate; he that indureth all the sin in the world, which he hateth, and the ruine and misery of so many millions whom he loveth, is not Al∣mighty?] Fifthly, What if the Questions Whether man be a rational Creature? whether he have any free will? whether bruits have reason? whether plants and stones have sense? Can I know none of these till I can answer all the Ob∣jections of the Somatists against the Soul? and all the Objections of Hobs against free will? and all the Objecti∣ons of Chambre for the reason of
beasts? and all that Campanella hath said de sensu rerum? In a Word, What shall we know in the world, if we can know nothing till we can solve all difficulties and Objections. Therefore I adde Prop. 4. The true method of one that would arrive at certainty, and not deceive himself and others, is to begin at the bot∣tom, and discern things in their neerest, intrinsecal and most certain evidences: and afterwards to try the by-objections as he is able: And not to pore first upon the objected difficulties, and judge of all the cause by those. The plain truth and case of Christi∣ans is, that if God had not done more for them by giving them his Spirit by the Gospel, and experience of its truth in the effects, than their Teachers have done by a right instructing them in the evidences of Faith, or than the Reason of the most doth in a clear discerning of those evidences in the thing or word it self; it were no wonder if Apostates were more numerous than they are,
when so many build on the sand, and are strangers to the true foundation, and will never see the evidences of the Christian Verity in it self; no won∣der if poor Objejections shake them, that never understood the nature and Reasons of their own Religion. If the Tree grow all in top, which exposeth it to the winds, and little in the roots which must hold it fast, no wonder if it be overthrown. When men never knew the great clear evidences of the Christian Religion, but take it up by Custome, Education and on the Cre∣dit only of the time and place in which they live, no wonder if every seeming weakness, error or contradiction in Scripture make them doubt. First, Look to all Learning, Arts and Sciences? Do not learners that would know, begin at the Elements and Foundation? Do we not begin in Grammar with our Letters, Syllables, Words, and chief rules? And in all Arts and Sciences with the Elements and Principles. Secondly, And Reason telleth us that the points that are most necessary, clear and certain must be held accord∣ly
with a more clear, assured confidence than those that are unnecessary & dark; And that uncertainties must be reduced to certainties, and not certainties to un∣certainties; And that all arguing should be a notiore, and not a minus not is. And as I said before, as the Trunks of the Tree, the Veins, the Arteries, the Nerves are few and visible, and easily and surely known, when the thou∣sands of little branches are hardly vi∣sible or numerable: so is it with the schemes of truths. He therefore that will begin at these numerous small branches will dote rather than know or learn. As in the former instances. First, When I see with my eyes, the effects of Power, Wisdome and Goodness in all the visible works of God, I am sure that it is perfect Power, Wisdome and Goodness which is the cause of this: I am certain that nothing can give that which (formaliter or eminenter) it hath not to give, nor can the effect exceed the totall cause: I am certain that he from whom all Creatures Power, Wis∣dome and Goodness doth proceed, must needs himself be more Great and
Wise and Good, than all the world of Creatures set together which he hath made. To this fundamental certainty therefore I must hold if I will not dote whatever little Objections or pratlings may be used against it. Secondly, Eternity is a thing in∣comprehensible, which quite swallow∣eth up my understanding; and many little things be said against it? But I am certain that nothing can make no∣thing; And if ever there had been no∣thing, there never would have been any thing: And to this certainty I will hold. Thirdly, A holy life hath a great many of cavilling Objections raised against it by corrupted nature. And shall I there begin to make my trial of it? No: I am first sure that a Ration∣al free Agent and Subject of God, is bound to obey him, and that the Grea∣test Good should be Greatliest loved, and that we are totally our Creators own, and should be totally devoted to him: I am sure I cannot love the infinite Good too much, nor be too Good, nor do too much Good to others in the world, nor make too sure of my own felicity, nor
too much seek my ultimate end. And shall not this assurance hold me fast against all the snarlings and pratlings of the doating drunken world? So here, I have in the Treatise o∣pened those grounds on which we may be certain of the necessity of this ho¦liness, of the life to come; and of the truth of the Christian Faith and hopes. And because God in mercy hath not put off the world with the skeleton of a bare Creed, but also given them the compleat body of sacred Scri∣ptures, to be a full perpetual Record of this truth, shall I turn his mer∣cy to a snare and sin, and question all, even the Articles of the Faith, be∣cause in the Scriptures there are some things accidental to Religion, and some things hard to be understood, which the ignorant and unskilfull wrest to their destruction? This is but to be Devils to our selves, and foolish enemies of our own peace and comfort: As Cicero speaks against them that pleaded for the souls mor∣tality, as if it were a desireable thing.
You have nothing else that suiteth the Nature and Interest of a man, and agreeth with the Nature and Interest of God, to set against the Christian Religion in Competition. If you would have no Religion, you would have no Hopes, no Safety, no Business or Com∣fort but Beaial in this world, and you would be no Men. If you would have nothing but Nature and the Ho∣liness which Nature clearly calleth for, you would have Health in an unhealed Body, and Health without the Physici∣an and his Means. The Mediator is the way to the Father, and if you would Love God and be happy in his Love and have the Pardon of your Sins, you have little reason to reject him that cometh to Procure, Reveal and Communicate that Love and Pardon, which must win your hearts to the Love of God. And if you would not die in desperation, but have the hopes and foresight of a better life, you have little Reason to quarrel with a Messenger from Heaven, which bring∣eth Life and Immortality to light. As bad as Christians are, if personal quar∣rels and malignity blind you not, and
if you will not take the enemies and persecutors of Christianity for Chri∣stians, meerly because they assume the name, you may easily see that serious Christians who live according to their profession, are persons of another kind of excellency, than all the unbe∣lieving world. I know that from some self-conceit∣ed ignorant well meaning persons, I must look to be reviled and called a betrayer of Christianity, because I plead not for it in their way, and give you any other answer to your objections than [That when God gi∣veth you the spirit, you shall know that the Scripture hath no contradictions, and that Christianity is the true Religion: Till then you cannot know it; nor must I give you Reasons for it.] But I do my work, and let who will wrangle and revile. How far the sayings of some are true or false, [that the Scripture is the onely means of faith or saving know∣ledge of God?] that [it is Principium indemonstrabile, as first principles of knowledg are in nature] that [(as o∣thers say) It hath evidence of credibi∣lity,
but not evidence of certainty] (as if evidence of Divine credibility or or faith, were not evidence of certain∣ty) [that faith hath not evidence; but evidence evacuateth faith, or the merits of it] with such like, a man of understanding may gather from what is said: And I must not be so tedious as particularly here to resolve them, ha∣ving done it (in Preface to the Second part of the Saints Rest. Edit. 2. &c.) long ago. And though I have written nothing here which some men cannot make an ill use of, and some men will not turn to matter of cavil and re∣proach, I will not therefore leave it out, whilst I expect that the Cood which Truth is fitted to, is greater than the evil, which by accident and abuse will follow it. And because you seem Confident, and think me bound to answer you, and consequently all others, not know∣ing how many hundreds may trouble me in the like kind, I send you this in print, that other mens mistakes and infidelity also may have the same re∣medies. But I shall conceal your name and dwelling, lest the shame of your
sin should hinder your patient appli∣cation of the remedy, save onely by telling you, that it is long ago since I read a noble Learned Lord who in a Latine Book De Verita∣te (Contra Veritatem) said much against the certainty of faith: But it was all but learned froth and vanity. I Rest A Servant of Christ, and desirer of your faith and salvation, R. Baxter Dec. 28. 161.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS APPENDIX; BEING Some ANIMADVERSIONS On the foresaid Treatise De Veritate, Resolving several Questi∣ons there included or implyed. HAving let fall the mention of that noble Authors Treatise, it came into my mind, that it having never been answered, might be thought unanswerable, and so the more considerable. Therefore I ad∣join
so much of my Animadversion, as the cause in hand requireth. And First, I must give the Author the Honor of his great Learning and strength of wit. Secondly, I must confess that the Teachers of the Church, have been too often such, as have given him the scandal which he so oft expresseth, as more regarding their Interest than Truth, and not making clear the truth which they have taught, and often wronging it by their omissions or additions, or un∣sound explications. Thirdly, I con∣fess the body of his Treatise contain∣eth many very considerable things, in order to the disquisition of truth; es∣pecially about the sutableness of the faculties to the object, the conditions requisite to a true apprehension, and somewhat about the nature of truth it self: Though that which he calleth Veritas apparentiae, I had rather call, Evidentia Veritatis rei. And I am not willing to think that I have as many different faculties as there are different plants in my Garden, or Books in my Study, or Sentences in those Books; And in several things I miss that accu∣rateness
which he pretendeth to: But these I shall pass by. Page 217. he saith, [An vero a∣liud (praeter Paenitentiam) & qui∣dem convenientius detur medium, unde justitiae divinae sit factum satis non est hic in animo exponere,—Hoc solummodo dicimus, (quicquid in adversam partem a quibusdam suggeratur) quod nisi sola peniten∣tia & fide in Deum, vitia & scelera quaecunque eliminari possint, & Ju∣stitiae Divinae Bonitas Divina adeo sit  ut non sit ulterius quo pro∣vecetur, nullum universale ita pa∣tere, vel olim patuisse remedium, ut fuerit quo confugeret misera ex peccati sensu languentium turba, vel haberet unde gratiam & pacem il∣lam internam conciliaret; & tandem in id deveniendum sit, ut quosdam, immo longe majorem hominum partem inscios (nedum invitos) & creaverit & damnaverit Deus Opt. Max. Quod adeo horrendum, & Providentiae, Bonitati immo & Ju∣stitiae Divinae incongruum sonat, ut mitiori immo & equiori sententia di∣cendum sit, totum humanum genus
ex paenitentia semper habuisse me∣dia unde Deo acceptum esse potuit; quibus si exciderit, non jam ex Dei bene placito, sed ex proprio homi∣num peccato, perditionem uniuscu∣jusque ex titisse, nec per deum ste∣tisse quo minus salvi fierent.] The first Question then is Quest. 1. Whether if Christ, and not onely our Repentance, and belief in God, be taken for a sacrifice and price given to God for mans Redemption, it will fol¦low that most of the world are damned by Gods will without any Remedy, to which they covld have recourse for salvation? Answ. First, It is strange that men should be left Remediless, if Christ, and not onely their Repentance be the Remedy? Surely if Christ had given sinners nothing, yet he hath taken no∣thing from them. Secondly, We all confess the uni∣versal necessity of Repentance? But this is partly coordinate (as the end) and partly subordinate (as an effect) and therefore not contrary to the necessity of a Redeemer? Repentance is our con∣version, and our begun Recovery from sin: And will it follow that the Physici∣an
is unnecessary because health and re∣covery are necessary? Yea, and sufficient in their kind? Thirdly, How doth it follow that the Remedy was not Universal, when Redemption by Christ was universal? Christ so far died for all men, as by his death he procured them any Grace. But he procured Grace (though not e∣qual Grace) for all: You confess an universal Grace, and yet an inequallity of benefits: we say, that Grace was procured by Christ: Do we narrow it at all, by saying, Christ procured it? Fourthly, I perceive some mens mis-explication of these things was your snare and scandal. First, We distinguish between Christs procure∣ment of our pardon and salvation by his sacrifice and merit with God, and Christ as the object of mans faith, or as Believed in by man. We do not make the latter so universally necessary as the former. For we hold that Infants are saved, that believe not. But we hold that no one is saved for whom Christ did not satisfie Gods Justice and merit salvation. Secondly, And
that this much causlessly offend you not, we say, That this satisfaction and merit consisteth not in an identity or gradual proportion of Christs pains or sufferings to all mankinds, but in an Aptitude of his Sacrifice and Righ∣teousness to attain the ends of God the sovoraign of the world, (the demonstra¦tion of his truth, holiness and right cous∣ness, together with triumphant love and mercy) better than the remediless damnation of all the sinning world would have done. Read but Master Trumans Great Propitiation, which sheweth you the true ends of the sa∣crifice of Christ, and this unjust of∣fence will vanish. Thirdly, And we maintain (as is said) that the merit and Propitiation wrought by Christ, is not to make our Repentance needless; But to procure it, and to make it effe∣ctual to its ends. He giveth us Repen∣tance and Remission of sins. You con∣fess that we may and must make a New Covenant with God upon our Re∣pentance: In that Covenant God pro∣miseth us Grace, as we consent to be his servants and children. Now if Christ did procure (and as Gods Ge∣neral
Administrator) Give us that pro∣mise of pardon and salvation to the tru∣ly Penitent, doth not this more oblige us to Repentance, and not less? And the merit of Repentance (if you will so call it with the Ancients) is quite of another order, rank and nature than the merit of Christ. Its one thing for the Innocent son of God to merit Re∣pentance, and pardon to all that will Repent; And another thing by Re∣penting (through his grace) to per∣form the Condition of the further Grace of pardon or salvation. Fourth∣ly, And yet further to heal your un∣just offence, we do not hold that Christ maketh God more merciful than he was, or that his Redemption is the first cause of our recovery and salvation, causing God to be willing, who was unwilling before: But that Gods love and mercy and his own good will is the first cause, which gave us Christ for a Redeemer as a second cause, an effect of his love, and the Head of all the means of our Recovery; and the true meriting cause of that Grace and sal∣vation which God will give us. Nor so meriting as to change God, but so
meriting as to remove the Impedi∣ments of his grace as to the Com∣munication, and as to become the sittest Instrument of the Fathers love and mercy, by whom to Govern the laps∣ed world, and to communicate grace and life to sinners. Fifthly, And yet fullier to satisfie your objection, we hold that. All mankind is brought by Christ under a Covenant of Grace, which is not vain, nor repealed by God; but as their abuse of the Grace of the Covenant may cast them out. For as a Covenant of Entire Nature or In∣nocency was made with all mankind in Innocent Adam; so a Covenant of Grace was made with all mankind in Lapsed Adam, Gen. 3. 15. in the pro∣mised seed: and renewed again with all mankind in Noah. No man can prove either a limitation of this Cove∣nant to some, (till the rest by violating it become the Serpents seed, at least) nor yet that ever God did abrogate it, as it was made to all the world. Sixth∣ly, And we further acquaint you, that it was not the existent humanity of Christ, that procured Grace and Life to the world, for those (about) 4000
years before his Incarnation. The meer Decree and Promise did serve for mans salvation all that time, without the Existence of his Humanity. Se∣venthly, Therefore when you grant a necessity of Believing in God, as merciful, you must needs include Christ in his Divine subsistence, for you must needs grant that the eternal  or wisdome of God, must be the fountain and determiner of all those means by which his Love and mercy would communicate recovering grace and life to man. You will not divide God as the object of our faith, and leave out the wisdome that must ma∣nage all. Eighthly, And yet further to remove your scandal, we maintain that the Jews themselves were not bound to believe many that are now Articles of our Faith (that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, descended to hades, and rose again the third day) And that his very death and resurrection, were not believed by his own Apostles till he was risen. Nor understood they the Article of the Ho∣ly Ghost. So that before a more gene∣ral
belief in the Messiah did serve the Jews themselves; That all this is so we are satisfied by this evidence. First, By the silence of the Old Testament in the Matter, giving us no proof that ordinary (much less all) believers, had such a particular knowledge of the of∣fice of Christ: And what is not reveal∣ed is not to be believed. Secondly, From Heb. 11. Where faith is descri∣bed (as in its latitude) to be the evi∣dence of things not seen, and the sub∣stance of things hoped for, and a be∣lieving that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and a looking for a better coun∣try and for a City that hath founda∣tions whose builder and maker is God and a believing the word and faithful∣ness of God, &c. And the Holy Ghost when he purposely describeth the faith which the ancients had been saved by, would never have left out the chief or any essential part. The same I say of Rom. 4. and 2 Cor. 4. 18. and 5. 1, 6, 7. Jam. 2 &c. Third∣ly, The Text expresly telleth us. First, Of Christs Death and Resurrection, and consequently the offering himself
a sacrifice for sin, and ransom for the world, and dying for us, that the Apostles themselves were ignorant of it till after his Resurrection, Mat. 16. 21, 22. When Christ told them that he must be killed and raised again the third day, Peter took him, and began to re∣buke him, saying, Be it far from thee Lord, This shall not be unto thee, Luke 9. 44, 45. The son of man shall be de∣livered into the hands of men: But they understood not this saying and it was hid from them that they perceived it not. Again, Luke 18. 31, 32, 33, 34. All things written in the Prophets concerning the son of man shall be accomplished, for he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and be mocked, and spitefully intreated and sit on, and they shall scourge him and put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again. And they understood none of these things, and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken: So Mark 9. 32. Luke 24. 21, 25, 26. We trusted this had been he that should have Redeem∣ed Israel-O fools and slow of heart to be∣lieve all that the Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these
things and to enter into his Glory: And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. Here you see that they knew not that he must die for our sins,, rise again and ascend to Glory: And that it is no proof that all that were justified before understood these things, because that Moses and the Prophets had foretold them; For the Apostles themselves understood it not in Moses and the Prophets. Secondly, They under∣stood not aright the doctrine of his Intercession, and that he must go to the Father and then be their high Priest, and that they must come to God by him, and ask in his name. For it is said, John 16. 5, 6, 7. Now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you ask∣eth me whither goest thou? but because I have said these things to you, sorrow hath filled your hearts—but it is expedient for you that I go away. v. 24. Hither∣to ye have asked nothing in my name, v. 26. At that day ye shall ask in my name. As for them that say that the Apostles knew that they were to come to God onely by a Mediator (as all the faith∣full
did of old) but yet they knew not that they must come to him by Christ, and in his name. First, There was no Mediator existent but God before the Incarnation, though there was to be a Mediator after. Seconnly, This im∣plyeth that the Apostles knew not Je∣sus to be the Christ, and that they went to God by some other Mediator, which are both false. Thirdly, And if by me∣diation be meant the satisfactory price of his Sacrifice, they knew not that he was to die and to be a Sacrifice for Sin. Fourthly, And it is plain that they un∣derstood not rightly the nature of his spiritual Kingdome and Reign; But had got an opinion of an Earthly Kingdom for the Jews deliverance and exalta∣tion: that Christ abideth for ever, Joh. 12. 34. in opposition to his heavenly abode was then a common opinion, Luke 24. We hoped this had been he that should have redeemed Israel: one would have sat on his right hand and another on his left: and they strove who should be greatest, Act. 1. Lord wilt thou at this thime restore the Kingdome to Israel? Jeh. 16. When the Advocate was to be sent he was to
teach them all things, and to testifie of Christ, and to convince the world of the sin of their unbelief, and of the righteousness and truth of Christ, and of his Judgment or Kingdome and pow∣er, as consisting (quoad exercitium) in the debellation or dejection of the Kingdome of Satan, and destroying the works of the Devil. By all which (and much more) it appeareth that the Apostles, (though then in a state of Justification,) had a very general and defective knowledge of the Office of Christ; and that though his Pro∣phetical Office was ordinarily believed (Joh. 4. The Samaritane woman could say, when the Messiah cometh, he will tell us all things) and a temporal Kingdom expected, yet his spiritual Kingdom, and especially his Priestly office, by his sacrifice, death, resurrection, heavenly intercession (for all the old Types and Sacrifices) was little under∣stood by the Disciples. Yea, he some∣times sorbad them and others to tell men that he was the Christ, because the great evidences of his Resurrection, As∣cension and Spirit, by which it was to be evinced, were yet to come. And
we believe not that all that were saved before, had more knowledge than the Apostles, so that though all the faithful Jews believed in the promised seed, e∣ven the Messiah, as one that was to be sent to be their Deliverer and Savi∣our, yet it was by a saith that was very general, and far from that di∣stinctness, which after the Resurrection of Christ was required, of all to whom the Gospel was promuglate, which I have said the more of to you, lest you think that we hold what we do not, and so take occasion to erre by suppo∣sing us to err, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, Arnobius, Lactantius. and other old Christians do go yet fur∣ther, then yet I have conceded to you. And our very learned Dr. Twisse doth argue that God could have saved the world without a Redeemer if he had pleased, because he saved the faith∣ful under the old Testament without any existent Mediator (except God himself) or any existent sacrifice or me∣rit or intercssion of him, and because he saveth Infants without faith. But for the first I take it to be at best too great temerity or audacity to dispute
whether God could have done things better or otherwise, which he has done so well: (of which I have said more in my Premonition before my Treatise, called the unreasonableness of Infidelity. (Though I know that Wallaeus, and ma∣ny other learned Protestants say the same.) And as for Infants they are not saved without the Sacrifice, and grace of the Redeemer, though they know him not; nor are they in the Cove∣nant without the faith of their Parents or Owners, which is as their own. And if the Spirit of the Prorphets be called the Spirt of Chrict, 1 Pet. 1. 11. And the reproach of Moses was the reproach of Christ Heb. 11. 26. We may much more conclude of the ordinary Believ∣ers before his coming, that Christs In∣terest and his Spirits operations and help, extended much further than mens un∣derstanding of him, his undertaking and his future work. No doubt but the eternal  that had undertaken mans Redemption, and thereupon was our Lord Redeemer, gave even to So∣crates, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Antonine, Epistotus, Plutarch, &c. What light and mercy they had, though they
understood not well from whom or upon what grounds they had them. Ninethly, And also we hold that the Jews were not the whole of Gods Kingdome or Church of Redeemed ones in the world (as I have fully pro∣ved elsewhere,) But that as the Gove∣nant was made with all mankind, so amongst them God-had other Servants besides the Jews; Though it was they that had the extraordinary benediction of being his peculiar sacred People. Tenthly, And we hold that as the Jews had by Promises, Prophesies and Types, more means to know God and the Messiah to come than other Nati∣ons, so they were answerably oblig∣ed to more knowledge and faith than o∣ther Nations were, that had not, nor could have, their means. If then all the world be under the first Covenant of Grace, and if you confess this to proceed from the wis∣dome and goodness of God, and that men are bound so to believe, and if Christ since his Incarnation hath dimi∣nished none of the mercies of God to the world, but rather greatly increas∣ed them; and so where the Gospel is
not preached, nor cannot be had, they that refuse it not, are in no worse case than they were before, how can you say that they are Remediless, if Christ be the ransome and remedy? We know that all men partake of a great deal of mercy from God, af∣ter the notorious demerit of their sin. We know that this mercy telleth them aloud, that God dealeth not with them according to the first Law of Innocency; They see he pardoneth them, they feel that he pardoneth them in part; that is, that he useth them not as they deserve. We know that all this mercy obligeth them to hope, that he will yet be further merciful; and to repentance, obedience, thankfulness and love. We know that the Heathen are no left as the Divels, without reme∣dy, but all the Nations are under Di∣vine obligations, to use certain means, which have a tendency to their reco∣very: And we know that God biddeth no man to use his means in vain. Fourthly, Let us therefore first de∣bate this Case, with any unbeliever that hath your objections, Whether you have any fault to find with the
Christian Doctrine of the way of mans salvation, for the first 4000 years, be∣fore the Incarnation of our Lord? If you have, First, Is it with the Author? Secondly, Or with the terms and con∣ditions of life? First, The Author then was none but God. The eternal , wisdome and word, did interpose to pre∣vent the execution of strict Justice, by resolving to glorifie Love and Mercy. Do you deny the being of Gods eter∣nal wisdome or word? Do you deny him to be God himself? Or a Divine subsist∣ence? & dream that it is but some Acci∣dent in God? No? your fair description of God, p. 210. dischargeth you from the imputation of so gross an error. You will say that the Divine power and goodness interposed as well as the Divine  wisdome and word. True: Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt in divisa: but so that each hath an eminency in his own work, though not as separa∣ted or a solitary principle or cause. The Father and Divine Vital Active Power, was eminently glorified in the Creati∣on; The Son and Divine wisdome is eminently glorified in the making of the Remedying Medicine; And the
Divine Love and Spirit is eminently glorified in the operation of it, to the Health and Salvation of the Soul. The son, and the wisdome or word doth not finish all the work himself, but with the Father and Divine power, sendeth the holy Spirit, and communicateth to man the Love of God. And all together will be glorified in our glorification. Secondly, And if it be the terms of life that do offend you. First, It is ei∣ther the terms of satisfying the Justice of God. Secondly, Or the terms of conveying the benefits to man. First, For the first, there is nothing in it, to give offence. For we dream not of any extrinsecal agent or action (much less that which was not exist∣ent till 4000 years after) having any proper casuality to change Gods mind or will; The sum of the Christian Doctrine about the Interposition and Redemption by the Son, for man upon his fall, is but this; As if God should say I will not destroy or damn sinful man remedilesly, according to the strict termes of the Law of Innocency which he hath broken; but will give him a remedying Covenant of Grace; because I will in
the fulness of Time, provide better for the glorifying of my Truth and Holiness, wisdome and goodness, justice and mer∣cy, than the remediless destruction of mankind would do; even by the Incarna∣tion, doctrine, sacrifice, merits, &c. of the eternal word.] So that this grand work of God is the cause of his subordi∣nate works: but not the cause of any real (but only relative or denomina∣tive) mutation in himself. This all sound Christians are agreed in; And can this offend you? Secondly, And for the termes of com∣munication of Grace to man, it is either First, The New Covenant as a Gift of pardon and life, Secondly, Or the conditions which it requireth of man. First, The former you neither do find fault with nor can do (That God should give the world a Recovering and pardoning Law.) Secondly, The second is all that is here liable to your exception. And what do you think a∣miss in that? First, Not that Repen∣tance is one of the Conditions of fur∣ther Grace; for that you plead for. Secondly, Not that Fides in Deum mi∣sericordem, Faith in Gods revealed me∣cy
as pardoning sin, is required of man for that also you plead for. But you would have his goodness and mercy to be a sufficient satisfaction to his Justice? Answ. First, I hope you will not exclude his wisdome, because you abhorre Atheism as folly. Second∣ly, And I hope you will distinguish between, the prime satisfying Cause, and the satisfying means; These plainly differ. The prime satisfying Cause is Gods wisdome contriving and determin∣ing of the fittest way to communicate his love and spirit. But the prime satis∣fying means is Jesus Christ, who was to do that which was fittest to attain the foresaid ends. But that which you will accept a∣gainst is, that the Belief in Christs fu∣ture incarnation was made then necessa∣ry to salvation. Answ. First, See that you feign not the Christian Doctrine to say more of this than indeed it doth, which I have opened to you be∣fore. I told you how narrow the Apo∣stles own faith was before Christs Re∣surrection. We know that  the be∣lieving Jews, knew not so much as they, nor so much as the Prophets, and
more illuminated men: And we know that the rest of the world had not so full a revelation as the Jews. But we know that all that had the notice of his pro∣mise, were to believe the truth there∣of: And those that had not the word of promise made known to them, had the possession of many such mercies as that promise gave, and as intimated much of the same grace which the promise did: Thefore none could be bound to lessthan to believe, that God of his mercy would pardon sin and save penitent Believers, by such a means of securing the honour of his holiness, truth and ju∣stice, as his infinite wisdome should pro∣vide. This much you cannot deny. And that the promise of the Victorious seed (though it seem too obscure to bind men to so distinct a faith, as ours is) was by Tradition told to Adams posterity, and that they had a General belief of such an expiation for some time, seemeth intimated in the early and almost universal use of sacrificing, of which I shall speak more anon. Hi∣therto then I have vindicated the Chri∣stian Doctrine of mans salvation for the first 4000 years.
Secondly, And is there any thing since which should make it more of∣fensive to you? First, As to the Person of Christ I have said enough in my Treatise (the Reason of Christian Re∣ligion.) Verily I think it far harder to confute those that feign all the world to be animated by God as the universal Soul, and to conceive how God, who is most intimate to all things, in whom we live, and move and are, should not be as neerly united to all things, as Chri∣stians believe him to be to the humane nature of Christ (though undoubted∣ly it is not so) than that he should have that neer union with his humane nature. Secondly, And as to Christs work, I have so largely shewed you the ne∣cessity, the reasonableness and the har∣monical congruities that I will not re∣peat them. In a word, The New Te∣stament is the Doctrine of the eternal  wisdome or word of God Incar∣nate to communicate the Divine Spirit, and love to man, to be a sacrifice for sin, the Conqueror of Satan, Death and Sin, the Head over All things to the Church, the Author of Redemption, the grand
Administrator of the new Covenant, the Reconciler and Restorer of man to God, the Teacher, Ruler and High Preist of the Church, in order to this our Restorati∣on and Salvation. Thirdly, But if it be the Time of his coming that doth offend you, I have answered that, and further adde. First, What is there in foolish man that should encourage him to dream, that he better knoweth the fittest season for Gods works, than God himself. Se∣condly, Man was not all the while be∣fore, without the Benefits of this de∣designed and undertaken Redemption: He was still under a Covenant of Grace. Thirdly, Consider well that God did not intend to give mankind that had so heinously sinned (by prefer∣ferring the Devils word before his,) a present and a perfect pardon, but onely to give a new Law and Covenant which should be a conditional gift of pardon, to be obteined in full per∣fection, in time, and by degrees, we had made our selves voluntarily the Slaves of Satan: And God would not deliver us all at once. We had forfeit∣ed the heavenly assistance of the holy
spirit, and God would not give it us all at once. Mans time of healing the wounds of his own sin is the time of this life: and the perfect cure will not be done till our entrance into the per∣fect world. And as it is with Indivi∣dual men, so it is with the world of all mankind. Grace mitateth nature and doth all by degrees, darker Revelations were meeter for the Infancy of the world, and clearer at noon day, and ri∣per knowledge fitter for its maturity. And when Satan by Divine permission had plai'd his part, and seemed to tri∣umph over the sinful world, it was time for Christ to come, by Power, Wisdom and Goodness meanly cloath∣ed to cast down his Temples and Al∣tars, to subsidue his Kingdoms, and to triumph over the Triumpher. Fourthly, But if it be the present conditions of the new Covenant since Christs Resurrection, that offendeth you, viz, that the world is required to believe in him, I have answered that, and now adde. First, Remember what I said before, that no mans condi∣tion is made worse by Christ, than it was before his incarnation. They that
neither have nor could have the Cove∣nant of Grace in the last edition, are under it as they were before in the first edition, further than as their after sins have deprived them of any of its benefits. Therefore the coming of Christ hath not narrowed the Church, nor repealed or diminished any grace that before was given, but added much more. Secondly, When there was more Grace to be given, it was needful that the Condition should be suited to it. Would you rather be with∣out the Graces and benefits, than be obliged to Believe: would you be cured by one that you would not be∣lieve, nor take for your Physician? would you be taught by one that you will not believe or take for your Tea∣cher? would you be ruled by one that you will not believe is your Ruler? IInd I have proved to you, that God bideth no man believe either without a meet object, or meet evidence of the credibility, yea the certain verity of that which he is commanded to be∣lieve. And the belief required of us, is but a means to our love of God and our belief of the everlasting glory,
and consequently is needful to our fur∣ther duty, to our perfection and our felicity. Do you not think your self, that the greatest demonstrations of the Divine Love, are fittest to breed Love in us to God? And is not this wonderful work of mans Redemption a wonderful demonstration of Gods Love; If you say that it is incredible because wonderful and incomprehensible, I answer you, It is the more credible because so wonderful. I cannot believe that any thing is a work of God, es∣pecially one of his great transcendent works which mortal man can compre∣hend. The work of the Father and of Omnipotency in Creation is wonderfully; will you therefore say that there is no world? The work of the Holy Ghost in Regeneration is wonderful, &c. espe∣cially in our perfection in Glory. And will you say therefore that there is no Sanctification or Glorification? so the work of the Son and Divine wisdome and word incarnate is wonderful; And it is the fitter to be thought a work of God. And would you not say your self
that if God should send an Angel from Heaven, to tell you his will, and tell you what is good and evil, and to tell you the certainty of the life to come and the Joyes thereof, would it not be a singular help to your Belief of all these things revealed, if he did but give you sufficient proof that he is sent of God? What perversness is it then to quarrel with Gods greatest mercy as incredible, meerly because it is wonderful and great, and there∣fore fit for God to give. Thefore ob∣serve here the error of those men, that overlook the Benefit, and taking all Duty for a Burden dispute against the necessity of the Duty: whereas all our Duty is our Benefit, like the duty of feasting, rejoycing, receiving money or honour when given us? And the true state of our Question should be, Whe∣ther all they that by the Gospel have the offer of a Saviour and Salvation, and all those treasures of mercy which are brought to mankind by Christ above what they had before his incarnation, are bound to believe that procurement and offer, and to accept so great a gift? When the same men that question this, can be
willing to accept of wealth and ho∣nours, without disputing whether they may not live without them, and will say, Quis insimentis inops oblatum res∣puit aurum? And he that can make a sorry shift with a Candle, will not dis∣pute whether it be his duty to open his Windows & let in the light of the Sun; It is Riches of Mercy which all they dispute against, who think they speak against the necessity of some difficult duty. Thirdly, And remember again that your self confess an Inequality of Gods Benefits, and that he is not bound to give them to all alike, though there were no inequality of demerit in the Receivers, If then he give more to the Church by Christ Incarnate, then he did before his Incarnation, or more than he giveth to the world that never hear the Gospel, their Eye should not be evil because he is good; much less ours who receive the benefit. Fourthly, And I am glad that all that you require of God for All the world, is but that their Salvation or Damnation may be brought to their own free choice, and not their perditi∣on
be a thing unavoidable by Gods meer will, without their culpable mis∣choosing. And all this we maintain as well as you: And you can never prove that the Christian Religion doth deny it. Nay tell me if you can what mercy your doctrine giveth to all the world, which ours giveth them not? Do you say that they are not under the meer Law of Innocency made with A∣dam, but under the Law of grace, which after was given him? so do we. But you say, that this Law of Grace is the Law of Nature? Let not names abuse us: It is not the Law of Innocent Nature: But it is so fitted to mans Lapsed State, and doth also so fitly ex∣press the Gracious Nature of God, and also hath such evidences in Gods mer∣ciful providence and dealing with the sinful world, that in all these respects, if you call it the Law of Lapsed and reprieved nature under its reparation, we will not contend about the name. But you say that all men may be sa∣ved, if they reject not their salvation: so say we, that all should be judged ac∣cording to that means and Law that is given them, their Consciences accu∣sing
or excusing them in the day when Christ shall judge the world, as the Gospel telleth us. And none perish now for the meer sin of Adam, nor meerly for want of the Innocency re∣quired by the first Law; but for the re∣fusing and abusing some mercy pur∣chased by Christ, which had an apt tendency to their Repentance and Recovery. But you lay the main stress on this, that All men may be saved by true saith in God and true Repentance without be∣lieving in a Crucified Christ. And we say that no man in the world shall perish that hath true faith in God and true Re∣pentance; For all such do Love God as God, and do devote themselves to his glory, to obedience and Love: and do hate sin as sin; and so are holy. And God cannot cast that Soul into Hell that loveth him and beareth his Image. Holiness hath so much of God and Heaven in it, that this would be to cast Heaven and Gods Image into Hell, and to jumble Heaven and Hell together. Do we not then grant you as much as you can reasonably desire. Tell us but what Heathens or Maho∣metans
are Holy, truly penitent for all sin, and devoted to God in obedience and love, and we will grant you that they shall all be saved. But you were ware that we would tell you that this Repentance and holi∣ness is not a thing, which sinful man is so easily brought to: And therefore the Question must be, whether really these Heathens do truly Repent and Love God as God or not? Answ. First, Here you may perceive that though before you did but require that salvation be brought down to the Sinners choice, yet now that will not serve the turn: Yea, though Faith in God, and true repentance were the terms that you were satisfied should be imposed on all, yet now you are loth to stand to that, unless we grant that all these men have the power so to be∣leive and repent. Well if by power you mean a Natural faculty we grant that they have the power of Intellection and Uolition. And if it be the object that is in question, we grant that the object of that Faith and Repentance which you mention your self is certain and existent; And if it be the evidence of
the object that is in question, we grant that the Being, Power, Wisdome, Good∣ness, Holiness, Truth, Justice and Mer∣cy of God, are revealed to manking, by an evidence sufficient in its kin, if their souls be but rightly disposed to receive it: And that sin to be repented of, is discernable in themselves is doubtless. Amyraldus largely labour∣eth to prove, that as God bindeth no man to natural impossibilities, that is, to any Act without, First, A faculty that can do it. Secondly, An Object. Thirdly, Evidence of that Object (As not to see. First, without an eye, Se∣condly, That which is not in being, Thirdly, Or that which is a thousand miles off, or in the dark, without Light) so that all Heathens have first the natural faculty, Secondly, An object which would save them if truly belie∣ved in and Loved; that is, God: Third∣ly, A Revelation of this object: And that the  is such an ob∣ject as would procure their felicity if duly apprehended. See also Mr. Tru∣mans Treatise of Natural and Moral Impotency.
But indeed when all is done, the wit of man that is offended with God, as if he gave not all men a power to be sa∣ved, will not be satisfied if that be granted, unless also he actually save them. Should we grant you all the rest, if some yet are damned, when God could have saved them, it will not sa∣tisfie them that will be above God, and will judge their Judge. But because you seem satisfied with less, suppose all the question come to this, Whether or no those that never had the Gospei, do ever come without it to true faith in God, and true repentance and so to be saved? Answ. First, And when we have granted you what you first desired, that none perish but those that are willfully impenitent and believe not truly in God, why must the controversie be carri∣ed to mens hearts, and acts. I can read Gods Law, but I cannot know or read the hearts of millions whom I never saw. Must I be obliged to know the thoughts of every man in China, Tar∣tary, Japan, or the Antipodes? Second∣ly, What number is it that you put the question of, and whose Repentance you
assert? Is it All or but some? If All, he must be mad that believeth it, that All men are true penitent Belivers in God. If but some, First, Would not your wit quarrel still with God for damning all the rest? Secondly, And must it be the greater part or the lesser? or would you know on what number or where to find satisfaction? And what have we to do to judge anothers Ser∣vants: To their own Master they stand or fall. Secondly, And methinks you should easily grant at least, First, That Re∣pentance and Holiness is far easier to them that have the Gospel, than to them that never heard it. Secondly, And that they are far more common. And so that far more Christians are holy and saved than of others. For, First, Tell me; If God should send an Angel from Heaven as aforesaid, with mira∣culous evidence of his mission, to call men to repentance and belief in God, and Glory, would it not be easier for those men to repent, than for others? Nay would not you the easilier believe in Christ your self if you had but such an Angel to confirm you? why then
should not the word of Christ, who by his Miracles, Resurrection and the donation of such a Spirit to his Ser∣vants, proved his mission from the Father, be a help to our Faith and Repentance. Especially when his word hath a self evidencing Light also in the Image and superscription of God upon it. Secondly, You will not deny but that the difference of common lower means, doth make Repentance much easier or harder to one than another. Take one man that is born in Brasile or Soldania or among any other savage People; or that is bred up in a Tavern, Ale-house or Whore-house, or Gam∣ing house, among those that make a scorn of godliness; and take ano∣ther that is bred up to Learning, La∣bour and Godliness, among them that by doctrine and example do ho∣nour and command a godly, righte∣ous, sober life. And hath not one of these abundance more hinderances to his Repentance than the other. Thirdly, And will not sense and expe∣rience make you certain that the Christian part of the world, hath
more such helps than all the rest. Is there not more Reason, Learning, So∣briety, Doctrine, all sorts of Teach∣ing there than among the rest. Were it but that Christianity hath furnished the World with more helps to repen∣tance and Holiness, the case were clear. Fourthly, And a little acquain∣tance with the World, and the Hi∣story of it, may fully satisfie you, that de facto, there are actually far more knowing, penitent, holy Persons among Christians than among any o∣thers. When therefore the fact it self is undeniable, and we see that more Souls are healed by Christ in the Church, than in the World without, what need we any greater evidence. And if there were no more in it than this, that the actual knowledge or belief of Christ incarnate, doth make so great an addition to the helps and hopes of Sinners, and maketh conversion from sin to God, and salva∣tion so much more easie and common (as Aquinas Cont. Gent. argueth should not this be received with the greatest thankfulness, rather than with unreverent arrogant Contra∣diction.
But I proceed to overthrow your Fundamental Error [That repentance alone with the mercy of God is a suffici∣ent satisfaction for our sins to divine Ju∣stice.] First, If it be but proved that de facto God hath required and provi∣ded another Sacrifice for satisfaction, then you cannot call Repentance alone sufficient. But this is proved fully. Secondly, If the great work of our Redemption by Christ, have all those blessed ends, tendencies and effects and bring all those benefits to man∣kind, which in the treat forementio∣ned I proved; If it was so actual a demonstration of Gods wisdom and love, of his holiness and truth, his Justice and Mercy as is there mani∣fested and proved; If it have brought men such helps to Repentance and Holiness as are forementioned, how perverse will it be then to say that our Repentance was sufficient with∣out, the Sacrifice and Merit and In∣tercession and Administration which did procure and behow it: How ab∣surd is it to say that the Cure of our Disease is sufficient for us, without
the Physician, the Medicine, the A∣pothecary, the Application, which we see by certain experience are the things that work this Cure. And which you your self cannot deny but that they effect this Cure (of Repen∣tance or Holiness) far more easily and commonly than it is ever wrought with∣out them? (Nay it is certain that the Grace of Christ, is absolutely necessa∣ry to Repentance and holiness in any one in the world, (whatsoever be thought of the necessity of the knowledge of Christ incarnate.) II. Quest. Whether the Notitiae Com∣munes be not many more than this learned and noble writer doth enumerate, viz. First, That there is one onely God at least supreme (whom he very well de∣scribeth by his attributes.) Secondly, That this God is to be worshipped, and prayed to, (Religion being ultima hominis differentia pag. 214). Thirdly, That the due conformity of our faculties (that is their holiness and rectitude) is the chief part of Gods worship; especially Gratitude, Fourthly, That all vices and crimes must be expiated by repen∣tance. Fifthly, That after this life there
is another life of rewards and punish∣ment. Answ. All these are excellent con∣cessions, as being not onely Truths, but such Notitiae Communes without which a man is scarce a man, but un∣man'd. Except that the fourth doth erroneously assert the foredisproved sufficient satisfactoriness in our Re∣pentance. And that this is not a Noti∣tia Communis, I further thus mani∣fest. First, By all humane Laws and Ju∣stice. No King will make such a Law as this [Let all the subjects be Traytors, Murderers, Oppressors, Perjured, never so long, and Repent at any time before they die, and all shall be forgiven] meer Repentance will not save such persons from the Gallows. Secondly, And as to more private Justice, no man gi∣veth his children and servants such a Law [Disobey me, burn my house, seek my death, and do all the mischief you can, and repent at last, and you shall be forgiven] Therefore meer Repentance is not sufficient satisfacti∣on, according to the Notitiae Commu∣nes of mankind. Thirdly, The reason
of the thing doth prove it; Because it is not sufficient to secure the ends of Government, Should such a Law alone be made, (that men shall be forgiven all the villanies of their lives, if they will but repent at last.) First, It would encourage the most in the world to live in all manner of wickedness: If the hearts of men are fully set in them to do evil, because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed but delayed; How much more, if they were sure it should never be executed? Secondly, The Laws and Lawgiver would be contemned, and lose their Ruling power. Thirdly, The common good would be prostituted, and cast a∣way utterly, and no man should live in safety and peace, because of the do∣minion of wickedness. Object. Doth not Christianity then introduce these evils, which giveth par∣don to all the penitent? Answ. No: First, because that only Christianity doth acquaint us of a fur∣ther satisfaction to justice than mans re∣pentance, by which all these ends of Government, may be obtained better than by our perdition. Secondly, Be∣cause
it giveth us no assurance of life and time of Repentance, but calleth us to be alwaies penitent and ready. Thirdly, Because it telleth us of the blindness of the mind, the power of sin, and hardness of the heart, by which Repentance becometh so great and hard a work, that without Gods grace it will not be done; And his grace is to be diligently sought in the use of means; and is so little at our com∣mand, as that the resisting of the holy Ghost, may cause us to be forsaken of God, and given over to our own hearts lusts, to walk in our own Counsells, Psal. 81. 11, 12. Fourthly, Because God doth not totally and perfectly pardon all sin, when he doth pardon the ever∣lasting punishment (though some in their ignorance will say so and revile those that will not be as ignorant.) He par∣doneth not temporal chastisements and death: he remitteth not the sad penal∣ties of a temporary and partial desertion by his spirit; horrours of Conscience and fears of Hell. He remitteth not the temporal punishment by Magi∣strates, but commandeth Justice to be done even on the penitent, even to the
loss of life it self. Fifthly, And his mercy is so great, that through Christ he will forgive the eternal punishment, and will judge men as he findeth them, and not as they have been, before conversion: So that without Christ you cannot imagine how God should neither send one to Hell or misery that loveth him, and hath his Image; nor yet expose his Government, Laws, and the common good to so much mischief, as the Proclamation of a pardon to all villanies that are but re∣pented of at last (alone) would cause. Object. But if the King must not save a Traitor or Murderer because Christ died and satisfied for him, why should you say that God doth so. Answ. First, Because Christs Sacri∣fice and merits, were not to satisfie the King, but God. Secondly, Be∣cause that God who is satisfied by them, hath told us how far and with what exceptions he is satisfied: Not so far as to excuse men from the Laws of men, or temporal Justice, chastisement or death; but to save them from everlasting misery, and procure them everlasting happiness, and to
sanctifie their unremitted castigatory penalties, to the furtherance of these ends. And that there are more Notitiae Communes about Religion than the five forenamed is easily manifested. It is as common a truth that all men are sinful and depraved even from the first (however it came to pass) that they are indisposed to the certain duties and ends, which their nature was formed for. That God is the universal Gover∣nour of man, by moral means; That he is just and true, that God only can make known to us, what is pleasing to himself and what reward or punishment he will retribute, That mans darkness is so great, that he learneth all this from nature alone, with great imperfection, doubtfulness and dissatisfaction: That therefore a further supernatural Revelati∣on, which is sure would be a great confir¦mation and satisfaction to mans minds. And therefore almost all the world do hearken after Oracles, Prophecies, Visions or some such further Revelation, as Cons∣cious of the unsatisfactoriness of their na∣tural light. That all Gods Revelations are certainly true. That whatever Reve∣lation
hath First, On the doctrine of it, no contradiction to natural truth, but the clear Impress of divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness as its self evi∣dence. Secondly, And maketh the same impress by divine co-operation on mans Souls in sanctifying them. Third∣ly, And was attested by a multitude of evident uncontrolled Miracles, (Resur∣rection, raising the dead; giving to mul∣titudes a Spirit of Miracles, &c.) this Revelation hath Gods Seal and Witness, and can be from none but God. These and many more which I have recit∣ed in my Treat. are naturally known Verities: As you very well confess all the ten Commandements to be (go∣ing a little further than I see my self, while you make one day in seven as separated to Gods worship to be such, of which ellewhere I have de∣livered my mind, how far it is a na∣tural or supernatural notice.) III Quest. Whether the Notitiae Com∣munes are the only certainties in Reli∣gion? Answ. No: Can you possibly deny all certainty of Discourse and Conclu∣sions, Ex vero nil nisi verum sequitur.
will you condemn the Judge as con∣demning a Malefactor upon uncer∣tainty, when he thus argueth. All wilful Murderers must be put to death, This is certain in the Law. This man is a wilful Murderer. (proved certain∣ly by confession, evidence and wit∣ness) Therefore this man must be put to death: so I argue (what ever doctrine is attested by a multitude of certain un∣controuled Miracles, and by the divine Impress on it self, and the divine I∣mage wrought by it on all; that truly re∣ceive it, is attested by God himself, and is certainly true. But the Doctrine of Christianity was so attested: Ergo it is attested by God himself and true. The major is a Notitia Communis, or naturally known truth. The minor was known by sense it self to the first Witnesses; (and that was as natural a notice as any man is capable of, and as sure (whatever the Papists say against it for transubstantiation:) no∣thing can be sure, if all sound Mens senses with their just objects and con∣ditions, are not sure in their Percep∣tions) And how sure the distant Believ∣ers are I have largely opened in the
Treatise: Therefore the Conclusion must be sure. Object. But (say the misinformed unbelievers) that which all mankind believeth or knoweth hath its evidence in nature it self, but beliefs of pretend∣ed Revelations, Oracles and Visions are as various as Countries almost, and therefore uncertain. Answ. First, To the last part first I an∣swer, in your converse with men, you will think him unnatural, unsociable, mad, that will either believe all things or believe nothing. There is cre∣dible truth, and there is incredible fal∣shood: And will you beleive that ei∣ther God saith all that every Lyar Fa∣thereth on him, or else that he never revealeth his will to mankind any otherwise than by his common works. When God hath made a Revelation of his Will to the World, the Devils usual way of hindring the beleif of it is by imitation, and by putting such names and colours on falshood (by false Prophets) as God doth on the truth: Shall we therefore conclude that either all or none is the word of God. Or that God saith not true
unless the Devil say true also. Secondly, And will you mark the gross error of such Reasoners about the Notitiae Communes. First, It is certain that no actual Knowledge (conceptive or intellectual Verity) is born in man, Infants know not these Common. No∣tions at all. As the Eye is not born with the actual Species of all things afterward seen, but only with a seeing, power and disposition; so these are called common Notions, because mans intellect is so able and disposed to know them, as that they will be known easily upon the first due evidence or notification of the Object, and there∣fore almost all men know them. Secondly, It is certain that this know∣ing faculty in man (as this noble Lord saith) requireth its proper conditi∣ons for its true apprehension of the Object. Now some mens understand∣ings have the help of these conditi∣ons far more than others have (he nameth to you the conditions him∣self.) Thirdly, It is certain that the understanding performs not all its ap∣prehensions at once or at first, but by degrees and in time as the Objects are
duly presented. As an Infant seeth not the first day all that ever he must see; nor a Schollar learneth not the first day all that he must learn. Fourthly, It is certain that the lat∣ter apprehensions are as sure, if not more clear then the first: As he that lived twenty years at home, and af∣terward travelleth to London, doth as certainly then see London as before he did his Fathers house; so a Schol∣lar doth afterward as certainly under∣stand Horace, Virgil or Homer, as at first he understood his Primmer. Fifthly, It is certain that as particular notices are multiplied quod actus in time by use and information, so the knowing disposition of the faculty is increased: And the notice of a thou∣sand truths doth so advance the un∣derstanding, and befreind other truths not yet received, that such a man can know more afterward in a day, than an ignorant man can learn in a year. Sixthly, By all which it is a most evident thing, that to make common Notions to be the only certain∣ties, is a weakness below a rational man: And it is to make the intellect
of an Infant to be the standard or measure of all certain intellectual ve∣rities, and to make the Schollar even before he goeth to School as wise (as to certainties) as his Master and to make a new born Child to have seen as many Objects as Drake, or de Noort, or Sandys, or Ludovics Ro∣manus in all his travels. In a word the Notitiae Communes being the very lowest degree of knowledge are thus equalled with the wis∣dom of the greatest Philosopher or Divine or Judge: Was this learned Lord when he wrote this Book sure of nothing, but these common Notions i Religion. Seventhly, To which I might add that even in mens natural capacities, there is a wonderful dif∣ference: As Ideots know little, so Dullards not much: And must the wisest go no higher than these. Eighthly, And will Lawyers, Statesmen, Physicians, Philosophers, make this consent of all mankind, the test of all their certainties? If not, why should we do so in our search after the greatest Verities, which are most worthy of all the stu∣dy of our Lives.
Nothing visible is so analogous to mans soul as fire. The nature of which is to be ever of an active illuminative and calefactive faculty; but doth ex∣etcise it in such various degrees as the fuel doth occasion. There is fire in a flint or steel, yea in all things: But is it the best way to know what fire is and can do, by judging of it onely as it is in a stone? No: but take your steel and strike the flint, and adde the combustible fuel, and that which is in a stone can set a City on fire? And nil agit quod agere non potest, whatever act is produced, proveth an antece∣dent power. So if you would judge what mans soul is, and can do, and what truth is in the Intellect, it is not in fools but in the wise that you must discern it. And by this those may see their er∣rour, who are tempted to think that mans soul is but highly sensitive and imaginative, or not made for heavenly and holy employments, because so ma∣ny ignorant and wicked people are otherwise disposed: whereas the Power and so the Nature of mans soul is certainly gathered from what the
wisest do attain: Because nothing can act beyond its Power: And if the attainments and acts of some mens souls do prove such a Power in them, all souls of men are of the same species, and therefore the rest might attain it if they had the same objects, eviden∣ces, excitations and improvements. I think all this is plain truth. Ninethly, And if by believing you will heartily give up your souls to Christ and his Spirit, you will find that there is yet a more excellent addi∣tion of knowledg and certainty to be obtained than by all other means could be procured: At least, as to the In∣tension and clearness of the Act, if not as to the extension of it to more ob∣jects. IV. Quest. Whether the aforesaid Common notices do make up all the Reli∣gion of the Catholick Church? And whether the Catholick Church be all the world believing these common truths. Answ. The question is either de no∣mine ecclesiae, or de re. As to the name, the word is not used in Gods word for any but the Society of Believers as se∣parated from the unbelieving and un∣godly
world. As for men themselves, every one may use this and other words in what sence he please. But how aptly you may judge. Quoad rem, I have told you be∣fore, how far all the world are capa∣ble of salvation, if that be the questi∣on. And I adde, The Kingdome of God is a word of a larger sense, but the Church of God properly so called is Narrower, being Caetus evocatus. The Kingdom of God signifieth, First, All that de jure are obliged to subjecti∣on and obedience; And so all man∣kind on earth are of his Kingdome, even Rebels. Secondly, Or it signifi∣eth all that consent to subjection and o∣bedience and profess it: And these are First, Such as profess subjection to God under some lame, defective, false conception; (as one that allow∣eth them to worship Idols under him, or to live in wickedness, or one that Governeth not the world by a Law, or will not make a Retribution here∣after, or as one that will pardon and save men, onely for their superstition or without a Saviour) And thus all∣most all Heathens and Infidels are of
Gods Consenting Kingdome, Secun∣dum quid, Eatenus, so far as this com∣eth to, and no more: Secondly, Or such as profess subjection, and love to God as truly described; And as re∣conciled to man and saving them by Christ our Mediator: And these are quoad actum First, But oral or un∣sound, not Cordial Professors; And such are Hypocritical Christians, who are simpliciter of the visible Church. Secondly, Or sincere Consenters, who are simpliciter of the essential mystical Church of the Regenerate. Now when we thus open the Case as to the Thing, there remaineth, besides the controversie de nomine, no more than how far Heathens are under a Cove∣nant of Grace, and how far they are capable of salvation, of which I have said enough before. V. Quest. Whether all Revelation for Religion must be but Notitiarum Com∣munium Symbolum, A Creed contain∣ing these common notices or truths. (as is asserted p. 221.) Answ. I have said enough against this before. First; What need God send a Prophet or an Angel to tell the
world that which they all knew cer∣tainly before? Secondly, Full exist∣ence assureth us (as I have proved in the Treat.) that mankind hath need of more. Thirdly, More tendeth to per∣fect mans understanding, and conse∣quently his will and life: This is un∣deniable. And mans perfection is his felicity and end: And therefore more than those common notices is needful to his end. Fourthly, Else as is said, you will reduce all the world to the measure of that part which is the low∣est, the unwisest and the worst. You would not in wealth or health be equal∣led with the basest poorest or the sickest: nor yet in wit and knowledg of other matters with the most foolish: And why then in the knowledg, love and practice of Holiness? VI. Quest. Whether (as some o∣thers say) all supernatural Revelations be to be tryed by the common notions known by nature. Answ. First, It is supposed that all that pretend to Prophesie and Revela∣tion are not to be believed: And there∣fore that we must try the Spirits whether they be of God; and that all
tryal of things unknown, must be made by some foreacknowledged principles, if it be a conclusion that must be known. Secondly, It must therefore next be understood, whether the Truth of the Gospel be to be known as a simple term, or a self evident proposition, or as a true conclusion. First, The first kind of knowledge onely apprehend∣eth the words and sense; but not the Verity. It is the Truth of the Doctrine that we enquire of. Secondly, Ma∣ny Divines assert the second way, and say it is Principium indemonstrabile; Like [est vel non est:] Doubtless this is not true as to the Natural Evidence of the proposition, principle or do∣ctrine. But I think that in the very hearing or reading Gods spirit often so concurreth, as that the will it self shall be touched with an internal gust or savour of the goodness contained in the doctrine, and at the same time the understanding with an internal irradiation, which breedeth such a sudden apprehension of the Verity of it, as nature giveth men of natural principles. And I am perswaded that this increased by more experience, and
Love and inward gusts, doth hold most Christians faster to Christ, than naked reasoning could do: And were it not for this unlearned ignorant per∣sons, were still in danger of Apostasie, by every subtile Caviller that assault∣eth them. And I believe that all true Christians have this kind of internal knowledge, from a suitableness of the Truth and Goodness of the Gospel to their now quickned, illuminated sanctified souls. Thirdly, But yet I believe that this is not All the know∣ledge of the truth of the Gospel which we have: There is a common Belief of its truth by other means which most usually goeth before this Generative spiritual reception and belief; usually they that are converted to holiness by the Gospel are such as had some Belief of it before, and not such as took it to be false to that moment. And after Conversion, it is to be known as a certain demonstrable Conclusion; And so the faith of wise and settled Christians is most rational: And they are thus made capable to defend it against Temptations and adversaries, and to preach it rightly to unbelie∣vers.
Thirdly, The premises from which this conclusion is proved [The Gospel is true] are both of them truths of in∣fallible evidence, viz. [Whatsoever doctrine is attested by so many and such miracles extrinsecally, by the self-evi∣dencing impress of Divine Power Wis∣dome and goodness intrinsecally, and by the effecting the like Impression in holy Life, Light and Love on the souls of all sincere receivers, is certainly true, being attested by the spirit of God: But such is the doctrine of the Gospel: Ergo it is true as attested by the spirit of God. I said before the first is a natural Verity; The second proposition is partly of sense and partly of internal and partly external experience, as is largely ma∣nifested. Now as to the Question, First, No doubt but our Natural faculties must be used in trying supernatural Truth. Secondly, No doubt he that dispu∣teth with or preacheth to an unbelie∣ver so as to prove what he delivereth to be true, must deal with him upon some common principles which both parties are agreed in; or else there is no room for proof or for dispute.
Thirdly, But some persons are so ignorant of those certain principles which infer the truth of Gospel reve∣lation, that they have need first to be convinced of them: which must be done by inferring them from the first truths or some principles which they do confess. Fourthly, And as a man would convince others, by the same method and arguing he must convince himself, and try the truth which he is in doubt of. Fifthly, But if any should mean. First, That nothing is true in the Gos∣pel but these common principles of nature. Secondly, Or that nothing else can be proved true: Thirdly, Or that it would prove any pretended prophesie, vision or revelation true, so be it they do not contradict the com∣mon truths; All these are palpable untruths. VII. Quest. Whether these common Verities inferre not the truth of Chri∣stianity. Answ. This is sufficiently answered in the last. Perhaps the few Verities mentioned by the Author are not e∣nough to prove Christianity by: But
that it hath true evidence in sense and reason is manifested heretofore. And I believe that he that will by just argumentation follow on the Christi∣an cause with an unbeliever, if he can hold him to the point from rambling, and suppose him capable of Historical evidence, may drive him to yield, or to deny common princi∣ples, yea to deny that God is God, and that man is man, and consequently that there is any be∣ing. But the evasion will be by de∣nying notorious matter of fact, which therefore must be proved by its proper evidence. IX. Quest. Whether they are necessa∣ry conditions of the certain knowledge of a divine Revelation. First, That it be made immediately to my self. Secondly, And that I feel a divine afflatus in the Reception? as is said Page. Answ. No: A Revelation made to others, may be certainly notified to me, else if an Angel from Heaven should appear to all men in the Town and Country save one, or if all save one saw a thousand miracles to con∣firm a Revelation, yet that one
could not be sure of it. But I have by abundance of arguments in a pe∣culiar disputation in a Treatise cal∣led the unreasonableness of unbelief, long ago fully proved the negative; And again in my Reas. of the Christian Relig. therefore I will not weary the Reader with repeti∣ons. X. Quest. Whether any concurrence of moral evidence, at least such as Gospel Revelation hath, do truly amount to na∣tural or certain evidence? De Rev. & Verisim. Answ. This Question too I have plainly decided in the Reas. of Christian Relig. I now add. First, The name of moral evidence is here taken by those that use it, for that which dependeth on the credit of a voluntary Agent as such: And the name of natural evidence, signifieth that which dependeth on the nature of the Object in it self considered. But I somewhat doubt whether all that use the distinction do commonly under∣stand the difference, or what they say.
Secondly, Note that the All or ef∣fect of a voluntary Agent, hath never∣theless a natural Evidence when it is done or existent. If I voluntarily speak or write or go, my Action is na∣turally evident to those that see and hear it, as present sensitive Witnesses of it. If I freely build a House, it is nevertheless naturally Evident when it is built: Al things existent in the universe were made by God as a free Agent, and yet are nevertheless natu∣rally evident. Thirdly, Every thing that is, when it is, (if corporeal) is naturally Evi∣dent to those that have their faculties in those conditions that are necessary, and have the object in its necessary magnitude, cognation, detection, site, distance, medium and abode. Fourthly, The judgement that is made upon sense it self faileth (as this noble Author hath well opened) when either the Object, the Evidence the Sense or the Intellect want their ne∣cessary conditions or qualifications; else not. Fifthly, The Fountain of all Free∣dome and Morality is the Will of
God: And yet the moral Evidence of truth which is in Gods word, when known to be his word, is as sure as a∣ny natural Evidence of the thing: There being the surest natural evidence ab effect is at least that there is a God most perfect, that cannot lie. Sixthly, The Essences of all things are but imperfectly evi∣dent to us; The existences of corporeal things that are present and duly quali∣fied, are fully evident. The exi∣stence of things absent beyond the reach of sense, is evident only to the discursive intellect; not by the imme∣diate natural evidence of the things themselves, but by a borrowed evi∣dence from Causes or Signes; Dis∣course improving the Fundamental common truths, for the knowing of the rest, by proving a certain con∣nexion between them. The Praterition of things, and the Futurition, are both like the distant existence, unknown to sense, and the immediate appre∣hension of the intellect; And there∣fore must both be known also by col∣lection as conclusions in discourse, or not at all.
Seventhly, Man was not born to know only things present in their exi∣stence by sense, but also to know things absent, things as past, and things as future. And herein he chiesly differeth from a Bruit. Eighthly, Though the understand∣ing is most confident of things sensible & present, yet about things absent, past and future it oft doubteth more and is less satisfied in its own conclusions from natural principles, than from moral. Because sometimes the na∣tural Principles themselves (though not the first, yet the second, or third) may be so obscure as to leave the mind unsatisfied. Secondly, And the connexion among many particu∣lars may be obscure and doubtful. Thirdly, And in the long Series of collection or arguing, the understand∣ing suspecteth its own fallibility: so that when Conclusions are far fetcht, though from natural Princi∣ples, the mind may be still in doubt about them. And on the contrary when in the way of Revelation the grounds are clear, and the under∣standing hath fewer Collections
to make and a shorter journey to go, it may be far better satisfied of the truth. Ninthly, Mans own necessity is the reason why God doth give us supernatural Revelation, and call us to know by the way of Believing. For, First, Most men are naturally dull. Secondly, Few have leisure by Learning to improve their intel∣lects. Thirdly, And fewer have leisure & disposition to exercise them by long searches & argumentation upon every thing that they should know. Fourthly, And therefore where Revelation was not, few were wise or virtuous; And the Philosophers themselves were all to pieces among themselves, and their disagreements and doubtfulness tend∣ed to the gulfe of utter Scepticisme. Now as nothing is more necessary than Religion (as you well profess) so Religion consisteth very little in the sensible apprehension of of present existences, but in the knowledge of things absent or insensible things past, and especially things to come, the Hap∣piness to be attained, and the misery to be escaped. Now if all the Poor
unlearned Men and Women in the World must have known all these things only by natural discourse, how little Religion would have been in the World, when the Philosophers knew so little themselves. And though your learning and understand∣ing made the immortality of the Soul so clear to you and the rewards and punishments of another life, as that you number it with the common notices; yet were not the old Philosophers themselves, so com∣monly agreed on it as they should have been; much less all the common People. And if you say that now almost all the world be∣lieveth it, I answer it is Gods great mercy that it is so. But consider whether it be not more by the way of believing, than of naturall instinct or knowledge. For all the Christians, and all the Mahometans (who believe the words of Moses and Christ also) take it by the way of be∣lieving. And so do most of the Heathens: The Japonians have their Amida and Zaca: The Chi∣nenses,
the Indians, the Siamenses the Peguans, &c. have all their Prophets: And the very Sa∣vages of all the West-Indies (or America) have their Idols, Oracles or Wizards, whom they far more depend on than their natural discourse about things Invisible, Past or Future. So that really if Commonuess go with you for a proof that any point is of natural instinct and certainty as a Notitia Communis, this will be one of the chiefest of them, that [Religion consisting in the notice of, and due respect to things absent, invisible, past and future; is to be maintain∣ed in the world by divine Revela∣tion and Faith, and not by the immediate evidence of things, nor by meer discursive Collections from things so evident.] So that Mans weakness with the quality of the Objects maketh Revelation so ne∣cessary, that without it, the vul∣gar (who are the main body of the World) would have next to no Religion; And on the contrary how easie and pleasant, and satis∣factory
is it for all these poor People (yea to the most learned) to have these mysterious truths brought by Revelation to their hands. Now through Gods mer∣cy, all our common People, Wo∣men and Children, Servants and day-Labourers, may know more with ease, than ever Democritus, E∣picurus, Antisthenes, Zeno, yea Socrates, Plato or Aristotle could reach by all their studies to the last: More I say of Religious necessa∣ry knowledge. Tenthly, And this being so ne∣cessary and so great a mercy to mankind, I wonder that you put it not among your common notices, that God being perfect in love and wisdom, and having made man purposely to be Religious, here, and happy hereafter, will certainly provide for his Religion and Happiness, so necessary and so excel∣lent a means as Revelation is, God being the Father and Lover of light and of Souls, and the De∣vil being the Prince and Friend of darkness; Consider whether
you may not strongly infer from the very nature of God, and the nature and necessity of man, and the other communications of Gods mercies to the world, that he will certainly give them this great mercy also. Eleventhly, It is certain that God hath ways of communicat∣ing light to mans understanding immediately and not only by ex∣trinsick sensible objects. The Father of Spirits who communicateth so much to the corporeal world, is not further from Souls, nor more out of love with them; But (if there be any difference) may ra∣ther be thought to hold a neerer more immediate communion with them than with Bodies, and to be himself to the mind, what the Sun is to the Eye, and more. Twelfthly, It is certain that God can give the standers by that have no Revelation immediately them∣selves a fully satisfactory attestati∣on or proof, of the truth of ano∣ther mans Revelations. He that denyeth this, maketh God to be impotent.
Thirteenthly, It is certain that the Attestation which I described in the Reasons of Christian Religion was such (supposing that such were given, viz. In the Antecedent Te∣stimony of fulfilled Prophesie, the Constitutive Testimony of Gods Spi∣rit apparent in the effects on Christ; person and on his Gospel, And the Concomitant Testimony of all his Mi∣racles and Resurrection and Ascen∣sion. And the subsequent Testimo∣ny of the Spirit, on the Apostles, their Miracles and doctrine, and on the souls of all serious Christians to the worlds end) These are things (set all together) First, Which none but God could do. Secondly, And which God would not do to de∣ceive the world; Thirdly, Yea, which God would not permit to be done to deceive them in so high a matter; Because he is the Omnipo∣tent, Omniscient, Gracious Gover∣nour of the world; And if these Te∣stimonies were not of God, it were impossible to know any Te∣stimony to be of God; And see∣ing w  have no surer, it would
be mans Duty to Believe and O∣bey and be Ruled by a Lie. And if it be our Duty to Believe God to be so defective either in Power, Wisdome or Goodnesse, Holinesse, Truth, Justice or Mercy as to rule the World, and the best of the World in the greatest matters, by lying and deceit, as if he wanted better means: What Wit can de∣vise any remedy against such de∣ceit as shall be so attested as afore∣said? Or if deceit can be per∣ceived, how can it be mans Du∣ty to Believe it, seeing mans In∣tellect is naturally made for Truth, and abhorreth falshood? And how can it be Good to Obey Deceit and Lyes? And when the Devil is the Father of Lies, what blasphemy is it to charge them on God? By this it will be apparent, that the Question must be in the upshot, whe∣ther there be a God or no God? and so whether there be any thing or nothing? Fourteenthly, There is some Mo∣ral Historical Evidence of the truth of things past, which is as certain,
and much more satisfactory than the Natural Evidence of Conclusions, rais∣ed by a long series of argumenta∣tion: Yea, some which is truly a Natural Evidence though it depend on the credit of free Agents. The proof and reasons I have given in the Treat. First, The Will though free is Quaedam Natura, and hath its Natural propensity to known good, as the understanding also is, and hath its Natural propensity to Truth. And the understanding is not free, of it self, but acteth per modum Naturae. Secondly, There are some of the acts of the Will it self, which are so free as yet to be necessary. As to will Good sub ratione boni; to will our own Felicity, and nill our own misery; to will Life and Pleasure, with a simple complacency, though not alwaies by election: To will all that is fully discerned to have omni∣modam rationem boni, and nill all that is discerned to have omnimo∣dam rationem mali: Now it oft falls out that Historical Narratives shall proceed from some of these neces∣sary
acts. Salvation, Life and Good∣ness and the necessary means of all, may be the Motives. Thirdly, There are other acts of the will which though they are not abso∣lutely necessary, are yet so neer to necessary, that they alwaies go one way, except in some very rare ex∣traordinary case. As for example, It is not of absolute necessity that a man feed or cloath himself, or that he murder not himself: But yet he will ordinarily do the first and forbear the latter, because he is necessarily a lover of himself, and life, and therefore will not cast himself away, nor destroy himself, without some conceived cause. Fourthly, There are no causes ex∣tant in rerum Natura for the com∣monness of some such actions: There∣fore it is certain they will not be done, because there can be no ef∣fect without its cause; And the turning of the will to a mans known corporeal destruction is an effect which hath no common cause. There∣fore it is a point of more Natural Evidence and Certainty, than many
Conclusions from Natural premises are, that all the people of Europe or England will not to morrow kill themselves, nor go naked, nor fa∣mish or wound themselves, &c. And consequently that formerly all never did so, since it was notori∣ously so much their interest to do otherwise. For, there was no cause to produce such an effect. If it must be a Miracle rebus sic stantibus, which should make all the Europeans or the English to go naked to morrow, or to kill them∣selves, than it is Natural to them to do the contrary, or not to do this (for a Miracle is the over∣powering of Nature.) But the An∣tecedent is evident, to reason, from experience. Ergo, &c. There may be Causes for one mans actions, which can never fall out to All, or to very many. All the Physicians in England ne∣ver did perswade all men against Physick, nor all the Lawyers a∣gainst Law; nor all the Covetous men in England, the Labourers or Beggars, were never against re∣cieving
Meat, Drink and Money; Because there never was a cause of such effects: And as it must be a great, powerful, common Cause, that must do this: so al∣so if the question be whether e∣ver there were a Parliament in England? Whether ever they made Laws with the Kings? Whe∣ther our statutes were made by such Kings and Parliaments as they are ascribed to, &c. There is such a concurrent consent of competent Witnesses, as could not be to it, were it false, because it would be an effect without a suf∣ficient Cause. Yea, against the ten∣dency or disposition of mans na∣ture which would have caused the wills of some to contradict it, ex∣cept a miracle had hindred them. For among so many there are cross interest notorious. Some Mens interest is against the thing, while other Mens are for it: And to make multitudes go a∣gainst their apparent Interest, and Friends and Enemies of the event to agree, must be done by the
power of truth, or by a miracle: suposing the case such as they could not be all deceived in. Fifteenthly, But there is yet a fuller natural evidence of the truth of some reports; Even when besides the report, there remain some visible unimitable effects of the reported actions, which could be caused by nothing else. As if their Fathers told the Grand-Children of Noah of the deluge, they might see such effects of it as might assure them that it was true. If the Parents of the man born blind, Joh. 9. were told by him that his eyes were cured, when they saw it in the effects they must believe it: If uncontroulled Histo∣ry tell our Children that London was burnt and new built, that Pauls Church was burnt, &c. that multitudes died of the Plague the year before, &c. When they see the City, the Church, the Graves, the change of Inhabitants, the proved Testaments of the deceas∣ed, besides uncontradicted testi∣mony here is a natural evidence to assure it.
Sixteenthly, Though some half witted Philosophers boast much of the certainty of their Physicks in com∣parison of Morality, the truth is, the most of Physicks are meer un∣tainties, and the wisest see it, and busily pull down others doctrines, but confess they are yet but search∣ing and groping by extrinsick ef∣fects and experiments to know what to set up in the stead: And so did others before them: And long may they so search before they find. Whereas there is a more sa∣tisfying Evidence in much of Mo∣rality, as being Natural to Man∣kind, and such as will no sooner cease to be believed than man will cease to be man: whereon all the affairs of the world are turned, and converse, Societies, and all the pri∣vate Comforts of Nature are main∣tained: God hath made known to us what pleased him, according to his own wisdome and not at our direction or choice. And he hath chosen that for us which is most usefull: It is more usefull to us to know how to live well, and how
to be happy, and how to please and glorifie God and do good to one another, than to know Gods skil or mysteries in his workes; to know what is in the center of the earth, or how the active Nature doth ope∣rate on the passive, whether cold be a privation or positive, what is the cause of the continued motus pro∣jectorum? Whether Light and Heat be bodies? or Substances? whe∣ther they penetrate other bodies? &c. As it is more useful for me to know how to keep my Clock in order than how to make one; to know how to plow, sow, eat, drink to my health, than to know by what mysterious operations, the Corn or other things do grow, and my food is digested, &c. Therefore this Learn∣ed Lord doth truly and wisely enu∣merate his Notitiae Communes in Morality and Religion as certain∣ties, the denial whereof doth un∣man us. God hath left such in∣stincts, powers, inclinations, and conscience in humane nature, as shall naturally (though with some degree of freedome in the exercise)
be an insuperable witness in the world to himself, and to our common prin∣ciples and duties. Seventeenthly, The Historical E∣vidence of the Gospel of Christ is such as hath all the advantages be∣fore described, in its kind. He liv∣ed and preached and wrought his miracles frequently, before thousands, friends and foes: His miracles were never controlled as Moses did the Magicians, by greater, nor by any certain Truth which they contradicted: The eye witnesses themselves were unbelieving till forced by Cogent Evidence: They delivered his Doctrine, Miracles, Resurrection to the world, not one∣ly by credible report, and to the ruine of their worldly pleasures and interests, with the loss of their lives, and all this meerly for the hopes of a reward in heaven, from God that well knew whether all were true or not; But also they did all in the power of the same Spirit which Christ did work by, doing such Miracles as Christ had done: And this not a few nor in a Cor∣ner
but in many Countries of the world, and that by many thousand Christians in one kind or other (tongues, healing, prophecie, or the like) as well as the Apostles. The certainty of which fact is at∣tested by the very existence of all the Churches converted by it, with all their Baptismes, Professions and the rest of the Tradition before na∣med. No Christian of all this mul∣titude, by any terrours, death, time, was brought to the last to re∣pent and say that he had deceived the world by a lie, Many Apostates falling off for fear of sufferings, but none with any such recantation: No adversary confuting the History, but commonly confessing most of it with more such evidence which I have o∣pen'd in the Treat. and must not oft repeat lest I be tedious, And that which is still the Natural Evidence is, that [There is still existent, First, On the sacred Gospel, Secondly, On the souls and lives of all serious Christians by its impress the unimitable Image of the Divine Power, Wisdome and good∣ness, Life, Light and Love, as the Di∣vine
attestation] Only as this noble Author requireth to all true Concepti∣ons and Intellections, so do we to this, that there be but the necessary condi∣tions in the mind of the receiver. And whereas he saith that common∣ly Miracles are reported a hundred years after; Here it was otherwise: The Jews were enraged by them for fear of the Romans! The Apostles and others wrought them openly; Mat∣thew and John that wrote Christs Hi∣story lived with him and saw what they wrote: so did Peter and James: Paul wrote what he saw and heard from heaven, Luke wrote the Acts of Paul which he saw, being his Compa∣nion in travels. The thousands were converted, and Churches in many Countries planted, not by bare words, but by the Conviction of the Miracles of the Apostles themselves: so that e∣very Church and Christian was a Hi∣story of them. And all this they were moved to, with the hopes of heaven, where truth is known, to deny the world, and mortifie the flesh, and suffer whatever the Gospel would in∣flict, to preserve their hopes and com∣forts
founded in this word of faith. XI. Quest. Whether the common cu∣stome of sacrificing throughout the world in all generations, were not their actual Confession that the sinner deserved death, and that Gods justice required punish∣ment of satisfaction? and proceeded not from Divine Revelation in the beginning, when God had new made the Covenant of Grace? and so was delivered down by Tradition? For my part it cannot come into my understanding, why else men should think that God is pleased or appeased by the Creatures death? or how this should become so common throughout the world. And the two exceptions confirm this to be truth: First, Some Savages in America use no sacrifices: But they are such as know not God, or so Savage as to have lost all antient Tradition. Secondly, All the Mahometans and Christians use no bloody sacrifice. But that is because, First, Christians believe that Sacrifices were but types of Christ and that he put an end to them by his perfect Sacrifice. 2dly, And Mahome∣tans received it from Christ, being but Christians degenerate first into Arrians,
and then into Mahometans, and still professing to take Christ for the word and son of God, and his word as true: onely hating the Christians for saying that he is very God. But of this in∣stead of writing after so many, I on∣ly refer you to their writings: And specially to Dr. Owens Latine Tractate on this subject. XII. Whether Interest make the Judg∣ment of Divines in the Cause of faith more suspicious or contemptible than other mens? I put this Question with respect to those words in the Preface. Sed ne∣que auspicaciores ubi{que} posterioris istius seculi Scriptores dicendi sunt—Fit ita ut pro Regionum & fidei diversitate in id potissimum incumbant, ne illos domi male multet inopia, adeo{que} non tam quid in se verum, quam quid sibi ipsis utile exquirant.—Non est igitur a larvato aliquo vel stipendioso Scriptore, ut verum Consummatum opperiaris. Illorum appri∣me interest, ne personam deponant, vel aliter quidem sentiant. Ingenuus & sui arbitrii, ista solummodo praestabit Au∣thor. Answ. First, It is not to be deny∣ed, that there are multitudes of such
Carnal Pastors in the Churches, that are Christians for the case, honour and wealth. Secondly, But that this should be so with all, I shall disprove, and prove that none on earth are so credi∣ble in this case as Divines. First, Be∣cause they have made it the business of their lives to search out the truth: and therefore (some of them) must be sup∣posed to have the greatest advantages to know it. So that for Ability they have no sort of men that are Compe∣titors. For diligence and helps are the improvers of understanding. And all men are found best at their own pro∣fession; Lawyers in the Law, Physi∣cians in Medicine, Philosophers in Philosophy, &c. And for your self, your next words are, [Nobis tamen ad alia omnia fere quam literarum studia (uti oportuit) exequenda, otium fuit: Partim armis in diversis regionibus, par∣tim quinquennali Legatione, partim nego∣tiis tum publicis tum privatis, vacavimus] And is not this your disadvantage? Who is a good Linguist, Lawyer, Phy∣sician, &c. that hath had but little lei∣sure for his studies? Secondly, And as for Will and In∣terest,
it is notorious that thousands of the Ministry have so little set by world∣ly Interest, as that it is upon the terms of greatest self-denyal to the flesh, that they take up and exercise their office; being moved onely by the great Inte∣rest of their own and others souls: Their voluntary diligent labours, their holy lives, their contempt of the world, may convince any of this, that are not blinded by prejudice or malice. There are few Learned men in the Reformed Churches, but might far better use their studies and labours, if they took that for best which is most profitable, advancing or pleasing to the flesh. Thirdly, You had a Brother of your own, so holy a man, as his sincerity was past exception; and so zealous in his Sacred Ministry, as shewed he did not dissemble; And I suppose had it been necessary, you would have so maintained him, that he should not have fled from truth for fear of pover∣ty. Fourthly, What can you think of all those that gave up their lives for the Christian saith and hopes? Did they go upon such carnal grounds as you men∣tion.
Fifthly, The revolutions of States, and the diversity of Sentiments, and especially the Interests of the Car∣nal part, do bring it to pass (by Gods over-ruling of all) that usually the most serious Christians and Pastors, are the sufferers of the age they live in: so that how much hath God done hereby to confute such suspicions and accusa∣tions! There are now in England lear∣ned and worthy men, in Church pre∣ferments, which doubtless do not so love them as to buy them with the loss of truth, and that to keep up a Re∣ligion against their Consciences. But if you did so accuse them, sure the ma∣ny hundred silenced Ministers now in England that live in poverty, and ma∣ny of them want Bread, when they might have preferment as well as o∣thers, do live out of the reach of this accusation: I write not this at all as meddling with their Cause, but as an∣swering your Exception. I have my self got no more for Preaching the Gos∣pel these nine years, than if I had been a Lay-man; I mean I have Preached for nothing, if the success on mens souls were not something, and Gods
acceptance (so far as I did Preach:) And more than that, I would offer any man my solemnest oath to satisfie him, that I believe and profess the Christian Doctrine for its proper evidence, and for the hopes of the blessedness pro∣mised thereby; which if they prevail∣ed not with me above all the riches, preferments and pleasures of this world, I would never have been a Preacher or a Christian, nor would continue in my calling and profession one day, much less on the self-denying terms as I now do. But, O my Lord, thou hast been to me a faithful Saviour, a happy Teacher, a supporting Comforter, in my greatest dangers, distress and fears: Thy service hath been sweet and good! Thy word hath been a powerful Light, a Quicken∣ing, a changing, an elevating, a guid∣ing, a comforting word. So far am I from Repenting that I am thy Disciple or thy Servant, that (now I am not far from my departure from this world) I do vehemently protest, that I beg no greater mercy of thee in this world than that I may Believe in thee more firmly, and Hope in thy promises more confidently, and by
thine Intercession receive more of thy Ho∣ly Spirit, by which I may have neerer ac∣cess to God, and that by thy blood and merits I may be justified and cleansed from the guilt of all my sins, and that by thee I may be taught to know the Fa∣ther, and to Love him as his Love and Goodness hath manifested it self in Thee, and in the gracious works of mans Re∣demption; That thou wilt be the underta∣ker for my soul and body, through my life, and that at death I may commend my Spirit into thy hands, in a strong well grounded Faith and Hope and come to the in the fervent desire of Divine and Heavenly Love And I ask for no great∣er felicity hereafter, than to be with thee where thou art, to behold thy Glory, and to see the Glory of the blessed Deity, and Live in the perfect Knowledge and Love and Praise of God. Sixthly, And I may add, that it is not only Clergy men that are Chri∣stians: Besides them the Learned'st men in the world have defended or stuck to the Christian Faith: I need not name to you either men of your own rank, such as the two Mirandula's, the great Du Plessis, Marnixius de Al∣degnde,
Anhaltinus, (a Prince though a Divine,) Bacon, and many a worthy Noble man of these Kingdoms, and of many other: nor such Laymen as the Scaligers, Salmasius, Grotius, Causo∣bone, Thuanus, and multitudes more. Were all these larvati vel palliati by as∣sed by price or fleshly interest? He that is not a Christian for Spiritual and E∣ternal Interest, taking up his Cross and following a Crucified Christ, on terms of self-denial, even to the for∣saking of all for him, not excepting life it self, and doth not by his Cross even Crucifie the flesh and the world, which is the provision for its lusts, is indeed no real Christian at all. I had thought to have said some∣what to your pag. 220, 221. [In om∣ni Religione, immo & conscientia, sive ex Natura sive ex gratia, media suffici∣entia dari unde Deo accepti esse possint, ultro credimus—] But I have been long enough, and the answer may be gathered from what is said before. The Lord save this Land and the darker world from Infidelity and its fruits; and give us mo f that spi∣rit
which is Christs Agent and witness in us, effectually to plead and main∣tain his cause, Amen. Jan. 16. 1672. Caes. Baronius Annal. ad An. 411. BUt because we are discoursing of such matters, Reader I intreat thee to suffer me, like the good house∣holder in the Gospel, who bringeth out of his Treasurie things new and old, to adde some things new (or la∣ter) to these of elder date: For what I shall briefly say will much delight thee. For I will not report unproved things, but what I know to be con∣firmed by the assertion of very many learned men, Yea, and by all Religi∣ous men out told the people in their Sermons: And for my part I will bring forth the Author of whom I received it, and that is, Michael Mercatus Mi∣niatensis PPronotory of the S. R.
Church, a man of most entire fidelity and of eminent knowledge and honesty of life: He told me of his Grandfather of the same name with himself, Micha∣el Mercatus senior, between whom and Marsilius Ficinus a man of a most no∣ble wit, there was an intimate friend∣ship, contracted and increased by Phi∣losophical studies, in which they both were followers of Plato. It happened on a time that as they used, they were gathering from Plato (but not without doubting) how much or what of man remained after death; which Platonick documents where they failed, were to be under-propt by the Sacraments of the Christian Faith: (for of that argu∣ment, there is extant a learned Epistle of Marsilius to this Michael Mercatus, of the Immortality of the Soul & God.) And in their discourse when they had long disputed, they thus concluded it; and giving each other their right hands, they Covenanted, that which ever of them first died, if he could do it, he should certifie the other of the state of the other life. And having thus covenanted and sworn to each other, they departed: And after a considera∣ble
space of time, it fell out, that Mi∣chael senior, being early in the morning at his Philosophical studies, unexpect∣edly he heard the noise of a horse swiftly running, and stopping at his door, and withall the voice of Marsi∣lius crying out [O Michael, O Micha∣el, those things are true.] Michael mar∣velling at the voice of his friend, rose up and opening the window, he saw him whom he heard, with his back toward him, in white, riding away on a white horse, and called after him, Marsilius, Marsilius, and looked af∣ter him, but he vanished from his sight. He being struck with admiration at the strangeness of the case, took care to enquire what was become of Marsili∣us, (he lived in Florence where he died) and found that he died that same hour in which he heard and saw him: And what did he hereupon? Though he had been a man of approved honesty, and had lived a life harmless and pro∣fitable to all (as it became a true Phi∣losopher) yet from that time, bidding farewell to Philosophical Disciplines, and becoming a forward Lover (or fol∣lower) of the true Christian Philosophy
onely, as more eminent than the rest, he lived the rest of his time as dead to the world, onely for (or to) the life to come; being an example of a most ab∣solute Christian, who before had been famous among the Philosophers of his time in praise, as second unto none. So far Baronius; The same is reported by abundance of other writers. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 1. l. penult. for were read was. p. 23. l. 2. r. Indic. p. 30. l. 10. r. adapted. p. 64. l. 7, 8. r. same appari∣tion; p. 117. l. 15. r. Treat. l. 27. r. bestow. p. 123. l. 23. r. mens. p. 149. l. 16. r. end.) p. 157. l. 20. for ls. r. is.
