B1416 12395210 61124
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of that Faithful Minister of Christ Mr. John Corbet. With his True and Exemplary CHARACTER. By RICHARD BAXTER. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower End of Cheapside.
A Funeral Sermon. 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory: I will come to visi∣ons and revelations of the Lord. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen year ago (whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth) such an one caught up to the third heaven. And I knew such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth) How that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeaka∣ble words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter. Of such an one will I glory; yet of my self will I not glory, but in mine infirmities. For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth: but now I forbear, left any man should think of me above that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abun∣dance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. IT is but lately that we were here lamenting the loss of this City and the Church of God, in the removal of an ex∣cellent Saint; we are now come on the like occasion. It is a year of Jubile for holy souls, and a harvest for heaven,
The ripest are gathered, and the green and sowre fruit is yet left on earth: But Oh what a heavy judgement is it, to the needy world, which wants such lights, as God is taking in. But we are not the Choosers! Its well if we be obedient Lear∣ners, and can follow such to life in the Holy path. The Text read to you hath so much matter of Instruction that will excuse me if I scarce name the most. It is part of Pauls Vindication against the accusers of his Person and Mini∣stry, which were some Erroneous Judaizing Teachers. He confesseth that glorying is an unexpedient thing, and sounds like folly; but yet in case of necessary defence, it may be modest∣ly and sincerely done: Especially the opening of those Divine Revelations and gifts which makes for the strength of the Faith of others. The Explication shall be taken in as we go. Observ. 1. It is no new thing for the wisest and holiest of Christs Ministers to be accused even by the Teachers of Christianity. For 1. There are many Erroneous Teachers, that are con∣fident they are in the right, and oppose the Teachers of Truth as if they were the erring men. 2. And there are Worldly, Proud, Malignant Hypocrites, who bring their unsanctified Hearts into the sacred Office, and manage it as men do common Trades, but with greater enmity and strife. 3. And there are abundance of ignorant or halfwise injudi∣cious men, who have self conceitedness enough to be peremp∣tory and confident, but neither knowledge nor humility enough to perceive their own weakness and mistakes. Vse. 1. Therefore let it not become a scandal to you if you hear some Teachers accusing and vilifying others. 2. And think not that a Minister is erroneous or faulty, meerly because others, though of great name, do accuse him, or so represent him. It hath still been so, and while Satan is Satan, and man is Corrupt man, and there is so much dark∣ness and so much Worldly Temptations, and Cross Interests, it will be so: And Preachers will be made the common and dangerous hinderers of Preachers; And where they have Po∣wer will silence them, and disgrace their work. Observ. 2. Glorying or boasting is in it self an inexpedient thing. It savours of Pride, and Selfishness, and Folly, when
it is not necessary and just. And therefore all Christians should be backward to it. Observ. 3. Yet that which is so inexpedient, may on just occa∣ons become good, and a duty. That is, 1. When it is made needful to Gods honour, and the vindication and success of our Ministry and the Truth. And, 2. VVhen these are our true ends. And, 3. VVhen we speak nothing but the Truth. Vse. III. O that men knew how great a sin it is, by their confident Errors and rash Accusations, to put Christs Mini∣sters upon such a defence; much more to seek their silence and destruction. 2. And here you see that inconveniencies will not excuse us from necessary duties; nor prove that all is unlawful which hath such. What is it in this confused and imperfect VVorld that hath not its inconveniencies? In Government, both Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy, absolute and limited, have their many inconveniencies. In Churches, the power of People and Pastors, equality and subordination, riches and poverty, severity and lenity; to use Discipline or neglect it, have their inconveniencies. In Worship, imposed words of free, and all humane forms and modes have their in∣conveniencies. In Houses, a marryed life and a single, to have Children and to have none, to have servants or none, to have much business or little, to be high or low, rich and poor, to rule greatly or severely, have all their inconveniencies. In our conversations to be yielding or not, to converse with few or many, with high or low, to speak or to be silent, have all their inconveniencies. And yet there are men that on one side can silence Christs faithful Ministers by hundreds or thousands and persecute the true Members of Christ, and cast out true discipline, and cor∣rupt the Churches, and justifie all this by urging some incon∣veniencies. And there are others that can unchurch most Churches in the World, and separate from their Worship, and think the charge of inconveniencies will justifie all. And so we should have no Government, no Ministry, no Worship, no Families, Wives or Children, or Servants, no Books, no Trades, no Food, no Physick, if all meer inconveniencies for∣bid them.
By this our instance Solomon may be understood, what it is to be Wise and Righteous overmuch, some are so Wise and Righteous (materially not formally) that they can find faults in all persons, all duties, all speeches, all actions, and on pretence of doing all better, would hinder us from doing what we can, and undo all as if it were for amending, not but that inconveniences may make actions sinful. But the great part of Christian prudence lyeth in holding the ballance, and trying wisely whether the good or hurt, the benefit or inconvenience do weigh down; We shall never Preach or Pray, nor converse with mankind without some inconveniency. Observ. 4. Divine Revelations acquainting the soul with Hea∣ven, are matters most worthy of lawful, humble, modest Glo∣rying. It was Pauls Heavenly Visions which he gloryed in as his ad∣vancement, when he had mentioned his many persecutions and sufferings in the way. These tend to that perfection and felicity of souls: In these men have to do with the glorious Jehovah, the Angelical Chore, the heavenly Society, our glorified Head, our highest Hopes, and matter of the greatest everlasting joys. O if God would but give you and me this Heavenly sight, and let us but once see what Paul saw, what little things would Crowns and Lordships seem to us when we look down from such an height? What trifling should we think most of the busles of this world? what toyes and dreams, their wealthy honour and sinful Delights. I should then say, Now I see what it is that we seek and hope and suffer for, what it is to enjoy God and our Redeemer: And therefore now I know, what it is to be a Beleiver, a Saint, a man indeed. O what a help to mortification would such a sight of Paradise be? How easily should we after resist tempta∣tions, deny the Flesh, contemn the world, and hate our sins. O how it would overcome all these distrustful trembling fears of death, and make us long, and grown and cry, to be with Christ? VVhat life would it put into all holy duty? How easily should we bear our short afflictions? How would it mellow our sowre contentious minds toward one another, and teach us better whom to love and live in Peace with, than pride and VVorldliness or Faction will teach us.
Fellow Christians, Though you and I may not expect such Raptures, and Extasies as Paul's; yet we have the Gospel of Jesus, a Divine Revelation of this same heavenly glory; not to be set light by, because we see it not our selves, It is by the Son of God that saw it, and now is there preparing it for us; it is by a sealed certain word. And the heavenly beams are sent down from him upon our hearts, to shew it us and lead us up. VVe are capable of a lively beleif of the full assurance of hope, of the pledges, earnest, and first fruits; and of rejoycing with unspeakable glorying joy. We are capable in our manner, and are sure of traffick for heaven, and with heaven, of sending up our treasures, and there conversing in spirit as in the City which is our home, and hearing by Faith the joyful harmony of the heavenly Songs and Praises of Jehovah. Here we are capable of such a powerful touch with the Loadstone of Divine Love, or to have our Spirits so refined and sublimated, as shall make it as natural to them to make upward towards Christ, and long for full and perfect union. O had we lived as Beleivers should have lived, how much more of heavenly mindedness, and delight might we have attained than we have done? O thank God for the Gospel revelation, and beg grace to bring it in power on your hearts; And then, let world∣lings take their earthly portion; VVe can spare them all that hindereth not the gathering and edification of the Church, and the heavenly interest of souls. Observ. 5. There is a third Heaven and Heavenly Paradice, where are the concerns and hopes of holy souls. Paul was thither taken up; had he no interest there, no hopes, no friends, no business there; VVhy then should he have been rapt up thither? How many Heavens there be, and why it is here called the third, I will not interrupt your more necessary thoughts, by conjecturing enquiries: Most say the Air is called the first, the Starry Heaven the second, and the place of the glorified Spirits, the third; but these are vain conjec∣tures. No man knoweth how many there be, the Globes or Stars are at vast distance from each other, some great Philo∣sophers have been tempted to think that VVorld is infinite as an adequate effect of infinite Power, because God hath no un∣active power; All this is prophane rashness. The Heavens
which are our inheritance are the place where perfect Glorious Spirits shall live in blessed Society with Christ and one another; joyfully beholding the Glory of God, and feeling the delights of mutual Love; And yet there are different degrees of Glory from the different degrees of the Capacity of Spirits: Whe∣ther also from any difference in the place and communicating Causes, we shall shortly better know. There are more sorts of Spirits thatn we can now know. Though I know not how to receive Aquinas's Doctrine that no two Angels are of the same Species; the diversity as well as the incomprehensible Glory and Numbers, are unknown to us. Those that God employ∣eth under Christ as his Pursuivants, Messengers, and Servants for his Church, are called Angels: Whether there be orders over orders quite above Angels, and how Angels differ from the perfected Spirits of the Just, we know not. As it is designed for Saints, its Glory consisteth, 1. In the Glory of the Place. 2. In the perfecting and glorifying the Natures and Persons that enjoy it. 3. In the Glory of the Heavenly Society, Christ, Angels and Saints. 4. In the Glory of their high and excellent work, to Love and Magnifie God for ever. 5. In the Communication of the Joyful Love, and Light and Life of God, upon these glorified Spirits. O what doth every one of these words signifie! Is not this a Paradise indeed, that is a place of purest greatest pleasure? Vse. 1. And are we not taught by such a glass as this, how Great and how Good a God we serve? O look up to the Hea∣vens, and see what he is by that which he hath made. Yea, its said Psal. 113. 6. that he humbles himself to behold the things in Heaven; as well as upon earth. O sinners! what a God do you despise, neglect, and forget! and what a Heaven do you fell for fleshly lust, and to feed a Corruptible Body for the Grave! O Christians, what a God have we to serve and fear! and how Zealously and purely should we serve him! What a God have we to trust and hope in, and how great a sin is it to distrust him! What a Heaven have we to seek and hope for, and how chearfully and constantly should we do it. Alas, our
cold Hearts, and slothful Lives, and worldly Cares, and sink∣ing Spirits, beseem not such a God and Heaven. Were we designed but to inhabit the Sun, or some resplendent Star, how high is it above this Earth? Shall we creep only on Earth and feed on dust, and defile our Souls as if we were preparing them by Sin for Hell, when we have a third heaven, and Paradise to look up to, and seek and hope for? Doth Satan say, what is that to thee, that is so far above thee. It is to us; it is the place where the Glory of God is which we seek; where our glorified Head is. The place of holy Spirits, whither also Henoch and Elias were Translated: where A∣braham, Isaac and Jacob live; whither Christs Spirit went at Death, and where he received the believing Thief; where Lazarus is in Abrahams bosom; which Stephen foresaw, and to which he was received. It is the place which we are set on Earth to seek; dearly purchased; surely promised; to which Gods Spirit is now preparing us: and of which it is our pledge and seal. Were it not for such an end and hope, how vain were Man, and what a dream this World. Take Hea∣ven from us, aud take our Lives, our Joyes, yea, more than many such lives as these: O that we could be more deep∣ly sensible for what we are Christians, and for what we hope! what holy, patient, joyful Christians should we then be. But it is not a wavering Belief, a divided heart, and a few cold strange and staggering thoughts of Heaven, that will do this, as we desire it. Observ. 6. Souls are not so closely tyed to the body, but now they may be rapt up into Paradise, or the third Heavens. When Paul could not tell whether it was in the body or out of it, it sheweth some how the Soul was there, and that its possible it might be out of the body. Obj. If it were in the body, the body must go with it: If out of the body it must leave the body dead. Ans. It might be in the body and not take up the body: If man were born blind, the Iucid Spirits, and visive faculty
would act only within: But as soon as a Miracle opened his eyes, he would see as far as the Sun and Stars. And the Sun sends down its beams even to this Earth. Should God open this dark Lanthorn of the Body, we little know how far a Soul may see without any separation from the body: Did not Stephen's Soul in the body see Christ in Glory? And if it went out of the Body, it followeth not that it must be separated from the body and leave it dead. When London was on fire, how high did the flame go above the fuel, and yet it was not separated from the fuel: A Soul can stay in the body, and yet not be confined to it as a Chicken in the Shell; but may see, and mount above it to the Heavens. Vse. Therefore think not of Souls as you do of Bodies, which are Circumscribed in their proper places. We know not what formal thoughts to have of the dimensions or locality of Spirits: Somewhat such eminenter they have, (for they have individuation and numeral quantity, and some passivity) but not formaliter as gross bodies have: While the Soul is in the Body, it worketh on it, and is a Substance distinct from it, and such a form as hath also its own form; even its formal Po∣wer or Virtue, of Vital Activity, Sensitive and Intellective Perception, and Sensitive and Rational Appetite. It is Active Life it self, as the Principle: It perceiveth it self, and loveth it self, it understandeth what other Spirits are, by it self; It remembereth innumerable things past: It riseth up to some knowledge of God. It can seek, love, and obey him, and all this though not out of the body yet above any efficiency of bodily Organs. O what a sad part of Mans Fall is it, to lose so much as the World hath done, of the knowledge of our selves. And to begin to know our selves, our souls, and how Man differs from a Beast, is the first part of recovering know∣ledge, leading up towards the knowledge of God, which is the highest. O then, Sirs, do not only own the heavenly dignity of Souls, but use your Souls accordingly. Are they good for no better▪ than to serve the Body in Lust and Appetite, and keep it in motion and some Pleasure, or at least from stinking a while in the World, Sinners, hear and consider, If you
willfully Condemn your own Souls to Beastiality, God will Condemn them to perpetual Misery. Yea, you do it your selves, and pass from bruitishness to the Devilish Nature and Woful State. Observ. 7. The things of the Heavenly Paradise are to Mortal Men unutterable. That is, 1. Such as cannot be uttered. And, 2. Such as must not be uttered. It is not lawful to Paul that saw them. Not that nothing of it may or must be uttered: Christ hath brought Life and Immortality to Light: They are great things and glorious which are by him revealed. Enough well believed and used to overcome the Temptation of this Flesh and World, and to raise us to a holy Life, and joyful Hope, and comfortable Sufferings and Death. Christ best knoweth the just measure of Revelation meet for Earth. Can∣dles must serve for narrow and dark Rooms, and are more worth than all the Gold on Earth: The Sun by day must not come too near us lest it burn us up, but send us its beams at the distance that we can bear them. And all Souls are not here meet for the same measures; Much less for that sight which the glorified enjoy. The pure in heart do see God, Mat. 5. and even here more than impure Souls. 1. There is no humane Language that hath words fit to re∣veal that part of the heavenly things which God hath shut up from us as his secrets. Mans words are only fitted to Mans Use and to Mans Concerns, and not to Angels and the secrets of Heauen: We speak not a VVord of God himself, which sig∣nifieth formally what God is, but only analogically or by simi∣litude, and yet not in vain. Paul saw, and holy Souls see, that which no humane Language can properly express. 2. And if it could, yet mortals could not understand it: No more than a Language which they never heard. 3. And Paul had it revealed in a manner suited to his own use, and not in a manner meet for Communication.
2. And it was unlawful also to utter it. For God saw not all that meet for the dark world of undisposed sinners, which was allowed to one eminent Saint. 2. Nor would he have so much more revealed by a Minister than the son of God from heaven; had himself before re∣vealed. 3. And the revelation is to be suited to the fruition. Full knowledge is fit only for those that must fully enjoy it. Vse. Therefore remember with what measures of heavenly knowledge, we must be here content, so much as Christ hath revealed and is suitable to a distant life of Faith. I have known some that have run into greater calamities than I will mention, by an expectation of visible Communion with An∣gels; and others by rash conceits of Visions, Dreams and Prophetical Revelations: But the common Errour of Christians is, to content themselves with a feeble Faith (or at least get no better) and then think it should be made up by somwhat like to sight or corporal sense, and to be unsatisfied because they know no more than by beleiving they can reach to: As if be∣leiving were but an uncertain apprehension, (with which we are unsatified) and we are not content to live on that which God hath revealed, but we would fain know more, before we are ready for it; whereas we must explicitly beleive all that is explicitly revealed, and implicitly beleive and trust God for the rest. VVe are here used to live by sight and sense, and the soul is strange to such apprehensions as are quite above sense and with∣out it. And fain we would have God bring down the unseen things to these sensations and perceptions: And we would fain have distinct and formal knowledge, of that which God hath but generally revealed. It is somewhat excusable for a soul to desire this, as it is the state of perfection to which we do aspire. But it is not well that we remember not more that sight and full fruition, are reserved together for the life to come; and that we live no more thankfully and joyfully on so much as we may in the body by beleiving know. Quest. What may we conjecture those things are which Paul had seen and must not utter?
VVhy should we enquire, when they must not be uttered? VVe may mention a possibility to rebuke our bold unquiet thoughts. Our souls would fain have not only Analogical, but formal conceptions of the essence, substance, glory, immensity, eternity of God. Hope for much in heaven (but never for an adequate comprehension) But this is the very highest of all those things which are not to be uttered, and therefore not to be here at∣tain'd. Our souls would fain be perfect extensively and intensively in Philosophy, and know Heaven and Earth, the Spheares, or Orbs, or Vortices; the magnitudes, number, distances, motions, and the nature of all the Stars, and the Compagina∣tion of the whole frame of Being. But this is unutterable, and not here to be known. Our souls would fain know more of the Angelical nature; what such Spirits are, whether absolutely immaterial as meer acts and virtues; or substances which are pure matter, and what their number and differences are, and how vast and many and distant their habitations, and what are their offices on Earth or elsewhere; and how much they know of us and our affairs, and in what subordination Men, Churches and King∣doms stand to them, and they to one another, and how they are individuated, and how farre one: But all these are unut∣terable, and lockt up from us. Our souls would fain know whether there was any VVorld before this Earth, and the Creation of the six dayes; and whether there was any spiritual Being, which was an eternal effect by emanation from an eternal Cause, as Light from the Sun: And whether the Sun, and Stars are intellectual or sensi∣tive, and exceed man in form as well as in matter, and what the noble nature of fire is. But these things are unutter∣able and so not knowable to us. Our souls would fain have more sensible perceptions of themselves, as to their substance, and their separate state? Whether they are substances utterly immaterial, how they are generated? How they subsist, and act out of the body? And how they do enjoy? How they are indivuate, and yet how far one? How far one or not one with Christ, and one another? Whe∣ther
they are divisible in substance as continued quantities, as well as in number as quantitates discretae: What place and li∣mits do confine them (being not infinite)? How far they have still sensation? And how they see, Praise and enjoy God? And how they converse with one another? And how farre they know the things on Earth? And how their state before the Resurrection differs from what it will be after? And how far the soul will be instrumental in the raising of the Body: But all these are unutterable things. We would fain know more of the decrees of God, and how all his acts are Eternal, and yet produce their effects in time? How they are many, and yet but one, producing di∣vers and contrary effects. Many such things inquisitive nature would fain know which are unutterable. But this must satisfie us. 1. That sinful souls, and dark, in a dark body, and a dark World, are not fit for so great a Light, nor capable of it; It will put out our eyes to gaze so neerly on the Sun. 2. That Christ hath revealed so much of the greatness and certainty of the heavenly glory, as he seeth meet and suitable to Gods holy ends and us. 3. That the Church hath so much clearer a revelation than the Heathen and Infidel World, as should make us thankful for our Light. 4. That if we believe the revelation of the Gospel soundly, we may live a holy joyful life, and die in the Peace and Tri∣umph of our hopes. 5. That it is not by sight, but by Faith that we must here live, in our VVilderness expectant state. 6. That the more we cleave to God, and live by Faith a∣bove the Flesh and World whilst we are in it, the clearer and sweeter our apprehensions of heaven will be. 7. That God must be trusted implicitely about that which is yet unknown to us, as well as explicitly for what we know. And, 8. That what we know not now, we shall know hereafter and the day is neer. Let these things quiet our souls in health and sickness, though we are yet in darkness as to the unutterable things.
9. And always adde, that what we know not, Christ knoweth for us, to whom it belongeth to prepare the place for us, and us for it, and to receive us. Had we but a Friend in heaven whom we could trust, we could partly, take up with their know∣ledge. Our head is there, and the Eyes that we must trust to are in our Head. But how was Paul in danger of being exalted above measure, by the abundance of Revelations? Answer, 1. It might have been above the measure meet for man in Flesh, and so unsuitable to his present state. 2. It might have been unto sinful Pride, as the Angels fell from God, and as Adam fell, desiring to be as a God in know∣ledge. Observ. 8. Even Heavenly Revelations may be made the matter and occasion of unmeet and sinful Exalta∣tion. For, 1. It is the nature of sin to turn all our objects into it self to feed it. Not as they are without us in esse reali, but within us in esse cognito, the idea's in our minds. Austin saith indeed, that Grace is that quo memo male utitur, but he must mean it. 1. As in it self. 2. And efficiently, Grace never doth evil. But objectively in the Idea or remembrance of it, it may be abused to pride. 2. And the greatest and most excellent objects as ours, give Pride the greatest advantage. Heavenly Revelations are far more excellent than Gold, and Dominion and VVorldly Pomp. Children are proud of fine Cloths, and VVordly fools of Vain-glory; but Saints may be more tempted to be proud of VVisdom, Holiness and things above the reach of others. 3. And Satan knoweth how to fetch. Temptations from the Highest, Best, and Holiest things: And his Malice being as much against them as against us, he will be here most malig∣nantly industrious. Vse VVe see then that Pride is such a sin, as the holiest Saint is not fully secured from, no not when he hath been hearing un∣utterable
words, and seeing the Heavenly Paradise it self: No not if he came down from the third Heavens, (and bring his unperfect Nature with him) Though he came newly from Converse with Angels; Much more when he cometh from the most fervent Prayers, or holiest Meditations, or most heaven∣ly and successful studies, and from hearing the most Seraphick Preacher, or Preaching as such an one himself: He is not out of danger, when he newly cometh from the most Self-denying acts of Mortification, or the greatest Victory against Tempta∣tion, or the greatest Suffering for Christ. VVhat a sad descrip∣tion do Cyprian and Epiphanius make of the miscarriages of some Confessours that had offered to die for Christ. Let none therefore abuse the Grace of Christ, and the Do∣ctrine of perseverance, by thinking that it sets him above all danger or fears of falling, unless he can say that he is better than Paul was, and hath seen and heard more than he did in Paradise, or than Peter did with Christ, and Moses and Elias on the Holy Mount. O that this Age did not loudly tell us, how much the real or supposed knowledge of Divine things, may be abused to sinful Exaltations! By one side, even by most famed Teachers, to contempt of others, and Lording it over the Heritage of God, and wracking and rending his Church by their needless, yea wicked comvulsive imposing devises. And by other side, by hurtful unwarrantable Cen∣sures and Separations, and speaking evil of the things which they know not. Have you heard and seen more of heaven than others? Be then more Holy, Loving, Merciful and Peaceable, and liker those in Heaven than others: Read over and over Jam. 3. shew out of a good Conversation your works with meekness of wisdom: For the wisdom from above neither be∣friendeth Enmity to Piety or Peace, but is first pure, then peaceable, &c. But how is Paul kept from being exalted above measure? God gave him a thorn in the flesh. Note, Observ. 9. God seeth our danger when we see not our own, and saveth us from that which we saw not, or had not else prevented. Thanks to him, and not to us.
But how doth God do it? By a Thorn in the Flesh. Observ. 10. It is better that the flesh smart, than the Soul be overmuch exalted. No pain or suffering of the Flesh is so bad as Pride, nor hath so bad effects. Vse. Why then do so little fear Exaltation. How gree∣dily do some Religious People desire it? How impatient of any thing that crosseth it and humbleth them: How little do they lament it and confess it. Is Pride so rare or so small a sin? even among Preachers and zealous men. And why do we so much fear every Thorn in the Flesh: Every Sickness, Pain, or Cross, as if Pride could be prevent∣ed or killed at too dear a rate? And why do we quarrel with God for our sufferings as if our Disease were not so bad as his Remedy. Who ever heard you in health cry out of your Pride, as in Sickness you do of your Pain. It's a happy Thorn which lets out this corrupt aud pestilent blood. But what was this Thorn in the Flesh of Paul. Answ. The Greek word signifieth a sharp stake, Pale, nail, stub, or Thorn, or any such sharp thing that runs into the flesh, as it falls out with barefoot Travellers among such Thorns and Stubs. Its strange how many Expositors came to take up that injuri∣ous conceit that it was fleshly lust; which hath not the least colour in the Text. 1. Lust wou'd be rather likened to a Fire or Itch, than to a Thorn. 2. It would be called an alluring rather than a buffeting. 3. Paul had a Life of Labour and Suffering, which would keep down flesly Lust.
4. This Thorn is given him, as sent from God to save him from sin; But where is God said to give men lust to save them from Pride. 5. This Thorn was the buffeting of a Messenger of Satan. But it is not like, that Satan could so excite Lust in Paul. 6. Paul prayeth thrice that it might be taken from him: It is not like that Satan could so follow him with Lustful motions, and that Paul would not have mentioned fasting and other means of Cure. 7. God doth not yet say that he will yet take it from him, but under his weakness manifest his sustaining Grace: which sounds not like an answer of a Prayer against Lust. 8. Paul is vindicating his Ministry against Accufers, by mentioning his Infirmities, that is, his bodily Sufferings and his Revelations; and is the telling them of his Lust a meet means for this? 9. It is called his weakness; which is his usual Title for his Sufferings; but you may see Rom. 7. that he calleth Lust by more odious names. I doubt not but it was some bodily Suffering which was this Thorn, but whether by Persecutors or by a Disease is the chief doubt: Many think that it was by Persecution. 1. Because it was by a Messenger of Satan. 2. Because wicked men are in Scripture likened to Thorns. I more encline to think it was a fit of some violent pain in the flesh, and most likely the stone (or some such thing) which indeed is a Tormenting Thorn in the flesh. For 1. VVe read of his frequent Persecutions, but never that he so named them, or that he so much prayed against them, but
rejoyced, as Christ bids such, with exceeding joy: Mat. 5. 11, 12. And when he and all the Apostles so much exhort Believers to rejoyce in such Sufferings for Christ, is it like he would here tell men how he prayed against it? And as to the Reasons for the contrary sense, 1. VVicked men are called Thorns as hurtful, and so are other hurting things. Christ had a Crown of Thorns on his head, Joh. 19. 5. and Paul must feel one in his Flesh. Job 41. 2. Prov. 26. 9. & 22. 5. Hos. 2. 6. & 9. 6. Any thing hurtful is likened to Thorns. 2. And Satan is in Scripture usually mentioned as Gods Executioner, even in trying his Children. It was into his hands that Job was put: Hurting work is fittest for an evil and destroying Angel. He would sift the Apostles as wheat, by outward affrighting as well as inward Tempting. However suffering it was. Observ. 10. A Thorn in the Flesh is one of Gods means to keep the best from being overmuch exalted. You have heard that the best may need it; 1. And the Flesh hath so much hand in our sin, that it is fit to bear its part of suffering. 2. And it is the most ignoble part, and therefore its suffer∣ing hath less of hurt, and less to signifie Gods displeasure. Soul sufferings are the sore sufferings. And it is the Soul that is the chief Agent in our Duties, and therefore where it is spared we are least disabled for Gods work, and our Communion with him. 3. And the nearness of Body and Soul is such, that God
can use the Body to keep the Soul in a humble, and a safe Condition. Vse. Mistake not the Nature and meaning of the Flesh's sufferings. Grudge not at God, if he exercise thus his greatest Saints: VVonder not if the best men have sharp persecutions, pinching wants, and painful sickness, a long and sharp tor∣menting stone, or other such like Thorn in the Flesh. 1. It is but the Flesh, in our British part; common to Beasts: If Flesh must die and rot, why may it not first feel the Thorn. 2. VVe grudged not at that health and youth and ease and pleasure of it, which was the danger and temptation to the Soul, why then should we grudge at the pain which tendeth to our Cure. 3. If you feel not the need of suffering, you know not your selves: Did you know your Pride, and overmuch Love of Flesh and Ease, you would say that Pain is a Physick which you need, were it but to help on your willingness to die. 4. Pain here depriveth us of none of our true Felicity; it hindereth not Gods love to us; it keeps us not from Heaven: Lazarus was in a fairer way than Dives. It takes nothing from us, but what we Covenanted to forsake for Christ. 5. Do we not find that we are better when we suffer than when we are high? Were Religious People better when Vi∣ctories and Successes did lift them up than they have been in their sufferings. Did they live then more humbly, peaceably and heavenly? 6. The Thorn will soon be taken out; Flesh will not endure long and therefore this pain will not be long; a few more pain∣ful Nights and Days, and the Porter which we fear, will break open our Prison Doors, and end these weary grievous suffer∣ings.
Vse. 2. And think not the Thorn is a mark that such are worse than others. Paul was not worse; and shall we Cen∣sure such as he. Vse. 3 But let us all know the use of suffering, what cure hath this Medicine wrought? Blessed be our wise and gracious Physician, we find it a powerful though unpleasant Remedy. It keepeth Lazarus from the sins of Dives; from living a worldly sensual Life; and loving the prosperity of the flesh instead of heavenly true felicity: It keepeth us from a beastly living to our appetites and lust; which would divert and deprave the spiritual appetite: It keepeth us from being de∣luded by worldly flatteries, and looking for a portion in this Life, and laying up a Treasure on Earth, and from growing sensless and impenitent in Sin. It awakeneth the Soul to seri∣ous expectations of Eternity, and keepeth us as within the sight or hearing of another World, and tells us to the quick that we must make ready to Die, and to be judged, and that we have much more to do with God than with man, and for Heaven than Earth; It taketh down Pride, and all excessive respects to humane approbation, and keeping us still in the sight of the Grave, doth tell us what mans body is, Mors solae fatetur, Quantula sunt hominum Corpuscula, Juv. What faith∣ful Soul that hath been bred up in the School of afflictions doth not by experience say that it was good for him? How Dull, how Proud, how worldly might we else have been, and trifled away our lives in sloth and vanity. And it is not for nothing that our Thorns (or Nailes) in the Flesh are kin to the Nailes that pierced our Saviour on the Cross, and that we tread in his steps, and as Cross-bearers are thus far conformable to his sufferings. Be patient than under the Pain, and careful to improve it, and thankful for the Profit. And let not the Soul too much condole the flesh, as if it had not at hand a better Habitation and Interest. It is but this Vile body, Phil. 3. 19. lent us for a little time, as our Clothes till Night, or as our Horse in a Journey; when we have done with them, be content of Gods separation; and till then let us not take our Corrector for our
Enemy. I groan too much, Lord, I complain too much, I fear too much: but my Soul doth acknowledge the Justice and Love and Wisdom of thy dealings, and looketh that this Thorn should bring forth sweet and happy fruit, and that all the Nailes of my Cross being sanctified by the blood of my Crucified Redeemer should tend to make me partaker of thy Holiness. But who put this Thorn into Pauls Flesh? It was one of Satans Messengers. Observ. 11. The sufferings of the holiest persons in the flesh, may be the buffettings of a Messenger of Satan. No wonder! He that hath got somewhat of his own in us all, defiling us with sin, if he also may answerably be permitted to afflict us: He possessed many in Christs time, and it was De∣vils that made them dumb, and deaf, and mad; whom Christ at once delivered from Devils and Diseases. He is called the Accuser and destroyer, and he that had the power of Death. Heb. 2. 14. whom Christ by Death and Resurrection Con∣quered. Christ calleth his healing the Palsie man, the forgiv∣ing of his sin; and James saith, upon Prayer and Anointing, the sick should be healed, and his sins forgiven. And for the Cause of sin, many Christians were sick and weak, and many fallen asleep. I cannot say that Good Angels may not hurt men, and execute Gods Judgments; but Scripture maketh evil ones his ordinary Executioners. Vse. Therefore it is no proof that a man is not a Child of God, though the Devil have permission to Torment his Flesh, Rev. 2. 10. The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison. Please God, and Satan hath no Power; and Christ will take take out the Thorn ere long, which Satan is permitted to put in. But how doth Paul endure the Thorn? He prayeth that is might depart from him. Observ. 12. The best men are sensible of the suffering of the Flesh, and may pray God to take it from them.
Grace doth not make the Flesh insensible; Nor separate the Soul from it, though it set us above it; nor make us despise it, though it shew us a higher Interest and better Ha∣bitation, and teach us to bear the Cross, and resign the Body to the Will of God. A Godly man may groan under his Pain, and take it as a fruit of sin, and an act of the Chastizing Justice of an offended Father, and pray against it as hurtful, though not as a Remedy. They that ignorantly dispute that because Christ hath suffered all our Punishment, therefore there is no Penal hurt in Pain or Death, confute themselves if they complain under it, or pray against it, or desire such Prayers from the Church or any. Yea, one use of the Thorn is to awaken and quicken us to Prayer: Like Jonas's Storm. Vse. Go then to God in all affliction, but not with carnal discouraged hearts. He maketh you thus feel the need of his Mercy, that you may with the Prodigal think of home and cry for Mercy, and abuse it no more. Christ did not blame the blind and lame for crying out, Jesus, thou Son of David have mercy on us. Nor the Canaanite VVoman for begging for the Crums; is any afflicted let him pray, and send for the Elders Prayers. The Thorn in the Flesh will make us feel; and feeling will teach us to repent and pray, and pray∣er is the means of hope for the deliverance of Body and Soul. Grace maketh us not stupid, yet there are some that think a man behaveth not himself like a Believer if he cry and pray that the Thorn may depart! What think they of Da∣vid, in Psal. 6. and 17. and 88. And many more? What think they of Christ that prayed, that if possible the Cup might passe by him. He did it to shew that even innocent na∣ture is averse to suffering, and death through Grace makes us submit to the Will of God; (we continue men when we are Beleivers, we must mourn with them that mourn, and yet not love others better than our selves; nor feel their Thorns more sensibly than our own. VVe must neither despise cha∣stenings, nor faint. But how doth Paul pray? Doth he make any great matter of of his thornes, He besought the Lord thrice, that it might de∣part.
Observ. 13. Even earnest and oft Prayer is suitable to sharp Afflictions. There is a kind of Devils, and so of Satans thornes, which go not out but by fasting and prayer, no not by Christs own Apo∣stles. The sense and means must be suited to the malady. God can do it upon one prayer, or upon none, but we are not so easily fited to receive it. And Paul in this also is conformed to Christ, who in his Agony pray'd thrice against his Cup, though with submis∣sion Vse. 1. You see here that the Apostles gift of healing, was not to be used at their own will, nor for their own flesh that it might not suffer; but for the confirmation of the Faith, when it pleased the Holy Spirit. Troplainus and Epaphroditus might be sick, and Timothy need a little VVine with his VVa∣ter, though Paul had the gift of healing. Vse. 2. O let our pains drive us all to God, who hath not some? Sicknesses are all abroad, what house, how few per∣sons have not some; and yet is there a Prayerless house, or person? If Faith have not taught you to pray as Christians, methinks feeling should teach you to pray as men? I say not that prayer must shut out Food and Physick, but Food and Physick will not do, if prayer prevail not with the Lord of all. Vse. 3. And think not thrice or continued praying to be too much, or that importunity is in vain, Luk. 18. 1. Christ spake a Parable to this end, that men ought always to pray and not wax faint. VVhether God deliver us or not, prayer is not lost, it is a good posture for God to find us in, we may get better if we get not what we ask. Obey and Pray, and Trust God. But what answer doth the Lord give to Pauls thrice pray∣ing. He said, My grace is sufficient for thee, and my strength is manifested in weakness.
1. It was not a promise that the thorn should depart. 2. It seems to be rather a denial at the present, and that Paul must not be yet cured of his thorn; for it is called a weakness that must continue for the manifesting of Gods strength: and what was the sufficiency of grace and strength for, but to endure and improve the thorn? 3. But this promised grace and strength is better than that which was desired. Obs. 14. Even oft and earnest prayer of the greatest Saint, for deliverance from bodily pains, may not be granted in the kind, or thing desired. For, 1. we are not Lords, but beggars, and must leave the issue to the donor. And God hath higher ends to accomplish, than our ease or deliverance. It's meet that he should first fit all his actions to his own will and glory, and next to the good of many, and to his publick works in the World; and then to look at our interest next. 2. And we are utterly unmeet judges of matter, manner, time or measure what God should give us for the body, and how much, and how, and when. When should we be sick, or pained, or perse∣cuted, or dye, if all our prayers must be absolutely granted. We know not how much better God is preparing us for by pain, and bringing us to by dismal death. He will not keep us from grace and glory because our flesh is loth to suffer, and to die. 3. And in this Paul also was conformed to Christ: He was heard in the thing that he feared, when in his agony he prayed with strong cryes: but it was not by the removing of the bitter cup, but by divine strength and acceptance: And so it is with Paul; sufficient grace and strength to bear, is the thing promised. Vse. 1. We see then that they are mistaken that think Christs promise of giving believers whatever they ask, will prove him a breaker of his promise, if the strongest believer receive not all that he asketh for the body. Was not Paul a strong believer? All that God hath promised, and we are fit to receive, God will be sure to give. 2. Let not unbelief get advantage by Gods not granting such
prayers for the body. Say not, Why then is it my duty to pray? 1. You know not before-hand but God may give it. Possibility bids you beg. 2. Why did Christ pray against his Cup? 3. You lose not prayer: you draw nearer God: you exercise repentance and desire: you signifie your dependance: you are prepared for much greater gifts. Obs. 15. When God will not take the thorn out of our flesh, and deliver us when we pray, from bodily sufferings, he will be sure to do better for prepared persons, even to give them his sufficient grace, and manifest his strength in their pain and weakness. It is not for want of Love or Power that he lets us tumble on our beds in pain, or lie under slanderers or persecutors rage. He that with a word could make the World, with a word can save us from all this. But if we suffer not, how shall suffering-graces be exer∣cised, faith, patience, self-denial, and hope? Is not grace better than ease or life? How shall we get the benefit of suffering, if we feel it not? How shall grace and divine strength be manifested to our selves and others? Quest. What is it that Grace is sufficient for? Ans. 1. Not to set us up above the frailties of humanity and mortality; nor to raise us to the joy that souls in heaven have. 2. Not to every one alike, but in our several measures: some fear pain and death more than others: some have greater patience and joy, and long to depart and be with Christ. But to all the faithful it shall suffice, 1. To keep them from re∣volting from Christ, and repenting of their choice and hope. 2. To save them from charging God foolishly, as if he did them wrong. 3. It shall keep them from damning despair. When Satan sift∣eth them, Christs intercession shall keep their faith from failing: Grace shall humble them, and save them from sin, and the flesh and world: they shall cast soul and body upon Christ, and trust him in hope in their several degrees. And those that have been more believing, heavenly and fruitful than the rest, are likest to have the greatest peace and comfort, especially in their greatest need. Quest. And how is Gods strength manifested in our weakness? Ans. 1. It is manifested to our selves, by keeping us from sin,
and sinking into despair, and enabling us to bear, and trust, and wait, and usually in the peace or joy of hope: We know we are insufficient for this our selves: When flesh and heart, as natural, fail us, God is the strength of our hearts, and our portion for ever, Psal. 73. 26. We do not think oft before that ever we can bear and over∣come, as grace enableth us. 2. And it's manifest oft to others, who shall see that power of grace in the sufferings of believers, which they did not see in their prosperity. Vse. 1. Let not then our own weakness and insufficiency too, much distress us with fears of suffering and death; yea, when we feel the thorn, let us not forget our help and strength. By Grace here is meant, the living and merciful help of God, especially giving us the inward strength by which we may not only bear, but improve the sufferings of the flesh. This body was not made to be here in∣corruptible or immortal; we were born in sin, and therefore born to pain and death. We have lived in sin, and no wonder if we live in sorrow: but the sufferings of our Redeemer have sanctified our sufferings. The Cross is not now such a cursed thing, as guilt had made it. He took our suffering flesh and blood, that he might destroy by death, the devil that had the power of death, and deli∣ver us who by the fear of death, were all our life-time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14. Our pain prepareth us for endless pleasures, and our sorrows for our Masters joy. When we have suffered with him, we shall reign with him: He liveth, and we shall live by him: He is risen, and we shall rise by him: He is in Glory, and we must be with him. In the mean time his Grace is sufficient for us, not only in health and ease, but in all our pain and sickness: He is not so unskilful or unkind, as to give such physick to his own, which shall do them more harm than good. Though it be grievous at the present, it brings forth the quieting-fruit of righteousness: but we must first be exercised therein. Let us not then be his impatient patients: Grace can support us and overcome. Men are not sufficient: Our wit, our power, our worthiness are not sufficient: but God's grace is sufficient: If ease and life had been better than Grace and Glory, we might have had them: But God giveth us better than flesh would chuse. Though the body be weak, the head weak, the me∣mory
weak, the stomack weak, and all weak, yet God is strong, and his strength will support us, and bring us safe to our journeys end. Lazarus lay among dogs in weakness at the rich mans doors, but the Angels convey'd him in strength to Abrahams bosom. We must lie, and languish, and groan in weakness, but Omnipotence is engaged for us: We must die in weakness, but we shall be raised in power, by him who will change these vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious body, by the power by which he can subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3. 20, 21. Let us therefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12. 12. Looking to Je∣sus the Author and finisher of our saith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross. And let us beg more for divine grace and strength, than for the departing of the thorn. Grace is better than ease and health. If the soul be our nobler part than the body, the health of it is more desirable. Bodily ease is common to bruits and wicked men: strength of Grace is proper to Saints: Ease and health in this life are short; but Holiness will be everlasting. Health fits us for flesh∣ly pleasure, but Holiness for Communion with God. O pray not carnally, for the flesh more than for the spirit, for earth more than for heaven. Pray, that while the outward man is perishing, the inward man may be renewed day by day; and that our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, may work for us an exceed∣ing and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the temporal things which are seen, but at the eternal things, which are unseen to us, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. Why should we grudg at any sufferings, which are for the glory of Gods grace and strength: As Christ said of Lazarus, This sickness is not unto death (that is, the end of it is not to end his life, though he dye) but that the glory of God may be revealed. So pain and death are not Gods ends, but the manifesting of his grace and strength. But, alas, it is not only the flesh that is weak, but Grace it self, (as it is in us, though not as it is in God and of God); nor is it flesh only that hath the thorn, but the heart or conscience also hath its part. The spirit of a man (if sound and well) will sustain (his bodily) infirmities: But a wounded spirit who can bear? If faith were not weak, if hope, and love, and desire were not weak, the weakness of the body might well be born. If sin and guilt were no wound or thorn in the soul and conscience, we could be more
indifferent as to the flesh, and almost as quietly bear our own pain and death, as our neighbours. Though it's hard to say is Tertullian Nihil crus sentit in nervo, cum animus est in coelo; yet our content and joy would overcome the evil of our suffering. But, alas, when soul and body must be both at once lamented, this, this, is hard∣ly born! Lord! seeing it is thy sufficient Grace, and not my bo∣dily ease which I must trust to, and my weakness must manifest thy strength: O let not Grace also be in me insufficient and weak! O let not Faith be weak, nor Hope, nor Love, nor Heavenly desires and foretasts be weak! Nor Patience and Obedience weak! Head is weak, and heart is weak; but if Faith also be weak, what shall support us: At least let it be unfeigned and effectual, and attain its end, and never fail. Flesh is failing, and health (as to its proper strength) is failing. But be thou my God, the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. And what ever thorn the flesh must feel, yet let me finish my course with joy. Amen. I have run over many things in a Text so suitable, that I could not well spare any of them. Those that well knew our Deceased friend, will say that except Pauls extraordinary rapture, and Apo∣stolical priviledges, in Pauls case I have been describing his. I come not to gratifie the interest of any of his Relations, to speak to you according to custom of a stranger whom I knew not; but for the honour of Gods grace, and our own edification, to tell you what I knew by my most faithful and familiar friend. It is almost forty years since I heard him preach in the City of Glou∣cester; there was his enterance, and there he lived (under a Papist Bishop of the Protestant Church, Godfry Goodman, as his last Te∣stament in Print professed) there he abode during the Civil Wars, and wrote the History of what happened there. He was after re∣moved to the City of Chichester, and from thence to Bramshot in Hamshire, and silenced with the rest, he was cast out, where he con∣tinued till 1662. He lived peaceably in London without gathering any Assembly for publick Preaching. Dwelling in Totteridg with Alderman Web, his great love drew him there, to remove to me, with whom a while he took up his habitation. In all the time that he was with me, I remember not that ever we differed once in any point of Doctrine, Worship, or Government Ecclesiastical or Ci∣vil, or that ever we had one displeasing word.
The Kings Licenses encouraged his old flock at Chicestor to invite him thither, though they had the help of another Nonconformist before, with whom he joined with love and concord. God many years afflicted him with the disease that was his death; while the pain was tolerable to nature, he endured it, and ceased not Preach∣ing till a fortnight before he was carried up to London to have been cut. But before that could be done, in about a fortnight more he died. This is the short History of his course. But I will next give you his true Character, and then tell you how like his case was to Pauls here in my Text, and then tell you to what use I do all this. I. He was a man so blameless in all his Conversation, that I may say as I did here lately of another (Alderman Ashurst) that I ne∣ver heard one person accuse or blame him, except for Nonconfor∣mity, and that difference from others in these divided times, which his Book expresses. Of which more anon. II. Were it not that I have said we never differed, and so made my self an incompetent Judg, I should have said that I thought him a man of great clearness and soundness in Religion, much by the advantage of the calmness and considerateness of his mind. III. He was of so great moderation and love of peace, that he hated all that was against it, and would have done any thing for concord in the Church, except sinning against God, and hazard∣ing Salvation. In the matter of the five Articles, or Arminianism, he went the reconciling way, and I have seen a Compendium of his thoughts in a Manuscript, which is but the same with what I have delivered in my Cath. Theol. but better fitted to Readers that must have much in a few words. He constantly at Totteridg joined in all the Worship with the Publick Assembly, and had no sinful separating Principles. He was for Catholick Union, and Communion of Saints, and for going no further from any Churches or Christians than they force us, or then they go from Christ. He then Preached only to such Neigh∣bours as came into the house between the times of the Publick Worship. He was for loving and doing good to all, and living peaceably with all as far as was in his power. Something in Episco∣pacy,
Presbytery, and Independency, he liked, and some things he dislikt in all; but with all sorts lived in love and peace, that did seek the furtherance of mens Salvation. Many parts of Conformi∣ty he could have yielded to, but not to all, nothing less than all would satisfie. IV. In all he was true to his Conscience, and warpt not for a parties interest or faction. If all the Nonconformists in England had refused, he would have conformed alone, if the terms had been reduced to what he thought lawful. And he studied that with great impartiality. V. He managed his Ministry with faithfulness and prudence: He took it for heinous Sacriledg to alienate himself from the Sa∣cred office to which he was devoted, though men forbad it him. But he thought not the same circumstances of Ministration ne∣cessary to all times and places: He was not for open preaching to great numbers, when it was like by accident to do more hurt than good: Nor yet for forbearing it, when it was like to do more good than hurt. He spared not his flesh, but held on from year to year under his great pain of the Stone in the bladder, till with∣in a month before he dyed. Much less would the prohibition of any restrain him, to whom God gave no such forbidding-power. VI. He served God with self-denial, not with any selfish or worldly designs: He never lookt after preferment or riches, or any great matters in the world: He had daily bread, and was therewith content. VII. He suffered his part in our common lot 1662. Aug. 22. (ejected and silenced with about 2000 more) with as little mur∣murring as any man that I knew: I never heard him dishonour the King, nor speak much against those by whom he suffered, or rip up their faults, unless a rare and necessary self-defence be called an accusing them. I never heard him so much as complain how much Church maintenance he was deprived of, nor of the difficulties of his low dejected case.
VIII. He was great hater of that base pride and envy, which possesseth too many of the sacred office, who grudg if others be pre∣ferred before them; and if the people go from them to others for their greater edification, and think themselves wronged if they be not followed and applauded, either above, or equal with more wor∣thy men: He was very careful to preserve the reputation of his bre∣thren, and rejoyced in the success of their labours, as well as of his own, and a most careful avoider of all divisions, contentions, or offences. And he was very free in acknowledging by whom he profited, and preferring others before himself. IX. He was very much in the study of his own heart, by strict examination, as his Cabinet-papers, which may come to light, make known, as I had also occasion otherwise to know. X. By this examination he was confidently assured of his own sincerity in the true love of God, and of holiness for it self, and such-like evidences which he wrote down, renewing his examina∣tion as occasion required: And though he had known what it was to be tempted to doubt of the life to come, he was fully setled a∣gainst all such doubts and temptations. XI. But though he had a setled assurance both of the truth of the Gospel, and the life to come, and of his own satisfaction and sincerity: yet so lively were his apprehensions of the great∣ness of his approaching change, and the weight of an everlasting state, and what it is to enter upon another world, that he was not without such fears, as in our frail condition here, poor mor∣tals that are near death are lyable to. And indeed fear signifieth a belief of the word of God, and the life to come, much more than dull insensibility: But he signified his belief both by fear and hope, and strong assurance. XII. He had the comfort of sensible growth in grace. He easi∣ly perceived a notable increase of his faith, and holiness, and hea∣venliness, and humility, and contempt of worldly vanity, especi∣ally of late years, and under his affliction, as the fruit of Gods correcting-rod.
I have truly given you the description of the man, according to my familiar knowledge. I shall yet review the similitude of his case with this of Paul described in my Text. I. Paul was accused by envious, contentious Teachers: And so was he; Though I never heard any one person else speak evil of him; as is said, They that upbraided not Paul with his former persecution, nor had any crime to charge him with, yet accused his Ministry: As they said of Daniel, We shall find no fault against him, except it be concerning the law of his God. His Preaching and Writings, though all for peace, were the matter of his accusations: The Bishop blamed him for Preaching, even when the King had licensed him: And a nameless Writer published a bloody Invective against his Pacificatory-book, called The Interest of England, as if it had been written to raise a War. The enemies of Peace were his enemies. II. He took boasting to be inexpedient, as Paul did: And when he was silenced as unworthy to be suffered in the Ministry, he once offered a modest defence to the Bishop, and wrote a short and peaceable account of his judgment about the sin of Schism, in his own Vindication. III. He had (though not the Extasie of Paul, yet) great knowledge of things Divine and Heavenly to have been the matter of his glory. IV. The heavenly Paradise was the place of his hopes, where he daily studied to lay up his treasure, which had his chiefest thoughts and care. V. He found by experience that an immortal soul is not so tyed to this body of flesh, but that it can get above it, and all its interest and pleasure, and live on the hopes of unseen glory. VI. As he knew the incapacity of mortals, to have formal and adequate conceptions of the state of the heavenly Paradise and separated souls; so he submitted to Gods-concealing Will, and lived on the measure of Gospel-revelation. VII. He knew the danger of being exalted above measure, by occasion of holy Knowledge; and how apt man is to be so puffed up. VIII. God himself saved him from that danger, by his hum∣bling wholesome sharper remedy.
IX. A Thorn in the flesh was Gods remedy to keep him in a serious humble frame: Three great Stones were found in his blad∣der, and one small one in a corrupted Kidney: And how pain∣ful a thorn these were for many years, it is easie to conje∣cture. X. Satan was permitted to try him as Job, not only by the pain of his flesh, but also by reproaches, as aforesaid, and by casting him out of his Ministry, as unworthy to preach the Gos∣pel of Christ, unless he would say, swear, and do all that was by men imposed, and the rest of those afflictions which are contained in such an ejected, impoverished, calumniated state, are de∣scribed in the late and former experience of may such. XI. Though I never heard him pray against poverty or reproach, yet for the liberty of his Ministry he did, that he might preach that Gospel of Salvation. And pain forced him to have recourse to God for deliverance from the thorn in his flesh. And if Christ and Paul prayed thrice with earnestness, no wonder if continued pain made him continue his suit to God. XII. As Christ was heard in the thing which he feared, and yet must drink that cup: and Paul instead of the departing of the one, was promised sufficient grace, and the manifesting of Gods strength in his pain and weakness; so it pleased not God to take away the Thorn from our dear Brothers flesh, but he did better for him, and gave him his supporting help, and an increase of grace, and shewed his own strength in all his weakness; and also hasten∣ed his final deliverance, beyond expectation. And now he is past all, at rest with Christ, and all the blessed: We see not them, but they see God, and God feeth us, and is preparing us for the same felicity: And if it be by the same means, and we must bear the Cross, and feel the Thorn, it will be whole∣some and short, and good is the will and work of God. Lord, let me not account ease, honour or life dear to me, that I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry received of the Lord, and come in season and peace to thee. And is not this Providence of God, and this example of our deceased friend of use to us? Yes, no doubt of manifold use.
I. It is of great use to all the Land, to good and bad, to ob∣serve Gods threatning in the removal of his servants: O how many excellent Christians and faithful Ministers of Christ, have been taken hence within a few months: The same week we hear of four or five more besides our brother, and some of them the most excellent useful men. And is it not time, 1. To repent of our neglect of such helps as God is now removing? 2 And to be presently awakened to use them better before the rest be taken away? Alas, poor Souls, what a case are you in, if you dye, or the word be taken from you, before you are regenerated and pre∣pared for a better life! It is not so much their loss and hurt as yours, which Satan endeavoureth in silencing so many hundred such: And it is your heavy punishment more than theirs, which God inflicteth by their death. O speedily repent, before that death have stopt the mouths which call'd you to repentance. And it should awaken the best to prepare for death, and for pub∣lick suffering: It seems there is some great evil to come when God thus takes away the best. Yea, if it should be a forerunner of a better state, yet all save two of the old stock that dishonoured God in the Wilderness must fall, and it was by bloody Wars (a dreadful means) that Joshua and the new generation were to possess the Land of promise. II. It is of use to us unworthy Ministers of Christ who yet survive. 1. It calleth loudly to us to work while it is day, for our night is near when we cannot work: Death will shortly silence us all more effectually, than men have done. Do Gods work prudently, do it patiently, peaceably, and in as much con∣cord and true obedience as you can: But be sure you do it, whoe∣ver forbid it, or be against it, as long as God or your selves have not rendered you uncapable. Whatever silencers say against it, Necessity is upon you: God calls for it: Souls call for it: The charge is dreadful, 2 Tim. 4. 1, 2. your Vows call for it: Satans malice, and the number of Soul-betrayers and murderers must provoke you: our time is short: Souls are precious: Christ the chief shepherd dearly purchased them, and will judge you accord∣ing to your works: It will not justifie your neglect to say, Men forbad me: Sufferings were prepared for me: Bishops and famous Divines wrote learned Books to prove that preaching was to me a
sin, and that I was bound to forbear it when forbidden. 2. And it telleth us that we as well as others must prepare for the sharpest tryals from God. No thorn in the flesh so sharp and painful, which we may not feel. No death so violent or sudden but we may undergo. Love and hatred are not known by outward events, prosperity or adversity. A great difference Solomon ac∣knowledgeth between the good and the bad, the righteous and wicked, him that sacrificeth (or worshippeth God) and him that doth not; him that sweareth (perjuriously or prophanely), and him that seareth (such) an Oath: some are loved of God, and some are hated: And this difference is manifest in such disposals, even of prosperity and adversity, as tend to their greater holiness and happiness, which shall manifest the difference fully and for ever. But outward events manifest it not in themselves: All such things come alike to all: yea, the Cross is more laid on the godly, than the wicked. O therefore away with the two Disciples desires of Church-preferment and worldly dignity, and prepare to drink of Christs Cup, and be baptized with his baptism, Eccles. 9. 1, 2, 3. Matth. 20. 22, 23. Learn daily how to bear slanders and persecutions from men, even from Christian Teachers; and how to lie in fleshly pains night and day, and how to die: and all this in faith, and peace, and joy, at least in the quiet hope of everlasting joy. III. And without any disgracing or provoking design, but meerly in conscience and compassion to the Souls of the people, and of our Reverend Brethren themselves; I do humbly intreat the Right Reverend and Reverend Imposing Clergy, to lay by a while, if possible, all unrighteous prejudice and partiality, and worldly interests and respects, and consider that they also must die, and as they will stand to it at last, to resolve these Que∣stions: I. Whether those Terms of Church-Concord and Peace be wisely and justly made, which are too narrow to receive such men as this (for faith, knowledge, peaceableness, blamelesness, holines, &c.) into the Ministry, Communion of their Church, or to endure themout of a Jayl? Whether wise and good men could find no better? And whether Christ ever directed the
Church to exclude such, or did not plainly require the contra∣ry? And whether the Apostles ever excluded such, or made such Rules? II. Whether they think in their hearts that it were better all the good were undone, which hath been done by Nonconfor∣mists these 18 years to the Ministerial furthering of knowledge, repentance, holiness and salvation, than that such should have preached the Gospel when forbidden? III. Whether it will be peace to your consciences at the Judg∣ment of Christ, that any of you have furthered the silencing of such, and their other sufferings? IV. Whether they that have written and preached against their Preaching, or for their silencing, and the execution of the Laws against them, or perswaded them to give over their work themselves, and reproached and accused them for doing it, be not engaged in this frightful Cause? V. Is it not gross partiality, if you will cherish men of igno∣rance, vitiousness, or far less worth, while such as these are thought intollerable, meerly because the former are more obedient to you, than fear of sinning will suffer these to be. VI. Was that Church therein guided by the Spirit of Christ, which made the Canon which ipso facto excommunicateth such? VII. If you had known as many of the (about) 2000 silenced, and as well as I have done, how much of the grace of God shined in them, Is it possible that any man that hath the true fear and love of God, and sense of everlasting things, could ever by any pretences of Church Government or Order, or upon any byas of interest, have consented to their silencing and sufferings? Some will think that in partiality I over-magnifie men, because they were of my own mind and party: I have (besides some pious Women) written the Characters, and published the praises of di∣vers; of Mr. Rich. Vines, Mr. John Janeway, Mr. Joseph Allen, Mr. Henry Stubbs, Mr. Wadsworth, and now Mr. John Corbet, and
lately one Layman, Alderman Ashurst; and he that hath now received them, whom such as you cast out or villified, knoweth that I have in knowledge of them, and love to Christ, whose grace shined in them, spoken simply the truth from my heart; and it is in a time and place where it is fully known, and feareth no confu∣tation. And the History shall live to the shame of Church-dividing tearing principles, and all thorny hurtful dispositions, and to the encouragement of the faithful, and the imitation of those that in time to come, shall by saith, patience, and well-doing, seek for immortality and eternal life, by serving our Redeemer, and pleasing God. FINIS. ERRATA. PAg. 3. Line 26. for great, read gentle. Pag. 4. l. 1. for our, r. one. l. 34. for grown, r. groan. p. 5. l. 11. for are sure, r. measure. l. 37. after that, r. the.
HIS Writings published are, 1. His History of Col. Massy's Military-Actions at and near Glocester. 2. The Interest of England, 1st and 2d Part. 3. A Discourse of the Religion of England, assert∣ing, That Reformed Christianity, setled in its due Lati∣tude, is the Stability and Advancement of this King∣dom: In two Parts. 4. The Kingdom of God among Men: With a Dis∣course of Schism: and an Account of himself about Conformity. 5. His secret Self-employment is now to be Printed. Containing, 1. Memorials for his own Practice. 2. His Evidences upon Self-examination. 3. His Thoughts in his last painful Afflictions. What else may hereafter see the light, we yet know not. Besides his Labour in Compiling Mr. Rushworth's first Volume of Historical Collections.
