B6203 16263823 105166
Not FEAR, but LOƲE. A SERMON PREACHED Before the Governors of the Charity for Relief of poor Widows and Orphans of Clergy-men, at St. Mary le Bow, on the 7th. day of Decemb. 1682. By Ar. BƲRY, DD. Rector of Exon. Coll. Oxon. Ama, & fac quicquid vis. D. Aug. OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, in the year, 1683.
ADVERTISEMENT. THIS following Sermon (dear Reader) I send to wait upon the foregoing Treatise, as being there∣to both very neer of Kin, and very Service∣able. Neer of Kin, as being a Restorer of Communion with our Lord; for This laboreth to Restore our Communion with the Father and the Son, to that Full joy which St. John declareth to be the Summ of his message; as That doth, to Restore our Communion with the Son in his Flesh and Blood, to that Constancy which himself made due to it: And Serviceab'l, not only in casting out the spirit of Fear, which is the common enemy; but particularly in caling to a more strict account that Self-examination, which, as prescribed, and practised by the best, is the greatest discora∣ger from the Lord's Supper. Here, tht Sermon advanceth beyond the Treatise, denying it so much as adviseabl to a good person, either upon That or any Other occasion. I say, to a good person: For to others I acknowledge the Prophets admonition always necessary, that they search and try their ways, and turn unto the Lord: but for those who have already do'n this necessary work, I see no Reason to be always repeting it. Many exhortations I find encoraging them to rejoice in the Lord alway, but not one to be always tormenting themselvs, with examining their interest in him. This, and another (no less heterodox) assertion concern∣ing Repentance, my design invited me to Touch, but my time forbad me to Handl, in any proportion to the need: which defect I have now endeavoured to supply by additio∣nal Annotations, wherein I have accounted for such texts as seem to discountenance them.
More or Less than this cannot be required: A sound mind cannot acknowledg the Scripture to be the adequate rule of faith and manners, yet fear to appeal to it. But to manage the appeal is not every one's work: it requireth good acquaintance with the Original language, som Academi∣cal improvement of the understanding, a Carefuley, a Free Heart, and a Good Key. For the last of these we stand obliged to the great Eras∣mus, who hath furnished us with This, as the best key to understand mystical Scrpture, that we observ what the speaker aims at. With this key I have unlocked such texts as stood in my way: And I add this to Erasmus's rule, That as every par∣ticular word must be unlocked by the Author's aim, as by its proper key; so must every text, and its particular key; conform to the Universal Aim of the Gospel, as their Com∣mon and Supreme King-key. This then I say and inculcate, and wish the whole Chri∣stian world would hear it. As sure as St. John hath pro∣clamed, that this is the design of the Gospel, that our joy may be full; as sure as St. Paul hath determined, that the Kingdom of Heaven is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, &c. so sure it is, that the King-key, wherewith we must unlock every abstruse text of Scripture; the Test, whereby we must try every Doctrine of Faith or Manners; the Oracle, which we must consult in all doubts of Conscience; is this: Whatever will most exalt the Joy of the Wise and Good, is most properly Evangelical, and most certainly True. Were this as generally believed, as throghout the whole New Testament it is plainly declared, how great, how hap∣py a change would it work in the Christian world! How would it advance both the Honor and Power of the Gospel! How would it promote both the Joy of the Godly, and the
Conversion of the Profane! How would it exalt the Glory of Gods love trward Us, and the Ardor of Ours towards Him! Whereas, not to know what spirit we ate of, is the most pernicios Ignorance: It made our Lord's Apostls uncha∣ritabl to the Samaritans, and it still makes his best intenti∣oned disciples Tormentors to Themselvs, and Scare-crows to Others. How serviceabl the discovery may be, God grant Ex∣perience may verify, as much as Reason promiseth, beyond what this poor Sermon can express; which that it may contribute its mite, offers its self and its unvulgar asser∣tions, to thy most deliberate examination. But remember, we appeal from All Human authori∣ty, to Divine.
Rom. X. 15. How shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gos∣pel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! WE shall not now consider these words as Part of an Argument, but as an Entire one. And since an Argument moveth more Gracefully (perhaps) from the Consequent to the Antecedent, but more Strongly from the Antece∣dent to the Consequent; it will be reasonab'l we should invert the Apostl's order: for so we find a Sorites of three pieces: The Gospel is glad tidings, therefore the Messengers feet are beautiful, therefore no man may preach except he be sent. A Gospel! A Gospel of Peace! Glad tidings! Good things! How doth the Apost'l travel to bring forth an expression suitab'l? Such glad tidings of great joy, an host of Angels found worth a jorny from Heaven to bring; and perhaps for that reason its first Preachers were stiled Angels of their Churches. And their reception was suitab'l both to this title, and those tidings: You received me, saith our Apost'l to the Galatians, as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. —If it had been possibl, you would have pluckt out your own eys, and have given them unto me. And
here he saith not much less. How beautiful are what? the Lips, the Eyes, the Countenances? yea, the very Feet! the very feet of Messengers! the feet of Mes∣sengers in those countries, where they must needs be Dirty, bicause naked. The charms of this beauty, like Aaron's ointment, run down from the Face to the very Feet. And for this reason no man may take this high ho∣nour to himself, but he that is caled of God, as was Aa∣ron. For as this encoraged our Apost'l in his work, so did it temt popularly ambitios spirits to dubl his task: he must not only Execute his commission, but Assert it: His next words speak him no less troubled with Rivals, than with Persecutors; and This makes it necessary to urge as in my Text, they must not preach except they be sent. Thus may the order of my Text be inverted, thus may it make a weighty argument, not perhaps so proper to the Apost'ls own design, as to that which hath brought us together. If the beauty of the Preachers descend from their Heads to their very Feet, needs must it descend from the head of the family to its neerest members: and you may justly expect, that from this expression I should take occasion to plead the right of those un∣happy widows and orphans, who have nothing left them by their deceased husbands and fathers but their merits to administer. But oh the disappointment! Our Apost'l, after his so great boast of the Galatians love, quickly com∣plains, Where is the blessedness you spoak of? And well may we demand, Where is this great beauty that so descends to the very feet? Hath age withered it to a deformity equal to its youthful loveliness? Our very
eyes are as loathsom as the primitive Preachers very feet were beatiful; and the deformity descends to our posterity as their only sure inheritance: yea som are so impios as to make God a party with them∣selvs in the entayl, pretending that Clergy-mens children are equally hated of God and Man, seldom or never attaining, either worth in themselvs, or pro∣sperity in the world. God be blessed, we are hence∣forth secured from that malicios slander; This con∣spicuos, and perhaps matchless assembly, having for ever rooted that fals toung out of its dwelling. Yet, thogh the Toung be rooted out, the Heart is still the same; so void of Love, so full of 'spite, against this once so honored caling. that we must think it a great bargain if we can compound for or∣dinary charity, and depose my Text to this poor plea, The Preachers of the Gospel bring no evil tidings; therefor they deserv not to be hated. And since it is better to Cure an evil than to Com∣plain of it, I conceve I cannot do better service to my Text, the Gospel, and its Preachers, than by re∣moving the cause of the hatred we sink under; which indeed is no other than that Epidemical mi∣stake, the root of all misery, the taking things by wrong handl. The Gospel hath two handls, Threats, and Pro∣mises: its threats are Few, and its promises Many: its Threats shew us our danger, only that we may re∣joyce in our escape; its Promises immediately raise our joys. Threats therefor, both in quantity and design, sit upon the face of the Gospel, as beauty-spots do upon that of a fair Lady; here one, and there another, to this only end, that by their vanquished blackness they may set off the lustre of the beauty
which is to adorn the very feet; but by the unhappy officiosness of melancholy messengers, those spots have been enlarged to a visor, which so cover the face of Religion, that we cannot see its Joys for its Fears; and the very grace of God which bringeth sal∣vation, appeareth like the inhumane Nero, saying, Let them Hate me, so they Fear me. This ugly visor shall I endeavor to pull off, as my Text directs me, by two Propositions. 1. The Gospel doth not design to bring us to God by Fear, but by Love: For it is a Gospel of Peace, glad tidings of good things. 2. The mistake of this is the cause that the Gospel and its Preachers are so hated by the world: For if Glad tidings make the messenger beautiful, Evil tidings must make him loathsom. I. THE Gospel doth not draw men to God by Fear, but by Love. This, as it is clearly exprest in my Text, so is it al∣most in every page of the New Testament: I shall instance but in one or two places more, which ex∣presly offer one handle, and reject the other. In this same Epistle ch. 8 v. 15. our Apost'l de∣clareth as clearly as possib'l, You have not receved the spirit of bondage again fear, but the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father: And no less clearly, 2 Tim. 1.7. God hath not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a Sound mind. In the former place he opposeth the spirit of the Gospel to That of the Law; and in the later, he vieth with the Philosophers, who pretend to exalt the mind to the highest freedom and perfection. If this can be yet more clear, St John hath made it
so: for with pomp unmatched by any other pen, he ushereth his first Epistl with This proclamation, These things we write unto you, that your joy may be full: and throghout the whole body of the following Epistl exalteth Love, as the only way to this fulness of Joy; ch. 4. v. 18. There is no fear in Love, but Love when it is perfected casteth out fear, bicaus Fear hath Torment. It is impossib'l to find Plainer, and therefor need∣less to seek for More declarations of this truth: No∣thing can remain, but that we reconcile them with such other words of Scripture as seem to contradict them. Two such especially there are: One spoken by our Lord, and another by our same Apostl: See Annot. 1. to which may be reduced all others of the same air. These two therefore if we can reconcile, we shall both State and Clear the truth. 1. Our Apostl himself seemeth to contradict this: Phil. 2, 12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Doth not this offer salvation by that handl which but now he rejected? That we may now or at any other time reconcile appearances of contradiction, we must carefully con∣sider which of the two Propositions may best be broght to compliance. It is plain, that what we have heard declared a∣against Fear, cannot be bent to any other sence: we must therefor try whether the fear and trembling, which he recommendeth to the Philippians, may a∣gree both with his declaration in two other Epistl's, that we have not receved the spirit of fear; or with his exhortation in the same Epistl, ch. v. Rejoyce in the Lord evermore, and again I say rejoice.
To find out this, it is necessary we look about us, and see how he useth the same phrase upon other oc∣casions, possibly it may be an Idiom. Twice more we find him at the same phrase, and in both places his meaning will very well comply with Love and Joy. Eph, 6.5, Servants obey your Masters with Fear and Trembling. What? doth not a Ser∣vant please both God and his Master better, if he Obey him with Love and Chearfulness? And what shall we say to the 9th. verse, And you Masters do the same things to Them. Must Masters also treat their Servants with Fear and Trembling? Yes, but such as may circulate between the best Masters, and the best Servants; even such as himself explaineth by good will, v. 7. This possibly will be plainer by 2 Cor. 7.15. His inward affection is more abundant towards you, while he remembreth the obedience of you all, how with Fear and Trembling you receved him. Titus came in kindness to visit them, and they welcomed him with such endearing caresses, as made his (already great) inward affection more abundant than before: Here certainly the Fear and Trembling which so welcomed and heightned Love, must be so far from excluding it and Joy, that they import an extraordinary mesure of them. Yea, we need look no farther for a good light, whereby to see the meaning of this phrase in That his exhortation to the Philippians, than the encorage∣ment wherewith he quickneth them in the words immediately following: For it is God which worketh in you both to Will and to Do of his , good will. It is the very same word wherewith the Angels broght their glad tidings of great joy, and it were
strange if out of the same breath should come Gladness and Fear, Joy and Trembling. That we may not seem bent wholely to pull down the obvios sence without bringing a better in place, this we offer as the Apostl's meaning: It was only the , the loving kindness of God, which wrought in you the desire of salvation: and the same loving kindness will crown That desire with success, if it be attended with endeavor: do you therefor your part with such affection, as shall make you even Tremble again. And that we may give account of the Idiom as well as of the Argument; we must observe, that Any passion whatever, if vehement, will cause Trembling: But bicaus this is most visib'l in Fear, therefor Fear is added to express the certainuy of Trembling, as Trembling is used to express the vehemence of the Passion. 2. HAVING Thus interpreted one saying of our Apost'ls by another, we com now to do our Savior the same service, who also seemeth to contradict our position, Lu. 12.4 I say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but I will forwarn you whom you shall fear: Fear Him, which after he hath killed you, hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear Him. It is plain, that Fear in this place can signifie no other than the Properest, and no less than the Greatest; and is enforced by our Lord in the most pressing manner; inculcated by sundry repetitions, and urged with a most dreadful reason. This cannot be denied, but must be interpreted by our Lord's own parab'l, Lu. 14.16. A certain man made a great supper, and bad many, and he sent his servants at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Com, for all things
are now ready; and they all with one consent began to make excuse; and the Lord said unto his servants, go out into the high ways and hedges, and compell them to com in, that my house may be furnished with guests. This parab'l will fully reconcile our Lord's threats with the spirit of Love: for it declareth, that the Lord's proper design was not to Troubl his neighbors, but to Fest them. His first work was to provide a great supper, and then many guests to enjoy it; to which end he secondeth his large provisions with kind in∣vitations: But when few or none can this way be prevailed with, to leav the farms and cattel which they have boght, or the Lusts which they have espou∣sed; either all the provisions must be lost, or som other means used, more suitab'l to the necessity than to the nature of a fest. We must therefore distinguish the Principal End from the Subordinate Means, who's whole buisi∣ness is to serv That End: And since the End is chosen for its own sake, and the Means only for the Ends sake; we must advance the spirit of Love as much as is Possib'l; but That of Fear, only so much as is Necessary; Comply with it so far as to follow it from the Hedg to the Hous, and then dismiss it to exercise its kind rudeness upon others who need it. And thus I hope I have fully accounted for my first position; The Gospel doth not design to draw us by Fear, but Love; and it is for Love's sake, if Fear be at all employed. Com we now to our Secund. II. THE mistake of this is the cause that the Gospel and its preachers are so hated by the world. What can we expect, but contrary causes must produce contrary effects? If therefor our preach∣ing
be different from that of the Apostl's, our recep∣tion must be so to: if glad tidings make the messen∣gers feet beautiful, evil tidings must needs make them loathsom. Ahab's inference is Natural, thogh scarce Reasonab'l: I hate him, bicaus he prophesieth not good of me, but evil: And whatsoever Jehoshaphat can say to the contrary, such a Prophet shall be sentenced to the bread and water of affliction. And hereof the proof is but too evident, in all our enemies, which may be reduced to two regiments. 1. Those that hate All religion in general. 2. Those that hate Ours of the Church of England in particular. 1. Of those who hate All Religion in general, som are Atheists, and som are Semi-atheists. I. THE ATHEISTS are made such by the spirit of Fear. Upon This only ground did Epicurus build his impudent pretence to that gracios title, which the Scripture teacheth us to pay our Lord THE SAVIOR OF THE WORLD. For he bosted, that he delive∣red his disciples from the torment of Fear: But we now heard St. John declare, that this is do'n by the spirit of Love: Love casteth out Fear, and for this reason too, bicaus Fear hath torment. The question therefor between Atheism and Reli∣gion, is not whether Fear shall be cast out or no? but whether of the two doth it most effectually? Christ, or Epicurus? Should we insist upon the Weakness or Dangerosness of Atheism, we might easily prove it both insufficient to give any settled peace to the ne∣ver-that-way secure conscience, and terribly dange∣ros if at last it prove fals. But my present work rather promts me to insist upon this, that it maketh not the least pretence to
the Beauty admired in my Text, but wholely renegs all glad tidings of good things: It's utmost aim is to cast out Fear, without a thoght of making our joy full. And this indeed is the proper ground whereon to fight out the quarrel. Whilst we dispute whether there be a God and Providence, or no, we maintain but a hedge fight, wherein the enemy may make a bad shift to skulk behind his bushes and ditches: But if we dispute concerning our own Happiness, even our Present happiness, whether it be greater in a Re∣ligios life or in a Sensual, then we charge him home in his own ground, and leav him no shelter. Colotes it seems was the first Epicurean, that ever appeared in this field: For he wrote a Treatise professing to prove, that upon the principls of the Religios, it is impossib'l to live pleasantly. Against this Plutarch opposeth another Treatise, proving that upon the principls of Epicurus a man cannot so much as live; and thus bosteth of his work: This is to trampl upon their bellies, and put them to fight for their very flesh; to take plesure from men that do nothing but cry, we are no good soldiers, nor scholars, nor magi∣strates, but we love to make good chear, to banquet, and fill our flesh with all delights, until the plesure mount to the very soul; to rob such men of plesure is to rob them of life. Thus doth he crow, and upon this ground com∣paring the plesures of the Spirit in Religios Fests, with those of the Flesh in Sensual; apparently tram∣pl the Epicurean to dirt: yet with force how short of the Gospel! who's Joys are fed with Hopes more glorios, and Evidences more incontestab'l, than could enter into Plutarch's imagination. Here then let us take our post: Let us not so
much contend for the Truth of the Gospel, as its Joys: Yea let us argue from its Joys, for its Truth; since infinite goodness will not fail to make That truest which is Best. Let us compare the Fruits of the Spi∣rit with That of the Vine; the Beauty of Holiness with That of a Whore; the Plesures of an Angel with those of a Beast; and he cannot scape the evidence, that his choice is as foolish as impios. True (saith Plutarch) we must be careful to shun superstitios fear, as the most pernicios error in the world: and herein he proceedeth so far as to say, that it is less impios to deny God to have Any being, than to character him such as superstition apprehen∣deth him. Let the comparison pass for odios, our Apost'l putteth us above any need of it: When he saith, Love casteth out Fear, he condemneth it suffi∣ciently, thogh he say not whether it be more or less guilty than its daughter Atheism. Objection. What then? must we not fear God as our Savior admonisheth? Answ. Yes, as our Savior admonisheth, but no o∣therwise: For we must distinguish Fear that hath Torment, from fear that hath only Caution. Love casteth not out That fear that keepeth waking, but that which tormenteth; it Therefor casteth it out, BICAUSE it hath torment; That is the Reason, and That is the Mesure; Just the same Fear, and in the same Mesure, as That Reason requireth, but no more. The Best and Greatest Subject so feareth the Law of his Prince, as to beware he run not upon its Pu∣nishments; yet is he not thereby hindred from living chearfully upon those honors and riches, which by the same Law he enjoyeth: A good man may be ve∣ry
careful to avoid the Threats, yet chearful in festing upon the Promises of the Gospel. Yea, our Apost'l himself so far cherisheth this kind of Fear, as to say, I keep my body in subjection, lest possibly when I have preached to others, I my self should be a cast away. II. THE SEMIATHEISTS, who mount not the scorners chair, so as to oppose All Religion; yet keep distance from a Religios life, and they are kept at that distance by Fear: And under this character com not only the Worst, but the Most: Not only those for whom the Apost'l declareth the Law to have been made, the lawless and disobedient, the ungodly and pro∣fane, &c. but the unscandalously wicked; yea such moral men, of whom we may say as our Lord did of the young man, they are not far from the Kingdom of God: Such as would pass thro the world with as litl guilt as possib'l, but with as litl troubl too; and therefor put repentance as an evil day far from them, not in love to their Lusts, but their Ease. They hear an evil report of Repentance, which must be their entrance upon a Religios life: Those who press it and its conditions, speak in a stile op∣posit to St. John, these things we write to you, that your grief may be full. Those who adventure upon it, com∣plain that such a grief is no more in their Power, than it is for their Pleasure: And those who have long served under it, are as far from freedom as at first; but live as much tormented with fear that their repentance is insufficient, as at first they were with repentance it self. For those who are broght to Repentance by Fear, are still to cherish That fear, as their best security from relaps: They must ever and anon, but special∣ly
when they are to receve the holy communion, be anxiosly examining themselvs, whether their repen∣tance be sound, and themselvs in the state of grace, or no? and they are directed by Teachers as melan∣choly as themselvs, and marks, which rather multiply than remove their fears. They are told of a twofold hypocrisy, open, and secret; and the bounds between the Least that sav∣ing grace requireth, and the Most that a hypocrite may perform, are so undiscernab'l, that they cannot be sure whether they be in the one state or the other: But still, the more they Examin, the less they Satisfie themselvs; they bate and flutter without End, or any other fruit but this, that they entang'l themselvs more; and perhaps at last sink into deep melancholy, incurab'l either by Spiritual or Corporal Physician: and by so sad a spectacl the by-standers take warn∣ing to shun the place of Torment, and hate their Mi∣nisters as Tormentors: So the Christian World is almost all divided, between such as are frighted from a Religios life, and such as live fearfully under it. It is worth more time than I can allow, fully to convince either party of their error: but it is of so great import, that I must (however briefly) avow that it proceedeth in Both from taking repentance by the wrong handl. I. THOSE who are frighted from Religion by the hardship of Repentance. It would not be so ter∣ribl if we receved it by the spirit of Love: bicause it would be neither so Difficult to be obteined, nor so Troublesom in the performance. 1. Not so difficult to be obteined: Observ the Love of God as proclamed in the Gospel, and answer that
Love of God, so as to be able to say with the Apost'l, We love God, bicause he loved us first; and forbear grieving for your sins, if you can. I say again Love God, and forbear to griev for having offended him, if you can. But be sure you cannot, for it is utterly impossib'l to forbear grieving, when we have offen∣ded whom we love. 2. Yet fear not you that love your Ease; this grief will not disturb it: For as I said of Fear, so say I of Grief; there is a grief that hath Torment, and there is a grief that hath only Tenderness; a grief that hath Bitterness, and a grief that hath only Sharp∣ness: and That, such a sharpness, as shall not mar your fest, but improve it with its poignance. This is that grata aciditas which recommendeth bankets; it is so sweetned by the sence of God's pardoning goodness, that it is none of the meanest part of the joys of the Spirit. I pray you take notice, and remember it, I deny not but grief is necessary; I confess it is impossib'l a penitent soul can be without it. But this grief as it is Necessary, so it is Natural; as a gracios foul can∣not be without it, so can he not Wish to be so: it costs him no pain, either to obtein or exercise it. But the grief that proceedeth from the spirit of Fear is every way contrary. I. It is hard to be obteined. To fear God's pu∣nishment, and for That reason to griev for sin, and thence to love God for pardoning upon such repen∣tance; This is to go quite against the hair, both in grace and nature: In Grace, bicause the Apost'l declareth, that Love casts out Fear, and how can Fear bring in that Love by which it self is cast out? In Nature, bicause That cannot but shun Fear and
Grief; and that, not only as it is corrupted, but in its whole integrity: When we address our selvs to Love, we shall not miss of the grief of Tenderness, bicause it is Love's certain attendant; but if we address our selvs to Grief, we court the Handmaid, which we cannot obtein bn by the Mistress; and if we ad-dress to That grief which proceeds from Fear, we court a Scoundrel, that is as coy as worthless; no less an ene∣my to Loving grief, than to our own inclinations. Obj. Is not Repentance the first step to Conversion? and is not Repentance, Grief? Answ. That duty which the Gospel prescribeth as necessary to salvation, is not only a Step to conver∣sion, but Conversion it self; it is not only Grief for what is past, but Change for the future. We are miserably abused by a base Translation: I appeal to you that understand the Greek and La∣tin Toungs, whether  or  be any kin to the Latin words, Repentance, Penance, Attri∣tion, or Contrition, by which the Latin Priests (Annot. 2. with no less injury to the Gospel, than to the words; to their own great advantage, but inestimab'l loss of souls,) have translated them; that so they might translate the Duty it self, from Turning to Grieving- And I appeal to your Annot. 3.Bibles, whether in the whole New Testament you meet any word that declareth Grief necessary to salvation? I know St. James pre∣scribeth it to the insolent wanton rich, as a specifik for That particular vice; but where do you find it en∣joyned as universally necessary for All kinds of sinners? No, the Spirit of God knew, that the Grief
which issueth from Love, needs not be commanded, bicause it floweth naturally from that fountain: and the other grief, which proceeds from Fear, is not worth commanding, bicause it is not worth accepting, as having nothing but Torment. It is a great maim to the happiness of mankind, but a much greater to the glory of God's goodness in Christ; that for That very reason it is enjoined, for which it is to be cast out. For we are told, that Christ hath not redeemed us from Temporal punish∣ment, tho he have from Eternal: but we must our selvs pay the temporal price, either in this life by voluntary grief and penances, proportional to our guilt, or in the other life by the fire of Purgatory, &c. Were this true, it would make one half of the Gospel: And as the story it self is a great disparage∣ment to the sufficiency, either of our Lord's Suffer∣ings, or his Love; if Those could not purchase, or This would not grant us a full redemtion, as well from the one punishment as the other; so is it a greater to his Faithfulness, if he would concele from us the knowlege of what he had left necessary for us to do for our selvs. How many Souls must there now and in all ages ly frying in Purgatory, that had never com'n thither, if our Lord had been as kind as himself charactered the damned rich man, who did all his possib'l, that his brethren might have warning of that place of Torment! And how can such poor souls scape the tentation, to blaspheme that Neglect, that exposed them to such danger without warning; yea! That Treachery, that deluded them with promises of Full and Free pardon, without the Least intimation of any grief or penance, necessary to be suffered either
in the one life, or the other! Were this true, the sum of Christ's benefits must upon due computation rise no higher than this, that he Redeemed us from Hell, and Betrayed us to Purgatory. Blessed be God, who hath shewen us a better escape than by Grief and Penance: The Love that casteth out Fear, for this reason bicause it hath torment, will for the same reason cast out such Grief too: In Christ Jesus nothing else is Needful, bicause nothing else Avail∣eth, but Faith working by Love: Let That so inflame our hearts, as to melt them with a genuine sorrow, purging them from all their dross; and we need not fear any other Purgatory, nor seek any other Grief. II. THOSE who make, not Repentance only, but the whole cours of a Religios life a state of Tor∣ment, are no less abused by the same spirit of Fear; which perpetually tormenteth them with doubts, and putteth them upon enquiries, whether they be in the state of salvation or no? This they cal Self-examination, and their Teachers prescribe it as a Spiritual duty frequently to be used, but especially before the holy Communion. But if Fear will hear reason, it may consider, That however Self-exami∣nation be by all wise men of all Religions highly mag∣nified, yet is it not to be exercised by All men in the same manner. 1. To those that are Enemies or Strangers to God∣liness, as it is most necessary, so it is most easie: They need not much examining whether they be in a good state or no? the first glance discovereth the contrary; the Question proper to Them is this, Whether it be better to continu in That state, or com out of it? To which question more Seriosness than Time is required.
2, Those who have forsaken their sins, especially those who have for any considerabl time do'n so, may with as great Fruit as Pleasure examin, 1. What progress they make? By comparing their present stature in Christ, with that of the last moneth or year, they may increase it. 2. They may daily examin their daily actions, that they may beg pardon for what they shall find ill do'n, and pay thanks for what they shall find well; and take Warning from the One, and Corage from the Other, to do better the next day. 3. But to question their whole interest in Christ, whether they be Children or Enemies to God? to be anxiosly solicitos upon such a question as This, See Annot. 4. I am not so sure that it is a Religios, yea or a Safe ex∣ercise at all; as I am that there are pernicios mistakes in the Rules prescribed for the performance; parti∣cularly in this, that there is too much partiality shewen for Fear against Hope; whereas plain Reason would perswade us, to judge as favorably for our selvs as our evidences can permit, since severity can do very litl (if any) good, but may do much hurt. 1. It can do but litl good, for it can only repete the lesson wherein we are already perfect: Our Fear of the worst is the very Reason which puts us upon examining our selvs; when we severely censure our selvs, this is no more but that we fear the worst: so we end where we began: the whole exercise is running a circle of Fear, without the least progress in Grace. 2. It is not only a Fruitless labor, but a Dangeros tentation, If we fear that God hateth Us, nature will promt us to hate God in our own defence; and so far to turn Atheists, as to wish there were no God.
Such fear as this, Love certainly must cast out, and it cannot be our duty to help It to cast out Love; but on the contrary to cherish the Antecedent of the A∣post'ls argument for the Consequent's sake: We love him, bicause he loved us first; and thence take spurr to serv him by the mesures of thankfulness, i.e. with∣out mesure. II. WE HAVE seen what an enemy Fear is to Religion in general: Consider we now how much it is so to our own in particular; and we shall soon discover that our enemies on Both hands, the Papists, and Nonconformists, are made such by the spirit of Fear. I. THE PAPISTS (it is plain) have corrupted the Gospel from a doctrine according to Godliness, to a doctrine according to Interest; especially in its two great limbs, Faith, and Repentance. Articls of Faith they have multiplied, and in every one multiplied difficulties, on purpose to make an infallib'l guide ne∣cessary to determin them: and Conditions of Repentance they have multiplied and imbittered, on purpose to fright men, not out of their Sins, but out of their Reason and their Mony: They drive men To Repen∣tance by fear of Damnation, and From Repentance by fear of its Torments, and allow them no quiet but by the Priest's Absolution. If now there be This only difference between Us and Them, that We Drive men to Repentance by the same Fear, and Torment them in it with the same Grief, but do not reliev them by the same Remedies; we have much less reason to wonder, that som half-considering peop'l run from us to them, than that
so many scape the temtation; especially seeing how greedily Fear and Pain catch at any (however impro∣bab'l) offer of help. II. That the NONCONFORMISTS on the other side are possessed by the same evil spirit, needeth no other evidence but this, That they are frighted from our Communion, by such things as themselvs acknow∣ledge Indifferent. Fears and Jealousies fill both pages, both in their Religion and Polity. Their whole con∣stitution is sowred by the melancholy humor; un∣easy both to Themselvs and others, especially their Governors. It is not possib'l in fewer and plainer words, both to Describe and Condemn this unhappy spirit, than we have found do'n by our Apost'l: You have not re∣ceved the spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a Sound mind. Love is opposed to Fear; Power, to Weakness; a Sound mind, to a Pained one. I wish he had never spoken worse, who said, that to be much and long troubled with any scruple, is a certain indication of a weak and cowardly spirit; bicause if the weight be considerably greater in either scale, the suspens will soon be ended; if not, the cause of doubt must be very light; and to be much trou∣bled about light maters, must needs signifie great weakness. Objection, What then? must we think any sin litl? or can we be too fearful of the least? Answ. Distinguish between Sin Known, and Sin Suspected. We must more fear the least Known sin, than the most cruel death: But to fear that which we only Suspect to be sin, as much as that which God hath declared to be so; This is it self a sin against
God, bicause it maketh our own Suspicion equal to his Laws; and against our Selvs, our Country, and our Governors; bicause we troubl them without competent reason. Our Lord's parab'l will illustrate this: The Gospel is a great Lord's Fest; and at such a Tab'l you may easily discern the Welbred from the Clown, by the frankness of his cariage. He payeth all due deference to his great Inviter; careful not to do or say any thing that may offer him the least disgust, nor to neglect any thing that may in any degree please him, specially to cary himself with such a decent mixture of Humility, and Chearfulness, as may speak his joy and thankfulness for the favor do'n him. In the Other, you find not the least air of chearfulness; but a Fear to mis-behave himself in every motion of hand or ey, every bit that he bringeth To his mouth, and every word that he uttereth Out of it; and thus by too much fear of misbehaving himself falleth into it. Thus differ the truly Religios and Superstitios; the One serveth God with a Careful, yet Chearful spirit; will rather incurr the worst death, than the least sin; yet despiseth litl scrupls as unworthy to discompose his frank spirit: the Other disordereth the whole frame of his conversation, by timorosnes in such maters as he Knoweth to be Indifferent, yet Suspecteth to be evil: a mere Spiritual Clown! Which of the two is best manners in the Kingdom of God, our Apost'l taght both the Corinthians, and Romans. Both those Churches were troubled with a scruple concerning meats offered to Idols; a scruple the more considerab'l, bicause himself had taght them, that it is impossib'l to partake the Lord's tab'l, and the tab'l of Devils: How doth the Apost'l treat this
great question? Why, he spurns it, as no other way considerab'l, but in the mischief it might do to the peace of the Churches: The Kingdom of Heaven (saith he) is not meat and drink, but Righteosness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost: for he that in these things serveth Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men: Let us therefor pursue the things that make for Peace, &c. Apply this decision of that Great controversy, to those pety ones that troub'l our peace, it will Determin them them the best way, by Destroying them. The Kingdom of Heaven is no more Vesture and Gesture, than it is Meat and Drink; Righteosness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, are still the best manners in sight of God and Man: and to pursue the things that make for peace, is still the best cours in such litl questions as endanger it. We have therefore nothing to enquire but this, Who best conform to this Rule? They who in such small maters submit to their Governors, or they who disturb the peace of the Church? However obvios the answer be, it is more obvios what the spirit is, that maketh men in such things troublesom to them∣selvs, and their country: See Annoi. ult.Nothing certainly but fear∣fulness can make a man so to fly his own shadow, as to run into the ditch. We see the Apost'l thinketh no way better to pre∣serv the peace, than by settling our Fundamental Position: Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost are the best manners in the Kingdom of Heaven, most pleas∣ing to God and man, and the best preservative both of Publik and Private quiet: which is in other words, The Gospel designeth not our Fear, but our Love.
I HOPE I have now effectually performed the task I undertook, which was not to exhaust all the contents of my Text, but to dig up that root of bitterness, which so undeservedly troubleth the world, and especially the Ministers of the Gospel; and most especially those of our Own Church, who are of all others most unhappy, because whether they they prevail or no, they are sure to create them∣selvs enemies. If they prevail not, then are they treated by the impenitent, as our Lord was by the Devils: What have we to do with thee? art thou com'n to torment us? If they do prevail, they do no better than journy-work; either for the Papists, to whom the Sanguin run for Anodynes of Absolution; or for the Non∣conformists, to whom the Melancholy run for food for their unsatisfiab'l scruples: So we are hated on All hands; by our enemies in Religion, bicause we will not torment our selvs with Their fears; and by our enemies in Irreligion, bicause they suspect we will betray them to that place of torment, which o∣thers hate us for renouncing. But in all that I have spoken to this too necessary purpose, how short am I falen of the requires of my Text? I have not be'n able to display any of the glad tidings of good things: cannot say, as St. John doth, These things have I spoken, that your joy may be full; or as St. Peter, We rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorios. Yet have we made no slight advance toward all this, if we have cast out Fear: For this visor once pluckt off, holiness will so display its beauty, that we shall soon find Plato's aphorism verified in its charms.
And now I have mentioned Plato, I shall vouch not only his Opinion, but his Experience: He spoke so much, and so well of the excellences and powers of Love, that the best Fathers of our Religion have not disdained to write after his copy, stiling him the Christian Philosopher. Plutarch. in Dione. Dion, the greatest No∣ble-man in Syracuse, went to Athens to hear him, and afteward prevailed with him to take a voyage to Sicily, to convert his unhappy Prince, miserably corrupted by ill education. He came, and his First labor was to encorage his hearers, that they should not be afraid of vertu: This he perpetually inculca∣ted, and having removed that prejudice, he char∣med the whole Court, and especially the young Prince, into such a love of virtu and himself, that never was Lover more fond or jelos: He would not endure that Plato should go out of his Palace, hardly out of his sight; was impatient that any beside him∣self should have any interest in Plato's love, made Pla∣to Lord of all his power and wealth; and had he not be'n countermined upon reasons of State, was in a fair way to have resigned up to the love of Plato and vertu, that unjust Kingdom, from which he was af∣terward banished. For this Diogenes upbraided Plato, saying, he had flattered a Tyran; and I doubt not, but som of the same Cynical humor will object against me, that I would have the Clergy flatter the Peop'l. Plato owned the charge, and so do I. It is our work to flatter our peop'l, just as Plato did Dionysius; not In their lusts, but Out of them; not for our Own benefit, but Theirs: We must out-flatter Epi∣curus,
yea we must out-flater Plato, we must flater like our Apost'l, the greatest flatterer in the world: Read his Epistl's with application; see if you can match them for tenderness in any of the Romances: He saith in one of them, that he had espoused his di∣sciples to Christ; and in that and all the rest he courted them with all the arts and insinuations of a wooer. And he plainly telleth us, that His and Our Com∣mission require it: We are (saith he) Embassadors for Christ: as if God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Which is a great improvement of my Text, and giveth us title to a nobler welcom: We are not only Messengers, to bring Tidings of peace; but Embas∣sadors, to Negotiate for its acceptance: to Nego∣tiate as in the Person of Christ, yet in the Posture of supplicants. Christ again deposeth himself from his Majesty, and creepeth to his rebellios subjects like a petitioner, begging in most humb'l manner (what? that they would not again destroy him? no, but) that they would permit him to save them: and in this posture are we commissioned to represent him. True, Embassadors, if they find it necessary, may sharpen their importunities for peace, by displaying the terrib'lness and unavoidabl'ness of That destru∣ction, which is to be the portion of the irreconcile∣ab'l; provided they do it with such tenderness, as may speak their Master's goodness equal to his power; more loth to destroy them, than themselvs are to perish. A preacher of the Gospel (sure) must not com short in kindness to a prophet vnder the Law: yet in this posture doth Ezekiel represent God: As I live faith the Lord, I desire not the death of him that
dieth, but rather that he will turn and live: turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dy, ye hous of Israel? Do ye say, that he offereth salvation only to a few Elect? Behold, he saith, yea he sweareth, that he desireth not the death even of Him that dieth. The difference is very observab'l, which our Sa∣vior puts between the two sentences. The blessed are invited to the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the world: but the cursed are dispatched to the fire that was prepared (not for Them, but) for the Divel and his Angels. There is therefore great difference between Ele∣ction and Reprobation: The one is a Positive act, the other a mere reterition, which doth not deprive men of Sufficient, yea Abundant means of salvation: The Reprobates are so far from prepared for hell∣fire, that the fire is not prepared for Them, but only for the Divel and his Angels. Many indeed will at last find it their portion, but by their own carving: God useth all the means that a Wise and Good father can, to hinder them from it: His Wisdom will not work miracl's except in cases extraordinary; and in such cases (possibly) he may by irresistib'l grace qualify som few chosen vessels for som extraordinary service; but in ordinary, he offereth no such violence to Nature, thogh he use all means suitab'l to it, for the benefit of the creature whom he endeavoreth to make happy. His Laws are far from grievos, he requireth no Satisfaction for the past, but Amendment for the fu∣tur; and That Amendment too, he requireth for This only reason, that we may be as happy both now and hereafter as we are capab'l- We are fond of our hedg-fruit bicause we know no better, but he
provideth for us bankets infinitly more delicios; and he Inviteth, he Intreateth; if this will not prevail, he Driveth us, to this purpose only that we may be happy in his fellowship. Plato broght the most dissolute to the love of ver∣tu, thogh he had no other motive but its mere beau∣ty, unendowed with any other reward than its self. But we have commission to promise you a dowry great as its beauty, and to embellish that beauty with most glorios additions. The glory of God's love shineth infinitely brighter in the face of Jesus Christ, than in That of the Sun, which was the best glass Plato had to see him in: The earnest of our inhe∣ritance (never heard of by Plato) is infinitely more valuabl for the inheritance it secureth; the joys of Hope being incomparably more ravishing, than those which tast nothing but the present. And is it not both very Sad and very Admirab'l, that Plato under such disadvantages, should so ina∣mor a dissolute company with naked vertu, and him∣self its preacher; yet We with such great advanta∣ges, prevail no otherwise than to drive our hearers into hatred both of our message and our selvs? Can any thing be more worth our Consideration? When we have duly eonsidered, we shall find that Plato better deserved the title of a preacher of the Gospel, than most have do'n for many ages: For his preaching was in St. Paul's stile; he preached not the spirit of Fear, but of Love: But the modern way hath be'n quite contrary; we have heard litl of Love, but much of Fear, and our success hath be'n as dif∣ferent as our message. Now should I apply all this to the service both of the Gospel and its Ministers: but as I have not Time,
so (if what I have said be well considered) there will be no Need: Not in behalf of the Gospel, bicause if it be once freed from this vizor, its beauty will need no other persuasive to draw us to its embraces: Not in behalf of its Ministers, bicause your very Presence upon this occasion, deserveth applaus, but superse∣deth exhortation: I shall therefor say no more, but pray, that as you have begun a good work, you may go on prosperously in it; that your kindness to those who have at least a dubl titl to it, may return a thou∣sand fold in blessings upon you and yours, both in This world and the better; that the peace of God which passeth all understanding, may keep your hearts and minds &c.
ANNOTATIONS. ANnot. 1. To which may be reduced all others of the same air.] Such is that which we meet in the close of Heb. 12. Serv God acceptably with reverence and Godly fear: for our God is a con∣suming fire. This seemeth to contradict our Position both in Plain terms, and with a potent Reason: but if we carefully view the whole context, it will appear otherwise. For the words immediately 'foregoing say, Where∣for we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be mo∣ved, , let us be thankful, that we may serv God acceptably: Where that we may reconcile Fear with Thankfulness, we must look back to the premises, whence the inference is drawn, which is offered in the word Wherefor: which are no less than a Rhetorical, or rather Poetical, Amplification, of what we but now found plainly laid down We have not received the spirit of bondage again to Fear, vers. 18, 19, 20, 21. but we have received the spirit of Adoption. vers. 22, 23, 24. whence the 25th verse immediately inferreth, See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if They escaped not who refused him that spake on Earth, much more shall not We escape if we turn away from him that speaketh from Heaven: which again is re∣peted with a threat, which requireth us to look much fur∣ther back to Deut. 4.23. where Moses warneth his Israelites in these words, Take heed unto your selvs lest ye forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, for the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jelos God.
The words then being mesured by the proper design of the whole discours, must be a threatning of those that shall turn from Christ: mesured by the Premises which they attend as a Conclusion; they must import so much greater punishment to be due to those that desert the Gos∣pel, by how much the Covenant is more gratios: so that the Threat is not leveled against those that Profess the Gospel, but against those that Forsake it; and it is so far from contradicting our Position, that it is built upon its Amplification- ANnot. 2. We are miserably abused by a base Translation.] For upon no better ground than this wretched Translation is built the whole doctrine of Penance among the Papists, and the dread of Repentance among the Reformtd. The Papists, having once taken the confidence to render the indispensab'l duty  by Poenitentia, proceed to improve this their precious word, by straining it as much beyond its constant signification, as That exceedeth the import of the word, which it pretendeth only to trans∣late. For whereas [Poenitentia] in no other case signi∣fieth any more than [Repentance] i. e. Grief of mind, they have enlarged it to signifie [Penance,] which sig∣nifieth a further punishment of Body or Purs: and up∣on this dubly fals ground they have thus built their Sa∣crament. He that is fallen into sin after Baptism, cannot be restored but by the Sacrament of Penance, which consisteth of three parts, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. 1. Contrition is grief of mind in sence of guilt in∣curred. Guilt importeth obligation to Punishment; from which the sinner cannot be absolved, but by the
Priest, to whom Christ hath given power to bind and loose: This power the Priest cannot exercise with∣out knowledge of the guilt, wherewith the Penitent is bound: therefor 2. The Penitent must humb'l himself before the Priests Tribunal, (it is the very expression of Trent) with full and particular Confession of every sin, and every circumstance, submitting to such punishment as he shall prescribe, in order to Absolution: and 3. The Priest must not grant Absolution, without such Penance as may bear som proportion to the crime. For (saith the Trent meeting) Christ hath satisfied for the Crime, but not for the Punishment; which the B. of Condom hath made easier to be Ʋn∣derstood, but not easier to he Believed, by this explica∣tion: That he hath changed a greater punishment into a lesser, i. e. Eternal into Temporal. If therefor the Penitent fail either of fully confessing every sin, or of fully performing the penalty imposed; Either of These, or som other desects, must be abundantly punished with the fire of Purgatory, which cometh short of Hell only in duration. If we look for Reasons for all this, we shall find none in Scripture, but abundanco in the world. All the Abbies, Priories, Chantries, &c. in Christendom, All the pomp and grandeur of the court of Rome &c. are so many benefits of this Sacrament to the Clergy; and assurance of Absolution upon easie Penance, to the Laity. For can it be, but the Priest must be highly reveren∣ced, to who's Tribunal the greatest must creep, to who's ears they must communicate their most shameful sins, and from who's mouth they must receiv their sentence? with∣out who's help they cannot hope for pardon, and by who's help they are secure of it? Or can any person of bowels
think any cost too much, to pay off the intolerabl torments, wherein their own or their dearest friends souls may fry, they know not how long, in the flames of Purgatory? It was but lately proved that a poor Maid gave, not only all she was worth, but a Bond for a greater Summ, to a gree∣dy Priest, who refused on any cheaper terms to free her father's soul; and how often they meet such bargains in the fears of dying persons, it is impossibl to compute. God be blessed we have reformed from all the base gains which are gotten by the word Penance: but we still re∣tain too strong a tincture of its first princip'l, in point of Fear and consequent Grief, derived from the word Re∣pentance; the very sound whereof striketh so hard upon our minds, that we cannot but believ, the great Duty which is expressed by That Word, must be performed by That Passion. We do (indeed) well to distinguish between two kinds of Grief; and we do well to declare, that Grief which ari∣seth from Fear, is nothing worth, if it bring us not to that which issueth from Love: But still we stick to This, that Repentance is Grief: and that however it be not accep∣ted until it amount to Contrition, yet doth it ordinarily begin at Attrition, to which therefor we must first apply our selvs. But 1. What reason have we to believe that Attrition will bring us to Contrition? Do we conclude them neer of kin, bieause they wear the same surname? Let us not look so much to the Name, as the Family. Fear (we know) is no friend to Love; and why shall we believ that Grief which issueth from the One, must be our best mediator to the Other? 2. Why must wee needs make our first addresses to Grief of either kind? Grief is an Enemy, but Love is a Friend: It is the first mover in all our affections, even those which
seem most opposit to it: We neither Hate, nor Fear, nor Griev, but by the dictates of Love: And the Love of God will constrain us to (do, what without it we can hardly obtein of our selvs) griev when we have offended him. If we perform this great duty in the proper sence of the words, Turn to God with all our heart; the weeping and mourning will not fail to follow; nor hath the Scripture been deficient, thogh it have not prescribed them. This is not a bare contention about words, but the most practical consideration in the world: Holiness of life is highly concerned in it, as having suffered more by This than All other errors: For on One side, men are Fright∣ed by the apprehension of Grief, as an enemy to our quiet; and on the Other side, they are encoraged to hope, that this may with more ease, and equal safety be undergon, when the days com wherein we shall say, we have no pleasure in them, or when that hour cometh, when we ean do nothing else but griev. This conceit, however discountenanced by Divines, yea by Experience, which sheweth that generally men dy as im∣penitent as they live; yet so partial are we to our sins and sloth, that the word [Repent] shall carry it against all the weight that can be laid against it. And here I cannot but applaud the amendment our Church hath made in the first sentence of our Liturgy. Of old it was, At what time soever a Sinner shall Re∣pent from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, saith the Lord; which was wont to be pleaded in behalf of death-bed re∣pentance: But now the very words of the Prophet are set forth, When the wicked man turneth away from wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive:
which may infer, that the promise is made, not to Griev∣ing, but Turning; and to such Turning too, as proceedenh to contrary actions. Were our Translation of the New Testament so reformed, that in stead of Repentance we might read, Turning, Changing, Amendment, or som such honest word, as would faithfully render the Original; it would remove that unhappy tentation, which hath so much discountenanced Conversion, by representing it both Hard and Needless in Youth, Easie and Safe on the Death-bed. ANnot.3. I appeal to your Bibles.] We find one text that seems to look That way, and for That reason, as it makes much talk, so doth it deserv our care∣ful consideration. It is in 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death. These words separated from the Context, thogh they deny that Grief and Repentance be the same thing (for if the One work the Other, they must differ as the Workman doth from his Work) yet bicause they seem to import a dependence of One upon the Other, require our answer. And 1. Tho these words seem to look this way, they com short of the concept we contend against. For the most they import is this; that the Apostl's reproof had made them so sory, that they amended their falt; which certainly falleth very short of making That Repentance which the Gospel requireth of every sinner, to be no more nor less but Sorrow. 2: Those words do not look this way, as we must needs perceiv if we look about us: for Such was the Apostl's Evangelical spirit, so unwilling to exercise Punishment upon offenders, that he shunneth the very word, and expresseth it by Grieving. This
appeareth most evident in the twelfth chapter of the same Epist'l, vers. 20. I fear lest when I com I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as you would not; lest there be de∣bates, wraths, &c. and lest when I come again my God will humb'l me among you, and that I shall BEWAIL many, which have sinned already, and have not repented &c. And chap. 12.2. I told you before, and 'foretell you as if I were present the se∣cund time, and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that if I com again, I will not spare. He had in his former Epist'l reproved them for not censuring a most scandalous person, 1 Cor. 5. It is re∣ported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his fa∣thers wife; and ye are puffed up, and have not ra∣ther mourned, that he that hath do'n this deed might be taken away from among you, i. e. in the sense now mentioned, you have encouraged him, and not puni∣shed him by excommunication. In this Epist'l he taketh notice of that affair: in the seeond chapter he justifieth himself for having grieved them, approveth of their obedience, and adviseth them to absolve the criminal, now sufficiently punished. And in this chapter taketh occasion to resume it, as appeareth by v. 8. For tho I made you sory with a Letter, I do not re∣pent thogh I did repent; and more plainly v. 12. thogh I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that did the wrong, (i. e. the incestuous Son,) nor for his cause that suffered wrong, (i. e. the injured Faether,) but that our care for you in the sight of God might ap∣pear to you.
The eleventh verse, which setteth forth the fruits of their sorrow, is closed with this Epiphonema: In all things you have approved your selvs to be clear in this mater: which plainly sheweth that the sorrow which he so applaudeth, was not sorrow for any crime of their Own, and consequently was not such Repentance as is necessary for every sinner in respect to his Own sins; but an Idiom of the Apost'l, whereby he express∣eth Ecclesiastical censures: which in the tenth vers he compareth with Civil punishments, saying that the one worketh the greatest good without the least ill consequence, but the other worketh death. This exposition seemeth more necessary to enlighten the Apostl's discours, than to answer what may be thence ob∣jected. For whether you accept it or no, you cannot a∣voed acknowledging that the discours is very obscure in many of its clauses, and in its whole design: and This very Obscurity is sufficient to disable it from stablishing a fundamental doctrine. Heb. 12.12. We find Repentance from dead works Owned for a Foundation of the Gospel: Had he said Repentance FOR dead works, Grief might have plea∣ded som title; but the partic'l FROM importeth more than a Passion, and no less than Turning: to Turn from dead works is a good phrase in Grammar, as well as a good work in Morality; but to Griev From an ill work, is a stile unpractised in any language that I know, Yet this is a Foundation, and as such oght to be firmly laid: Can we then justify our Lord as no less faithful than Moses in all his hous, if nether by himself nor any of his Apost ls, he left any One Precept, so clear as to be above danger of mistake; but we must retein for all our knowledge of our Fundamental duty, to an accidental
word, occasionally dropt by our Apost'l, and that so ob∣scurely, that we cannot be secure of its meaning? Such a concept certainly will it self need Repentance. ANnot. 4. I am not sure that it is a Religios ex∣ercise.] I Therefor cannot be sure that it is a Re∣ligios exercise, much less that it is a necessary Duty, so to examin my self as is vulgarly prescribed; becaus I nei∣ther find it Enjoyned by any Precept, nor Recommended by any Examp'l in holy Scripture. I find indeed two words of St. Paul to the Corinthi∣ans, whereof the One seemeth to Intimate it, the Other expresly to Require it. The Former, 1 Cor. 17.27. Let a man Examin him∣self, and so let him eat of That Bread, and drink of that Cup: Which is generally believed to signifie, that we must Examin, whether we be worthy to receiv the Lord's Supper or no? which is not Less but More, than whether we be in the state of Grace, or no? But upon full consideration we must find, that the Apost'l cannot mean such an Examination as shall leav us in suspense, or forbid our Communicating, (for the very same breath absolutely requireth us to do it without any exception or limitation,) but such as shall prevent the crime he there reproveth, which was their doing it in an unworthy Manner: To which end it is not necessary to examin, what Right we have to the Lord's Supper, but what Reverence? not what we have already do'n, but what we are about to do? And whatever self-examination exceedeth this end, will be Impertinent; whatever hindreth the Performance of the later clause of the Precept, (so let him Eat,) will be Opposit to the Apostl's intentions, as at large is proved in the foregoing Treatise, and is now further confirmed; if the practice of such self-examination be useless and
prejudicial, not only in order to the Sacrament, but to all other good purposes. The other word, which seemeth expresly to require us to examin our interest in Christ, we meet 2 Cor. 13.5. Examin your selvs, whether you be in the saith, prove your own selvs, know you not that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? But all the foregoing and following context will forbid us to imagin, that the Apost'l should require them to examin themselvs concern∣ing what was not then in question or mention. It is plain that his discourse reflecteth upon the punishment which they had Formerly Neglected, and upon his admonition Lately Inflicted, upon a most scandalous offender; yet so, that som among them seemed to question His authority, and perhaps That of the Church, for so doing, and there∣for seek a proof of Christ speaking in him. Such per∣sons in the now-recited words he admonisheth to examin themselvs, not concerning their interest in Christ by his saving grace, but concerning their relation to him as a visib'l Church, and their consequent authority to judge those that are within, as in the former Epist'l he ex∣presseth it. Our Incomparab'l Dr. Hammond hath to this sense paraphrased this text; wherein he supposeth that  signifieth, not IN, but AMONG you; and that the A∣post'l thereby alludeth to Exod. 17.7. where the tem∣ting contumacios Israelites, after all the signs and mi∣racl's shewed among them, ask in these very words, , is the Lord among us or no? so that the meaning of the Apostl's question here is; many mi∣racl's of Christ and his Spirit have be'n wroght a∣mong you, so that if you do not believ that I am an Apost'l, and so that Christ is among you, you are (sure) of the number of those Israelites, who after so
many mirac'ls still required more signs. Thus our Excellent Doctor. But if we will not look fo far, we shall find a fair occa∣sion for the word IN, and for his playing with the word Reprobate too, in the third verse. Whereas you seek , a Proof of Christ speaking In me: Examin it well, and you shall find him in your selvs, when you censure such offenders as are within; if not, you are : which word, that it cannot here signify Reprobates in that strict sens, appeareth, bicause he immediately ad∣deth, I hope you shall find that We are not Repro∣bate: but he descanteth upon their own word , re∣peating it no less than five times in two verses, in a sence which must therefor answer their own: You seek an Evidence of Christ speaking in Me, as in his A∣post'l: I have already pleaded, that If I be not an A∣post'l to Others, yet doubtless I am to You, for the seal of mine Apost'lship are ye in the Lord, and I need no other evidence: Examin therefore your selvs, whether ye be in the faith which I preached among you: Do ye not know that Christ is in You, as in his Church planted by my ministry, except ye be vile persons, which have no () appearance of Christi∣anity? This the context evidenceth to be the true meaning of those words, who's singl voice must outvote a multitude of other express texts, and the fundamental design of the Gospel, which invite us to rejoice in God. WE are miserably mistaken in the rules and me∣sures,] as may appear, not only by the Reason glanced at from their dangeros tendency, or by the Silence of Scripture, which in mater of duty is equivalent to a Ne∣gative; but by the contrary conduct of the Apost'l in
governing this exercise. For however his words seem to prescribe self-examination as every mans duty, yet doth he plainly direct it to a quite contrary purpose. His words are, Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his ownwork: Let Every man without exception; Prove , examin, his own Work, in the most compre∣hensive sense (as the French express a man's whole busi∣ness by son fait) else will the Plaster be too narrow for the Sore, which is discovered in the words immediatly 'fore∣going,; If a man think himself to be som thing when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself: All this seemeth to amount to no less than Let every man examin the state of his own soul, that he may not be deceived, but certainly understand, whether he be a lively member of Christ or no. I shall not fence with these words, by pleading that by Every man is meant Every man Concerned in the ad∣vice, which is directed only to them which are Spiritual; or that by  is meant not only Prove, but Ap∣prove: but, which is much better, I shall mesure the Pla∣ster by the Sore, the Meaning of the Words by the De∣sign of the Author; which the first verse discovereth to be Charity to offenders: the Means prescribed for this good end is Self-consideration: 1. Consideration of hu∣man frailty, whereto while himself is subject, he is nei∣ther above the Reach, nor secure against the Power of the tentation. 2. Consideration of his own Experience, which if he examin, may inform him, that himself hath be'n guilty, perhaps of the Same, perhaps of Great crimes. This is the plain design of the precept: it is prescribed as a specifik against a particular evil, to cauterize the proud flesh, to lance the swelling apostem, to divert the sharp humor, from our neighbors to our own weakness or wickedness; to pass from judging another to judging
our selvs; wherein we shall have better Evidence, better Autority, and better Success. And what success doth the Apost'l promise? Is it, thou shalt be frighted at thy danger, and confounded with thy guilt? This (indeed) one would expect, as most serviceab'l to the purpose in hand: but bicause it is least so, to the general design of the Gospel, the Apost'l turneth short to a quite contrary inference, and then shall he have re∣joycing. How careful, that no particular precept should cross the Ʋniversal! that his Precepts should have no wors consequent than his Reproofs! But may clear them∣selvs, and say, as he did in his Apology to the Corinthi∣ans, for having made them sory, 2 Coo. 7.9. you have received damage by us in nothing; which this exer∣cise can hardly be able to plead, if fear hold the scales, and we weigh our selvs by grains and scruples, and those authorized only by the precarios dictates of melancholy. Our Apost'l hath plainly enogh told us, that our ad∣aequate mark is Faith working by Love: If hereby we examin our selvs, the work will be neither tedios in the Performance, nor tormenting in the Issu. Not tedios in the Performance: for it cannot (sure) require much skill, time, or labor, to search whether I love or no? I look no further than mine own bowels for assurance, whether I love this or that neighbor or kinsman; and why may they not with the same ease and certainty secure me whether I love God or no? Nor tormenting in the Issu: for at worst I shall be put to no wors penance or task, than to labor for a greater Me∣sure of Love; and all Love's tasks are full of pleasure. To ly down and afflict my self with grief for want of Love, or (as is prescribed in the second place) for want of grief, or with fear for want of any kind of grief &c. is more likely to quench Love than to inflame it. But to
apply my affections to the original of all loveliness, the in∣finite beauties of God in his own perfections, the glories of his goodness towards his creatures, and to my self in par∣ticular, &c. is certainly of all exercises most proper for this end, and most pleasant in the practise: This must needs be the fittest ground for the fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace. ANnot. 5. Nothing certainly but Fearfulness.] It may be worth observing, how the light of Nature concurreth with that of the Gospel, to cast out this spirit. For as in All Ages, Nations, and Religions, it hath pos∣sessed and tormented the Weakest; so hath it in them All be'n exorcised by the Wisest. The Greeks gave it a name which expresseth its Na∣ture, the Latins gave it one that expresseth its Operaetions, for  sheweth it in its Cause; Superstition, in its Effects: That, signifieth Fearfulness towards God; This, signifyeth Overdoing our duty toward him: yet Both agree in the same apprehensions. For when the Greeks describe its Operations, they paint them with the very same colours as do the Latins, witness Theophra∣stus's Character: and again, when the Latins define its Nature, they do it by the very name which the Greeks have given it; witness Varro, who maketh this the es∣sential difference between Religion and Superstition; that the Superstitios Fear the Gods, while the Religios reverence them as Parents, but do not fear them as Enemies: and what is this other than St Paul's do∣ctrine? You have not received the spirit of Fear, but you have received the spirit of Adoption. Seneca more Laconically giveth us account both of its Nature and Effects: Superstitio error insanus, amandos ti∣met, quos colit, violat: Superstition is a mad error;
whom it should love, it feareth; whom it worshippeth, it slandereth. And more largely in another place: Si∣cui intueri vacet, quae patiuntur superstitiosi, inve∣nies tam indecora honestis, tam indigna liberis, tam dissimilia sanis, ut nemo fuerit dubitaturus furere eos, si cum paucioribus furerent. If any one be at leisure to view what the superstitious suffer, you shall find things so disgraceful for gentlemen, so unworthy of free men, so unsuitabl to sound men, that no man would doubt but they were mad, were they mad with fewer companions. Give us who can, a better explication of those words of St. Paul, which call it, the spirit of bon∣dage, and oppose it to the spirit of Power, of Love, and of a Sound mind. And all this St. Paul spoke of the Law of Moses, which had been nothing else but Superstition, had not God authorised it: For as throughout the Old Testament Fear is Godliness; so in all the ceremonies of the Law, Obedience hallowed the exercises. For as I said but now, Superstition, however exploded by the Wisest, ever possessed the Weakest, that is, the Great∣est part of mankind: And at That time, the world was not capabl to have it Cured, but only Fomented. And that upon That very account the Law imposed such exercises as the Gospel forbids, we have a clear discours of St, Paul, in the beginning of the fourth chapter to the Galatians Now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, thogh he be Lord of all, but is under tutors and governors, until the time appointed of the father; even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the Elements ( the a, b, c,) of the world. But when the fulness of time was com, God sent forth his Son made of a woman made under the law, to redeem
them that were under the law, that we might receiv the adoption of sons. And bicause ye are sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba, father. Wherefor thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God throgh Christ. In this discours you have a full discovery of Supersti∣tion, its Nature, its Operations, and its Abolition. 1. Its Nature, childishness, requiring the discipline of Fear to govern it: 2. Its Exercises, childish, weak, and beggar∣ly Elements, the first letters that children learn. 3. Its Cure, the spirit of Adoption, sent forth into the hearts of Gods children now grown up to manhood. Ʋpon this discours how justly doth he ground his ex∣postulation, ver. 9. Now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye a∣gain to the weak and beggarly elements, wherein you desire again to be in bondage? When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thoght as a child, but when I became a man, I put away childish things. When mankind was unripe in Age, it was so in Ʋnderstanding, and no wonder its Ex∣ercises should be suitabl. It was governed by the rod, and busied about ceremonies; but now it is com to man∣hood, you are called to have fellowship with the Fa∣ther, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Jo. 1.3. to be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and con∣sequently of his Wisdom and Holines, his Loves, and his Hates: and therefore to approve things that are ex∣cellent. Phil. 1.10. How is it then, that you still spend your time, your strength, and your labour in whipping of topps, bandying of balls, and playing with nuts, no less childish in your imaginations, than the law of Moses could either Find, or Make you?
Thus did the Apostl rebuke the Galatians, and what would he have said to this and som preceding generati∣ons, which have outgo'n both Jews and Gentiles in this childishness? and that especially in two great respects. 1. We find not that either Jews or Gentiles disquieted themselvs about maters of mere Belief, thogh they did about maters of Action. 2. Nor that they disturbed the peace of their Nations, thogh they did that of their own Minds. 1. They disquieted not themselvs with maters of mere belief, conceiving that the true worship of God consisted not in Disputing, but Imitating his Perfe∣ctions. But we, in mere honor to the glorious promises which are made to Believing, have multiplied Articls of Faith, and Questions upon every Articl, and Doubts up∣on every Question; and every one of these we call maters of Faith, and mater of Faith we take to be mater of Sal∣vation, and if we mistake in the One, we believ we shall miss of the Other. Hence is it that Catholik and Here∣tik among the Romanists, Orthodox and Heterodox among the Beformed, sound so terribly as to fray many a good man, if not quite out of his Wits, yet (which is al∣most as bad) out of his Corage to use them. Reason, we are told, must not presume to medl in ma∣ters of Faith, but we must deny our selvs, no less in our Rational faculties, than in our Sensual appetites; for it is no less impious to Disbeliev God's word, than to Diso∣bey his command: And in This, they speak, not only Truth, but Reason, which therefor they justify by exer∣cising. But, as it is in Moral vertues, so is it in Faith; it lieth between two extremes, Defect on One hand, and Ex∣cess on the Other. It is no less frequent in maters of Faith than in Manners, to teach for Doctrines of God
the Commandments of Men; in the One tormenting the Mind with needless Mysteries, as in the Other, the Body with needless Penances. But to Faith what could have be'n more incongruos? Repentance, indeed, in its very name carrieth a sower countenance, importing a mortification of our Natural appetites, and consequently a pain to our hearts: But Faith, who's proper object is Glad-tidings, might justly claim, not only freedom from Pain, but such fulness of joy, as should cast out the grief even of Repentance; whereas now it is made the harder taskmaster of the two. For however painful it be, it is not impossibl, to cut off hands, or feet, or pull out eys; but our Reason is not only the Ey, but the Heart of our Soul, not to be cutt or pluckt off: Tormented indeed it may be, and most in those who have most improved it, as the clearest ey is always tenderest: and stupified it may be, yet not to such a privation, but that it will ever and anon feel anxios fits of melancholy, doubting of the truth of som things which are received as matters of Faith, and consequently of our title to Salva∣tion for want of Faith. Few can at all times bost with the Physician, there are not impossibilities enogh in Religion, and fewer with the Father, credo quia impossibile est. It is hard to apprehend, how any thing can be at once True and Im∣possib'l; but to make the very Impossibility, a reason why I should believ it, let St. Paul judg, whether this be not cum ratione insanire. For when he would perswade a belief of the Resurrection, he did not urge the impossibili∣ty but the contrary: Why should it be thoght a thing incredib'l that God should raise the dead? and when hereupon Festus charged him with madness, he replied, I am not mad, but speak the words of truth and soberness. What Soberness can there be in a quite
contrary argument, yea, what plainer madness, than to talk such extravagant inconsistences, as infer credibility from impossibility? What other spirit but that of Fear could thus confound mens understandings? Fear, of all passions the most infa∣tuating; Fear, which most frequently blindeth the most piercing judgments; Fear, which maketh every shadow a man, and every bush a thief, and every thief a murtherer; Fear, and only fear, can so disorder our minds, that we think it equally necessary to salvation, to believ the nice∣ties of Schoolmen, and the Doctrines of the Gospel; and distrust our interest in Christ, if we can neither satisfie, nor destroy our reason, when it cannot comply with contra∣dictions, which he never enjoyned us to believ. 2. Much less did they embroil the publik peace with controversies in Religion: Whereas among Chri∣stians, there is not any question so nice in point of Belief, or so slight in point of Worship; but hath be'n able to en∣gage whole Families in the fiercest contentions, and whole Nations in most bloody wars; yea, for two or three ages there hath hardly b'en a rebellion, whereof Religion hath not be'n either the Real or Pretended cause. And This, as it is more notoriosly scandalous than the now mentioned disquiets of private persons, so is it (if possibl) more directly opposit to the most earnest endeavours of the Gospel: which doth indeed very frequently exhort us to joy and comfort in our own spirits; but much more earnestly and solenly provoke us to love and peace toward others: Yea, Love maketh so great a figure in almost every page of the New Testament, that it seemeth not on∣ly the Supreme, but almost the Only grace: It looks like unlawful to fight upon Any occasion whatsoever; but to fight for Religion, seemeth no less contradictious, than to fight for Love: And that the Only Religion which com∣mandeth
to beat swords into plow-shares, should be the only religion that forgeth plow-shares to swords; is a fa∣naticism so irrational, as nothing but Fear could have produced. The summ therefor is This: The light of Nature a∣greeth with that of the Gospel, to declare, that we are not to serv God for Fear, but Love: What our Apost'l opposeth to a Sound mind, that our Philosopher caleth a mad error; but the madness is incomparably greater in a Christian, than ever it was, or indeed could possibly be, in a Heathen: For as it is the utmost extravagance of frensy, to beat our selvs, or our friends; so in this we ex∣ceed the Heathen, that many among Ʋs, but none among Them, disturb their own souls with anxios doubts concer∣ning Faith, or imbroil their Nation with bloody wars upon difference of opinions in Doctrine or Worship; so is it more monstrosly mad in a Christian, by how much more clearly and solenly the Gospel hath labored to pre∣vent the one and the other, by declaring that we have not receved the slavish and mad spirit of Fear, but of Power and Love, and of a sound mind. And again, that The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteosness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, for he that in these things serveth Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men: This upright and erect walking, this frank and chearful, this manly yea divine freedom of spirit, as it maketh men more Like God, so doth it make them more Acceptabl to him; it will not on∣ly vindicate religion from the obloquies of its enemies, who either despise or fear it, as a curb to generosity and free∣dom; but recommend it to them as most noble and plea∣sant: nor will it only silence our quarrels, but endear us in mutual affection. FINIS.
