d749 12676707 65577
A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of the ARMY. BEING Severall Papers delivered to the Commissioners of the Parliament & Citie, from the Generall and his Councell of Warre, at Alisbury July 23. 1647. ALSO, A Petition and engagement, drawn up in the name of the Citizens Commanders, Officers and Souldiers of the Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries; and Apprentizes of the Cities of London and West∣minster: Sea Commanders, Officers, Sea-men, and Wa∣termen: with diverse others, &c. VVhereunto is annexed a PROCLAMATION from his Ex∣cellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Against the entertainment of Cavaleers in the Army. By the appointment of the Generall, and his Councell of VVarre. Signed IOHN RUSHWORTH. OXFORD, Printed by . and H. and published for the satisfaction of the Kingdome, 1647.
A PAPER FROM THE ARMY, DELIVERED JN TO THE Commissioners of the Parliament and City, at Alisbu∣ry. July 23. 1647. My Lords and Gentlemen. WEE received this inclosed paper the last night, from the hand of a very well ffectd Citizen, It was delivered him by an Officer of the Citie Militia, who being invited to meet some Citizens at Skinners Hall upon Wednesday last, with divers others to signe the same, and offering to dispute against the mater of it, and to shew how dangerous and illegall it was, was silenced, and told that that it was not to be disputed, but to be signed and joyned in: there being divers Citizens and others at the same place for that purpose, which when he understood he tooke this printed copie away with him. By the contents of which when you read it, you will easily perceive what it tends to, and how desperate and dangerous it is to the hazzard of the whole Kingdome, and to frustrate all those endeavours of the Parliament, the Army and Kingdome for a happy settlement: And likewise to precipitate all into a new and bloody warre. We cannot therefore but acquaint you that we looke at this as a business set on foot, by the mallice of some desperate minded men, this being their last engine for the putting all into confusion, when they could not accomplish their wicked ends by other meanes. To this have all secret listings tended, and we with that tht needless and superfluous listing of Auxiliaries, and coance at the continuance of the Reformadoes about the Cities of London and Westminster, have not had the same aime, and by this we hope it will appeare that our jealousies and feares of some such desperate designes to be hatched in and about the City (considering the temper of men there) have not been groundless, nor our desires to draw neare the City of London with the Army to disappoint and breake all such plots, and to free the Parliament from the violence of them, have not been with∣out just cause: And we desire all indifferent men to judg, whether our withdrawing from the City in obedience to the Parliaments command, was for their and the Kingdomes security or not? We wonder that divers men did calumniate that our marching so near the City, and put so bad representations upon it,  that it tended to force the Parliament, or  plunder the City, seeing our doing so was to breake that black dgre which now begins to shew it selfe in its colour. Whereas indeed our consciences witnes with , that our aime were cleare and honest, tending to restore the Parliament into its just liberty which was much abated in the eyes of all the Kingdome, and no doubt by the authors and contrivers of this new Covenant and  whereof have been so farre from assisting to put the Reformadoes, and other dangerous persons out of the lines▪ that now they have called them to joyne in the conspiracy. We intreat you to give the  representation of these things, which that you may doe, we have sent you the papers ogether with such information as may give them an opportunity to discover the bottome of this business. We were marching from
London when we received this information in obedience to the Parliament, and to give the City more content and to stop the mouth of slanderers. But if such designes so distructive to the Parliament, and the worke in hand be suffered to go on, or that the Parliament be interrupted in the freedome of their debates and proceedings as we heare within this few dayes, they were by those that are invited in this confederacy, We beg it of the Parliament, as they tender their own safety, the peace of the Kingdome, and preventing of a second warre, as they would not have the Kingdome loose the fruit and benefit of all that blood and treasure that hath been spent in this cause that they do not suffer their freedome and liberty to be indangered by such designes as these, they having an Army, which by the blessing of God in spight of all that their and the Kingdomes enemies can doe, will stand and fall with them, and be found faithfull and obedient to them in all things, and as ready to relieve Ireland when the peace and right of this Kingdome are setled. We write not this to desire the Parliament to invite us to march up to them, we care not how great a distance we are from London, if it be the Parliaments pleasure, and con∣sists with their security, and the breaking of those combinations which are hatcht in the bowels of that City. We are hastning our proposals which are for the generall settlement, and which we are confident will satisfie all that love truth and peace. But we see plainly, we need more to intend security, then have cause to expect to bring things to a happy issue by treaty, whilst such designes are on foot. We pray you therefore that the Parliament would speedily and throughly inquire into, and breake these designes, wherein as in all things else we shall be ready to serve them, as they shall judge it needfull, and when they shall command us.
A PAPER DELIVERED TO THE COMMISSIO∣NERS OF THE CITIE. BY a Printed Paper come to our hands this day, (a Copy whereof you receive herewith) we still fnd▪ and clearely perceive that some evill Spirits within the City of London malliciously disaffected to the Peace of the Kingdome; do secretly and wickedly endeavour to bring about that mischiefe upon the Kingdome, which wee have so much feared; and by all our addres unto you sought to prevent; which indeed are of that dangerous consequence, as we can expect no other issue from, then the unavoidable engaging of the Kingdome in a second Warre; if not timely and effe∣ctually prevented by your wisdome and diligence: we must further observe unto you, that whatsoever Designe is intended in the foresaid Paper, it is contrary to the Authori∣ty of Parliament and direct opposite to the proceedings of the Army, which the two Houses have owned as theirs, and approved of their Fidellity, by committing the For∣ces of the Kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales, and Islands of Garnsey, and Jersey under the Generals care▪ and command▪ and therefore cannot be effected but by force of Armes against the Parliament and their Armies, which in probabillity may in∣volve the whole Kingdome in blood, but must necessarily begin within your own bow∣ells, and draw the seat and miserie of warre upon you and your City. Also we desire you would consider whether we have not just cause to suspect, that an evil party lurkes within the City ready to distemper it, and the whole kingdome upon every occasion, and whether it be probable such persons desire a happy close between the King and his Parliament (at least such as will be for the Kingdomes good) which take upon them the boldness to make new offers to his Majesty, with solemn ingage∣ments to make good the same during the time that the Parliament, hath given us leave to make tender of and treat with their Commissioners about those things which tend to a generall ettlement, and therefore we cannot but desire that you would take a speedy course timeously to suppress this great evill, and to prevent all of this nature for the fu∣ure, by making some of those examples, who have been active to carry on this business, we have not had time to inquire into particulars, but shall give you only one instance of a meeting at Skinners Hall concerning this business, where some persons have been very active, the names of some of whom we have given to your Commissioners, and also the names of other citizens who will testifie their carriage there. Lastly, We cannot but desire your concurrence in our desire to the parliament to put the Militia into the hands of those that had it before, without which we can have no assurance that your City will be free from designes of this nature, nor can we expect to see a happy close. Alsbury July 23. By the appointment of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAJRFAX, and his Counsell of warre. John Rushworth.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE THE LORD MAJOR, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE ALDER∣men and Common-Counsell of the City of London, in the Common or Guild-Hall of the Gity of London assembled. The Humble Petition of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, the Young-men Apprentices of the Cities of London and Westminster, Sea-Com∣manders, Sea-Officers, Sea-men, and VVater-men, together with divers other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers within the line of Communication, and parishes mentioned in the weekly bills of Mortallity. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners (taking into serious consideration, how Religi∣on, his Maiesties honour and safety, the Priviledges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Subject are at present greatly indangered, and like to be distroyed. And also weighing with our selves what meanes might likely prove effectuall to procure a firme and lasting peace, without a further effusion of Christian blood; have there∣fore entered, into a solemn Ingagement, which is hereto annexed, and doe humbly and earnestly desire, that this whole City may joyne together by all lawfull meanes as one man in hearty indeavours for his Majesties present comming up o his two Houses of Parliament, with honour, safety and freedome, (and that with∣out the nearer approach of the Army) and to confirme such things as he hath granted in his Message of the 12. of may, last, in answer to the propositions of both Kingdomes, that by that personall Treaty with his two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scotland▪ such things as yet are in difference may be speedily setled and a firme and lasting peace established. All which we desire may be presented to both Houses of Parliament, by this honourable Assembly.
A SOLEMNE INGAGEMENT OF THE CJTJZENS COM∣manders, Officers and Soldiers of the Trained Bands and Auxi∣liaries, the Young-men and Apprentices of the Cities of London and Westminster, Sea-commanders, Sea-men and Water-men. Together with divers other Commanders, Officers and Sol∣diers within the Lines of Communica∣tion, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bill of mortallity. WHereas we have entered into a solemn League and Covenant for Reformation▪ and defence of Religion; the honour and happiness of the King, and the peace and safety of the three Kingdomes of England, Scotland and Ireland, all which we doe eminently perceive not only to be indangered but ready to be destroyed: We doe therefore in pursuance of our said Covenant, Oath of Allegiance, Oath of every free∣man of the Cities of London and Westminster, and Protestatic as solemnly ingage our selves, and vow unto almighty God, that we will to the utmost of our power, cordially indeavour that his Majesty may Speedily come to his two houses of Parliment▪ with honour safety and freedome (and that without the nearer approach of the Army) there to confirme such things as he hath granted in his message of the 12. of May last. In ans∣wer to the Propositions of both Kingdomes, and by a personall Treaty with his two hou∣ses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scotland, such things as are yet in difference may be speedily setled, and a firme and lasting peace established: for the effecting hereof, We doe protest and re-obleige our selves as in the presence of God the searcher of all hearts, with our lives and fortunes, to indeavour what in us lyes to preserve and defend his Majesties royall person and authority, the previledges of Par∣liament, and liberties of the Subject in their full and constant freedome, the Cities of London and Westminster, Lines of Communication, and parishes mentioned in the Weekly bills of Mortality, and all other that shall adhere with us to the said Cove∣nant, Oath of Allegiance, Oath of every free man of London and Westminster, and Pro∣testation, nor shall wee by any meanes admit, suffer or indure any kind of neutrality in this common cause of God, the King and Kingdome, as we doe expect the blessing of Almighty God, whose helpe we crave, and wholly devolve our selves upon in this our undertaking.
A PRCOLAMATION, From his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAJRFAX, con∣cerning the putting Cavaliers out of the Army. I do hereby require the chiefe officer present with every Troup, and Company, to make strict enquiry what Cavaliers have been listed and entertained in their Troups and Com∣panies, since the Muster preceding the last muster; and that all such chiefe Officers shall presently upon such enquiry as before, put them forth of Troups and Companies from such Muster as befoe: and that before they receive any pay upon this last Muster, they shall expunge the names of all such Cavaliers out of their Muster-rolls, as they shall have put out of their Troups and Companies: and if it shall hereafter appeare that any chiefe Officer present with their Troups or Companies, shall neglect to put forth, or Cashiere such Cavaliers in manner as before; or receive any for the time to come; upon proofe made thereof, he shall be lyable to a Coun∣cell of VVarre, and be proceeded against accordingly. Given unde my hand, July 23. 1647. FAJRFAX.
