E41 99834517 39018
The Toutch-Stone of MONY and COMMERCE: Or an Expedient For increase of Trade, Mony, and Shiping In England. Shewing also how the Arrears of the Army, and other Publique Debts, may be forthwith Satisfied, without laying more Impositions upon the People, or Burthen on Trade. Together with CVSTOME and EXCISE REGVLATED. Wherein is manifest the Destruction of Trade, by its Irregular mannagement at present: with means to prevent the like Inconvenience for time to come. By S. E. A Lover of his Country. LONDON. Printed at the Authors Charge, for his Countries good: and are to be sold at the Turcks Head in Crn-hill, near the Royall Exchange.
To the Supream Authority, the Parliament of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND. Right Honourable, I Know you cannot be Ignorant of the (at present) Deplo∣rable Estate of England, whose former Plenty, and Freedome, of Commerce, hath sounded as Ecchoes of Tryumph to all Nations round about her: and in despite of envy or their Emulating her happiness, made her Trade the Worlds Exchange: untill of late years (for such is her un∣happiness) her Millions of plenty are grown to complaints, and such her Commerce into a Languishing consumption: so universally dispersed that even the greatest of her Gentry complain for want of Mony, whilst their Tenants groan under the burthen of Contribution and Taxes; The Mar∣chant and Mariner, too late sorrowing for their loss of no less then 1300 Sail of Ships since the Warr with Spain, whereof many richly laden; to the ruine of their Owners and Proprietors; when others yet Trading, and paying Excise, with other great Duties, complain more for the Intollerable burthen by the manner of Collecting it, then the duty it self: the laws of Excise being in truth contrived (as if purposely) to mantain a numerous rabble of Excise-men, the most use∣less and unprofitable members in a Common-wealth: who making themselves gainers by the ruine of Trade, go away with the greatest share of the revennue, whilst the private Souldier for want of pay is brought to a kind of beggarry; being driven to take upon trust, (where they can have it,)
the very meat they eat; and considering their penni-worths to pay dear for the Interest. All which together with the com∣plaints of many, Thousands poor Families distressed throughout the Nation, for want of Trade, being considered, I hope will so work upon your spirits, (now the Lord hath a∣gain, I presume beyond your own Expectations brought you together) that you will not rest till you have Improved this opportunity once more put into your hands of doing good for your Country, to which end you are called; wherein the Lord will undoubtedly own you, and those yet unborn be Obliged to Honour your remembrance. And apprehending that amongst other waighty affaires that of raising Monies for time to come, for supply of the Army, and Navy of the Common-wealth, by the most equi∣table and properest waies, not burthensome to the Nation, with the increase of Trade, Mony, and Shiping, (all so much wanting in England) are not the least of Importance: and having had the perusal of the several reports, and pro∣posals made this Parliament and Committee of Inspection, with all others that have written in reference thereunto; I have upon serious consideration substracted the most sutable and (as I apprehend) properest collections from the whole, and have taken liberty to publish it, with some additions of my own observations in England, and Experience in For∣rain parts: which, when receiving the Honour of your debate, will I hope merrit the favour of your good likeing, and the Authour have his expected reward, by being an Instrument of promoting the good and welfare of his Country. S E.
The Toutch-stone of MONY and COMMERCE. AMongst the diversity of Mettalls which God the Creator hath shut up in the concave Closet of the Earth; none is accounted more Excel∣lent than Gold, and Silver; which since it became in use amongst men may properly be termed the Vniver∣sall measure of all things, and the Staple of Commerce, which in All Ages, and Nations, where it goes drives the Wheel of Trade and Success. I shall therefore (since the World gives it that Esteem) begin with its Standard as in vallew here amongst us. The Allay, or standard of England (I mean the Intrin∣cical The English Standard bet∣ter then For∣rain. vallew of Plate) being inferiour to none, if not the best and purest of Europe. and the large proportion in waight allowed to our pound Sterling, gives it the great∣er vallue in Forrain parts, and is therefore by them the more covetted: so that its par or vallue runing higher in the North-East parts of the World then our Native Commodities; England is by that means made but the Carravan for its transportation from the South-West parts thither; and by reason of the Warr with Spain, (a place that vended much of English manufa∣ctures) together with the Obstruction by us given, the Spanish West-India-Fleet which occasioned Plate to Plate decreased and the reason why. run at a higher vallue there; England hath of late years been prevented of Importing Plate as Formerly; and her exports thereof greater by reason of the loss of her
Southern Trade, from whence her Marchants usually sent Commodities for Holland and other Northern Countries of the production of English goods, which now are bought from the Dutch and others their Neighbours with English Coyn: who by that means are become almost Masters, both of our Mony and Trade, which will prove of dangerous consequence to England, if not timely prevented. Another reason of the Decrease of Plate, is by the a∣bundance thereof melted down, and converted to the Plate Melted down. making of Silver and Gold Lace, Buttons, and the like, in which un-necessary superfluity in the three Nations, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, is wasted no less then two hundred Thousand pounds Sterling Yearly, by a very good estimate of knowing persons dealing therein. Also there is a great demunition of the Coyne of England, by converting it into Tankards, Bowls, and o∣ther By Gold∣smiths. Vessels of Plate, which in a super-abounding mea∣sure we dayly see in Gold-Smiths Shops, and Gentlemen and Cittizens Houses: far exceeding the Estates and For∣tunes of most of them, which though convenient for private uses, yet tends to the decrease of Monyes, and the Publique Stock of the Nation, and consequently to the decay of Trade: which is contained in a proposal late presented the Committee of Safety by one Mr. Marshall, unto whom I give this remembrance, Mr Marshalls Proposals. though I know not the Author. And having I hope sufficiently laid down the reasons of the decrease, and exportation of English Coyn, which Gold and Sil∣ver exported, how to be pre∣vented. is too apparent in the scarcety of Gold, but of late Years more frequently passing then Silver; and by the few half Crowns left in comparison of the aboundance
Coyned since the Warr in England, (they being the most profitable to be exported, or melted down, as be∣ing least worn, and waying more proportionably then smaler Coyn, from the Mint, by so much as the labour of Coynage is less:) I now propose the means for en∣crease thereof, with advance to Trade and the Pub∣lique Revennue. That from hence forward the English Shilling may The English shillings to be made less. contain in wait but 11d, and the Silver to be a penny courser; so that 10d in vallue according to the present Standard may futurely be allowed taken and re∣puted for 12d Sterling, and so be Stamped; and the standard fixed according to that vallue; all other Coyn runing alike in proportion. That the Mint in London, with others to be erected The Mint to be set going, and all Mony new Coyned. in the most proper places of England, Scotland, and Ireland, may be set going; and all Monyes in the States hands above the vallue of groats (the smaler being worn and not considerable to return a profit,) may be forthwith new Coyned according to that standard: and by degrees calling in the old Coyn and paying the owners again with new, (they allowing for all Clypt, and Broken,) all the Mony in England will (without obstruction of Trade) be new Coyned into more ne∣cessary peeces as ⅔ parts into half Crowns, and the o∣ther ⅓ into Shillings, and Six pences, whereof at present there is to great a proportion, as being the more troble∣some in counting; The Spaniard being so expert in this manner of new Coyning his Mony, that I have known all the Brass Mony of his Kingdome (which cannot be less in number of peeces then 6 times the Sterling Mony in England,) new Coyned in two moneths time, which I here intimate to shew the facility
of that, which some perhaps may think to be a work of great difficulty: But not approving of that cheat in Spain, I return to prevent the Cheats that some may also sug∣gest will be practised in England, by false Coyning, To prvent cheats in falce Coynage. though for my own part, I apprehend need not be feared. That it may be ordered upon some penalty that all Mony within London and lines of Communication may be brought into the Guild-Hall, or some other safe place within the Citty: Or otherwise into some treasu∣ry to be appointed in every Parish; there to remain as in Banck until new Mony be given in Exchange: so that all sums considerable (contracted for by Marchants or others) may be aswell paid from one to another in Banck, as if actually told and delivered: the experience Moni to be brought into Bank. whereof we find continueally practised in Holland, Genoway, and amongst other Bankers, who find both ease and profit thereby; and I think would be also of great use in England, if here erected. And for all petty sums for pocket use, it will presently be supplyed by the Monyes first to be issued out of the Mint. The like manner of bringing their Monies into a Treasury may be observed in other Citties and places of Commerce; and no Monies be suffered to pass in payments but of the new Coyn Provided that any sum of Monies paya∣ble at a day certain by persons either of Citty or Coun∣try; if delivered into the next Bank or Treasury; may be held paid, and Credit given for so much to the per∣son that of right ought to have it. And since I have hint∣ed at a Bank, I shall give the manner of it; I suppose not known to all persons, but worth observation to some. A Bank is a Certain number of sufficient men of Credit and Estates joyned together in a stok, as it
for keeping several mens Cash in one Treasury; and The nature of a Bank. letting out imaginary Mony at Interest, for 2 ½, or 3 per Cent. to Trades-men, or others that agree with them for the same: and making payment thereof by assig∣nation, passing each mans account from one to another; yet paying no monies: in so much, that if a Marchant or other person want Mony: If he have or can but pro∣cure credit in Bank, he may make as good payment by assignment in Bank without it. As for Example, the said Marchant buyes Cloath of a Cloathier for 100 lb. value more or less, and goes with him to the Bank, where he is debtor for so much monies as he takes up; and the Clothier is made Creditor for so much as he sold his goods for to the said Marchant: Then such Clothier having occasion to pay Mony to a Stapler or Wool-monger for Wool bought, the said Clothier is made Debtor, and the Wool-monger Creditor upon account: the said Wool-monger buys Wool of a Coun∣try Farmer, for so much Mony, more or less; so the Wool-monger is made Debtor, and the Farmer Credi∣tor: the Farmer must pay Rent to his Landlord, and is likewise made Debtor, and his Landlord Creditor: the said Landlord for his occasions buys good of a Mercer, Grocer, Vintner, or the like, or from all; then he is made Debtor, and such Mercer or other Trades-man Creditor: then peradventure such Mercer or other Trads-man buyes goods from the same Marchants that took up the first Credit in Bank, and stands yet Debtor there, but upon sale of his goods to the Mercer, or o∣ther Trads-man both clears their accounts in Bank: and so in all Trads; as occasion presents, which is practi∣sed in many places as aforesaid, and is of very great use and advantadge to Trade; the payment made therein
being generally esteemed better by ½ per Cent. then out of Bank, as preventing troble and the receiving Clipt or bad Mony: but being already published at large in Mr Lambs de∣scription there∣of: a Book writen by Mr. Lamb, who is worthy of incou∣ragement therein: I shall not stay longer hereon, but re∣turn to my purpose. That to prevent the melting down of any Coyn, by Gold-Smiths or others, to the prejudice of the State and To prevent the melting down of Plate. decrease of Monies: An Impossition of 12d upon eve∣ry ounce of Silver, and the like proportionably upon Gold, may be laid upon all Plate already wrought, and to be wrought into any form for use, other then the Mint, aswell in the hands of Gold-Smiths as other per∣sons whatsoever: and an Office to be appointed in London, and each respective County of England for the same to be paid, upon penalty of forfeiture: and to re∣ceive in testimony thereof some stamp of the Office, and accordingly to be regestred. Alwaies provided, that such as will bring in wrought Plate to the Mint, may be allowed to Coyn it upon like terms as at pre∣sent. That all Gold may be Coyned alike in proportion, New Coynage of Gold. regard being had to its current value, which now runs higher then Silver by 2sh in the pound: so that out of every 20sh peece of Gold will be taken the waight of 5sh 4d. to make its parrity or quallity equal with that Standard. That the superfluous wearing of Silver, and Gold Lace, Buttons, &c. may be prevented by good To prevent the waring of Sil∣ver Lace. example given of some other more comly Trimming to be worn at Court; or by adirect prohibition against it, as is at present in France: Or otherwise by laying an Imposition of 1sh 6d on the ounce to be paid by the
maker thereof; or by laying a yearly Fine or duty on the persons wearing it, of the quallity of an Esq; or upwards 10l. each: the Gentleman 5l. and all of a∣meaner quallity 3l. per Annum each: which I presume will bring in a Considerable revennue, or else cause the same to be held contemptible and not worn: either of which will prove usefull to the Publique good, and prevent such superfluous extravigancies. Which being done, I doubt not but in a short time Of the increase of Mony, and Trade. the want and scarcety both of Gold and Silver, will be found so plentifull in England, that our lost Trade will again revive; and no Commodity be held the dearer for this moderate advance of Monies; which is not here in∣troduced to incourage the Supream Authority of Eng∣land to Immitate our Neighbours the Hollander, and other States and Princes, whose usuall custome is to advance their Monies in their payments, and to decry them in their receipts; which though some account to be good State Pollicy, yet I am bold to call it great The manner of Inhancing Mo∣nies in Hol∣land. oppression, when no excuse can be pleaded other then State Interest; but otherwise, if in pollicy, done either to keep a Competency, or to supply a scarcity of Mo∣nies in a Kingdome or Common-wealth. As for in∣stance, if the State of England had put the 20sh. peece of Gold higher in value but 6d. when it first began to rise it self; and be drawn away it would have stopt that currant, and perhaps also have prevented Forrain Na∣tions of covetting our Silver, by keeping them Ignorant of its worth and value; and I wish heartily that such That the Ex∣port of Gold, and Silver might have been better pe∣vented former∣ly. timely care were taken in the preventing other Incon∣veniences of as great Consequence by inspecting the proceedings of Forrain Princes, and States, touching Trade and Commerce, (wherein we are as much con∣cerned
as any,) that we might not suffer our selves to be out-witted, and by degrees Courted out of all Trade, as we have from our Gold and Silver, for which the gapp being now opened so wide, and the scarcity of Gold by degrees rising a disparrity from its standing value, to above 2s. in every 20s. and our Silver by being here (as I may properly say) bought at so low a rate, is found a better Commodity in Forrain parts than our Native Manufacture, and Commodities: so that the stream is even grown to an inundation and drowning of all Trade, for want of such timely prevention. And truly I apply this my design of advancing Mo∣nies more principally, as a means to reconcile the pre∣sent This design is more to recon∣cile the value of Mony and Trade, then for a Revennue. disparrity of the Coyn and Trade of England, with the currant Commerce, of Forrain parts, then singly to advance the States revenue; though I confess, finding the same will prove so advantagious both to State and Common good, I am the more incouraged hereunto, and am glad to be serviceable to both; conceiving the States advantage thereby cannot be less then 5 Milli∣ons, The benefit to the State, and Common-wealth. besides the ease to the Common-wealth, of paying the like sum in contribution, and other Taxes; and no man have the less in esteem or vallue, but all will be in∣riched again by Trade, that will revive by the return of Treasure; which the Dutch having more plentifull in reallity then England: besides being supplyed imaginary, upon occasion by the help of their Banks, is the princi∣pal reason they eat us out of Trade, and by no better way then this to be prevented. Then will all English Traders have vent for their Commodities, and the Far∣mer have Mony to pay his Landlord; Cloathing and other Manufacturies will find a market, and be encou∣raged: the Souldier have his pay, and the Common-wealth
in general again have Trade, all being now at a stand for want of Mony the Usurer only excepted, whose ungodly gain is become the greater: So that if it should be admitted, the scope of this designe were up∣on no other account but to satisfy the Immergencies of State. (which I hope I have given sufficient reasons of Contradiction) it cannot be more justly and equitably imposed then upon the greatest Mony-mongers, who Ʋsurrs have born the least share of Taxes. of all Men have born the least Share of Burthen in Eng∣land, during the late Wars, and justly deserves this re∣membrance. And referring the ingenious States man, that desires to enquire farther into the mistery and practice of For∣rain States concerning rising and falling their monies to the several and differing Authors that have written more at large thereupon; I conclude this subject, with this my observation, That whilst we put so high an esteem upon Forraign goods, and continue our Coyn The reason why Plate is drawn away. at the same vallue, it will be still drawn away, and our Exports become the less; which is wholly Inconsistant with the Common-good of England; whose poor are imployed, Trade increased, and wealth brought in by so much the more, as the current of her Exports ex∣ceed her Imports: which stream hath run backward ever since the Spanish War: which War more duly de∣serves the dayly remembrance of the Supream Autho∣rity of England; then Callis did to the Kings of France, whilest t continued under the English Scepter. Having done with the subject of Mony: I come Of Shiping and Commerce. now to speak of Commerce and Shipping, the other Wheel of Trade, Driven by Marchants; but so laden with Impositions, and more by the abuses in col∣lecting
it, as if Marchants (the most honourable professi∣on and principal Fountain, from whose Industrious streams floweth in the riches of a Common-wealth) were guilty of some high crimination, and not deser∣ving the least incouragement. And since I have sub∣stracted the principal parts of this composure from o∣ther Authors whom I desire not to rob of the thanks due unto them for so Publique a merrit; I have and shall give each a due remembrance, and come now to Mr Hawkins, the substance of whose Proposal made Mr Hawkins his Proposal touching Ex∣cise. to this Parliament and Committee of Inspection, was for the taking away of Contribution, with Custome and Excise upon all goods Imported or Exported in Eng∣lish bottoms: and that in consideration thereof, and for a Revennue to the State, an Imposition should be laid only upon Wine, Beer, and Tobaccho, throughout Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland; to be Collected by Com∣missioners, to be appointed in every County, in manner following. That every Vintner, Strong-water-seller, Inn-keeper, Ale house, and Coffee-seller, in the three Nations should yearly compound for his drauft of any such Liquors and Drinks: and to pay quarterly the sum to be a∣greed with the said Commissioners. That all private Families whatsoever should pay yearly for the Drink spent in their Houses, according to the rates and qualifications following. All Gentlemen of 1000lb. per Annum, or upwards, or 10000lb. personal Estate; or a Marchant for themselves, and all in their Families per Head. 8 or 10s.
All others of 500lb. per Annum, or upwards, or 5000lb personal Estate, to pay for all in their Families per Head. 6 or 8s All those of 100lb per Annum, or 500lb per∣sonal Estate, to pay for themselves and all in their Families per Head. 4 or 6s All worth 100lb, and those in their Fami∣lies to pay per Head. 2 or 4s All worth 20lb Estate, and their Families, excepting all Children under, 12 years of age to pay per Head. 0 or 1s And all Persons of a lower Estate to go free. That all persons that take Tobaccho by the Pipe, sneezing, or Chewing, to pay yearly as follow. All Lords and persons of Dignity, and their Ladies to pay yearly each. 3l Knights and their Ladies, each. 2l Esquiers and their Wives, each. 1l Gentlemen and their Wives, each. 10s Yoewmen and their Wives, each. 5s Handicraft men and their Wives, each. 2s Labourours and their Wives, each. 1s All Servants and Children above 12 years, old. 1s The Calculation made of the Revennue that will be brought in by the Publique draft of Wine, Beer, and o∣ther Drinks in the three Nations, is a Million yearly. By the rates set upon all private Families, for them∣selves, and those they have in Family, is computed will amount yearly to two Millions. Besides, for the Takers of Tobaccho, which is uncer∣tain till setled, and therefore not estimated. Which sum of three Millions is more then was ever yet Colle∣cted
by Custome, Excise, and Contribution: besides by taking off the burthen from Trade, Mony, and Shiping, which are the stay and support of Commerce, will be again increased in England. This proposal receiving the debate of Parliament The result of the Committee of Inspection thereupon. was committed to the Committe of Inspection: and upon their consideration confined only to the Publique draft and sale of Wine, Beer, and Tobaccho, in publique Shops, and Houses: whereby I perceive they were not pleased to approve of any such Imposition to be laid up∣on private Families: Remembring (as I suppose) how distastfull it was in the year 1651. when Excise was paid by private Families, much after this manner. Neither do I thing it proper at present, considering how the State of affairs stand in England, to take off the Duty of Custome and Excise from a few Marchants that sell it again for profit, and place it so generall upon all pri∣vate Families, now not sensible of paying any thing; though in truth I hartily wish it gone from all, except from such goods as in pollicy ought to pay a greater duty then ordinary; for incouragement and setting a ballance to Trade. But for taking away the troble oc∣casioned to Marchants by the ill method or manner of Collecting it, which is so great a Charge to the Publique; that I think it most necessary to be forth-with done; which will be a most acceptable service and favour to Marchants. And for that I find it so rationally answered in a paper put in before the said Committee by Mr. Cradock (whose report also touching this subject, lies before them) I think it propper to commit the heads thereof, also to publique view. Its therein confessed, that the taking away of all Custome, and Excise, lying for the most part upon For∣rain
goods, will increase a Forrain Trade, and make Mr. Cradocks answer to Mr. Hawkins his Proposals. the Importation and Consumption of England to be the greater: But mony and a great part of the English ma∣nufactures will by that means fall and decrease; for that by laying a duty upon such Forrain manufactures whereof the like are made in England, and the conti∣nueing of it upon Coals, Lead, and Tynn, not to be had else-where but in England, doth not only bring Forrain Nations to contribute to our Revennue, but supports our Native Industry, which otherwise would be under sould and discouraged: and if not by that means ballanced and supported with some more pro∣per law made to prevent the Exportation of Wools, and Fullers-earth, whereby the Native Commodities of England exported may be made equivolent in vallue to purchase the Commodities Imported, and Consumed; It must necessarily follow that Plate must go to supply it, as it hath done for some years past. Moreover it were most Imprudent for this Common-wealth, not to have regard to the Incouragement of Trade with Friends, and Alyes, and with that Country which vends most of our superfluities, and supplies our de∣fects: and otherwise to discourage that Trade which hinders our manufacturies at home, or proves otherwise prejudicial to our Plantations abroad; which will never be well inspected without a Committee of Trade. Be∣sides, the method in Collecting the Custome and Ex∣cise, may be so amended that by taking away the super∣fluous number of Officers, and preventing the frauds of some Marchants that by saving their own duties are inabled to under-sell their Neighbours, to the great prejudice of Trade, that the revenue may be brought in by a more proper way for incouragement of Trade, and
ease of so great a charge to the Nation. Which if once taken into Consideration, M. Hawkins his method would be found asmuch short in proper∣ty, as his Calculation of so many Millions is too large in quantity: for allowing the 9725. Parishes in England to have 160. Families, in each Parish, at 6 Persons in a Fa∣mily; the whole number of Persons makes 9336000. which being reasonably proportioned according to the rates set upon private Families, will not amount to the part of Two Millions, the sum estimated; and to ex∣pect from Scotland, and Ireland, above ½ asmuch, they both paying in Custome and Excise, not the ⅛ part, nor in Contribution more then the ⅓ part, were as unequall as impossible in those parts to be Collected. Also in the Calculation of the Publique sale of Wine, and Beer, the mistake cannot be less: for if the late Far∣mers by so much complained of Extortion, could not make their Rents contracted for their respective-Farms of Beer and Ale in England, which together with the whole receipts of Custome and Excise upon Wines in the three Nations (which paies as much as it first Cost,) amounts unto in all but 420000lb per Annum; How can Mr. Hawkins expect to raise a Million upon the same, And admitting the Vintner may be compounded with at a Rate considerable; the Marchant being freed from paying Custome and Excise may drink Wine in his own house at half the Tavern price; As other private Families may also, that buy it from Marchants; which will not easily be prevented: so that the Vintner and that revennue will infallibly be ruined. And for Tobaccho Mr. Cradock agrees with Mr. Hawkins, that the receipt will be uncertain till setled and approves of the conceipt to be good, though not
for the end Intended; for that the laying such an Impo∣sition thereupon will peradventure cause many Gen∣tleman and others to leave it for Fancie, as they took it: and the Ladies of England that now take it too publique to do it more private, not to the dishonour of their Sex and Country. I have the rather been large upon this Proposal, find∣ing it took up so long Debate before this Parliament and Committee of Inspection, and was taking with many of them. For I confess if so great a Revennue could be made out, and the People be brought to pay it willing∣ly, such a method may be drawn from Mr. Hawkins Qury whether it be best for Wine and To∣baccho to pay by Lycence? his proposals as may be good for advance of Trade. But what the Committee of Inspection hath done in de∣signing Wines and Tobacchoes to pay by Lycence, I may not civilly contradict: yet am bold to Query; Whether that duty will be as properly collected from many hands, so dispersed throughout the Nations, as from the Few Imports thereof? And if it be by any al∣ledged that it will much advance the revennue (which I fear will not prove so,) Whether it may not also be called hard measure when the Sellers thereof are com∣pelled to pay such a duty, or leave off Trading in those Commodities, for which they have no warrant to rate the same in the Wines, and Tobacchoes, to be sold by any method or prescription, other then every mans fancie: it being otherwise (at present) in the Brewers Trade, who makes his Drink so much the smaller, according to an exact proportion of so much the Barrel as is laid there∣upon? But for Beer, Ale &c. in Publique houses, it will be Beer and Ale, will be best col∣lected by Ly∣cense. undoubtedly the properest way of Collecting it by Ly∣cence, as Mr Hawkins hath designed, whereby the
Commonwealth will be excused of 20000lb per Annum, now paid in Sallaries to Officers, besides brybes, and the trouble of attendance upon Offices, to make weekly entries, &c. And the 10sh. yearly paid for every Ly∣cence to the Justices of Peace, their Clarks by the persons that sell Drink in Lycensed houses, will serve to pay half the rent of many of the poorer sort. But for that I find it most plainly set down in the report made by Mr Cradock, part in Print (but never published,) and part written, I have inserted it in the latter part of my Book Touching a method pre∣sented in, by Mr Cradock, to the Parliament Verbatim; and also taken from thence the cheifest part of my Method, (touching Custome, and Forrain Excise, with the increase of Shiping,) the rather for that I find his method so well approved by many Members of Parliament, Collonel Harvy especially, whose experience in those affaires, I render inferiour to none; I shall there∣fore proceed as follows. That the Book of rates for Customs may be referred to some fit Person experienced in Trade, to be rectified; Of Customes and Books of Rates. and all Goods and Marchandize rated therein accord∣ing to the true worth and vallue now Currant. That where regard shall be had to Impose a greater or smaler duty to be paid upon any Commodity either for advance to the revennue, the peservation of our own Trade, or to discourage or invite others to Trade with us, in general or particular Commodities; it may be done by imposing more or less to be paid in the pound, according to such Book o Rates, and not by put∣ing a differing price upon Goods of the same specie and vallue; as is improperly done in the Book of Rates now in being and cannot be properly corrected in any part, without a new Impression of the whole. That the duty may bepaid upon all Goods alike, by
all Persons, the difference to be only upon Commodi∣ties Forrain Ships only to pay Forrain duties. Imported or Exported in Forrain Bottoms; (that is to say) such Ship or Vessel not built in England, or English Teritories, or not in the possession of English Owners, and whereof the Master and ¾ of the Marriners are not Natural born Subjects of England: That such goodsand no other shall pay a greater duty in the nature of Forrain Custome, which will be of greater advan∣tage to the State, be more agreeable with the gover∣ment of a Common-wealth, and prove the best expedi∣ent for increase of Shipping, and incouragement of Na∣vigation. That London, Bristol, Plimouth, Dover, Portsmouth, Hull and Yarmouth may be made free Ports for Mar∣chants Of making free Ports in Eng∣land. to Import, Land, and House all dry goods in the States Ware-Houses, without paying any duty, more then a reasonable rate for Ware-House room: and that such goods, with all other Forrain goods whatsoever, may be at pleasure exported in such English Ships as a∣foresaid; with all Custome and Excise paid, to be re∣turned; and in Forrain bottoms with half subsidy re∣turned, as at present: whereby goods may find a Mar∣ket in Forrain parts to some advadtage. The State hereby cannot hazzard more then 19000lb per Annum now received for half subsidy, which I am confident will return with great advance, when that Clog of Trade is Taken away, which only prevents goods here to be Imported: for Exportation, as in Holland, and Legorn, where most goods consumed or sent by land∣carriage up into the Country pays a greater Excise then in England: besides English Shipping will be Imployed in Exportation of great quantities of Forrain goods, yearly, that will then be laid on shoar by Sweds, Danes,
Hamburgars, and other of the East-Land Frozen Coun∣tries; whose Shiping comming home but little to late, are inforced to remain in our Harbours for safety most England as free as Hol∣land, &c. part of the Winter; during which time they might make another Voyage to the South-West parts, and return a∣gain Laden: so that excepting what is done in favour to English Shiping, which cannot safely be taken away, England will be as free as Holland, or any Port in Europe. That Timber may be Prohibited to be Exporred, and care taken for its preservation: For the Hollander For building of Shiping in England. (though buying his Timber from us, and other Forrain parts) makes Shiping his great manufacture; whilest the English having it more plentifull both in England, Ire∣land, and New-England, instead of building one, im∣prudently buy four Ships from them, which will be prevented by putting this difference between English and Forrain bottoms, and will be so great an Incou∣ragement for building here, that in few years Shiping may become as great a manufacture in England, to her support against Forrain Enemies, and encrease both of Trade and the Revennue. That to the end all Forrainers may be prevented of entring Ships for English, whose Proprietors, and building are not really such, all Shiping now belonging to the respective Ports and Harbours of England may be ordered forth-with to be registred, and a duty of 40sh. per Tunn: laid upon all that shall be bought for the Future, from Forrain Nations, to be regestred also in like manner; and oath being made by the owners, or the major part of them, before the Commissioners or Collectors of the Custome house appointed for the Port, of each Ship really and truly appertaining to
English proprietors, Certifficate thereof shall be given, under their hands and seal of Office; which with the usuall oath at present made by Masters upon entry in Custome house, may be a sufficient testimony in any Port of England; and all other Ships be deemed as For∣rain, and the duty be Collected for all goods Imported or Exported therein accordingly. That to prevent the Exportation of Wools, and Ful∣lers-Earth, To prevent the Exportation of Wools and Ful∣lers-Earth. it may be made Fellony for any person proved to be ayding, consenting to, or assisting in the Shiping or putting the same on board any Forrain Ship, or Vessell, or English Ship of War, (or some of them by report using to carry it for Holland, being never visited the Custom-house Officers,) and that the Captain, Ma∣ster, and Mariners thereof (if within seven years after ta∣ken in England,) may be also adjudged as Fellons: But if Shiped in other English bottoms, the Goods, and Ship, only to be forfeited: for that few Masters (if any at all) offend in that kind without approbation of their own∣ers, who are too often consenting to, and Imployers of Masters and their Sea-men upon that account: so that by taking away the penalty from Masters and Mariners, (at present lying so hard that I conceive it duls the edge of the Law) their Testimony, which is all that can be had, will not only be preserved, but Justice be more freely Executed. And if Wools were Prohibited to be water born, within the Dominions of England, and Scotland, upon any pretence whatsoever, (except to be brought from an Island to the Main) and also not to be put in any House, Barn, or other place nearer the Sea or any Navigable River then the owners dwelling-House, upon pain of Confiscation, with a greater fine, according to the nature of the Offence, I am confi∣dent
it would prevent much fraud practised; which is of very great Importance to England, and most worthy of remedy. That upon seizing any Ship or other goods: whatsoe∣ver upon pretence of breach of any law, or for non∣payment Commissioners of Customes to have more power. of Duty, the Commissioners of the Customes in London may be Impowred to call any person before them, and to take examinations upon oath touching the same; and if they see cause to discharge such seizure; (referring only such as they find in their judgement duly seized into the Exchequer,) and that the difficult proofe now lying upon the seizor (which I doubt introduces The proofe to ly upon the own∣ers of goods seizen. much perjury) may be put upon the proprietor; who if innocent of Fraud intended, is the best able to clear his goods without further expence or delay by sute in the Exchequer: besides much fraud in saving Customes, will by this means be prevented: Provided it may not be construed to extend any power to Officers of the Cu∣stomes for seizing other goods but such as by very pro∣bable or apparent demonstration are in truth seizable, whereof the Commissiones of the Customes, may take care for preservation of Trade, and punishing offenders according to their demerrits. This being the substance of what I apprehend is de∣ficient touching the premises, and necessary to be com∣municated to the Parliament, to whom I have presu∣med to Dedicate these my unworthy lines, Concei∣ving it within the power of the Commissioners of Cu∣stomes to rectify other things amiss; in the method whereof more is spoken in Mr Cradocks report; unto which I refer my self and others, desirous of the parti∣culars, and proceed to the method for Excise. That the same Book of Rates to be made for Cu∣stomes,
may also stand and be for Excise; the difference Method for Excise. of paying more or less then Custome to be rated so much more or less in the pound, in like manner as afore∣said: which will prove a kind of check to each Office, by the other, and be the best Informant to the general Sur∣veyours that shall be appointed over both. That the Excise and Customes being dependent one Excise to be brought to the Custome-house. upon the other, may be reduced into one Intire Office, (the receipts only to be kept distinct,) and mannaged by the same Commissioners and Officers; which will be very much to the ease and accommodation of Mar∣chants in their dispatches, and take off the trouble from Shop-keepers and others of fetching tickets, (which is the cheef cause of such complaint against the duty. That in order thereunto, instead of the first buyer Marchants to pay Excise. the Marchant may be made lyable to pay the Excise; who doth the same voluntary already, in all the out parts, and many also in London selling their goods ac∣cordingly. That in lew of the Marchants standing lyable to pay, Time to be gi∣ven for pay∣ment. Excise, six moneths time may be given him to pay for the like quantity he entred in-wards, and paid Cu∣stomes, regard being had to such Commodities as are not sold or exported within the said term, which may have three moneths time more, but no longer. Also that a certain allowance may be computed for Leakage of Wines, and other liquid or wasting Commodities, at so much per Cent, and no other allowance to be made upon any pretence whatsoever. That by making that a standing Law, which is now Marchants wil have warrant to sell the duty with his goods. so differently practised, and falls out often as Controver∣sies between the Marchant and first buyer, who although by the Law in being) is lyable to pay the du∣ty,
yet the Marchant also stands obliged to see it done, and discharged upon his account (which trouble is in smal parcels of goods sold a greater inconvenience then the payment of the duty) many sutes will be there∣by prevented, and the Marchant have more possitive warrant to demand for and sell both the Custome and Excise with his goods. That all Collectors and Receivers of Customes their Accounts how to be kept. Journal or day Book, of receipts may serve to charge the Merchant for Excise, whose Firm may also serve for Bill of Entry at Custome-House, and from thence be transferred to the Leagar, (which is all the trouble extraordinary,) and both accounts are compleated: the trouble in this and all things else, will be to both Mar∣chant and Officer shortned, the accounts upon occasion readier to be compared and examined, and many mistakes and other inconveniences that now happen between both, be prevented. That the 5 per Cent now allowed upon all Goods en∣tred 5 per Cent to be allowed. in Custome-House may be taken off, and in lew thereof 5 per Cent may be allowed the Marchant in Monies, upon payment of his Excise: Provided it be paid in at the day appointed, as aforesaid: otherwise the Marchant shall not claim any benefit thereof: whereby Arrears will be prevented, by which the State hath lo many hundred thousand pounds. That the Officers of Customes and Excise, are so far from corresponding one with the other, or the one to The Officers of Excise and Cu∣stome, help to cheat the state. question that which might prevent a fraud to the other Office, (if it bring no profit to himself, as servants  one Master should do,) that they are rather helpfull  cheat the State against each others Office, as thoug servants of two different Interest; which shews ho
unnecessary and Inconsistant one of them stands with the Publique good. That seven Commissioners may be appointed at the The number of Commissioners. Custome-House to mannage both duties; whether the Excise may be removed in all Ports: and that any three of the said Commissioners may be a Corum; so that they may divide into two Committees upon occasion: and that 8 hours in the Day may be allowed for all men to have their business done, either in Custome or Excise, (that is to say, from 8 in the morning till 12 a Clock, and from 2 till 6 in the afternoon.) And that all the Ex∣cise Officers may be discharged, excepting some few Accountants, and Surveyours, which will be inconside∣rable in respect of the present number which accord∣to this Method will be useless. That the prejudice to the State for want of redu∣cing Excise makes less then Cu∣stome. the Excise sooner to a more certain method is evi∣dent, in that the said Duties of Excise, set on Wines and many other Commodities is double as much (and in no particular less then the duty of Customes; yet as to the same Commodities, it ever came short in the re∣ceipts of what the Customes yeeldeth to the Revenue, as may appear by the account following, taken out of Mr Cradocks report: which I have examined by the Au∣ditors Books, and do think it worthy to be hear Com∣municated. The totall receipts of the Customes of England are Mr Cradocks account. usually 390000l. per Annum, as it amounted unto, for the last four years, taking them together; from which I substract 95000l. per Annum, received for Na∣tive goods Exported, and 19000l. per Annum, for half subsidy of Forrain goods again Exported, and the real receipt of Forrain goods consumed in England is Yearly. 276000l.
That the said Forrain goods consumed ought to pay Excise: which upon Wines, Drugs, and many other Commodities is double as much as the duty of Cu∣stomes and upon all other Commodities 5 per Cent, more; so that the Excise may be reasonably computed at least ¼ part more then Custome, which then amount∣eth to 345000l. per Annum, from which is deducted for Leakage of Wines, and other Liquid Commodi∣ties after Housing 8000l. per Annum, which is all that can be pretended, and the real receipt of Excise Yearly ought to be. 337000l. For the Excise of Forrain goods, for the last four years past by a Computed medium for one year have been received but. 175000l. So there appears to be lost in the Collecting it (by the present method) of what it ought to make accord∣ing to the entries in Custome-House, Yearly. 162000l. Moreover there may be preserved by bringing the Excise under the Custome-House management, and taking away the superstuous number of Officers and o∣ther insident charges, Yearly. 030000l. Also by puting the Excise of Beer, and Ale, into the method following, to be paid by Lycence in the se∣veral Counties of England (London excepted) it may be Collected for 6d in the pound better then for the 2sh at present allowed the Sub-commissioners; and thereby, will be also preserved Yearly. 018000l. So the demunition of the Revennue by the super∣stuous charge of Excise Officers and apparent loss (as I conceive by the improper method) in collecting it is Yearly 210000 pounds (allowing the Custome receipts the same, which by a better method might be also very much improved) I say. 210000l. I presume some that are acquainted with the receipts Excise Im∣proved by Ma∣jor Manron. of the Excise may alledge that a greater sum then 175000l, was received for Forrain Goods the last
Years which is confessed; but Computing the last four Years (which is the properest way to find its reall in∣come) and it will be found not to exceed the said sum: yet I confess a very great Improvement was the last year made by regulating their Method, in keeping Marchants accounts, which was done by Major Man∣ton one of the late Commissioners, whose ingenuity duly observes this remembrance. I confess my own opinion could not credit this ac∣count, with other particulars in Mr Cradocks report, (as Custome falen since 1655. the revenue of Customes to be decreased 80000 l. per Annum, since the Year 1655. finding the totall receipts as great as formerly) untill I was convinced of its reallity by a further inspection into the Book of Rates, as I have likewise made into the method of Excise, which I find contrived as if purposely designed to ruine Trade; by compelling every person buying or selling any Goods in the strickness of the Law to fetch a Ticket before it be delivered (though living at never so remote a distance from the Excise Office) or else must submit his Goods and himself and Trade to be Trouble to Marchants by the ill method and other in∣conveniences. interupted by every (of the too many) Excise Officers, which is not all; for he that desires to walk according to their Excise rule, is so much enslaved by the long and tedious attendance upon Offices, that, besides his own trouble and hinderance in his Trade, requires a Servants labour extraordinary to all of any considerable dealings. And I am bold to affirm that the very Officers of Excise are as chargable to the Common-wealth, as a considerable Army: Besides, the present method refers so much to the Oaths of all Trades and their servants that he is become the most expert Mar∣chant that sweares with the most handsome reservations,
and knows best how to equivocate: which custome of sinning hath so taken away the Conscience of it, that by such careless swearing is introduced most wilfull perju∣ry; to the great dishonour of God the scandal of our religion, and infamy of this Nation: so that if not speedily stopped, it will eat out the very life of Grace, and Spirit of Fidelity from amongst us: whereby that sacred bond of an Oath (observed by the very Turks, and Heathens, as the most binding tye on Earth, and should be also a Christians chief security) will expose the Lives and Estates of every honest tender Con∣science to the cruelty and trechery of such profain persons. Truly, the hopes I have that this will be rectified have induce me to bestow this labour, in expectation, This written in hopes to cause Excise to be taken down, &c that what advance shall be made to the revenue will be applyed to extemate the burthen of Trade: so that Cloathing and other English manufactures, with the Oyls and other materials, Imported to be Imployed thereupon, will be exempted from paying the least duty: whereby we may recall that Staple from Holland, and prevent those ingenious Artists from under selling us. I find also in Mr Cradocks report a second method touching Excise, which I remember to have seen pra∣ctised The nature of Collecting Ex∣cise in Spain. in Malaga, and as I suppose is in use in all other parts of Spain, where in truth Excise is greater then in England, but Collected (in my apprehension) by a much properer way then with us here: for there on∣ly two or three Officers with a Book (wherein the Marchant stands charged, goes to their Houses once in 5. or 6. moneths, and taking account of all Goods re∣maining pon the Marchants hands give him another distinct charge, which being compared with his old
account, they compute for all Goods found gone or sold, for which the Marchant gives his bill to pay ac∣cordingly at a moneth after: so that likewise by this method the Marchant is made pay Excise for asmuch as he entred in the Custome-House: and may deliver his Goods at pleasure, without ticket or trouble of Officers; and Oaths are not at all required. But I must return to the method of Beer, and Ale, which I conceive will be Collected most proper, and at least charge by Ly∣censes, as aforesaid, and the Excise now rendred so Com∣pulsive be accounted a more voluntary duty. That in referrence thereunto, the former Laws Pro∣hibiting Method touch∣ing Ber and Ale. all Persons to sell Beer and other Drinks with∣out Lycense, may be revived, and enjoyned to be duly executed; and that Lycenses may be granted only to such as the Justices of Peace in each County shall think fit and apoint at a yearly rate: unto whose assistance may be added a Commissioner, without whom nothing shall be transacted: who with a servant or two at most may be sufficient to mannage any indifferent County according to this method, at little charge in respect of of what is now therein expended. That the unequallity in the Trades and draughts of How all men may be justly rated. several persons appearing the greatest obsticle in this designe, I conceive may be rectified by the said Com∣missioner, who making it his whole business, may in∣form himself by the former receipts, or by the People themselves, that are apt enough to inform him also what they paid the last Farmers; which together with the assistance of the said Justices may enable them to put an equal estimate upon all Lycenses, according to to the quallity and trade of the Persons desiring them; who will not be unwilling to pay down a quarters rent,
and give Bond yearly to be renewed, for the remainder. That no Lycense granted to any Person may extend further then for Drink sold and spent in his dwelling Drink sold in Faires to pay Excise. House: So that the Drink sold at Publique Faires, may not be exempted from paying Excise, but may be Col∣lected at so much the Barrel, by the said Commissi∣oner and his servants, which will be of some use, if only to pay them their yearly Sallaries. That the said Justices or any one of them, together with the said Commissioner may have power to call Power to punish offend∣ers. Constables and other Officers to their assistance in their several districts; and also to lay a Fine or other lawfull punishment upon offenders (that sell drink without Ly∣cense, according to ther demerits: to be paid one Moye∣ty to the State, and the other to the poor of the Parrish where the offence is committed: by which means the People will be made to observe the plain Laws by them understood, and be freed from that of Excise, often in∣trapping them, and so mystical to vulgar apprehen∣sions. That all common Brewers not selling within London, Brewers out of London to be discharge of Excise, except for smal Beer. and lines of Communication, by means thereof may be dis-obliged from paying Excise for all strong Beer, or Ale; and a penalty be imposed on such as shall sell to persons not Lycensed that usually are known to tapp out or retayle the same: and that in consideration of the six pence per Barrel laid on smaller Beer, the Brewer that will not compound may be made lyable to such Imposition quarterly to be paid as two of the said Justi∣ces and Commissioner shall reasonably calculate. Al∣waies provided, that any Brewer finding himself Inju∣red by such estimation and shall together with the testi∣mony of another make proof thereof upon Oath be∣fore the said Justices, &c. that then due allowance may
That this way of management will not be so proper Brewers of London to pay as at present. in London, and lines of Communication, where the Brew∣er serves all that is expended; and from whom the du∣ty will be collected at the least charge; but as to the Country duty the case is much different, for their Ex∣cise being paid promiscuously by others as well as by Common Brewers, both must be kept to a survey, which if done to any purpose, the one fourth part of the receipts will not defray the charge: by which means both the former Commissioners and late Farmers have been enforced to compound with all in the Country at as good rates as they could: which in effect is the me∣thod here prescribed, dearly paid for, and brought from Holland to England, for expedition over the Alps. To this may be added, that the revolutions and In∣terruptions of Governments since the Death of the Pro∣tector, Obstructions in Goverment hinders the receipt. have been great Obstructions, to the receipts upon both Forrain and Inland duties, which are (as I conceive) augmented by giving the Custome and Ex∣cise but a 2 or 3 moneths continuance, and is no smal Intemation to Officers (whose places seem the more contingent,) and others also to make Hay whilest the Sun shines: but apprehending the reason, I shall say no more, but that when the Excise upon all Goods is reduced to a certain sum, and day of payment accord∣ing to the methods aforesaid, it may then be revived from one moneth to another, (if thought fit) without prejudice to the receipts; when contrariwise if it re∣main subject to supposed changes, under the present method, the revenue will be exposed to ruine, and many Marchants also receive prejudice by the advan∣tage made by others that pay little (if any duty at all:) which is, and will be a great hindrance to Trade.
And apprehending that the Excise laid upon Beer, Ale, Iron, Hops, with other Inland Commodities, (not usually exported,) is the properest to be continued as long as the necessities of State require to be so sup∣plyed, as being the least burthen to Trade, and there∣fore in use, with the Netherlands State, whose revenues is chiefly supported thereby. I shall conclude with Mr Cradock, that if less were laid upon many particulars The benefit to the State and Common-wealth. of Forrain Goods, more would be received into the re∣venue: and that by this regulating the Custome and Excise, the foregoing Orders and Tickets, whereby the State hath been abused, and still are with other frauds practised between the Marchant and first buyer will be prevented: the Marchants colour of being so much in arreares as he hath been; (whereby the Common-wealth lost five parts of six, at once of all the debts in the Nation) and no good way to this day found to make the Marchant truly accountable, will be also remedied, the Shop-keepers and others freed from the trouble of fetching Tickets, the revenue of Excise and Custome be improved as may appear by the aforesaid account two hundred and odd thousand pounds per Annum; be∣sides by such advance of Plate may forthwith yeeld profit to the State at least five Millions; and by the Im∣position upon all wrought Plate half a Million at pre∣sent, and 50000 lb. per Annum for time to come: which will discharge the Arrears due to the Army, and other Publique debts with a great overplus. Naviga∣tion in England will be also incouraged, Shiping and Mony increased, and the Excise Offiers so obnoctious to the People be taken away, the Common-wealth eased and the revenue be more quietly mannaged to the con∣tent of all People, and Incouragement of Trade.
Post-script. TO the objections which some perhaps will make that these Particulars are of great waight, and therefore fit to be deferred till they may be more properly discoursed on, is answered; that what is said touching Plate, may soon be determined, and a Revenue thereby brought in sooner then by a monethly Assesment, and with more satisfa∣ction to the Nation; and that the method here laid down for Excise and Custome doth a breviate the Circumstances (that occasion trouble) and superfluities (that beget charge) and brings it into a narower compass, and the Revenue to a greater Certainty; which if referred to a Committee Experi∣enced in Trade, might be composed within a fortnight, and would be a most acceptable service done in England. FINIS.
