E691 19637585 109240
REFLECTIONS Upon some PASSAGES In a Book Entituled, A DEFENCE Of a Book Entituled, The Snake in the Grass. By EDMVND ELYS. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, in White-Hart-Court, in Gra∣cious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1700.
Reflections, &c. A Defence, &c, p. 29. This was the Rule in all Holy Enthusiams; they submited to be Try'd and Examin'd by the Rule of the Scriptures. Answ. A Learned Foreigner that Writes against ROBERT BARCLAY doth acknowledge, Se cum suis Doctrinas, & Mores suos libentissime Examini earum (S. Scripturarum) concedere, &c. That he, with those of his Religion, are willing their Do∣ctrines should be Try'd by the Holy Scriptures, and to admit as a positive, and certain Maxim, that whatsoever any do, pretending to be led by the Spirit, which is contrary to the Holy Scrip∣tures, should be reputed a Delusion of the De∣vil. P. 90. He comes, p. 27. to a material Point in∣deed, where it is objected against the Quakers, That they hold the Light within Every Man that comes into the World, Sufficient to Salvation, without Something else, that is, without the outward Christ, to Suffer, and Dye outwardly for Us. Which makes Christ's coming into the World, of no Necessity at all to our Salvation. I desire the Candid Reader to take a Review of G. Whitehead's Words: The first part is not true: We are not offended at G. K's Preaching Christ, or his Suffering, and Dying without us, truly con∣sidered.
But, 2. at his undervaluing the Light within, as not Sufficient to Salvation, or not Suffi∣cient without something else, seeing G. K. con∣fesseth, That the Light within, in a true sense, is God, and Christ, the Eternal, and Essential Word, as in his Antichrists, and Sadduces, p. 23. Surely Christ within, and Christ without, are not two Christs; Christ without, is not another Christ, than Christ, within, tho' his being without, and within, was in different manners. By the Light within, being Sufficient to Salvation, or to bring Salvation, we mean, able to Save, as the ingrafted Word is able to save the Soul. By truly Considered, I doubt not but G. W. means, Consider'd with a due Regard to the Obligation to Holiness, which Our HOLY ONE has  upon All Men, and a Power to become Holy, which He Offers to All, in the Suffering and Death of Christ. The Outward Christ, which this Author uses so frequently, is a Term most Intolerably Scandalous; For it seems to import that the Same Person, who is (the Light of the World) The Light within, is not HE that was Crucified at Jerusalem. P. 103. The Quakers expect no Justification, but only by their own Works, wrought In them By the Spirit. Answ. The Works wrought In us, By the Spirit, are not Our own Works, but the Works of GOD, and the Righteousness which is of FAITH. I do again and again, Request this Learned Man, to Attempt the Refutation of what I have written, against G. Keith's most impious Saying, that The Light within is not Sufficient to Salvation without something else.
P. 196. By which Logick the Vnderstanding has no more Light in it self, than the Eye, only a Capacity to receive Light ab Extra. Answ. It is the Nature of the Humane Under∣standing, or Intellect, to receive an Irradiation, or Emanation of Light, from the Fountain of Light, the Sun of Righteousness: And it has no more In∣telligible Light in it self, than the Eye has of Corpo∣real Light. In my Animadversions, upon a Book Entituled, Christianity not Mysterious, I have these Words: Every Act of the Intellect, or Vnderstand∣ing, so far as it is not Deprav'd, or Perverted by the Will, is nothing else but the Perception of ESSENTIAL REASON in it Self, or in its Effects. P. 199. Here is a Light within, which God Com∣mands us not to Follow. This is a most Horrid, and Detestable Falshood, There's no Light within, but Christ Himself, or what Comes from Him. P. 205. Our Mind cou'd no more Resist it than our Hands, if our Mind had no more Light than the Divine; unless you suppose that the Divine Light wou'd Resist it self. Answ. Certainly the Light is not Resisted by Any Light, but only by Darkness: Every Sin is a Work of Darkness. P. 227. The Quakers will not Allow that He is Absent from us, even as to His Person, or we from Him. Answ. Certainly if His Person be the True, and Eternal GOD, Christ is not Absent from us, as to His Person, or we from Him.
P. 227. Another Text they urge mightily for the Vniversality of their Light within, is John 1. 9. That was the true Light, which lighteth Every Man that cometh into the World. This they Understand of Faith, the True, Saving Faith, and to suppose that Every Man must have it. Answ. This is a Gross Mistake: By this En∣lightning of Every Man, they do not Understand Faith, but a Manifestation of the Object of Faith. I shall here Recite some words of G. FOX, concerning Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, The Light Within, which import that Truth, which I Hope, I shall be ever Ready, by the Help of GOD, to Defend against any Opponent, or Opponents what∣soever. G. F. Epist. 6. No Man is Justified, Acting Contrary to that Spirit, that doth Convince them. Epist. 51. GOD is not seen, but in the Eter∣nal Light, from whence all pure Wisdom comes. This Treasure is not seen, but with the Spiri∣tual Eye; nor received, but with the Pure in Heart, and by those who dwell, and abide in the Eternal Light. P. 76. To the Light I direct you, that with it ye may see your selves; then in it stand, that with it ye may see Jesus, from whence it Comes. P. 99. Every one that comes into the World, having a Light from Christ Jesus, who is not of the World; and being turned to this Light, which he is lighted withal, he is turned to Jesus Christ, from whence it Comes—Every one with the Light, which comes from Him, shall see Christ,
and shall see the Father through the Spirit, that Proceeds from the Father, and the Son; and the Glory that he had with the Father before the World began. P. 112. Live in the Wisdom of the Lord, that Jesus Christ may be known in the midst of you, as a Prophet, Priest, and King. Therefore I say, Know Christ, who is the Substance of all the Types, Figures, and Shadows, By whom the World was Made. P. 126. Be Faithful unto GOD, in your Measure of Light, Life and Truth. P. 175. The True Freedom is in the Son, who Suffered and Dyed, and is Risen again. P. 492. Christ Suffered in the Flesh, and Dyed, and was Crucified as he was Man, not as he was God, the Word, which was in the Beginning; but as he was Man, who bore the Sins and Iniquities of all Mankind; and was an Offering for the Sins of the whole World, who Tasted Death for Every Man; All being in Death in Adam; so that they might have Life through Christ, the Second Adam: So I say again, that Christ did not Dye, as he was GOD, but as Man: He was Crucified, and Buried, and Rose again the Third Day, and Ascended, and is at the Right Hand of GOD. P. 539. The Stone that Smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and filled the Earth, Dan. 2. Is not this Christ Jesus, who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, that He Filleth the Whole Earth with his Divinity, to whom GOD gave the Heathen for an Inheritance? &c.
I Beseech Almighty GOD to give Me Grace to Persevere in this Resolution, To Abhor All that I Know to be Evil, and to cleave to All that I Know to be Good, Wheresoever I Discover it. COME, LORD JESVS. FINIS.
