h1409 12561300 63212
A New Method OF CURING All Sorts of FEVERS, Without taking any thing by the Mouth. Discovered and presented to the King by Mr. Ad. Helve∣tius, Doctor of Physick in Paris. Translated out of French, by P. M. LONDON, Printed for J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Pauls Church yard, 1694.
TO THE KING. THE new Ʋse I have disco∣vered of the Bark, to cure infallibly all sorts of Fevers, with∣out taking any thing by
the Mouth, has been ap∣proved of by your Ma∣jesty, with a Goodness so obliging, when I had the Honour to present it, that I should have all the reason in the world to believe, the Publick would give it a no less favour∣able Reception, if I offer it my self. But, Sir, after what man∣ner will it not be re∣ceived by all your Sub∣jects,
when they know 'tis Your Majesty, that has been graciously pleas∣ed to impart this Disco∣very, thro the Paternal Care which Your Royal Goodness is pleased to take of their Health? Yes, Sir, 'tis this ex∣treme Goodness, that after having made Your Majesty condescend to enquire into the particu∣lar Wants of the Sick,
which are some of those that have the Happi∣ness to serve in Your Houshold, and: which Your Majesty has done me the Honour to recom∣mend to my Care, oblig'd Your Majesty thereupon to command me to pub∣lish my Remedy; to the intent, that no person in Your Kingdom might be deprived of the Advan∣tage of making use of it.
I obey, Sir, not only with the most humble Respect, and the most profound Submission, which I owe to the Commands of my King, but also with a particular. Satisfaction and Joy, that I have been able to enrich, and bring the Art of Physick to perfection for the good of France, which your Heroick Vertues have
advanced so far above the rest of the Nations of the World; and which is my true Country, since it has pleased Your Ma∣jesty in Naturalizing me, to honour me with the quality of one of Your Majesties Subjects. But at the same time, Sir, I take the Liberty which Your Majesty has given me, to put under the Pro∣tection
of Your August Name, this which I have published to the World; it being Justice, that after the singular Grace Your Majesty did me, (when I had the Honor to present my Specifick against the Dysenter) in granting me the pow∣er to have Laboratories throughout the whole Kingdom all the Fruits
of my future Labours should be devoted, as of Right belonging to Your Majesty, and should serve me as a means to testify a lively and hear∣ty Acknowledgment of Your Majestys Favours, and my ardent Zeal to sacrifice to Your Service during my whole Life, with an entire Devotion, all that my mean Ca∣pacity
and weak Endea∣vours are capable of. I am, Sir, Your Majesties most Humble and most Obedient Ser∣vant and Subject, A. Helvetius, M.D.
ERRATA. PAge 2  for  Animal.
A New Method Of Curing all Sorts of FEVERS. OF all the Febrifuges yet known to the World, without doubt the Bark must be allowed to be the best. It's what all of our faculty grant; I have par∣ticularly studied the point, with all the care and exactness pos∣sible,
and am thoroughly con∣vinc'd of its excellency. 'Tis true, from the manner hither∣to observed in giving it, ma∣ny inconveniences arise; 'tis this has put me upon the search after some better way, by which, we might be exempt from the ill circumstances, and enjoy only the good of this wonderful Remedy. Without dispute, many Phy∣sicians before me, have endea∣vour'd the same; which is the reason, that within these thirty or forty years last past, you have seen so many different preparations of the Bark, which are every day in use all over Europe. Some give it in Infusion; o∣thers in Substance; there are
others that make a Tincture of it; some prepare it in Syrup; others order it in an Extract; and in a word, they disguise it in an hundred different forms, But after all that, they are not yet arrived to that method of prescribing it, so as the Patient may have no reason to be dis∣satisfyed. For in truth, after taking it, one complains of an intolera∣ble weight and pain in his Sto∣mach: another, that there is a disturbanee in his Breast; a third, that he feels an extraor∣dinary heat, another that he is scorcht up by it. In fine, we see some every day, tho cured by its means, yet resolve never to make use of it any more; whether or no, the Bark it self
is the cause of their complaint, or rather the management of themselves in the taking of it, that produces those ill effects, may be a question; for consider∣ing how often 'tis to be re∣peated, and with what cauti∣on, 'tis no difficult matter for the Patient to transgress in some point or other. I mention not the complaints generally made by the sick, nor the inconveniences most known; besides these particular ones which I am going to speak of, viz. the Illness of Taste, the Nauseousness and Bitterness which always attend it, if taken by the mouth, vary how you can in the manner of giving it; that which is so much the great∣er pain and trouble to the Pati∣ent,
notwithstanding the great∣est aversion after the first taking it, is the absolute necessity of repeating it every day, some∣times for the space of six weeks or more, and after all, in case of relapse, the vexation of be∣ing forc'd to begin all again. It was upon weighing serious∣ly these disagreeable circum∣stances, which attend the Re∣medy, that I thought upon the discovery of a more proper way of giving it, that the Pati∣ent might receive the benefit of it without the pain. The way is only by giving it in Clyster. For that, you must take one ounce of the best Bark pulve∣riz'd, and mix it well in a pint of warm water without putting any thing to't besides.
In intermitting Fevers this Clyster ought to be given just after the fit, and to be repeat∣ed three times a day till the Patient is thoroughly well; which won't be long first, for 'tis extraordinary if another fit returns, very rare if two; and I never saw a third. After the cure the person must take care to continue the same Clysters for the space of twelve days, viz. the first six days one in the morning and another in the evening; the six last days one in the morning only. As the chief and necessary point in the matter, is to hold the Clyster in as long as possi∣bly may be, and considering there are a great many persons
that can do that but a very lit∣tle while, for such you must add to the Powder half an ounce of the Syrup of White Poppies, which will easily make it stay without pain. In continual Fevers, the Cly∣ster must be made of a strong decoction of the Bark with sim∣ple water, with which deco∣ction you shall also mix one ounce of the Powder. And the Syrup of White Poppies shall be used upon occasion as before. This Clyster must be given upon the declining of the Pa∣roxysme; but if there be no∣thing of a Paroxysme, you must give it when the Fever is least violent.
Instead of giving it as you do in intermitting Fevers three times a day, in this you must give it every fourth hour; till the Patient has lost his Fe∣ver. After he is well, you must re∣member to continue still the same Clyster for twelve days, in the same order as before, that is to say, the first six days twice a day, the other six but once only. This Remedy is proper for all sorts of persons of any age of sex, allowing only for the difference of the dose. For Infants that suck, and till they are four years of age, the dose of powder must be two drachms. From the age of four to ten the dose three drachms.
From ten to fifteen half an ounce; from fifteen to twenty six drachms; from twenty to sixty you must give the whole dose of an ounce; the same to Women with Child; for the Remedy has its effect without causing the least disturbance. Nevertheless, persons of a very weak constitution, whose Fibres are very delicate, shall take but half a Dose, viz. half an ounce. You must observe that those that keep in the Clyster but a little time, ought to continue the taking it much longer, that the frequent repetition may make amends, for the deficien∣cy of every particular one, and by the number perform the cure. Which is to be under∣stood,
as well of those that take the whole dose, as of those that take but part. You must observe also, that for those that find themselves dozed, as generally most are in Malignant Fevers; you must make use of no Syrup of white Poppies, but endeavour to make 'em hold the Clyster, as long as possible you can without it. On the contrary, you must observe in all Fevers accompanied with a loosness, that you ought ne∣ver to fail mixing the half ounce of Syrup of white Poppies in the Clyster. In fine, you must observe that in all complicated Distem∣pers, as defluctions upon the Lungs, Deliriums, Plurisies, all sorts of wounds, and the like,
this remedy is always given with success, and never fails to take off the Fever, leaving all things in a better condition to be the more easily cured. There is but one thing which can accompany a Fever, where∣in you must deny your self the use of the Bark, and that is, in the extraordinary tensions of the Abdomen. I have one thing more to give caution of, which is, as there are a great many that can∣not keep in a Clyster, so there are a great many that don't give it back again when taken, and so feel themselves inflated. For such I think it conve∣nient to take a purgative Cly∣ster towards night for two days, which will soon carry off the
other; upon which account it would not be amiss to inform the Patients that these Clysters have nothing of a purging qua∣lity, neither are given for that intent; that they may not be frighted and disturb'd, as a great many are, unless they see a large evacuation of Choler and other humors, as is usual from ordinary Clysters. As for management of the Diet, I shall prescribe nothing extraordinary. Let the Patient live upon Broths as long as the Fever continues; after that let him eat sparingly without over∣charging his stomach, and avoid every thing that's hard of di∣gestion. During the Fever let the Patient drink Barley Broth, made palataable as he shall
think fit. Every one knows ve∣ry well, that the root of Scor∣zoner with Hartshorn is of great use in Malignant Fevers; that the root of Sorrel, Agrimony, Succory, Dogs Grass are used for refreshment; that Marsh∣mallows, Liquorice, Sebesten, Jujubes, Narbone Honey, are very good pectorals. When the Fever's gone, I am not for denying a moderate use of Wine to those that desire it; for I take it to be one of the best maxims in Physick, to satis∣fy the Patient upon all occasi∣ons as far as you can. 'Tis according to this maxim, that if I find any at the first be∣ginning of their Fever, unwil∣ling to make use of the Bark, either in Clyster, or by the Mouth,
I am not against it; so far from it, that I should think 'em very much in the right, to endeavour first by a little Bleeding and Purging to recover their health; which oftentimes has success. For that intent I'll give 'em this excellent Purgative. In half a pint of water boil one ounce of Tamarinds, two drachms of salt Polychreste, one ounce of purified Cassia, one ounce and an half of Manna, a little Cin∣namon, and the White of an Egg beaten. After you have boil'd it alto∣gether seven or eight turns, squeeze into it a little juice of Citron, then let it cool, and strain it through a cloath for use; three hours after you have taken it, drink a good dish of broth.
Those that have a mind to add, or diminish, or alter any thing in this Receipt, may do it if they please; and provided they observe the manner I have set before them, they'll never fail of a very agreeable Medi∣cine. If there be any likewise that have an inclination to vomiting, and there be a sufficient indica∣tion for a vomit, as is in all Fe∣vers where there is a reaching, which by that means goes off, without any other remedy; yet I would willingly give 'em a preparation, which is the best and easiest that can be taken for that purpose. Take of purified Nitre and crude Antimony each one pound, beat 'em into a very fine Powder
and searce it; put a Crucible up∣on fresh coals, and when 'tis red hot, throw in this powder by little spoonfuls, and let it make a detonation, leave it in fusion for one half hour; after that let the fire go out, and the Crucible grow cold, then break it to take out the vitrified mat∣ter, and reduce it again into a subtle powder; then add to it double its weight of Cremor Tartar also pulveriz'd, mix it all together and searce it; throw it in by little and little into a sufficient quantity of boiling wa∣ter, to make a dissolution of the salt this powder contains; filtre the water through Cap-paper, after that evaporate it till no moisture's left, and you'll have a salt, without dispute, the best of all Emeticks.
The Dose is from eight grains to twelve. The manner of taking it is to warm a Glass of Wine, and pour a little out into a spoon where you have put the powder, and swallow it down; then put a little more warm Wine into the spoon, and drink down that, and leave none of the powder behind, then drink off the re∣mains of the Glass. The Patient will have an in∣clination to vomit a quarter or half an hour after: Assoon as he has vomited once, let him drink a large glass of warm wa∣ter, that it may operate the more easily, and repeat it three or four times during the opera∣tion. Three hours after he has taken the powder you may give
him some broath, the remaining part of the day let him live tem∣perately. It is not the same thing with Cordials, as with Catharticks and Emeticks, for I not only approve of their use in Fevers, if the Patients desire it before the Bark is given; but I ad∣vise in the time of taking their Clysters, that they neglect not the use of 'em; not that they are absolutely necessary for the cure, but because they are of won∣derful efficacy for strengthning and keeping up a good heart, driving off its heaviness, and pre∣venting disorders in the head. For a Cordial I would have 'em take in intermitting Fevers, one ounce of Cinnamon water, two ounces of Borrage water,
as many of Wallnut water, the same quantity of Balm water, two drachms of the confection of Alchermes, one ounce and an half of Syrup of Lemons, or Pomegranate, mix 'em all toge∣ther, and drop in some drops of Spirit of Sulphur, to give it an agreeable acidity. It has an extraordinary plea∣sant taste. Let 'em take one or two spoonfuls every hour. Those that have a vomiting or looseness with an intermit∣ting Fever, let 'em make use of this for their Cordial; take of Plantain and Knotgrass water each four ounces, Diaphoretick Mineral, and Hartshorn pre∣par'd each two scruples, Con∣fection of Hyacinth 2 drachms, Syrup of Diacodium, and Syrup
of Quinces each one ounce, mix 'em all together, and take of it every hour as before. In Fevers continual and ma∣lignant, I would accordingly advise a Cordial Julep to puri∣fy the blood, and resist the ma∣lignity, by causing a gentle per∣spiration; let it be this; take one ounce of Treacle water, two ounces of Scorzoneer water, Carduus Benedictus and Scabious water the same quantity each, twenty grains of powder of Vi∣pers, two scruples of Bezoard Mineral, half a drachm of Ve∣nice Treacle, one drachm of the Confection of Hyacinth, the same quantity of Alchermes, one ounce of the Syrup of Cloves; mix it all together as before.
These sorts of Cordial Juleps cannot fail of good success; those that instead of the powder of Vipers, had rather make use of its Volatile Salt, and Bezoar Stone, if they can get it, may put in ten or twelve grains of each, if the Fever be very ma∣lignant. 'Tis thus providing against the troublesome accidents that usually attend the most dangerous and malignant Fe∣vers, and the Bark taken in Clyster, which has nothing more to do but to take off the ferment of the Fever, will do it so easi∣ly, that it will be a pleasant sur∣prize to the Patient, and will give satisfaction to the world of its usefulness in Clysters, which we here treat of.
I think by this manner of giv∣ing the Bark, I have avoided all the inconveniencies which have hitherto accompanied it in the ordinary method of taking it. It's plain, the Patients cannot complain of the bitter taste, be∣cause they do not take it by the mouth. It's also evident, there will be no more a weight felt in the stomach, because it is not re∣ceived there. As to the heat, it's certain the grosser parts of the Bark, which are the sole cause of it, stay in the body no longer than 'tis just requisite for the natural heat to digest it, and extract the vo∣lative and wholesom parts, the remaining dregs being soon car∣ried off, without taking so long
a course as it necessarily must, if taken by the mouth; it must of necessity have a very good effect upon the body, which o∣therwise would be incommoded with that noxious and uneasy weight which is the cause of those heats so much complained of. There are only those Patients that are troubled with the Piles, that can suffer any pain in gi∣ving back the Clyster, the pow∣der as it passes fretting the part; so I advise 'em to diminish the dose, and put but half an ounce of the powder, or rather no powder at all, but take a strong decoction of the Bark, which will cause no pain at all, and at the same time perform the cure as well; only with this difference,
that 'twill cost the more, because you must use a larger quantity of the Bark; which I remark here so much the more willing∣ly, because this advice may be serviceable to all sorts of Peo∣ple, that for what reason so ever, shall think fit rather to make use of a strong decoction than of the Powder it self: tho to speak the truth, except for so important a reason as that of the Piles, I should al∣ways give the Bark in substance the preference; I can affirm that within these three years, since I first made the discovery of the manner of giving it, I have made use of it in the cure of above two thousand Patients, of every Age and Sex, who never perceived any in∣convenience,
notwithstanding the great number of Clysters they have taken: and some have taken a great many more than others, by reason of the relapses they have had from the extraordinary malignity and stubbornness of their Fevers. I don't question but that this remedy will find so good a re∣ception, that the more 'tis known to the Physicians the more 'twill be esteem'd by 'em; and I dare say the Pati∣ents will own themselves obli∣ged to me, for having first discovered the way to the most convenient, easie, and certain cure, that has been hitherto in practice: for who is not sensi∣ble, that abundance of sick have died because they have
not been able to get down the Bark? And considering there are many that have an invinci∣ble antipathy to the taking of other Drugs which would be for their health, this manner of giving by Clyster, what they refuse to take by Mouth, will be of more general use than it appear'd to be at first; and perhaps one day or other some will acknowledge that I have in some measure contributed to∣wards the perfection of Physick. I have had the experience of it in my remedies against a dy∣sentery; having met with ma∣ny Patients, whose tenderness of constitution has put me to a great deal of trouble, in giving my specifick by Mouth, by rea∣son of the vomiting it causes.
and I have happily succeeded by using it in Clyster. I have also communicated the manner of giving this to M. the first Physician, who did me the honour to approve of it, as well as that of the Bark, and every one knows of what an authority his approbation is. As to what I said, relating to the quickness of the cure, which is perfectly and much sooner perform'd this way, than by taking the Bark by the Mouth; the reason of it is ve∣ry plain. First they give it in a much larger quantity by Clyster, than can be given by Mouth. In the second place, they give it always in substance, and con∣sequently it must have the bet∣ter effect.
Thirdly, Its subtle parts which act only upon the ferment of the Fever, and make its ebul∣lition to cease, get very easi∣ly into the mass of Blood by the mouths of those numerous vessels wich center in the in∣testin's: even so broths given in Clysters pass into the blood with the same ease, for the nourishment of the sick; as also we see Tobacco Clysters carry their volatile parts with a wonderful quickness, by means of the Circulation even to the Stomach, and so cause a vomiting. In fine, experience gives a perfect confirmation of the speediness and certainty of of this way of curing; for in all the Fevers, where-ever I
made use of this remedy, the most obstinate could never hold out beyond two fits. And if it be necessary to produce instances of those that are well known to the world, the sick which were put under my care at Versails, by the command of the King, are authentick and undeniable testimonies. I present you with all their Names, Qualities, Distempers and their Symptoms. The Lady Abbess of the Mo∣nastery of Charity, relapsed in∣to a double tertian continual Fever, with a great pain in her head, as also delirious at the return of the fit. Mr. Hurant, one of the Kings Guards, aged thirty years, ta∣ken with a double tertian, ac∣companied
with disorders in the head, and intolerable pains in the back; it began with a cold fit, which lasted twelve hours at least, and went off in a great sweat, which weakened him extremely. Mr. Gueri, another of the Kings Guards, forty eight years of age, that had been seiz'd fifteen days before, with a double tertian continual Fever, together with an extreme pain in his head, and very deli∣rious. Mr. Varenne, of the Kings Guards forty five years old, that lay sick ten days of a dou∣ble tertian; its mildest Symp∣tomes were an oppression of the lungs, restlesness and great pains of the head.
Mr Case, another of the Kings Guards, aged thirty five years, that had been sick twelve days of a double tertian, and by a defluction upon the lungs in great danger of his life. One Langlois, Groom of the great Stables, seven and twen∣ty years of age, that had a continual Fever for seven days with a paroxysm, nauseousness, vomiting and Phrensie. One Chistal, Postilion to Mr. the Abbot of la Roche, twen∣ty years of age, seiz'd with a Tertian five days before; the fit lasted the space of twelve hours, during which time he strained very much to vomit, was all in a fire and very near being delirious.
One Jenot, Under-Gardener in the Trianon, aged twenty six years, sick of a double Terti∣an, continual Fever, without sleep and delirious. One Crespin, an Under-Clerk in the Office at my Lord Duke of Burgundy's, eighteen years of age, that had been for six days in a continual Fever, with periodick vomitings, pains at the heart, and fainting fits. One Valere, a Switzer, be∣longing to the Appartments, aged thirty four years, tor∣mented twenty days with a Tertian; the fit lasted twenty four hours: and after that he was taken with excessive vo∣mitings, and an intolerable pain of the head.
One Saint Germain, Groom of the great Stables, thirty years of age, that lay sick for twen∣ty six days of a continual Fe∣ver, delirious, always tossing and turning. All these Patients; to whom I have given my remedy out of Charity, by Mr. Regnault Ma∣ster Apothecary at Paris, who for that intent was constantly with 'em during their sickness, were cured without any relapse, except two, whoseever return∣ed, whom I was forc'd to begin again withal. Also the Son of Mr. Simon, the King's Coachman in the lit∣tle Stables, sixteen years of age, after he had had a double ter∣tian twenty days.
A Valet de Chambre of Mr. Cantin, sick of a Tertian. Mr. Lapierre, Valet de Cham∣bre to and Officer of the Kings Wardrobe, who had a double Tertian for fifteen days, and all with the same dangerous accidents, as the others we just now spoke of. 'Tis not worth while to pro∣duce any more instances: I could easily write a volume of them, but there are so many already, that have cured them∣selves by this method, since the King has made it publick, that they speak sufficiently for me, without any further enlarge∣ment. From what I have said, it ought not to be concluded, that by the means of this dis∣covery,
I pretend to make a man immortal: but what is evi∣dent from it is, that abun∣dance of accidents may be pre∣vented, which otherwise hap∣pen in a tedious Fever, and we may easily see the error of bleeding, which not only pro∣longs the distemper, but often∣times is the cause of many a Patients Death. Not that I ob∣stinately and without reason am against once or twice bleeding, or thrice upon occasion, where we see a great plethory; nei∣ther am I against bleeding in the foot, when we are afraid the Patient will be delirious. I have nothing to say against it, neither can I perceive, that it will hinder the effect of any other remedy, the Physicians
shall think sufficiently indica∣ted: but I cannot bear that so great a quantity of blood should be taken away, which is only prescribed by custom, and by which a Patient is ex∣hausted, for a Fever, which may be cured in three of four days at most, without the loss of one drop. As to what remains, I could wish that the discovery of this manner of giving the Bark, was a kindly and generally received, as it would be of general advantage to the whole world, and I should think my self too well recompenced for the pains I have been at, for so long time before I could ar∣rive to it, and for the continual labour and care I have ta∣ken
for these three years to examine into it, to be thorough∣ly convinc'd of those advan∣tages, which appear'd to me at first: If I could communicate the fruits of my labour, with∣out raising the envy and ma∣lice of a certain sort of Men, that dishonour the Profession, and deserve not the name of Physicians. But as a man ought not to be discouraged from do∣ing good, by the jealousi and mean spirit of those that ap∣prove of nothing, but what they do themselves; so I shall al∣ways chearfully employ my self as long as I live, in the search after something that may be profitable to Mankind, either in preserving their Health or curing their distempers. And
in the mean time, I can so far vouch for the infallibility of what I now present to the world, that I durst say, you'll never fail curing any Fever, continual or intermitting, pro∣vided you follow exactly my Method. There is but one case where the Bark, given after this man∣ner, fails of taking off the Fe∣ver; and that is when there's an Imposthume in the body. Therefore you ought to look upon it as a very ill sign, if the Fever cannot be stopt. In any other case besides this you may assure your self of success. I thought to have finish'd my writing here, and to have ad∣ded nothing more to it, but I perceiv'd this passion of envy,
which I have already mention'd; and which I imagin'd might have ended only in denying to these Clysters, an approba∣tion which they stood in no need of. This malice ran so high, that they scrupled not to raise lyes, to take away the re∣putation of this remedy: Not contented to deprive me of the the advantage of discovering so good a thing, but also en∣deavouring to rob the publick of what might be useful to it from my discovery; for they spread it abroad, wherever they could gain hearing, that Cly∣sters of the Bark were the cause of Ulcers in some; in others of Imposthumes in the Intestines, in others Fistula's, Abortions to Women with Child, and a
thousand the like Disorders. To confute so gross a Ca∣lumny, I could easily bring Ar∣guments which cannot be an∣swered. As for example, if it be true that the Bark swallow∣ed down in substance, pro∣duces no other ill effects than those I have already re∣markt, how comes it to pass, that when 'tis taken in Clyster there should happen such terri∣ble accidents, when at the same time it does not stay in any of the delicate parts of the Body, as it does when 'tis taken by the mouth. There's no Physician but what knows, that an Emetick taken by the mouth is a very powerful remedy, and yet at the same time, when treble the
dose of the same Remedy is gi∣ven in Clyster, it has but a mo∣derate operation; which plain∣ly proves, that the violence of the remedy is beyond all com∣parison much less when 'tis given in a Clyster, than when 'tis taken by the Mouth. Besides, make an Analysis of all the parts of the Bark, you'll find none of it cause the least pain or disturbance in the Intestines. But I am willing to shew these ignorant Detractors, that I can produce something more convincing and stronger than ar∣gument; I mean matter of fact, examples, experiences both of young Children, and Women with Child; for if it was true, that these troublesom accidents did arise from the
use of these Clysters, without doubt it would be most severe with little Infants, that are so tender and weak; and if they cause Abortion, the Wo∣men big with Child that have taken 'em, have reason to know something of it; and all these persons that I am going to in∣stance, had not recovered their perfect health, as they did, by the use of 'em. Madamoiselle duChatel, Grand∣daughter of Monsieur Mareschal de Bellefond, 18 months old, had a Fever, and was perfectly reco∣vered by twelve Clysters. The Sons of the Marquis of St. Germain Beaupre, one eight years of age, seiz'd with a double Tertian and Ma∣lignant Fever with Convulsi∣ons;
the other twelve years old, that had a double Tertain, whose fit lasted for eighteen hours; each of 'em took twen∣ty five, or thirty Clysters, and both were perfectly cured. The Son of the Marquis de Novion, three years of age, that had fits of a double Tertian, that held him for fif∣teen hours, was cured by these Clysters in a very few days. The Son of Monsieur Nicolai, the first President, 20 months old, taken with a continual Fever, accompanied with a vio∣lent Colick, that made him cry out day and night; was also cured in a very little time. The Son of the Marquis de Lavergne, twelve months old, seiz'd with a very
strong double Tertian, toge∣ther with a continual pain in his belly, and frequent deje∣ctions, was cured by twelve Clysters. The Daughter of Monsieur de Beloy, Farmer general, eigh∣teen months old, reduced to the last extremity by a vast number of fits of a double Ter∣tian, took about twenty Cly∣sters, and was perfectly well. The Son of Mr. Coipel, Pain∣ter in ordinary to Monsieur, six months old, taken with a Tertian, together with a de∣fluxion upon the lungs, was per∣fectly recovered by twenty Clysters. The Daughter of Monsieur Beinval, Master of the Horse to Monsieur the Count d' Auvergne,
three years of age, that had been seiz'd with a double Ter∣tian a month before, whose fits were very tedious, took ten or twelve Clysters, and was perfectly cured. The Daughter of Madam de Gassien, the Widow of Mon∣sieur de Gassien, Councellor in the Parliament, eight years of age, taken with a continual Fe∣ver, with a Paroxysm accom∣panied with Colick pains and a loosness; took eighteen Cly∣sters and was well. The Daughter of Monsieur de Logni in Platriere-street, se∣ven years of age, seiz'd with a malignant Fever, with violent Paroxysms every six hours, by the means of fifty Clysters was perfectly cured.
The Daughter of Monsieur de Lamet, Secretary to the King, five years of age, taken with a double Tertian, whose fit last∣ed eighteen hours, was cured with two and twenty Clysters. The Son of Monsieur Colat, Secretary to the King, three years of age, taken with a con∣tinual Fever, was recovered by eight Clysters, The Son of Monsieur Ber∣trand, Secretary to the King, two years and an half old, ta∣ken with a Dysentery and con∣tinual Fever, was cured imme∣diately of the Dysentery by my Specifick, and afterwards took sixteen Clysters which took off the Fever. On which 'tis remarkable, that if there were any ill consequence from
these Clysters, without doubt it would be seen in this case; for there is no person but what must know, that after a Dysente∣ry the intestines are very weak and feeble, and easily subject to any ill impression; I mean in old and strong bodies, and much more in young tender In∣fants. The Son of Monsieur Audiger, Auditor of the Accounts, a Re∣lation of Mr. Hermand, Physi∣cian, three years of age redu∣ced to the last extremity, was set upon his Legs again by these Clysters, contrary to the advice, and notwithstanding the opposition of his Kinsman. The Daughter of Monsieur Huglas, in Bourdonnois-street, aged seven years, who had
been very much afflicted, and near death for many days, with a continual Fever and Defluxion upon the Lungs; was cured by this method alone. She took about thirty Clysters. The Son of Mr. Michalet, Bookseller, eight years of age, that had been sick of a double Tertian six weeks, whose fit was very violent and tedious, took eighteen Clysters and was perfectly cured. The Son of Mr. Malet, Mer∣cer, in Montmartre-street, four years old, that had been ma∣ny days afflicted with a conti∣nual Fever near death, was cu∣red by sixteen Clysters. The Daughter of one Priou, Coachman to the lately deceas'd Monsieur Voisin, Counsellor of
State, five years of age, seiz'd with a malignant Fever, deli∣rious, and having at the same time a defluxion upon the Lungs, given over, and upon the point of death, when I was sent for, took forty Cly∣sters, and was perfectly cured. As to Women with Child, Madam the Countess of Flaman∣ville, seven months gone, was seiz'd with a double Tertian continual Fever; who after she had taken the Bark all manner of ways by the Mouth, and the Fever still grew worse, and the Patient despaired of any relief; at last by my or∣der took it in Clyster; which gave her life again, and by that means she went her time out, and was safely brought to Bed.
It is about two Months since, Monsieur des Forges the famous Man-Midwife, sent for me to consult about Madam de Belle∣cour, Wife of Monsieur de Belle∣cour, Pay-master of the Rents, a Lady of a very nice constitu∣tion; she had been sick for six weeks of a Tertian Ague and then a doulbe Tertian; she had taken the Bark a great while by the Mouth, which had brought it to some inter∣mission, but not perfectly cured it. I satisfied Monsieur des For∣ges of the easiness and excel∣lency of the Bark by Clyster, he agreed to make use of it, and the Lady was perfectly cured by its means. I have given you Instances over and above, for the satis∣faction
of those whose interest it is, to inform themselves of the manner of giving the Bark in Clyster: should I endeavour to relate the like Cures I have perform'd I should never come to an end without abusing the patience of the Read∣er. I have only related this small number, because I thought my self obliged to give this proof to the Publick, since they endeavour to deceive the World, by their notorious Lies and scandalous Discourses, un∣worthy of Men of honour. All those I have just now mentioned, are persons very well known to the World: any one may be easily satisfied from them, and all must acknow∣ledge the worth and innocence
of a Remedy, which is of such use, that those that detract from it, may be ashamed of their injustice, in stifling a Truch so beneficial to the health of Mankind. Yet if there are Physicians still of that malicious temper, I can vouch that there are also a great many at Paris, that have done me justice, and the honour to approve of these Clysters, by prescribing them to their Patients, and have ac∣cordingly found success. If any one has endeavour'd to make use of these Clysters, and they have not answered expectation, it is without doubt either because they did not understand thoroughly my way of giving them, or else because
they have not observed it. But I boldly defie any Man whatever, Physician or not, to bring any one that I have ma∣naged after this way of pra∣ctice within these three years, that have had a Fistula, or any such like disaster, which can be imputed to this Remedy. It is an easie matter to speak against a thing, and suppose it to be false, but this is not suffici∣ent to gain belief, they ought to prove what they say. All the world knows that I have prescribed these Clysters, to a great many Patients in the utmost extremity. A great ma∣ny have recovered, and some have died, not from any ill ef∣fect of the remedy, but because we must all dye, and when it
Pleases God to take us out of this world, all our endeavours are but vain. I have already said, that I do not pretend to make a man im∣mortal by this method, neither do I oblige any man to it; I only publish it to discharge my duty, who ever pleases may make use of it. If the Cures it perform'd were not so spee∣dy, and there were a greater formality than the thing re∣quires in the management of it, it would not be of so little repute. However, if there be any, out of a strong antipathy to the Bark, absolutely refuse to take it either in Clyster or by the Mouth, if they'll do me the honour to come to me for re∣lief,
I'll give 'em remedies which shall be as innocent and effectual as the other. The poor of all sorts shall be kindly received whenever they come, throughout the whole year, viz. in the Sum∣mer time, from half an hour after five to half an hour af∣ter six; in the Winter from seven a Clock in the morning to eight: I shall take a great deal of care to hear and examine 'em, and will give 'em reme∣dies gratis, not only for Fevers and the Dysentery, but for all other Distempers, excepting none; which I thought my self obliged to give notice of, that the foolish modesty of some may be no hinderance to the cure of the Distemper they are ashamed to own.
THE PRIVILEGE OF THE KING. LOuis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to our Beloved and Faithful Counsellors, Gentlemen of our Courts of Parliament, Master of the
Ordinary Requests of our Court, Provosts, Bailiffs, Seneschals, their Civil Lieu∣tenants, and all other our Officers to whom it shall be∣long greeting. Our well be∣loved Adrien Helvetius Do∣ctor of Physick, has humbly shewn to us, that-having discovered the manner of cu∣ring Fevers without taking any thing by the mouth, he might present it to us, and receive Orders from us to make it public, and accord∣ingly might have it printed, under the Title of A Me∣thod
of curing all sorts of Fevers without taking any thing by the Mouth. Which he being not in a ca∣pacity to do without our Letters of Permission and Privilege requisite for it, he has humbly petitioned us, that we would grant him them. For these Reasons, being willing to treat the said Mr. Helvetius kindly, considering the Services he does every day to the Public, and the Cures he has per∣form'd of most sorts of Fe∣vers by his New Method, as
well in the Hospital of Ver∣sailles, as elsewhere. We have given him Li∣cence, and by these Presents do give him Licence to print the said Method by such Bookseller or Printer, in such a Volume, Margent, Cha∣racter, and as often as he shall think fit, during the space of Ten Years next en∣suing, to begin from the day the said Method shall be fi∣nished at the Press; to sell and distribute it throughout our Kingdom, by such Per∣sons as he shall advise with.
We prohibit all Booksellers, and others, to print or cause to be printed, sell or distribute the said Book un∣der any pretence whatsoever, either of a Foreign Impres∣sion or otherwise, without the consent of the said Hel∣vetius, or those that are in Commission under him, upon pain of Confiscation of the counterfeit Copies, two thou∣sand Livers mulct, and all costs, damages and interests; upon condition that he shall put two Copies of it in our publick Library, one in our
Cabinet of Books, at our Castle of Louvre, and the other in that of our dearly beloved and faithful Cheva∣lier, Commander of our or∣ders, Mr. Boucherat Chan∣cellour of France; as also that he takes care to print the said Book upon good Pa∣per, and in a fair Charact∣er, according to the orders of the Library and Printing; that the Impression of it be in our Kingdom and not else∣where, and that he causes these Presents to be registred in the Registry, of the Com∣pany
of the Merchant Book∣sellers and Printers at Paris, upon pain of these Presents be∣ing void & of none effect; the contents of which we command and enjoyn you, that the said Helvetius enjoy with all its rights fully and peaceably, ceasing and cau∣sing to cease all troubles and hinderances to the con∣trary. Our Will is that in putting at the beginning or end of the said Book the abstract of these Presents, they may be held authentick & duly signified, and that to
the Copies, compared by one of our beloved and faithful Coun∣sellors and Secretaries, credit may be given as to the Original. We command our first Appari∣tor or Sergeant upon this Sum∣mons to make for the executi∣on of these Presents all signifi∣cations, & other acts of justice necessary, without demand∣ing any other permission: For so is our Will and Pleasure. Given at Paris the eighth day of November, in the Year of our Lord One Thou∣sand Six Hundred Ninety Three, and in the Fifty
First Year of our Reign. Sign'd by the King in Coun∣cil. Boucher. Registred in the Book of the Company of Booksellers and Printers of Paris, the 18th of November 1693. Sign'd by Aubouyn Recorder. The first Impression fi∣nished the 2d of Janu∣ary. 1694.
This Impression was just finish'd, when Monsieur d' Rouviere, very well known by his personal merit, as well as by his composition of Treacle, the finest now made; transmitted a Letter to me, which was writ to him by the learned Monsieur Fo∣vet; which my Friends thought convenient I should give an abstract of here, that may be service∣able to the publick, as a testimony; which is so much the more consider∣able,
because it came from a good hand, and was not sought after. The ab∣stract runs thus word for word.
The Abstract of a Let∣ter from Monsieur Fovet, Physician to the King, Intendant of the Waters of Vi∣chi; to Mr. Rouviere the King's Apothe∣cary. Vichi the 30th of Novem. 1693. —If you see Monsieur Helvetius tell him, that I give him thanks, for his in∣vention of the way of curing
Fevers by giving the Bark in Clyster; for it never fails me, and before the Fever re∣turns again I repeat it, or at least cause it to be re∣peated, with very great suc∣cess. Posterity will be ve∣ry much obliged to him. The last cure I perform'd was upon a woman, seventy two years of age, who had a double Quartan with an unquenchable thirst without sleep; she nauseated every thing, and was excessive weak; all this succeeded a continual Fever she had for 6
weeks; in a word, all the Family, with the Patient her self, lookt upon this cure as un enchantment. If he pub∣lishes any writing concern∣ing it, whatever it costs, pray, Sir, let me have it. FINIS.
BOOKS sold by J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1694. THE Memoirs of Monsieur Pon∣tis, who served in the French Armies 56 Years, under Hen. IV. Lewis XIII, and Lewis XIV. Kings of France. Containing many re∣markable Passages relating to the Court, the War, and the Govern∣ment of those Princes, translated at the desire of the late Duke of Or∣mond, by Charles Cotton, Esq; and de∣dicated to his Grace, the present Duke. Sir W. Temples Memoirs of what past in Christendom from the War in 1672. to the Peace concluded 1679. 2d edit. Processus integri in morbis fere omni∣bus curandis a D. Tho. Sydenham con∣scripti, 12s. Scriveners directions to a holy Life, Oct. Dr. Barrow of Contentment, Oct.
