H3793 11800810 49378
THE Faithful and Diligent SERVANT OF THE LORD, Blessed at the COMING OF HIS LORD. As it was lately unfolded in a Funeral Discourse On the Death of Mr. THOMAS CAWTON. AND Now on the earnest desire of the Hearers Published by H. Hurst. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, 1677.
To the Christian Reader, and to those who desired the publishing of the en∣suing Discourse. Christian Reader, IT would be an indecorum, as custom now ob∣taineth, to send abroad a discourse, without direction where it may seek its entertainment: whether this be to be imputed to the great unkind∣ness of Readers, or to the unreasonable multitude of Writers, it concerns me very little to enquire, and thee as little to know. To them I send it, who I hope intended honestly, when they desired this plain discourse might be publish'd; and though perhaps it might be weakness in me to let your desires have this effect on me, yet it is no fault to wish it may, and to hope it will do thee good. It was a plain discourse in my mouth, and it was needful it should be so; and it is plain now in paper and Ink, because I was desir'd to publish what I preach'd: if it be somewhat more concise, it is not without reason (somewhat being proper enough to the Hearers, which might be less proper to Readers, who knew not those circumstances the Hearers were acquainted with). And you need quarrel the brevity of it no sooner than you find you were at
the end of it before you were willing. I am sure I had an excellent pattern of fidelity and diligence in Gods Family, when I had his life in my eye, whose death was occasion of this discourse; I will not praeoccupate your Judgment, whether I have well commended the Duty to you, or encouraged you to the performance of it. I pray of you a serious and heedful Reading: and I pray to God that he would give you such a heart as he requireth, such a life of holy care to save your selves and others, that God may give you the blessedness of faithful Ser∣vants in life, at death, to eternity. That this may contribute to all these, prayeth, Your Souls Friend, H. HƲRST. April 20. 1677.
Luk. XII. Ver. 43. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. I Think I need not give a Reason of my choice of this Text, when I have told you the occasion of the words: If you will look into the Context, you will soon see how great agreement there is in it, to this mournful occa∣sion; and that there was sufficient rea∣son why I should fix here, where the best encouragement of faithful Servants is laid before us, and an example of such an one is to be treated by us. Nor shall I need other reason to perswade you to attend to what shall be spoken. Our blessed Lord, having exhorted his hearers to a rea∣diness and watchfulness, which becometh Servants whose Lord will certainly come, though they know not when, ver. 35, 36. And having encouraged them with the pro∣posal of blessedness, ver. 37, 38, in case they do attend diligently to this Duty, and persevere in it unto his coming; and withall, proposing it in so comprehen∣sive a manner, that it did not appear whether it were spoken to all equally, or to some more than unto o∣thers: Saint Peter, either out of desire to know his Duty, or out of curiosity to know his Lords mind, doth (as in some other cases he did) make the enquiry, ver. 42, whether the Parable were spoken unto all, or
only to the Disciples and Apostles, Lord, speakest thou this unto us, or even unto all? unto which query, Christ gives such an answer as doth more closely bind our Du∣ty on us, and awakeneth all concerned in it, to see to it that they do their duty, be ready for their account, and wait for their blessedness; And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, &c? Christ seems to have answered with a check to his curiosity, but with a direction to his and our willingness to our Duty; as if Christ had plainly told him, I speak to as many as hope to be blessed by their Lord when he cometh, excluding none who pretend to the relation of Servants to the Lord, or to the hoped reward; who so would be found faithful in his work, and blessed for it; who so is either Servant or Steward, to him I speak; and according to the proportion of the Talents and Trust, I do advise to diligence and fidelity in their employs, and assure of blessedness to their fidelity. Be then your condition what it will, whether higher or lower in your Lords Family, if you are in that con∣dition faithful, and wise, and helpful to your fellow-Servants, and so continue to be till your Lord shall come, you are and shall be blessed. For, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. The words I shall, with your leave, briefly Para∣phrase: [Blessed], we so express a good, comfortable, and desirable state: It is well with him that is blessed; and he is thus well, who is thus well doing, and found in it. [Is that Servant, whom, &c.] This noteth the uni∣versality of it, extending to all, and yet pointeth out the persons, who are here put under the Character of blessedness; That Servant, though no more; That Steward or Ruler, if so much, is the person Christ speaks of, who shall be blessed, when his Lord, who hath authority
and right to require and direct our obedience, who hath right of calling us to account, and of distributing re∣wards; when Christ shall come, then they who served him faithfully, shall be blessed, and in a good condition. [When he cometh] which referreth both to the time when, and to the manner how he cometh; at what time soever, or in what manner soever our Lord shall come, all his faithful servants shall be blessed, for they are found [so doing]; which you must refer, partly to what was spoken more remotely in the Parable, and concerneth all according to the capacity in which they are, Servants in the Family; and partly to what was spoken in the foregoing verse, where Stewards and Rulers in the Family, giving to the Family its portion of meat in season, are described, and supposed to be found faithful and wise in this charge; and these are they who are so expresly pronounced happy in their so doing. Briefly, this so doing, is doing the office of our places, and doing it according to the Rule there∣of, wisely, faithfully and diligently. The words thus opened, do lay in open view before us, 1. A Lord who will sometime or other certainly come to see what his Servants are in their several places doing. 2. A blessedness or happy condition of some of those Servants. 3. The Character of those who shall be happy, which Cha∣racter is made up of the particulars mentioned distinct∣ly in ver. 42, and summ'd up in the Text in so doing. Hence then passing by other particulars, I commend to your attention this Doctrine. Doct. That whensoever, and however our Lord shall come, all his Servants, especially his Stewards, who have been wise, faithful, and diligent in his family, giving to all their portion in season, shall be found in a good and happy state. It is not certain when or how our Lord will come;
but whenever it is, or however it may be, they are Servants and Stewards in happy state who are found fit for, and faithful in the Lords Service. His condition is and shall be good, who is a good ser∣vant to the Great and good God. The meanest, and most ordinary Servants in the family being faithful, are blessed according to their capacities; the Stewards who are above ordinary Servants in their charge, abilities, and account, are also above them in their blessedness, when they are found faithful to their Lord. It is a good, and a great imployment to be a Servant: It is a better and greater thing to be a Steward in Gods Fami∣ly, the Church of Christ. It is the best temper to be wise and faithful in discharge of either, as our Lord shall appoint to us and require of us. Now in handling this Doctrine, that I may speak fully to it, I shall desire you with me to consider, 1. The time when our Lord cometh. 2. The manner in which he cometh. 3. The Scriptures do assure us his faithful Servants are happy. 4. Wherein their happiness doth consist. 5. Why appropriated to so doing, i. e. to giving the Portion to each, &c. 6. Why deferred until the coming of our Lord. When these are dispatched, the Doctrinal part will afford us profitable Application. Now to the first thing proposed, I answer: 1. General. e of our ds coming. That our Lord in his coming doth not observe the same time towards all; he cometh sooner to some, he stays longer to others; our experience and observation herein is an undeniable witness. Some Parents God hath taken away sooner, and left in younger days both Wiows and fatherless Children: Some Preachers have hd the opportunities of Forty or Fifty years, when o∣thers
have been called to their rest at half that period. You know not how long God may continue you to yours, or them with you; P. Martyr aged 63. H. Bulling 50 years d aged 71. Guil. Fare lived 76 ye Bishop Lat∣mer lived years, and Gataker. Nicol. Hem∣mingius, ag 87. Theod. Beza aged 87. Dr. Chader 89. Pet. Nanniu insigni litera∣tura, viz. 10 A. you had not been now mourn∣ing under this loss, if God had given to all his faithful Ministers the same length of time for their work, to which some attended longer than others have lived. The years of labour to some exceeding by much the years of Life given to others. Thus 35 or 36 end the life, and of these, some 16 or 17 years end the Labours of this Ser∣vant of God; yet he dyed not the youngest Minister that ever yet dyed. But the unaccountable variety here bids me forbear to enquire farther into it. 2. That our Lords coming is according to his own de∣termined purpose: Our times for life and service are in Gods hand; they are reserved with him, and he will come in his own time. Were our times in other hands, we might be unseasonably hurried too soon out of Life and Labour, by unkind hands of ill-willers; or detained too long by the unwillingness of our Friends to part with us. But our Lord hath appointed, and will keep his own set-time to come to us. 3. There can no measures be given beforehand, what time our Lord will take to come to us in. Nor may we expect any such Rules from any by which to guess how long it will be ere our Lord will come to you, or me; Thousands have within our time and observation (if we had heeded it) been summoned, when all about them have thought they might have continued much longer. Parents have lost their Children, Wives have lost their Husbands, and People have been deprived of their Pastors on a sudden, when no such calaiy was fear'd. Our Lord hath not made an hour to come sure to any of us, or invested us with a Right to another suc∣ceeding moment. Our rule is, Work now, attend on the present business God lays before us, for our Lord comes
at an hour we know not of, as Matth. 24.42, sooner or later; expected, or unexpected; seasonably to our com∣fort, or unseasonably to our Friends, Relations, and Churches grief; we cannot foretel. Sure we are, he cometh not to all at one age, nor to any in any time but his own; nor with certain fore-warnings of weeks, or days, or hours; he hath no where told us he will stay a day longer for the youngest of us: It is enough that he doth assure us, if we are faithful in our places, and serve him, we shall be blessed in so doing. And as the time is thus various, so in the second place, His manner of com∣ing is various; of which next. 2. Gen. Gen. The ner of our is coming. There are five several ways wherein the Lord is pleas'd to come toward us. 1. He cometh in publick afflictions, and general cala∣mities upon Kingdoms, or Nations, or People, among which many of his faithful servants dwell, and are with others oftentimes involved in their troubles and sorrows: When the Lord did call (Psal. 50) his Saints together, vers. 3, he tells us a fire shall devour before him; and this is the effect when God shall come, and not keep silence. Of such a coming Isaiah speaketh in these words, The Lord shall come out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth, Isa. 26.21. The faithful Servants of God inha∣biting the earth with others, may thus feel the castiga∣tory indignation of their Father. And in his Prophe∣tick lofty strains, the same Prophet doth lively de∣scribe this coming of the Lord, Chap. 13.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 verses, Who is represented coming with the weapons of his indignation, vers. 5, And the day of de∣struction cometh, vers. 6, To lay the land desolate, vers. 9, which was indeed accomplisht in its time on Jerusalem and the Jews after they had rejected Christ, and crucified him; yet then at this coming, those that were faithful, were found in a good Condition; they were blessed who
served the Lord, and prepar'd for his coming; though this be not the coming chiefly meant in the Text, yet the Doctrine is sound in this regard. 2. Sometime the Lord cometh in that manner, that par∣ticular families or persons are found out by the rod and corrections. Lev. 20.5, God speaks of cutting off a house or person. Dent. 29, 18, 19. God warneth persons in a Family, and the Family too; now if such do not take warning, but provoke him, he will in his own time come to correct or punish such a person or family: of this manner of proceeding are we to understand that of 1 Sam. 2.30, 31, and cap. 3.13. When God doth thus visit persons, or families, he is properly enough said to come against them, and in such cases still it holdeth true, Those servants of God who are faithful in their service to God, are blessed, or in a good condition. So Eli was, though he smarted under the Rod; and David comforted himself in the prospect hereof, 2 Sam. 23.5, though his house should not grow; though severe corrections and rebukes should cause the Beauty of his house to wither; yet God would give him the Covenant-salvation, it should be well with him, in case of such coming: though the Text less intend it, the Doctrine is both true and useful. 3. Sometime the Lord cometh to search and try mens state, and conscience is awakened to make enquiry, and to discover them to themselves. While God stands as at a di∣stance, men are secure; but when he cometh by his Word and Spirit, and commands an admission, he sets up that light within the mans soul that discovers what he hath done, what he may expect, and what he farther must do. The word is sharp as a two-edged sword, and searcheth the reins, Heb. 4.12. And thus the secrets of mens hearts are discovered, when God cometh with his word, 1 Cor. 14.25, among men. When God heweth men by his prophets,
and maketh his judgments as the light, Hos. 6.5, then he cometh into the heart and conscience. Now cer∣tainly the Faithful and Diligent are in a good condition, when their hearts do not condemn them, when they know God will not condemn them. But oh the sad condition of those that dare not look themselves in them∣selves! that are self-condemned, and afraid to know what God discovereth at such coming! The Kings of Judah, who did not obey the Command of the Lord, could not endure the Prophets, or their word. But Josiah who was faithful to God, can bear such a searching word, 2 Chron. 34.19. & 27. ver. Who desire to be faithful to God, they dare abide this coming; it doth discover their sincerity, and declare them happy. In this case (though not directly intended by the Text) it holdeth true, All Gods faithful Servants and Stew∣ards are found in a good and happy state. But next, which is that coming intended chiefly in the words and Doctrine: 4. When Death is the Messenger God sendeth to let us know he is coming to us, when he fetcheth us from amidst men, and cometh to take account of each of us; each man by man, thus visited, is either more or less happy, as he is found more or less faithful and di∣ligent at this coming of the Lord; this is that com∣ing, of which by concurrent vote of our Interpreters the Text doth speak, as also doth its Parallels, Matt. 24. ver. 42, 43. and Mark 13. ver. 34, 35, 36. of which I say the less, because it passing with so general con∣sent, needs not much proof. But, Fifthly and lastly, The Lord cometh in his Glory and Majesty to raise the dead, and to Judg all men. They who now do, shall not eternally sleep in the dust; God will come and call them out of their beds: The Lord Jesus will descend with the voice of the Trump,
and the dead shall hear and rise, to the great, general and last judgment. Thus he cometh to judg the world (Psal. 96.13, and 98.9,) with righteousness, and the people with equity. Places that, speaking of the Kingdom of the Mes∣siah, do include this Royal procedure which shall con∣summate his ministerial Government. When he cometh (as Rev. 1.7,) in view of every eye, for every eye shall see him when he thus cometh; or as 'tis described, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24, 25, At this coming the Faithful diligent Servant is in good state. Briefly then, Whether our Lord come sooner or later to try the heart by his word, or families by his Rod, or Nations, as he did try the Jews by more pub∣lick calamities; In these cases the most faithful of his Servants and Stewards are in the most safe and blessed state; but when he cometh as the judg of all men to par∣ticular judgment, calling each man by death; and to the general judgment, calling all men before him; He, and he only is in a good and blessed state, who is found to have been faithful and diligent in his Stewardship and Service within the House and Family of God, giving to each what portion of meat is due to them. Which is In the third place now to be proved by the more ge∣neral Testimony of the Scriptures. 3. Gen. Proofs of the Doctrine. Where we find all faithful and diligent Servants, and Stewards especially, pronounced blessed and happy in their attendance to the work of doing good to all as they are able, and therein serving their Lord, and waiting for his coming. So Rev. 14.1, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord: Death is the greatest, as well as last Enemy to our life; yet if that natural life be spent for the Lord, and we dye in him, we are blessed; for such mens Works do follow them, and they rest from their Labours. Now certainly lesser troubles, and lighter afflictions can∣not render him or her unhappy, whom Death found and left in a blessed state; so that to work those works
which we would have to follow us, and to dye in the Lord, as they prove our Fidelity, so they do prove our Felicity, and at once prove us good Christians, and in good state. Again, Matth. 25.34, 35, Come ye blessed of my father, &c. These are such who fed, cloathed, harboured, visited, and refreshed those in the Lords Fa∣mily, though the least of his Family, vers. 40, which was as much a Duty to them who could do it, as it was useful to others for whom it was done: Now they are declared happy ones, who had thus, according to their opportunity Ministred unto others. And much more will they appear blessed, who have faithfully directed thirsty Souls to the Fountain of living Waters, hungry Souls to the Bread of Life, naked Souls to the white Robes, wandring Souls to the rest of Souls. Again, Matth. 7.21, Not he that saith, Lord, Lord, but he that doth the Will of my heavenly Father, &c. not a fruitless profession, but a faithful obedience; not an unactive complement, but a diligent fulfilling the Will of our Lord, is at last a blessing to us; he is in a good state indeed, whose Lord doth reward his Service with an entrance into, and enjoyment of eternal life in Heaven. And no∣thing can alter it to him, who altereth not his course of Faithfulness and Diligence. Such an one is (Jam. 1.22,) Blessed in his deed: now who is blessed in doing his work, can never be in ill-state whilst he is doing it; and he is in better state when the work done is rewarded: whose work is his happiness, cannot but be happy, whilst he attends his work; and this is the case of all diligent and sincere observers of Gods Commandments, Psal. 19.11. The keeping them is a great reward. Christians consider it, if glory, honour, immortality, and eternal life, can be a blessedness to us, we are assured of this, For every soul that doth good (as God requireth) whether Jew or Gen∣tile, Rom. 2.13. There is a crown of righteousness (2 Tim.
4.8. for St. Paul who had fought a good fight, &c. Yea, but if it were limited to his person, none could rejoyce herein with assurance for themselves; or were it limited to his excellent qualifications, and unparallel'd diligence, few or none of us could argue our own right hereby; therefore it is added, not for me only, but for all that love his appearing. It is then unquestionable, that when the Lord shall come by Death and particular Judgment to any of us; and when he shall come in the general Judgment to us all, every faithful and diligent Servant shall be blessed. And the blessedness of that future state, will as much make and keep every state here in our way to it, good and happy, as gains of thousands yearly will make and keep him rich who loseth some farthings or pence now and then. Thus in general, the common and ordinary Servants find their diligence and fidelity to be their happiness; Stewards and Ministers of the grace of God find it much more their happiness to have been faithful and diligent. So the Holy Ghost seems to speak for encouragement to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2.10. And 2 Cor. 4.1, Mini∣sters of the Gospel are mentioned, who did handle the word of God faithfully, and commended themselves to the consciences of men, vers. 2. Who did preach not themselves, but Christ, vers. 5. Who were troubled on every side, vers. 8. Of these it is said, that light and mo∣mentary afflictions work for them a far more exceed∣ing and eternal weight of glory, vers. 17, 18. The share Ministers shall have in answer to the diligence and faith∣fulness of their Labours, shall be greater than the share of common or ordinary Christians at the coming of him who is Lord to them all. When each Believer hath his Crown, and all their joys are full, then are those Be∣lievers an accession to the glory and joy of their faith∣ful diligent Ministers, who labour'd for their Conversion, and helped forward their final and eternal salvation,
1 Thes. 2.19, 20. And once for all, that of Dan. 12.3, Who turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the bright∣ness of the firmament, &c. Each faithful Minister shall have his Aureola, golden Ornament added to his Crown: though all the faithful Servants of the Lord shall be as the stars, yet one star differeth from another; the most bright and glorious will be those who were on earth the stars that Christ held in his right hand, Rev. 2.1. These Scriptures, with others, which might be added, do confirm the blessed future state of faithful and diligent Servants, and Stewards, who in the Lords family attend to their work, and serve the Lord by their affording what help they can to all; and in proportion to their trust and fidelity, shall be their happiness at Death and Judg∣ment. And in the mean time, in what ever way of cor∣rections or judgments the Lord may come to others, and to them while they are among others, and are liable to troubles; yet they shall be found blessed in publick troubles, blessed in private troubles, blessed under per∣sonal trials, at death more, in the resurrection most bles∣sed, happy, and in good state in all these cases. Now wherein this blessedness consisteth, is the fourth proposed head of our discourse, to which your attention is now desired, that you may be throughly affected with this undoubted truth, and be brought to a greater re∣solution for fidelity and diligence according to your Talents, and may at last have a larger measure of this pre∣sent, and that future blessedness, which I thus range be∣fore you. 4. Gen. What the blessedness of faithful Ser∣vants. 1. The faithful and wise Servant of the Lord is blessed in the pardon of his sins, and culpable blemishes, which in∣termix with his services. He that will be so wise for, and faithful to his fellow Servants, as to perswade, di∣rect, encourage and help them to serve the Lord, cannot be suppos'd will not be wise for himself, or unfaithful to
himself, or neglect to sue out a Pardon for his known and unknown infirmities: The good man Nehemiah, cap. 13.22, sought this pardoning Grace from the greatness of Gods mercy, when he reflected upon the great services he had done for God and his Church. David, the man after Gods own heart, joins this suit for Pardon, to his re∣quests for guiding in the ways of God, to which he was fully addicted, Psal. 25.4, 5, 6. and in midst of troubles he sueth for the same mercy, Psal. 25. ver. 15.16, 17, 18. When his feet were in the net, v. 15. when desolate, v. 16. when troubles were enlarged into distresses, v. 17. Then he pray'd that God would forgive all his sin. So the re∣turning Church, Hos. 14. ver. 2, prays, and God promi∣seth he will do it, ver. 4. And so Micah 7. ver. 18.19. Now this maketh any condition good and safe: The man whose transgression is forgiven, Psal. 32. ver. 1, is in eve∣ry place and in every condition a safe and happy man. God who pitieth infirmities, pardoneth them where he finds sincerity in his Servants. He that faithfully warns another, and calls on him to repent, and seek his Pardon; he that faithfully endeavours to engage others to do their Duty, and seek for mercy, is a man whom God hath af∣fected, so as to ensure the blessedness for himself which he perswades others to look after. Parents, Husbands, Wives, Friends and Ministers, who heartily desire and labour to get others into the service of God, on terms and encouragements sufficient to prevail with them, are indeed the persons whom we must in charity believe are pardoned. I should think he were pardoned who com∣mended the Grace of his Prince, who perswaded to all due Allegiance for future, and urged his fellow Sub∣ject to sue for Pardon of what had been ill and unduti∣fully done already. It is certain the faithful are forgiven and blessed therein, though perhaps they have not sense of it, or we evidences to prove it of them. Now no condition
can come on such a man, to render him miserable or in e∣vil state. 2. The blessedness of such faithful and diligent ones does lie in that gracious acceptance which God doth afford to them for all their sincere and willing obedience, though imperfect in it self, unsuccessful to others, and altogether unprofitable to God. It is a blessed thing to be accepted with God; this is Heaven upon Earth; this is Heaven af∣ter we leave Earth. The Lord rejecteth none that he hath fitted for, and who are faithful in his charge: This was a blessing that David intreated of the Lord, Psal. 19.14, Let the meditations of my heart, and the words of my mouth be acceptable in thy sight, &c. This gracious acceptance did in Davids troubles counter-balance the grieviousness of his troubles, Psal. 69. ver. 7, 8, with ver. 13. He could bear the reproach of enemies, when he knew his prayer should be acceptable unto his God. No Courtier despis'd by Rebels is so happy in his Prince's Favour, and free access to his Prince's Person, as such diligent and faithful Servants are in their access to, and acceptance with their God. You may guess at what I say by the re∣sentment Cain (of men one of the worst) had of Gods refusing to accept him, Gen. 4. ver. 5. It cast him down, and fill'd him with trouble. No condition is uneasy to a soul that enjoys Gods Favour; for it is better than life, Psal. 63. ver. 3. and every condition is dark and doleful without his favour. What is Hell, but a place where hopeless Souls are under the inconceivable Tortures of an eternal rejection and separation from God? What is Hea∣ven but a glorious, free, full and eternal state of nearness to God, and of favour with him? This acceptance is the great blessing God hath promised to such as serve and love him, Isa. 56.7. It is the sum of all we obtain through Christ, in whom we are accepted with God, Eph. 1. ver. 6. Matt. 25. ver. 21, Well done good and faithful Servant, is
enough to make us blessed now; enter thou into the joy of thy Master is fulness of the future blessedness. In every state, and at the coming of the Lord, thus blessed is the good Servant. 3. This Blessedness of the faithful and good Servant, doth lie partly in the peace and tranquility of his mind, perswaded that now sin is pardoned and his duties are ac∣cepted: every condition shall at last give place to what is best, and all shall work together for good to him; though va∣rious troubles do tols him, yet they (like rowling waves) carry the Ship toward the Harbour. It is well with him, because he knoweth the knife which lanceth him, doth not make him a Sacrifice under avenging Justice. And though he is corrected, yet it is under the hand of a Fa∣ther, he is not destroyed by the hand of an Executioner. He is satisfied that it is good for him that he hath been af∣flicted, Psal. 119. ver. 67, 71, 75. When he suffers with others, he seeth he needed it; so all appears seasonable, necessary and profitable to him, 1 Pet. 1.6, We are in heaviness for a season if need be, and for our profit, Heb. 12. ver. 10. It is blessed to be refined, and God doth by his coming intend this, Isa. 48. ver. 10, That he may chuse them before others. Now this considered, the faithful Servants of God do account their condition good, for that it is always tending to, and shall at last end in what is best for them: It is on the increase towards full happiness. 4. The faithful and good Servants happiness doth partly consist in that support which his Lord giveth to him under his burthens; while he submits to the will of his Lord waits for him, and doth his Duty, he is supported by the presence of his Lord: He sinketh not, because the Lord uphold∣eth him, Psal. 94. ver. 17, 18. When Davids feet did well nigh slip, the Lords mercy held him up. It is an unutter∣able variety of helps that God affordeth to his faithful
ones, they are very secret, unexpected, strong and satis∣factory, many times beyond the belief of strangers, and the hope of those who receive them, Isa. 43.2, In midst of Rivers and waters, in midst of fire and flames; if God promise to be with us, we may account our condition good and safe; for his presence shall save us from Rivers, that they do not overflow us, and from Fire, that it kin∣dle not on us. Now thus safe and good is the conditi∣on of every faithful Servant of God, he is pardoned, ac∣cepted, bettered, and supported still, The Angel of Gods presence is with him, and saveth him, Isa. 63. ver. 9. He is blessed whom God will save, whom God will support. It is sad to be left sinking under our burthens; but to be supported under them, is next to a blessed freedom from them, or next to a life above them. 5. However, it may be death shall be the sad consequence of a faithful and diligent Servants sufferings with others; yet he is in this case blessed too: For he might die in peace and joy; he doth at least die in safety, and free from danger of suture evils. It is possible a good Servant may die under fears, but he doth not die under danger of con∣demnation; Who walk in their integrity, enter into their Rest, Isa. 57. ver. 2. Though Death be an enemy, it is last to a child of God: Stewards and Servants though faith∣ful and diligent, yet they must die; but after death there is no other enemy, all is then safe to them: they pass by Death to the enjoyment of the love of their Lord, to be filled with that love which is inconceivable, and possess that love which is eternal; from which, Nothing can ever separate them, Rom. 8. ver. 37, 38. thus death is theirs, 1 Cor. 3. ver. 22. Now that is a blessed state indeed which is so full of safety: How do dying men acknowledg this! when Death brings no danger with it, we are happy in∣deed: This Balaam wish'd for, though he never attain∣ed it. The untrusty and slothful Servant is unhappy in
his death, because he dyeth under greatest danger, he dyeth an evil and wicked Servant; the good Servant dyeth as safe as he can wish, and as happy as he can be made. Which will appear in the Sixth thing, wherein the blessed state of such doth con∣sist: They pass after death immediately into an incon∣ceivable glory, where their souls purifi'd from all sin, and made perfectly holy, enjoy a blessed, though not a full con∣summated glory: they are in the joys of their master; they live in the sight of their glorifi'd redeemer, triumph over sin and temptation; assured of the future resur∣rection of their bodies, without tediousness of a delay wait for it; they possess their building of God, their house not made with hands, which is eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. They are before the throne, &c. Rev. 7.14. Thus blessed in life, in death, after death, are the faithful Servants of the Lord. And yet, this is not all, there is A seventh thing, part of their blessedness, which, when their Lord cometh, they shall enjoy, that is, the resurrection of their bodies in a glorious conformity to the glorifi'd body of their redeemer. When the Lord of these Servants and Stewards we speak of, shall come and awaken all out of their beds of dust; His good Servants, whose bodies were sown in dishonour, shall receive their bodies raised in honour: those bodies which were sown mortal and weak, shall be raised immortal, and in strength, fit to be the eternal habitation of immortal souls; and both soul and body united, shall ever live in a most de∣lightful, regular and sinless harmony and friendship. You that admire the unparallel'd beauties of mortal creatures, and judg That their happiness, which is your envy or wish; withdraw your eye, and look to the Grave, whence the rarest beauties are at last to rise, whence the firmest strength, the most desirable activity, and the spiritfullest
vigor. And then say whether you can think them less than blessed, who have their part in this Resurrection, to allude to that of Saint John. Nothing shall ever be able to hinder them from this, which though exceeding great, is yet followed with ano∣ther part necessary to their happiness; which is, 8thly, A publick, solemn and full declaration of their absolution from the charge which men or Devils, in their accusation of them, would load them with; nay, the charge wherewith the Law would burthen them, shall be fully and solemnly taken off: when they shall be justified before men and Angels, from all that from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.38, which shall be when our Lord shall proceed in Judgment towards all, when according to the order of the Resurrection, those that are Christs, shall be first called, judged and absolved; when according to the order of the Parable, Matt. 25.34, Those shall be adjuged to glory first, who fed the hun∣gry, cloathed the naked, took into their houses those that were strangers, &c. This I doubt not, you'l confess is a great happiness in∣deed: well, when our Lord cometh, thus happy shall all his faithful and diligent Servants be, who in life laid out themselves in labour for the Lord, who in death rest from their labours, and whose labours follow them into Judg∣ment, to be examined, pardoned and rewarded according to the riches of Grace. 9thly, Our Lord, when he cometh, will add another thing to their happiness: They shall then with him, as assessors and approvers of his righteous proceeding with the rest of the world, sit Judges of the world; of this we are assured, Jude 14, The Lord cometh with (or in midst of) ten thousand of his Saints to Judg, &c. Of this the Apo∣stle speaks more clearly, 1 Cor. 6.2, The Saints shall judg the world: Nay, more, we shall judg Angels, saith the
Apostle. This honour have all his Saints; and in this they are blessed: and this is enough to make every con∣dition good to them, until the glorious coming of their Lord, until they are thus advanced: In a word, Christ seems to promise to his, who are more than the ordinary Servants in his Family, a more than ordinary degree of this Honour, Luk. 22. ver. 28, 29, 30. with Matt. 19.28. I will not enquire how far faithful Stewards and Mi∣nisters are herein, next to the Apostles, concerned: It is well for them, their faithfulness to souls shall then be ma∣nifested and honoured. 10thly and lastly, Christ our Lord, when he cometh in the Glory of his Father Judg of all, will, when the solem∣nity of Judgment is finished, and the wicked world is cast into Hell, thrown into the place of Torment, where their worm dieth not, where the fire is not quenched; Then Christ will take all his faithful ones, and pass with them into the inconceivable and eternal Glory of his King∣dom, brought to the fullest degree of greatness and Majesty that is foretold to us. When they shall ever be with the Lord, and behold his Glory; when they shall be like to him whom they see, and be filled with that Glory that shi∣neth on them; when all the Saints of God, and none o∣thers, shall be amassed into one great and general assem∣bly, and all orderly ranged before the throne of God, and the Lamb ministring in sinless praises, love and adorati∣on for ever. Now certainly, could you and I lift up our eyes to∣wards this illustrious assembly; could we view them there, we should ever be satisfied, That diligence in, and faithfulness to the service of our Lord, according to our capacity, now is, and will, at the coming of our Lord, appear to be as much our comfort and happiness, as it is our Duty, and ought to be our care. Oh then, let us consider, What it is to be acquitted from guilt: What to
be approved and rewarded: What 'tis to be bettered by all providences: What to die in safety at last: Is not this to be blessed? Is not this to die the death of the righteous? Why Christians, your faithfulness and diligence shall so be found, and so end, if you continue it. Do we believe a glory succeeds our death, a resurrection our burial, a publick absolution our being judged? shall we sit assessors, approvers, and witnesses to the Great Judg, and pass with him into glory everlasting? And shall not our unwearied diligence and faithfulness exercised in his Service, prove we believe the truth, and expect this bene∣fit hereof? I hope now you will be less moved with pre∣sent difficulties, and more fixed for future diligence in serving the Lord, and doing good to his Family, expres∣sed here by giving the Portion of meat in season; in which appears the wisdom and fidelity of Servants and Stewards, and to which blessedness is annexed and appro∣priated in the Text. The Reason whereof, is the fifth ge∣neral head of discourse, and which we shall now briefly touch upon. 1. Wisdom and faithfulness in Servants and Stewards, Gen. Why  Ted, who e the Por∣ of, &c. are the best qualifications, and comprise all that a Lord and Master requireth, or need require in them: for wisdom makes them meet for such a trust, and faithfulness encou∣rageth their Lord to trust them. And both these appear in their observing what is fit for each person and season, and applying to both accordingly. So when Fathers know what is fit for Children, and Masters know what is fit for Servants, and Ministers for their people, and ac∣cordingly instruct, reprove, warn, encourage, or com∣fort them: Here is both the widom and fidelity requisite to a good Servant; and the Lord, who intends in the Text to oblige us to all that good Servants and Stewards should do, hath thus closely couched all our Duty in this comprehensive phrase. So the blessedness is appropri∣ated,
not to a single Duty, but to the universal dili∣gent discharge of all our Duty; which is summed up in this giving to each other our Portion of meat in season. 2. Thus we are seasonably minded of that great and necessary duty, which the last and worst age of the world doth neglect; we are minded of giving mutual help and furtherance to each other in the way of Holiness and Obedience. Our disputing, quarrelling, censuring, and condemning age, is ready to turn one another out of the way, to dispute each other out of the truth, and to quarrel each other for doing their duty, instead of help∣ing each other to do it: But this little becomes Servants and Stewards in the same Family; this is no part of their wisdom or fidelity; Christ knew we should (unto his coming) need each others help, and hath therefore so commended it as our wisdom and fidelity, and so en∣couraged the discharge of it by this large reward. Let us then have so much reason to see the excellency of the duty and temper, and so much Religion before God, and love to our selves, as to get this temper that we may do the duty, and receive the reward, and be at last blessed with those we helpt towards Hea∣ven. 3. This giving the portion of meat in season: This charitable benificence, puts a great honour upon Religion, and commends it to others: And Christ doth therefore expect we should thus adorn our Profession; and he en∣courageth us to it, by such a declaration of the blessed∣ness of those who attend this duty. A wise, faithful, and diligent Physitian credits his Profession, and con∣vinceth men, that it is very useful and profitable to man∣kind. A Christian of such a temper in Christianity, and so exercising himself to do this comprehensive good in his place, doth as much convince the world, that Chri∣stianity
is of all Professions most useful to mankind, who are by it helped forward in the arduous and important affairs of eternity. 4. Thus we are awakened to greater watchfulness over our selves and others, and minded of observing, laying hold on, and improving opportunities; which, though we are so engaged not to let slip, yet we too too often let fall quite out of our own hands: and that becometh for ever impossible to us, which once might have been easi∣ly effected by us. Time is not easily redeemed, but opportunities are more difficultly recovered, and for most part once slipt, and for ever lost: Well then, might such Emphasis be laid on this Duty of giving a portion in season, that all might be awakened to heed what op∣portunities are in their hand. Oh consider it, I beseech you, Parents for your Children, Husbands for your Wives, Masters for your Servants, elder ones for the younger, and Ministers for their People; you cannot always live, they must dye, and neither can give or receive helps when death swallows up your opportunities. You'l never hear him catechising, preaching, praying, and ex∣horting, who now rests in his grave; and you are not sure you shall ever have such another. How heedful should we be then to receive our portion when offered, and to offer it to others while we may; and be so found prepared for the reward which is promised to these good Servants, but is reserved until the coming of our Lord: The reason of which delay or adjourning of our happiness is the sixth General branch of our discourse, and now cometh to be considered. And so, 1.  Gen. This ssedness y reserved  last coming, &c. The seasons and manner of our Lords coming before Death and Judgment, are notable discoveries of the un∣happiness of sinners, and therefore do by a necessary conse∣quence manifest the happiness of the servants of God; Though light is always pleasant, yet it was most pleasant
in Goshen, when Egypt lay in darkness. Heaven is al∣ways desirable, but when the misery threatned involves the contemners of it, they will appear blessed indeed, who sought it, and obtain'd it. The various coming of our Lord doth shew the world the evil state in which the unbelieving and rebellious sinners are found, and so cannot but shew the good state in which the faithful are found to be at his coming. 2. There is somewhat of Royal prerogative in it: God will have his last coming to be the season, because it seems good to him that it should be so. And this were reason enough, though there were no other; he hath reserved times and seasons in his own hand: and he who gives the reward freely, may (surely) choose the time where∣in he will give it. That ever he will give, it is grace; that he will give it at last, is his pleasure; of which none ever complain'd, when they received the blessing. 3. There is much of Decorum, and due order herein: it would not be so seasonable at any other time; their Ser∣vice is for the Lord their Master, and he is the fittest to view their Service, and to assign their recompence; they did not expect their happiness before his coming, and yet they professed they should receive it at his com∣ing; and now when times and seasons suit their expecta∣tions and declared hopes, there appears a just order and harmony between times and things: Now the promise, and their hopes are consonant to each other. 4. There is somewhat of that we call necessary in the case, their happiness is reserved to that time, because it could not be sooner. For, 1. All the greatest good Gods Servants can receive be∣fore this coming of their Lord, is too little and mean to be their blessedness; besides that, most of external advantages are the rewards of such as shall never have better, and are given to hypocrites, Now 'tis necessary
that faithful Servants should stay till they may receive a better reward than hypocrites have. 2. It is necessary all their work be done, before they receive their full blessedness; now their work ends not till they dye, then their works follow them, and they are blessed. It is not more necessary a Labourer do his work, ere he receive his wages; or a Soldier conquer, ere he triumph; than that the faithful Servants of the Lord do all their work ere they are blessed and fully recompenced for it. 3. Full blessedness of Gods Servants must be in a place and state where all (not one excepted) may meet, and be joynt-heirs of the same inheritance. Now this cannot be in any place or state, but that to which (at the Lords coming) they shall be carried. Now we come into the world, live a few days, and in small numbers together, and cannot live all together, nor long together; your tears witness it: but we must be all gathered together ere all tears shall be wiped from all faces, and this can∣not be but where our Lord will be with us for ever, which will not, cannot be till his coming. 4. Ʋntil death be conquered, and we raised immortal, which cannot be till the last coming of our Lord, we are not able to bear that glory which must be our final and full blessedness: none can see God while they live, mortal flesh is too weak for immortal Glory, this is too weighty a Crown for heads that must lye down in dust: We must dye, that we may be raised immortal, and so be made capable of our final happiness. Ʋlt. lastly, in a word, The eternal Presence of God with us in the immediate fruits of it, is our objective happiness, and necessary to our reward; and this cannot be hoped or enjoyed whilst we are on this side eternity, and are measur'd by time: But when the last coming of our Lord shall determine the periods of time, and fix our
eternity, which shall commence at the expiration of time: Then he will never more be absent from us, or hide his presence, or abate it to us. This being necessary to our happiness, it is necessary we stay until his last coming; wherein you will, I hope, and wherein I pray that you may meet the faithful and diligent Ser∣vants of God, his Stewards; wherein I perswade my self you will meet this faithful servant of Christ, whom you now lament, but shall then ever rejoyce with him. Sirs, I believe you will scarce doubt the truth I have preached; I am sure you cannot with reason contradict it: I hope you will not through slothful hearts lose the proposed blessedness which is last, that it may be best to you. I have now done with all the Doctrinal part, and think I have spoken to as much as needed to be handled in it: I proceed to the Uses of the Point; which I shall confine to these two following: 1. Information: Hence we may learn, 1. Use. Information. 1. That the care and business of Christians is as their priviledg, ve∣ry great: Happiness in every condition and state is an exceeding great priviledg; and to be faithful and di∣ligent in the Lords Family, according to our Talents and Relations, is no light and easy care, or work; it requires much wisdom, and much heedfulness. I wish we were more apprehensive of both, that our endea∣vour to be faithful might somewhat answer our hopes to be happy; if you separate them now, God will se∣parate you from them hereafter, when death shall cut you off from your opportunities, and Judgment shall cut you off from your hopes. Be holy, and serve your Lord, as ever you hope to be happy with your Lord. 2. Hence learn, The first part of a faithful Servants and Stewards work is the more troublesome, the last
part is most sweet, and satisfactory; Sincerity and Dili∣gence are sweetest at last. The idle revelling Servant is most at ease when his Master is at farthest distance; but the diligent and faithful Servant doth most rejoyce when his work is nearest an end, his Master nearest com∣ing, and his reward nearest to his hand. All that is difficult, is at first somewhat harsh to our weakness; but when difficulties are well nigh conquered, it is great∣est quiet and satisfaction to the diligent hand, and wil∣ling mind. Religion grows sweetest to us at last, if we are sincere in it. 3. Hence learn, That best men, though they shall be fully blessed at last, yet that last shall not be but when the Lord pleaseth. None have our times in their hands, to prolong them, or shorten them to their humors or passions: Good Christians should live too little, and serve God and the Church too little, if bad men might measure out the time of their service: such men would send them to their happiness sooner than would be con∣venient for those that neeed them. And were our ar∣rival in glory at the disposal of our friends, and such as love us, we should be kept longer from it than we would. It is fit it should, and 'tis best that it be in God our gracious Soveraign and Lords hand, to mea∣sure out the time of our Service, and to fix the time of our reward, which shall be when he cometh; and he will come when he pleaseth, and never to the loss of his faithful Servants. 4. Hence learn, To check the inordinate and exces∣sive grief or impatience of Spirit under our losses, in the death of our Relations. A thousand disputing thoughts will start up in your breast, which must not be allow∣ed
any debate: It is the Lord who might have come sooner, though we should possibly think he came too soon; crush such like surmizes, look rather to the known piety, diligence, faithfulness and labours of your de∣ceased Christian Relations, and consider to whom they lived Servants, to whom they are passed, with whom they now do, and ever shall live. Be followers of them, as they were of Christ; that in Gods time, i. e. the best and sittest time, you pass to them, and be with your Lord and theirs, in fulness of rewards and joys. But Secondly, By way of Exhortation. 2. Use. Exhortation. Since the faith∣ful and diligent Servant shall be blessed at his Lords coming; be perswaded, all, whether Hearers or Read∣ers, especially you who have such examples, and who have a more peculiar concern in the occasion of these lines; Be perswaded to get such a temper of soul, and lead such a course of life, as may best become the Servants of such a Lord who will come, and as may most comfort you when he cometh. I will not prolixly direct how you may thus do, nor farther move with argument; I will suppose you willing already, and desirous to hear how you may be blessed in your temper, life and death. 1. Wisdom is necessary; the verse before my Text tells us as much, therefore you must get wisdom from the Scriptures. Read, consider and remember them, they are the rule our Lord hath left for direction of his whole Family: The entrance into these, giveth wisdom, and this wisdom will attemper both heart and life, that both may be holy, and the end happy. 2. Settle your resolutions to do all the known will of your Lord: Let it be your motive why you do,
and your warrant when you have done the things that are proper to your places and callings. An unresol∣ved man will never be throughly faithful or diligent: the full purpose of your heart must be to do all the good to all as you can; which is the will of him who is good to all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works. 3. Whatever advantage you have on men, whether it be advantage of Interest or Authority, use it all for God, and the good of their souls, who in likelihood will hearken to you, and be advised by you: Perhaps you may thus save some. Where you may forbid, let not sin be committed, unforbidden: Where you may command let not good be omitted through want of your Command: use the Power God gives you to engage others to serve God. Abraham would command his House to keep the Covenant of the Lord, so do you. 4. Watch over your selves, that you may watch over o∣thers; and ere you pretend faithfulness to others, and di∣ligence and care to make them good, be sure to be good your selves; none can believe you are in earnest bent on the good of souls, if you neglect your own. First, Do the good which your places require, and then perswade others to mind their Duty in their places. Masters, Fathers, and Teachers will do more hurt by bad examples, than they can do good by best Counsels. 5. Look frequently to the future blessedness, under the conditions with which it is proposed to you and others, in the Text, Context, and other places: a frequent view of that blessedness, will heighten your desires and hopes: A frequent view of the conditions, will awaken your
care, and provoke to diligence, lest you should come short of your hopes, and be disappointed of your best desires. We are apt to forget our hopes, therefore look often to that blessedness; we are apt to indulge our ease and sloth, therefore look well and often to the terms on which it must be expected. Though many weaknesses are passed by and covered, yet wilful negligence and insincerity will not be passed by; you must be faithful and sincere, if you will be happy and blessed: This light is sown for the upright; and the spirit in which is no guile, is, and shall be blessed, Psal. 32.2. 6. Remember and imitate the best examples that fall under your observation. Beside what are recorded in sa∣cred Scripture, (to which you must look) it will be helpful to you, if you will remember and imitate those whose life and carriage was much in your eye. And let me tell you, in the Copy our late faithful Brother set you, there are remarkable for your imitation. A prudent care to manage soul-concerns; a constant un∣wearied diligence in Labours for their good; an un∣dannted resolution for known duty to God and Man; a tender and meek spirit, gently dealing with the weak, yet willing enquirers after God; A ready and full-willing mind to minister on every occasion to the edifying of those he conversed with: An even and steddy practice of what he commended as excellent or urged, as ne∣cessary duty, an acquaintedness with the importance of duty and reward. A serious mindfulness of Death and Judgment, on which he discoursed frequently, and lively; dying to the World, but living to God, and still valuing most what was so good, God would not, and men could not take from him: which appear'd in his deportment and frame of spirit, when loss of dy∣ing
Children, and uncertain riches, raised his esteem and value of the Gospel, and his and your hopes set be∣fore us in the Gospel; a heart full of love, and thought∣fulness for your good; whence those last desires and re∣quests in order to the promoting of your good, which I am informed he left you to consider: Prize a Guide that will be faithful to your souls; keep the unity of the spirit into which you are called by the Gospel; and seek God earnestly for both. Now could we prevail with you who heard, and with others who read this discourse, to endeavour for such a frame of spirit, and to act ac∣cording to it, I know there would be more faithful∣ness, diligence, and mutual hope among the Servants of the Lord, and his Family would be more beautiful in sight of others, and more comforted and edified in their own souls. Read then, and read again, and be in your houses (which should be little Families, or Churches of God) in directing, and helping them to Heaven, what he desired and labour'd to be amongst you all; I do think he gave you the Copy of Faithfulness and Diligence, or I would not have thus set it before you; and I com∣mend it to you as becomes both me and it, viz. It is the Copy of one who whilst he was good, was still a man; but though I could wish you would excel him, I will not flatter you with a hope you will do it; Oh that you would equal him, of whom allow me to say, He could do as much as most of best Men, Scholars, Chri∣stians, Husbands, Fathers, Brethren, Ministers; and his will was ever equal to his ability; the Service of his Lord was his life: though he lived not on it, he would not, he could not live without it; by a gracious Master fitted for, succeeded in, carried through much work in a little time; and I believe now rewarded with a Crown of Life and Righteousness, which he knew he did not
merit, though he knew it should be his wages. In brief, he was such an one as friends who knew him, desire they may be; and now is such as they hope they shall be; such an one as some enemies already (as I am inform'd) have wisht they might be, and others will once at last wish they had been. He had a worth known to himself, and others, but it did not puff him up. Should I say all I could, strangers would think I exceed, Friends would know a better Orator might justifiably have spo∣ken more. Yet once for all; If either Readers or Hearers carp at the Character I have given him, I have two things to say: First it will be easier to quarrel at the praises, than to deserve them: Next, I would defraud none of the Commendation due to them; nor do I prefer him above all; there are some (but too few) superior in gifts and graces, I hope there are many his equals; I am sure the most are lower by head and shoulders, who likeliest to misinterpret me, shall have a good wish for them, or rather a serious Prayer, testimony of a hearty love to their persons, and unfeigned desire of their own good, comfort and welfare; and of all these, to theirs, and the Church of God, in this, and after ages; for them I say, I will pray more days, fewer troubles, and that they may be in other things altogether such as he was. FINIS.
