i836 16150781 104884
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. ORMONDE VVHereas it appears by the Examination of John Totty, one of Officers at Mace in the City of Dublin, taken upon Oath before the Lord Mayor of the said City, That on the first day of this instant April, the Examinant being commanded, went with the Magistrates and other Officers, pursuant to an Order of this Board to a Mass house on the Merchants-Key in this City, where they found a Priest & many People assembled together, and that the Lord Mayor of this City or∣dered them to forbear their Meetings, or having any Publick Mass, for that We the Lord Lieutenant & Council had given Divers to the contrary, and that the Examinant taking the said Priest by the shoul∣der, and pulling him away, the said Priest cryed out, that he would be revenged for it. And that the same night betwixt nine and ten of the Clock, the Examinant was met near the Thollsel in this City by two men whose names the Examinant knowes not, who forcibly seized on him, and took him by the throat, and there almost strangled him, and that immediately after, three or four men more came with Clubs, and there with knocked him on the head with several blowes, whereby he fell flat to the Ground, and left the Examinant on the Ground for Dead, one of them stamping on the Examinants face with his foot, after he had received many bruises, and that one of them with his Ra∣pier run the Examinant into his left side, & said, you Son of a whore, you rogue, will you pull down the Holy Altar. And whereas We con∣ceive it necessary, that diligent and strict enquiry should be made after the persons who committed the said outrage, whose insolence therein, We cannot but look upon, not only as a high breach of the Peace, but also as a hainous contempt of his Majesties Authority. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council have therefore thought fit hereby to publish & declare, That in case any person shall at any time within the space of three Months after the date hereof, discover to Us the Lord Leiutenant, or to any the Members of this Board, or to the Lord Mayor, or any of the Justices of Peace, of this City, any of the said of∣fendors who so beat or abused the said John-Totty, so as they may be apprehended and brought to justice, such person making such discove∣ry, shall upon conviction of the said persons so discovered by him for the said offences, receive for his reward the summe of Twenty pounds; and if any of the persons who were guilty of the said offence, shall make the like discovery of any other of the said offendors, he shall likewise receive the said reward of Twenty pounds for such his discovery, together also with his Majesties pardon for the said offence by him therein committed. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin the 14th day of April 1679. Mich: Armarch: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran, Blesinton. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Ro: Fitz-Gerald. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. Jo: Davys. Ol: St. George. John Cole. GOD Save the KING. Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Tooke, and John Crook, Printers to the King's Most Excellent Majesties; And are to be sold by Mary Crook, at His Majesties Printing house in Skinner-row 1679.
