J324A 12275296 58431
I2R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Containing His Majesties Gracious Pardon and Indemnity to the Commoners within the Shires of Argile and Tarbat. JAMES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as We being now Resol∣ved for the case of Our good Subjects, and quieting the Shires of Argile and Tarbat, out of Our Royal Clemency and Princely Compassion, to Indemnifie the Commoners therein, for their accession to the Late Argiles Rebellion, with the exception after-mentioned: Do therefore with Advice of our Privy Coun∣cil hereby Give and Grant Our full, free, and ample Pardon and Indemnity to all the Commoners within the saids Shires of Argile and Tarbat, for their Lives only; Excepting such as shall be found by Our Commissioner now sent thither, during his stay there, to have been either Ring-leaders, or Officers in the said Rebellion, (who are hereby exclu∣ded.) And We hereby Declare, that this Our Pardon and Indemnity shall be to the saids Com∣moners (not excepted as said is) as valid and sufficient, for any accession they had to the said late Rebellion, or for Harbouring, Resetting. Conversing, or Corresponding with these Rebels, as if they and every of them had a particular Remission for the said Crimes past under Our Great Seal. And further, We hereby Declare, That it is and shall be free to all our Liedges, from the Date hereof, to Converse, Correspond, and intercommune with, Reset, Harbour, and Entertain the Commoners Indemnified, as said is, without incurring any Hazard, or Action, Civil or Criminal, upon that Account, in all time coming: And that this Our Gracious and Ample Indemnity may be Published and known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command that in∣continent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there, in Our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Publication of Our Gracious Pardon and In∣demnity above-written, that all persons concerned may have notice thereof. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of September, 1686. And of Our Reign the second Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL MCKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilij. GOD Save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1686. This may be Reprinted at London, R. L. S. the 28th of September, 1686. By D. Maller, next Door to Mr. Shipton's Coffee House near Fleet-Bridge
