J754 27160682 110023
A Job for a Ioyner OR A good Workman well imploy'd, This Maid must have a workman come in hast Because she could not live no longer chast, And John the Joyner is the Man must do Hr Job and make the bed go Jigg a Jog go Tune of, Over the water, fain I would pass, or Jig a Jog-goo, &c. COme and attend young Virgins all A Country Damsel caught a fall And so perhaps may one of you When you make your bed go Jigg a Jog goo. But yet such falls so harmless are Breaking of Bones you néed not fear When e're you try you'l find it true, If you make the bed go Jigg a Jog-goo. Then mark me well and you shall hear A pritty story in your Ear, Which I lay open to your view, O'th bed was made to go Jigg a Jog-goo, There was a Maid came out of Kent And to be kist was her intent, A Ioyners Iob she had to do To make her bed go Jigg a Jog-goo. She hearing of a lusty Lad Who was a workman of his Trade She sent him word to come and view And make her bed go Jigg a Jog goo. Quth she swéet John make hast to me And fear not but we will agrée, I ever to thée will prove true If thou makes my bed to go Jigg a Jog-goo▪ John strait way like an honest man Packt vp his tools and went to Nan, He askt for the Mal had a Iob to do To make her bed go Jigg a Jog-goo. Nan heard his voice and down she came Her workman for to entertain, She smiling said O is it you Can make my bed go Jigg a Jog-goo.
YOu ae th only man 'tis said that can do wondes for a Maid, Disach then what you hav to do And make my bed o go Jigg a Jog goo. like a workman  my hand I Nan will be at th cmmad, And to m romise Ile be true If thou makes my bed go Jigg a Jog goo. Nan having gve her had to John Quth he he must , I  I can do To make thy bed go Jigg a Jog goo. O then  Nan I'd have it done as soon as you can, With Roses I my bed will strew If thou mak'st it to go Jigg a Jog goo. Quoth John, rar tools I with me brought My  in this kin hath wrought, For many a Maid to me did sue To make their beds go Jigg a Jog goo. Ne're fear but I have learn'd my trade I know well how to please a Maid, And sure ile please thée e're I o And make thy bed go Jigg a Jog goo. Then John unto his work did fall And Nan she play'd at Vptails all, He naty did his bsiness do And made her bed go Jigg a Jog goo. Nan commended John for his Art And John thankt Nan with all his heart They both were pleas'd with what you know For he made the bed go Jigg a Jog goo. Her Mother she came fll of woe, O  Daughter why would you do so Doth this with modesty agrée To make your bed go Jigg a Jg gee. Had ou advse'd wih me no doubt I might have found a workman out Shoud hav done you Iob as well as he To make your bed go Jigg a Jogg gee. O hen repl' her Daughter Nan Mother this is the onely Man, I had a mind that none but he Should make my bed go Jigg a Jog gee. The World sings of this work-mans fame And John the Ioyner is his Name, He did it well as well might be And made my bed go Jigg a Jog gee. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and . Wright.
