L1124 12043385 53033
THE Charge of Socinianism AGAINST Dr. TILLOTSON CONSIDERED. In EXAMINATION of some SERMONS He has lately Published on purpose to clear Himself from that IMPUTATION. By way of a DIALOGUE betwixt F. a Friend of Dr. T's and C. a Catholick Christian. To which is Added Some REFLECTIONS upon the Second of Dr. BUR∣NET's Four Discourses, concerning the Divinity and Death of CHRIST. Printed 1694. To which is likewise Annexed, A SUPPLEMENT upon Occasion of a History of Religion, lately Published, Supposed to be Wrote by Sir R.— H—d. Wherein likewise CHARLES BLOƲNT's Great Diana is Con∣sidered; And both Compar'd with Dr. TILLOTSON's Sermons. By a True Son of the Church. EDENBƲRGH: Printed MDCXCV.
☜ N. B. When the Reader meets with this Mark * P. 6. C. 2. line 51. He must cast his Eye to the next Col. to this Mark ** and read that Four Line-Paragraph (which was left out by Mistake in Composing, and thro' haste misplaced in Correcting) at the first Mark. ERRATA. PAge 3. Col. 2 li. 50. read Subtily, p. 4. C. 2. l. 3. r. which by th, l. 46. after of dele r. p. 6. C. 2. l. 51. r. permission, ibid. l. 57. d. a p. 7. C. 1. l. 55. r. are not now, p. 7. C. 2. l. 53. for  r. . p. . C. 1. l. 29. r. Imperfection, l. 37. r. Till-n, Col. 2. l. 37. r. Exult, l. 39. for That, r. Thus, p. 10. Col. 1. l. 3. r. Mountain that, l. 22. r. there is no more, C. 2. l. 49. r. lends, p. 11. C. 1. l. 19. r. his, C. 2. l. penul for generally r. Eternally, p. 12. C. 2. l. 2. r. run, l. 13. r. without either, l. 21. r. so obstinately, p. 13. C. 2. l. 34. r. as to, p. 14. c. 1. l. 21. for to r. do, p. 15. col. 1. l. 9. r. Christ's, col. 2. l. 10. r. Justifies, l. 27. for to r. the, p. 16, col. 2. l. 25. r. over, p. 18. col. 1. l. 49. for Naturer. Honour, p. 19. col. r. l. 21. f. He r. there, p. 21. c. 1. l. 3. f. or r. as, c. 2. l. 42. f. by r. upon, p. 22. c. 2. l. Antep. r Conceive, p. 23. l. ult. f. put? p. 26. c. 2. l. 42. f. it r. is, p. 27. c. 1. l. 24 for fight r. light.
The PREFACE. THat which I have to Advertise the Reader of by way of Preface, is That the following Animadversions upon Dr. Tillotson's Sermons, were wrote before the Death of that Unhappy Man: and should not now have been Published, were it not that his much Mistaken and Pernicious Principles have surviv'd him, and are Recommended by the Authority of his Name. Yet the Respect I bear to the Dead might have restrain'd some Sharpness (if any such be found) in the fol∣lowing Sheets, had they been wrote since his Lamentable Exit. I am likewise to tell the Reader that the Socinians have Publish'd an Answer to what they think, or pretend makes against them, in the Four Sermons, hereafter Examin'd, of Dr. Tillotsons; and the 2d of Dr. Bur∣net's Discourses, which I have taken into Consideration. Their Treatise bears this Title, Considerations on the Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, occasioned by Four Sermons Preach'd by his Grace the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury— A Discourse by the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, &c. Printed 1694. To this there is a Reply, by Dr. Burnet, for himself, in a Letter to Dr. Williams, and by the said Dr. Williams in Vindication of Dr. Tillotson, Published since his Death, both Printed together, 1695. and carries this Title. A Vindication of the Sermons of his Grace John Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, cou∣cerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our B. Saviour— From the Exceptions of a late Book, En∣tituled, Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity. To which is annexed, a Let∣ter from the Lord Bishop of Sarum, to the Author of the said Vindication on the same Subject. The License for Printing this Book, is Dated at Lambeth, 17. Nov. 1694. the very day before Dr. Til∣lotson was struck with that Fatal Apoplexy, which carry'd him out of this World the fourth day after; and made Room for another Comprehensive Latitudinarian who look'd over Lincoln, to Succeed him. But the Books above mentioned came to my view after some of the following Sheets were sent to the Press, otherwise I had made more particular Observations upon them; for the present I had only opportunity to make some short mention of them in some of the remaining Sheets. And here I must take notice, that whereas the abovesaid Considerations p. 63.64. Objected against the Ac∣count which Dr. Tillotson had given of the Grounds of Christian Religion, viz. That the Mysteries of our Religion were only a Gratification to the Humour of Mankind, who were fond of Mysteries: That the In∣carnation of Christ was to Comply with their Notion of a Sensible Deity: And his Passion, with their Cu∣stom of Human Sacrifices: His Exaltation, with their Custom of Deifying Men: His Intercession: with their Common Apprehension of Mediators, between the Gods and them, &c. which are a main Subject of the ensuing Discourse. I say; these being thus Objected, together with some other Exceptions, against Dr. Tillot∣son's Doctrine, in the fore-quoted pages, his Vindicator Replys to some of the others, but leaves these above∣mentioned totally untouch'd. Vindication, page 61.62. Whether they were Material to be Answer'd I leave to what follows: and whether they are Answerable, upon any Christian Principles, I refer to the Judgment of the Reader, and this sort of No-Vindication of them. Doubtless Dr. Tillotson would read this Vindication of himself before he Licens'd it to be Printed. And, if he could have given any Answer to these most Monstrous Objections made against him, be would cer∣tainty have done it: Wherefore we must conclude him Self-Condemn'd: and yet he has not (at least Publickly, as he ought) Recanted these Blasphemous Errors: He ought to have Recanted and Abhorred them, both in Print, and in Pulpit, as he had Published them. But he has receiv'd his Sentence.— Here let me Reply, tho' not for Dr. Tillotson, yet against these Socinians: They Argue that there was no Necessity for the Incarnation of God; and for this they Quote Dr. Tillotson's own words, Considerations p. 63. That the Gospel, and the Pardon of Sin; might have been offer'd to Mankind by a Prophet in the Name of God. And because he says it, they charge it upon the Church. Our Opposers (say they) Grant it, his GRACE Grants it. See the mischief of this Man's Prevarications, and his Advancement to the Throne of Canterbury! But to the Argument, First, the Vindicator, p. 61. (and consequently Dr. Tillotson himself) does shamefully give up this Cause: and Plead for the No-need or Necessity either of CHRIST's Incarnation, or of his Death. But yet it was the Height of Impudence in the Socinians to Object the No-necessity of the Incarnation, against the Divinity of Christ; when that same Argument Militates as strongly against themselves, as to the Death of Christ: For which, upon their Principles of No-Satisfaction being due to the Justice of God for Sin, there can no tolerable Account be given; for a Prophet might have Taught, and Preach'd, and been a good Example, and Intercessor too; and Perform'd every one of the Conditions, and Ends, which they As∣sign for Christ's coming into the World, and for the Sacrifice of his Death upon the Cross.
This of Denying the Satisfaction, is the Heart of Socinianism, and the Mill-stone which will sink it into the Sea▪ for without this, there was no Need or Necessity, either for the Incarnation or Death of Christ: But the Doctrine of Satisfaction being Established, infers the Necessity of the Divinity of Christ, (without which an Adequate Satisfaction could not be ade) and the Divinity of Christ does necessarily infes the Plu∣rality of Persons in the Deity; which is the whole of the Difficulty alledg'd against the Trinity. So closely are these Divine Principles of the Christian Religion link'd and joyn a together. The denial of any one of them breaks the whole Chain. Dr. Burnet, in the abovesaid Vindication of himself, p. 101. Instead of Recanting his former Error, proceeds expresly to Dispute yet farther against the Satisfaction; and says, that, It is no part of the Doctrine of our Church— our Articles (say he) are the only Standard to Judge of our Doctrine, as far as they go, but they have Determin'd nothing in this matter, but rest in the General Notions of Expiation (which the Dr, Expounds not to mean SATISFACTION) and of Reconciling us to God. Thus this Lear∣ned Doctor. But my last Topick, with which I close my Observations upon his Discourse, has sufficiently disprov'd this; and shewn the Doctrine of the Satisfaction to be expresly taught in the Homilies, and that they account not him who denies is to be a Christian-Man, but an Adversary to Christ and his Gospel. Now shall we suppose it possible that this Dr. never Read the Homilies, which he has Subscrib'd? No, nor they very Articles which he Quotes? Or that the Homilies are not contain'd, and all expresly nam'd in the said Articles? Or otherwise shall we think that he meant hereby to Impose upon unwary Readers, and thus to Belye and Fal∣sifie the Doctrine of our Church, on purpose to conceal the more effectually his own Apostacy from it? But tho' every Body is not well acquainted with the Homilies (through an inexcusable neglect of reading them Publickly, as it is enjoyn'd) yet none can come to the Sacrament, without taking notice that in the very Prayer of Confecration, Christ is said to have made full Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. The Dr. has forgot this too.— Lastly, I will shew you the Advantage which the Socinians make of these seeming Defences of the Chri∣stian Religion, which of all other Methods, do most effectually undermine and betray it. See how they Glory and Exult in this Performance of Dr. Burnets. Furthermore (say they) Considerations, p. 15. The Socinians, and all other small and envied Parties of Christians, are in his Debt, for Owning and Espousing Pub∣lickly, Divers such Truths, as others perhaps see as well as he, but have not Sincerity, nor Generosity enough, to avow them. Here they detestably insinuate that all are Hypocrites who, in good Earnest, do oppose Socinianism: And gather from the Account which Dr. T. and Dr. B. give of the Christian Faith, that others are of the same Opinion; while they see them not Oppos'd nor Censur'd for these their Blasphemous Heresie; but on the contrary, they are Vindicated, Excus'd, and their vile Sophistry Palliated and cover'd by the Divines in Fa∣shion. What the Consequences of this may be is dreadful to apprehend! This Dr. B. has so Explain'd the Doctrine of the Church, as that the Socinians may close with it. It is (say they) Considerat. p 31.32. the very Doctrine of the Socinians, which they have own'd from the begin∣ning in all their Books. And speaking of the Satisfaction, they truly say, That his Lordship himself, Pro∣fessedly dislikes it, and Argues against it. Which they there prove from p. 135. of his Discourse. In brief (say they) were the Questions about the Trinity and the Divinity of our Saviour adjusted; there would be no longer Dispute about the Satisfaction; as his Lordship has stated it. Nor, to say true, have we Con∣troversy with him, about the two former Questions; for he contents himself to say the Three, and when he says most, the Holy Three, disclaiming (expresly) the word Persons; in the Sense, says he, that is com∣monly taken— To say all at once (concludes that Socinian Author) I have not made this Reply, to oppose it to his Lordship's Discourse, but to testifie our Respects to his Lordship; and that we submit to his Doctrine. His Lordship (as this Socinian stiles him) in his Vindication, p. 99. calls this an Imputation upon him; but yet does not clear himself from it; for which I refer to what followes, where it is Examined. I conclude this Preface with giving the Reader a needful Caution against these Horrible Socinians, that they are going about to Ʋndermine the Authority of the Holy Scriptures; because they cannot Reconcile them to their Damnable Heresie. They have now (Considerat. p. 50.51.) Publickly assauted all the whole Works of St. John, his Gospel, Epistles, and Revelation. This was the shortest way of Answering them; and, at the same time, of confessing that they were, no otherwise Answerable by them. I say nothing here to their Arguments, because they are sufficiently Confuted in Dr. William's Vindication. Only let me Observe, that if their pretences against these parts of Scripture which make most against them, and which therefore they Reject, do hold, the whole Canon of the Scripture is rendered precarious, andour FAITH Uncertain. Which must be the consequence, if these most Execrable of Hereticks should prevail. Which God of his Mercy prevent
THE Charge of Socinianism AGAINST Dr. TILLOTSON, CONSIDERED, &c. F. SInce our last Discourse upon the Famous Ser∣mon of Hell, preach'd before the Queen, 7th of March, 1690. upon Matth. 25.46. and Printed by Their Majesties Special Command, The Author has this Year 93. publish'd 4 Sermons, two of them preach'd An. 79. and two An. 80. upon John 1.14. This he has done to clear himself from Socinianism. C. He says in his Advertisement to the Reader, That he has Revis'd and Enlarg'd them; so that we cannot tell what Part of them was preach'd at the time Speci∣fied, or what added since, to clear his Reputation now that he is got into an higher Station, so as to make such a Vindication necessary. For it is to be presum'd that he did not think it worth his while before, other∣wise he would not so long have lain under the Im∣putation of having been neither Christened, nor a Chri∣stian in his Principles: Both which have not only been loudly Clamour'd, but objected in Print against him many years ago. Wherein only he truly Exercis'd Non-Resistance; For he opened not his Mouth. But it is never too late to mend. And if he be not now; Pray God he may be a good Christian before he dies. For I must confess, I do not think it suffici∣ently Evinc'd in these Sermons. In the Reading of which the Character which the History of the Ʋnitarians gives (tho' falsly) of Grotius came into my Mind; wherein he endeavours to make Grotius a tho'ro'-pac'd Socinian, but yet to have cover'd his Meaning so craf∣tily, particularly in his Comments upon this First Chap∣ter of St. John's Gospel, whence this Author has taken his Text, as not to be known to be a Socinian, unless to a very discerning Reader. And I must observe, that this Author in the foresaid 4 Sermons, tho' he seems to speak home sometimes; yet has taken special Care to avoid the only Shibboleth which the Christian Church could find out to discover the several Sorts of Arian and other Hereticks, who deny'd the Divinity of Christ. which was Consubstantiality. That God the Son was of the same Substance with his Father. Several of them (for there were several Subdivisions of them, and of different Opinions) would allow Christ to be of the like Substance with the Father▪ That is , but not , that is of the same Substance. And except the single Iota, which is betwixt these two Words, they could swallow the whole Nicene Creed, by vertue of Distinctions, in which they were great Masters; And it is very strange that this Author should forget this only Matterial Word, which is the heart of the whole Cause, and expresly asserted in the Nicene Creed; especially considering that Sermon 3. p. 140, 141. he quotes the words in that Creed immediately following these [Being of one Sub∣stance with the Father] which words he does not men∣tion; and which being own'd by him would have been a more clear and full Vindication of his Orthodoxy in this point, than all these 4 Sermons; And since it was impossible he should forget it, he repeating the same Sentence in the Creed wherein it is contain'd; we must conclude; that be left it out on purpose, and consequent∣ly, That he does not really believe it; tho' he endea∣vours with all his Art, to cast a Mist before the Reader's Eyes, in other Expressions, which to some might seem Tantamount, as Arius and his Followers did. Even our Modern Biddle in his Confession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity, Printed in the Year 1648. and now re∣printed in the Year 1691. Artic. 3. Confesses Christ to be Our Lord, yea Our God, and yet in the same Arti∣cle asserts, That he hath no other than a Human Nature. But he was a Senseless Socinian, tho' now much Admir'd amongst them in London, and his Books carefully re∣printed. He Refin'd from the Socinians, and added to it the Old Anthropomorphite Heresie, That God was a Body, of the Shape of a Man, Fingers, Eyes, Toes. &c.
As the Socinians refin'd from the Arians, and gave the Son of God no Existence before his Birth of the Virgin, and have exceedingly Entangled their Cause by it. The Arians were more Subtle and Learned than any of their Folloers, who have grafted upon their Stock. It was hard to discover the depth of Arianism, They defended themselves with Nice distinctions. They would call the Son, God, yea, Truly and Re∣ally God. As this Author confesses. 2 Serm. p. 123. And what plainer or fuller words could readily be de∣sired, wherein to confess the true and real Divinity of Christ in opposition to Angels and to Men; who are cal∣led Gods, but it is only in a Figurative and Borrowed Sense? They are not truly and really God, as the Ari∣ans said of Christ. F. The Author in the same Sentence explains himself, and those whom he calls his Adversaries (whether A∣rians or Socinians) who say that Christ is truly and really God, by adding these words, by Office, and by Divine Appointment and Constitution. C. That is a very vain Distinction: For a God by Office, or any other way, so he be truly and really God, is as great as a God by Nature, because nothing can be greater than God. Besides, a God by Office, if he be truly and really God, must likewise be a God by Nature, for he could not, otherwise, be Truly and Really God: as he could not be truly and really Man, who were not a Man by Na∣ture, or who did not truly and really partake of the Na∣ture of Man. And, as a Consequence of all this, the Author tells, ibid. That our Adversaries did allow the very same Ho∣nour and Worship to be given to the Truly and Really God, tho' by Office, which we give to him who is God by Nature And as these Adversaries could not be found out by the word GOD, which they freely allow'd to Christ; no, not by the words Truly and Really God: So neither could the word Eternity fully discover them, viz. To assert Christ to have been from Eternity. We know several Adversaries to Christianity, who have asserted the World to have been from Eternity, and yet would not allow it to be God. It is part of the Muggletonian Creed, at this day, that Earth and Water were from Eternity, and yet not God. A Book call'd The Oracles of Reason (by that Execra∣ble Char. Blount, Mr. Gildon, and others of Hbb's wretched Disciples) does argue expresly for the Eterni∣ty of the World, and of Mankind too, in the same State they are in now. This is printed for our Instru∣ction in the Year 1693. as one Branch of our Glorious Reformation, and Christian Toleration. And if these Wits allow Eternity to meer Men, much less would these Socinians stick to call Christ Eternal, who own him to be truly and really God. For whatever is so, must be Eternal. Therefore, as I said before there was no Shibboleth, which all these our Adversaries did refuse, but that of Consubstantiality, and which this Author does refuse; and while he does so, he must still be reckoned among these Adversaries to the Christian Cathelick Faith. Tho' Tho among what particular Species or Denomination of them I will not determine; or whether he may not have refin'd to a degree and Peculiarity by himself, for he delights in Bold Stroaks. Mr. Biddle above told, is own'd by the Socinians, as a good and laudable Brother, tho he set up the Old and Exploded Heresie of the Athropomorphites: And the Arians are admitted into their Communion, and, as such, quoted and pleaded by them against the Or∣thodox, tho they held the Prae-Existence of Christ before his Incarnation, which the Socinians have rejected. A∣mong whom some, even at this day, hold the Persona∣lity of the Word, and Holy Ghost, which others of them do absolutely deny. Some of them make these to be Creatures, others to be Really and Truly God, and not any thing different from God. Nay the Old Nazarens, Ebionites, &c. are in the Brief Hist. of the Ʋnitar. Quoted as the Primitive Fa∣thers of the Socinian Opinion, some of whom rejected the Scriptures, others all of it, but some Particular Books, which pleas'd their Fancies; Others own'd o∣ther Scriptures never Received by the Church; and publickly allow'd and practised Altering the Holy Scriptures, which they called Mending of them; and some of them said that Christ was begot by Joseph like other Men, Nay by their Latudinarian Principles, Ma∣homet himself, and his Alcoran must be admitted into their Confederacy, who speak more honourably of Christ than the Socinians themselves, and deserve the Name of Ʋnitarians, even in their own Sense; as much as they can pretend to. In the Church of Rome, if you will but own Expres∣sly the Authority of their Church, to the Height they Assert it; you shall be own'd a good Catholick, and ex∣cused by an Implicit Faith in all other Articles of the Creed, tho you be never so ignorant, or hold particular Opinions different from the Church. So, with the Socinians, if you will but reject the Consulstantiality of Christ, you shall have Liberty to make him a God, or a Creature, or what you will; You may talk of his Eternity, his True and Real God-Head; His being God of God, Light of Light, &c. They have distinctions for all these. And tho they love not; nor like the Expressions, yet they can make a hard shift with them: They can puzzle People's Understandings, tho by very foolish and contradictory Arguments, How God by his Infinit Power, might have bestowed True and Real Divinity upon another, and that even from Eternity; for what he can do to day, he might have done Yesterday, and so backwards for ever. But then, this would have been only a voluntary Act of God; and what he did, he might not have done, if he had so pleased; and consequently, that this A∣dopted God, tho from Eternity, was still a Precarious, tho a True and Real God; and yet not properly to be called a Creature, that is, like Finite Things, pro∣duc'd in time. But on the other hand, to make another Person Con∣substantial, that is, of the same Nature with God the Father, this infers the necessity of a Plurality of Persons
in the very Nature of the Godhead, and so to be of the Essence of God, as Faculties are of the Essence of the Soul, so that it could not be a Soul without the Faculties, nor a God, without the Persons, and tho one depends upon another, and springs from another, yet they are all equally Necessary, Co-Eternal, and Co-Equal, as be∣ing all of the same Nature. This grows too hard for a Distinction, and our Ʋni∣tarians, as they call themselves, will compound for a∣ny thing, so you keep off from this Consubstantiality. And therefore the Christian Church could find no other Criterion to discover the subtle Heresie of these pretend∣ed Ʋnitarians of several Degrees and Classes, who, tho differing never so widely among themselves, yet all join, and reckon themselves as Brethren; against the most Glorious, and most ample Revelations of the ever Blessed Trinity, Recorded in the Holy Scriptures of God. And whoever refuse this Test, cannot be accounted sound in the Christian Faith. But where there is unwillingness it will one way or another shew it self; and it is easie to distinguish be∣twixt those Expressions which proceed from a hearty Conviction, and those which are taken up out of force and necessity, to clear our selves from an Imputation which lies upon Us. This your Dr. discovers pretty plainly, in the pre∣sent Case; for being necessitated, in a Vindication of himself, as to the Doctrin of the Trinity, to use the Word Persons, he does it, as brought to it against his Will, very grudgingly and slightly, he does pass it over, and cannot conceal his Inclination rather to the Distinction used by the Anti-Trinitarian Hereticks, to elude those Texts which speak of the Trinity, which is, that there are three Differences in the Deity, which are express'd in Scripture by the three Denominations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and which they allow are spoken of after the manner of Persons; as Wisdom is said to build hee House, &c. But they will not allow them to be tru∣ly and properly Persons, or different Subsistences, but on∣ly three several acceptations of the same Person, accord∣ing to the different Manner of his Revealing himself upon several occasions: And thus they may make as many Persons, in this Sense of theirs, as their Fancy pleases to suggest. And in this Sense, and no other, the Dr. is pleased to let the word Persons pass, since we must have it; tho at the same time he gives it such a stab, as shews that he is by no means reconciled to it. But take his own words, which he gives as his determination of the whole Matter, and the utmost to which he will be brought. Serm. 2. p. 120. Here then I fix my foot: That there are three Dif∣ferences in the Deity, which the Scripture speaks of by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and every where speaks of them as we use to do of three distinct Persons: And therefore I see no reason why in this Argument we should Nicely abstain from using the word Person; tho I remember that St: Jerom does somewhere desire to be excused from it. Thus the Dr. and according to this, where he has occasion to name the Three Persons of God, he adds to explain himself, his own word Differences, which he likes better, thus, p. 122. The Three Differences or Persons in the Divine Nature, expressed in Scripture by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, &c. and so in other places. And here, He has fixt his foot; you shall have no more of him, if you be not pleased with this, you must let it alone, and trouble him no more about Socinianism, Arianism, or any of these like Matters. But this somewhere of St Jerome's was a strange Quo∣tation for so Grave a Dr. to bring into the Pulpit upon so serious a Subject, if he thought it so. For, I fancy he spoke this with a Smile, saying to himself— I'll make this poor Auditory believe that I have a place of St. Jerome under my Thumb, to overthrow all this business of different Persons in God; which word since they force me to use, I'll be revenged on it. But I will not name the Place in St. Jerome, for there are Rogues will be Examining of it, and put me to a great deal of trouble; It will do well enough for a Squib among the Crowd. But these poor hopes are vanished; for this Dr. has already been taken to task, and stands Corrected for this, by a much more Learned Person than himself. The Author of the Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book Entituled, A Vindication of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, &c. Printed 1693. There Chap. 8. p. 265. This Place of St. Jerome is quoted. And it is shewn, that St. Jerom did not Scruple to use the word [Person] or desired to be excused (as our Author comi∣cally words it, by way of wit) but on the contrary, that he did use the word [Person] and in the same Sense, in this Question, which is put upon it by us at this day, as one of the distinct Subsistences of the Divine Nature, or Substance, whom he did own to be Tres Personas Sub∣sistentes. But that what scruple he had was concerning the Greek word Hypostasis, which yet he did not abso∣lutely reject, nor refuse to make use of it, but thought it needed some Explanation, or rather Caution, in the use of it. But this Author (whatever scruple he may have, which he signifies in Hints very plain) will not too nicely abstain from the Word Person (or any other word) since he can make it signify what he pleases, only a Difference, or a Somewhat, or a No-what, by a Men∣tal Reservation, tho he knows those he disputes with, and those he speaks to, take it in another sense. The great Art of the Socinians is in altering the meaning of Words, so that no words almost can bind them. And this Dr. does very subtlely recommend their Interpretations of Scripture, by bringing them sometimes to prove the Divinity of Christ, that so he may take you off the much more strong and full proof which lies in the true and plain meaning of the words. For example. Serm. 2. p. 0. He brings Phil. 2; 6. &c. as a Proof of the Divinity of Christ; who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God. But instead of he thought is not Robbery, . The Dr. would have the Sense
to be, He did not arrogate to himself to be equal with God, tho' it is quite contrary to the words, which are liter∣ally translated. He thought it not Robbery to be equal: (i. e.) He did make himself equal. He did not arro∣gate to himself to be Equal (i. e.) He did not make him∣self Equal. Senses which are in terms opposite. He did, says the Text; He did not, says Dr T. This is the Im∣pudent answer which the Brief History of the Ʋnitari∣ans gives to this Text, and which the Dr. here recom∣mends. And he says, that that Phrase is used so by Plutarch. But he names not the words, nor Quotes the Place, which he would have done, if he had thought it for his purpose. For he cannot deny that the words are rightly Translated, and they cannot bear two op∣posite Senses, But now to bring himself off from seeming to fa∣vour the Socinians in this Intepretation: He pretends to prove the Divinity of Christ from it, thus; Christ did not arrogate to himself to be Equal with God; (i. e.) He made no Ostentation of his Divinity, and this the Dr. says, He takes to be the true Meaning of that Phrase. But it means much more easily, That Christ had no Divinity to make Ostentation of, that he did not so much as pretend to it, or arrogate it to himself. By this Socinian Interpretation of the Dr's, Here is first a very weak Argument brought for the Divinity of Christ, which is the most effectual Method to destroy a Cause. Secondly, Here is a very strong Argument for his Divinity diverted and eluded. For let the Text lie in the plain and Grammatical Interpretation of the words, and they are not to be answer'd by the Socinians: For if it was no Robbery in Christ to be Equal with God, it follows unavoidably, That he was True and Real God by Nature. F. Let us come now to the other great point of Soci∣nianism, the Doctrine of Satisfaction. They deny that the Death of Christ was a Satisfaction paid to the Justice of God for our Sins, for the Dr. has Clear'd himself in this Point likewise. C. He hath Clear'd himself indeed! not only to have been, but still to continue a rank Socinian in this Point, even where he endeavours most to make a shew, as if he were come off it. He mumbles it like Thistles. For tho the Great point be the Satisfying God's Justice. Yet he is so very Careful to avoid coming upon that Question, That he names it but once in all those 4 Sermons; And that after such a manner as plainly dis∣covers, that he is still of the Opinion he told us in his Sermon of Hell, of which he says there is no Certain∣ty, Because there was no need of any Satisfaction to Gods Justice at all. And that God's Justice is to be Consider'd no otherwise than as a Politiu to secure his Government, and therefore does not infer any pu∣nishment of Sinners, But that his threats may be only in Terrorem, or so far to be inflicted as may secure his Government from the Rebellion and Ʋsurpation of wick∣ed Men. As if God were afraid of being Deposed by them. A strange Notion of the Justice of God! But this New Doctrin of making Hell precarious does total∣ly overthrow the Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ, and plucks it up Root and Branch: For, if there be no cer∣tainty of a Hell, there can be no Necessity of Satisfaction for Sins; which this means are remitted without it. But your Author thinks to put us off with a Complement in this matter. Serm. 4. p. 211. He says, that this way of Remitting Sins by the Death of Christ, was a way, indeed, very Honourable to the Justice of God, and the Authority of his Laws. And this is every word he says, as to the Justice of God in all these 4 Sermons. He comes off like a Courtier, I confess, and will let it be very Honourable for God; (that is Civil!) if we would let alone any Arguments as to what the Nature of Justice requires, which makes it more than Honour∣able, even Necessary, That a full and adequate Satisfa∣ction be made to Justice; otherwise, Justice can be no more Justice, and God is no more Justice. Besides, it will appear that, if there was no necessi∣ty of satisfying Justice, it was not only, not very Ho∣nourable in God, but even not reconcileable to any No∣tion we can have of Justice, to take the life of an In∣nocent Person without any necessity in the world. F. You are a sort of People hard to be pleas'd, Therefore this good Dr. in Compliance to your Infirmi∣ty; and because indeed he has treated very slightly of the Satisfaction in these 4 Sermons; he has since preach∣ed a Sermon before the Queen at White-hall 9th of A∣pril. 93. upon Heb. 9.29. on purpose, Cencerning the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ; and it is publish'd by Her Majesties Special Command, and was put into the Gazette. C. All this Honour had his Sermon of Hell above told; of which, we have formerly discours'd at large; and this shall have as fair dealing from me, to be Im∣partially and honestly examin'd, without any Flattery. First therefore, I will shew the most Barbarous, Ab∣surd, and Blasphemous Notion he has of the Christian Religion in General. And then, as to the Doctrine of Satisfaction, that he is Expresly Socinian. His Notion of the Christian Religion, in these first Four, and this single Sermon express'd, did I confess amaze me, beyond any thing ever I read, except of the same Author: And if no name had been affixed, I should have guess'd no other than Muggleton, it is ex∣actly his Size of apprehending the Scriptures, or ra∣the ofr a Lucian, or a Julian to mock, and slander Christianity out of the World. But that you may know whether there be Reason for all this. First, I will shew you, That he makes the Foundation of Christion Religion to be some foolish and wicked Fancies, which got into People's heads, he knows not, and says, no matter, How, and instead of Reforming these, and commanding us to Renounce and Abbor them; which one would have expected; and which Christ did to all other Wickedness; The Dr's Scheme is, That God in Compliance with these, and to indulge Men in these same Wild and wicked Phancies, did send Christ, Took his Life, and Instituted the whole Aeconomy of the Christian Religion. This appears so Dreadful, and astonishingly Impious,
that you must have patience to take it in pieces, and see by what degrees the Dr. arrived at this New pitch of Super-Hobbism. First, Those Revelations which all the Christian World has hitherto believ'd God gave at the Beginning to Adam, and after to the Patriarchs and Prophets more expresly of the Promised Seed; and those Types and Institutions which God from the Beginning did ap∣point as Shadows and sensible Representations of the Expiatory Death of Christ upon the Cross, such as Sacri∣fices, which for this End were commanded to Adam, practised by Cain and Abel his Children, and descend∣ed by uninterrupted Tradition, even to his Heathen Posterity; tho they knew not their Original, more than they did their own, or that of the World's; All these the Dr. thinks to be only Fancies and Imaginations. which came (he knows not how) into Men's Brains. And that to comply with these was the End of Christ's Incarnation, Death, &c. Whereas, on the Contrary, it has been the Received Opinion, that instead of God's imitating or following the Inventions of Men, or In∣spirations of the Devil, That the Institutions of false and Idolatrous Religions, were but Corruptions and I∣mitations of the True Religion Instituted by God; and that in this the Devil was but an Ape of God Almighty, whence arose the saying, That where God has a Church, the Devil has a Chappel, (i. e.) That the Devil does Ape and Imitate the Institutions which God has appointed in his Holy Religion. Hence the Devil had his Sacri∣fices, his Feasts, his Priests, &c. Not that these Insti∣tutions were of the Devil's Invention; He did only i∣mitate God's Institution in all these things, as the Feast to his Calves, was in imitation of God's Feast in Ju∣dah, (1 Kings 12.32. But this Author turns the Ta∣bles, and would have the Devil, or wicked Men, by his Inspiration to have first invented these Religious Rites; And then that God did follow their Steps, and framed his Religion after the Pattern of theirs, or in Condescension to their wicked Phancies or Imaginations, as this Author words it. By which means, instead of the common Opinion, That God was the Author of all Religious Worship, and the Devil the Corrupter of it; This Author would persuade us. That the Devil was the Author and first Inventer of it, and that God came in but at the second hand in imitation of the Devil, and to graft upon his Stock; So that, if the Devil and Fool∣ish men had let alone their Inventions, as of the Ne∣cessity of Sacrifices, and Vicaricus Suffering, of a Medi∣ator, and of Mysteries; we had had no need of a Me∣diator, of a Christ to have been a Sacrifice for us, or of any Mystery, or Religion at all: For all these the Dr. tells us, we owe to these Phantastical, and even Diabolical Prejudices, and Gross Conceptions of Mankind. And this was not out of Forgetfulness of what is said above of their Institution by God. No, He mentions it several times, but so slightly and with that Contempt, as if no stress at all were to be laid upon it. Page 5. of the single Sermon. He says. This Notion of the Expiation of Sin by Sacrifice, whether it had its first Rise from Divine Revelation, and was afterwards propagated from Age to Age by Traditiou I say, from whencesoever this Notion come.—And P. 11. He (God) seems either to have possessed Mankind with this Principle, or to have permitted them to be so persuaded, that Sin was not to be Expiated but by Blood; that is, either by the Death of the Sinner. or of the Sacrifice. Serm. 4. upon John 1.14. p. 185. It is not easie to give a certain account of the true Original of some Notions and Prejudiees concerning God and Religion, which have ge∣nerally obtained in the World. Several of these Notions he mentions in the same place, as Expiation of Sin by Sacrifices; The Necessity of Mediators to God, Rever∣ence to Mysteries, &c. And these Notions (however come by) He does not make to be grounded upon any Truth, any solid Reason, but to be meerly Phantastical, to be common Prejudices of Mankind; Nay to be not only weak and foolsh, but wicked and abominable. Hear his own words, Begin∣ning of Sermon 4th. p. 179. He calls these, The Weaknesses and Common Prejudices of Mankind—very weak and gross apprehensions. p. 189. very edd and Phantastical—very Lewd and Impious — very Inhuman and Cruel, and e∣very way unworthy of the Deity. p. 206. Inveterate pre∣judices. Single Serm. p. 7. Barbarous and Inhuman. p. 29. Enormities and Cruelties. — Ʋnreasnable and Bloody way of Worship. p. 35. Inhumne and Ineffectual way of Sacrificing one another, whereby instead of Expiating their Guilt, they did inflame it; and by thinking to make Atonement for their Sins, they did in truth add to the number and heinousness of them. Serm. 4. p. 186. He calls this Worship the Worship of Devils, and not of God. And Serm. 3. p. 155. He confesses, The Devil and the World to be the two Great Enemies of our Salvation, which Christ came to Conquer and Triumph over. Now, who would imagine, that the End of Christ's Coming should be to gratify these Enemies of his whom he came to Destroy; To comply and condescend to these; and to indulge these Wild and Diabolical No∣tions of Mankind! But this subtle Doctor has found it out. Serm. 4. p. 179. The Wisdom of God thought fit thus to order things, in Great Condescension to the Weakness, and common Pre∣judices of Mankind.—P. 184. For the Religion and Laws which God gave them were far from being the Best, and most Perfect in themselves. In which Sense some under∣stand that passage in Ezek, where it is said, That God gave them Statutes which were not good p. 187 God seems likewise to have very much suited the Dspesation of the Gos∣pel, and the Method of our Salvation by the Incarnation and Sufferings of his Son, to the common Prejudices of Man∣kind, especially of the Heathen World — by Gratifying them in some measure, and in a gracious Compliance with our Weakness, by bending and accommodating the way and method of our Salvation to our weak Capacity, and imper∣fect Conceptions of things. p. 186. God seems to have had great Consideration of some very weak and gross Appro∣hensions of Mankind concerning Religion. p. 206. And he hath in great Goodness and Condescension to our Invete∣rate Prejudices concerning these things.—appared in the end of the World to take away Sin by the Sacrifice of him∣self. Single Serm. p. 5. Anether reason of this Lispensa∣tion seems to have been a Gracious Condescension and Com∣pliance
of Almighty God, with a certain apprehension and persuasion which had very early and universally obtained among Mankind, concerning the Expiation of Sin, and ap∣peasing the effendid Deity by Sacrifices. p. 6. God was pleased to comply so far with these Notions and Apprehen∣sions of theirs, as to make his own Son both a Priest and a Sacrifice. Serm. 4 p. 192. And indeed a great part of the Jewish Religion and Worship was a plain Condescen¦sion to the General Apprehensions of Men concerning this way of Appeasing the Deity by Sacrifice. p. 193. And with this General Notion of Mankind, whatever the ground or foundation of it might be, God was pleased so far to comply, as once for all to have a General Atonement made for the Sins of all Mankind, by the Sacrifice of his Only Son. p. 195. The World was mightily bent upon Addressing their Requests and Supplications, not to the Deity imme∣diately, because their Superstition thought that too great a Presumption, but by some Mediators between the Gods and them, who might with advantage, in this humble Manner, present their Requests so as to find Acceptance. This Notion of theirs he calls Superstition, to think that there needed any Mediator betwixt God and Man. They indeed mistook the Mediator, and therein was their Superstition and Idelatry: But the Notion was Right and Necessary; and deduc'd to them from Adam. (to whom it was Reveal'd) tho' they knew it not. But if their Notions of a Mediator and Sacrifice for Sin was wicked, Abominable, &c. as this Author says, was it not wicked and abominable to comply with such a wicked and abominable Notion? Nay, were not the very thing of a Mediator, or Sacrifice for Sin, a wicked and abominable thing? How otherwise was the bare Notion of it so wicked and abominable? I see not how he can escape upon this Scheme, either to ju∣stifie the Heathen Sacrifices, or Condemn that of Christ. Either to say that there was no need of a Mediator, or to Confess that their Notion of it, which he calls Su∣perstition was just and good. But if it was Superstiti∣on, is it not Superstition still? If a Mediator in Gene∣ral be Superstition, is not this or that Mediator the same Superstition? Is not appointing any Mediator a Superstition? And must it not be Superstition in any to think it necessary? As the Heathens did. And yet to Comply with this Superstition of theirs, the Dr. maker the end of Christ's coming to be our Me∣diator, p. 196. In a Gracious Complyance with this com∣mon Apprehension—God was pleas'd to constitute and appoint One in our Nature to be a perpetual Advocate and Intercessor in Heaven for us. Again we know the Socintans are much offended, that there should be any Mystery in our Religion. And for this the Dr. gives the same Reason, (viz.) That it was only to comply with an odd Notion the World had got to have Msteries in their Religion, Serm. 4 p. 188. The World was much given to admire Mysteries in Religion, p. 190. Since the Wrld had such an Admiration for Mysteris—God gave them a Mystery inded. The Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, &c. 1 Tim. 3.16. Otherwise we needed not have had any Mystery in our Religion, norany Mediator, nor any Expiatory Sacrifice. Blessed God! This Man makes no more of the My∣steries of our Religion than to satisfie Men's foolish Curi∣osities. He that will have a May-Pole. shall have a May-Pole. Since you will have Mysteries, here's one for you —God manifest in the Flesh—This is to satisfie their foolish longing after Mysteries, and to give you your fill of Mysteries—Was there ever so impious a Burlesque upon God and upon the Religion of Christ! As if he was Incarnate for no other end but to make People wonder and Gaze, and because of the Mystery forsooth! And that he was Crucify'd, only to outdo Raw-Head and Bloody Bones, the Inhumanity of the Hathen Sacrifices! That is, to Cure the Wickedness and Folly of Men, by Overacting them in both! For what are Mysteries, without any further. Consideration than as Mysteries, that is, Wonders and strange things, but the height of Folly, perfect Rary-Shows? And what an account is it of Religion to say, That God was manifest in the Flesh to satisfie such Childish Curiosity, and because the World was given to admire Mysteries! They were given likewise to Sacrifice, not only Beasts, but to Sacrifice one Man for another, an Inno∣cent Person for the Guilty. But was not this a very wicked and inhuman Custom? Yes. The Dr. confesses it to have been even Diabolical. And yet to comply with this wicked and Diabolical Custom, and in Imita∣tion of it, he would have to be the reason why God Sacrific'd Christ, an Innocent Person for the Guilty? It makes all my Flesh creep, and my Soul to tremble within me, but to repeat such Blasphemous Schemes of Divinity, which makes God to be the Devil's Ape, and to have follow'd his wicked Inventions in the Institu∣tion of the Christian Religion. But on the Contrary Christ himself assures us, That he came to destroy the works of the Devil, not to Com∣pound with the Devil, much less to Gratify him, in fol∣lowing his wicked Suggestions which he had put into the Minds of Men; and to carry them to greater heights of wickedness than ever the Devil himself could have done, or so much as have imagin'd, viz. Instead of the Sacrifices of Beasts, or of Men (which the Hea∣thens practis'd) to sacrifice the Sn of God himself. F. The Dr. puts this Objection, p. 28. of single Ser∣mon. And gives two Answers to it: First, That God did not command his Son to be Sacrific'd, but his Provi∣dence permitted the wickedness and violence of Men to put him to Death.—And that this is no moe a Reslection upon the Providence of God than any Enormities and Cru∣elties which by his Permission are daily committed in the World. 1. But if there was no more than God's bare Permissions in the Sacrifice of Christ, as in all other wicked Action, How was his Death a Sacrifice more than the Death of any other Man? You say, that God's Govenant with him for Remission of the Sins of the Penitent was grounded upon his Death, and made with him before his Death; was not this a more than a bare Permission of his Death? How did God make him both a Priest and a Sacrifice, by his Death, as the Dr. says he did, if he concurr'd no otherwise to his Death than by such
a bare Permission as he suffers an honest Man to be murder'd by Thieves? But 2. This cannot be called bare Permission. It was a Method of God's own finding out, and Ordering; which exceeded the Inventions of Men and Angels. It is said, Acts 4.28. That God did determine it before to be done. But tho God permits evil, You will not say, That he does determine, or Order it to be done; And God sent his Son for this very end and purpose. This was more than only permitting it. F. The Dr. Explains it, p. 32. by this Comparison, Suppose, says he, A Malefactor condemn'd, and the King's Sin to save him—is contented to submit to great Dis∣grace, and Sufferings. C. But suppose the King's Son prays and begs of his Father with Tears, That he would excuse him from such Suffering, as Christ pray'd to his Father. Mat. 26.39. That that Cup might pass from him? F. You would seem to imply as if Christ's Suffering were not voluntary. C. No, not all. But that it was not only his Father's bare Permission, but his express will and pleasure that his Son should Suffer. Therefore Christ said, Not mine, but thy will be done, And therefore because it was his Father's Will that he should Suffer, he did voluntarily and resignedly submit to it. But I hope you will make this something more than his Father's bare per∣mitting of it. It is said Isaiah 53.10. That it pleas'd the Lord to bruise him (Christ) and to put him to Grief, and he made Christ's Soul an Offering for Sin. This exceeds a bare Permssion, such as that by which God permits the En∣ormities and Cruelties committed in the World, which is all this Author would have meant by it. F. His second Answer is, p. 29. That by this means God did at once put an End to that unreasonable and bloody way of Worship, which has been so long practised in the World—And it hath ever since obtained this effect, of making all other Sacrifices to cease, in all Parts of the World where Christianity hath prevailed. C. This is only repeating the Objection, instead of answering it, (as if the Sacrifice of Christ (upon this Author's Scheme) were not more unreasonable and bloody than any other Sacrifices used before. And this being all the Dr. says to the Objection, we must suppose that he still thinks it to be so unreasonable. And it is the more, and not the less so, that it was as he says, p. 22. to comply with an unreasonable Ex∣pectation Men had of being sav'd by the Vicarius Suffering of some other in their stead; and that it was to gratifie this unreasonable Expectation of theirs, That Christ did suffer; for, if it was unreasonable for them to expect it, it was unreasonable in Christ to suffer it. F. Repeat the Dr's own Words— C. We are now upon vindicating Gods Providence for the permission of Evil. that is, starting another que∣stion, to divert us from this we are upon, which is, The reason of Gods sending his Son to Expiate the Sins of Men. C. But this Expectation how unreasonable soever, plain∣ly shews it to have been the Common apprehension of Mankind in all Ages that God would not be appeas∣ed, nor should Sin be pardoned without Suffering: But yet so that Men generally conceiv'd good hopes that upon the Repentance of Sinners, God would ac∣cept of a Vicarious Punishment, that is, of the Suffer∣ing of some other in their stead. And very probably, as I said before, in Compliance with this apprehension of Mankind, and in Condescension to it, as well as for other weighty Reasons, best known to the Divine Wisdom, God was pleased to find out such a Sacrifice. F. The Dr. says here, That it is only probable that was the Reason. C. Is it probable that God would Sacrifice his Son, in Compliance with an Expectation, How unreasonable soever? But the Dr. in what I have quoted out of him before does not make any doubt, or perhaps of it; but sets it down as a plain Case. As Serm. 4. p. 192. And in∣deed (says he, in a positive Asseveration) A great Part of the Jewish Religion was a PLAIN Condescension to the general Apprehensions of Men concerning this way of ap∣peasing God by Sacrifice. And therefore he does not scru∣ple Impiously to Blaspheme that Religion which God gave to the Jews, and therein to arraign God its Au∣thor. He says, as above Quoted. Serm. 4. p. 184. That the Religion and Laws which God gave them was far from being the Bst; Nay, plainly, that they were not good, by applying to them that Text. Ezek. 20.25. or at least approving others Application of it that way, to which end he produces it. F. These Laws were not Good, that is, says the Dr. they were very imperfect in Comparison of what he could have given them. C. So you may say of the Christian Laws; they are Imperfect in respect to those of Heaven. At this rate, nothing can be good but God. Yet God said of his works, that they were very good. And said so of his Laws which he gave to the Jews out of his own mouth. And sure it is a most presumptuous Blasphemy for any Man to say, that they were not good. They were the same with the Christian Laws, as much as could be before Christ came. They were all Types and Fore∣runners of his coming; and therefore they are call'dRom. 7.14. Spiritual; their meaning was all Spiritual; They are calledHeb.  2.16. the Go∣spel, and it is said, that the Gospel was first preacht to the Jews, and thatActs 15.11. they were sav'd by the Gospel, as well as we. The preaching of Christ is the Gospel; and he was preached and exhibited in the whole Jewish Aeconomy, as the Seed promised, Gen. 3.15. which things the Angels desire  To stoop down with Reverence and admire.1 Pet. 1.12. They exceeded all Created understand∣ings ever to comprehend the full Glory, and Goodness, and Wisdom which is contain'd in them, they far ex∣cel the whole material Creation; and the leastMat. Tittle of the Law is preferr'd be∣fore
Heaven and Earth,5.18. Luke 16.17. and shall out-last them. And was this Law far from being the best? Could this wise Dr. have found out better? Were these Statutes which were not good, and Judgments whereby Men should not live? Was this the meaning of these words. Ezek. 20.25? Whereas the Reason given in the very same Sentence, v. 24 for God's threatning to give them Statutes which were not good, was as a just Judgment upon them for despising those good Statutes which he had given them. Such Statutes, says God, v. 11. which if a Man do he shall even live in them. Yet this Author would have these to be the Statutes whereby men should not live. This is an Excellent Interpretation! And for the word give, which I suppose must have misled this Author, viz. That God is said to give them these Statutes which were not good, and therefore he has Interpreted these to be the Law which God gave them; God is said to give them these evil Statutes, v. 25. no otherwise than as he is said to pollute them, v. 26. that is, to suffer them to be polluted, and to follow Idolatry, there meant by the Statutes which were not good. As God has threat∣ned, Deut. 4.28. That it they would not serve him, He would give them up to Idolatry to serve Gods of Wood and Stone, &c. But to say that the Laws which God gave were far from being the best, that they were not good, is such a bold stroke as stops nothing short of Blasphemy. Whereas to express their exceeding Excel∣lency, and that there was no manner of defect or im∣perfection in them; They are often compared to Gold purified 7 times in the Fire, till no dross at all was left. They were calledProv. 30.5. Pure and Perfect, and therefore we are commanded neither to add nor diminish, They are called ourDeut. 32.47. Life,Rom. 7.2. Holy, and Just, and Good,Psal. 119.96. far exceeding all Perfection; But Dr. Til—t thinks they were nothing but a Complaisance to the Folly and Wickedness of Men. O good God! Was the Glorious Gospel and Salvation by Christ, not only exhited under its Types in the Lr, butTit. 1.2. promised before the World began.Eph. 3.11. Purposed from Eternity,Ps. 119.15 2. Found∣ed forever; was theHeb. 13.20. Blood of the Everlasting Testament shed for no other Reasons but to comply with Men's fool∣ish Expectations, How unreasonable so∣ever! That such dreadful Blasphemy should ever be heard in a Christian Nation! That it should pass uncensured! F. The Dr. says there may be other weighty Reasons, best known to the Divine Wisdom. C. This is perfect shirting and putting off. No doubt the Divine Wisdom his many reasons for every thing He does, which we cannot Comprehend. But the Dr. gives no other reason; and 'tis to be supposed he would have given a better, if he had it. Our dis∣pute is not what God knows, but what God has Re∣vealed. And how this Dr. understands those Revelations, and whether according to the received Doctrine of the Catholick Church, particularly as it is professed in the Church of England, in that Great and Fundamental Point of the Satisfaction of Christ, wherein if what is said be not sufficient. I will further shew you, that he is altogether a Socinian, even in this Sermon which he has published to blind the Eyes of the World, and free himself from that Imputation. First, He absolutely and avowedly cuts off the whole Doctrine of Satisfaction due to the Justice of God for our Sins; or if due, that it need not be paid, and therefore, whatever other reasons there may be, That can be none o the Reasons of Christ's Dying for us; Not (says the Dr. in this Sermon, p. 11.) That God could not have pardoned sin without Satisfaction made to his Ju∣stice, either by the suffering of the sinner himself, or if a Sacrifice in his stead. p. 26. God did not want Goodness to have forgiven sin freely, and without any satisfaction. F. Why? Will you say that God did want so much Goodness? C. By Goodness here you mean Mercy; and we know it is the proper effect of Mercy to forgive; and God's Mercy is Infinite; and so is his Justice, they do not Thwart or Contradict one another, but they Exalt and Magnify one another. Now the Dr. would put a Sophism upon us. To bid us deny that Goodness, or Mercy will forgive; Or to say that God is stinted in his Mercy or Goodness. But we will say, That Justice cannot be satisfied, without full Payment made; and that God is not crippled or stinted in his Justice more than in his Mercy: for He is Justice it self, and therefore what is necessary to the Nature of Justice, must be so to His Nature, for they are the same. In your Sense, Gods Atributes fight with one another, and one must overcome the other. But, as we explain it, They all stand Full and Infi∣nite, and no one Encroaches upon the other: but they Rejoice and Exalt together, and one Extols and Glorifies the other. That Gods Justice is magnified in Requiring full sa∣tisfaction, His Wisdom in Finding it; and his Mercy or Goodness in Giving that Satisfaction for us. Now I appeal to your self whether this be not more Rational, than to make the End of all the Glorious Dis∣pensation of the Gospel to be nothing else than a Com∣pliance with a parcel of unreasonable; and even wicked and Diabolical Fancies which had possess'd Men's Minds, no matter how: Especially considering that the Author and Preacher of this Glorious Conceit, Serm. 4. p. 180. confesses, That notwithstanding of all that he can say in favour of this Brat of his own Brain, It may still seem strange to a Considering Man, that God, who, without all this Circumstance and Condescension, could have done the Business for which his Son came into the World—should yet make choice of this way for the Redemption and Recovery of fallen Man. That is to say, That God should Sacrifice his own Son for nothing, to no purpose in the World, when all that his Son came for, might have been as well done without it. And this indeed must eternally seem strange to any Man of common sense.
F. But the Doctor defends himself in the words just following, (viz.) I make no manner of doubt to say that it would be a great presumption and boldness in any Man, to affirm that the infinite Wisdom of God could not have brought about the Salvation of Men by any other way, than by this very way in which he hath done it. C. This is the Doctor's usual Topick (which I ob∣serv'd to you in our last Conversation concerning his Sermon of Hell) when Reason fails him to fly to God's Omnipotence, and dare us to say that God cannot do this or that; and therefore that what the Dr. says, may be true, for who dare say that God cannot make it true? F. But after all, will you say that God could not have sav'd Man any other way than by the Sacrifice of Christ. C. To avoid that Irreverent manner of Expression, of saving God cannot— I say that, from the very nature of Justice, which is God, there was a necessity for a full and adequate Satisfaction to be made for sin. Whether any other Satisfaction could have been found besides the Sacrifice of Christ? is another que∣stion. And not to enter into the Depths of God, I will give you these Reasons why no other way was pos∣sible by any Argument or Thought imaginable to us. Because the Person must be Infinite, who could pay an Infinite Debt, (for such is Sin, being an offence against Infinite Goodness) and likewise must be Man, that the same Nature which offended, should make the Satis∣faction. And therefore that Christ took upon him the Nature of Man, and not the Person of any Man; that he might make Satisfaction for Mankind, and not on∣ly for any particular Person. Hence he took all our Natural, but none of our Personal Infirmities. He was subject to Sleep, Weariness, Grief, Pain, and even Death, all which are incident to our Nature: But not to Sickness, Blindness, Lameness, or any Personal in∣firmities. Since therefore it was necessary that our Redeemer must be God-Man, I think it will follow that it could be none other but Christ. Again, I think this Question is decided Matth. 26.39. where Christ prays, That if it were possible that Cup might pass from him. Which shews that it was not possible for him to accomplish the Redemption of Man which he had undertaken; without suffering death, Otherwise, no doubt, God wou'd not have refused the Petition of his Well beloved Son. And it is no impeach∣ment of the Wisdom of God, to say, there was no other way possible. But, on the contrary, it is carrying the notion of Wisdom to the utmost height, that when there was but one possible way, Wisdom should find it out. And the Dr. himself stumbles upon this unawares: it is hard to be constant in Error, which is it self all unconstancy. p. 10 of single Serm. he said, That nothing less than the perfect Innocency and Holiness of him who was to be a Sacrifice for us, could have explated the guilt of our sins, and purchas'd eternal Redemption for us. Se∣condly, Great Sufferings likewise in our nature, even to the suffering of Death were requisit to the perfect expia∣tion of Sin; I say even to the suffering of Death. These are the Doctor's words. From whence I ar∣gue, That none had perfect Innocency and Holiness but God, and therefore that none but He COƲLD have Explated the Guilt of our Sins. Secondly, The Sufferings, for Explating the Guilt of our Sins, must be in our Nature, therefore the Expia∣tor must be likewise Man. Thirdly, These Sufferings must be even unto Death. From all which it follows, that none cou'd be this Ex∣piator but Christ God and Man, and that he must Suffer even unto Death. If all which be true, then I desire the Dr. to answer his own Objection, and tell us how it was possible for the Redemption of Man to have been effected any other way? I would recommend to him his own Advice upon this very matter. Serm. 4th p. 181. which he says he follows, All along, to take the express Declarations, or at least, the pregnant Intimations of Scripture, for his Ground and Guide: it being always safest to take the Reasons of the Divine Counsels and Actions from God himself. Now we wou'd gladly know (for he has no where told us) in what place of Scripture it is reveal'd, that God's sending his Son and all the Aeconomy of the Gospel was to Gratifie and Indulge the Senseless and Wicked Prejudices, which Men had pick'd up concern∣ing Religion. For that is the account the Dr. gives us of his Faith. And it is more Monstrous by far than any ever I heard set up, even by the Socinians themselves. Yet the Dr. does not forsake them, tho' he thus ad∣vances sometimes in stretches beyond them. For single Serm. p: 21. He sets up in express terms, the account the Socinians give of the Remission of Sins by Christ, viz. That it was not upon account of any Sa∣tisfaction made by Christ for our sins; but only an Ar∣bitrary Covenant, they cannot tell why, which God made with Christ, that if he wou'd be Crucified, God wou'd remit the sins of the Penitent. And that there was no need nor necessity for this Covenant, because God might have remitted sins, as well without this Covenant; or upon any other Covenant, the turning of a Straw, or what you will; or upon no Covenant at all. So that this Covenant with Christ, was wholly Causeless, Needless and Arbitrary. The same Socinian Covenant this Author sets up in the page above quoted, where he says, That upon the Sufferings of Christ, God thereupon entered into a Cove∣nant of Grace and Mercy with Mankind, wherein he en∣gag'd himself to forgive the sins of these who Believe and Repent. Thus this Author holds with the Socinians by exclu∣ding the Satisfaction from being any part of the Cove∣nant or consider'd at all in it. F. You wou'd make one think it strange how the Dr. came to Preach and Publish such a Sermon as this with a design against the Socinians. C. It was really to do them service; And reconcile Men more to their principles, by lessening the Diffe∣rences which are conceiv'd betwixt them and us, (a
Topick much in practice with the Jesuits in their Di∣sputes with the Protestants, as Mahomet went to the Mountain which wou'd not come to him) which he makes so small as to consist in nothing but words. p. 32. to signifie just nothing. p. 31. For an account of this you will find pp. 16. 31. and 32. He sums up the difference 'twixt the Socinians and us, as to the Do∣ctrine of Satisfaction, to consist only in this, That the Socinians say Christ suffered for us, or for our Sake; whereas others wou'd have it understood that Christ suffered for us, that is, in our stead. Which the Dr. proves, p. 32. to be a meer Controversie about words. And so the matter is shortly reconcil'd, which has so much taken up the Christian Church. And that very undeservedly and uncharitably, if the difference be no more than this Author wou'd have us believe: Out of Friendship to which Party is easie to discover; for he has turn'd the Doctrine of Satisfaction, which is the whole of this Controversie, to be no part of the Con∣troversie; and indeed without it all the rest is a Contest about words, and he wou'd make you believe, that there is more betwixt the Socinians and Ʋs, than, whe∣ther Christ died for our Sake, or, in our Stead, which, he says, are the same. Having thus cleverly brought off his belov'd Socinians,Witness the sweet and gentle Epithets of Brutal, False, Nonsence, &c. which in one page of the History of the Ʋnitarians (p. 24.) are bestow'd on us. That our Faith is absurd, and contrary both to Reason, and to it self: Impossible, in∣excusable, and that not to disern it is not to be a Man. Ibid. Besides many other the like Endearing Com∣plements, in other places. As Impudent, Blasphemous, and even Diabolical, and Idolatrous; Polytheisme, Depths of Satan: Thus they call the Christian Doctrine which we pro∣fess. he no longer conceals his Dear and In∣timate Affection to them. He prefers them before all sorts of Men in the World, and says, 2 Serm. p. 72. That even the Pro∣testant, the Popish, nay, the very Jesuits them∣selves, are in Comparison of them, but meer Scolds and Bunglers. And p. 70, 71. He says, To do right to the Writers on that side (The Socinians) I must own generally they are a Pattern of the fair way of Di∣sputing, and of Depating matters of Religion, with∣out Heat and unseemly Reflections upon their. Ad∣versaries. They generally argue matters with that Temper and Gravity; with that Freedom from Passion, and Tran∣sport which becomes a serious and weighty Argument. And for the most part they Reason closely and clearly, with extraordinary Guard and Caution, with great Dex∣terity and Decency, and yet with Smartness and Sub∣tilty enough, with a very gentle Heat; and few hard words. A Man could hardly describe his Mistress in a softer Air. The Socinians must be very ill natur'd if they take any thing amiss which this Gentleman has said against them. It was meer necessity; they see how un∣willingly, and artificially he has done it; and when rightly understood (no doubt they understand him) what he has said is with a design to give a better ac∣count of them than has been done, to take off that frightful Character with which some have painted them, not allowing them the very name of Christians. Whereas, alas! The Dr. has told us that there is no∣thing betwixt them and us, but a meer Controversie about words, which all mean the same thing. And then, that they are the best Temper'd, the Goodest sort of People in all the World. So that we need not be afraid of them, nor stand upon our guard against them. And then they are the most Ingenious, and the Sweetest Men, that we should love to Converse with them, and Read their Writings; all the Christian writers are but Scolds and Bunglers to them. This is our Author's Method of opposing Socinanism, nor are they behind him in their Civility and due Re∣spect, in the Answer they have Publish'd this year 1694. to his abovesaid four Sermons, with other Discourses against them. He (say they, that is, Dr. Tid. whom they call Arch Bishop of Cant.) is the Common Father of the Nation,Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Tri∣nity. Occasion'd by four Sermons Preach∣ed by his Crace the Lord Arch Bishop of Cant, &c. p. 43.) and has Instructed the Socinians themselves, with the Air and Language of a Fa∣ther, not of an Adversary, or a Judge— He is Respected and Lov'd by All, but those that are also known to Hate their Country; He hath no other Maligners, but the Enemies of the Nation it self, &c. CLAW ME AND I'LL CLAW YOU— Here is Love and good Correspondence in abnudance These Gentlemen know their Friends; And the Cause of Chri∣stianity is like to be well Defended, when it is maintain'd by some of a Party, on purpose that it may be soundly an-swer'd by others of them, who play Booty to one anothers Hands. And commend and recommend one another to all Mens Esteem and Veneration. But that this may not be discover'd, they Argree sometimes, like Counsels at the Bar, to fall foul upon one another, even to Scold, and call Names: which, to the wise Observers, serves only to expose either their Contradictory Banter, or otherwise their Hypocri∣tical Malice, and Deceit. Thus notwithstanding of Dr. T's Honey Words, above told, and all his Love-fits, to the Socinians, he sends them a Bit and a Blow. Amantium Ira— He plays with his Clog. First, I will give you his Character of Secinus himself, the Head and Founder of that Order, and then of the Socinians his followers. 1st Serm. p. 17. 18. He tells the method of Socin∣us in Interpreting Scriptures, which was, meerly by Criticising upon words, and searching into all the Senses they are possibly capable of, till he can find one, tho' never so forc'd and forreign, that will save harmless the Opinion, which he was before hand reslved to main∣tain, even against the most Natural and Obvious Sense
of the Text which he undertakes to Interpret. p. 44. That he puts quite another Sense upon the Scripture, than the Dr. believes, was thought of by any Christian Writer whatsoever before Socinus, p 45. He accuses the Novelty— great Violence and Ʋnreasonableness, and utter Inconsistency of Socinus's Interpretations of Scripture. And, that it may not be forgot, he re∣peats all this again, 2 Serm. p. 57. and in p. 58. he calls Socinus's Interpretations Strain'd and Violent— Pitiful and wretched shifts— Precarious and Arbi∣trary— without either Reason or Modesty (p. 68.) And as to the Novelty of it, Socinus himself makes no difficulty to own it, nay, he seems rather to rejoyce and Applaud himself in it. Ʋnhappy Man! That was so wedded to his own Opinion, that no Objection, no Diffi∣culty could divorce him from it. (p. 77.) Socinus— Imposing a new and very odd and violent Sense— Con∣trary to the Sense of the Christian Church in all Ages down to this time— And all this only to serve and sup∣port an Opinion which he had entertain'd before, and therefore was resolv'd one way or other to bring the Scripture to comply with it. And if he cou'd not have done it, it is greatly to be fear'd, that he wou'd at last have call'd in question the Divine Authority of S. John's Gospel, rather than have quitted his Opinion. And to speak freely, I must needs say, that it seems to me a much fairer way to reject the Divine Authority of a Book. than to use it so Disingeniously, and to wrest the plain Expressions of it, with so wuch strain∣ing and violence from their most Natural and Obvious Sense: for no Doctrine whatsoever can have any certain foundation in any Book, if this Liberty be once admitted, without regard to the plain Scope and Occasion of it, to play upon the Words, and Phrases. p. 80. Socinus by a dangerous Liberty of imposing a forreign and forc'd Sense upon particular Texts (has) brought the whole (H. Scriptures) into uncertainty. p. 82.— Any one that reads him may see he was sufficiently conscious to him∣self (of the Novelty and Boldness of his Interpretation) p. 83. Socinus was the first Author of this Interpreta∣tion, because it was impossible he could ever have been so fond of so ill favour'd a Child, if it had not been his own. p. 114 Of which (Antiquity) as Socinus had but little Knowledge, so he seems to have made but little account. This is our Author's Character of Socinus, a Man of no Learning, despising Antiquity, because Ignorant of it. Arrogant and Conceited, past all Modesty, Boasting that none in the World understood the true meaning of Scripture before himself. Of which the Dr. gives se∣veral Quotations out of his own words. 2 Serm. p. 69. Yet that his Shifts were Pitiful and Wretched, Strain'd and Violent, Precarious and Arbitrary, with∣out either Reason or Modesty; That he was so positive an Opiniator, that he wou'd rather have deny'd the Hly Scripture. than been convinc'd of his Error; that he dealt so Disingeniously with the Holy Scripture, wresting the plain Expressions of it in such a manner, that the Dr, thought it preferrable to reject their Di∣vine Authority, rather than to abuse them as he has done: Nay, that no Writing whatsoever can have any certain meaning, if Socinus's Liberty be allow'd of playing with the VVords and Phrases. Thus much for Socinus himself. Let us now see whether this Author gives a more favourable Chara∣cter of his Disciples, to make good the High Eulo∣giums above told? Serm. 2. p. 69. speaking of Schlictingius, one of the first Form in his School our Author says, he carry'd himself with more Confidence, but much less Decency than his Master; That he spoke so Extravagantly, and with so much Contempt of these Great and Venerable Names, who were the chief Propagators of Christianity in the World, and to whom all Ages do so justly pay a Reverence, That (he said) those Ancient Interpreters went so far from the Apostles meaning, as if they had Rav'd and been out of their Wits. And the Dr. says in general of the Socinians Serm. 1st p. 39. That their Interpretations of the Holy Scrip∣tures were strange and extravagant. (p. 44.) did con∣tradict not only the Ancient Fathers, but the General Consent of all Christians for 1500 years together. p. 61. That they avoid the plain and necessary Consequence of Holy Scriptures by strain'd and forc'd Arts of Interpre∣trtion. p. 62. Than which nothing can be more unnatural and violent. p. 65. Which I dare say no Indifferent Rea∣der of St. John, that had not been preposess'd and byas'd by some violent prejudice would ever have thought of. p. 75. The plainest Text for any Article of Faith, how Fundamental and Necessary sever, may, by the same Arts and ways of Interpretation, be cluded and rendered utterly ineffectual for the establishing of it. p. 92. 93. This is so Arbitrary and Precarious a supposition, that I must confess my self a little out of Countenance for them, that Men of so much Wit and Reason should ever be put to so sorry and pitiful a Shift. p. 96. This is so Inartificial, not to say Absurd a way of avoiding a Diffi∣culty— that no Man of common Ingenuity would make use of it. p. 99. A Sense so very flat, that I can hardly abstain from calling it Ridiculous. p. 113. We may plainly see by this, That they can Interpret a Text right when necessity forceth them to it, and they cannot, with∣out great Inconveniency to their Cause, avoid it: But when Men have once resolv'd to hold fast an Opinion they have taken up, it then becomes, not only Convenient but Necessary to understand nothing that makes against it: And this is truly the present Case: But in the mean time, where is Ingenuity and love of Truth? p. 115. They Triumph without Modesty, and without Mea∣sure. p. 125. Do they see no Absurdity in all this? Nothing that is contrary to Reason and Good Sense? Nothing that feels like Inconsistency and Contradiction? p. 129. Which way (the Socinians way) of dealing with them (the Holy Scriptures) seems to be really more Con∣tumelious to those Holy Oracles, than the down-right rejecting of their Authority. And single Serm. p. 18. He that can deny this (the Doctor's Argument against the Socinians) is perverse to the highest degree, and I fear beyond the possibility of being Convicted. p. 20. Men may generally wrangle about any thing, but what a fri∣volous Contention, what a Trifling in serious matter,
what Barretry in Divinity is this? p. 30. So little do Men in the heat of Dispute and Opposition, who are re∣solv'd to hold fast an Opinion in despight of Reason and Good Sense, consider that they do many times in effect, and by necessary Consequence, grant the very thing in ex∣press terms, they do so stifly and pertinaciously deny. p. 32. And this for no other reason, that I can imagine, but because they have deny'd it so often; and so long. F. These so different Characters which the Dr. gives of Socinus, and the Socinians, may be Reconciled, by saying, as I suppose the Dr. means, that this later Evil Character belongs to them, only in this present Controversy of the Trinity, the Divinity and Satisfacti∣on of Christ. But that the former High and most Ex∣traordinarly Excellent Character is due to them, in other matters of Religion, as against the Church of Rome; which the Dr. seems to intend, 2. Serm. p. 79. where he says. That the Socinian Writers have mana∣ged the Cause of the Reformation against the Innova∣tions and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, both in Doctrine and Practise, with great acuteness and advan∣tage. C. And yet in the very next words. he says, That the Socinians have put into their (the Papists) hands better and sharper Weapons than ever they had before for the weakening and undermining of the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. And p. 129. That nothing hath given a greater force to the Exceptions of the Church of Rome against the Holy Scriptures, being a sufficient and certain Rule of Faith, than the uncertainty into which they (the Socinians) have brought the plainest Texts ima∣ginable for the Establishing of Doctrines of the greatest Moment in the Christian Religion, by their Remote and Wrested Interpretations of them. And p. 124. That to avoid the shaddow and appearance of a Plurality of Deities, they ran readily into it. And into downright Idolatry. Now how invalidating the Holy Scriptures, and in∣troducing Idolatry is managing the Cause of the Refor∣mation, with Accuteness and Advantage against the Church of Rome, I leave to the Worthy Dr. to Ex∣plain. And likewise how Men can deserve such extra∣vagant Commendations for Wit, and Modesty; and all Discretion and Temper in one point of Controversy; and in another to be quite void of all these, to fall in∣to all Ridiculous Absurdities and Contradictions, and to manage either without Reason or Modesty; to be so Wedded to their own Opinion, as rather to Renounce the Holy Scriptures than endure to be convinced by them, in their most foolish and groundless Errors, taken up against the whole Christian World since the days of Christ. Modesty and Sweetness in a-Mans Temper, will shew it self in all his Actions. And a strong Reason cannot overlook a Contradiction in one case more than another, at least not to be obstinately so Wedded to it, as to be deaf to all Conviction. But we have spent too much time upon this Au∣thor's Character of these Socinians; which is not ma∣terial, otherwise, than to shew his own Unconstancy, and Inconsistency with himself; How unwillingly he is brought to appear against them; And what Salvoes and Shifts he makes use of to make them understand him, That he might not lose their Favour. God grant Him and Them true Conviction, and Save Unstable Souls from their Snares. POSTSCRIPT. SInce this was wrote, the Author before spoke of Dr. T. has Printed A Sermon concerning the Ʋnity of the Divine Nature, and the B. Trinity. And here if ever we might expect full Satisfaction in this point: But it is so far from it, that of all the others we have consider'd, this Sermon does most pal∣pably bewray his wretched Socinianism, if not some∣thing worse: for he not only speaks the very Socinian Language of the Trinity, but he really undermines the Ʋnity of God, by his setting it up upon a Foundation, which he himself, in this same Sermon, quite over∣throws. His great Proof is p. 10. The General Con∣sent of Mankind concerning the Unity of God that, the Ʋnity of the Divine Nature, is a Notion wherein the Greatest and the Wisest part of Mankind did always agree. p. 4. And yet, speaking of the Heathen Ido∣latry (which was all the rest of the World except the small Nation of the Jews) he says plainly, p. 9. that, The generality were grosly guilty both of believing more Gods, and of worshiping false Gods. p. 10. And did termi∣nate their worship there (in the Idol) as being the very Deity it self, which was certainly (says he) the Case of the greatest part of the Heathen World. And yet upon the Belief of this Greatest part, he builds, the Ʋnity of God; when he confesses that this Greatest part did not believe the Ʋnity of God. All the Salvo for this most palpable Contradiction is what he offers p. 9. viz. That the Ʋnity of the Divine Nature— was the Pri∣mitive and General Belief of Mankind, and that Poly∣theism and Idolatry were a Corruption and Degeneracy from the Original Notion which Mankind had concerning God.
I do not doubt but Adam worshiped the True God. And it is as true that Idolatry came in very soon; some say Cain introduc'd it. And that there was a very great defection so quickly made, that it is Recorded of the Birth of Enos, That then began Men to call upon the Name of the Lord, Gen. 4.29. as if they had ne∣ver done it before. And the Scripture tells of the Ge∣neral Corruption before the Flood. After the Flood we know the whole World was swallow'd up in an Ʋniversal Idolatry, except only the Family of Abraham, and after him of the Jews, who also were continually lap∣sing into it. what then becomes of this Author's Greatest part of Mankind? And his always? That this Greatest part did always agree in the Notion of the Ʋnity of God? Whereas he, in the same place, makes this Greatest part to have been always since the World was Peopled, Believers and Worshipers of more Gods and false Gods, in such gross Idolatry (as I cannot believe ever befel one Man since Adam, or that it is possible to besal any Man, being so apparent a Contradiction, viz.) to terminate our Worship in the Image or Idol as being the very Deity it self. For how can any Man believe such a thing to be the Image, or Picture of another thing; and yet to be that very thing of which it is the Image? Or is it in any Man's power to believe that a thing can be the Image, or Idol of its self? Cou'd Solomon be∣lieve this? Or was not he an Idolater? We know whom this favours and there may be a time to Recant even our Nestrum against Transubstan∣tion. It won'd be no greater change, than what has been already! And there is no stop in Art, nor are we ever, too old to learn. Thus much for his betraying the Unity of God, by placing it upon a Foundation, which he himself hath overthrown. Next to shew that, as to the Trinity of God, he speak the very Socinian Language. All that he says of it is in Sect. 3. p. 19, 20. Be∣cause he must say something. He is soon weary of it, and first he gives a Broad-side against it in direct Op∣position to what the Divines say of it (He desires not, or deserves not to be reckon'd one of the number) for the Dispute is not about the words Trinity, or Person, but as to the Sense of these words, in which they are used by Divines. The Socinians own a Trinity; and they have lately Re-printed and Published Bidle's Con∣fession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity. But all the matter is in what Sense the word Trinity is us'd by our Divines, and by the Socinians, and in this he peremp∣torily determines against the Sense of the Divines as Anti-Scriptural. He says, That neither the word Tri∣nity, nor perhaps Person, in the Sense in which it is used by Divines when they treat of this Mystery, are any where to e met with in Scripture. This is directly op∣posing the Doctrine of the Trinity, as taught by Di∣vines. Put he brings himself off thus. Yet it cannot be deny'd (says he) but that Three are there spoken of by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, [this no So∣cinian in the World denies] in whose Name every Chri∣stian is Baptized, [this is likewise granted by the So∣cinians] and to each of whom the highest Titles and Pro∣perties of God are in Scripture Attributed. Neither does this offend the Secinians, who Plead the same in answer to Jhn 1.3. as you have it in the Brief Ho∣ry of the Ʋnitarians, which solves that Text, All things were made by him, (i. e.) by the  or word, thus: The word (says he) begins here to be spo∣ken of as a Person, by the the same figure of Speech, That Solomon saith, Wisdom hath hath builded her House, and heuen out her seven Pillars, Prov. 9.1. And that David calls Gods Commandments Councellours, Psal. 119.24. And, in conclusion, this Author is willing to Com∣pound for the word Person (of which we have spoke before) So long (says he) as we mean by it neither more nor less than what the Scripture says in other words. But he has told you before, that there is no such thing to be found in Scripture, in the sense in which it is used by Divines; And what other sense he means, is easie to tell. For the present Controversie is only betwixt the two senses, of the Divines (as he calls them) and the Socinians: unless he means something else by the word Divines, and so makes the whole a Banter upon us. For he does not explain himself, nor say one word more, in all that Sermon touching the Blessed Trinity; of the difference 'twxit the Socinians and us concerning this great Fundamental of our Faith. And whether this be or whether it be not, a sufficient clearing of himself as to what side he inclines. when he could find no more to say against the Socinians up∣on this point, in a Discourse which he Entitles, and so would make us believe to be, A Vindication of the Christian Doctrines to the Blessed Trinity against that of the Socinians, I leave to the Impartial Reader. And now for a Conclusion, upon the whole, that has been said of all his Sermons, they are all the Genuine effects of Hobbism which loosens the Notions of Reli∣gion, takes from it all that is Spiritual, Ridicules whatever is called Supernatural; it reduces God to Matter, and Religion to Nature. In this School Dr. T. has these many years, held the First Form, and now diffuses his Poyson from a high Station. It is many years ago since the E. of D. one Sunday, that Dr. T. Preach'd at White-Hall, told K. C. 2d that Mr Hbbs was got into the Pulpit, his Politicks are Leviathan, and his Religion is Latitudinarian, which is none; that is, nothing that is positive, but against every thing that is positive in other Religions; whereby to reduce all Religions to an uncertainty, and determinable on∣ly by the Civil Power; against whose Command Dr. T. does not think it lawful to Preach the Gospel,Preach'd before K. C. the ad at White-Hall, the 2d of April 80 upon Jsh. 24.15. without such extraordinary Commission as the Apostles had; and that we were able to vouch it with Miracles, as they did; which is as much as Hobbs himself could have ask'd, if he had got into the Pult it in Person, and not sent his Deputy: He is own'd by the Atheistical Wits of all England, as
their true Primate and Apostle; They Glory and Rejoice in him, and make their publick Boasts of him; He leads them not only the length of Socinianism (they are but slender Beaux have got no father than that) but to call in question all Revelation; to turn Gene∣sis, &c. into a meer Romance, to Ridicule the whole as Blunt, Gildo, and others of the Doctor's Disciples have done in Print. They now cry there is nothing but Natural Religion. All that which is called Re∣vealed, is at most but Gods Compliance with the Superstition of the vulgar, and what does that con∣cern Men of Wit and Sense? Since Religion has no deeper a Root, what Reverence, what Veneration is due to it? All the Ordinances and Constitutions of the Law and Gospel are but Politicks to secure Government and the threatenings even of Hell it self are no more, and therefore, there is no necessity, no certainty that they will be inflicted; as our Primate has boldly asser∣ted in the very Face of the Government, and his Ser∣mon was Printed by their Majesties special Command. Thus to the Deists Triumph! And thus, actum est d Religione, if none dare oppose these depths of Satan, and the Spiritual wickednesses which are now set up in high places. When this Sermon of Hell was first Pub∣lished, it was handed about among the great Debau∣chees, and small Atheistical Wits, more than any new Play ever came out, He was not a Man of Fashion who wanted one of them in his Pocket, ot could not draw it out at the Coffee-House, and read a Lecture of the Priest-Ridden Ages, who were frighted with the Eter∣nity of Hell, only to keep them in absolute subjection to the Church forsooth! And then to run two or three Divisions in praise of Dr. T. as a Man of Sense and Reason, and not afraid to undeceive the World, and break off from a Company of formal and narrow-spirited Church-men, who going on in the track of their Fa∣thers, durst not understand the Scriptures, out of the ancient Roade, in a Generous Latitude, over the Pailes of any Church or Profession whatsoever; but crept on still in their straight and narrow way to Heaven; which Dr. T. like another Prómetheus, having stole the Divine Secret, has opened so broad and wide as to let in the Latitudinarians, that is all the World; and af∣ter some reasonable time even Hell it self: For God has only threatened, that they shall not enter into his Rest; and the Dr. has determined in that Hellish Ser∣mon p. 13. and 15. That God is not obliged to Exe∣cute his Threatenings, tho' he is to perform his Promises. But having spoke at large of this in a former Conver∣sation with you, I will not Repeat. I am now only from the cnstant Tract of all his Sermons (as well before as since this Revolution, but now highly improved and grown bolder) shewing you what a Face he puts upon Religion; he gives it quite another turn from what all other Divine, Ancient and Modern (except those infected with Hbbism) have told us. They make the chief business of Religion to re∣spect another World, tho' it is likewise highly useful, and the most efficacious of any other means whatsoe∣ver to preserve the Peace of this. But Mr. Hobbs, Dr. T. &c. make its chief, and indeed almost onely consideration to respect the Peace and Quietness of this World. Which is largely set forth in his Sermon before the House of Commons the 5th of November, 1678. upon Luke 9.55, 56. where, as if Religion were good for nothing else but to secure Temporal Go∣vernment and Peace in this World; He demands Ma∣gisterially, and with great vehemence in these words And for God's sake what is Religion good for, but to Re∣form the Manners and Dispositions of Men, to restrain Human Nature from Violence and Cruelty, from Falshood and Treachery, from Sedition and Rebellion? And then, In the very next words, he roundly and without min∣cing the matter, comes to the Objection, That if this be all the end of Religion, it were better to have no Religion at all, than to disturb our outward Peace and Tranquility for it: Because the End is always to be preferr'd before the Means; And therefore if the End of all Religion be only to preserve the Peace of this World, it follows necessarily that Religion must give place to the Peace of this World; so that if both can∣not stand together, we must part with our Religion to preserve the Peace of this World. Here the Dr. does distinguish, and puts in a Salvo for his dearly beloved Natural Religion, because he can make of that what he will. But he plainly and in terms gives up the Cause as to all Revealed Religion: That it were better have no such thing, that is, no Christ, or Christianity, rather than to disturb our Peace in this World for it. Better it were, says he, there were no Revealed Re∣ligion, and that Human Nature were left to the Conduct of its own Principles, and Inclinations, which are much more mild and merciful, much more for the Peace and Happiness of Human Society, than to be acted by a Re∣ligion that is continually supplanting Government, and undermining the Wellfare of Mankind. This is their outward Wellfare he is still speaking of. And above in the same page, aggravating the mischiefs of distur∣bances upon account of Religion, (viz.) setting a kee∣ner edge upon Mens Spirits, and making them more Cruel and Bitter to one another, he concludes thus. For let any Man say worse of Atheism and Infidelity, if he can, Here is a bold Challenge, and the Dr. could not but foresee the Answer which would be ready in every Man's Mouth, That Hell and Damnation, which are threatened as the punishment to Atheism and Infide∣lity, were much worse than any Embroylments could be in this World. But he has made Hell precarious, and consequently Religion to look no further than this World, at least with any certainty. But it is not only matters of such consequence as Government which the Dr. prefers to Revealed Religion: But, to shew his utmost Contempt of it, he has found out so very mean a thing to compare to it, and prefer before it, as must surprise and astonish every Christian Reader. He makes a Womans giving out her Child to Nurse to be a more heinous matter, than to renounce Christ, and all Revealed Religion. His words are these.
And this; (says he, that is, a Womans Nursing her own Child) is a Natural Duty; and because it is so,Six Sermons Prin∣ed together, 1694. Serm. 3. Concerning the Education of Children, p. 103. of a mere necessary and indispensable Obligation than any positive Precept of Revealed Reli∣gion. Now the Belief of Christ is nothing else but a positive Precept of Reveal∣ed Religion. Christ is the only truly Revealed Religion. God never Revealed any other: For the Gospel was Preach'd to the Jews as well as unto us. Heb. 4.2. The Law and the Prophets taught Christ to come, as the Gospel shewed him, when he was come. From the first Revelation of him Gen. 3.15. to the end of the World, it is the same Gospel, the same Christ that is Revealed. And Dr. T. even since he came to Cant, has Printed it, and Published it to all the World, that he thinks, a Womans Nursing her own Child is more necessary than the Belief of Christ, and of more Indispensible Obliga∣tion. And his poor Reason, because it is a Natural Duty, will advance every Passion or Vice that we think to be Natural, above all the Commands of God in Scripture. We know what sins the Libertines do plead for as Na∣tural; and they think that Marriage, which is but a Positive Precept, ought not to supersede the Natural Freedom. These Men measure Good and Evil by their present corrupted Nature, and thereby give their Lusts the Ascendent, and a Superior Authority to the Written Word of God. By which means they have shaken themselves loose from all Discipline of Religion; But what they know Naturally, as Brute Beasts, Jude 10. in those things they corrupt themselves. What our Nature was before the Fall, we cannot nw tell. And that only can be truly called Natural; that is, what was agreeable to our Nature in its Purity and in its Perfection; not now in its Broken and Cor∣rupted Condition. Which is therefore much more safely conducted by unerrable Revelation from God; than to have those Sa∣cred Oracles over-rul'd, and superseded by our very Fallible Notions of Nature; which every Man may make to mean what he pleases: For what is counted very vile and abominable in some Nations, is practised without scruple, among other People, and thought ve∣ry Natural, and therefore very Good. Nay, a Man may think that to be Natural to day, which to morrow he may think quite otherwise. Which shews the Fallibility of this Rule. Even this great Natural Dr. himself, in the Reign of K. C. 2d thought (at least Preached it before the K.) that Sedition and Rebellion, Perfidiousness and Perjury, were contrary to the Natural No∣tions;3d Vol. of his Serm. 3d Serm. upon 1 John 4.1. p. 76. 77. and therefore that no Re∣velation was to be credited which did but Allow of them; no, not tho' even Miracles were done in confirmation of any such Revelation. And yet, this notwithstanding, he justified the Present Revolu∣tion from the visible Finger of God in it,Thanksgiving Serm. for our Deliverance by the P. of O. p. 68. 69. 70, 71, 72. and the plain Signatures and Characters of a more imme∣diate Divine Interpositon. Such as the uncertainty of the Weather, the Infatuation of the Jesuits Councils, and other such like Signatures of a Divine Interposition, which he mentions: And from such Miraculous Interpositions, he Justifiers those (whom he calls, The Worthies of our Nation) who De∣serted, Betray'd, and took Arms against K. James. So that we find the Doctors Nature, and his Natural No∣tions vary'd in a very little time, and upon a small variation of Circumstances; insomuch that what one day, he would not trust to Revelation or Miracles for; the next day, the turning of the Wind shall be Argu∣ment sufficient. For some Mens Notions of what is Natural, are suited to what they find agreeable to their Nature, that is, to their Ease; their Convenience, or sometimes to their Lusts and Pleasures, or even their Resentments and basest Passions. I would not here be misunderstood, as if I meant to Decry all Natural Religion and Reason. No doubt, there is such a Light imprinted in our Nature by God▪ But it is much darkened since to Fall, and needs the as∣sistance of Revelation to direct our way to Heaven. And it ought to be subservient to Revelation, which is all I plead for; and not set up against it, and prefer'd before it, as this Dr. and others of his Principles have rashly done. I compare our Natural Light or Knowledge to the Creation of the First Day. And it is the Light of the First Day which we enjoy still: But not as it was that day Created. It was Regulated and Modeled the Fourth Day into the Sun, Moon; and Stars: And now we have no Participation at all of the Light of the First Day, but what we have from its Regulation on the Fourth Day, and conveyed to us from the Sun: Which I compare to Revealed, that is, the Christian Religion, God is called Light, 1 John 1.5. and Christ (Mat. 4.2.) is called the Sun of Righteousness: and tho' there is a Precedent Natural Knowledge of God; like the Light of the First Day; yet now that Christ is Revealed, the true Knowledge of God is to be had, as the Scripture speaks, only in the Face of Jesus Christ: For none know God truly but the Son, and he to whom soever the Son will Reveal him. Mat. 11.27, And to go back now from the Revealed to Natural Religion, is, as if we should forsake the Light of the Sun, to grope after the Light of the First Day. And as Christ is Superiour to our Natural Light, or Reason; so the Institutions of his Revealed Religion, do take place of our Natural Instincts. Thus shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, which are Natural Relations, and shall cleave to his Wife, which is a Positive Institution. Kings and Bishops, our Governors both in Church and State, our Spiritual and Political Fathers have greater Authority over us than our Natural Parents.
So far is it from being true which Dr. T. has set up as a Maxim, that what he calls. Natural Duties, are of more necessary and Indispensible Obligation, than any Po∣sitive Precepts of Revealed Religion. On the contrary, the Precepts of Revealed Religion, as they are of far Greater and Higher Authority than our own meer Natural Notions; So are they the surest Indication of what was the First and Original, Pure and Ʋncorrurted Dictates of our Nature. I have here only mentioned these short passages out of some of Dr. T's Sermons, to shew his plain and down-right Hbbism; upon which I could enlarge, and shew you the same Thread to run through all his Works: But this I intend for a Task by it self, my present Work being his Socinianism. And I think it an Indi∣spensible Duty to warn the World, especially this poor Kingdom, of this Man's Diabolical Principles, because he is got now into so high a Sphere, as to be able to do much mischief among the Clergy, by preferring those of his own Principles, the Latitudinarians; and by this means, he may bid fair to Pervert the whole Na∣tion; he has deeply poysoned them already. And if this be not a time to speak, we may for ever after hold our Tongue. He that would not, in this Case, ex∣pose his Life, and all that he had, would never do it for any Cause of Christ; for the Ax was never laid more palpably at the very Root of all Christianity. I hope what I have said will at least provoke abler Pens to Engage in Defence not only of Christianity, but of the first Principles and Foundation of Religion in General; which the Hobbiss; have depress'd far below that of the Heathen; who acknowledg'd Divine Re∣velation tho' they mistook it: But these make it a per∣fect Tool and Engine of State, hung at the Belt of the Civil Magistrate, and disposeable by him at his pleasure, These are yet more dangerous, more affronting to God, than the Socinians: For the Socinians argue, tho from a false Topick, for the Honour of God, as if more Per∣sons were Dishonourable to the Divine Nature; But these dare Blasphemously to make God an Ape to the Devil himself; and to be beholding to his Imvention, and the Capricio's of Foolish and Wicked Men, for all the Institutions of his Holy Religion; and to have sent our Lord Christ into the World, and Sacrificed Him up∣on the Cross for no other End than to comply with the wickedness of Men, and instead of destroying the works of the Devil, infinitely to out-do them, to put them out of Countenance, and make them asham'd of their Little∣ness in Sacrificing Beasts and Men, instead of which poor Butcheries and Murther, and to make them no more regarded, Here the Son of God shall be murthered, to shew how little mischief the Devil could do in Compa∣rison of God! And to frighten and amaze Mankind, the most wicked of them, and to stop their hand from the further pursuit of their little Insignificant Cruelties to one another, by being struck with the horror of such Super-wickedness, and unnatural Barbarity; As the K. of Moab Sacrificed his Eldest Son, to stop the pursuit of his Enemies. (2 Kings 3.27.) by over glutting their Revenge and out-doing their Cruelty. These are not Tares Sown in the Night, and by Stealth; But it is Rooting up all Revealed Religion in the Noon-day, and exposing of Christianity to the Contempt and Buffoonery of Atheistical Wits. And if the Husband∣men take no no notice of it; They are not Asleep but Dead. God awaken them by a timely sense of their Duty, and not by a Total Extirpation and Removeal of their Candlestick. Amen.
Some REFLECTIONS upon the Second of Dr. BURNET's Four Discourses, concerning the Divinity and Death of Christ. Printed 1694. I Had ended the Reader's Labour and my own, but that I am call'd back by a Book now lately Published; Licensed by this Great Dr. Himself Jo. Cant. to give it the greater Authority; and wrote by his Collegue Dr. Burnst, now called Bishop of Sarum; It is Entituled, Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocess of Sarum, &c. Printed 1694. One of these Discourses is Concerning the Divinity and Death of Christ; wherein there is such a Notion of Christ's Divinity set down as would make any Christian Ear to tingle. He gives the very same account of it as the Brief History of the Ʋnitarians, in Answer to John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh; that is, says that So∣cinian Author, the Word dwelt in, or did Inhabit the Person of Jesus Christ. There is none that is unpreju∣diced but must see how very far this is from the full Import of that Text, and what a force is done to the words of the Text , was made Flesh. This is sure a degree beyond bare Inhabitation. It is true our Soul may be said to dwell in our Body: But there is something more, It is Impersonated with our Body, whence there arises what the Schools call Commu∣nicatio Idiomatum, between the Soul and the Body; That is, that the Properties of each are attributed to the Person who partakes of Both. Thus Man is called Mortal, because his Body is such; and Immortal, be∣cause his Soul is such. And thus it is that Christ is called God, in respect to his Divine Nature, and Man in re∣spect to his Human. Neither of these can be predi∣cated of the other. The Divine Nature, is not the Hu∣man Nature, nor the Human Nature the Divine. The Soul is not the Body, nor the Body the Soul: But each of these is predicated of the Person who partakes of Both. All the Atiributes of the Divine, and Properties of Human Nature, are predicated of Christ; as all Pro∣perties of Soul and Body are predicated, tho' not of One another, yet of Man, who is made up of Both. This is the true Notion of Impersonation, and with∣out this Christ could never be made Flesh. The Spirit of God did Inhabit, or Inspire the Apostles, Prophets, and Holy Men of Old: and will do every Saint, or Holy Person to all Eternity. But this does not make God to become Flesh. If you answer that the Spirit of God, or the Word (as the Socinians say, did inhabit or inspire that Man Jesus Christ, in an Higher Degree than other Men: That will make nothing, as to the Word's becoming Flesh: God was no more Flesh in Abraham or St. Paul, than in the Meanest Saint, tho' he inspired one much more than another. Nothing short of Impersonation could make him to become Flesh; or make that Flesh Adorable without the highest Idolatry. Dr. B. thinks to solve all this by comparing God's Indwelling in Jesus, to the Indwelling of God in the Cloud of Glory in the Temple, and he says, p. 127. That the Jews, worshipped the Cloud of Glory, because of God's Resting upon it, and therefore that they could make no Objection to the Christians Worshipping of Christ, by vertus of the Indwelling of the Eternal word in Him. Make no Objection▪ Yes sure; and Retort the Argu∣ment, to the Confusion of such Christians. For they did not worship the Cloud of Glory. That had been Rank Idolatry, Notwithstanding of any Inhabitation of God there, and therefore from this Reasoning, it must have been Idolatry to have worshipped Christ, notwith∣standing of any Inhabitation of God in him. Nor will it solve this, that the Dr. says, p. 116. That there was a more perfest Indwelling of God in Christ, than in the Cloud. So there was in the Cloud more than in the Temple; yet it had been as great Idolatry to have worshiped the Cloud as the Temple. God's Presence was never more visibly exhibited in any Apparition under the Law, than when he descen∣ded upon Mount Hereb in Fire, Cloud, &c. He spoke out of that Fire with an Audible Vice, which he did not out of the Cloud of Glory in the Temple. And yet he strictly forbids the worshipping of any thing they there saw, or the making any Resemblance or Similitude of any thing that there appeared, lest it should cor∣rupt them to Idelatry, Deut. 4.15. &c. As before observed, the Degrees of Inhabitation say nothing to the making the thing inhabited to be God: No less Inhabitation than an Impersonation can do that, because no lesser or other sort of Inhabitation does car∣ry with it the Communicatio Inlimatum, so as to make God be called that thing, or that thing be called God. And therefore it is a gross Error which the Dr. asserts p. 113. That the Indwelling of the Jehovah was accor∣ding to the Scripture Phrase, said to be Jehovah, It is so far from Scripture Phrase, that all the Holy Scriptures do detest it as Idolatry. This distinction would justifie the worship of the Sun, as being a Glorious Tent or Tabernacle of God.
And no doubt, God does Inhabit it, as he does every Creature in their several Degrees, and this will justifie all the wild Heathen Idolatry. For Higher or Lower in Creatures, that is, different degrees of God's Inhabi∣tion make no difference as to the worship of them. It is as much Idolatry to worship the highest Angel as the meanest Worm. Therefore the Dr's Argument is most Heterodox, that the Inhabitation of God in Christ, makes Christ to be God: If by Inhabitation he means any thing short of Impersonation. Which if he had meant, he had never thought of explaining it, by the Inhabitation of God in the Cloud: Or thrust himself upon such a Pre∣cipice of Idolatry, as to aver that the Cloud was Jeho∣vah, and that they worshipped the Cloud because of God's dwlling in it. Yet as the former Dr. who Licenses what this his Second has wrote, will not (as before told) stand out, or loose any thing for the word Person: But then you must take what he means by it; So this Stickler, does now and then slip it in, that he may have it to say; but will not let himself be mistaken, in explaining it, as above. The design is to wear Men off from this Personality by degrees; never making use of the word, but some way or other to expose it, and to lead Men from the true and full meaning of it, as it was necessarily used, on purpose to distinguish such direful and wasting He∣resies as now infest the Church under much Sheeps Cloathing. For if God has not assum'd our Nature into his own Person; only dwelt in Christ, as in the Temple, as in the Cloud, tho' in an higher degree: Christ cannot be our God, and we are Idolaters in worshipping Him; as much as the Heathen in worshipping their Idols from the supposed Inhabitation of God in them. And God has not taken upon him our Nature, more than the Nature of Angels (as the Apostle argues Heb. 2.16.) Nay, God dwells more visibly with his Angels, or In∣habits them more sully, and intimately, than Mankind. Therefore God's dwelling in a Man does no more make him God, than God's dwelling in the Angels of his Pre∣sence, makes all them to be God. If this Argument hold, Lucifer was in the right when he pretended to be God: for he was the most Glorious Angel; and con∣sequently God did dwell in him in an Higher Degree than in other Angels. This Example shews that no degrees of Inhabitation gives any Title to Divine Nature. What then has Mankind gain'd by God's Inhabitation in the Human Nature of Jesus Christ, if that be all? What is that to other Men? What better am I for that, than for his Inhabitation in the Human Nature of Moses, or even in the dead Walls of the Temple? O, yes, says the Dr. p. 120. The Great God is also our Faderal God, or Jehovah, by his dwelling in the Hu∣man Nature of Jesus Christ. Was He not Jehovah likewise, or a Faderal God, to the Jews? And that by his Dwelling in the Temple, and affording his Presence there? Does he not call them his Faderal People? Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. Psal. 50.5. How is the Human Nature advanced beyond that of Angels? Or, as it is express'd in St. Athanasius's Creed, how is the Manhood taken into God, if there be no more than a bare Inhabitation of God in the Flesh? Christ is our Lord (says the Dr. ibid. p. 120.) nos by an Assumption into an High Dignity, or the Communica∣ting Divine. Honour to him, but as the Eternal Word dwelt Bodily in him. Well then, Dr. You say that the In-dwelling of the Eternal word did not Communicate Divine Honour to Christ. How then, I pray you, is he Adorable? How is he God by Nature? Since (as you quote it in the next page 121.) it is the Definition which St. Paul gives of Heathenish Idolatry 4 Gal. 8. to worship those who by Nature are not, Gods. And you your self p. 110.) Give this Description of Idolatry, that is, Either the worshipping of other Gods besides the true, or the worship∣ping the true God under a Bodily Representation. Now you confess that the Eternal word dwelt Bodily in Christ Jesus, which I suppose you will not say of his dwelling in the Temple, or in any other Holy Man. and therefore to worship God only in Christ (which you would be at) is the worshipping of God under a Bodily Representation, more than worshipping him in the Sun, or in any Image, because he is not so Bodily Represented in them or in any thing else as in the Human Nature of Jesus Christ. I say the worshipping of Christ must, by this Rule, be the most direct Idolatry, if we suppose no more than an Indwelling of the Divinity in him; and not that his Human Nature was Exalted, and even Im∣personated with the Divine Nature, whereby he was as truly and really, that is, Naturally God, as he was Man. But rather then let Christ be a Divine Person, the Dr. Would be content to loose his own Personality, and Confound the very Notion of Subsistence or Personallity; at least 'twixt Flesh and Spirit; which he takes upon him to Explain in a New and Extraordinary Manner, for several Pages to gether. At last he comes to this. p. 106. These are all the ways (says he) That we can apprehend of a Minds assuming matter, and being united to it, which is the having it under i'ts actuation or authority; So that the Acts of the mind give such Im∣pressions to the Body, as Govern and Command it. This Description wou'd Impersenat all the Angels which have appeared in Bodyes with that matter which they assum'd: for there is no doubt but they did per∣fectly well Command and Govern those Bodyes: better much than we can do ours. Made 'em Fly and Mount as they pleased. And upon this account the Eternal word was often Im∣personated with Matter, before his being made Flesh in the womb of the Blessed Virgin; if we believe, as it is Generally believed, That it was He who appear'd to Moses in the Bush, to Joshua as the Captain of the Lord's Hist, to Abraham, in the form of an Angel, &c.
But all this was not assuming any of these forms, in which he appeared, into his own Person; for then wou'd have follow'd the Communicatio Idiomatum, such Fire, or Body in which he appear'd would have been truly and Really God, and God wou'd have been that Fire, or that Body. which as it is Blasphemy to affirm, so this shews us a stricter Notion of Impersonation than the Dr. sets up; which is only the Minds Commanding and Governing of matter. In which Sense, God must be Impersinated with every Body in the World, for he Commands and Governs them Absolutely; and he Inha∣bits and Dwells in every one of them, for in Him they have their Being. The Dr. in his Vindicatory Letter to Dr. Williams, be∣fore Quoted, p: 99. adds further, That this indwelling is a vital one, like that of the Souls dwelling in the Body, and not an assisting one, like Inspiration, or the Gift of Tongues or Miracles. But this will not hinder the Consequence above told. For in God we Live and Move, as well as have our Be∣ing in Him. Acts. 17.28; Therefore He may be even a VITAL Indwelling, and yet short of Impersenation. He says, That this Indwelling of the Word in Christ, is LIKE that f the Souls dwelling in the Body. It may be like it, but not of the same sort. Every like, we say, is not the same. He says above, in the same page; That the Ʋnion of the Divine and Human Nature in Christ, is represented in Scripture as the Compounding one Person, as much as in other Men the Ʋnion of Soul and Body makes one Man. This, indeed is fairly said, if it be as sincerely in∣tended. For, if this be so, there must follow the Communi∣tio Idiomatum betwixt the Divine and Human Natures in Christ, as much as betwixt the Soul and Body of Man. Which the Dr. will not allow. For, if he al∣low'd this, there cou'd be no Cause of Dispute. And if he had thought thus, he cou'd never have explain'd it by the Indwelling of God in the Cloud; nor found any scruple against the word Person; nor have been forc'd to new and uncouth Expositions of Personality: Nor wou'd he have made a Distinction (as before told) betwixt the Man-hoed of Christ or the Man Christ being advanc'd into God (as the Athanasian Creed expresses it) or the Communicating Divine Honour to Him (as Dr. Burnet words it p. 120. of his Discourse above Quoted) I say, if he had Really and Truly believ'd the Imper∣sonation of the Divine and Human Nature in Christ, as the Soul and Body are Impersonated in Man, as he would seem to speak in his Vindication, he could not have made a Distinction between Christ's Assumption into an High Dignity, or the Communicating Divine Honour to Him, and betwixt the Dwelling of the Eternal Word Bodily in him. For if by Bodily here he had meant a Bedily Imper∣sonation as betwixt MANS Soul and Body, then that Man CHRIST had not only Divine Honour Communicated to Him (which the Dr. denies) by the Indwelling of the Word, but He Himself was the Word. But the Dr's true meaning is, that the Bodily dwelling of the Word in the Man Christ, was only a dwelling in his Body, without Impersonation, or Communicating His Divine Attributes to Him; and therefore that no Divine Honour was thereby Communicated to Him; which the Dr. asserts, as above Quoted, in the 120th p. of his Discourse. And instead of correcting this, in his Vindication, he re-asserts it more positively in another as he thinks, more odious Form of words, For there p. 96. He puts the Case of a Mans being made a God, and that was so called, and was to be worshipped as such. And this he calls a new Doctrine, that it seems (says he) scarce conceivable how any one can entertain this, and yet retain any value for Religion: I must confess (says he) I cannot; and it is so natural for a Man to judge of others by himself, that I do not think others do it, or indeed can do it. These are his words. And, by this, it is very plain that he does not think the Man Christ to be God, or, that Christ is God and Man, but only God in Man. And consequently, that there is no Hypostatical, that is, Personal Union betwixt the Divine and Human Nature of Christ, as there is be∣twixt the Soul and Body in Man; For if there were, then the Communicatio Idiomatum must necessarily fol∣low; that is, the Properties or Attributes of each of their Natures would belong to the Person who did par∣take of both. And the Man Christ would be as truly God as he was Man. And as for the Dr's Bug-bear word of a Man's being made Gods. with which he thinks to frighten us, as if God could be made, let him know that there are none so absurd as to think that God can be made; and that this is not the same thing as a Man's being made God; because, tho' the God-head cannot be made; and in that Sense, nothing can be made God; yet a Man by be∣ing taken into a Personal Union with God, becomes really God, as much as the Body becomes a Man, by its Personal Union with an Human Soul: Notwithstanding of which Ʋnion, the two different Natures of Body and Soul remain nothing the less distinct and Unconfounded in themselves, and in their several Properties, Incommu∣nicable to each other. tho' all equally Predicated of the same Person who partakes of both Natures. And therefore Dr. Burnet by this Phrase, in this place, does plainly declare against the Divinity of Christ, and that he neither does nor can believe it. Nay he Ridicules it, and Blasphemes it, in setting up the Notion of a Man that was made a God. And tho' as he says, p. 99. The Ʋnion of the Divine and Human Nature in Christ, irrepresented in Scripture as the compounding one Person, as much as in other Men, the Ʋnion of Soul and Body makes one Man. He must mean, by this, only that this was a Comparison or Representation used in Scripture whereby the Dwel∣ling of the Word in Christ was in some manner, sha∣dowed out, or represented, not that it was strictly so. For if he had thought it strictly so, that the Divine and Human Natures in Christ were as much Impersonated, as Soul and Body in other Men, he would never have made it an absurdity that a Man was made God, more than that the matter of a Man's Body is made a Man. or part of the Person of a Man.
He could never have stumbled upon such broad Blas∣phemy as to say, That no Divine Honour was Com∣municated to Christ, and that he was not our Lord, by an Assumption into an High Dignity, as before quo∣ted. Hence we must learn how to understand many of his Plausible sayings, as thus p. 127. of his Discourse, where, having Explain'd Personality, as above told, to mean no more than a Power in the Soul to Command and Govern the Body; he brings in a Plausible Sen∣tence for the Personal Union of the Divine and Human Natures in Christ; but yet with a Salvo to secure his secret meaning. So that upon these Reasons (says he, and not other∣wise) we may well and safely determine that Christ is truly God and man: and that the God-head did as really dwell in his Human Nature, and became Ʋnited to it, as our Souls dwell in our Bodies, and are Ʋnited to them. This sounds very Orthedox. But it is all to be un∣derstood only upon these Reasons. That is, which dwindle down Personality only to a Power to Command and Govern; and by Christ is God and Man, he means no more than that God dwelt in that Man Christ; and so He was both God and Man; but not that they were one Person, any otherwise than as God did Command, Go∣vern, or Enliven that Man; (as he does all Men.) Christ was truly God. That is, as the Cloud was Jehovah, which the Dr. asserts in this same page, and is one of the Premises from whence he draws this Conclusion. 2. The God-head dwelt in Christ and was Ʋnited to him, as our Souls dwell in our Bodies, and are Ʋnited to them, that is, as the Dr. has Explain'd it, only to Command and Govern them. Thus you see what true pains is taken by these two Great Doctors to Elude and totally to Enervat the whole Christian Doctrine, and all the Terms wherein for sup∣pression of Heresies, it has been conceived and deliver∣ed down to us from Christ and his Apostles through all Ages of the Catholick Church. If it be not so. Why are not they content to set down their Faith in the plain Terms used by the Church? Why all these New and Laborious Expositions? Why do they thus Intangle and Perplex? Why can they not say three Persons in the Trinity, as well as three dif∣ferences, three somewhats? Why do they confound us as this Dr. p. 96. with the difference betwixt distinct and distinction? viz. That by Person, in the Trinity, we must not mean a compleat Intelligent Being distinct from every other Being. But only that every one of that Blessed Three, has a peculiar distinction in Himself, by which he is truly different from the other Two. Different but not distinct; Not distinct but that has a Distinction! What is the meaning of this? What is the Quarrel at the word Person? O that these Dr's would speak out! That they would go fair over to the Socinian side! Or do they stay, that they may more Effectually under∣mine the Christian Doctrine by distinguishing and Ac∣commodating all to the Socinian Hypothesis. And by this means draw Men Insensibly into it? Therefore we must deal plainly with them and tell (because they will not) what they would be at. Which is, to make the 3 Persons of God. onely 3 Manifestations of God; Or, the same Person of God considered under 3 different Qualifications and Respects, as our Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier. But we must Ask, if it was only a Manifestation that was made Flesh? If we are Baptized into the Faith and worship of a Manifestation? why but 2. or 3 Manifestations of God, are there not Hundreds? is God, or the first Person, one of his own Manifesta∣tions; Why then is He reckoned as one of the Three? Are these three all one and the same Person? Is this then the meaning of Mat. 12.32. That whosoever speaketh against one of these One shall be forgiven, but whosoever speaketh against Another of the same One shall not be forgiven? That we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son (who is the Same person with the Father) and of the Holy Ghost (who is the same Person with them both (or in the Name of the Father, and of Himself, and of Himself? This is the plain, Easie, and Intelligible Socinian Sy∣stem of Divinity! This is the Rational account of their Faith. And this (Doctors Both) you must stick to, or give us leave to use the word Person in the already known and Received Notion of that Term, and as the Holy Catholick Church hath always understood it in Express∣ing the Glorious Trinity of God. Dr. B. Concludes this point with referring to the four bove-said Sermons of Dr. T. and clawing him for the Grace of this Imprimatur, by giving his Judgment of that work, as perform'd with great Strength and clear∣ness of Reason. p. 128. Thus these two Pillars stand bound jointly and se∣verally for one Anothers Ingenuity and Performances. And that they may keep even pace, Dr. B. now passes on to the other great point of Socinianism, the Sacrifice, and Death of Christ. p. 134. Wherein he Copys after, and comes up to the full of that Diaboli∣cal Heresie, so bare-fac'd set up by Dr. T. against the Satisfaction of Christ, which is the only Foundation for the Remission of sin. He first. p. 134. Endeavours to Remove the Great Ground-Work of any Satisfaction being due to Gods Justice for sin, by Advancing that Notion of Justice which Dr. T. does in his Sermon of Hell. He calls it onely a Right of punishing which is vest∣ed in Himself, and therefore which he may either use or not use at his pleasure. Upon this is grounded the pre∣cariousness of Hell, that God not being Oblidg'd in his Justice, to inflict Hell, notwithstanding of his threa∣tening it, It is not certain whether he will do it or not. Dr. B. Says that this Justice is a Right, vested in God Himself; and which therefore, He argues. God may dispense with at his pleasure. So far he argues truely, That God is not, nor can be accountable to a∣ny other; And therefore, in this sense, he may do, in every thing, as he pleases; That is, as to any Outward Compulsion, or giving an Account of his Actions to any whatsoever.
But, on the other hand, God is (as I may so say) Ty'd up to his own Inherent Rectitude, and all the Perfections of his Nature. It is not being Ty'd up, or a∣ny way Limited, It is the Highest and most absolute Liberty, that he can never be otherwise. If he could lose his Liberty, He would not be so free. Thus God cannot Die, cannot cease to be God, Cannot make Him∣self not to be Eternal, Infinite, &c. And that he can∣not depart from any of his Attributes (not withstand∣ing the sound of the word Cannot) is no Stinting of his Prerogative, but the Height of it. Now Justice is as much an Attribute of God as his Mercy. He is not onely just, that is, has Justice, or a Great deal of Justice in him, but he is Justice it self, Justice in the Abstract; Justice is of the Nature of God. And therefore, He can no more depart from it than from Himself. The Highest Notion of Justice, as of Love or Goodness, that is God, it is the very Nature of God. God is Love. 1 John 4.8. God is likewise Ju∣stice. And as all the Love or Goodness in us, is but a par∣ticipation of the Infinite and Eternal Goodness; so all the justice, all the Notion we have of Right or Wrong, is but a Ray Sent down to us from the Eternal and Essential Restitude and Justice which is God. Now here is the difference betwixt God and us, We have a Mixture of Justice, and of Mercy in us: and sometimes we Exert an Act of Justice, and sometimes of our Mer∣cy; Justice has the Ascendant in some, over Mercy; and in others Mercy has it over Justice. Therefore, if a Man Remits without Satisfaction; We say not that it is unjust in him, because he then Exerts an Act of Mercy onely. But none say that this proceeds from his Justice. To forgive is no part of Justice, that is all-together Mercy. Justice will Exact to the uttermost farthing. Justice MUST do it, it were not o∣therwise Justice. And if Justice cannot do it; God cannot do it. For God is Justice; and therefore whatever is Essential to Ju∣stice must be so to God. Mercy and Justice do not thwart or overcome One Another in God, as in Man: because each is Infinit in God. If you cannot apprehend how Infinit Justice and Mer∣cy can stand together: Behold in the wonderful Redemp∣tion of Man, Justice Requires full satisfaction: and Mercy Finds it: And thus the Attributes of God Ex∣alt and Magnify one Another; One Raises the other to the Height, and each Exert themselves to the utmost, that is, Infinitly. But Dr. B. says, Ibid. p. 135. That the Scripture sets none of these speculations before. What! Does not the Scripture tell us that God is Just? and these Specu∣lations are but Necessary Inferences from the Nature of Justice. But even as to the Exactness of God's Justice. Does the Scripture say nothing to give us a true and high Idea of it? God's Justice is there represented as exacting the utter∣most Farthing (what stricter Notion of Justice?Matth. 5.26. Deut. 4.24. Exod. 34.7.) as Consuming Fire. Burning Jealousie,Heb. 1.13. Matth. 12.36. Matth. 9.53.44. that will by no means clear the Guilty, of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, that can∣not look on Iniquity. Who will take an Account of every idle word. A Worm that never dies, and a Fire that never shall be quenched. Whatever Dr. T. and his Brother B. have laboured to the contrary; to persuade the World, in the words of the first Deceiver, that tho' ye sin, yet ye shall not surely die. Gen. 3.4. Notwithstanding that the Scrip∣ture has said so in plain Terms That the Fire of Hell, that is, of God's Justice is everlasting, shall never be quenched; yet these Dctors would have you venture against all this, a pretty distinction they have found out (of which the Hly Scriptures are totally silent) that Remunerative but not punishing Justice is Essential to God. Which is the gound-work of Dr. T's Sermon against the Truth of Hells Eternity. And repeated here by Dr. B. p. 135. and yet, in the very same Breath, he pretends to answer all the Arguments brought from God's Justice, by saying, That the Scrip∣ture sets nine of these Speculations before us. Whereas Dr. T. does plainly confess in his above said Sermon of Hell; That there is no ground or light in the World so much as to be expected from the Scripture, to support his Hypothesis of the No-certainty of Hell; and he gives a Reason for it. Because, says he, less than the threatening Eternal punishment was not sufficient to deter Men from sin; and therefore that in the same Re∣velation which told us of the Eternity of Hell, it was not to be expected that we should find any thing which should give the least Ʋmbrage to the contrary. This is very subtile! But then it would be enquired how these Doctors came by it, since they confess there is not the least footstep to be found of it in Scripture? Dr. T. in the aforesaid Sermon does allow, for the above Reason, that God did, by his wording of the Scriptures, de∣sign that Men should believe the Eternity of Hell, with∣out which the threatening of it had been to no effect. It seems then that God could not keep it from these Doctors! But if they were either too Wise for God's de∣sign, or could not be Impos'd by God like other Men; or that God did, by a particular Revelation, discover the mighty secret to these Men, sure it was not with a design that all the World should know it; For, as the Dr. says, the contrivance of concealing it, in Scripture, was on purpose, lest Mankind should know it, or have the least suspicion of it; but that they should believe the Eternity of Hell, to keep them to their Duty, I say, if these Doctors were so perfect as not to need such an Awe upon them; and that there∣fore God had opened their Eyes; Why would they Blabb this, and spoyl God's design, upon other Men? I dare say, he will tell them no more Secrets for this trick. It terrifies me while I must expose the wicked pre∣sumption of these Blasphemers. Who when God has said plainly, That Hell is Eternal; and Christ has as∣sured us, as a true Doctor and Teacher of his Church, That the Fire shall never be quenched, would persuade
us to believe Them contrary to all this; whereby they plainly insinuate that they are wiser than God: or design better for Mankind, in revealing to us, what they confess, God would have kept secret. And, to carry on the Argument of their Folly, that they should object against the Christian Doctrine, That, as they say, it is not told plain enough in Scripture, when they confess their own to have no foundation at all in Scripture, They think they have a right to call God to an Account for his Remunerating Justice, to perform his Promises to them, and that this is Essential to his very Nature: But not so of his Punishing Justice: They will not have that to belong at all to the nature of Justice, tho' they can give no other Reason, than their not desiring it. For I am confident there is hard∣ly a Man in the World but thinks that Punshing as well as Rewarding does belong to the Nature of Ju∣stice. It is a Principle as selt-evident, and rooted in the first Notions of Men as any whatsoever that can be named. So that these Doctors will find Reason as much their Enemy as Revelation, and it is a just Judgment that those who prosumptuously go against the latter, should discover their extreme folly in the other, where∣in they boast themselves. And this they do, with all their Socinian Brethren in most palpable manner, by the account they give of the Death of Christ. For upon their ground of the no necessity to satisfie God's Justice for sin. They cannot find out any Reason why he should die. Some∣time they say to confirm the Truth of his Doctrine. But that does not confirm it, or say any more than that he was fully persuaded of it himself. For Men have died for Errors. And Christ vouch'd his Miracles, not his Death, to confirm the Truth of his Doctrine. At other times, they say, It war only to shew God's Abhorrence to sin. How! To excuse the Guilty, and punish the Innocent! This, upon their way of Reason∣ing, shews rather God's acceptance of sin, and abhor∣ring of Innocence. Were it not more reasonable what Solomon says, Prov. 21.18. That the Wicked should be a Ransom for the Righteous, and the Transgressors for the Ʋpright? Or as he otherwise words it, Ch. 11.8. The Righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the Wicked cometh in his stead. Is not this more Justice than that the Righteous should be punished in the stead of the Wicked? It cannot stand with Justice any other way than upon the Doctrine of Satisfaction, nor can the Death of Christ be otherwise rationally accounted for. In short the Socinians can find no Reason for it that has the least Pretence. And therefore they settle here as I have shew'n above. That God made a Covenant with Christ (tho for what Reason they do not know) to Remit the Sins of the Penitent, if he would suffer him∣self to be murdered, by those whose sins were to be Remitted by virtue of that Murder. They say there was no need for any such Covenant, for that God might have Remitted sins without it, or without any Covenant, or upon any sort of Covenant. For as Dr. B. Says. p. 151. It is the Appointment and the Acceptation that makes the Satisfaction. But then if the Appointment and Acceptation of the Sacrifice of a Bullock could have made Satisfaction, what need was there for Christ being Sacrificed? Why, no need at all, say our Dr's. that we can tell: But we find in Scripture oft Mention of Gods Covenant in Christ and we suppose this to be it. But the Siripture gives a quite different account of it, viz. That in order to Remission, there was a necessi∣ty for Christ's Suffering. Luke 24.46. That it beho∣ved Him to Suffer, Because it was not possible that the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins. Heb. 10.4. c. 7.13. That there was a disanulling of the Legal Commandments and Institution, not for want of Appointment, (for they were Appointed) but for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. Here respect is had to the Nature of the means, and not only to the Appointment. Rom. 8.3. For what the Law cannot do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin, con∣demns sin in the Flesh. Gal. 3.21. For if there had been a Law given which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law— For if Righteousness came by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. c. 2.21. And in vain did He die, for all the account these Men give of it, or can give, upon these Socinian Poinciples which they maintain. And they bewray their Erros to that degree, that sometime they fall foul upon God's Justice, for suffer∣ing Christ an Innocent Person to die. Thus Dr. B. p. 148. says that Christ had nothing to fear from a Just and Good God. Why? because he was conscious to him self of no sin. And therefore, he says, he cannot ap∣prehend what could have rais'd such amazing sorrows in so pure and unspotted a Soul that was conscious to it self of no sin, and so could fear nothing from a Just and Good God, and therefore, says he, we must not pretend to explain what we cannot understand. But if he could have understood Christ then laying under the weight of all the sins of the World, which he had undertaken, as our Surety to answer for, and satisfie the utmost demand of God's Justice for them, he would have found the reason of that unexpressible Agony of Christ our Redeemer, who had an Adequat Notion of the Infinite demerit of Sin, and what was due to it; and had taken it all upon himself, and was to present to God a Sense and a Sorrow for it, fully propotrionable to the whole Offence, which all the Damned in Hell can never do; No, nor all Creatures; for they are not all able to comprehend the full Heinousness and Obliquity of an Offence against an Infinit Being. And when we conceive such an Infinit Sorrow lodg'd in the Soul of Christ, and so strong a sense of the hatefulness of Sin, and its Monstrous Deformity, and of the full Wrath of God which lay upon that Accursed or Devoted Head who was to answer for it, Gal. 3.13. such a Sense, I say, and a Sorrow (which is always proportio∣nable to the Sense we have of the sin) as all the Capa∣cities of all Creatures to Eternity were not large e∣nough to contain; when we perceive Christ our Saviour under such a Sorrow and Apprehersion as this, we can∣not wonder at his so terrible an Agony.
But indeed, without this consideration of Christ's satisfying the Justice of God for our Sins, there can be no account given of his Agony. It is altogether unintel∣ligible, as Dr. B. says. For he had no sin of his own to answer for, and unless we suppose that he took our sin upon himself, he had nothing (according to Dr. B.) to fear from a Just God. And Dr. B. denying the ne∣cessity of any Satisfaction, to be made to Justice, and consequently thinking that Christ did not make any satisfaction, or that our Sins were laid upon him, con∣sequently must think that as Christ had nothing to fear from a Just God, so that God was not Just in inflict∣ing Death upon Christ. elso Christ had something to fear from a Just God. Dr. T. likewise runs into the same strain, in his Ser∣mon before spoke of concerning the Sacrifice and Satis∣faction of Christ, wondering at the great Severity shewed to Christ, he says p. 34. That God seemed, in that, to have gone almost further than Goodness and Justice could well admit; to afflict Innocency it self, to save the Guilty— And, that it looked almost like hatred of INNOCENCY and bis onely Son. Now to almost ordoubt of God's JUSTICE or GOODNESS, is next door, if not the same as denying it: Because God is a Necessary Being; if this Being, or if any Attribute he had were doubtful, he could not be God: therefore to doubt of God, or of any of his Attributes, is almost and alto∣gether not to believe a God. To such straits are these Men driven, who would give an Account of the Sacrifice and Death of Christ without the Doctrine of Satisfaction. I will end this Discourse with shewing that the Doctrine of Satisfaction as I have set it down, is strictly pursuant to the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England, and consequently, That these Doctors T. and B. have Apostatized from that Church, and from that very Doctrine, which they once professed. Therefore my Proof shall be out of the Common-Prayer-Book, and the Homilies. And first for the Common-Prayer-Book, in the Prayer of Consecration of the Elements of the Lord's Supper, it is said that Christ made, upon the Cross, a Full, Per∣fect, and Sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World. And in the first Homily for Good-Friday it is expresly said, That without Payment (of our Debt by Sin) God the Father could never be at one with us. And through all that and the following Homily, it is insisted on as necessary to the Pardon of Sin, that Christ himself should come down from Heaven, be Incarnat and Dis; and that no Prophet or Angel, or less than the Eternal Son of God, could have wrought our Deliverance. And this is agreeable to the Scripture Language, as before told: That Christ OUGHT to have suffered; that it BEHOVED Him to suffer. Luke 24.26.46. That thus it MUST be. Mat. 26.54.39. That it was not POSSIBLE the Cup should pass from Him, if He wou'd compleat the Redemption of Man. In the Homily of the Salvation of Mankind, &c. you have these words. God sent his Son— to fulfill the Law for us, and by shedding his most precious Blood to make a Sacrifice and Satisfaction, or (as it may be called) Amends to his Father for our sins— And whereas i lay not in us to do that, he provided a Ransom for us— And so the Justice of God and his Mercy did embrace to∣gether and fulfilled the Mystery of our Redemption. He would not by his Mercy deliver us clearly, without Ju∣stice or Payment of a Just Ransom, but with his endless Mercy he joyned his most upright and equal Justice— Ʋpon God's part, his Great Mercy and Grace, Ʋpon Christ's part, Justice, that is, the Satisfaction of God's Justice— So that in our Justification there is not only God's Mercy and Grace, but also his Justice— The Grace of God doth not shut out the Justice of God in our Justification— And whereas all the World was not able of themselves to pay any part toward their Ransom. It pleased our Heavenly Father of his Infinite Mercy without any of our desert or deserving, to propare for us the most precious Jewels of Christ's Body and Blood; whereby our Ransom might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his Justice fully satisfied. This Faith the Holy Scripture teaches us, is the strong Rock and Foundation of Christian Religion. This Doctrine all Old and Ancient Authors of Christ's Church do approve; This Doctrine advanceth and setteth forth the true Glory of Christ, and beateth down the vain Glory of Man, this whosoever denieth, is not to be accounted for a Christian Man— but for an Adver∣sary to Christ and his Gospel. Yet these Adversaries Rear in the midst of our Con∣gregations, and set up their Banners for Takens. O God, in what a Condition is this poor Church, these miserable, misled People of England when such Doctrine is taught from the Throne of Canterbury! When Addresses are made to the Clergy by their Bishops, publickly and in Print, to teach and propagate these Damnable Heresies! When these Men are made Primates and Bishops of our Church, whom our Homilies think not fit to be accoun∣ted as Christian Men, but Adversaries to Christ and his Gospel! The whole Head is sick, and the whole Hears faint! It is for the fins of these Nations, that such Priests are sent to them, according to the words of the Prophet, Hos. 4.9. There shall be like People like Priest. 9.7. The Prophet is a Fool, the Spiritual Man is Mad, for the multitude of thine Iniquity, and the great Ha∣tred— 8. The Prophet is a snare of a Fowler in all his ways, and Hatred in the House of his God. Jer. 23.9. My Heart within me is broken, because of the Prophets. all my Bones shake— For the Land is full of Adulte∣ries, for because of SWEARING, the Land mourneth— 5.31. Their cause is Evil, and their force is not Right. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land. The Prophets Prophesy falsly, and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and my People love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof.
POSTSCRPT. I Am the more encouraged in what I have here un∣dertaken, that Dr. Sherlock, who formerly was so rankly Socinian as to the Doctrine of Satisfaction, not only to Blaspheme but Ridicule it, as Dr. S. has severe∣ly shewn from his Book of the Knowledge of Christ, has now at last come off from these two Doctors, and Disputed expresly against them, upon this point, and answered their Arguments against the Doctrine of Sa∣tisfaction, in his Sermon Peached at White-Hall last Trinity Sunday, 1694. which it is much desired that he would Publish, tho' he could get no License from Lam∣beth. It gave great satisfaction to many of his Audi∣tors, from some of whom I had a very good Account of it. Particularly in answer to Dr. T's main, and (he thinks) unanswerable Objection, where he Dares any Man to say that God could'not save Man otherwise than by the Death or Satisfaction of Christ. To which Dr. Sherlock Reply'd (as it was Represented to me) that if this was understood of any Compulsion from without, God could not be Compell'd or Oblig'd in any Case: But if the necessity proceeded from what is Internal, and consequently Eternal in God, that is his Justice, it was no Imperfection to suppose such a Necessity in God of requiring Satisfaction, &c. But I will not Anticipate, nor Prejudice the Dr. We desire it in his own words. FINIS.
A SUPPLEMENT upon Occasion of A History of Religion lately Published, supposed to be Wrote by Sir R.H—d. Wherein likewise Charles Blount's GREAT DIANA is Considered; And both Compar'd with Dr. TILLOTSON's Sermons READER. THis comes to you upon occasion of a Book Publish∣ed this year 94. since the foregoing Observa∣tions were wrote. It is call'd, A History of Re∣ligion, And gives a like account of Religion as what I have already told out of Dr. Till. but in somewhat another Form. And it quotes him with great Applause in the Preface, as the true Pattern of Orthodox Divinity; that is, such Principles as he there sets forth; and so much in the Doctor's Stile and Air, that if he be not the Author, it comes from some of his Disciples that have Copy'd after him very exactly. He Ridicules all Reveal'd Religion, and turns it into what he calls Priest-Craft; This was but borrowed from a work of that Execrable Charles Blount, one of the Atheistical Club, and very intimate with Dr. Tillotson. It was Prin∣ted in London Anno 1680. and is Intituled, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Or, The Original of Idolatry, together with the Politick Institution of the Gentiles Sacrifices. The Design and whole Import of that Book, is under the Name of the Gentile Sacrifices, and Religion, to Blas∣pheme, and, like a Mad Dog, to Curse and Reproach the whole Institution of God, as well under the Law as the Gospel. And he Builds upon the very same Foundation as Dr. Till. in the Sermons above Quoted, of Sacrifices and all the other Institutions of Revealed Religion, being meer∣ly an Invention of Men. Though he does not go the length of his Master Dr. Till. to make the Sacrifice of Christ, and other Institutions of the Christian Religion, to be only a Complyance with the Wicked and Diabolical Fan∣cies of Men, in their Bloody Sacrifices of Beasts and Hu∣man Kind, &c. But that you may see the Thread and Progress of this horrid Mastery of Iniquity (the like sure never known or Tolerated in any Christian Countrey) let me give you a short view of this Book of Blounts: Then I will shew how this new History of Religion agreet with it, or was taken out of it: And how exactly both do square with Dr. T's No∣tions and Scheme of Religion, which I have laid down in the Discourse going before. First, Blount makes it known, That there are no Mar∣tyrs in their Religion, for he tells you Sect. 11. p. 23. That they are too wise to hazard their own Ruin for the In∣struction of foolish Men— knowing that if any Man should be so vain, as to oppose the Common Belief, the Mobile would (as they did to Socrates) Oppresi and decry him for an Atheist. Therefore the Wisest among the Heathens followed this Rule, in their Converse. LOQUENDUM CUM VULGO, SENTIENDUM CUM SAPIENTIBUS, SI MUNDUS VULT DECIPI, DECIPIATUR. And, in the next words, he Blasphemously brings in our Saviour as observing the same Poor and Wicked Craft, and that this was his Reason for speaking to the People in Parables. He Instances almost in every Circumstance of our Savi∣our's Life, and Death, his Miracles and Proofs of his Di∣vinity; by telling over the Story, in something that he finds or makes like it among the Heathens; and for which he gives all the ill Names can be to the Heathen Worship, as being contradictory to Reason, with a But the Christian Reli∣gion is not so— when he has made them the very same, and no more Grounds for believing the one than the other, and that so plainly, that none who have but half an Eye can help seeing that the whole is meant to Ridicule and Blaspheme the Christian Religion, in this most Malicious and Provoking manner. p. 39. He thus Ridicules our Commemoration of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. As all Entertainments (says he) the Company are apt to drink the Founder's Health. The whole Book, from beginning to ending, is of the same strain, that I must Transcribe it all if I should under∣take to set down all his Blasphemies and Prophaneness. And I am very glad to be released from the Repetition of such Wickedness as curdles my Blood, and shakes all my Frame. And the less that others hear of it the better. Would God it had never been heard or wrote, that there might have been no necessity of ever mentioning of it. Having thus made Christ himself to be Belzebub. the Great Deceiver, you cannot expect he should treat his Church and Servants better than their Master. And indeed he deals more roundly with them. He spares not to Name them plainly and above board. By which he puts it out of doubt that it was the Christian Religion which he Bat∣tels through all this Book. Sect. 18. Telling one of the Politick Ends of the Institution of Sanguinary Sacrifices, to be the enuring People to War and Blood: But, says he, p. 45. The Primitive Church did prohibit the Christians such Bloody Sights, they chose another way, i e. To Go∣vern in the Spirit of Meekness and Innocence, Hopeing thereby to gain a greater Submission. So that Ambition was the whole End of all that Meek∣ness and Innocency, which is taught in the Christian Reli∣gion— Hopeing thereby to gain a Greater Submission! And
this he meant against Christ Himself, tho' Here he only names the Primitive Church: for Christ first taught that Meekness and Innocency which they afterwards Preach'd; and He was the Head of the Church, whom this Black Infi∣del traduces; and he downright names the Christians, that you may know against whom he writes. And that not only these later corrupted Times, but the Primitive Church, in which the Times of Christ and the Apostles are included: And it is of these, and all other Christian Priests, that he means what he says in the same page, under his Cobweb Vell of the Heathen Priests, who were certainly (says he) the Wickedest and the Craftiest of Men. You must know he never Convers'd with any in his life, except Dr. Tillotson (because he was a Politician) and those of his Recommen∣dation. Sect. 10. p. 22. He argues against Future Punishments (but not Rewards) at least the Eternity of them. (Exact Dr. Tilletson's Notion in his Sermon of Hell before spoke of) and Disputes (as Dr. T. does; as If they were inconsistent with the Goodness of God. And from their Invisibility de∣duces their Ʋncertainty; He makes them nothing else but the Invention of Government to keep their Subjects in Awe. Which Dr. Tillotson words (in the said Sermon of Hell) That God is under no other Obligation to Justice (or the Proportioning the Punishment to the Crime) than so far as it may tend to secure His Government. Nay, he says, that to Proportion the Punishment to the Crime, does not be∣long to Justice at all, but is only a Consideration of Poli∣ticks, to secure Government. Thus while these bold Miscreants are straining their Wit to turn all Revealed Religion into Priest-Craft; they have reduced the whole Notion of Justice (which is God, who is justice in the Abstract) into nothing else but a piece of State-Craft! And have, in all their lewd Harangues, but Copied af∣ter the old Roman Atheists. Primos in orbe Deos Timor fecit. Which Blount repeats in the same page above quoted, in these words, Animo tortore Eagellum. And having made the Belief of Eternal Punishments to be con∣trary to the Goodness of God, and so Irrational, and al∣together Pracarious, as being Invisible and Imperceptible by any Natural means, he ten, in his Method above-told, lays the Absurdity upon the belief of the Stygian-Lake. But, So Rational (says he, thrusting out his Tongue) and so Natural is that Article of our Christian Faith! In like manner he deals with the Institution of Sacrifices. Sect. 7. p. 15. which Superstition (as he calls it) suffers neither God nor Man to live at rest, as evidently appears by thse Heathen Sacrifices. But instead of Reproving them for that wherein only they were faulty, so far as they were Aberrations from the Divine Institution, and were Offer'd to Devils and not to God; I say, instead of this, he vents such Reasons against them as equally involve the Sacrifices of the Jews which were made to God, and by him Com∣manded; and consequently the Sacrifice of Christ our Lord. This Wild Beast's Reasons against Sacrisices are in the words Immediately following those above quoted, viz.  What could be more Sottish and Irational, than to think that the slaughter of a poor Innocent Creature (who fol∣lowed the simplicity or his own Nature, without ever offending God) should be so Grateful to the Deity, as thereby we might Expiate our Sins, and render a sufficient Attonement for the most exerable Villanlei of Man∣kind? As if the Almighty Justice could be no otherwise appeased for the Errors of the Wicked, but by the Suf∣ferings of the Innocent. [This I desire his Tutor Dr. T. to Answer, upon his Scheme of no Satisfaction being due to the JUSTICE of GOD for our Sins But Blount goes on.]  Now as Sacrifices were the most Ancient and Universal, so the Greatest and most Mysterious Fourbs that ever were invented, or imposed upon. Mankind. What have Sacrifices to do with Sins? Could none but their Enlightned Priests make Peace between God and Man, when Sins were committed? Thus Blount. And in what follows, he tells you what he would be at. That is, to throw off all outward Ordinances, Sacrifices, Sacra∣ments, &c. and resolve all to Inward Repentance. Which is the very Notion of the Quakers, whither his great Wit has carried him. Now I will shew you how he agrees with his Tutor in all this. I will set down their words over against one another. As if (says Blount, as above quoted) the Almighty Ju∣stice could be no otherwise appeased for the Errors of the Wicked, but by the Sufferings of the Innocent. In this Dispensation (says Tillotson as before quoted, in his Sermon of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ p. 34.) of God's Grace and Mercy to Mankind, by the Death of his Son, God seems to have gone to the very Extremity of things, and almost further than Goodness and Justice will well ad∣mit; to afflict Innocency it self, to save the Guilty— It looks almost like Hatred of Innocency and his own Son. These two Almosts, are like two Greek Negatives, which make an Affirmative. And shew this Dr. to be both al∣most, and altogether such a Christian as his Disciple Blount. And indeed, without the Doctrine of Satisfaction, there can no Rational account be given for the Typical Sacrifices before Christ came, and much less for His Sacrifice, who was Innocency it self. But, according to te Doctrine of Satisfaction, He could not otherwise have been an Expiato∣ry Sacrifice for Sin: And God's Mercy and His Justice do equally Magnifie one another in this Glorious and most Ra∣tional Dispensation. But this has been discoursed in the foregoing Observations. Wherein has been shewn, that Dr. Tidotson's Account of the Legal Sacrifices, it as Athei∣stical and Prophane as this which I have quoted out of Blount. Both of them agree that this was a Trick and Barba∣rous Invention of Wicked and Foolish Men. Bu Dr. T. gets, I think, beyond Blount; where he makes the Jewish Religion and Sacrifices (as well as the Christian) to be a Compliance in God with all this Barbarous Wickedness. And indeed (says he, in the above quoted Sermon of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, p. 6.) a very great part of the Jewish Religion, which was Instituted by God Himself, seems to have been a plain Condescension to the General. Apprehension of Mankind, concerning this way of appeasing the Offended Deity with Sacrifices. This is the most Irrational and Blasphemous Account which those who deny the Satisfaction of Christ (because as they pretend, against their Reason) are forc'd to give of the Sacrifice and Death of Christ. [But I have Treated largely of this elsewhere.] And while they set up for the only Men of Reason, they have shewn themselves utterly Uncapable of Reason.
To think (as Blount here) that there was no other End or Design in God's Institution of Sacrifices, but the plea∣sure he took in the death of a Beast! How blind and wretched is the Reason of such Men! How totally Igno∣rant of the Great Designs of God! Of the Glorious and ever Adorable Methods of His Wisdom and Goodness in the Redemption of lost Mankind! In the Satisfaction of His Infinite and exact Justice! Together with the Exaltation of equal Infinit Mercy! Which things the Angels delight to look into; but the wicked Arrogance of poor misera∣ble Men presume madly to Blaspheme; measuring the Eternal Wisdom by their short Plummet! Void of common sense, as well as modesty, or any Reverence to that Being, whom, in words, they own to be Almighty and Incompre∣hensible! How just is it in God to suffer these Men to Expose themselves most shamefully, even in the point of Reason; their Great Diana, wherein they so vainly magnifie them∣selves! Which appears, very plainly, in the present Case, of the Account they give of the Original of Sacrifices, and the Possitive Institutions of Revealed Religion. Perhaps (says Blount ibid. Sect. 8. p. 17.) Melancholly Men might at first sight upon this Frenzy, He means of Sacrifices (calling the Institution of God, after the Delirium of his own Brain, a Melancholly Frenzy) and the highest he can derive Sacrifices is from the Egyptians, among whom, he says, they were first used, and from them deriv'd to the Hebrews (Sect. 15. p. 39) as if he had never heard, or did not believe, that Cain, Abel, and Noah, Sacrificed, long before there were either Hebrews or Egyptians in the World. If he lay no greater stress upon the Scriptures, than upon other Common Hystories, this must betray the most stupid or wilful Ignorance. There is nothing more plain than how the Heathen came to the Knowledge of Sacrifices, viz. That Cain, tho' he corrupted the True Religion, yet preserved the Institu∣tion, and deriv'd that Worship of Sacrifices to his Posteri∣ties: Tho', in process of time, they forgot both the Insti∣tution and the true Ends of it; as they did of the Crea∣tion of the World, or their own Origination. But they preserv'd, along with the Sacrifices so much of the true Import and Meaning of them, and of that to which they pointed, which was the Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, that they retain'd a Traditionary Belief of the ne∣cessity of a Vicarious suffering for Sin: which was a sort of implicit and dark Falth in Christ, tho' they knew him not, nor had any true Notion of him; as the generality of the Jews had not, no nor the Apostles themselves till after the Resurrection of Christ. How far this Intitl'd these very Heathens to a degree of Faith in Christ, and of Salvability by it, at least, till He was Preach'd, and more plainly Exhibited to them, I will not now dispure. The ways of God are unsearchable, and with Reverence to the Ador'd, even where they exceed our Understandings. But thus much we may conclude from hence, that the Representation which I have shewn above Dr. T. has given of the Heathen Notion of a Vica¦rious Suffering, as a Foolish and Wicked Notion, Ground∣less, and of their own Fancy: And then his making this the Reason and Foundation of the Sacrifice of Christ, as a Gratification and Compliance with such Ʋnreasonable and Bloody Notions and Practices; I say all this shews the Dr's exceeding Ignorance of the true Principles of Christianity; and the Brutality of these his Disciples and Followers, who give this senseless and malicious Account of the Gentile Sa∣crifices, on purpose to wound Christianity under that Co∣ver. And tho' they have no Account from the Heathens, how their Sacrifices began, yet these Gentlemen are very sure, they were first introduced by Priest-Craft. That is the word! And every thing must be laid upon that. Tho' in this, they fall out among themselves. And are not constant three pages together, to their own No-Hypothesis. Thus, when they are angry with Kings (the malice to Them and to Priests commonly go together) then Idolatry and Sacrifices were the Invention of Kings; and Priests came in but at second hand, to keep it up, and im∣prove it. This Blount (Sect. 2. p. 7.) endeavours to prove. The Primitive Institution of Idolatry (says he) received its Birth from Princes: at whose Charge it was afterwards Edu∣cated by Ecclesiasticks. Again Sect. 3. p. 8. Idolatry (and Sacrifices, which were the Worship Instituted to the Idol) being thus Instituted by the Civil Power, the Ecclesiastick was left to build upon that Foundation. But the History of Religion p. 6. makes Priests to be the first Inventers; and that Kings, seeing the Veneration and Authority they obtain'd by it, became Priests themselves; and joined that Title to the Imperial Dignity; thus Casar and other Emperors of Rome were Priests; and among the Egyptians, their Kings were chosen from among the Priests. Thus they preserve to themselves a double Handle (tho' by this, in true Reason, hey lose both) and make Religion to be Priest-Craft or State-Craft, as it serves their purpose. For these Latitudinarians in Religion are always the same in Government. But this History if Religion, being the latest Effort, brings the matter closer. Blount Ridicules Religion in the Person of the Heathen: This, in the same Form, exposes it in the Church of Rome. Whose Errors [they have given too much occasion for it] he makes use of, not to Reform, but undermine Christianity it self: and makes all to be No∣thing but Priest-Craft. tho' he forgets not the Heathen Pa∣rallel, and to spit his Venom at the Mosaical Institution, when it comes in his way, to shew that he Grafts upon the same Stock. Page's 8: Speaking of the Religious Institutions before Christ, he calls them Strange and Puziling Methods of Religi∣ous Ceremonies and Mysteries, and of various Rites of Sacri∣ficing, good for nothing but to confound and distract the Minds of Men. Then coming down to Christianity, he borrows the So∣cinian Arms against it: And so exactly in their very words, as points to us plainly, out of whose Quiver this Arrow came. He sets up Irreconcilable War against all Mystery; And making Transubstantiation his Mark, he levels directly at the Trinity, Incarnation, Divinity, and Satisfaction of Christ, and every thing that there is the least pretence of Mystery in. And yet these Gentlement endeavour all they can at My∣stery, while they wound Christianity, covertly as they think, through the sides of the Heathens, Jews, and Ro∣man Catholicks: But the Clovn-Foot does plain appear: for their Wit is not so great as their Malice.
They confess God to be Incomprehensible, and his ways past finding out, yet they cry out upon Mystery in his Re∣ligion. There are Mysteries, Irreconsilable to them, in their own Natures, and in the Natures of every thing they see before them; yet they would have every thing in a Super∣natural Religion Revealed from Heaven to be so plain, that their Reason should be able to dive to the very bottom of it: which if it were, it would be no Revelation, or perfectly to no purpose: for what needed Revelation in things which are Plain and Obvious without it? Physick is an Art, and a Mystery to those who know it not. Which leads only to the preservation of Health; in those Bodies whose Constitutions we know, and their Original, as much as of any thing that we see or touch. And yet we will let nothing be Mysterious (that is, no∣thing but what every Man in the World perfectly under∣stands, with all the Reasons, and hidden Causes of it) in the saving of a Soul, whose Substance, Origination, Constitution, Operation, and every thing of it, but that we know it is, and feel it by its Effects, is altogether hid∣den from us. Our coming into this World is totally a Mystery. No Human Reason can attain unto it. And must there be no Mystery at all in our Re-Generation, and being Born into the never-ending World of Spirits? Is not the other World, is not Heaven a Mystery to us? Do we understand it Perfectly? Can we Describe it? And is it not Reasonable, is it not Necessary that the Me∣thods of fitting us for it, and of conveying us thither should be very Mysterious to us? If we know not the End of out Journey, how do we pretend to understand every step of the way? But let us hear this Author's Reason against Mystery. You find it p. 60. and 61. in the very words of the Defence of the History of the Ʋnitarians, and other Socinian Books lately Printed for the Instruction of this Age, viz. That no Revelation can be a Mystery, more than a Secret when it is told, can be a Secret still. But these strong Reasoners should know, that a Mystery is not that of which we know nothing at all. But that of which we know some part, but darkly and obscurely, as in a Glass, which is the Comparison the Apostle makes use of, 1 Cor. 13.12. Thus it is we know Heaven. Yet it is Revealed. And thus we know the Trinity, Incarnation, and Divinity of Christ. If they had not been Revealed, we should have known nothing of them: Yet we understand them not Perfectly, nor can give the Reason for every Modus of them, Why it is thus and thus, and the manner How. For that is not Revealed: Nor are our Understandings capable of Comprehending the whole Nature of God; for nothing but Infinit can Comprehend Infinit. And to attempt it, or go about it, and reject every thing we do not under∣stand in it, is not only Wicked and Prophane, but it argues the greatest Weakness and Folly in any Man who is capa∣ble of such a Thought, of any other Instance that is pos∣sible to be given. Christ says to his Apostles, Joh. 16.12. He had many things to tell them, which they were not able to bear. If I have told you Earthly things, (says He to Nicodemus, that is, concerning the Re-generation by the Spirit of God in this life) and ye Believe not (that is, cannot Comprehend it, for the Difficulty and Mysteriousness of it) How shall ye Believe, if I tell you of Heavenly things? Joh. .12. Will not these be much more Mysterious to you? This Author would have called him a Mystery-Monger, as he does his Disciples for Preaching what he Taught. p. 62. He laughs at any thing that is called Sublime in Religion, or above the reach of Servile Reason, as he thinks he Ral∣lies, p. 43. And it is a Servile and Poor Reason indeed that can see nothing above it self; that can find nothing Sublime in God, or His Religion; in those Infinit Promises of an Eternal Heaven; and the wonderful Methods by which He has appointed to Conduct us thither, in ways suitable to His Justice, which is as much Himself, and as In∣dispensible in Him, as His Mercy. The truth of the matter is, These sort of Gentlemen do not love to Think. Their Wet is Frothy and Superficial; but will endure no Test. Therefore, to save themselves further Trouble, they take up with a short thought of Re∣ligion; and reduce all to what they call Morality (tho' they agree not among themselves what that is; and keep to it the least of all Mankind) which being what every Man pleases to make of it, they are sure that it shall not be uneasie to them, for they keep the Dispensing Power in their own Hands Whereas Revealed Religion puts them under Discipline; and that managed by others; and sets them out of all Hopes of future Happiness, without Conforming them∣selves to the Rules und Methods therein prescrib'd. Therefore they Roar against this. And because to de∣cry Religion by Name is not so Popular (and their Smmuns Bonum being EASE, they never run any hazard for their Opinion) therefore they cry out against the Priests, which have the Administration of Religion, which is the same thing as to decry Religion it self: Because without Priests there can be no Religion. There may be a Belief of those things which Religion teaches (that is, it is barely Possible; for without Teachers that would soon decay) but Religion is not only a Belief or a Persuasion, which is sufficient in∣deed to Intitle a Man to a Sect, to be an Epicurean, a Stoick, or other Sect of Phylosiphers, to which no more is re∣quired than to be of such and such an Opinion; but Christ has settled his Religion not only in a Sect of Believers; but He has Form'd those Believers into a Society, or Corpora∣tion, which is called His Church, to which He has anneed great and unconceavable Priviledges and Promises; upon Conditions therein required; and under the Government and Administration of the Officers the Bishops whom He has appointed in that Society, with Power to Expel out of the Society, and admit into it, according to the Rules pre∣scribed in their Charter: And which when they do, pur∣suant to those Rules, He has given his Infallible Promise to ratifie every such Sentence of theirs in Heaven: But Men cannot be Excommunicated or hindered from an Opinion. Therefore Religion is something more. From hence it follows, That instead of there being no Revealed Religion (as these Moralists would have it) there is nothing else Religion but that which is Revealed. Be∣cause my Believing according to the Light of my Nature, which we call Morality, does not Intitle me to any Privi∣ledge, beyond what I have by Nature, which every Man has as well as I; it does not distinguish me into any
distinct Society from other Men, put me under no other Rules, Conditions, &c. And therefore these Moral-Men may be any thing, but a Church, which is a Society. And She is a Society founded upon such a Belief, which is called Her Religion: But such a Religion or Belief cannot be meerly Natural, otherwise all Men must have it, and consequently all Men must be of that Society; which destroys its being a Society; because a Society is a particular Company of Men, Exclusive of others, else it is no Society. And every Society must be by Possitive Institution, by which the Officers and Rules of the Society are appointed. So that the Church being a Society, and Religion being that Belief upon which the Society is Founded; the conse∣quence is necessary that Religion can be nothing else but that which is Revealed. I do not speak against Morality, or undervalue it. No, by no means. On the contrary, that can be no True Reli∣gion, which goes against Morality: Religion improves and heightens Morality. But Morality it self could never carry us to Heaven, more than our own Natural strength could lift us up to the Skies. Again, I do not take upon me to vindicate all Priests: No doubt there have been many wicked of them (never more than in this Age) and such wicked Priests are no where more severely Reprehended than in Scripture: But upon this handle, to turn all Religion into Priest-Craft, and to make that Craft to be all Imposture and Villany, is to place the same Character upon Christ Himself, for He was a Priest, and is so at this day, and for ever. And indeed all these Mystical Harangues are levell'd only at Him; for His is the only truly Reavealed Religion; and His Priests are the only Priests in the World; all others do but falsly bear that Name. And therefore to deny Priesthood in the General, or set up this Common place of Priest-Craft, is down-right to destroy Christianity, and all Religion out of the World. I will not Retort upon these Men, that what they call Priest-Craft appears, by their own Arguments, to be more Lay-Craft, or State-Craft: Because true Religion is neither: And it would serve these Anti-Christs to have it any Craft, whereby it might be thought a Cheat, and lose its Force; and be no longer a Yoke (as they think it) upon them. The true Religion (of God's Institution) has been cor∣rupted by Kings, by Priests, by Lay-Men: and, if it were to any purpose to make the Comparison, as much, or more by Lay-men, by Parliaments, than by the Priests themselves. But it does not seem so direct a blow to Religion, as when all is made to be Priest-Craft: Because, if that be believ'd, or but suspected, the Regard to the Office of Priest-hood is taken away; and consequently Religion must infallibly sink with it, for the Reasons above told. It was never known but that the Respect and Reverence to Priests and to Religion rise and fell toge∣ther. They are so inseparably annexed, that the one cannot be without the other. Wicked and Profligate Priests cannot be respected as the Good and Pious are. But this is Personal, and touches not the Office. Where That is brought into Contempt, Religion must bear it Company. It was never otherwise, nor ever can be. And that is the whole Design of this Modish word Priest-Craft. Which tho' not Pardonable upon the Stage, I and others have heard it often from Dr. Burnet in the Pulpit, where he Acted, in Lawn or Scotch Cleath Sleeves. I think of all Mankind such sort of Priests, who under∣mine, who Betray, who Disgrace Religion, are the most Vile and Contemptible, most Nauseous and Loathsom: But, that is no more an Argument against Priest-hood than the Devils are against the Angelick-Order in Heaven. And there is as much pretence for Harangue against Angel-Craft. as against Priest-Craft. The Ancient Prophets while they inveigh'd so severely against the Corrupt Priests of Israel; and our Saviour against the Scribes and Pharisees, yet preserv'd the Reve∣rence due to the Office Sacred and Inviolable. Mat. 23.1.3, Christ Commands his Disciples as well as the Mul∣titude to pay entire Submission to them. Heb, 5.5. No Man taketh (that is, ought to take) this Honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron: 6. So also Christ Glorified not Himself to be made an High Priest, but He that said unto Him—Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Mlchisedeck. Was it a Glorification even to Christ to be made a Priest And how it that most Sacred Office become (amongst us) Contemptible! It is in Veneration to that High Character that I expose these Cursed Priests, Latitudinarians and Socinians, Ene∣mies to the Cross of Christ, the Ministers of Satan trans∣form'd into His Ministers; as Satan himself into an Angel of Light: and then he is most a Devil. It is a true saying, That the Corruption, of the best thing proves the worst. A Corrupt Angel is a Devil; and a Corrupt Priest the next in wickedness to him. False-Christs and False-Prophets are much the greater Enemies o Christ that they come in His Name. As False-Friends can do much more Mischief than Open-Enemies. Vice is most dangerous when it is recommended under the Notion of Virtue. Barefac'd Wickedness, Atheism, and Infidelity create a Horror in any Mind not thorowly de∣bunch'd, and hardened. Therefore we are Caution'd against the Mystery of Iniquity. And that is it which now worketh in these Men who Dispute against any Mystery in Religion; where it is ne∣cessary, and cannot be otherwise, unless we were able, clearly and fully to comprehend the whole Nature of God, in which there is something which is and ever will be My∣sterious, that is Dark and Hidden, not fully Ʋnderstood by all the Angels of Heaven to Eternity: And yet where there is no necessity in the World, so much as can be pre∣tended, except that of Knavery, they write all Mystery, and work under ground that they may not be discover'd. They dwell all in Generals, in which as the Proverb says; Dolulater, there is always Deceit at the bottom: They will not tell plainly what they would beat: But wound side-ways and by stealth, as these Authors whom we have Examin'd. And their admired Teacher Dr. Til∣lotson, in his ad Sermon concerning Family Religion, p. 61. gives special Caution not to have Children bred up in the
JARGON of any Party: But will not tell what Party or what JARGON he means. You may apply it to all, to Christianity it self (as it was intended) but so, that you shall not fix it upon him, he dwells in the Clouds, and My∣sterious Politicks; more Subtile than any of which Aristotle was ever Master: Whose Phylosophy the History of Reli∣gion takes pains (from p. 74. to 80.) to prove was brought into such esteemation by Priest-Craft, on purpose to ad∣vance Mystery. Great Wits make strange Discoverys! It is the Bishop's Foot in the Pot which singes the Milk. Among these Mysterious Arts of Priest-Craft, there is none moves this Author's Spleen so much as Creeds, and Rules of Faith. Against which he vents his Indignation. Hist. Rel. p. 64. In very deed (says he) Creeds were the Spi∣ritual Revenges of Dissenting Parties upon one another. These Creeds are strange sort of things! That a Man (whatever he believes) may not have Liberty openly to Profess and Preach what likes him best. But must go a∣bout the Bush and take pains to Blaspheme! And that Atheists, Socinians, and Latitudinarians cannot get in to the Preforments of the Church without Swearing; Sub∣scribing, or Declaring I know not how many Lyes: And all to no purpose! For that will never keep them out. He calls these Creeds p. 115. The Insolent value of O∣pinions. Yet he values his own Opinion highly; and would have others to value it, above that of the Genera∣lity of the whole World, in all Ages, who have ever re∣tain'd a great value for Religion, and what he Blasphemes, under the opprobrious New-made JARGON of Priest-Craft. He calls Their valuing, an Insolent Value. This was to shew his Modesty and Good Breeding. Insolent for any to be Pessitive but himself. He has Prescription and would have the Monopoly, he may have the Reward of it. He shews great Respect to the Socinians, because they retain nothing of Christianity but the Name. Therefore, in the same page, he falls foul upon St. Atha∣nasius his Creed, knowing that most offensive to the Soci∣nians. And p. 85. He abuses the Homo-ousians, that is, the Christians, and the whole Council of Nice, which (he says) Shew'd a Spirit of Contention, rather than of Peace and Charity. This was for their Insolent Value of their Faith, so as to Express it in a Creed. And p. 116. He thinks to make great advantage to the Socinian Cause, by the difference 'twixt Dr. Sherlock, and Dr. South, con∣cerning the Trinity. But this was only a difference in their Exposition of what both acknowledg'd. The Holy and ever Blessed Trinity. Whereas I can tell you, Sir Possitive (and ask your Priest-Craft at Lambeth if it be not true) that the Socinians do differ, not only in their Exposition of the Object of their Worship, but in the thing it self: and that not on∣ly two Doctors, or so, but whole Parties and Nations of them. The Brief History of the Ʋnitarians upon Act. 9.14.21. tells us, that the Polonian Ʋnitarians were so Zealous for Divine Worship to be paid to Christ, that they Excommu∣nicated, and Depos'd from their Ministry such of their own Party as deny'd it. Which, I think, they generally do in England. Where likewise they are of most different Faiths; tho' they call themselves Ʋnitarians, and own one another (in odium Tertij) as Christian Brethren. John Biddle's Confession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity, [Printed in the Devil's Reformation of 43. and now Re∣printed, with other Works of his, among Volumes of So∣cinian Treatises which are with great Industry, distributed Gratis since this Revolution] owns Three Persons in the Holy Trinity: But make the Second and Third Persons to be Crea∣tures. The rest of our Socinians (as those that wrote The Brief History of the Ʋnitarians, which is Printed in the same Vo∣lume with Biddle's Confession of Faith abovesaid) do acknow∣ledge a Trinity, that is, Three in Heaven, but the Second and the Third, i. e. The Word and the Spirit, they would have to be the very same with the First, that is, the Father. So that theirs is the only Contradiction in the Doctrine of the Trinity, who would have Three to be Three, and yet all the Three to be really but One. It is they who are out in Counting or Reckoning, which the Hist. of the Ʋnitarians calls Brutal in us. The Christians and Biddelite-Socinians do confess Three in Heaven, whom they acknowledge to be Three distinct Persons, this is fair and plain Reckoning. But then the Biddelites are guilty of very gross Idolatry, in joyning two Creatures into the same Holy Trinity with God. On the other Hand, how is it, that these Biddelites, and the other Socinians do own one another to be of the same Faith? and Print their Books together, as setting forth the same Doctrine? The Trinity of the one is Three, who are One Person (a most palpable Contradiction, which no Distinction can solve) the Trinity of the other is God and two Creatures (which is rank Idolatry) One Party of them say, That the Word and Spirit are Persons, the other say, nt. One, that they are God, the other that they are not God; one, that they are Adorable, the other say, No. Here are differences, not only concerning the Explana∣tion of their Faith (as that Objected 'tiwxt Dr. Sherlock and Dr. South; and may happen to any of the same Faith; as different Expositions of a Text in Scripture, does not infer, in either, a disbelief of the Scripture; and diffe∣rent Explanations of the Nature of God, which often happens among Divines, does not conclude any of them to be Atheists) but this difference among the several Sects of Socinians, is concerning the very Object of their Faith and Worship, those whom one Part of them make to be God, the rest of them say are but Creatures. Then which it is impossible to imagine a Greater or more Fundamental difference. Yet these are the Men who cry out upon My∣stery! Whose Faith is flatly contradictory to it self, as these Ʋnitarians stand Divided from one another: And if you take the Hypothesis of any of their Sub-Divisions by it self, it is nothing but Mystery: If by Mystery you mean an Ʋn∣intelligible thing. If Three in one Nature (which is the Christian-Trinity) is not fully Explicable to us; (tho' there is something ve∣ry like it even in Human-Nature, which contains in it se∣veral Persons) yet Three in One Person (which is the Socinian-Trinity) must be flat Contradiction, and has no Parallel or Image in any Created Nature.
And Two Creatures to make up One Holy Trinity with God (which is another Socinian-Trinity) tho' not so contra∣dictory, is yet more Blasphemous. Great is the Mystery of Godliness. God dwells in Light Inaccessible, in thick Clouds and Darkness (caused by Light too strong for our weak Senses) because of the In∣comprehensibility of his Nature, so far exalted above all Created-Ʋnderstandings. But the Devil and his Socinian-Latitudinarian Ministers, wrap up the Mystery of their Iniquity in Darkness, lest it should be Detected: Whose Form would be so Mon∣strous if seen in its own Native Colours, as would deter all, but invite none, to enter into the Black and Dismal Regions of Error. But these Libertines would fain persuade themselves and others, that there is no Condemnation for Error. Tho' our Saviour says, Mark 16.16. Those who Be∣lieve not, upon the Preaching (the Sufficient Publication) of His Gospel, shall be Damned. But what is their Reason why they should not account for Error. Sir Possitive tells, p. 96. Because Error proceeds from our Innocence, that is (says he) our Weakness and Ignorance. These are they who accuse the Church of Rome, and laugh at them for making Ignorance the Mother of their Devotion! But when Ignorance is set up to Countenance Infidelity and Irreligion, then it is all Innocence! They decry all Mystery as being a Subterfuge for Igno∣rance: And plead their Ignorance as an excuse for not Be∣lieving in Mysteries! But is all Ignorance, Innocence? Why then do these Un∣charitable Pretenders to Wisdom, seek to Rob us of our Innocence? Why do they say such severe and bloody things against the Papists, the Jews, or the Heathens for their Ignorance? But if there be an Affected and Wilful Ignorance; an Ig∣norance that proceed; from our Negligence, from our Vice; If we spend that time in Debauchery or Idleness, which, if well Imploy'd, would have improv'd our Understandings; If our Ignorance proceeds from such Causes as these, and therefore will be rather an Aggravation than an Excuse to us; then can none trust to their Ignorance, who have not been all their life-time, perfectly Innocent; and who have not improv'd every minute to the best advantage of inform∣ing their Ʋnderstandings. Which since no Man in the World can pretend to) and that there is no Remedy for mis-spent time, but to Employ the remainder more diligent∣ly▪ Ignorance will be an excuse for very few of our Faults: And it will be very hard to determine which these are. But it is much easier to guess what they are not. Not Sins of Affectation and Pride, for a true sense of our Igno∣rance would make us Humble and Modest: Therefore nei∣ther Possitives nor Poslings will have any share in this Excuse. Nor Sins of Ingratitude. Because Forgetfulness, in that Case, is the Sin. Else Posling's turning his Father out of Door, proceeded from his Innocence, that is, his Ignorance. However it may serve as a Fescue to Sir Possitive; he having, not long before assisted in the same sin against a Neigh∣bour, who never injur'd him; and who had done more for him than all the Friends and Relations he had in the World. Nor, Lastly, in Sins of Intriegue and Design; to Circum∣vent and Deceive when we cannot Persuade by plain Rea∣son, which is the drift of these Books, and of all the Par∣ty. For Ignorance cannot be pretended in that Case, more than of direct Lying; in which their Ability are much ap∣prov'd and have been made use of. And I believe the sense of what they deserve for this, is that which chiefly moves them so Zealously against what they call Persecution, hopeing to include within that Ap∣pellation, the Just Punishments for their Crimes: for if all Errors are Innocence, it would be very hard to Punish them. Blasphemy, Idolatry, and Treason too may escape at this rate, for they are but Errors. But this Author's Proofs against Persecution, p. 94. are these. 1. That Force does not Convince. 2. That the Prescriptions of the Gospel are all Gentle and Meek, not Force and Arms: I confine my Answer to the Point of Blasphemy, and seeking to turn Men away from the Worship of God. For these are the Errors of which we now Dispute. I am far from thinking every Error Criminal, much less Capital. And am as much in my Opinion as any body for that Gentle and Persuasive Methods as to Errors which proceed meer∣ly from Weakness, and have no Malice in them. But in the present Case of Blaspheming, and which is worse, Ridiculing of God and of Religion; God Himelf has Pronounc'd it to be Death. Nor would those Sons of Belial have escap'd it, if they had liv'd in any Christian Country. Shall the Honour of the King be Guarded with Death; and God be Blasphem'd Impune in Print, and in the streets! Has not this Propagated Atheism to the Degree we now see it! Not only to pass unpunished, but to be thought a Grace in Conversation, and the mark of a Wit! Shall not God visit for these things! Will not his Soul be avenged on such, a Nation as this! As to the two foresaid frivolous Objections; for the first, That Force does not Convince. Answ. Punishments are inflicted for other ends than Converting the Criminal, tho' they often too work that effect, where they meet with Minds not thorowly hardened. They are intended to vindicate the Honour of the Government, chiefly of God, the Governor of Heaven and Earth. In the next place to prevent the Infection of others, and to deter them from the like. As to the ad Obj. That the Prescriptions of the Gospel are all Gentle and Meek. Answ. That is as to the Preachers. Who might not make use of Force, nor Usurp the Sword, which God had committed to the Civil Magistrate, who Beareth it not in vain, but is a Revenger to execute Wrath upon them that do Evil. Rom. 13.4. And that Blasphemy is not one of the Evils which is within his Commission to Pu∣nish, I believe will not be found in all the Gospel. Christ urg'd no such thing when He Himself was Condemn'd for alledg'd Blasphmy. But on the contrary He Confirm'd the Magistate's Power, in that very Case; and own'd that it was given Him from Heaven. John 19.11.
Christ Commands, if a Man smite us on one Cheek, to turn the other. If a Man take our Coat, let him have our Cloak also, and not to avenge an injury done to us. Will any Man say that these are Rules for Judges to go by, in distributing Justice 'twixt Man and Man? There is no better pretence, from the Injunctions of Meekness and Forgiving of Injuries, to conclude against the Power of the Magistrate in case of Blasphemy, or to call this a Persecution But they are in no fear of the Laws at present. They cry before they are hurt. But they think, by this Argument, to raise an Odium against Kings as well as Priests; and to Curtall the Power of both: for they are equal Enemies to both. There are none of these Latitudinarians that are not Commonwealth-Men: They are against Monarchy in Hea∣ven or on Earth: and indeed against all Government, if they could tell how: that is, all that is not in their own Hands. They cannot bear to be under the Discipline of any other. This is the true ground of their Quarrel at Reli∣gion. It is not the Mystery of it, that they would not trou∣ble their Head with: nor spend their Breath to undeceive those Fools (as they call them) who believe it: they would not concern themselves at Priest-Craft, or care if Priests wore Fools-Caps, so they were not under their Correction. It is the Law not the Doctrine of Christ which is Grievous to them. They would break his Bonds asunder, and cast away his Cords from them. Psal. 2, 3. And they will flie in the Face of the Civil Government if it tie these faster upon them, or restrain their Libertinism in this, or in any other Instance. Re∣ligion enforces and strengthens Government; and Govern∣ment Protects and Encourages Religion: therefore both are equally Obnoxious to these Filthy Dreamers, who Defile the Flesh, Despise Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities, of those things which they know not, Jude 8. But what they know naturally, as Brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt them∣selves. 10. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, 11. and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam, for Reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core: 12. Clouds they are without Water, carried about of Winds; Trees whose Fruit withereth, without Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots; 13. Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. Is not this a lively Description of these Men? And are these Men to be Tolerated in any Government? Will God Bless that Church or Government? Is it a Christian Lenity to Indulge this sort of Men? God Commends the Church of Ephesus Rev. 2.6. because they hated the Deeds of the Ni∣colaitans (who gave way to the sins of the Flesh, tho' un∣der colour of Religion) which I also hate, says God. And he threatens to fight against the Church of Prgams, be∣cause they had amongst them those that taught that Do∣ctrine. 15. And who held the Doctrine of Balaam to cast a Stumbling-Block 14. before the People (and are not these Stumbling-blocks which I have mentioned out of these Mens Works?) The Church of Thyatira 20. was condemn'd for suffering that wicked Woman Jezebel to seduce the Servants of Christ: Who will spue those out of his Mouth, Chap. 3.16. who have no more Zeal for his Religion, who are neither Hot nor Cold, who have a Latitudinarian Indif∣ferency. Let every Man go his own way.— I would thou were either Cold or Hot  15. being per∣fectly Cold. That is, having no Religion at all, is prefer∣able to this Luke-warm Loadicean temper, to profess e Religion of Christ, and be so careless and unconcern'd what becomes of it. The Kings of Israel were Blam'd and severely Punished by God, for permitting of Idolatry, which could not be, if it did not belong to their Office to Restrain it. And those Kings must be very weak indeed who will be gain'd by the sometimes servile soothings of these Priest-Craft-Men, and not see that all they Belch out against the Priests, is equally levell'd against them. They cannot keep it (always) Conceal'd. lount bestows his loving Glances upon them. Sect. 16. p. 41. where he represents them under the Figures of Beasts of Rapine, Lions, Dragons, &c. But for petty Princes (says he) a Fox may be the better Emblem. And these Men who cry out of Persecution, at the same time, endeavour to raise all Mankind against those whom they Hate or Fear. They would stir up Persecution against those whom they call Persecutors. That is to say, Perse∣cution is only Evil when it touches them. And of all Mankind none were more violent Persecutors than the Arians (that is, the Socinians) when they had the Power: who now speak against Persecution, because they have not the Inflicting of it: yet go in it, as far as their Power reaches, that is, their Wit and Malice. But tho' the Sword of Justice be (at present) otherwise employ'd than to Animadvert upon these Blasphemers; is the Cause of God, is the Christian (not to name the Prote∣stant) Religion so sunk, that none must oppose, and that boldly and openly, such loud Contempt of all that is Sacred! And when the Chief and Father of them is advanc'd to the Throne of Canterbury; and thence infuses his deadly Poison through the Nation; Preaches it Publickly at White-Hall; and gets it Printed by Their Majesties Special Com∣mand, to give it greater Countenance and Authority; and another Collegue of his at Salisbury: Recommends the same in Print, to be Preach'd and Taught through the Diocess which (Indignatione Divinâ) is committed to his Charge, and all the other Bishops and Clergy of their Communion let it pass, with at least Silent Consent: When the Braves of this (at best) Theistical Junct, Place Dr. Tillotson's Name (not only in his private Capacity, but as Arch-Bishop of Canterbury) in the Front of their An∣ti-Christian Haranguea in Print; and he shews no Displea∣sure in it. And (to Recapitulate a little of what is said before.) He himself has exceeded them in the Barbarous Account he has given of the Rise and Foundation of the Christian Religion. They make Religion to be the Invention of Wicked Men, or of Devils; and he improves it, making the Christian Religion only a Compliance with that Wicked∣ness. As before is sufficiently shewn. When he dares so openly and bare-fac'd Attack all Re∣vial'd Religion as to make: it good for nothing but to pre∣serve outward. Peace in this World. As he does in his Seon upon Luke 9.55. which is quoted with Magnifi∣cence in the Preface to this History of Religion. But this Historian himself, had the Modesty or Cunning to leave
out those broad words of the Doctors, which I have shewn above, viz. That it were better there had never been any Revealed Religion; that is, that Christ had never come, than to make uneasiness in the World, and disturb Govern∣ment for it. And tho', as I have shewn above, The Chri∣stian Religion is the greatest Security to Government, and the outward Peace of this world; yet that Notion could never have come into the Head of a Christian, that we had better never have had any Christ, than that any Worldly Government should be disturb'd. Nay, farther, when, as I have shewn above, this Dr. makes a Mother Suckling her own Child, to be of a more Necessary and Indispensible Obligation than to believe in Christ, that is, than any possitive Precept of Revealed Reli∣gion (which are his words) for the Belief of Christ is no∣thing else but a Possitive Precept of Revealed Religion. When He Disputes openly against the Satisfaction of Christ; and makes all our Thirty Nine Articles, or the Belief of any particular Church, but the Jargon of a Party, and Commands all the Children of the Nation to be bred up loose from any such Narrow Principles. When He makes not only the Eternity but the Being of a Hell wholly Precarious. And lastly, when (as I have shewn from Dr. Burnt, Li∣cens'd by Dr. Tillotson) That Christ is made to be no other∣wise God than the Cloud of Glory in the Temple. When such Wickedness is set up in our High Places, shall we not give warning! First, to the Clergy in these Mens Communion, quickly and speedily to separate from them. I meddle not (Here) with the point of Schism. (That stands a Dispute by it self) but as the 15th Canon of the Synod of Constantinople which was omitted in Mr Hody's Edition of the Baroccian MS. expresly ordians, That if any Bishop (though a lawful Bishop) do hold Heretical Opi∣nions, and shall PUBLICKLY Teach and Preach the same bare-fac'd in the Church, all, even the meanest Laick is Obliged to Separate from such wicked Teacher, even be∣fore Synodical Condemnation. And whether the Opinions before told are not, in the grossest manner, Heretical: And whether Preaching them at White-Hall, and Printing them, be not a publick Tea∣ching and Preaching the same, is left to the Judgment of the Reader. And then what an Indispensible Obligation must lie up∣on all the Clergy (especially) in their Communion to Sepa∣rate from them! and, as publickly and openly as they have done, to Disclaim, Renounce, and Confute their Damnable Heresiel, Otherwise the Blood of all those Souls who shall be infected by them, and of all their Po∣sterities, whom they shall likewise infect, will be required of every single Clergy-Man, who but by his Silence and continuing in their Communion, shall, so far, giue Counte∣nance to their Errors. Silence can never be an excuse in a Watch-Man, whose Office it is to cry aloud: And if he low not the Trumpet, he cannot deliver his Soul. And tho' immediate Death attended it, this he ought to do. But there is not that Hazard. The Government is not concern'd in this. It is the Common Cause of Chri∣stianity: And I see no Reason but to expect that every such Clergy-Man would be esteemed and valued, even by this Government, which would (besides) think it some sort of a Vindication of the Government, from what share it may be supposed they have in the Abetting or Encouragement of such Heterodox Principles Preach'd before them, by those in such High Place with them, and said to be Printed by Their Special Command. And for the People, such Clergy would certainly be great∣ly regarded by them; as Men of Conscience, and Zeal for their Religion. But if the Clergy (which God forbid) should prove so Laodicean as not to think this worth their while, and so leave the Imputation to fall upon their whole Communion: Then I must Admonish all the Godly Laity, that they are obliged, in their Station, as much as the Clergy in theirs, to Separate from such wicked Teachers: and that by the above quoted Council of Constantinople, they are not to be Reputed Schismaticks for so doing, but a Preservers of the Unity of the Church, whose Unity consists chiefly in the Unity of their Doctrine. But they have a greater Authority than that of any Council. Gal. 1.8. Tho' we (says one of the Apostles) or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached un∣to you, let him be Accursed. And as all the Laity are hereby oblig'd, under the penalty of, Sin, to Separate from the Church-Communion of these Heretical Bishops, and of all who Communicate with them: so is it likewise required of them to abstain, as much as is possible, even from their private Conversa∣tion: with such a one, says St. Paul, not so much as to eat. And let them think that these are Trying Times, sent on purpose to distinguish God's Elect from the Reprobate, to Separate His Little Flock from the World of Iniquity. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved, way the made manifest among you. 1 Cor. 11.19. FINIS.
