L1436 R43387 27376434 110091
A LETTER From A SCHOLLER IN OXFORD-SHIRE to his Vnkle a Merchant in Broad-street, upon occasion of a Book Intituled, A Moderate and most Proper Reply to a Declara∣tion, Printed and Published under His Majesties Name, Decemb. 8. intended against an Ordinance of Parliament for Assessing, &c. Sent to the Presse by the Merchant, who confesseth himselfe converted by it. Printed in the Yeare M.DC.XLII.
A Letter from a Scholler in OXFORD∣shire to his Vnkle a Merchant in Broad-streete, upon occasion of a Booke intitu∣led, A moderate, and most proper Reply to a Decla∣ration Printed and Published under His Majesties Name, Decemb. 8. intended against an Ordinance of Parliament for assessing, &c. sent to the Presse by the Merchant, who confesseth him∣selfe converted by it. SIR, I Received your Letter, and the two Bookes you sent mee on Saturday last by the Carrier, and have ever since imployed my thoughts and best Reason upon them, and in sum∣ming up to my selfe the whole State of the Case; Which is truly the sub∣ject matter of this dispute. You know, Sir, what obligations I have to you for your care and expence in my education, and for recommending mee into so pious and honourable a Family, and therefore would not willingly dis∣sent from you in an Opinion, to which (to my sorrow) I find you so much wedded; But since you require from mee to try to perswade my Father (whom you call Malignant) to make himselfe a good Example in the City, by freely bringing in the 20. part of his estate, before the Assessors fetch it; and to per∣swade, and enable mee to perswade him to it, you inclosed the
Kings Declaration against the Ordinance for that Payment, and an Answer (as you are pleased to call it, a most cleare and con∣vincing one) to that Declaration, I suppose you will sooner excuse mee for giving you my Reasons, why I cannot obey you, then for a silent sullen disobedience. And I differ from you with the more confidence, because it seemes by your Letter that I have the Authority of a Father for mee, though I have that of an Unkle against mee. Truly Sir, I am so much satisfied with the Kings Declaration, and so little with the Reply, That I cannot but thinke that the two Houses did purposely avoid replying themselves, and turn'd it over to another, as finding their side too weake to be maintained, and thinking it lesse dishonourable to be confuted by Proxie, And that the most proper Reply to such Declarations is to forbid the Printing and Publishing under paihe of Plundering and imprisonment. And indeed, if all that hath beene written on both sides had beene suffered freely, and indifferently (as was required by Justice, and desired by the King) to have beene communicated to, and examined by the People (to whom the House of Commons had first (and with∣out any president) in that way begun to appeale) those Paper-bullets (as hee calls them) would have killed this Warre in the wombe, and the same People who have beene now seduced into Rebellion, would have kept their seducers to their Loyalty, whether they would or no. I shall now come to the Reply it selfe, in answer to which, if I shall speake of things that you may conceive mee a stranger to, I shall desire you to remember how industrious a curiosity I have ever had to informe my selfe fully in all the Questions of the Times, how carefully I studied the Questions of Arminia∣nisme, the point of Shipmony, and the disputes about Altar and Table, and then you will not wonder, if in a question which concerned as well the subsistence, as the Salvation of all the Subjects of this Kingdome. I have not beene lazy to satis∣fie my selfe, as well in Right as in Fact; of which though the latter (by reason of my condition) was harder to mee, yet what with my Interest in the Gentleman of the House of Commons who was my Pupill in Oxford: What with my acquaintance
with some Exeter Colledge men, Chaplaines to some of the Kings Regiment (men even till now rather esteemed Puritans, then Popishly affected) and by being often present by their meanes, where some discreet Officers of the Kings have often met; I am confident, I am so well inform'd, that what I shall say is come to mee by very good Conduit pipes, though I had it not from the Spring head. Mee thinkes, if the Author of this Reply had intended, that his moderation should have reacht any farther then the Title of his Booke, he would not in the very first lines have confu∣ted his Title, and spoken so scornfully of a Declaration under His Majesties Name, as hee doth in the Phrase of the Pen, that drops this Declaration, and so falsly and maliciously as to say, It is fellow to the Tongue which cuts like a sharpe Rasor; to say, that Malignity was the whetstone, and that it cares not though it mangle Truth and goodnesse: For suppose, that his implicite beliefe in some Vote of the House of Commons, as when to free Sir Henry Ludlow for saying in that House up∣on the reading of a Declaration sent from the King enclosed in a Letter signed and sealed by His owne Royall Hand and signet, That he that made that Declaration deserv'd not to be King of England; they Voted as if pretending to Inspiration, that that Declaration was not the Kings (for you know I was present when this was related to you the same night at supper by a Parliament man) Suppose, I say, this confidence in some such new Vote upon this occasion, should have perswaded him, that the King did not wholly endite it Himselfe; yet since He visibly did allow of, and send it, I wonder He should not conceive it to be as much His, as this very Ordinance is the Act of both Houses; Since it is more evident that the Houses did not write this, then that the King writ not the other, and that being drawne up by their Command, and published by their Autho∣rity (as the other is by the Kings) is all that can make it theirs; And yet I beleeve a Person that were brought to the Barre for using the same words of their Ordinance, would not be excused from breach of Priviledge, by answering that not the Houses, but some Committee, or particular Member of them was the Author of it.
Next, the King objects the totall destruction of the Liberty and Propriety of all His Subjects by the imprisonment of their persons without cause, and disposing of their Estates with∣out Law: and the Reply acknowledges as much as the Decla∣ration objects, by that full and sufficient Answer. What have these men to do to talke of fundamentall Lawes? It were well hee would have it moved, that an Ordinance be made, that the Lawes should no more be spoken of; for doing as they doe, they can get little advantage by such discourses; else, that the King who is sworne to protect the Law should alone not have leave to name it, were a very hard case. But perhaps the Re∣plyer may defend himselfe by saying he imitates onely the Stile of the Psalmes, why doe the wicked take my Law in their mouth? and followes only the usuall Stile of all their Sermons, who whatsoever is sayed of wicked Kings and Persons, assume Authority to take it for granted as appliable to the Person of our gracious Prince, and of all those who venture their Lives to assist and defend Him: for to defend himselfe he may well ac∣cuse his friends, I am sure, to defend his friends, he is no other way able to doe it then by recrimination upon his enemies and for that runnes up as high as Loanes, Knighthood, and Shipmo∣ney. His memory is very good concerning those greivances, but very ill to forget by whose just and gracious concurrence were have beene eased both of them, and even of the feare of the like for the future; and sure, if any knowne Authors or Ministers of those Calamities, remaine still about his Majestie to frame his Declarations, it hath been by their negligence, not by His Maje∣sties opposall of their Remove and Punishment. And it is not so strange that his Majesty upon information, how grievous those pressures were to his Subjects, opposes the introducing of the same Illegalities, and miseries under no other colour then of new names, and hath learned Law enough this Parliament to know that the pretence of necessity, and Propterea quòd Reg∣num nostrum periclitatur, is no sufficient cause of levying mo∣ney, either by Writ or Ordinance; As that this Author will talke of such past faults, when there was nothing then suffered by the Subject, which hath not upon the same Pretences, but with
lesse colour, beene since acted and exceeded by those, who were called together to ease them from the like sufferings. But alas, they onely take away mens estates in the defence of their propriety, and imprison their persons in defence of their liber∣ty, and I beleeve will shortly hang them up to save their lives (as they already shoot at the King in his owne defence) for he sayes, the Parliament (and by that throughout he meanes both Houses) hath power not onely of liberty and imprisonment, but of life and death. Nor are we like to stay here, for hee saith, that the House of Commons alone is trusted with all the estates of the Commons of England, and consequently may shortly save the Lords a labour of joyning with them in disposing of the estates of Commoners. And if they shall after pretend (as by the same Right they may) to a power over the lives of Commoners too, a Member of such a House in a perpetuall Par∣liament may get more Revenue and maintenance by his place, then ever any Penman of His Majesties Declarations will doe by his. The truth is, the King and Lords both are as much trusted with the estates of all the Commons of England, as the House of Commons is; neither it without them, nor they without it can dispose of them: and whatsoever Rights the King hath in Him by the Law, as the choice of Counsellers and Officers, of Commanders of Forts and Castles, and of the Militia of the Kingdome, and the like; with them he is trusted by the whole Nation, and neither one nor both Houses have any more supe∣riority over that Trust, then he hath over any Trust committed to them. He represents the people too in what the Law hath left to Him, nor doe they represent them in any thing which the Law hath not trusted to them. But unlesse such Ordinances be made, the Warre cannot be maintained. I wonder, not that this Argument should appeare a good one in their Army which lives by Warre, but I wonder it should be suspected likely to prevaile upon the Citie, which can as little subsist without Trade, as Trade can continue with∣out Peace, and which by this Warre hath beene so much alrea∣dy diverted, that many yeares will scarce returne it into the former channell. I wonder the Citizens doe not consider,
that by this Warre their charge increases, whilest their gettings diminish: That their Traine-bands are already suspected (and perhaps will shortly be disarm'd and plundered too) and the Citie awed by Red-coats. That for this Warre the twentieth part of their estates is voted away, and Assessors most of one faction appointed, who may call nineteene parts the twentieth; That they are (under that terrour) imprisoned, upon grounds upon which no man should be imprisoned, and imprisoned by persons who ought to imprison no body; (for suppose both Houses had an Arbitrary power over their goods and liberties, they never claimed any till now by Ordinance, or otherwise, to transferre that power to a Committee; which yet is dayly acted by them without reporting to the Houses) and this sla∣very is onely evaded by saying, it is thus farre a voluntary sla∣very, that they may free their persons if they will by a volun∣tary Contribution, and that it is done to fright them from a per∣petuall slavery: And truely, the Kings Atturney had no great invention, if he could not have found the same Answer to justi∣fie all the imprisonments for Ship-money, Knighting-money. Coat and Conduct money, &c. to have beene both voluntary and necessary. Nor is this reason of maintaining the Warre any better as to the legall, then as to the prudentiall part. The King (who hath power of making Warre and Peace, which both Houses, how full and free soever they are, have not in never so just and ne∣cessary a Warre, (hath no legall power to leavy money to main∣taine it, without consent in Parliament. But this Warre for which this Ordinance is made, is not onely as illegall as the Or∣dinance it selfe; (I can make no greater expression) but it is as ungrounded as it is illegall. They first make a necessity, that they may make a Warre; and then root up liberty and proper∣ty, that they may continue it: Schisme, Pride, Faction, and Ambition, were the onely grounds; Feares and Jealousies were the onely pretences; and Misery, Slavery, and Desolation, are the onely effects, of that which now to petition against is be∣come a crime. And if I make this appeare to you, I doubt not Sir, but you
will then confesse, that not onely these illegall proceedings of theirs are not justified by the Warre, but that even the illegall pressures to which they have necessitated the King; (what Taxe soever He can have laid upon Oxfordshire, or my Lord of Newcastle upon Yorkeshire, or Sir Ralph Hopton upon the West) are to be imputed to the beginners of this Warre; and that both the plundering of Master Speaker of his Wine and his Battel∣axe, and the plundering of Brainceford, (which though it were done to a Towne taken by assault, yet for want of other instan∣ces is twice repeated) and the danger of London (which hee sayes was as neare to the state of Brainceford, as Brainceford is to London) is to be charg'd upon the same score. Let us consider the beginning of these distractions, when with so much diffi∣culty, by so few voyces, that unexampled Declaration of the House of Commons had been spread among the people, which incited them against the establisht Lawes, and against the House of Lords, which would not alter what was establisht: And when the people, giving credit to their information, that there was no hope of happinesse for them without their concurrence, had (to the dishonour of Parliaments, and with the breach of the highest priviledges of that most Honourable Court) come downe in Tumults to make them concurre; and by affronting and injuring some of the Members of both Houses, so awed the rest, that the Army if it had really beene brought up to London, could have done no more (though a meere discourse concer∣ning that was voted to be Treason.) When all these Tumults (of which I speake the more knowingly, because I was then by accident in the Court of Requests when the Rabble came up, and heard, no Bishops, no Bishops, cryed with that animosity and violence, that it rings still in my eares; and saw Sir John Strangwayes threatned as their enemy; and one (I thinke they called him Master Killigrew) laid hands on, and so much feare in the faces of some other Members, that I beleeve they hardly knew what they voted in a weeke after, and the next day saw Westminster Abby assaulted by the same Rabble) when these Tumults were not onely not punisht, nor the Authors enquired after, nor so much as the complaints of the particular Members
considered, but the Lords were twice refused to be joyn'd with in a Declaration against the like for the future. And this Rabble commended and stiled their friends by the most eminent Mem∣bers in that House: When Justice Long was committed by the House of Commons for obeying a Writ sent by direction of the Lords House, and sending a watch to guard them, and the Sheriffe forbid by the same House to proceed legally against a Riot in Southwarke. When this countenance to Riots, and dis∣countenance of Law had made Tumults ordinary and familiar even at the Gates of White-Hall, and occasioned that accusati∣on of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members which hath been since five hundred times repeated as the principall ground of Jealousie, (though they were accused in so legall a manner, as had beene formerly accepted by the House of Peeres in the Earle of Bristols Case: and though the King offered them so much satisfaction for it, that any private Christian that should refuse to receive it from his equall, were in no case to receive the Communion.) Who ever after that saw the great Leavies of armed men in London, and the multitudes of people every day flocking to them from severall Countries, and the low con∣dition the King then was in, removing from place to place, without the convenience of ordinary Accommodation, (some of His servants leaving Him, and others refusing to attend Him) could not beleeve that He could then give them such a Terror, as no lesse then all the Castles and Forts of the Kingdome, and the sole disposall of the whole Militia could give them security enough against Him, who had not with, or neare Him, money enough to pay a man, nor powder enough to kill a bird; and could never have arrived at such a condition, as to be able to raise an Army, if the violence which hath beene since offered Him, had not assisted Him. Nor were the Lords then so af∣fraid of the King, or yet so afraid of the people, as to demand so unreasonable security; so that the House of Commons ha∣ving twice in vaine attempted their consent, were faine to aske it of His Majestie alone. But when after the usuall Satellites came up to them with a Petition, seconded and countenanc't by the House of Commons, demanding those Lords names who refu∣sed
to joyne; This Eloquence prevailed, or rather this Militia made the other passe; and in a few dayes (the King granting most, but not all they askt) the Lords (who were unwilling to put the people to the trouble of comming againe) joyned in Declaring, (and were as good as their words) that if the King would not consent, they would put the Militia in execution without Him. Thus illegally was that Ordinance past both Hou∣ses, which would have been most illegall, however it had past. Thus was the Kings highest Right, His Negative voyce, and in the highest point (which alone enabled Him to defend the rest) forced from Him. Thus was England put in Armes without His consent, whose Commission onely could legally warrant the least Assembly in that kinde; and a few Officers by His command in a peaceable manner, attending Him at Kingstone for His security, was voted leavying of warre against himselfe; and this was the first beginning of this necessary warre, which now must make all things lawfull in order to that necessity: Whilest the King presses still His Message of the 20 of January, that Hee may but know what they would have, and is not thought worthy of an Answer. But to justifie their actions by their feares, Armies are daily threatned from beyond-Sea, (though they have laine wind-bound ever since) because all the world saw He had nothing in England He could fright them with; but still the lower He was, the higher they grew; and the more they contemned Him, the more they feare Him: Nothing that He can doe will satisfie them; Nothing that He can say shall satisfie the people, for they shall not be suffered to see it. Care is taken by order to the severall Burgesses, That all the Townes of England must heare of His comming to the House of Commons; and that in a manner in which he did not come. But His sorrow that He hath by this broke any Privi∣ledge, His offers of satisfaction for it, and His Resolution both to observe and defend them all for the future; If this bee printed and offered to be publisht, His Secretary must be que∣stioned for sending it to the Sheriffes by His Majesties Com∣mand, and the Sheriffes forbid to publish it according to the Kings owne Warrant, and sent for as Delinquents if they doe.
Would he have my Lord of Newcastle command his Towne? He must not. Would he not have Sir John Hotham command it? He must. Dares he not come to London? He must. Would he be wayted on in the Countrey by his meniall servants? He must not. Will he not choose such Officers and Counsellors as they will name, and displace such evill Counsellors as they can∣not name? Then the prevalency of the Malignant Party is cryed out upon; His not encountring Colonell Burges and Captaine Venne in the head of their Mirmidons, is called deser∣ting His Parliament: The Rebellion of Ireland (which he had disarmed himselfe to resist) is laid to his charge, and his offer to venture His Royall Person against the Rebels there, is voted to be an encouragement to that Rebellion. If He deny or delay any thing they aske, though never so much in His power to grant or deny, a new Vote passes upon the Advisers, of being enemies to the State; and (having once found that Word to have great influence upon the people) whatsoever He sayes or does, He cannot but breake their Priviledges; and whatsoever they say or doe, they cannot breake His. And indeed their ob∣serving no Rule at all in their Votes, and the peoples readinesse to observe all their Votes as a Rule, had so hared Him and all His servants, that I had rather be not onely Master Pym, or Ma∣ster Hampden, but Master Cromwell, or Master Pury, then King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, in so sad and distra∣cted a condition. And I wonder not when they asked Him His Crowne in the Nineteene Propositions, that they thought they had made Him weary enough of it, to part with it for asking. Still the Militia is every where press't, and Sir John Hotham having before pretended to keepe Hull for the King, now keepes the King out of Hull, though He offered to enter but with twenty servants; He is justified in it by the Houses, and the Houses slander themselves that they may justifie Him, and acknowledge a direction they never gave. Upon this He takes to Himselfe a much smaller Guard then they had daily kept to∣gether many moneths at Westminster, This is voted an intention to leavy Warre against His Parliament, and the Sheriffes are or∣dered to suppresse it. All this while (to prepare the people to
suffer any wrong to be offered the King) the Presses and the Pulpits (the two seed-plots of this Warre) had swarmed daily with slanderous Invectives against His Majestie: (besides Declarations of a strange nature.) And if any grave pious Mi∣nisters did write, preach, speake, or almost thinke for the King, he was accused by the factious part of his Parish before the Committee for scandalous Ministers, and their meere receiving and countenancing of such an Accusation, (though their leisure would not admit him to cleare himselfe before them) was e∣nough to blast Him with the people. After this, all that could be taken of the Kings, or any of His Friends, Armes, Goods, Ships, any thing is good prize; and (as if the Maxime were inverted, and Hee now could receive no wrong, who was wont He could doe none) they proceed real∣ly against Him (though in pure civility they pass't no such Vote upon Him) as an enemy to the State. And at last, having pro∣tected all Delinquents against Him and the knowne Law, and voted all Delinquents who had refused to become so by submit∣ting to their illegall commands: Though the King had for His Guard onely one Regiment of the Yorkeshire Traine-bands, and one Troope of Horse, Voluntiers of the Gentlemen of that Countrey, And though the King never protected any man, till Sir John Hotham was denyed to be brought to a Legall try∣all; yet an Army is voted to be raised to defend them from the King and His Cavaliers, and to fetch up His Majestie and His fellow Delinquents. Yet to this Vote His Majestie opposes onely His owne Declaration, and that of the Lords with Him, (who saw best what was done towards it, being upon the place) that he had no such intention as was pretended; and till contributions were raised to raise men, He desired no contribu∣tion to be prepared by His friends for Him; and till he had lea∣vyed men, and mustered them in some number, He gave not out so much as one Commission to leavy a man; But then (not thinking it needfull to stay till my Lord of Essex should come and take Him En Cuerpo, that He might satisfie the world how defensive the Warre was on His part) He grants out Commis∣sions, but then grants not any to any Papists; and takes all possible care, and gives all possible Orders, that they entertaine
no Souldiers of that Religion; yet these men (who well may couple Peace and Truth together, for their actions and words have a long time shewed that they love them alike) charge Him to the people in dayly Declarations of raysing an Army of Papists against the Parliament; which makes it the lesse strange, if His Majestie since consented to have the assistance of some Papists, (for they are not so many as you thinke for) since He saw that without their assistance Hee could not avoyd all the scandall, which having it could produce, especially since Hee saw many of that Religion were entertained in their Army; (having taken at Edgehill severall Wallons, English, and Irish, of that Religion, who confesse of many more:) And since He saw a great part of the rest to consist of another kinde of Recu∣sants, which by the Law of this Kingdome not onely ought not to be armed in it, but not to remaine in it at all. Well, His Majestie is come to Nottingham, and though He was confident the Commissions Hee had sent forth, would timely enough bring Him in a sufficient Army to beate theirs; (as the event hath since shewed) yet preferring Peace even before Victory it selfe. He sent twice to desire it (I had almost said to petition for it) from both Houses: How it was received all the world knowes. After this He meets them, He fights with them, He beates them, (of which the suffering their Ordinance to be ta∣ken away next morning before their faces, the quitting Banbu∣ry which they came to relieve, and marching to London them∣selves in stead of bringing the King up thither, was so great a proofe, as farre outweighs the single assertion of my Lord Whar∣ton, or my Lord Brooke to the contrary.) He is still constant to His Principles, and (though after a Victory) gives a quite other kinde of Answer to their Petition at Colebrooke, then they had done to His Message from Nottingham. Whilest the Com∣mittee was with Him there, part of their Army marcheth out of London; That Hee might not be inclosed on all sides, Hee marches to prepossesse Brainceford, (but at the instant sends word of His march, and the reason of it to the Houses) Hee found them there, He beates them out; And if His intention had beene to have marcht on and sacked London, what altered
that intention? Could He thinke Himselfe so much weaker by the losse of ten men, or them so much stronger by the losse of two of their best Regiments, besides their losse by water, as for that reason to change His minde? No: Assoone as He found King∣stone quitted behinde Him, before any approach or notice of any Forces of theirs, He gives orders to march away. He againe and againe repeates His desire of Peace, which is so farre from being accepted, that the English Petitioners are threatned, hurt, and im∣prisoned, for desiring it too, and a Scotch Army is invited to con∣tinue the Warre. But I hope our brethren will remember that those against whom they are called, have paid and are to pay them more of the brotherly assistance then those that call them; and these men will finde themselves as much deceived in their hopes of their owne forreigne Forces, as they were in feare of the Kings, and that the Scotch will stay till the Danes come. To summe up this point, If to take away by force all the others just Rights, be to begin the War, His Majestie is not the Aggres∣sor: If to have a Guard first be the beginning of the Warre, (as the Replyer pretends) certainly this Warre began at London, and not at Yorke; the first being raised by the power of a Committee, upon some thing (which after came to nothing) fetcht as sarre off as Edonburgh: If the raising men first by Commissions were to begin it, it was begun there too: If the denying of Delinquents to be legally tryed were to begin it, London was the place, and Sir John Hotham the person, where and for whom it was first begun: If the eagernesse of continuing can shew who begun it, does not this Aversion from Peace declare sufficiently that they begun the Warre, who now so carefully nurse their owne childe? And I suppose no indifferent person can thinke these visible Arguments confuted by the Replyers wonder, and his onely Arguments in the Reply to the contrary; which are a Tale of a Papist in Yorke, that should say, Let the sword try it; (when it were little to any other purpose whether a Papist had said so, then to shew by the Kings backwardnesse to follow this Councell, that the Councels of Pa∣pists were more prevalent with the Parliament, then with Him; And of Sir Francis Wortley's drawing his sword, and saying, Who is for the King? When it is well knowne at Yorke, that this was
not said at all by him: and that what was said and done, was to a very Different end: But indeed upon such an information upon hearesay, (which Mr Rushworth brought from Yorke in short hand) St Francis was likely to have beene accused of high Treason, but it being put off for that time, the truth was discovered, the Rela∣ter was ashamed, and Sir Francis Wortley never further accused for it. Yet as little as he can say to prove the War begun on the Kings part, and as much as is said to prove the contrary, he hath the face to compare the Kings making Warre upon his Parliament to Sauls hunting of David, and that, as if the case were so exactly the same, that nothing but not having heard of the Bible could make us not know it. You tooke, I thanke you Sir, very early care, that I should not be unacquainted with the Booke hee speakes of, and I wonder not, (knowing it soe well as I doe) that he should be better able to justify this Rebellion (though this case too differs wholly from that there quoted) out of Bodine, then out of the Bible. A Popish Author is fittest to justify that which hath been raised out of Popish Principles. But to returne to David; Had hee ever given Saul any cause to feare him by spreading Declarations, or raising and encouraging Tumults, a∣gainst him and the established Laws? Had he nothing to make him apprehend Saul but meere feares and Jealousies? Did Saul attempt him with an Impeachment, or with a Iavelin? And did hee ever offer after to quit him by a Bill? Did David upon his Apprehensi∣on seize the Cittadell in Jerusalem, and keepe Saul out with ar∣med men? Did hee seize his Armes, Goods, and Ships, and then justify the seizure by saying, Hee tooke from him not the Property, but the mischiefe? or fly into a remote Cave for securi∣ty? Did hee invade Sauls Priviledges, and deny him a Negative voyce? Did he pretend to command the Militia of all Israel with∣out Sauls consent? Did he ever demand from him such 19 Propo∣sitions, as the onely way to compose differences betweene them? Did hee raise an Army to fetch those evill Counsellors from about Saul who had perswaded him to seeke his life? Did hee pursue him with it, and give him battaile, and then charge the malignant Party about him, for going about to destroy him, by bringing him
betweene the two Armies, and so into the danger of that Destruc∣tion? Or did his heart smite him for cutting but the Lapp of his Garment? Did David ever reject such Messages from Saul as that of the 20. of Ianuary, and those from Nottingham? Or did hee ever imprison any of his followers for desiring an Accommodation? Certainly who ever hath read that story and seen this, will find a wide difference betweene what the King did, and what was done to Him; and Sauls Provocations of David, and Davids returnes towards Saul. And who ever had waited on the King this last yeare from place to place, would easily conclude, whether Hee or the Parliament were hunted most like the Partridge. Yet, Sir, I charge not the Parliament with this. The Replier thinkes not so well of, and wishes not so well to that honorable As∣sembly, as I doe: Nothing offends me more in the present Actions of the remayning part of the Parliament, then that by them they furnish those who wish Parliaments but ill, with Arguments to in∣fuse into Princes an ill Opinion of Parliaments, and furnish Princes with Principles which with more pretence may be applied by them to the Destruction of their Subjects. Parliaments are indeed the Roote of our Propriety, and their genuine Priviledges are the Roote of Parliaments. But the Parliament consists of three Estates, and for any two to deny the third his just Rights and Priviledges, And for one, or both, or a part of both or either, a Committee, to usurpe the Rights and Priviledges which be∣long onely to the whole Three, is the way to roote up both Pri∣viledges, Property, Parliaments, and all; and to make the People more weary of their Physitians, then they were before of their diseases. Who knows not that the House of Commons consists of neere five hundred Members, and that usually fourescore is now counted a full House, and that if at any time they make one hun∣dred and forty (as for a rare instance, the Replyer tels us of once or twice, and that onely by report) it is when the military Members are sent for up from the Army to pay their gratitude to their new profession by opposing of Peace? And that many of those, who are present, do not beleeve themselves secured by their Army, though they are too much frighted to dare to complaine of feare? And can it be thought that so many persons of Honour, trusted
by their Country, would be absent from the service of it, if they thought the worke now in hand so necessary to the Publike de∣fence of Religion, Lawes, Liberty, Property, and Parliaments, and that the highest service they could doe them were to countenance the present cause with a full House, as they must do, if they were of the same opinions with the remaining Partie? and on the other side, if they be confessed to be of contrary opinions, can it be thought, that so many as are able to make up a major part (for that is most true still as to the House of Commons, though they have put out a great number, because, their Conscience bound them either to defend their King, or not to assist against him, and it is evidently true as to the House of Lords) would not have chosen rather to have stayed and hindered this warre, or yet to come up and compose it, by over voting the rest, if they had not knowne or did not know, that then and now the tumults, and the Redcoats had and will have the casting voices in all such Debates? And if the Example of Sir Sydney Mountague, by so much as the Replyer con∣fesseth, did not shew them, that if they came not all at a time, any single men that should refuse to sweare to assist them, in that which already by severall Oathes they are bound to resist, and being ask't their reason, should say that which their absence hath exprest, then beleeve the Statute of 25. Edw: 3. before some late Ordinan∣ces, and call a Spade a Spade, and Treason Treason, they should but change their place in the House for one in the Tower; since my Lord Kimbolton himselfe upon such an occasion could not save his uncle, though he could his Father. And indeed who ever ob∣serves the Differences betweene the Actions of the House, will find something to have interceded besides time, and that either they are not composed of the same men, or the same men have not the same Freedome. In a fortnights space the Lords House twice denyed to aske the Militia of the King, and declared that they would put it in Execution without Him. In two monthss time the Lords-House desired the House of Commons to joyne with them in a Declaration against Tumults (with reasons expressing a great sence how scandalous it would be even to the past Lawes made by this Parliament, if such meetings were not supprest) and joyne with the House of Commons in a Declaration to his Majesty de∣nying that there had beene any Tumulrs, and justifying those mee∣tings
which they had called so before. When His Majestie was going into Scotland. It is well knowne that the principall reason upon which both Houses pressed his stay, or to have a Custos Reg∣ni in his absence, was that without His authority concurring, mo∣ney could not be raised in that time of extreme necessity: and yet it seemes they have now discovered, that His absence From, is a desertion Of His parliament; and that This and Necessity suffi∣ciently enables them by the fundamentall Law to impose Levies, and other Lawes upon his Subjects, without his consent, and con∣trary to His Command: and that the case is now the same as in the minority of a King, though even then Sir Simon Dewes him∣selfe cannot produce one Record, that ever any such Levie was made by both Houses alone, without the concurrence of the Roy∣all assent by some Protector. It is well known by the many long Debates about it without prevailing, what little hopes at first ap∣peared in the House of Commons, that the Bill against Bishops Roote and Branch, should passe in that House; that a clause to that purpose was dasht even out of their first Remonstrance, when they appeare not to have beene in any humour of complying beyond their ordinary inclinations; and how impossible it ap∣peared for a long time after, that such a Bill should ever passe in the House of Peeres, not six Lords then appearing of that mind, and yet since a Declaration is past, and a Billis passing both Houses to that purpose. They past a Bill upon my Lord of Strafford, of which the principall ground was, that he had said, That the King having endeavoured to have the assistance of his Parliament in extreme necessity, and for the defence of Himselfe and King∣dome, and being deserted by them, was absolved from all the Rules of Government: and yet since (as if His Judges had beene His Successours, and had cut off His head onely to take out His Principles) they upon the same pretence have absolved them∣selves from all Rules of Obedience, and onely differd in not using the power of their claime, with the limitation he gave, that is, Candide & Castè: Nor is this onely since an actuall Warre, (though that being begun by them is no excuse) but when all was quiet, and no danger but from feares,  Hothams Letter (in answer to a Complaint he expected from the Inhabitants of Hull for some violent and illegall actions) was read and not re∣proved
in the House of Commons, saying, that he hoped, since what hee did was in order to their commands, they would not stand upon the formalities of Law and Lawyers. Sir, It is true, those formalities are now wholly laid by, but till wee shall returne to them, and by them to some knowne Rule, we shall have a most miserable forme of Government. If we sight yet another yeare in this Kingdome, by that time this Kingdome will not be worth fighting for; And when those Ar∣mies which shall have impoverished you by their Pay, shall have kept the Land from being tilled by their terrour (for the Countri∣man will not sow what he cannot hope quietly to reape) as omni∣potent as an Ordinance is, it will not be able to forbid a famine, and to secure you from sterving by the Authority of both Houses: you may yet secure your selves if you please; Make but good your Protestation; let not London help to undoe it selfe, and the Country, and the thing is done. Defend the Religion established, Suffer not Alderman Pennington (so known a Brownist and despi∣ser of the Common-Prayer, that the Replyer hath done his best to prove him none, when hee hath beene able to name one time in which he could bring himselfe to endure to be present at some twenty lines of it in the House of Commons, as good an argument as he is a Major) to encourage a Rabble of the same opinion (whom I will name, when he names that new Truth which hee would have joyned to our Peace) to suppresse That, and the Act of Parliament that appoints it. Defend your Liberties, and suffer not a close Committee (for your last journall tells us, that such an excluding Committee there is, and that they commit men by their owne Orders, as Colonell Browne for one, whether that be the same with the Committee for Examinations is not much materiall) which by the course of Parliament can have no other power deri∣ved to it, then to consider and report; to imprison you by no Rule, but that of their discretions (which is more then they from whom they have their power have right to doe) nor suffer an Order of the House of Commons to stoppe Habeas Corpusses, the Birth∣right of every Subject. Defend your Propriety, and suffer not the Twentieth (or as much as they will call the Twentieth) part of your Estates to be taken from you, by so insufficient an Autho∣riy,
upon so invalid security, for so rebellious an end, as are an Ordinance, publique Faith, and this present Warre. Defend the Priviledges of Parliament, and His Majesties Honour and Rights, and joyne not to take away His Majesties negative voyce, by sub∣mitting to that Authority, to exclude Him as no part of the Pub∣lique; by accepting of that Security, to include Him among the publique enemies, by contributing (beyond your Abilities, and contrary to your Duties) to a Warre against Him. Let not your money and Plate be turned into the price of the bloud of your fel∣low Subjects. Suffer not a few men to set a whole Kingdome on fire to roast their owne egges by it; at least, become not you the incendiaries, by ministring fuell to this publique fire, which else must instantly goe out of it selfe; and give the King but what is his, that you may keepe what is your owne. Who can secure you, that his Majesty may not prevaile by Force? And if he doe, (after so many desires of Peace, and proffers of Pardon) who can secure you from an offended Prince, and a victorious Army, that your Citizens shall not be destroyed, and your City Ashes? Who can secure you (who believe His Protestations no better) that if he come once againe to governe by the help of an Army, that he may not be tempted to governe alwayes by one, and learne of you to declare Necessity, and rule according to those Principles, which you have taught Him to be lawfull by the fundamentall Lawes in times of Necessity, and accept of no security from fu∣ture Rebellions, but such as shall leave us none from future oppres∣sions? Who can secure you, that if the Papists have assisted Him in the actuall Recovery of His Crowne by force, in so great an exigent, (and in so great numbers, as you would have us thinke they doe) that his Gratitude to them may not be a temptation, to encline Him to such favours towards, and trust in them, as may in time be more prejudiciall to us, and our Religion, then Hee may either discover or suspect? But who can give you hope, if the Rebels prevaile, that the close Committee will be ever content to be private men againe, That the Parliament shall not be everlasting, and their necessity, and your pressures as everlasting as the Parlia∣ment; and that you shall not suffer more under the Tyranny of many, then any one (how witty and industrious soever in it) can
inflict upon you? besides the perpetuall danger of Warre from a∣broad (from the potent Allies to the Crowne, who for the gene∣rall interest of Princes, and hope of particular Advantages, will be alwayes ready to assist the discontented party here in the recovery of the just Rights of it for the King and His Posterity) and of Schisme and Factions at home, and many other evils not to be par∣ticularly foreseene, which will undoubtedly arise from the totall alteration both of Church and State: whereas if such moderate and equall proportions shall be offered, as may and ought to pro∣duce a Peace, either they will be accepted, or refused. If they be refused, your cause will be mended, and your Power increared: If they be accepted, the Armies will be disbanded: Poore Magna Charta (which hath of late beene so crusht betweene two severall supposed Necessities) will be againe in Credit and estimation, and will be preserved in it by Trienniall Parliaments; And the people having now so full a sence of their Liberties, and His Majestie having such experience, how much it endangers the Prerogative to encroach upon those Liberties, & being restored to that sweet∣nesse of honour and quiet, which no reasonable man thus warned, will endanger, and quit, for a possible encrease of unnecessary power, there will be little cause to feare any slavery for the future, and the King will have no more temptation or meanes, then I hope Hee hath will to oppresse us. Then the Papists (when Peace hath resettled the Lawes to secure us from them for the present, and the Law, (of which His Majesty hath shewed Himselfe so desirous) for the education of their children in the Protestant Re∣ligion, will (when it is past) secure us from them for the future; and then the Government of both Church and State being new settled in the old way, the King may againe be honoured, the Par∣liament againe respected, Ireland regained, and this Kingdome happy, Which God of his mercy grant. Amen. Sir, I confesse, I have beene transported into an unusuall stile, and lesse remembred to whom, then against whom I writ this. But I beseech you pardon mee for it, since it is my affection to you, and desire to
disengage so good a man from so ill a cause, that hath so transported mee. Nor would I have hazzarded your displeasure, and the losse I may sustaine by it, If I had not beene farre more concern'd to save your soule, then to inherit your estate. And so Sir, beseeching you to commend my duty to my Aunt, and God to have you both in his holy Protection, I remaine Your most affectionate and dutifull Nephew,
