L276 12625937 64642
LAMENTABLE NEWES FROM IRELAND BEING, A true, perfect, and exact Relation of the Landing of 10000. men in that Kingdom, who are rumor'd to be un∣der the Command of the Lord George Digby who hath joyn'd himself to the Rebels, who in their march toward Dublin, have fir'd two towns Racool and Sword, put both man, wo∣man, and child to the sword. Also the sending forth of forces under Sir Thomas Moor to oppose the Rebels proceeding, his happy fight, and joy∣full victory, wherby their bloody proceedings were prohibited. Also, a strange Apparition of two Stars, which all the time during the Skirmish, appeared in a most glorious manner over the Protestant Army. LONDON, Printed for I. G. Smith, and A. Cot, 1642.
Sad News from Ireland. Worthy friend Mr. Gates, VPon the 6. of this present May, there were landed at Waterford, 10000. men all accounted in war∣like habit fitted for present service, which men, in this Martial array, provi∣ded with all kind of Ammunition, were supposed to be under the conduct and command of the Lord George Digby, and that he and the rest of these his Rebel∣lious Confederates have joyned them∣selves unto the Rebels now in Ireland. Immediatly after their arrivall in Ireland, they having had some Conference with the Ring-leaders of all these mischievous De∣signs, they marched toward Dublin, and in their march they gave most cruell and bloudy testimonies of their divellish and inhumane intentions. In their march unto Dublin, they burnt two stately towns, and put all the Inhabitants
to the sword, their cruelty neither spa∣ed the Infant for the cryes of the bleeding Father or Mother, nor the Parents in Com∣passion to the Innocent Infant, but most mali∣cioussy slrw all, both man, woman, and child; neither did their malice stay here, but did extend it self even unto the senslesse stocks, for after they had pillaged and spoyled the Towns of all their wealth, and butchered the Inhabitants, at their departure they set fire unto the building, and burnt them down to to the ground. It was strange unto all our English Na∣tion, that that nobly descended Lord Geore Digby should bid his farewell to his Reli∣gion, and Allegeance unto this Kingdome. The noise and shrikes of these so inhu∣manely butchered Protestants, and the flames of these so burned towns, could not long bee convealed from Dublin. But with a speed as great as the mi∣tery, it did soon arrive at Dublin, and cntred into the knowledh of Sir Thomas Moor, who was grieved at the soul at that heavy and bloudy News, and being
rather desirous to redresse and save their survivers cryes, forthwith desired that a generall counsell might bee summoned within the City, to advise what should be the most speedy and most conveni∣ent meanes of remedy. The agreement and consent being made for present for∣ces, it was much dilated under whose command these Forces should be dispat∣ched, but at the length it was agreed up∣on by the generall consent, that Sir Thomas Moore should have the ordering and command of those present Forces. This Noble Cavaleere was now on fire untill he came to action, and thought every minute a tedious Age untill hee came to face his enemy. At his first ap∣proach, the Enemy seemed very confi∣dent and resolute, and as if he had de∣pended upon the merit of his cause, was bold and gave strong defiance unto the now approaching Cavaleere. It was no-now a time to debate the mattet in words; the quarrell, which nothing else could determine, their Swords now
must decide. Without any further de∣lay their Forces are brought up, the sig∣nall was given, and the Fight began. So hot and fierce was the first on-set, that the Enemy would not now neede the heat of those damnable flames which his divellish malice had kindled to warme himselfe. The Fight was vio∣lent and fitrce, and the true God of war was himself a spectator, and a just Judge of this cause; and after a tedious and after a tedious and bloody Skirmish, thought it fit, that those who by their practises had endeavoured to bring all to ruine and destruction, should now themselves, like waste and ruined buil∣dings, lye in heaps and spectacles to the publike contempt and scorne, as wayes fit for their former cruelty. And here I cannot omit to informe the Reader, and let him understand of a most strange Apparition, which appea∣red in the time during this Skirmish, the time being rare as the sight, and the truth having been confirmed by many
worthy Gentlemen, who were specta∣tors thereof, and now are resident in this Citie. When both the Armies had joyned in Battaile, it being about the mid season of the day, there appeared, to the Admiration and astonishment of all the Spetators, two great Luminaries or starres, of more then an ordinary big∣nesse, and during all the whole space of the Battaile, according to the motion of the Combatants, did mhve up and downe sensibly, to the Apprehension of many thousand people. And as soone as the Fight was ended, these two Starres shrouded themselves within the Clouds, and appeared no more. I have not made this Re∣lation to winne the Reader to a superstitious beliefe, but thus far I will be bold to say, that I eleeva they were great encourage∣ments to their Cause, and might serve as te∣stimonies of Almighty Gods assistance. As I would not be too curious in my ob∣servations, so would I not be too carelesse in my respects; I would willingly shun both the censure of superstitious folly and
negligent obstinacie, I doe not belee my reall assistance in the Apparition, yet I will not deny but they did appeare by the speciall providence of God, and although as no rell assistants, yet may be thought good encourage∣ments unto the Protestant Cause. These Apparitions are supernaturall, and without a Providence to judgment, may be construed to arise by some extraordinary and speciall Cause. FINIS.
