L3027A 12775665 93766
A LOOKING-GLASS FOR The Lord Chancellor; OR, A Brief Summary of some of his Notorious Crimes. WHat horrid guilt surpriz'd the Man, That in each cause still won the day; Who always us'd to lead the Van, And knew no Justice to Obey. That he should leave the glorious Court, The Splendid Place of his Resort, Where he had all things at Command, To fly into another Land? It was because a Monarch Great, A Mighty Prince, a Protestant, Was come to Rectify the State Of England, by a Parliament. Which Settlement he did abhor, Who was a Traytor to the Crown; Advis'd the King the Laws to mar, To pull the Rights and Charters down. He always sided with the Times, Being guilty of Notorious Crimes; Gave Counsel to himself and fled, For fear the Law should reach his Head. Tho Vengeance suffer'd not to fly, But fill'd his Conscience full of guilt, And loudly after him did Cry, For all the Blood that he had Spilt: Being Apprehended, back was brought, For all the Evil he had wrought; Committed Pris'ner, on Tower-Hill, His Dream in order to fulfill: Which Dream Presag'd his fatal Woe, That first Advanc'd he should be high, Ev'n next unto the Crown but two, At last be Hang'd in shame to dye. The two first hath already been, As Oats did at the Bar declare, When wrongfully he Sentenc'd him, Who bid him of the Third beware. The King may cry, Alas, Alas, By's Evil Counsel I'm undone, Which I too often did Embrace, A Fatal Shaking to my Throne: The Citizens may Curse the Day That ever Nature gave him Breath, And loudly Cry, Away, away With such a fellow from the Earth; Who doomed was unto Disgrace, Before the Parliament, was brought Upon his knees, when in his place Great Misdemeanours he had wrought: Who smother'd the whole Popish Plot, That Godfrey's Death might be forgot: VVho did Invade our Charters Right, And in our Ruine did delight: VVho abhorred all Petitioning VVhen we His Majesty did Intreat, Insinuating to the King To pull us down, we were too great. He also (as says the Records) VVhen on the Bench gave his Consent, To Bail out all the Popish Lords, Altho Impeach'd by Parliament. VVho did against Lord Russel plead, And Sentenc'd him to Death severe; A Valiant Protestant indeed, Against whom nothing was found clear. He VVorthy Cornish doom'd to dye, Tho he'd commited no Offence, And like a Villain, Treacherously His Jury 'gainst him did incense. VVhen Noble Essex in the Tower VVas Murther'd by a Barbarous hand, He to the utmost of his Power Did its Discovery withstand. Nay more, this barb'rous Murther he (VVhich never ought to be forgot) Proof 'gainst Lord Russel made to be, That he was guilty of a Plot. He Murther'd Innocents in th' VVest, And did the bood of Thousands spill, Caus'd those inhumane deaths to taste, VVho had been far from doing ill: This Bawling fellow made a sport Of Scoffing Men out of their own, And got a Name at last in Court, By Bawling Jefferies to be known. Innumerable were his Crimes, Half which this Paper can't relate, For all his Evils done at times, He must be Sacrific'd to th' State. The Man that Judg'd in every Cause, And yet did Justice unto none, Must stand Indicted by our Laws, And as a Pris'ner, Plead his own: A Fatal Fall from Bench to Bar, The just demerit of his Crimes, VVhich will his Honour greatly mar, By Changing Laws, has Changed Times. He needs not Counsel for to Fee, His Judges all will do him Right, He Council for himself may be, And keep his Guines out of sight, Untill the Hangman do appear To do him Justice on Tower-Hill, VVhere greatest Shouts will fill the Sphere, VVhen Jefferies doth his Dream fulfill. FINIS.
