L337 12675288 65533
ALARVM TO POETS. IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device LONDON. Printed in the Yeare, 1648.
Aeolus Trumpet to his Foure Winds. GOe Triton, calme all storms of turbulence, From turning up side down both sea, & shore, Triton, proclaime silent obedience, That they henceforth shall dare to break no more; For dread Astreaes Signe, amid the Line, Erected hath her seales for true, and just; Whereto all vertuous projects shall confine, So that her calme, no more shall be combust: But that her Poets now may sing of peace, And all cromatick descant harsh surcease. Poetries Complaint. THough I Poesie grow out of request, As a sad mendicant unwelcome mate, Yet this me joyes, the Muses me invest, Amid their gracious classis Laureat; With whom, (selfe-faring) I alone descrie All my malignants end in obliquie. Where all their crancks I trace with little thanks, And goe invisible, yet see their prancks, That parable so open, and shut the same, As Truth, Art, Wit, prais'd for their friendly blame: Else over-openly foule faults to tell, Would kindle hot blood (as gravity knows well) But for th'ideal Anagoge, whereby, The mark shot at, is hit ingeniously, Scurrilitie abhor'd, and flattery, Hisse off the stage by faire morality.
Alarum to Poets. WHen Jove spread his convexed Canopie Of constant azure, arched low and high, Did twinckling tapers infinitely set, Where cloud, nor freckle, could their lustre let, But that those seven great Lamps which ever turn, Might every where fling light as round they journ, Forc'd by that wheele which moveth all the rest, With, and against each other, to contest, In that long dance of number, tune, and time, Which by proportion doth joyne, and dis-joyne, Of friendly hatred, loving so, and hate, As wisedome knowes to reconcile the bate Of these strange combatants, which rise, and fall, In their continuall battell cubicall, VVhich to the circular well reconcil'd Makes, that to unity they gladly yeild. VVhich when he saw so good, and well agree, He bid th'whole Choire sound out their harmony, VVhereof the seven tones to that one of eight, Sent whole, and halfe tunes by measure and weight, Yea fifths, and thirds, and so a fourth did sound, A second, and a sixt, so well compound,
As thereof rang the sweetest melodie, That rule, and order breed, to amitie. VVherefore the Chorus 'mid th'etheriall Hall, Diffusing all those concords musicall, Did so rejoyce all kinds, each sexe and age, (Invited guests unto that middle stage) As vouch'd on all sides, truth t'own selfe conformes, As vertue demonstrates by all her normes; VVhence not to fall, stands where the first belong'd, Still to that mistery to correspond. VVherein Iove stood rapt, sith this unisone Meerly deriv'd but from one radick tone, Deign'd for it selfe, it selfe to glorifie, Into that multiplying Euphonie, That never ceasing, warbled in that frame That can none other doe then still the same. O noblest consonance! O excellence! In which truth breeds love, justice, innocence. Now to concomitate this Musicks feast, Made to the middle, high, and lowest guest, Iove of those three call'd one out, at whose cry, Averdi came (his daughter) instantly; A Lady truly whiter then the snow, More humble, meek, and mild, then Doves below; More pure, subtill, acute, then clearest aire, More swift then sight, of kind most debonaire. Goe candor (said he) make thine ayrie flight, Downe through the fiery Region, and enlight With notion generall some above the rest, But thereto make choise of the lowliest, Select of Nations, th'acies of whose mind, Shall to my limits stand by me confin'd; So as though they in part doe know the right, Yet future ages shall receive more light;
When Mee list some more speciall ones inspire With knowledge; whilest others shall delire, Til one particular much more shall know, For knowledge but successively shall grow. Averdi thus dispatch'd with science rare, Her purport of three Regions to declare, The winged Graces (flie she low, or high) Her wayes enlightned with their radij; So did the Classick Vertues lovingly Amid them all still beare her company. When loe, Dlfisa to prevent her, lay, If possibly by any wile she may; About whom, Phantasmes infinite did swarme, Dreames to intoxicate with windy barme, Vaine apparitions, strong imaginations, Conceits, opinions, mad inaugurations, Formes, fancies, figures, fables improbable, Untopicall, unsalted, fond, unstable, Such as the Spirits of th'aire (loos'd to elusion) Have to confound with (making their intrusion) Where, soothly false suborne in steed of true, To be imbib'd by the phanatick crew; And now to bob Averdies negotiation, She featly coyn'd an art of emulation, By stealing to her selfe Averdies shade, Which from the ground did off her light evade, In which she strove her to assimilate, Yet but as shades true bodies imitate; Still plotting her but so to counterfeit, As truth's name, forme, gaine hers be by excheat Of contradiction: which opposing ever, No meane hath to assigne to own endeavour, But that malengin (woven into faction) Might profit wring out b'others rais'd detraction;
For envy never ceaseth to deprave, Till others properties she seize and have. Yet when Auroraes calm serenitie, Had burnish'd Titans rosie visnomie, And so set up her glasse, as might appeare, All tamskipp prospectives, both far, and neare; Downe soar'd Averdi by her winding staire, On wings display'd, (compos'd of fire, and aire,) Which beare her on that mild amenitie, That all inferiours viewd with singlest eye, All longilatitudes, altitudes eke, Degrees, and what else reason hath to seeke; Each peopled Nation, climate, hot, cold, meane, Th'intemperate, and the temperate, foule and cleane, Where, after her made universall slight, As well around the globe, mid, crosse, and right, She did o're Caldie, then o're Aegypt soare, Where, did on some her meek, elixir poure, VVhereof, a gentle, meeke, mild flame, did tine That furor, which their spirits up rapt divine, To contemplate in singlest extasie, Hid speculation from the proudest eye, As yet Astronomie recordth well, And Geometrie, who first did them revell, Yea sow'd the first seeds of Philosophy, By some, with paine, and cost, sought far, and nigh, Their candle to illumin at that light. But this the more enrag'd Delsisaes spight, VVho, coasting neere Averdi, as her shade, On wings of all mixt colours, fraud had made, Did there her malarts phiols drench out pour, On such as would become her Paramour; VVhereof, arose most noysome pestilence, VVhich soone infected scient sapience; A worser pestilence was never known, Then science turn'd into opinion▪
To croaking frogs, whose tongues shall never rest, While stood suborn'd Aver's Anthagonist, And therefore barring them her quintassence, Left all those mutinous to owne insolence. To find out Gaul, (far hotter of desire) The soner caught of one intestine sire, Inconstant libertines, ires rendezvous, At sodaines, esteem'd most dangerous, Immoderate, rash, giddy, turbulent, Hath but to counterfeit the continent; Albeit insinuates humilianist, Most slily playeth proud opinionist. On this, perceiving Delsis had beset her, Averdi soone resolv'd from thence to get her; Impossible it finding, Gaul, Almaine, Should her, on those conditions enetrtaine; And therefore pawn'd, her wndring wings to rest, While limbs more strength ger, as they are releast▪ Till sweaty Phoebus, wending from her sight, Her, with a ruddy cogey bode good-night: Which grace, as it prelag'd next morning gray; So promis'd, to perfor a golden day. But when Night, blacks had doff't, and put on blew, Blew, mixt with white, compounding a gray hew, Most fit for Phoebus when him chaires in State, All far off prospectives to speculate; Averdi, still as meeke, as calmest day, Then soaring for discovery, every way, Intended her rath Muses to bestow, On some more meet, discreet, and grave below: Far kenning from an high point, Faiery Land, Which sounds encrease, and nourishing, if scan'd, Did there reigne her Elixir, which so wrought, As that folke, rapt in love, this Dame most sought, Whose very light, them strake with admiration, To trace her steps from Nation, into Nation,
And Land, to Land, where so she chose to alight, Although it be in Fairy I and she pight. On top of whose sharp Promontore, her voice Them call'd, who did ascend with merry noise; The cheifest Spire whereof Oneida hight, For beauty famous, strength, and steeples right; Built on a rock, which had on it an hill, That stood for Land mark, after Sea-mans skill; The Holt whereof, on which Averdi keeps, Belsoma Castl'is watred round with deeps, Where, while alost, in prospective she sate, Whole chirmes of Poets thither congregate, To serve that soveraigne Beauty, which had power, To ravish each observing Paramour: Whose lovely radij so the men disuought, As they were lost, and found in her they sought; So could not but thus her ofright desine, O Essence appetible, and O Divine Forme! causing our beginning, being, end, Therefore, thine honour we shall still defend. Thus stood they rapt into her observation, Time, habit, place, resounding th'approbation, Them gave to meditate the Deitie, Express'd in the'xercise of pietie; Then plainly sinding, all herparts agree With her own selfe, when they converted be; She like power having, hers to unite so in one, As all their tones resound her unisone: Like so, how ever any species growes, Its every property meets one in close, As simple vertue knoweth to desine, Which of all demonstrations is the prime Now all these Laureats standing at her gate, Own offices did, and her love dilate,
Averdies Love for Guerdon, is not small, Besides, a Poes Laureat Coronal; Which earning, out will sing the Victors praise, And sound loves triumph to these latter daies, With blessed peace, that welcomes in the bringer, And cheeres up every sad rejoycing singer. But first, ought sing a song of twelve monthes long, Next, noblest Guy, (righted on others wrong) Then Chaucers Squires lost tale, on his conditions, The second last part of Poetick visions. For in this order ought the legend bee, According to the Muses own decree. Now then rapt Poets, what have yee to say? To Dame Averdies key, (the Muses way?) If yee deign answer her Alarum, rise! And arme your verse, to win from prose the prize, Sing swans of Thames, that all the world may know, Yee win the golden wreath, from silver Poe; Whose learned Schools, though have not to give wit, Yet wondrous curiously, they polish it: But high Ichouh, down through his stars distils What his imployed Philomela thrils, In April blith, and May, but ends in Iune, That other monthly birds, in kind, may tune, But that another Turtle sing before yee, Assures to your inheritance, the glorie. At that, Delsisa fell into a rage, Till every other hiss'd her off the stage, And kick her oft, after her own intent, Then merrily, as from a banquet, went. J. L. FINIS.
