N796 R222237 99833434 37910
THE NEW WIFE OF BEATH Much better Reformed, Enlarg∣ed, and Corrected, than it was formerly in the Old uncorrect Copy. With the Addition of many o∣ther Things. GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, one of His Majesties Printers. ANNO DOM. 1700.
TO THE READER. COurteous Reader, What was Papal or Heretical in the former Copy is left out here in this second Edition: For there is nothing that can offend the Wise and Judicious, not being taken up nto a literal Sense, but be way of Allego∣ry and Mystical, which thus may edifie. The whole Dialogue is nothing but that which is recorded in Scripture for our Example, wherefore I appeal from the Capi-Critick & Censorious, who start at straws, & leap over Blocks: And whose Nature is with the Spider, to suck nothing but Venom out of the sweet∣est Flowers. Ʋnto the Judicious and Wise, who an registrate Vertue with the point of a Diamond, into the Rock of eternal Me∣mory, & Vice into Oblivion Sand▪ And whose Genius with the Bee, to extract Honey out of the bitterest Flower. Therefore, the one may read and be E∣ified, the other read and be Offended: et Dogs bark what they will, the Moon s still the same: Farewel.
The New Wife of Beath. IN Beath, once dwelt a worthy Wife, Of whom brave Chancer mention makes She lived a Licentious life, And namely in Venerial Acts: But Death did come for all her Cracks, When years were spent and dayes out drive Then suddenly the sickness takes, Deceast fore-with, and went to Heaven. But as she went upon the way, There followed her a certain Guide; And kindly to her did he say, Where mean you Dame for to abide, I know you are the Wife of Beath, And would not then that you go wrong For I'm your Friend, and will be leath, That you go through this narrow throng. This way is broader; go with me, And very pleasant is the way; I'le bring you there, where you would be, God with me Friend, say not me nay. She looked on him, then did spear, I pray you, Sir, what is your Name; Show me the Way how you came here, To tell to me it is no shame. Is that a Favour about your Neck, And what is that upon your side; Is it a Bag, or Silver Seck? What art thou then; where do you bide? I was a Servant unto Christ, And Iudas likewise is my Name; I knew you by your colours first, Forsooth indeed you are to blame; Your Master did you not betray, And hanged your self when you had done,
Where-ever you bide I will not stay; Go then, you Knave, let me alone. What ever I be, I'le be your Guide, Because ye know not well the Way, Will ye but once in me consyde, I'le do all Friendship that I may. What would you me? where do you dwel, I have no will to go with thee; I fear it is some lower Cell, I pray thee therefore let me be. This is a stormy night and cold, I'le bring you to a right warm Inn; Will ye go foreward, and be bold, And mend your pace till we win in. I'm fear'd your Inn it be too warm, For too much hotness is not best; Such hotness there may do me harm, And keep me that I do not rest: I know your Way, it is to Hell, For you are none of the eleven; Go haste you then unto your Cell, My Way is only unto Heaven. That Way then is by Gates of Hell, If you intend there for to go, Go Dame, I will not you compel, But I with you will go also: Then down they went a right steep Hill, Where smoak and darkness did abound And Pick and Sulpher burned still With yells and cryes, Hills did redound, The Fiend himself came to the Gate, And asked him where he had been; Do ye not know and have forgot, Seeking this Wife could not be seen. Good Dame, he said, would you be here, I pray you then tell me your Name;
The Wife of Beath, since that you spear, But to come in I were to blame: I will not have you here good Dame, For you were Mistriss of the Flyting; If once within this Gate you come, I will be troubled with your byting. Commer, go back, and let me be, Here are too many of your rout; Such Women lewd like unto thee, I cannot turn my foot about. Sir Theeff I say I shall bide out, But Gossop thou was ne'er to me; For to come in, I'm not so stout: And of my biting thou'st be free: But Lucifer what's that on thee? Hast thou no Water in this place; Thou looks so black it seems to me; Thou never doth wash thy ugly face. If we had Water for to drink We should not care for washing then; Into these Flames and filthy stink, We burn with fire unto the Doom: Vpbraid me then, Good wife, no more For first when I heard of thy Name; I knew thou hadst such words in store, Would make the Devil for to think shame, Forsooth, Sir Theeff, you are to blame. If I had time now for to bide: Once you were well but may think shame, That lost heaven for rebellious pride; Who Traitor-like fell with the rest, Because you would not be content, And now of Bless is dispossest, Without all grace for to repent. Thou madst poor Eva to consent, To eat of the forbidden Tree;
Which we poor Daughters may relent, And made us almost like to thee: But God be blest who past thee by, And did a Saviour provide; For Adams whole Posterity, All those who do in him confyde, Adieu false-fiend, I may not bide, With thee I may no longer stay; My God in Death he was my Guide, O're Hell I'll get the Victory. Then up the Hill the poor wife went, Opprest with stinking flames, and fear; Weeping right sore, with great relent, For to go else she wist not where: A narrow Way with thorns & briers, And full of Myres were her before; She sighed oft with sobs and tears, The poor wifes heart was wondrous sore: Tyred and torn she went on still, Sometimes she sat, and sometimes fell, Ay till she came to an high Hill, And then she looked back to Hell. When that she had clum up the Hill, Before her was a goodly plain; Where she did rest and weep her fill, Then rose and to her feet again, Her heart was glad, the way was good, Vp to the Hill she hy'd in haste, The Flowers were fair, where that she stood The Fields were pleasant in her taste, There then, she spyed Ierusalem, On Sions-Mount where that it stood; Shining with Gold light as the Sun, Her silly Soul was then right glad: The Ports were Pearls shining bright Glorious it was for to behold,
With precious Stones gave such a Light, The Walls were of transparent Gold, High were the Walls, the Gates were shut And long she thought for to be in; But then for fear of biding out, She knocked hard and made some din; To knock and cry she did not spare, Till Father Adam did her hear; Who is't that raps so rudely there Heaven cannot well be won by Weir. The Wife of Beath since that you speir Hath stood this two hours at the Gate, Go back, quoth he, thou must forbear, Here may no Sinners entrance get. Adam, quoth she, I shal be in In spite of all such Churles as thee; Thou art the Original of all sin, For eating of the Forbidden Tree; For which thou art not flyting free, But for thy Foul Offences fled, Adam went back and let her be; Looking as if his Nose had bled. Then Mother Eve did him spear, Who was it there that made such din? He said a Woman would be here, For me, I durst not let her in. I'le go, said she, and ask her Will, Her company I would have fain; But ay she cryed, and knocked still, And in no wayes she would refrain. Daughter, said Eve you will do well And come again another time; Heaven is not won by Sword or Steel. Nor none that's guilty of a Crime, Mother, said she, the fault is thine, That knocking here so long I stand; Thy guilt is more than that of mine,
If thou wilt rightly understand Thou wast the cause of all our sin, Wherein we were born and conceiv'd, Our Misery thou didst begin, By thee thy Husband was deceiv'd. Eva went back where Noah was, And told him all how she was blam'd, Of her great Sin and first Trespass, Whereof she was so much asham'd. Then Noah said, I will go down, And will forbid her that she knock; Go back, she said, ye drunken Lown, You're none of the Celestial Flock. Noah, she said, hold thou thy peace, Where I drank Ale, thou didst drink Wine, Discovered was to thy disgrace, When thou was full, like to a Swine: If I was drunk I learn'd at thee, For thou'rt the Father and the first, That others taught, and likewise me To drink when as we have no thrist. Then Noah in haste, turn'd back with speed And told the Patriarch Abraham then; How that the Carling made him dread, And all his Deeds how she did ken. Abraham, then said, now get you gone, Let us no more hear of your din. No lying Wife as I suppone, May enter in these Gates within. Abraham, she said, will you but spair, I hope you are not flyting free; You of your self had such a care, Deny'd you Wife and made a lie: Oh then I pray you let me be, For I repent of all my sin, Do thou but open the Gates to me,
And let me quietly come in. Abraham went back to Iacob then, And told his Nephew how he sped How that of her nothing he wan. He thought the Carling was right mad. Then down came Iacob thorow the closs And said go backward down to Hell? Iacob, quoth she, I know thy voice, That gate pertaineth to thy sell: Of thy old Trumperies I can tell, With two Sisters thou ledst thy Life And the third part of these Tribes twelve, Thou got with Maids besides thy Wife: And stole thy Fathers Bennison, Only by fraud, thy Father frae: Gave thou him not for Vennison, A Rid, in stead of a baken Rae? Iacob himself was tickled so, He went to Lot where he was lying, And to the Gate prayed him to go, To stainch the Carling of her crying. Lot sayes fair Dame make less ado, And come again another day; Old harlot Carle, and Drunkard to, Thou with thine own two Daughters lay, Of thine untimely seed I say, Proceeded never good, but ill; Poor Lot for shame, he stole away, And let the Wife still knock her fill. Meek Moses then went down at last, To pacifie the Carling then; Now Dame, said he, knock not so fast, Your knocking will not let you ben, Good Sir, she said, I am agast, When that I look you in the Face; If that your Law till now had fast,
Then surely I had ne'er got grace: But Moses Sir, now be your lieve, Although in Heaven you be possest, For all you saw, did not believe But you in Horeb there transgrest, herefore by all it is confest, You got but once the Land to see, nd in the Mount was put to rest, ea buried there, where you did die. Moses meekly, he turned back, And told his Brother Aaron there; How that the Carling did so crack, nd in no wayes did him forbear, Then Aaron said I will not swear But I'll conjurs her as I can: nd I will make her now forbear, So that she shall not rap again. Then Aaron said, you whorish Wife, o get you gone and rap no more; With Idols you have led your life Or then you shall repent it sore, Good Aaron Priest, I know you well, The Golden Calf you may remember ho made the People Plagues to feel, his is of you recorded ever: our Priest-hood now is nothing worth Christ is my only Priest and He My Lord who will not keep me forth, o I'll in the spite of thee. Then up start Sampson at the length, nto the Gate a pace came he, o drive away the Wife with strength, ut all in vain it would not be. Sampson, quoth she, the World may see, hou was a Iudge who prov'd unjust, hose gracious Gifts which God gave thee.
Thou lost them by licentious lust, From Dalila thy wicked Wife, Thy Secrets chief couldst not refrain, She daily sought to take thy Life, Thou lost thy sight and then was slain, Tho thou was strong it was in vain. Hunting with Harlots here and there, Then Sampson turned back again, And with the Wife would mell no mai. Then said King David knock no more We are all troubled with your cry, David, quoth she, how camst thou there? Thou mightst bide out as well as I: Thy Deeds no wayes thou canst deny, Is not thy Sin far worse than mine, Who with Vriahs Wife did ly, And caus'd him to be murthered sine. Then Iudeth said, whose there that knock And to our Neighbours gives these Notes Madam, said she, let be your mocks, I came not here for cutting Throats: I am a Sinner full of Blotts. Yet through Christs Blood I shal be clean If You and I be Iudg'd by Votes, The thing thou didst was worser done, Then said the sapient Solomon, Thou art a Sinner all Men say, Therefore our Saviour I suppone, The Heavenly enterance will deny, Remember, quoth she, thy latter dayes What Idol Gods thou didst up set, And was so lewd in Venus Playes, Thou didst thy Maker quite forget Then Ionas said fair Dame content yo If you intend to come to Grace, You must dree pennance, and repent you
E'er you can come within this place. Ionas, quoth she, how stands the case? ow came you here to be with Christ? ow dare you look him in the Face? Considering how you brack your Tryst: To go Gods Earrand thou withstood him nd held his Counsel in disdain; The Raven Messenger thou plaidst him, nd brought no Message back again: With Mercy thou was not content, When that the Lord he did them spare; Although the City did repent, t grieved thee thy Heart was sair et me alone, and speak no more, o back again into the Whale, or now my Heart is also sore, But yet I hope I shal prevail. Good Ionas said, Crack on your fill For here I may no longer tarry, et knock as long as e'er ye will, nd yo unto the sirie, farie, Ionas, she sayes, you do miscarrie. s I have done in former time, You're not Saint Peter nor Saint Mary, Thy Blot's as black as ever mine. So Ionas then he was ashamed, Because he was not flyting free, Of all his Faults she had him blamed, He left the Wife and let her be. Saint Thomas then, I counsel thee, Go speak unto you wicked Wife, She shames us all, and as for me, Her like I never heard in life. Thomas then said, you make much strife, When you are nut, and meikle in, f ye were here I'le lay my Life
No peace the Saints will get within: It is your Trade for to be flyting, Still in a Fever as one reaves, No marvel though you Wives be byting, Your Tongues were made of Aspen leaves Thomas, quoth she, let be your Taunts You play the pick-thank I perceive. Tho thou be Brother'd among the Saints An unbelieving heart you have, Thou broughtst thy Lord unto the Grave, But wouldst no more with him remain, And was the last of all the leave, That did believe he rose again, There might no Doctrine do thee good, Nor Miracles make thee confyde, Till thou beheld Christs wounds and blood And putst thy hands into his side: Didst thou not dayly with him byde? And sawest the Wonders which he wrought, But blest are they who do confyde And do believe, yet saw him nought: Thomas, she sayes, will ye but speir, If that my Sister Magdalen Will come to me, if she be here; For Comforts sure you give me naue. He was so blyth and turned back, And thanked God that he was gone; He had no will to hear her crack, But told it Mary Magdalen. When that she heard her Sisters mocks, She went unto the Gate with speed; And asked her whose there that knocks? Its I the Wife of Beath, indeed, She said good Mistriss, you must stand Till you be tryed by Tribulation. Sister, quoth she, give me your hand.
Are we not both of one Vocation? It is not through your Occupation, That you are placed so Divine, My Faith is sixed on Christs Passion, My Soul shal be as safe as thine. Then Mary went away in haste, The Carling made her so ashamed, She had no will of such a Guest, To lose her pains and be so blam'd. Now good Saint Paul, said Magdalen, For that you are a learned Man, So and convince this Woman then For I have done all that I can: Sure if she were in Hell I doubt; They would not keep her longer there, But to the Gate would put her out: And send her back to be else where. Then went the good Apostle Paul, To put the wife in better Tune, Wash off that filth which files thy Soul, Then shal Heavens Gates be opened soon, Remember Paul what thou hast done, For all th Epistles thou didst compile, Though now thou sittest up above, Thou persecutedst Christ a while, Woman, he said, thou art not right, hat which I did, I did not know; ut thou didst sin with all thy might; lthough the Preachers did thee show, Saint Paul, she said, it is not so, did not know so well as ye, ut I will to my Saviour go, tho will his Favour show to me: ou think you are of flyting free, ecause you was rapt up above, ut yet it was Christs Grace to thee,
And matchlesness of his dear Love, Then Paul, sayes she, let Peter come, If he be lying let him rise, To him I will confess my Sin, And let him quickly bring the Keyes, Too long I stand, he'll let me in: For why I cannot longer tarrie, Then shal you all be quite of din, For I must speak with good Saint Marie. The good Apostle discontent, Right suddenly he turned back, For he did very much repent, To hear the Carling proudly crack, Paul sayes, good Brother, now arise, And make an end of all this din: And if so be you have the Keyes Open and let the Carling in, The Apostle Peter, rose at last, And to the Gate with speed he hies. Carling quoth he, knock not so fast, You cumber Mary with your cryes, Peter, she said let Christ arise, And grant me Mercy in my need; For why I never deny'd Him thrice, As thou thy self hast done indeed. Thou Carling bold, what's that to thee I got remission for my sin; It cost many sad Tears to me, Before I entered here within: It will not be thy meikle din, Will cause Heavens Gates to opened be, Thou must be purified of Sin And of all Sins must be made free, Saint Peter then no thanks to you, That so you were rid of your Fears It was Christs gracious Look I trow
That made you weep those bitter Tears, The Door of Mercy is not clos'd, I may get Mercy as well as ye, It is not so as ye suppos'd, I will be in despite of thee. But wicked Wife it is too late Thou shouldst have mourned upon Earth, Repentance now is out of date: It should have been before thy Death: Thou mightest then have turned Wrath, To Mercy then, and Mercy got, But now the Lord is very loath, And all thy cryes not worth a jot. Ah▪ Peter then what shal I do? He will not have me as I hear, Shal I despair of Mercy to, No, no, I'le trust on Mercy dear: And if I perish here I'le stay, And never go from Heavens bright; I'le ever hope, and alwayes pray, Vntil I get my Saviours sight. I think indeed you are now right If you had Faith you could win in; Importune then with all your might, Faith is the Feet wherewith ye come: It is the Hands will hold Him fast, But weak Faith may not presume; 'Twill let you sink, and be agast, Strongly Believe or else undone. But Good Saint Peter let me be, Had you such Faith did it abound? When you did walk upon the Sea, Was you not like for to be drown'd: Had not our Saviour helped thee, Who came and took thee by the hand; So can my Lord do the like to me,
And bring me to the promised Land Is my Faith weak? Yet he is still The same, and ever shall remain; His mercies lasts and his good will, To bring me to his Flock again; He will me help and me relieve, And will increase my Faith also, If weakly I can but believe. For from this place I'll never go. But Peter said, how can that be? How darst thou look him in the face, Such horrid Sinners like to thee, Can have no courage to get Grace: Here none comes in but they that's stout. And suffered have for the good Cause; Like unto thee are keeped out, For thou hast broke all Moses Laws: Peter, she said, I do appeal From Moses, and from thee also; With him and you I'll not prevail, But to my Saviour I will go: Indeed of old you were right stout, When you did cut off Malchus Ear; But after that you went about; And a poor Maid then did you fear, Wherefore Saint Peter do forbear A comforter indeed you're not: Let me alone I do not fear. Take home the wissel of your groat: Was it your own, or Pauls good Sword, When that your courage was so keen, You was right stout upon my word, Then would you fain at fishing been; For at the crowing of the Cock, You did deny your Master thrise For all your stoutness turn'd a block,
Now flyte no more if thou be wise. Yet at the last the Lord arose, Invironed with Angels bright, And to the wife in haste he goes, Desir'd her soon pass out of sight, O Lord, quoth she, cause do me right, But not according to my sin; Have you not promis'd day and night, When Sinners knock, to let them in, e said thou wrests the Scripture wrong, The night is come, thou spent the day, n whoredom thou hast lived long And to repent thou didst delay; Still my Commandments thou abusedst, And vice committest bussilie, Since thou my mercy then refus'dst, Go down to Hell eternallie. O Lord my Soul doth testifie, That I have spent my Life in vain; Oh! make a wandring Sheep of me, And bring me to thy Flock again. Thinkst thou there is no count to crave, Of all these Gifts in thee was planted, gave thee beauty above the leave, A pregnant wit thou never wanted. Master, quoth she, it must be granted, My sins are great give me Contrition: The forelorn Son when he repented Obtain'd his Fathers full Remission. I spar'd my judgements many times And Spiritual Pastors did thee send; But thou renewedst thy former Crimes, y more and more me to offend. My Lord, quoth she, I do amend, amenting for my former vice, The poor Theeff at the latter end,
For one word went to Paradice, The Theef heard never of my teachings, My Heavenly Precepts, and my Laws, But thou was dayly at my preachings, Both heard, and saw, and yet misknaws. Master, quoth she, the Scripture shows The Iewish woman which play'd the Low Conform unto the Hebrews Laws, Was brought to thee to be put down; But nevertheless thou letst her go, And made the Pharisees afraid. Indeed sayes Christ it was right so And that my biding was obeyed. Woman he said I may not cast, The Childrens bread to Dogs like thee Altho my Mercies yet doth last, Yet is there Mercy none for thee. But loving Lord, may I presume, Poor worm that I may speak again; The Dogs for hunger were undone, And of the Crumbs they are right fain: Grant me one Crumb then that doth fall, From thy best Childrens Table Lord, That I may be refresht withal, It will me help enough afford. The Gates of Mercy are now clos'd, And thou canst hardly enter in; It is not so as thou suppos'd, For thou art deadly sick in sin. Its true indeed, my Lord, most meek My Sore and Sickness I do feel; Yet thou the Lame didst truly seek Who lay long at Belthesda's Pool Of many that thee never sought, Like to the poor Samaritan; Whom thou unto thy Fold hast brought,
Even as thou didst the Widow of Naim, Most gracious God, didst thou not bid All that were weary come to thee, Behold, I come! even overload With sin, have mercy upon me. The issues of thy Soul are great, Thou art both leprous and unclean To be with Me thou art not fit, o from Me then let me alone. Let me thy Garments once but touch My bloody issue shal be whole, It will not cost Thee very much, To save a poor distressed Soul, Speak Thou the word, I shal be whole, One Look of Thee shal do me good, Save now, good Lord, my silly Soul, Bought with thine own most precious Blood. Let Me alone, none of My Blood Was ever shed for such as thee, It was My Mercy patience good, Which from Damnation made thee free. It is confest Thou hadst been just, Altho Thou hadst condemned me; But O! Thy Mercies still doth last, To save the Soul that trusts in Thee; Let me not then condemned be, Most humbly Lord I Thee request. Of Sinners all none like to me, So much the more Thy Praise shal last. Thy praising Me is not perfite, My Saints shal praise Me evermore; In Sinners I have no desire, Such Sacrifice I do abhore. Then she unto the Lord did say, At foot-stool of Thy Grace I'le ly, Sweet Lord my God, say me not nay,
For if I perish, here I'll dy. Poor silly wretch then speak no more, Thy Faith poor soul, hath saved thee; Enter go in unto my Glore, And rest for all Eternitie. How soon our Saviour these words said, A long white Robe to her was given; And then the Angels did her lead, Forthwith within the Gates of Heaven; A Lawrel Crown set on her head, Spangled with Rubies, and with Gold; A bright white Palm, she likewayes had, Glorious it was for to behold: Her face did shine like to the Sun, Like threeds of Gold, her hair hang down Her eyes like Lamps unto the Moon, Of precious Stones, rich was her Crown, Angels and Saints did welcome her, The Heavenly Quire did sing rejoice: King David with his Harp was there; The Silver Bells give a great noise, Such Musick, and such Melodie Was never heard nor likewayes seen, When this poor Saint was plac'd so high, And of all Sins made freely clean: But then when thus she was possest, And looked back on all her fears; And that she was come to her rest, Fred from her sins, and all her tears, She from her Head did take the Crown Giving all praise to Christ on high, And at his Feet she laid it down. For that the Lamb had made her free, Now doth she sing triumhntlie, And shall rejoice for evermore, O're Death, and Hell victoriouslie; With lasting pleasures laid in store.
CONCLVSION. OF Wife of Beath I make an end, And do these Lines with this conclude, t none their lives in sin now spend, ut watch and pray, be doing good. ispondent Souls do not dispair, epent, and still believe in Christ, is Mercies which lasts evermore Will save the Soul that in Him trust. FINIS.
