o205 12572550 63520
THE Old Leaven purged out. OR, THE APOSTACY Of this DAY further Opened. BEING A true and faithful Narrative of the orderly Proceedings and Dealings of the Lesser part of the Congrega∣tion formerly walking with Mr. John Sympson, with and against severall Souldiers of the Army, who (being fallen in with the APOSTACY of this DAY, contrary to Professed and Declared Principles, and the ma∣ny out-goings of the Lord thereupon) are withdrawn and separated from, together with Mr. Sympson their Chief Abettor, and others, after neer two Years labouring, whilest we were in the Congregation, and neer two Years more since. AS ALSO The true Coppies of seven of the Letters, which Mr. Sympson wrote with his own Hand, and sent to the Congregation whilest he was a Prisoner for Truth in Windsor-Castle. WITH An Answer to severall Objections, that have been, or may be raised against Printing and Publishing the Whole. ALL Humbly presented to Publique view, not in Strife, Vain-glory, or to be seen of Men, but we hope out of conscience, to endeavour a Recovering of the Name of the Lord, which hath layen under so great reproach, through Misreports raised of us since our first withdrawing. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. 2 Thes. 3.6. Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh disorderly, &c. 2 Tim. 3.4, 5. Traytors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away. Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1658.
To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sin∣cerity, in this evill day, whether in Chur∣ches, or out, Beloved in our Lord, INcrease of Faith, Hope, Love, Humility, Zeal, Wisdom, and Patience, with all other the fruits of the Spirit be multiplied un∣to, and bestowed upon you, according to the purchase of our Lord Jesus, who is King of Saints and Nations: that you may bee able to stand upon the Sea of glasseRev. 15.2. mingled with Fire, and main∣tain your Victorie over the Beast, and his Image, and Number of his name, having the Harps of God in your hands, that when his IudgmentsRev. 15.4. shall be made manifest, and a reward given to Babylon, according to his word, you may not with the Merchants and great Men of the Earth, stand afar off,Rev. 18.10, 11. crying alas, alas, but may with the Angell and the followers of the Lamb, who are called, chosen and faithfull, with rejoycing say;Rev. 16.5. compared with ch. 19.2. Righteous art thou O Lord, because thou hast judged thus. How unmeet such as we are above any, who have obtained like precious faith, to appear in this publike manner, is best knowne to the Lord and our own souls, being in some measure through his Free grace, made sensible of our insufficiency to so weighty a Work, the consideration whereof might wholly discourage our proceeding herein, did not the honor of God, the interest of Christ Jesus our Lord groundedly provoke us thereunto; for now as all will behold, whether Saints or Sinners, so many being already prejudiced in their judgments thorough false reports received of us, (as they have been apt enough) will shoot their arrowes against us, but with how much unwarrantableness on their parts, let the Reader judge by this ensu∣ing Narrative. Others being convinced of the truth and goodness of the cause we are ingaged in, as they do not speak against us, so on the other hand, lest they should come under the like reproach with us, are silent in saying any thing on our behalf, yet some Elijahs there are, who have been and still are willing to bear part of the burthen with us: Adding hereunto, that we are a stumbling block to many, thorough the many failings, infirmities and miscarriages such poor nothing-creatures as we are, have been compassed with, in the ma∣nagement of so honourable and weighty a cause as this is, for which
each one of us have great reason to be truly humbled before the Lord (though hereby we may humbly say, Are we as SignsIsa. 8.18. and Wonders in Isreal?) Howerver, notwithstanding all the reproaches and hard speeches that hitherto hath attended us from many of our Brethren, and Familiars, (whom we desire dearly to love in the Lord) as wel as from the Apostates of this day; the latter of which as we have & may expect it, so we do not much regard it. We have been strengthned in our Head the Lord Jesus, to bear up under all, though many halts & stops have been made in this work thereby, which hath caused some searchings of heart amongst us; and we trust that the same power and goodness of our Father, which hath been so wonderfully manifested towards us to this very day, will still carry us on therein, to the glory of his grace, by Jesus Christ, which is to be acknowledged by us be∣fore him and his people, with all humility and thankfulness; some passages whereof are inserted in these following particulars. First, by frustrating the intentions of those from whom we are sepe∣rated, to have proceeded against us, even to a casting out, though the chiefest of them were unanimous therein, and in making them confu∣sed and abortive in all their indeavors that way. Secondly, that when they had sent (as they apprehended) to the soberest and choicest of the Independent and Baptised Congregati∣ons in the City to countenance them therein, (who accordingly sent chief men from amongst them) they hitherto have been so over-ruled by the Lord, as that they have not been capable of advising therein. Thirdly, In keeping us together as one intire body, from first to last, though full of weaknesses, inabling us from time to time & that according to Gospel-rule) to admonish those from whom we are se∣perated, end to watch over one another in love, though Mr. Sympson gave out upon our first with-drawing, that he was confident we should break asunder within three moneths, (or thereabouts) as the just hand of the Lord against us. And therefore the Lord having so graciously ow∣ned us, we do not desire to be fore-casting what will be the event or issue of this our publike testimony, but looking up to him, desire to rest satisfied in this, that herein we have done no more then our du∣ty, for these following reasons. First, That in regard the Lord hath been, and is so greatly disho∣noured by a professing generation, sinning against so great light as never was known before, (amongst whom the Souldiers and Mr. Sym∣pson we are seperated from are apart) it may appear there is a rem∣nant among the Churches of Christ, who do not wink at, or comply with so great iniquity, but do desire to bear a sutable Testimony a∣gainst,
and make a due seperation from it. Reas. 2. There being many reproaches and calumnies cast upon us, as to the matter and ground of our seperation and with-drawing to this day, so as that the name of the Lord is greatly reproached tho∣rough these Misreports concerning us; it might therefore hereby appear, that the cause why we do so, is for such sins as are publikely scandalous and sinful, that so whatever becomes of our persons the truth may be vindicated. Reas. 3. That all who fear the Lord in uprightness of heart, may consider and see it's their duty to with-draw and seperate from all such persons; For what saith the Apostle?1 Cor. 5.6. Know you not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Purge out therefore the old lea∣ven, &c. And may it not be spoken with grief of heart, that the lump, or generality of the Churches in this day, are much leavened with a luke-warm, sensual, selfish spirit, seeking the honor and favor of men for their own advantage, rather then setting the Lord before them, and approving their hearts to him, and indeavouring after the advancement of his glory in the world, which comes to pass in a great measure for want of doing their duty to such persons in this particular. Reas. 4. That if it should please the Lord to call any, or all of us, further to suffer herein, or upon such like account, it may appear we suffer for his Name sake and not as evil doers; the mouthes of many professors having been already opened in this respect, though wee could wish it hath not rather been to palliate and cover over their own Apostacy. Reas. 5. Because thus saith the Scripture,1 Tim. 5.20. com. with Deur. 19, 20. Them that sin (to wit, in the sight of all men as these have done, and that against the light of Nature and Grace) rebuke before all, that others also may see and fear, and do no more so wikedly; for as Jannes and Jambres, Korah, Dathan and Abiram, with their company, withstood Moses2 Tim, 2.8 comp. with Num. 16.3, 12, 13, 14. in the work of GOD in their day, so these likewise do resist his cause and truth in our day, proceeding from iniquity to iniquity. Reas. 6. That so such as are unknown to us, and have been already engaged in this work of seperation, may bee incouraged, and not discouraged, and may know that whatsoever their afflictions and tri∣alls are thereupon, the same are also accomplished in others of their Brethren upon the same account, that so from a spirit of love to truth we may be strengthning one anothers hands in so blessed and honorable a work. Rea. 7. If Pilate was so sensible of the innocency of Jesus Christ,
that he could do no less but (in the presence of the Court, and the whole multitude) take water and wash his hands, saying these words, (the better to clear himself from being guilty of his blood)Mat, 27.19, 24. I am free from the blood of this just man, look ye to it: Doth it not much more concern us in such a day as this, when our Lord in his members and cause contended for in the late warrs is again crucified afresh & put to open shame, to take this water of our publike testimony in the presence both of Saints and Sinners, and testifie our dislike of, and seperation from so great iniquity, as also the persons guilty thereof: And if our Lord Jesus could charge upon the JewesMat. 23.34, 35. all the righteous blood shed from Abel to that day, and Peter, Act. 3.13. and so Stephen Act. 7.51, 52. likewise charge them for retaining their fore∣fathers wicked spirit (though theyMat. 23.30. pretended otherwise) manife∣sted in denying, betraying, delivering up and killing of Christ and the Saints, who were witnesses to the truth in that day; May not wee justly fear that if we should be silent in this day, the guilt of their blood which was shed in the late wars, as also of the sufferings of the Saints formerly, and yet imprisoned for their faithfulness to the de∣spised cause and interest of Christ, who did and do offer themselves so willingly, may be found upon us when the Lord makes inquisition for the same, and we come to be partakers of that judgement, which we are perswaded will lye heavie upon all that shall be found guilty, more or less. Reas. 8. Because of the so plain discovery (through a generall si∣lence) of a Laodicean, or luke-warm spirit for Christ, in this day, which the Lord loaths and threatensRev. 3.15, 16. to spue out of his mouth; But on the contrary commends the Churches of Ephesus and Smyr∣na, &c.Rev. 2.2, 3, 10. for their zeal and faithfulness, in discovering of, and not bearing with sin nor sinners, yea the Lord delights in such who offer themselves willingly; And the Inhabitants of MerozJudg. 5.9, 3. are cursed with a bitter curse, not because they appeared against Gods cause and people, but for standing Neuters, and not coming forth (when an opportunity was offered) to his help against the mighty. So in Psal. 94.16. there seems to be another plain word of instruction in this case, where the Prophet by way of Proclamation hath these vvords, Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? Who will stand up for me a∣gainst the workers of iniquity? He doth not say (as some say novv) Sit still, and let God alone, for he will finde out wayes and means to do his work in his appointed time himself, for he hath power at command; why do you trouble your selves more then a great many wiser men? No: So the Lord seems to speak in this day, as once Iohn said,2 King. 9.32. Who is on my side, who?
And although such poor creatures as vve are can adde nothing to him, yet he loves to see us shevv our good affection, and to do vvhat vve are able, and he hath so appointed, thatIsa. 26.6. comp. with Jer. 49, 20. the foot, yea the feet of the poor, and the steps (viz the indeavours) of the needy shall tread down the lofty City. And the least of the Flock shall draw them out, &c. And it may not be forgotten how that the Parliament in the time of the late war, as they took notice of Neuters by way of dislike on the one hand, so they did very kindly resent the constant good affections of others, on the other hand. Reas. 9. When sin comes to be National; First, in respect of the sin it self. Secondly, in respect of the persons committing it, being in a National or publike capacity. Thirdly, And contrary to profes∣sed and declared light, as the sin of this day is, and persisting therein after many admonitions, so as that we may truly say of the trans∣gressors of this day, as the Spirit of the Lord by Isaiah said of Israel of oldIsa. 30.1, 2. Wo to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take coun∣sel, but not of me; that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin; that walk to go down to Aegypt, and have not ask∣ed at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharoah, and to trust in the shadow of Aegypt, &c. Now as in verse the eight, the Prophet is commanded to go write is before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious people, &c. so ought we to do the same, if we would be found faithful to the Lord, & his despised Cause & People in our day, as the Prophet Isaiah was in his, the sins, and persons committing them in our day, being very like the sins, and persons guilty thereof, in that day: And though to bear up a sutable testimony in this day, be as irksome unto us as it was to Jeremiah, chap. 20.8, 9, 10. yet when we consider what encouragement he had from the Lord to hold on his way,Jer. 15.19, 20, 21. com. with chap. 1.17, 18, 19. and not to return to them, and though they might lay many snares for him, he would stand by him, and make him as a fenced City, and brazen walls against them, and be with him, to save and deliver him. We are comfortably perswaded that he will likewise be with us his poor nothing creatures, in this our testimony, if we be found faith∣ful herein unto the death, as he was. For these forementioned Reasons, among others that might be gi∣ven, are we encouraged to publish our proceedings, from the day of our first withdrawing, to the day of our separation, being the substance of three years labouring, or thereabouts, for the Name and Cause of our Lord Jesus; and therefore give us leave to contend earnestly for the faith of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, once deli∣ver'd
to the Saints, and for common Justice and righteousness, which hath been sealed unto with so much of the Saints (and others) blood in the late Wars, though now it be very unworthily betrayed, not by Enemies, but professed Friends, many of whom are Brethren in Church-Relation. We hope we can, as in the presence of the Lord that searcheth all htarts, (however others may judge of us) profess our selves very disi∣rous to follow after those things which makes for peace, so far as the shooes of the Gospel will carry us; but to have peace with Dishonesty, Injustice, Unrighteousness, Lying, Deceit, or Oppression, &c. is con∣trary to the mind of the Gospel of peace,2 Cor. 6.14 Phil. 4.8 any of which sins should Paul himself been found guilty of, were ground sufficient by his own Argument,2 Cor. 7.2. for the Church of Corinth (and so by consequence for any other Church) to refuse Communion with him; therefore to have peace upon this account, is to have peace where God would have war, and to bring our selves under that wo pronounced against thoseIsa. 5.20 who call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, &c. And if any shall yet blame us for appearing in this publike way, give us leave to say unto them as David said unto his brethren when he came into the Camp of Israel,1 Sam. 17.29. What have we now done? is there not a cause? Adding hereunto also, the report gone out amongst many of those from whom we are separated, saying, That if we could prove any thing against the Souldiers, they were ready to do their duty towards them as well ae we: Wherefore it is very requisite that others should see the matter of fact, and judge whether from the whole we had not just ground for this our withdrawing and separation; and we also hope, that such among them who are sensible of the evil testified a∣gainst, will bear with us in what we have done therein. But if any shall say of us deridingly, as Michal said of David,2 Sam. 6.20 How glorious was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself in the eyes of his ser∣vants as one of the vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth himself, &c. Give us leave for answer, to say as David said, It is for the Lord, otherwise we had rather be silent then displease any, much less those whom we dearly love in the Lord. But if this be to be vile, we shall yet be more vile, & we hope in our own sight also; and although flesh may in some respects be ready to shew it self in this case, yet if all things be duly considered, there is little reason for it; for where flesh would shew it self, it is for some advantage; but it seems to us as if there were little fleshly advantage to be reaped by it; for flesh naturally loves a good report of all especially among the generallity of professors;Luk 11.43. but
do we not hereby, yea, have we not already lost the good report of men, and of Brethren too? Again, flesh loves the Rulers favour,Prov. 29 26. where there is hopes of honor, profit, or preferment, &c. But on the contrary, do we not hereby hazard our Estates, and lives and all? But admit that flesh will be shewing it self, as we have sufficient cause to fear, and as we have experience, and may too sadly complain thereof in our own souls, in the best and most warrantable Work the Lord may require of us, yet this ought not to be matter of discou∣ragement, but of caution. Pray therefore for us all ye faithful ones, in the Work, Kingdom, and patient expectation of our Lord Jesus,Rev. 1.9. to whom this especially is directed, and on whose behalf (in a great measure) this Testimony comes, We humbly intreat that you would beg of the Lord that flesh may receive a rebuke every way. What temptations we have, and do meet withall, none knows so well as our selves, it being sometimes suggested to us, That it were better to lay down our Testimony, and venture no further, then run the hazard that may follow thereupon; but when we think of that Scripture,Mat. 25.23. comp. with Luke 12: from 35, to 45. Well done good and faithful servant, thou hast been faith∣ful in a little, I will make thee Ruler over much, enter thou into thy Ma∣sters joy, &c. It is then matter of encouragement to us to persevere therein, considering also how easie a thing it is for us to lose the Crown of our Testimony, Rev. 3.11. by declining the Cause of Christ we through Grace have been, and yet are engaged in, although we may not lose the salvation of our own souls; which puts us in mind of Barnabas, of whom it was said,Acts 11.22, 23, 24. He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, exhorting the Saints at Antioch to cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart; yet afterwards this good man received a check by joyning with John, whose Sirname was Mark, who left Paul in the Work at Pamphilia,Acts 15.38: that Paul testifies against him for so doing and afterwards we do not hear of Barnabas in any further Work for Christ, as formerly he had been; so good it is to stick close to Christ in an Evil day. And have we not also this further promise,Rev: 31.10: Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keepe thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. It would have been too long and tedious to have inserted the whole matter, as it was publikely debated in the whole Congregati∣on, drawn from those six scandalous sins laid to the charge of the Souldiers then amongst us; Moreover, we should thereby have gi∣ven occasion to some to have given a Reply to many things, which we suppose will hereby be avoided. But if any notwithstanding our
indeavors, shall adventure to blemish the Truth, and Cause, we do hereby contend for, we trust the Lord will give us wisdom to make an humble and sober Reply o such persons if need be: And there∣fore for the better clearing of truth to the understanding of the Reader, some Marginal Annotations are onely added, whereby the matter of fact is proved by the Armies Declarations, and Engage∣ments, &c. whilest they pretended to be faithful to the cause of Christ, whereof the Souldiers aforementioned, were then, and still are Members; besides several particulars proved against them, all being contained in our first paper, and after that comes in our gradial pro∣ceedings against them, and their Abettors, upon their perseverance in so great evill, that so it may appear we have walked according to Rule, in order to the convincing, and recovering of them, if the Lord had so pleased. We know upon perusall of the subject-matter contained in this Book, there will be many infirmities, and weaknesses, shewing forth themselves therein; but we hope the Lord hath given you such bow∣els of tenderness as to pass them over, and rather be eying the drift and scope of what is intended hereby, and therefore shall take up no more time in an Epistolary way, but leave it unto the blessing of the Lord, with this Exhortation to you, as well as unto our selves,2 Tim: 2: 19: com: with Jude 23: Let every one that nameth the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh, that so at the appearing of our Lord Jesus, he may say unto us, Well done good and faithfull Ser∣vants, enter you into your Masters Joy. Signed in the name and by the appointment of the greater number of the Congregation, who have seperated from those now walking with Mr. John Sympson. Humphrey Hathorn, Caleb Ingold, John Seely, John Portmans.
THE Old Leaven purged out: OR, The Apostacy of this day further opened. A true Copy of our first Paper to Mr. SYMPSON, and the other part of the Congregation, after we were withdrawn upon the account of the Souldiers, declaring the grounds and reasons of our withdrawing; Dated the first day of the fourth month, 1656. Delivered in writing at Lon∣don-house the next first day after the date hereof, by six of our Bre∣thren, accompanied with the whole. Onely the Marginal Annotations were since added, to prove what we have asserted in the body of our pa∣pers. Dearly beloved Brethren & Sisters in our Lord Iesus Christ, HAving spent some time together, and apart, to seek the Lord for counsel and directi∣on since we absented our selves from you, having had (as we hope) some sorrow and grief of heart that we cannot with any comfort partake with you at present of those Ordinances our Lord Jesus hath left his people to be exercised in until his second coming and appearance, and we trust have endeavoured in some degree of sincerity to search our own hearts concerning those sins laid to our
charge, as Vncharitableness, Pride, Rashness, Self-will'dness, Arrogan∣cy, &c. which we must acknowledge to be in as in too great a mea∣sure, yet doubtless this we may speak to the glory of the free Grace of our Father in Jesus Christ, That notwithstanding Satan, toge∣gether with the body of sin we carry about us, hath had great ad∣vantage to blemish that blessed Cause and Interest we have been so long contending for, we may (we hope), declare, That in plici∣ty, and godly sincerity, this Work hath been managed by us; and al∣so, that it is out of love to Truth, as well as on Truths behalf, we are so far engaged. It is in the conclusion of our waiting upon, and seeking to the Lord much upon our hearts, to lay before you the Truth we are so much under a Cloud for, that if the Lord will we may find such a fruit of this our seeking to, and waiting upon him, as will bring most glory to God, and comfort to you and us, and the provoking the Churches of Christ in this Nation, too generally fal∣len in with the iniquity of this day. Dear Brethren and Sisters, and longed for in the Lord, You very well know how for some years together the Lord hath been risen out of his holy placeIsa. 26.21. to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their i∣niquity; and notwithstanding those Inhabitants have, and do under a form of godliness get into Zion; yet so narrow hath the Lord been, and still is in his search at this day, thatIsa. 33.14. comp. with chap 4.4, 5. the sinners in Zion are a∣fraid; for he hath set up his fire in Zion, and fornace in Jerusalem, and will not leave till he hath throughly purged his floor; in which great Work we find that his own people have not been without their refinings in regard of so great filth they carry about them; for he saith,Isa. 4.4.5: that he must wash away the filth of the daughter of Zion from the midst thereof, and purge away the blood of Jerusalem by a spirit of Judgement, and a spirit of Burning, that upon all the glory may be a defence. The nature of this Work hath been not onely by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God in the  of his Servrnts the Prophets; but also by the Sword of a man, (or the ma∣terial Sword) and herein we find the Saints not onely by their pray∣ers, but their persons also have been instrumental, making good that Word in the Psalms,Psal. 149 4. Let the high praises of God be in their ths,
and a two-edged Sword in their hands, to execute upon the Ad∣versaries of his glory, the judg∣ments written, to binde their * * VVas not the vengeance executed upon the King, his Issue, Nobles, Gentry, Clergy, and other abettors, a manifest return of prayer to the Lords people, and in part a fulfilling of that Scripture? Yea, let the ar∣my & the souldiers from whom we are separated, look ouer their Declarations and Remonstrances, &c. upon this-account; See Abridgm: Remonst: at Albns, pag: 30-31: o Book, called The Looking. Glass; and Decl: July: 19 1650: pag: 46, 47: of that Book: Decl Aug: 1. 1650: p: 48, 49, 50. or in a sheet or paper commonly seen: Decl: after old Parl: was dissolved, p. 53, 54: & in their Speech to the little Part: p. 55, 56, 58, 61, 62, 63: of the afore∣mentioned book; and we entreat all the churches of Christ in this city, and the three Nations, to consider how far they encouraged the army therein, & whether they did not take up arms for the interest and cause of Christ, at the invitation of their Pastors and Elders; if not so, we are not able to judge upon what account churches, as churches, should be sent unto, to take up the material Sword; but if te, what means this general silence under, & falling in with the present power upon the old ock of Monarchy: who not onely have taken the remainder of the great Houses, Robes, & Reve∣nues, &c: out of the spoils of the late Monarchy, and put them among their ownstuff, which ought to be im∣proved to carry on the work of the Lord, but also the old bribing practice of giving & receiving honors, with other arbitrary & antichristian powers (that part of the accursed thing which should wholly be destroyed) to uphold themselves and court in that outward Pomp, Pride, Luxury, yea greater oppression & tyranny, which so much faith, prayer & appeals hath formerly been put up and exercised, blood and treasure spent for the ruin and destruction of: Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Feters of Iron, &c. But oh! that which we desire to mourn before the Lord for, is. That after nine or ten years War, wherein for the latter part thereof, our ad∣versaries have been but as dust before the Wind, not being able to stand before the Faith, Prayers, and Persons of the Lords people, either by Sea or Land; Wherein we cannot but think that the dispensation of the Lord hath been somewhat like that of Israel in their journey to Canaan, and our present stan∣ding somewhat like that in the sixth and seventh of Jo∣shua, where Achan thorough his Covetousness made bold with a wedge of Gold, and Ba∣bylonish Garment, contrary to the command of the Lord in the destruction of Jericho, upon which account it is called an Ac∣cursed thing, wherein give us leave humbly to observe this, e e Mr. Sympson upon asecond day at All hallows, spake, from Ioshua 6.26. Cursed be the man before the lord, that riseth up, and builds the Citie Iericho, &c. and raised the same observation from the words, that we have here inserted, and did then say, That he looked upon the late King and his Monarchy, with the Hierar∣chy of the Bishops, to be that Jericho, in whose ruin the lord was as much glorified as in that of Jericho, being the fruite of the faith and prayers of the lords people, as well as of their persons; and that whosoever should build it, or when built, maintain it, did hazard the bringing themselves, under the curse of the lord for so doing; and by way of allusion unto Jericho, did spiritually discover the present apostacy, manifesting how dangerous it was to be an abettor unto, and a complyer with the lericho builders of this day. That that person, or those persons who shall build that which the Lord hath got him∣self so much glory in the de∣struction of, do transgress the Command of the Lord, and hazard the bringing them∣selves under the Curse of the Lord for so doing, and such al∣so
who partake with them in this their building, become guilty there∣of before the Lord, and not onely so, but to partake of the Wedge of God, and Babylonish Garment; surely such persons are in a high measure accessary to such transgressions, by means whereof the Work of the Lord is retarded, as to any vi∣sible appearance; yea he is withdrawn from us, and goeth not forth with our Forces f Hath there not been a series of providences loudly witnessing against the present apostacy since its first rise; and to mention but three or four of many; First, In frustrating the consultations of both his Par∣liaments, though (as we conceive) they were called and garbled on purpose to settle the person in power. Secondly, the very chargeable, and in a great measure fruitless expedition of the Navy to the Straits. Third∣ly, The wonderful blasting that so much boasted of de∣sign to, and at Hypaniola, though some have vainly said, That the Lord was bound to carry on that design, to manifest their integrity for Christs interest; yet hath it hi∣therto been greatly dishonourable to this Nation, and the loss of many thousand lives by a few cow-killers, and a great mortality there, and at Iamaica: Fourthly, In not onely withdrawing the prayers of his people, from, but engaging them against it; and their forces doth clearly declare that God is departed from them, and become their Enemy, Isa: 26:11: by Sea or Land, as of old, but we fall and consume away be∣fore our Enemies, according to that in Isa. 30.15, 16, 17. And now give us leave in the fear of the Lord (and we hope in humility) to declare, That our dear brethren who wear the Sword to maintain the present Power and Govern∣ment, (the new erected Jericho of this day) being all of the formerly engaged for God and Christ before the present Apostacy, cannot free themselves from those publike sins laid before them by us in the presence of the Congregation to wit,Gal. 2.18. Rom 21.32. Rom. 2.3. Phil 4.8. First, Treason, contrary to an Act g If every just Ordinance of man ought to be o∣beyed, 1 Pet: 2:13: then surely this Act of Jan. 30. 1648, with that of March 17. following, (see Looking-Glass, pag. 43, 44.) being a fruit of the Parliament, together with the Lords people, and the armies pub∣like testimony against Oppression and Tyranny, as al∣so Monarchy the foundation thereof; in prosecution whereof, the Army and Navy were wonderfully bles∣sed against all opposers; not that we magnifie that form of Government otherwise then as we saw it at that time more conducing to the advancement of the inte∣rest of Christ, and the Nations liberty, and more refi∣ned in its nature than Kingly Government could be at the best, from whom many corrupt members being purged, Tyranny was in some measure supprest, and the cause of Christ carryed on in opposition to anti∣christ; for otherwise we judge that all forms of mens invention may be broken and made void, when they answer not the end for which they were appointed. made by Parliament, the then Authority of this Nation, after many out∣goings of God, not onely a∣gainst the late King as a Ty∣rant, but against his Monar∣chy as the root of Tyranny, whereby the Form, as well as the Power, was destroyed, as that Jericho which stood in op∣position to the Lord, his Cause and People; so that to
build it, or when built, to maintain it, the Lord being much glorified in the ruin of it can be no less then publikely scandalous; for with∣out the Army, of which our Brethren are Members, (and some of them very eminent in office) in the judgement of reason this h An image of the Beast in regard it prosecutes the same tyrannical interest from a tincture of the same spirit which the late King did; stands upon the same, yea a more bloody bottom, so much of the Saints & others blood being shed in opposition to it, is more arbitrary then the former, having first by himself, and se∣condly, under the false cover of a second garbled Company of Sallary and self-interested men, without the lords people, and the Nations consent, taken the Military power, and a negative voice, &c. which no King ever was allowed; and is not onely sinful and scandalous, but contrary to the mind of the lord, and right Reason; (Therefore when Soul through a spirit of apostacy in, and from the wrath of God upon the people, was chosen king, Samuel declared he would be such a one, 1 Sam. 8.9, 10 v: 18: layes opn the arbitrary power and oppression of a king, or monarchy) so that he is onely divers in name through the old thred-bare pretence of giving liberty to the lords people, which is no other then to go peaceaby to their several meetings, and home again, if they let him alone, and not reprove his tyranny and usurpation; but to all who speak against it, and comply not with him therein, he is both in look, and in deed, more stout then his fellows, as by his former and late actions to some doth plainly appear. Image of the Beast now set up, could not stand: and though our Brother Kelzey was pleased to say, That he or they were Traytors who spoke, or rose up against him who had now the power of the Nati∣on, though usurpedly, in his hand, thereby endevouring to fasten than upon us which he himself, with the rest, are guilty of; yea, we think it is plain to every one that will not shut their eyes against the light, that it can be no treason to speak a∣gainst a person who hath no Law for his standing or pra∣ctise, i The Army in Remonstrance at Albons, Novem. 16: 1648: and in the Abridgement thereof, (See looking-Glass, . 7, 28, 30) to justifie their pressing for justice against the king in opposition to the Parliament, about the personal Treaty, do say, That where a person trusted with a limited power to rule according to law, shall not onely pervert that Trust, but assume hurtful powers never committed to him, and swallow up all foundations of right and li∣berties, into his absolute wil and power, to imposs, tak away, and destroy at his pleasure, &c. and shall by force uphold himself in that tyrannical power, is guilty of the highest treason against the highest law amongst men, and forfeits all that trust and power he had, and sets the people free to take their best advantage to bring him to justice &c. And in answer to that common objection from Rom. 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, &c. (urged by malignants in that day, as by members of Chur∣ches, and others now) they say, Paul speaks of magistracy in its constitution, not of a person abusively exercising it, to be Gods instrument for good to every one, an encourager of good in every man, and an enemie to evil, therefore the kings of the Israelites must know the law for a rule, for this they quote, Deut. 17.2 kings ii, 12.2 Sam. 23. wherein we apprehend they speak the will and mind of God: Now if a lawful power acting thus, or king Charls, between whom and the people was some kind of compact and a∣greement, could not, nor was not then reputed to be Gods Ordi∣nance, and might not onely be spoken against, but brought to ju∣stice, then surely O. Cromwel who forceth his power upon us, com∣mitting the same, and greater wickednesse, is much lesse Gods Or∣dinance, and may not onely be spoken against, but brought under the same, and greater condemnation, And for our brethren the Souldiers to be abetting and supporting such abominations, ha∣ving formerly declared and engaged against them, may, and ought to be reproved, and in case they persist therein, to be withdrawn from, yea, to disown all Church relation with them: but like a brute beast, hath broken all the bounds & limits of Law or Reason to ac∣complish his lustful Will, there∣fore where there is no Law, there is no transgression; And what Law of the Nation do we transgress? yea, Is there not a good Law of the Land that doth justifie us in making it Treason for the person now in Power to act singly in the Government; and our Bre∣thren who abet him that he may not be brought to pub∣like Justice, are likewise trans∣gressors of that Law; yea the Instrument of Government shall be Judg, he having there∣in sworn to maintain all the
the laws of this land, of which that Act is one, yet in force, so that we humbly think they do directly come under the reproof of that Scripture, 2 Tim. 3.4. in these Words, Traytors, heady, high minded, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away; which is the more considerable if compared with the first verse of that chapter, where the A∣postle among other sins, rec∣kons that to be one of the dangerous sinnes of the last times; and that likewise in the sixth of Luke, verse 16. where our Lord Jesus speaking con∣cerning Judas, calls him Traytor, foretelling what he would do to him; and whether the cause of Christ be not be∣trayed k Iudas professing love to the person of Christ, as a friend & Disciple, afterwards falling in with the Power in being betraying him into their hands for 30. pieces of silver, was called a Traytor; So the army having de∣clared for the advancement of his Kingdom & Interest in opposition to Antichrist, Monarchy and Tyranny, and after all, for the riches and preserments of this world, to deliver up this blessed cause, and the people who are kept faithful to it, to be persecuted and imprisoned by their General, who to keep power in his hand, is act∣ing upon that foundation, and doth those very, and worse things, for which the former Tyrant and Monar∣chy were destroyed, in the mean while (like Iudas when he kist Christ) pretending faithfulness thereunto; they may more truly be called Traytors then he, ha∣ving herein acted not onely the part of treacherous Iudas, but been more vile then the wicked Magistrates. by this generation for whom our Brethren do so-stifly contend, we leave unto the Lord and you to judge; yea with grief of heart we may speak it to be truth. Secondly, which is the sad∣nesse of it, our Brethren cannot free themselves from being guilty of the breach of that Engagement l See the Ingagement in page 46: of the foremen∣tioned Book, which was sent to the Officers and Soul∣diers to sign, to take off the reproach cast upon them, That they cut off the King to set up one of theire own; we look not upon their transgression so much to con∣sist in being against a Common-wealth otherwise then as it was opposed to Monarchy, which was, is, and in the hand of any single person but Christ, will be ty∣rannical and antichristian: And if self-interest, Op∣pression, and arbitrary power were not more establisht now then before, we should be the more silent, being to eye the end of an Engagement, and the form onely as it answers the end; but we may truly say there is a breach of the form, with the power and end also, as is plain to every eye not by ast with gifts and preferments, which (Deut. 16: 19:) doth blinde the eyes of the wise, &c. gi∣ven by the Parliament to all that served them, To be true and faithfull to the Go∣vernment as it was then esta∣blished, without a King and House of Lords. Besides the
Declaration of the Army m See this Declaration in the same book, page 3, as also Deol. Iuly 19. 1650. pag. 46, 47 say they, A party in Parliament true to God and their Trust, did bring to justice, and cause to be executed the late King, did lay a∣side the House of Lords, and for the good of the people, re∣solved the Government into a Common-wealth, and remo∣ved the King and Kingship, And that it might appear the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, was in the womb of all their undertakings, they cause more particularly to declare for the same, see Decl. Aug: 1: 1650, say they, And having these things singly in our eye, namely, the destruction of antichrist, and the advancement of the Kingdom of Iesus Christ, &c. and being perswaded in our consciences that the King and his Monarchy was one of the ten horns of the beast, spoken of Rev: 17.12, 13, 14 & be∣ing witnesses to so much innocent blood of the Saints he had shed in supporting the beast, & considering the loud cryes of the souls of the Saints under the altar, we were carryed forth to desire justice upon the King, &c: VVe are not souldiers of fortune, nor meerly the servants of men; we have not on∣ly proclaimed Christ to be our King by profession; but desire to admit him to the exercise of his royal authority in our hearts, and to follow him whither soever, he goes, it is our prayer dayly that those that seat the Lord in England and Scotland, may become one in the hand of the Lord, & joine together in the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and throwing down, and trampling upon the seate of the Beast; why should not Scotland as well as England, rejoice to see the horns of the beast cut off, that we may join together to hate the whore & burn her flsh with fire, &c, & in another Decl. pag. 54: of the same Book, they desire the people might forget Monarchy. See their speech to the little Parlia∣ment, pag 55, 61, 62, 63: of the aforementioned book, where much is spoken to this purpose: And what inte∣rest is now exalted but self-interest? how is antichrist destroyed but in changing Bishops for Triers? VVhat Church and people delivered but the National Church, and such as are willing quietly to walk under the former abominations? what means the present Monarchy? at whole doore will the blood of the Saints shed in opposition to the late King, lye? yea, and the blood of the King and his party lyespunctel; Give leave to instance Hos. 1: 4: Yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezrel upon the house of John; Are not our brethren and the army souldiers of Fortune, and the servants of; men now? if not so, would they crouch to such abominations as these? Have they not chosen another King besides Je∣sus? Surely these Declarations and Engagements stare them in the face, and at which they could not but blush if their consciences were not feared; see what is the mind of the Lord con∣cerning this thing in the following Scriptures, Numb. 30.2. Eccles. 5.4 compared with Psal: 66 13, 14. Deut: 33:2: Isa: 5.9 3 Hos. 10.4. Mal. 3:5 Gal: 3:15:2 Tim: 3:3: June 14. 1647. likewise another upon the Armies go∣ing into Scotland, dated July 10. 1650 wherein they do vo∣luntarily, and without com∣pulsion declare unto the World that they will not set up a single person over the Na∣tion, though he were such a one as they could most confide in; look∣ing upon that form of Go∣vernment not onely to be ty∣rannical; but antichristian. And many, more reasons are there laid downe to ground their judgements upon truth, according to the Scriptures; whereby it plainly appears to us they are no less then guil∣ty of Covenant-breaking and false swearing, whatsoe're may be said to the contrary, by ob∣jecting, That me can not prove their hands were to any such De∣clarations or Engagments, for it is all one if they being then in, or belonging to the Army, & did in their place prosecute the ends of those Declarat∣tions
and Engagements against the Stuarts Party, and other oppo∣sers, never in the least declaring against the matter and ends there∣of. Thirdly, For one sin doth not go without its Concomi∣tants; the Lords people, their own Brethren are oppressed, first, Because they cannot pay Taxes n Besides the forementioned particulars, the ve∣ry same, and greater arbitrary powers, (which they declared should not be exercised by any, much less by themselves) viz. a negative voice, the costly pomp of a Court, of which the man in power once said, He abhor'd that way of government for nothing more; a House of Lords, of whom he said, It would never be well whilest there was one Lord left in England, and till the Earl of Manche∣ster was called Mr. Montague. Keeping men in prison without bringing them to tryal. Injustice in proceeding at Law. Paying Taxes whilest Oppression remains: Forming a balancing party in the Parliament for his interest: Forcing rebble damages from those who refuse to pay Tythes: Lock∣ing up Printing-Presses against whom they please; Vphold∣ing Monopolies, Which is, as in other things, so now up. on the Bible; with many other particulars that might be named, all practised in this day, which the Army, the generality of the Churches, and other godly pro∣declared against, as may be seen in the several Declara∣tions, Remonstrances, Petitions, and Letters of the army; as also the large petition presented to the Parliament by thousands well affected people in, and about London, in pag. 9, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 29, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. of Book called, The Looking-Glass. And yet for our Brethren and the Army after all, to be upholding not onely the same, but greater oppressions (and chiefly a∣mong themseves) it can be no less then open aposta∣cy. And to demand, much more force the Lords people, and others, to pay Taxes to maintaine them herein, (it being evident they ventured their Estates, Lives and all with them, whilest prosecuting the cause of Christ) it can be no other then Oppression in a hign degree. With those Scriptures in the Margent, see Obad. ver. 13. to maintain them in their present standing of apo∣stacy and back∣sliding. Second∣ly, Mic. 2.2 Zeph. 3.4. comp. with Ezek. 22.27. Ezek. 46.18. Pro. 22.22. Zech. 7.10. Neh. 5. v. 9, to 14. Iam. 2.6. Tythes o To demand, much more force the payment of tythes for maintenance of parish-Ministers, or others upon that account, is against the dispensation of the Gospel, Heb. 7.12. The Levitical priesthood being chan∣ged, so is the Law, Heb. 7 13. Christ sprang from Ju∣dah, of which Tribe was no priest to receive tythes; the National Ministers pretend to receive their Com∣mission from Christ who sprang from Judah, and not from the Priesthood which was of the tribe of Levi: There is no New-Teltament-Rule for any dwelling within such a compass of ground, to build a Steeple-house to preach the Gospel in, or to compel all, or any within that bounds, to come to hear that Minister which is either appointed by themslves, or by others imposed upon them; & whether they come or no, to de∣mand, much less force a contribution to help maintain that House and Minister, and in case they refuse, to hale them before Magistrates, and cast them in pri∣son, this is no other then the invention of the Pope, and his Brethren, the Magistrates of Antichrist, to support their interest and power over the people, and not the mind of Jesus Christ, whose appointment is, That although his Ministers who administer their spi∣ritual things to others, should if they are poor live of the Gospel, and reap of their carnal things, 1 Cor. 9, 10, 14. com. with Gal. 6.6. yet he hath no where appoint∣ed that any should be compelled to hear, or maintain them, much less presecuted of imprisoned for refusing either, but the contrary; see Matth. 10.8, 11, 13, 14 com. with Luke 10.5. to 10. The Lord in Mich 3: 5: doth threaten those priests and prophets that teach for hire, and divine for money, and prepare warre against him that putteth not into their mouths, com. with Isa. 56.11. All which (with much more that might be spoken to this purpose) being considered, we wonder how such who have so highly declared for Christ against antichrist, dare be supporting of such abominations; he that runs may read the daylie Oppression of this kind, except there be a bowing down to the Golden Image of the national Clergy, with her head: are forced from ma∣ny, to the op∣pression of some, and the undoing of others; and so they oppress a man and his house, a man and his Heritage. Now it is not so much our selves are likely to suffer if we should willingly walk after the Com∣mandment, but the glory of him who hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, will be so much blemish∣ed, as is beyond expression. And indeed this is much to be lamented that there are so few to bear up their testimony for the Lord against the Evil-do∣ers at this day. Likewise our posterities, if the Lord should not mercifully ease us of our Opp∣ressors, would feel the weight of so great bondage, as to be at the will and mercy of one man to dispose of their persons and Estates, and this backed with
an Army of thirty thousand men; and what is likely to be the consequence if the Lord should continue us under this bondage; we think that eighth chap. of the first of Samuel, from verse 9. to verse 19. to gether with Amos 5.10, 11, 12. will plainly make out the sadness of our condition, and the dislike of such who shall quietly acquiess in, and ap∣prove of those oppressions, and the sad condition also of such who shall be active for such Oppressors, and Op∣pressions. Moreover we de∣sire to ask our Brethren who wear the Sword, these two questions; First, Whether they do not receive the un∣righteous Wages of Warre in a time of peace? Second∣ly, Whether the Wages so received be not to enslave us p A Testimony for this in the former and present imprisonment of many of the servants of Christ for testifying against the abominations of this day; to wit, Mr. Carew, Major General Harrison, Mr. Feake, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Courtny, Coll. Rich, Sir Henry Vane, Major General Overton, Vice Admiral Lawson, M. Cann: Cornet Day, and several others, some whereof remain in prison to this day; and the Soldiers, the chief instruments in this oppression, yea their Ge∣neral lately to take off the odium that such a wicked act would bring upon him, Commissio∣nates the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City, (who employ the baser sort of man, (Act. 17.15.) that like themselves will do any drudgery is put upon them) to come to the meeting in Cole∣man street to interrupt and hale the Lords faithful people to prison for nothing but pleading for, and pressing after those good things which himself and the army have been greatly in∣strumental to lead them into, & for declaring against their back-sliding from them; therefore what man or woman that hath any love to Christ, his Cause and People, can pay Taxes to maintain such Oppression and Persecution, or hold communion with any of them in the Ordinances of Christ. in our consciences, as wel as in our persons? For what∣ever the Government saith, We shall have liberty of consci∣ence, it is only to such who can quietly acquiess in their un∣just and Antichristian procee∣dings.
Fourthly, Persecusion of Saints; q Besides what is already mentioned concerning the Soldiers being instrumental to imprison the faith∣ful in this day, and what is hinted in this place, there are some things more particularly charged upon Coll. Kelzey Major Strange, Capt. Harrison, &c. immediate∣ly following the sixth head; adding hereunto (besides the Scriptures in the margent) Obad. v. 10, 11, 12. where Esau is charged for his violence and persecution against his brother Iacob, and for standing on the other side when his Enemies dealt hardly with him. Then surely they are guilty who uphold the present persecution, and say, It is possible our Brethren suffer for evil-doing. Let also Acts 7.58 comp. with chap. 22.20. be considered, where Paul after conversion, acknowledgeth himself a perse∣cutor before conversion, for standing by, and keeping the Rayment of them which stoned Stephen, thereby consenting to his death. And are not the Souldiers who are mem∣bers of Churches, and professed brethren, much more guilty, who can imprison their brethren themselves, and be their Jaylors too? Yea, some of them to get the applause and favour of man, lye in wait to catch the Lords people, who visit their Brethren in prison, and when they have caught them, like Soul. Acts 9.2. go to the head persecutor to obtain an Order to keep them there, as Mr. Feake was dealt withall at the Tow∣er, not long since; yea, Coll. Eaxter, one of the new Lords, many times keeping not only the acquaintance, but Wives and Relations of the Lords people (in his custody) from visiting of them, which Heathens would abhor to do, see Acts 24.23: and yet the plausi∣ble pretences these men make, are with their Pastors, &c. and some other professors, (blinded as themselves) like the whore, Prov. 30.20. wiping her mouth, as if they had done no evil. Wherefore we may justly take up the lamentation of the Prophet, Psal. 55.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. which we desire the Reader to peruse parti∣cularly. for plain it is many of our Brethren and others,2 Chron. 36.16. Matt. 23.30, 31, 34. 2 Chro. 19.2. Esther did other∣wise, chap. 8.3, 5. com. with chap. 7.3, 4, 6. yea she desi∣red that the ren sons of Haman the perse∣cutor might be hanged also, Esth. 9.13. Luk. 11.23. suffer im∣prisonment for bearing testimony against the present Iniquity, having no evil to lay to their charge; and in this that which we would mourn before the Lord for, is, That some of our Brethren do not stick to say, That it is possible they suffer for evil-doing. Which word, It is possible, is no less to us then an indirect justifying the persecutors in their im∣prisoning of them, thereby adding affliction to their bonds; wherein we think that Scripture doth truly reach them, Prov. 17.15. He that ju∣stifieth the wicked, and condem∣neth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. And in this the Souldiers are altogether instrumental, having neither the Law of God or man to justifie their practice by civil Officers. And we are sure that good Moses, though he might have been owned and honored as Son to Pharoahs Daughter, could not in conscience slay in Pharoahs Court when he beheld the affliction of his Brethren, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. though we think his condition there was more harmless, and might more have been improved to the glory of God, and the good of his Brethren, then our Brethren, imployment can possibly be, and yet he forsook Pharoahs Court.
Fifthly, By this present A∣postacy the whole body of the Laws,Mic. 6.16. 2. King. 10.29, 30, 31, 32. Isa. 29.13, 14. com. with Matt. 15.8, 9. r Upon search into the Laws, Statutes, and Cu∣stoms of this Nation, it will appear most of them are contrary to Scriptute, as that of Felony, which for stealing to the value of 5. s. is death; but for further satisfaction, see that Book called Examen Legum An∣gliae: And indeed we may well wonder how any man pretending conscience, could at once swear to maintain such a numberless number, being most of them made in the times of popery. It were likewise to be wished that all other subordinate Officers, as Justices of Peace, sider how they can with comfort take such Oaths as they do; for it is time now for professors to look before they leap. Statutes, and Customes of this Land are sworne to be maintained without any en∣quiry into the e∣quity or justice of them, which brings in the support of many wicked and s We call that Antichristian which is set up for Christs institution, yet hath no warrant in Scripture; and surely it never entred into the heart of Christ to set up Patrons, Parsons, Viccars, Curates, Triers, Deans, Doctors, Chancellors, &c. but are from the Pope, & con∣tinued by the succeeding popish, carnal, selfish kings, Queens, and Protectors of this Nation, as will appear upon search; wherefore let that Scripture Amos 8.14. compared with 1 King. 12.26, 27, 28, 29. be considered, where Ieroboam set up two calves, at Dan and Bethel, to the end the people might not go up to Ierusalem to worship, fearing the Kingdom would return to the house of David; and thereby caused them to lay aside his true worship, which thing became a sin and a snare unto Israel. And doth not the upholding the National clergy, &c, run parallel? and as God was then greatly dishonored, is he not so now? for do they not by their practise declare that Christ as a Son in his house, was not so faithful as Moses a servant? whom first the Pope, and all others to this day, acting as Head of the church directly, or Law received a just recompence of reward, how shall this generation escape, who maintain an invention of wor∣ship in opposition to Christ, and force the people to bow down to it by the payment of rythes, though the Tythes, Tenths, & first Fruits, which are claimed as the Magistrates, Clergy, and others due, are no other in their rise then what King Harry the eighth took from the Pope, and the Pope with his Priests had before cheated our forefathers of, under pretence of good works and charity to merit heaven by, and for saying prayers for their souls, and the souls of their deceased ancestors, that they might escape the torments of hell; for further satisfaction, see a Book called The Great Case of Tythes stated, sold for 3 d. at the Black-spread-Eagle neer the west of Pauls, which notably discovers how Parsons, Viccars, and Curates, &c, with Tythes were at first brought in, and have been continued to this day. Antichristian Laws, some whereof are already put? in execution, as that of Patrons, parsons, Viccars, Curates, Tythes, together with the old Hierarchy of Bishops, though couched under a new Name of Triers; and in this we con∣ceive our Brethren are guilty also; for time was the Army did declare for removing eve∣ry yoke from the necks of the Lords People, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, and that they were not Mercenary to serve the lusts of men, as now they are, some of them also plead∣ing for the Right of Tythes, and by deceitful words excuse these abominations to the grief of our hearts, and do stand by to maintain him who is the Head of this Apostacy.
Sixthly, The great reproach t If what is reported from other countreys may be believed, the reproach unto the Name of God by this apostacy is so great, that it is sufficient ignominy to be known as an English professor: And as for our own Nation, all who joyned with the Army in the work ac∣cording to their former good professions and Declarati∣ons, are a stink in the Nostrils both of the late Kings party, and others, insomuch that in a deriding manner they say to our very faces, &c. Did we not tell you before how things would be carryed? we knew the spirits of these men you followed, better then you did, as now you se: Did not we tell you they desired the destruction of the King that they might get into the Throne themselves is not Oliver Cromwell a greater Tyrant now, then ever King. Charles was You simply out of honest intents followed him, think∣ing to have greater liberty and priviledges, which we al∣wayes told you would be otherwise, and we think you find our words true now. You then scrupled the paying a little ship money, and such small matters; But what do you say to the great Taxes and Burthens laid upon the Nation now, and yet know not what they will do further? And say others of them, Though we were grieved at cutting off the Kings head, yet when we considered the honest things the army held forth in their Declarations against their own self-interest, and for liberty in opposition to oppression, we were the more quiet, hoping they would have been as good as their words; but now we see plainly you are all a company of juglers, and intended nothing else in all you said, and did but your own advancement; this is the godly army; we will never trust professors more for your sakes. And many more of the like, and worse expressions, whereby Religion is made a scorn; so that we may say in truth as Nathan said to David, 2 Same 12: 13. Because by this apostacy so great oc∣casion is given the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, there∣fore shall not this iniquity pass away without some special judgement: Adding hereunto the great reproach that is brought upon the wayes of Christ by the divisions and breaches among his own people, such as hath not been for many generations past; it puts that Scripture often in some of our thoughts, Mat. 18.7. Offences will come, but wo to that man by whom the offence cometh. And is there not just offence given by the army and our Brethren in particular? More especially, Coll. Kelzey, who said in the presence of the whole congregations, That if any should rise up against the present Power, under what pretence soever, he would sheath his sword in their bowels, though his own Brethren, for he should look upon them as disturbers of the peace. And have we not cause to be offended & grieved at these things? can we sit at Christs Table with such persons as he? Surely no. brought to the Name of God,Lam. 2.15 16. Rom. 2.23, 24. com. with Isa. 52 5.6. Psa. 79.4. Dan. 9.16.2 Sam. 12 14 his Cause, and Son at this day, which makes the hearts of the righteous sad, whom the Lord would not have fadned,2 King. 19 3: Jam. 2: 7: Psa: 69: 9. Ezck. 13.22. and the E∣nemy great ground to rejoice that so large profession should end in the greatest oppression & wickedness that we could have expected from the ad∣versaries of his glory, against whom so great a contest hath been by blood for so many years; and for our Brethren to own and approve of him who hath so greatly dishonor∣ed the Lord, by serving him with their Swords in their hands, cannot we think free them from being transgres∣sors thereof in a high mea∣sure.
And now we shall humbly lay before you some particular instances from these generals, though one would think this were enough to every impartial eye; for by how much sin comes to be countenanced,Isa. 10.1. &c car∣ryed on by a Law, by so much it is the more dangerous for particular persons to fall in with it. Our Brother Kelzey cannot be freed from having a hand in the [v] rise of the Government (the Cockatrice Egge of this day) in regard himself and Coll. u Coll. Kelzey did at Mr. Sapmsons house in Cole∣harbour, before many brethren, more fully confess what was laid to his charge in coming down to the Fleet, then is laid down in the paper: Moreover at that time he said also, That before his coming down to the Fleet he was at a Meeting of the Officers of the Army when the Govern∣ment was presented to them in writing for their approbati∣on, and that he himself did alder something therein, and so gave his consent, it being his judgement and conscience, (as he said) although when his coming down to the Fleet was first laid to his charge, it was denyed by him in these words, That he had not directly, or indirectly a hand in the rise of the Government; whereby he was guilty of a plain untruth; onely this is to be remembred, That whereas it is said in the paper, Coll. Clark was with him when the first came down to the Fleet, it was a mi∣stake, for it seems he came down alone that time. Clark was imployed in December, 1653. to come down to the Fleet then riding before Portsmouth, & brought along with them the Paper of Government in writing, with a blank in that Article where the Persons Name who was to be Protector, should be inser∣ted; when it was also declared that it was thought the Lord General should be the Man, but it was not yet determi∣ned. Likewise since that he hath taken upon him to be a Major Ge∣neral, whereby the Nation is divided into Provinces, the plain fruit of Monarchical Conquest, as if twelve or thirteen years War, wherein so much blood both of the Saints and others had been spilt, though in pretence for Christ; yet indeed to establish the lustful interest of one particular person, founded upon a more Tyrannical and Antichristian bottom then the late King, who was cut off for his Tyranny. More∣over as a Fruit of this our Brothers new degree of honour, he hath oppressed several of the Lords People by forcing Taxes from them, as from Coll. Rich. † A copy of Coll. Rich his Let∣ter to Kelzey, was produced to know the reason of his sending Souldiers to quarter upon him; and Kelzey's answer, wherein he declared, That there they should quarter till the Tax were paid. a prisoner for truth, of which we have been particular in making it out how long the Souldiers quartered at his house in Kent, selling his Corn, killing three of his Tenants sheep for Food, and last of all distrained, which they might have done at first, but that they resolved to make the yoke as heavy as they could; and not onely so, but
took between four of five pounds more then the Tax came to. Like∣wise since that, Taxes have been forced from Capt. Burcher Capt. Owen, and Capt. Price, in Canterbury; from the first of whom the SouldiersThis also was by Kelzeys Order. took to the value of thirty shillings, to pay for their quar∣ters a day and night, (as they said) and if this be not Oppression, we know not what it. Also he justifieth the imprisonment of our Bre∣thren by saying, 'Tis possible they suffer for evil-doing. Our Brother Capt. Harrison was Keeper to our Brother Sympson whilest he was a x It is some grief of heart un∣to us that we should make mention of Mr. Sympson's Name, as declined from that spirit of Testimony which was upon him whilest he continued a prisoner. pri∣soner for truth; and though he might do it in love, yet that will onely excuse the aggra∣vation of the sin, and not the sin it self; for we are to do no evil that good may come of it; yea we are to avoid every appearance of evil; and since that, the Church took cognizance of our Brothers evil therein, and did declare their dislike of that act, yet notwithstanding have they received him by their last vote, without the least acknowledge∣ment of his sin. Our Brother Ducket did in the presence of the Brethren at Lon∣don-house declare his full approbation of the present Government, as if there had been no sin in its first rise; and indeed did so justifie the iniquity of this day, that the generallity of the Brethren were much dis-satisfied with him. Also he declared, That he would have none in his troop but such as would engage to be true to the present power; which did then much dis-satisfie the Brethren, and our Brother Sypmson also; since which he hath been in Scotland. Our Brother Strange had the custody of our Brother Major Ge∣neral Harrison, until we think he was ashamed out of it by some of the Lords servants who came to visit him, professing their non-commu∣nion with our brother Strange in common eating, whilest he was his brothers Jaylor. Likewise our brother, Strange did ask our brother Speneer in Marybone-Park, VVhether the Souldiers had sold their Debentors un∣to him, Brother Spencer answered, No, he did profess they would not sell them. Strange answered, Is not theirTo wit, the time allowed them to look after their own occasions. time out? if it be, cashiere them. This our Brother Strange denyed, saying, If that can be proved you may judge all the rest to be true; but it was witnessed to his face at our bro∣ther Gardners house. Likewise he did declare, That he would have none of the congregation in his troop, which came to be made known up∣on this occasion, Our brother Hathorne declared to our brother Spen∣cer his desire to ride in the Major Generals. Troope, whereupon our brother Spencer sent him to the Major General; but not having an
opportunity to speak with him, he less his Errand with brother Strange; and coming back to brother Spencer, he told him, Thou hast undone thy self, for Strange hath said he will have none of the Congrega∣tion in his Troop; which he also denyed with a great deal of cavilling, but it was witnessed to his face. Our brother Summer being asked what he fought for now, he re∣plyed, For half Crowns. Whether a Saint if called to venture his life onely for money, can with comfort lay it down, having nothing of conscience to engage him, we leave unto the Lord and you to judge. These things still lying upon our hearts, we judged it our duty to present them unto you, and lay them before you, and with humility to offer these following Queries as the Grounds and Reasons of our ab∣sence to this day. 1 1. Whether there be not from what hath been already offered, ground to believe that our Brethren are under sin, and that scanda∣lous, though they excuse it by saying, It doth not appeare to be so to them? 2 2. Whether it be not accor∣ding to the Rule to deal with a Brother upon the account of sin committed, y When we laid the Souldiers evil to their charge, they excused it, saying, It did not appear to be so to them: The incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.5. was to be dealt with∣all for sin committed, though his conviction was after∣wards: The reason why they wil not acknowledge their sin, is because Deut. 16.19: A gift blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverts the words of the righteous. And Prov. 17.8. A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it; wheresoever it turns, it prospers; implying, if the heart desires gifts, it will be ready to serve their end who gives them, therefore (Prov. 18.16.) it is said, A mans gift maketh room for him, and brings him before great men. And if they have such power upon them, not won∣der if they prevail upon our brethren, so lately raised up from a mean condition, who whilest they are wil∣ling to receive their money, will not acknowledge their serving of them to bean evil. Paul (1 Cor. 5.2.) reproves the Church for keeping the incestuous person so long among them; and yet the present Churches keep Army-men, and others among them, though their sin be as plain as the incestuous persons was. whe∣ther he be convinced of it, or not, such dealing being in or∣der to conviction? but in case he shall be convinced, or not be convinced, yet if he do not forsake it by turning from his evil way, the censure, of the Church is to pass upon him notwithstanding.
3 3. Whether you have not in some degree missed of the will of God in receiving them amongst you without so much as a word of z Besides Eph. 5.11. see Psal. 50.16, 17, 18. comp. with Prov. 24.24. where you may find it is not onely a consenting to, and a partaking with evil, but a saying to the wicked, Thou art righteous, when we see persons commit sin, and not reprove them: And if what is said in Prov. 24.24. be true, He that saith to the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations shall abhor him; then surely not onely the people of this, but the Nations abroad when they come to hear of the aposta∣cy of the Army and them in power, from those good principles, leading to the advancement of Zion, and the Kingdom of Christ, (formerly declared for) which had they been pursued, would have brought in so much good to the whole creation, they will not onely abhor them, but also curse those godly people both in, and out of Churches, who instead of doing their duty in reproving and withdrawing from the (the onely means to put a stop thereunto, and to revive the works again) do sit down with, and streng∣them therein, whereby that good is kept from coming to them. Ad∣monition from the Lord, as being jealous of their souls, least sin (though as they say, unseen to them) lying hid in their hearts, should at last break forth in a greater mea∣sure, to the greater dishonor of God. 4 4. Whether you do not in a great measure bid them a Psal. 50.18. compared with Prov: 24: 25: it is a partaking with evil to approve of persons that com∣mit it, see Iob 34: 8: compared with 2 Iohn chap: 10: verse : God speed in their Employments as they now stand, and thereby become partakers of their evil deeds? 5 5. Whether our Brethren do not by their continu∣ance in these sinnes, walk b 2 Thess: 3: 6: Disorderly walking is declared in v: 8: 11: to be eating a mans bread for nought, or not an∣swering the end for which that bread is given; Now our Brethren receiving pay and sallaries from the pre∣sent Power, which is the bread extorted by them from the people, pretending for their good, and yet imploy∣ing it contrary thereunto, (as our experience can wit∣ness) our Brethren upholding them therein, may tru∣ly be said to eat the peoples bread for nought; therefore verse 14: of that chapter, we are to note such disorder∣ly persons, and have no fellowship with them, that they may be ashamed: And 1 Cor: 5: 11: we are not to keep company, or eat with a brother that is covetous, or an extortioner, &c: And we conceive by what hath been already (and may be) offered, it doth (and will) appear our brethren are herein guilty also: See Psal: 26: 4, 5, ti: to this purpose: disorderly? If so, Whe∣ther we have not ground in Scripture to withdraw from every Brother that walks disor∣derly, and for a time to absent our selves from the Church having voted communion with them, notwithstand∣ing their sin? For it can∣not be that we should sit down with the c The Reader may judge it a contradiction for us in this Query to call them a Church in distinction from our selves, and yet in the close of our following Papers to judge otherwise: To which we answer, That upon our first coming off we were greatly in the dark, but waiting upon the Lord for light and direction herein, did afterwards discern, that where the major part fell in with scandalous sins, the lesser part with drawing from them upon that account, the Lord did look upon those who had the truth and purity on their side, to have virtually the power of the church in them, though the lesser number; of which more may be seen in our last Paper. Church, and not sit down with them, as the case now stands, our end being (if the Lord so
please) that the Church might consider whether sinne be not at their doore in so voteing communion with them. 6 6. Whether we are not in the Lords way,Matth. 18.19, 20. Jam, 1.5. chap. 5.16. Mal. 3.16. Luk. 24.14, 15, 17, 32. desiring to be resol∣ved in these things? If out of the way, (as is supposed) it is by meeting together to seek the Lord for counsel and directi∣on, not mixing our selves with others, (as is reported) or running into the World for our liberty to sin, but opening our hearts before the Lord, and each to other, to find out wherein, if so be that we have missed of the Will of God. 7 7. Whether those tearms of Schismaticks and faction to make a rent in the Church, and that we have no Scripture to warrant our practise,Matt. 18.7 Rom. 16.17. (as many say) be not unduly and wrongfully charged upon us? Consider∣ing also, that we were a year and upwards by a patient waiting, en∣deavouring to bring the matter before the Church, and when brought before them, they refusing to deal with our Brethren for the same. 8 8. Whether to comply with our Brethren lying under these sins,1 Cor. 13.6. be not a breach of the bond of love? according to that in the Corinths, Love rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth And whether it be the union and wisdom of the spirit, to hold the bond of peace without purity? according to that in James 3.17. The wisdom that is from a∣bove, is first pure, then peaceable, &c. So that our present practise seems unto us to be a pressing after that Grace of love in its true end according to the Scripture; yea, it is counted by the Lord a hating of our brother, to see sin upon him, and not to admonish him, Lev. 19.17.Matt. 18.16, 17. and to withdraw from him in cafe that Admonition bring him not to such an acknowledgement of his sinne as to forsake it. 9 9. Whether it be suf∣ficient to excuse us at the great day of the Lord, d The occasion of this query did arise from the great outcry made against us by the generality of them, charging us with Schism, and making division in the Church, when our Lord saith that offenees will come, but wo be to those by whom they do come: And whether the crying evil of the Souldiers hath not justly given offence, and Mr. Simpson, and some others chiefly abetting of them, hath not also added thereunto, we leave unto the upright in heart to judge; and whether it be not a popish principle, and also they do not hereby condemn their own practice in seperating from the Na∣tional church (so called) of England, in saying, There is no with∣drawing from a Brother walking disorderly, because the maior part of a congregation falls in with them: And is it not the argu∣ment of the Church of Rome at this day, who say we do withdraw from the Mother-church, because the grand apostacy first sprang from a true Church in home, who in number have all along been the maior part. that Wee did cry out, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we, when at the same time it will appeare that wee have those amongst us who do defile the
Temple of the Lord to the view of the World; for the Temple of God is holy; and that you should rejoice in such defilement, surely all such rejoycing is not good: And whether our Lord Jesus by the Evangelist John doth not charge five of the seven Churches in the Re∣velation for complying with sin, yea one of them for their lukewarm∣ness is threatned to be spued out of his mouth, as being a Church onely in Name, and not in deed; and one of the other two (to wit, Smyrna) hath no sin laid to their charge, but are exhorted to be faith∣ful unto death, and they shall receive a Crown of life, for the Devil would cast some of them into prison: Now we suppose that the Devil there, it taken for some of his Instruments, which makes out, That their te∣stimony was of such a publike nature, that the power in being would take hold of them; and yet it cannot be supposed but that they had their sins of weakness, though nothing is laid to their charge in re∣gard of their faithfulness to some present Truth. 10 10. Whether sin in a Church of Christ (we mean sinnes of scan∣dal) be not more dishonoura∣ble e If the incestuous persons sin, or two or three Brethren committing the same, or other sins, be dis∣honorable to God, then surely if the church (whose du∣ty it is to reprove, & cast out such from amongst them; Matth. 18 17. com. with 1 Cor. 5.13.) should either be guilty of the same, or own them that are so, their sin would be so much more. But to come more home to our present case, see Numb. chap. 14. chap. 16. where the lesser part of the congregation (to wit, Moses, Aaron, Caleb and Ioshua, who were pressing on from Egypt to Canaan, the work of God in that generation) were counted faithful, & owned by him for that very cause; but the greater part of the conregation, who said, Let us make a captain, and return into Aegypt, and would have stoned Moses and Aaron, &c. their sin was so dishono∣rable to God, and did so provoke the eyes of his glory, that their carkasses must fall, and not see the good Land they were going into, yea and their children af∣ter them wander in the Wilderness forty years. And in Numb. 16. The sin of the greater part of the congregation in joyning with Korah and the renowned men amongst them in opposi∣tion to the Spirit of the Lord in Moses, &c. upon the forementioned account (see verse 13, 14) was like wise so abominable in his fight, that he bid Moses and Aaron, ver. 21, 24, 26. Separ te from them, and also speak to the congregation to depart from the Tents of those wicked men, and touch nothing of thews, lest they be consumed in all their sins. Then surely the wickedness of them in Power, who have indeed made a Captain, and are gone back to Aegypt, and those that up∣hold them, whilest they oppose and persecute the Lords spirit in his little Remnant, who are pressing from Monarchy and Tyranny, towards the promised Zion, and Kingdom of Christ, (the work of God in this generation) doth equal, if not exceed the sin of that congregation, & of Korah & his company; & it is as great an evil to touch with them, or receive any of their things upon that account & as dishonorable to God to stand by, & uphold them therein, (or for Churches or others to own them that do so) as it was to have countenanced, upheld or touch't with Korah and his company in that day. to God then the like in a private brother, or two or three Brethren? And how can we be said to withdraw from e∣very Brother that walks disor∣derly, when we quietly sit down with the Church that owns them in their sin, (as we conceive) and do break bread with, and prophesie amongst them? for we cannot see how this will hold before the Lord when we are to avoid every appearance of evil.
11 11. Whether to acquiess in the judgement of a Church concern∣ing sin, though a restimony have been born against it, be not some∣thing of the reliques of the man of sin, and in process of time may not bring us under this Maxime, To believe as the Church believes, though we ought to be very tender and careful how we proceed in such a business, that we be upright in heart before the Lord, earnestly seeking to him for direction and counsel? 12 12. Whether our Brethren that wear the Sword, are not to be charged with Schism, & making a rent in the Church, having through their just offence given to many Brethren and Sisters in the Congre∣gation, and many other choice Saints in the Nation, made division amongst us? and as we hear several others standing in the like quality with them, have been f There was a mistake about the Souldiers men∣tionend in this query, as cast our of two Congregations in VVales; for so soon as they began to lay their sin to their charge, they withdrew themselves, and came no more to them, as we are since informed, otherwise they had proceeded further against them. cast out of two Churches in Wales upon the same occasion, to wit, Mr. Jen∣kin Jones, & Mr. Powells Chur∣ches; and likewise (as we hear) another in England, whose Name at present we have forgotten. 13 13. Whether that Principle of the Congregation, namely, Com∣munion with Saints upon the account of union with the Head, be not unduly charged, as broken by us, when it is not intended, by so good and righteous a principle, that a Brother or Sister should take a liber∣ty thereby, as an occasion to the Gal. 5.13. Flesh, to walk scandalously a∣mong Saints and sinners, for that is the corruption, and not the true end of it. The consideration whereof we think doth lye with such sorrow upon our souls, as we may truly say hath wrung tears out of some of our hard hearts. We shall not add more at present, fearing it may be thought we have been too large in this already; onely this, that whereas it is said, Nothing would content us but the sudden casting out of our Brethren with∣out an orderly process according to the Scripture, to which end we had re∣solved our present withdrawing before we came to the Church: We do therefore desire to leave this with you as before the Lord, That it was the least in our thoughts so to do, for we hoped that truth would have taken so much place, as that our brethren would have been ad∣monished of their sin by the Church, and so to have withdrawn from them if happily thorow a more narrow search into their hearts here∣by, the Lord might please out of his Grace to discover this their sin,
which hath, and doth bring so great dishonor to the Name of the Lord, though at present (as they say) unseen to them; and in this Work not to have counted them as enemies, but admonished them as bre∣thren; but so sudden a vote for communion with them, lying under so great sin, as we judge by what was offered that day, did so amaze us, that when we came out of London-House, we knew not what to do, only some of us did then conclude to meet together, to enquire what was the mind of the Lord in this thing; in which way of seek∣ing to him we have continued to this day. Now we hope you will bear with us, and put a brotherly interpretation upon any thing therein that may not seem to carry with it that Love, Affection, and Gentleness which we desire from our hearts should be, it not being our intention to justifie our selves in any evil, but rather to lye at the Lords, and your feet therein; yet would gladly be found faith∣ful to the Lord in such a day as this, when they that tempt God are de∣livered, and they that work wickedness are set up; yea, he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey, and a snare is laid for him that reproveth in the Gate. Thus we humbly leave these our thoughts to your seri∣ous consideration, hoping that whatever our failings may be, yet we shall not want the guidance and direction of his spirit in every way of truth; and we also trust, That as you are in some measure pres∣sing after that excellent Grace of Love, so you may abound therein more and more, in knowledge and in all judgement, that you may approve things that are excellent in such a day as this, being sincere, and without offence until the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of Righteous∣ness, which are by Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God; and then it will be our joy and rejoycing to return unto you; and in the mean time we judge it our duty to be waiting upon the Lord and you, till his mind and Will be further revealed concerning us; in whose pro∣tection we leave you, and remain. Dated the first day of the fourth Month, 1656. Your poor, destitute, and mourn∣ing Brethren and Sisters in some measure, till the Lord re∣store you to your primitive spi∣rit of Faith, Light, Love, and Zeal for his glory, wherein you have been as a Beacon upon the top of a Mountain.
AFter some solemn waiting upon the Lord, this Paper was signed by threescore in number, or thereabouts, and was intended so to have been given in, but was otherwise determined upon for these two Reasons; First, Because in such an evil day as this, we ought not to trust in a Friend, no, not in a Guide, but to keep the door of our mouths from those that lye in our bosome; If so, then not to trust our hands with those who had so unworthily betrayed the Cause of Christ. Se∣condly, It was judged most for the glory of God to go in person all of us, being about twelve more then signed it, and own the said Pa∣per, which would be more authentick, and less advantage given a∣gainst any particular person; and therefore an exact Copy was drawn out, and carryed unsigned, all of us accompanying the Brethren (to whom it was chiefly committed) unto London-House, the next first day after the date thereof; when being come, a Brother of ours stood up, and spake a few Words to this effect, That we were here come to pre∣sent unto them in brotherly love, after solemn waiting upon the Lord, a Paper, containing the evil of those persons amongst them, against whom we had been so long contending, together with the Grounds and Reasons of our withdrawing to this day, which we had the more hastened to give in, in re∣gard we were several times urged thereunto by several Brethren sent by their appointment unto us; and further, desired that liberty might be gran∣ted unto one of the Brethren (by us intrusted) for the reading of it; Which was not onely denyed us, but much scruple raised by some, What Scripture-Warrant we had to give in our dissatisfactions in Writing. To which answer was made, That we judged it our Gospel-liberty to give it in by writing, or otherwise, as might be most for the glory of God; for by this writing we did give in our joynt Testimony against the present evil, with the reasons of our withdrawing, which we apprehended could not be so well done by a private brother, or brethren in speaking; but that we might have had just grounds of exceptions against some things that might be spoken against such brethren. Hereupon our Brother Marsh who walks with them, said, That he thought it was not onely our Gospel-liberty, but the Scripture would warrant our practice, else Pauls writing to the Corinthians about the incestuous person, was not warrantable; but if it was, then our practice had ground in Scrip∣ture, and therefore conceived there need be no further discourse a∣bout that. And by this means was that Scruple in some measure re∣moved, and some Way made for the reading of our Paper, but not by any one of us, which although we judged it a little unreasonable, yet for peace sake we condescended thereunto, and accordingly deli∣vered
in our Paper, which was read by the Brother aforemention∣ed, though it was so late before he began, that there was hardly time to read it thorough by day-light, much less to debate it, and open the Scriptures therein; however before we departed, they made us a promise that We should have full liberty another time to read it our selves deliberately, and debate it, with the Scriptures laid down for proof of what was there asserted; & We also promised them to come whensoever they should desire it. And so We departed for that time, continuing with one accord together in prayer and supplication, ex∣pecting to hear from them according to promise; but contrary here∣unto, in some Weeks after, they sent for several Pastors and Members out of other Congregations without our consent, to receive their Advice how to deal with us: Their Names are as followeth. Mr. Cockayn, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Roberts, Mr. Jessey, Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Isles, Mr. Knowles, Mr. Highland, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Jacksen, Chir. Mr Woolaston. Mr. Barebone, Mr. Taylor. Having knowledge of this Meeting thorough the report of others, We did appoint a time to seek the Lord, to consider what might be our duty, & how far we should appear therein, or whether we should appear or not; and at last came to this issue, That we should appoint several Brethren in the Name of the whole, to go unto those Bre∣thren above mentioned, when they should meet with the other part of the Congregation, and acquaint them with the Grounds and Rea∣sons why we could not own them in the Work they were come about. The Reasons are these. 1 1. They (meaning those from whom we were withdrawn) had not performed their promise to us, having declared when We were last vvith them, That the Paper presented should be debated in the Church, according to the Scriptures there inserted; Which hath not yet been done, though We promised to be with them whensoever they would send for us about it. 2 2. We see no rule in Scripture that any Brethren from any Churches, or others, should be sent for to debate our Paper before it had been debated in the Church amongst us, and the Scriptures in the Margent opened. 3 3. We conceive it had been meet according to Scripture, that We the Brethren and Sisters differing from them, should have had cognizance and approbation of the persons so nominated, to debate the matter in difference.
4 4. Whether they have ta∣ken the consent of the h We would not be understood by these two Que∣ries as if we did judge that in extraordinary cales particular Brethren out of Churches might not be sent for without the consent of their respective congre∣gations, to determine a Church-difference, there be∣ing onely one occasional practice by the Church at Antioch to Jerusalem, Act. 15 2. But that which we chiefly aim at, (as by the third, and the close of the fifth Query will appear) was their sending without our consent in the Name of the church, when we our selves were a part; likewise there was several persons there, a∣gainst whom we had just exceptions, if it had then been meet to speak of it. Moreover their case was ordinary, not difficult to them, for that most of the churches in the city, more or less, seem to us guilty of the same transgression; and therefore we apprehend that such a practice was more binding to them then to us, as our case at this time stands, otherwise we desire to keepe strictly to every primitive practice that hath any such instructions for us. Churches for the choice of those Brethren they have sent for? If not, What Scripture Rule they have to do so? 5 5. Whether such a pra∣ctise doth not savour of an ar∣bitrary spirit amongst men? much more among the Chur∣ches of Christ, in calling seve∣ral Brethren without the con∣sent of the Churches to whom they belong, which We can∣not own lest we should betray the cause of Christ for which we contend, into the hands of a few, which will be a bad president for other Churches for the time to come. The said Queries being laid before the Brethren aforementioned, did so prevail with them, as they not onely judged it unmeet, but did wholly refuse to meddle with the matter in difference as the case then stood, declaring It was but reasonable We should have a free debate of our Paper in the Congregation, according to promise, before a∣ny other means be used, and so they departed for that time Within a short time after this, a day and time was agreed upon between us and the other part of the Congregation, from whom we were withdrawn to seek the Lord together, and then to proceed to the debate of our Paper, though that vvhich provoked them hereun∣to, (as We conceive was from the refusal of those Brethren they sent for to meddle therein, as the case stood, rather then their ovvn voluntary act: But the day appointed being come, the fore-part of it vvas spent in prayer, opening our hearts before the Lord, and each other, hereby hoping such a spirit might be sound both in them and us, as the debate would have been to the glory of God, and the disco∣very of truth on either side; but instead thereof, so many grating ex∣pressions both in prayer and speaking vvere uttered by Mr. Sympson against us, as vvas to the grief of most of us, and the indisposing of some in a great measure unto the Work We were met about: How∣ever about two in the Afternoon, we proceeded to the debate of our
Paper with some reasonable liberty, though commonly interrupted by Mr. Sympson, who when any thing came close upon the Souldiers, would frequently be speaking in excusing of them, and condemning us. In the close of the day having got through our Paper, We desired to have the result of the Congregation, Whether by what was laid before them, they did not judge the Souldiers to be guilty of those sins laid to their charge by us? Whereupon Mr. Sympson stood up, and spake in Words to this effect, That he looked upon us as such who had made a rent in the Church, and that there was a mark set upon us by the Holy Spirit, being such as had made i We desire that Scripture, Rom. 16.17, 18. may be considered, where those words spoken by Mr. Sympson are laid down, and it will appear the Apostle was spea∣king of such persons as we are now separated from, to wit, such as serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. May we not truly say, That worldy interest and self-ad∣vantage hath been the ground and root of this aposta∣cy, wherein the Souldiers are chief; and to palliate so great wickedness, are not good words, and fair spee∣ches the cover by which they deceive the hearts of the simple? and give us leave humbly to ask what belly-ad∣vantage have we thereby? Do we not rather hazard all that is near and dear unto us? yea, we are become the reproach of most professors, having much evil laid to our charge, through we trust it shall appear that it is groundlesly. division; and therefore we should have no vote with them, neither should there be any vote in the Church except we would withdraw; Which not a little grieved our spirits: But notwithstanding so foul an as∣persion, we made little reply, but waited to heare what o∣thers would say; but a general silence continuing, we conclu∣ded that the major part were of his mind: Whereupon we departed, and waited patient∣ly for some time, to see whether they would send us their thoughts about the Souldiers, since they would not let us have a vote with them; and least if should be laid aside, which Mr. Sympson endeavoured all along to do; We did by Messengers remind them several times, likewise to know whether those Words then spoken by Mr. Sympson were the sense of the whole, which they disown'd, as being Mr. Symp∣sons Words alone; but to the other We could get no return to this day, as by our next Paper given in to them, doth more at large appear. Likewise before the delivery of the ensuing Paper, having spent some particular time to seek the Lord for direction and coun∣sel, and also to enquire into his Will at this time, it was judged a duty incumbent upon us to go to our Brother Sympson, & lay his evil before him in abetting the Souldiers, and declining the Testimony of Christ he had suffered for in Windsor Castle, as by several Letters from thence being read amongst us, did appear, (some Copies where∣of the Reader may peruse in the close of this Book) and according∣ly six Brethren in the Name of the whole, were sent unto him, and
with all humility to intreat his hearing of what by them we had to say; which accordingly they did; but how unkindly they were recei∣ved, will appear by the eusuing Narrative, being the substance of what then passed between him and them. The 11th. of the 9th. Month, 1656. A briefe account of some Passages between our Brother Sympson, and the Brethren appointed by us to meet with him about some Letters he wrote to the Congreation du∣ring the time of his imprisonment in Windsor Castle, it be∣ing apprehended he is very much fallen from the truths therein laid down, to the great dishonour of the Gospel, and the grief of many of the faithful in this day. THE six Brethren appointed to this Work, met at a Brothers House in Coloman-street the day abovementioned, about two in the Afternoon, to commend their present Work unto the Lord, and desire his blessing upon them therein, and then made their repair to our Brother Sympson, where after a little waiting for the coming of our Brothers, Shrimpton and Marsh, who desired (as the Brethren were informed) to hear what should pass in relation to the Letters: This motion was also made by Brother Powell, being also present, That before any progress be made, there might be a word put up to the Lord for a blessing. To which end another brother made answer, That it would be necessary the naked ground of their coming should be first laid down, that we might pray with understanding. Which be∣ing done, the Brethren sent by us declared their readiness to joyne therein: Hereupon one of the Brethren proceeded to declare the ground of their coming to this effect; That several of our Bro∣ther Sympsons Letters from Windsor Castle being presented to seve∣ral Brethren who met at our Brother Caryes house intentionally up∣on another account; but those Letters intervening, we spent our time in perusing them, which in the reading did so work upon their hearts, that they throught meet to present unto the Brethren & Si∣sters (in whose Name they were then come) the said Letters, and to offer, Whether some Brethren should not be chosen in the Name of the rest, humbly to lay the matter contained in them before him, that if it were the Will of the Lord he might be convinced wherein, and how far he had declined the Cause and Interest of our Lord Jesus,
and be provoked to that old Spirit of Life and Zeal in testifying to so glorious a Cause, and accordingly upon reading of them we were of one heart that the Brethren aforementioned, in the Name of the whole, be desired to lay them before him with as much love & ten∣derness as could be; and that we were also reproved in our own spi∣rits as having missed of the Will of the Lord that we had it no more upon our hearts to beg mercy for him at the Throne of Grace, that the Lord would restore unto him that primitive spirit for the cause of Christ; & that many of our hearts were broken on his behalf at the reading of his Letters. After an account thus given, it was offer∣ed that a Word should be spoken to the Lord in prayer before any discourse should be. Our Brother Sympson then spake to this effect; That having had some knowledge of their coming from some of us, and the occasion of their coming from some others before their meeting here, he had privately commended the business they were come about, unto the Lord, as he did suppose they also had done; likewise he judged that if a∣ny of them should speak unto the Lord in prayer he could not freely joyne with them; so neither if he should speak there might be that spoken where∣in they could not freely joyn with him, which being pre-considered, be jud∣ged it most convenient to proceed to the work without prayer; and there∣upon spake further to this purpose; That since they profest they had in all plainness declared the ground of their coming, he would give them as plain an Answer, which that he might the better do, he should lay down his Answer under three heads: 1. As to themselves, and those whom they represented. 2. As to the Church, meaning those with whom he walked. 3. As to the Letters about which our Brethren came. As to the first, They were to know that he could not have discoursed with them in regard that the Church had dealt with us, and not onely declared their dissatisfaction of our withdrawing from them, but also that he had in the Name of the Church admonished us of our evil therein, & that they had waited upon us a great while, to the end we might repent and return; but we persisting in our sin, and refusing to hear the Church, we were thereby cut off from the priviledges of the Church, and therefore he could not look upon us as Brethren, but as heathens and publicans, and so to refuse discourse with them upon account of the Brotherhood, according to that in Matth 18. Which though they might look upon as very harsh, and a mani∣festation of little love, yet it being the Rule of Christ in the Gospel, he therefore was not to dispute the reason of it, but rather to judge, That obe∣dience to the commands of Christ in this, as well as in other things, is the only rule of love, and therefore did declare, That the Church having so
proceeded against us, he could not entertain any debate with them about those Letters. Which brought in the third Head, to which he spake to this effect; That the Letters about which they came were directed to the Church, (meaning those with whom he walked) and if he had writ∣ten any thing therein contrary to sound dectrine, or otherwise, he must appeal unto the Church, as Paul did from Agrippa to Caesar; and if the Church thought meet upon perusal to call him to an account for any thing therein, he should be ready to answer it before them; but he could not give way to the debating of them by our Brethren for the reasons aforementioned, be∣sides he could not in this case bring himself under the judgement of his adversaries, (or Words to that purpose) and thereby also give away the priviledges of the Church into the hands of such whom according to the Rule of the Gospel be must look upon as Heathens and Publicans; but if they or any other would come in their own k Mr. Sympson did not mean by coming in our own Name, to receive us as Brethren, but as Heathens and Publicans. Name, he should be ready to discourse with them; yet herein it was to be weighed, whe∣ther the Church would give away so much of their priviledge, as that any Letters directed to them should be questioned by any person, without their consent at least. After this our Brother Cary (one of the six) said, It was some∣what strange to him that he could so considently assert an untruth, (to wit) That we should lye under the Admonition of the Church, when there was never any Admonition from those Brethren and Sisters from whom we were withdrawn, much less from the Church: Which the said Brother further made out thus; That himself with some other Brethren were appointed in the Name of the Whole to go to the other part of the Congregation from whom We were withdrawn, who went to Allhallows, and met with a considerable number of those Brethren in the Vestrey, to know of them, Whe∣ther, those Words spoken by Mr. Sympson that day our Paper was debated, (to wit, That the Holy Spirit had set a mark upon us for such as had made division) were the sense of the whole with them? To which they answered, It was not theirs; and Mr. Sympson also said, They were his own words. After this our Brother Cary was silent, and then our Brothers,Brethren of the o∣ther part of the Congrega∣tion. Marsh, Shrimpton, and Powell, being present as aforsaid, said, They never remembred any such Admonition. Mr. Sympson said, It was so; which he endeavoured to make out thus: That the Brethren who were entrusted with the Government of the Church, did agree that we should be admonished, as having sinned in lea∣ving the Congregation, and turning out backs upon the Ordinances of Christ, and that they had committed it to him to declare the same, which
he did at that time when brought in our paper containing the grounds of our withdrawing, through at that time we were not admitted to read them;& the Church not disowning of it, he looked upon it as an admoniti∣on of the Church. After this other of our Brethren spake in few Words to this purpose; That they were come as brethren, and they hoped in much love and singleness of heart to discourse with him, and to have laid down wherein we judged he had missed of the Will of God, and declined the Cause of our Lord Christ, comparing the present frame of heart he is in, with what it was when he lay a priso∣ner in Windsor Castle, when they could not but look upon him as ha∣ving an excellent spirit for Christ; but since he did refuse, they would turn unto the Lord (who would hear) and mourn for him: And so those Brethren departed, returning the said account unto us. Being thus unkindly, yea, may We not say unchristianly entertained by Mr. Sympson, We still continued vvaiting upon the Lord in our estate of vvithdrawing, our spirits being grieved by this carriage of his; And after some time seeking the Lord, and enquiring into his mind and Will, We came to this conclusion as a present duty lying before us, That in regard We did find no repentance in the Souldiers, but rather hardness of heart, as also Mr. Sympson hardened in his evil, in excusing and abetting of them, vvhich encouraged others to do the like; and the rest vvho vvere some vvhat sensible of the evil amongst them, much darkned in their understandings by reason thereof, We should unanimously go unto them, and lay before the Souldiers their ovvn evil, and the evil of the rest as abetting of them in their degree, and to admonish them in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, vvith as much brotherly love as the Lord should help us. And that We might have the greater avve of the Lord upon our souls, and be more or∣derly in this Work, vve did agree to send unto the Brethren hereafter mentioned, to intreat them in brotherly love, and for the glory of God, to accompany us as Witnesses therein; vvhich was accordingly done, and persons chosen from amongst us to speak unto them. The Names of the brethren sent unto, are these: Mr. Cann, Mr. Clark, Col. Danvers, Mr. Bland, Mr. Barbone; Mr. Waters, Mr. Squibb, Mr. Luxford, Mr. Barret, Mr. Ireten, Having given notice to the other part of the Congregation the VVeek before our coming. That vve intended upon the next first day after to come & offer something to them. All these brethren (except Mr. Barbone, who vvas not vvell) being members of other Congrega∣tions
and Societies, came according to our request, and accompany∣ed us to Lodon house upon the said first day of the VVeek in the Af∣ternoon; vvhere being come; the said brethren vvere not vvillingly admitted; but after our coming in vvith them, one of our brethren stood up to acquaint them with the occasion of our coming at this time; but Mr. Sympson and two or three more speaking together very confusedly cryed out, No, no, we should not speake except those Bre∣thren that came along with us would depart. To which answer was made, That we desired their company to testifie to the Truth of vvhat we had to say. And then the brother vvhich spake first would have gone on; but several of them cryed out together very confused∣ly, as before; to which vve replyed, That having sought the Lord therein before our coming, we could not give way thereunto; but since they did refuse to hear, vve vvould depart. And in a short time after vve sent them the substance in VVriting of vvhat was then in∣tended to be spoken. A Copy whereof is as follows. Dear Brethren and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ, SInce your unkindness to∣wards us the last l We mean that time wherein we intended to de∣liver this Admonicion by word of mouth, and had te∣stified thereunto according to the Rule of the Gospel, Math. 18 16, 17. time we vvere with you; & after some seeking unto the Lord vvhat might be our duty yet fur∣ther; this is gathered to be his mind and vvill, That the substance of what was then upon our hearts to have delivered by word of mouth, should be done in vvriting as vvell for your sakes, as in discharge of our own duty according to the Rule of the Gospel; and therefore vve intreat that you will suffer us hereby to plead a little vvith you for truths sake; and vve hope it is unfeignedly upon our hearts to lay your great sin before you from some sense of the great dishonour brought unto the Name of the Lord by you; and let these lines be patiently read through, before you judge you poor unvvorthy bre∣thren and sisters; for we can truly say that we disire to mourn and groan in secret for you, as well as for our own vveaknesses; and this is some part of our joy, That in simplicity and godly sincerity many of us have been by the space of two years and upwards endeavouring to get your feet (as well as our own) out of the Snare of the apostacy of this day, having compassion of you, as of our own souls; for we are in some measure perswaded, that some eminent hand of the Lord wil be manifested in due time to distinguish, between those that serve him
faithfully, and those that serve him not. In the first place therefore we pray you to consider the six great and scandalous sins laid to the charg of the brethren amongst you wearing the Sword, which for brevity sake we shall here onely mention, referring you to our paper alrea∣dy given in for a more particular knowledge thereof, wherein We desire the Scriptures in the margent may be diligently perused, and some remembrance had of vvhat the Lord did inable us to speak from them when our Paper vvas debated in the Church, al∣though it is very vvell knovvn so much liberty vvas hardly obtai∣ned. First, Treason against Christ as King and Prophet of his people, and King of Nations also; for the latter part of the late VVar did run in that Channel. Likewise against the faithful and vvell-affected in this Nation, whose Liberties and they are made bond-slaves to their bre∣thren, though some blood was spilt, and treasure spent to obtain it our of the hands of the late Tyrant. Secondly, Convenant-breaking, and false swearing, having engaged before the Lord and his People to perform the good promised on the behalf of Christ, his People, and the Nation, vvhich are novv broken in the face of the Sun. Thirdly, Oppression byThe man in Powerbid Mr. Jessey & others call him Iugler if tythes were not ta∣ken away by the third of Septem. 1654. Tythes, Taxes, &c. upon the bodyes and consciences of the Lords People, and the well-affected the Nation at this day. Fourthly, Persecution of Saints, many of the Lords people ha∣ving been, and some are still imprisoned for their testimony on the behalf of the Lord, his Cause, and the Nations liberty; and therein the Souldiers are altogether active, there being no rule, not so much as according to the Law of the Land, to justifie their practice by Ci∣vil Officers. Fifthly, Maintaining Antichristian Laws, Statutes and Customs, con∣trary to former Engagements and Declarations; by vvhich the Saints of old have suffered, and some do now suffer at this very day. Sixthly, Hereby the hearts of the righteous are greatly grieved: for that brethren (at least professing themselves so to be) should be a∣ctive in abetting and supporting so great vvikedness, That these sins were plainly proved against our brethren wearing the Svvord novv amongst you, is very manifest, not onely in general, but also in a great measure particularly, and therfore shall leave it unto the Lord vvho judgeth righteously. Yet vve do hereby hum∣bly admonish them of their evil, as being very great and scandalous.
After this there is laid down several Queries how vve vvere in duty bound to withdraw from them, and by the same Rule to admonish and withdraw from your selves, as being partakers with them, having made your selves m Guilty; for they are hereby encouraged to keep their places, whereby the Man in Power is encouraged to go on in his apostacy, and to judge himself (in pre∣tence at least) to be in a good condition; for when he hath been told, That he had not the love of good peo∣ple as formerly; and that many were grieved at his pre∣sent actions; he replyed, They were but a few inconsider∣able people who were dissatisfied, for the greatest part of ho∣nest men in the Army and Churches were for him, and ap∣proved of what he had done; which approhensions are begotten by members of Churches, and other profes∣sors holding places under him; for whilest they do so, their tongues are tyed, that they dare not openly speak their minds, though they really apprehend, yea, and will to some confess, That the present state of things are out of course, and are not so honest as in the day of their straits they declared they should be. Where∣fore doth is not concern the Churches to take heed how they encourage those (by continuing them among them) who abet and uphold the present apostacy, lest they become guilty thereof themselves, and incur the Lords displeasure for so doing. guilty of their iniquity by your vote of communion with them: And this vve do in obedience to our Lord Je∣sus Christ, who hath comman∣ded us to withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly, though herein we would di∣stinguish between such of our Brethren & Sisters as do plead for, encourage, and support them in their evil; and others who for want of a true know∣ledge & understanding there∣of, together with the overaw∣ing of some amongst you (as we fear) are notwithstanding in their degree also become partakers with them in their evil. And here desire so far to digress as to answer one objection, namely, That our brethren the Souldiers desired leave to go off from us be∣fore we procceded so far as now we have, but we would not. To which vve answer, That it is to be considered their sins are ve∣ry scandalous, and if so, such a practice would be contrary to the Rule directing in such cases, That if a brother, or brethren offend, to admonish them particularly, then more publikely, as he or they are found to persevere in their sin, that if the Lord will, they may see their evil and repent, and not suffer them to go off without knowledge of their evil, for if they should, it may prove to the har∣dening of their hearts, and consequently to the ruine of their souls. Indeed, to have let them gone off, would have been much more easie to us, and pleasing to the flesh; for we did in some measure foresee how hard it would be in this rough path to follow the Lord fully, yet we take comfort in this, That our Cause is of God, and our hearts we trust (in the main) upright therein.
Now we shall proceed to give you a short account how the Lord hath led us since our said withdrawing, wherin it will be manifest (if the Lord give you a spirit of discerning) that we have to this day been patiently waiting upon the Lord and you, to the end that if it had pleased our heavenly Father, it might have put you upon inqui∣ry how far you are become guilty of the great iniquity of this day, which hath brought so great reproach unto the Name of the Lord, even through the World; but instead of inquiring and smiting upon the thigh, saying, What have I done? your practice doth demonstrate that you say, You have well done. Further, We desire you to remem∣ber, That the same Evening after the debate our Paper, the whole Church being there, We desired their result, to wit, Whether our bre∣thren the Souldiers by what was offered, were not in a great measure guil∣ty of she evil laid to their charge? Whereupon our Brother Sympson spake to this purpose, That the holy spirit had set a mark upon us for such as had made division; and therfore declared, that we were not persons fit to have a vote amongst them; neither should there by any vote had there unless we would depart. Which words, though we cannot say he spake in the Name of the Church, yet we are sure the major part were n It is the great fault of Church-members and other professors in this day, and much discovers their dark∣ness, that they approve their hearts no more to God, but are so much led (whether right or wrong) as their Pastor or some eminent member or person among them, steers their course; which low, carnal frame of spirit, (the more the spirit of the Lord is poured forth) will not onely stink in the Nostrils of his faithful peo∣ple, but be condemned and dye; for the true spirit doth so redeem those who have it, from the fear and favour of man to God, as they will follow no man nor things (let their pretence be never so high and glorious) fur∣ther then they follow, and are for Christ, according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 1.1. so silent, that not∣withstanding he spake so un∣advisedly, there was little spo∣ken against it: so that for peace sake it was judge meet to depart at that time with∣out the result of the Congre∣gation. Next after this several Brethren in the Name of the whole (with∣drawn from you) were sent to London-house to desire, That since you would not admit us to have a vote with you, we might by your selves have the sense of Paper, (to wit, that which was first given in) but you wholly refused to give us a hearing of what we had to say. Since which several Brethren in the Name of the Whole, were sent to Allhallows upon a first day in the Afternoon, after breaking of bread, to know your sense Whether those Words spoken by our Brother Sympson, (to wit, That we were marked by the holy spirit for such as had made a rent in the Church, and that he admonished us of our evil therein, in their namo. Likewise whether by their vote of communion with the Souldiers,
this were not to be taken into the vote, to wit, notwithstanding the evil laid to their charge, to the former they said, They did not remem∣ber any admention; but to the latter your Brother Sympson said, That we might know their mind by their practice; to which they were ge∣nerally silent, none contradicting what our Brother Sympson had spo∣ken; whereupon those brethren took their leave, and departed out of the Vestrey; for the Message vvas only delivered to the brethren, being fifty or sixty in number, or thereabouts, it not being thought meet so speak in publike; first, because many strangers were present. Secondly, We did desire to order it as might make most for peace. After this, upon further inquiry what our duty was yet to do, not∣withstanding so much means used to provoke you to jeanlousie, and no fruit of it but hardness of heart, and a further closing in with the present evil by your continued practise. There were several Letters of our brother Sympsons presented to us, Dated from Windsor Castle. when he was a prisoner there, it being judged that the Lord was emi∣nently present with him, as by the said Letters will appear; Which Letters being read among us, the Lord was pleased so generally to melt out hearts in the sense of that spirit of truth We judged then to be breathing in him; but his present frame of heart compared with what it was then, seeming to us as contrary as light to dark∣ness: It was thereupon concluded as a duty incumbent upon us to appoint several brethren in the Name of the Whole, to take those Letters, and in love and meekness to read them to our said brother, to the end, that if the Lord so please he might thereby consider from whence he is fallen, and do his first works, hoping also that he might thereby be brought to consider whether he had not missed of the Will of God in endeavouring not onely to excuse, but (as We judge) to countenance our brethren the Souldiers in their evil Way. But oh! that which We desire to mention with grief and sorrow of heart, instead of receiving us in love, as We came unto him, and giving us leave to open our hearts before him, he absolutely refused not onely to pray with those brethren sent by us, but also to entertain them in our Name as brethren, or to admit any conference with them upon that account, in regard that we were by him admonished in the Name of the Church of our evil in making a rent and division, as he said. And since that (he said) they had waited upon us to see if we would re∣turn and repent; but we not returing, they looked upon us as Heathens and Publicant, and that he did so look upon us also. And for the letters they were directed to the Church, (meaning your selves without us) and that if they had any thing to question him about'them, he would make answer
unto them. Vnto which this Answer in general was made, That We humbly thought he spake an untruth, in that We could not remem∣ber there was ever any such Admonition given us as yet, much less had We any account that We vvere esteemed no other then Hea∣thens and Publicans. After the Brethren (sent by us to him) depar∣ted, being much grieved that our love should be so returned upon us, (but so it was, the Lord lay it not to his charge if it be his Will) up∣on further seeking to the Lord what was our next Work, it was thought meet, That as We had been a long time waiting upon you by patience and much long-suffering, as We judge, (our Weakness ex∣cepted) having laid the sin of our Brethren before you by our selves, and of your own evil in abetting them; (some more, and some less) but in∣stead of returning from your evil, you have fallen in with it more directly in o It seems they were not contented with their first vote in declaring communion with the Souldiers not∣withstanding their evil, though at our first coming off, they disowned that by saying, That they did onely declare a continuance of communion with them as Souldiers, with∣out respect to the evil laid no their charge. But by revote∣ing communion with them, they have plainly declared the evil laid to their charge to be no evil; and so have directly justified them therein. And that their evil who approve of, and uphold the present Apostasy, may more plainly appear, see the following Scriptures, Numb. 27.3. to 7. The Daughter of Zelophead to cleare their title to a portion of Land they claimed in right of their deceased father in the Land of Canaan, plea∣ded, That he dyed in the wildernesse in his own sin, and was not in the company of Korah (and those with him) who gathered themselves together against the Lord; imply∣ing, that if he had been among them, and standing on their side when they opposed Moses, and Aaron, &c. who were going to possesse the Land of Canaan, (a type of the work of our day) was greater then any other of his sins, and that which, would have cut him and them off from such a portion of Land as was allotted to those who followed the Lord to his foot in the work of that day: And is not the Souldiers Sin the same? revoting communion with them; so that your practice is no less to us then adding sin to sin: And particularly our brother Kel∣zey, who confessed more, as having a hand in the Govern∣ment at its first rise, then We could prove, though at first he denyed it: Likewise, That he had summoned some persons to shew cause why they would not pay tythes, from whence did follow further trouble to those persons by his Depu∣ty so far as they were taken into custody, til they had made their composition. We ought now according toMal: 18: 16: Rule, to take with us several brethren full of Grace and godliness, faithful to the Lord and his Cause in this day, and spotless in their lives and conversations, vvho might go a∣long with us as Witnesses in our further Testimony against so great evil, that out of the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be established; and accordingly We did present our selves with the said
brethren, intending to have laid the evil before you, and thereof in brotherly love to have admonished you, as We now do by these lines in VVriting, because you would not vouchsafe us to do it otherwise. Likewise to this further end, That none of our brethren and sisters may plead ignorance of the end of our coming at that time, having ground to fear that many are, whose conditions We desire to tender as our own souls, were We in their estate. But it may be objected, That we might have had liberty to have spoken what was upon our hearts when we were last with you, had those friends, which came with us departed according to your desire. To which We answer, That our coming there at that time was in obedience to a command of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, to wit, That when a Brother or Brethren will not hear, so as to return from his, or their evil, being privately admonished, We are then to take other Brethren with us as VVitnesses to vvhat we should say, so that had we given way to such a motion, we must have made void that Ordinance of Christ; moreover we our selves had been with you several times by our selves, as is already mention∣ed, besides the sins laid before you are publike, and not private sins, and therefore needed not so much secresie. Thus desiring you will re∣ceive this Admonition in love, being done (we hope) for Christs sake, and in tender regard to your souls: VVe subscribe our selves Your poor unworthy brethren and Sisters, who do appre∣hend that as truth is with us, so the power of the Church rests in us. John Proud, Tho. Cary, Caleb Ingold, James Chadwick, Signed in the Name and by the appoint∣ment of the whole, none contradicting Dated the fourth of the 11. Moneth, 1656. AFter the delivery of the said Admonition in writing, we continu∣ed waiting upon the Lord to see what good would be wrought up on their hearts thereby, but instead thereof in some short time after they send unto the several Churches in the City without our know∣ledge or consent (as they did when we sent in our first Paper) to the end they might send chosen men from amongst them to hear and de∣termine
the matter in difference between us, which we did a little won∣der at, hoping rather, the sense of their evil laid before them might have provoked them to a godly jealousie; but so it was, that the Pa∣stors and Elders, with chief men amongst the Brethren in the Churches, were sent according to their request the 26 of the 11th. Month, 1656. But before we give an account of what passed that day, we shall crave leave to hint thus much, That after our knowledge of their intention to send to the Churches as aforesaid, and before the day of their com∣ing abovesaid, not knowing under what tryal we might come there∣by, we set our selves to seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, to know what might be our duty therein; and as the result of our waiting up∣on him came to this conclusion, That it would be most for the glory of God to choose out several brethren from amongst us to give in our Reasons unto the Pastors and Elders of the Churches, (when they were met with the other part of the Congregation) why we could not admit they should hear the matter in difference between us. And accordingly five Reasons were draw up, and committed to fix brethren to deliver in writing, or by word of mouth, as they should see cause. The Reasons should be here inserted, but because they will be most proper for perusal when given in to the Pastors and Elders at their meeting, we shall refer the Reader thereunto, pag 38. and so proceed to give an account of that dayes meeting. When the Pastors and Elders, &c. of the Churches were met, the six brethren chosen by us, according to appointment were there present, & when they came first into London-House, (the place of their meeting) they found Mr. Sympson in prayer, and after he had ended prayer, he pro∣ceeded to give a Narrative of what had passed between us and them to that day; but with how much partiallity in many things, and in some things direct p Mr. Sympson asserted these three things in his Narrative; first, That he admonished us in the Name of the Congregation. Secondly, That we had nothing against our Brethren the souldiers but meerly their places in the Army. Thirdly, That we went from House to House to get away numbers from them. How far the two first are untrue, we think the Reader by what hath been already laid down, may be able to judge. For the third we can clearly acquit our selves, having been so far from any such practice, that those of us whose wives are mem∣bers of the Congregation, have not been provoked by us, but have wholly left them to be guided by the Lord therein. un∣truths the brethren then pre∣sent by our appointment can testifie. After he had ended his Narrative, Mr. Nye (chief speaker of the Pastors and El∣ders, &c.) stood up, and spake to this purpose to Mr. Sympson, That he had given in a large Narrative of the matter in dif∣ference, which containing many things, would require some time to be searching, into; but before
any entrance be made thereupon, he desired to know whether any of the o∣ther part gone off from them, were there; if they were, he did desire to hear somthing from them in this case, & did hope that the Pastors & Elders there present would be very careful how they didIt being as he said, so great a case of, Consci∣ence; And which in∣deed is so to us. intermiddle therewith, for if what he had heard herein were true, it was a marvellous good separation, & upon good grounds, or to this effect. After this a Brother of ours stood up, and spake to this purpose; That after solemn waiting upon the Lord, several Brethren in the Name of the Whole withdrawn from that part of the Congregation, were there present, being chosen to present unto them in love and humility, the Reasons why We could not admit of their hearing the matter in difference be∣tween us; but before that, they desired the liberty of three Questi∣ons if it might be granted; and then the Brother which spake kept silence to hear their Answer. Upon which Mr. Nye stood up again, and said, It was but reasonable that we should have our liberty. Here∣upon the Brother which began, stood up, and proceeded with the following questions, two to the Brethren and Sisters from whom We were withdrawn, and one to the Pastors and Elders, &c. Quest. 1. Whether they did look upon us as part of the Congre∣gation. To which Mr. Sympson made answer, That sure we were; for he knew not when we were dealt with, to the best of his remembrance. Q. 2. We humbly propose to the Pastors. Elders, and Brethren of the Churches now present, Whether they were all of them sent and chosen by their respective Congregations. Here there was a great silence, but afterwards several of them spake, some saying, That they were chosen by their respective Congrega∣tions; others, That they were sent unto as particular persons; Whereby it was plain there was a disorder in their choice, which was in love ac∣knowledged by them. Q. 3. Whether the Pastors, Elders and Brethren of the respective Congregations then present, were invited and sent unto in the name of the whole Church? Here several of them were at a stand, not knowning well what to say; but they generally gave in at the last, That they were sent unto in the Name of the Church; Which was not so, for that themselves in answer to our first question acknowledge us to be a part, and what was done in sending for them, was without our knowledge or con∣sent. After this one of our Brethren stood up, and desired liberty to give their Reasons in our Name, Why they could not condiscend to the hearing the matter in difference by the Pastors, Elders, and Bre∣thren
of several Congregations then present; Which are as fol∣lows. 1. We conceive it to be contrary to the practice of the Churches of Christ in the New-Testament, that brethren of other Churches (though chosen by consent of their respective Congregations, should hear a Church-controversie without the consent of both parties a∣mongst whom the difference is; see Act. 15.1, 2, 3. the whole Church at Antioch sent to Jerusalem about Circumcision, as well those that were against it, as those that were for it. Upon this Mr. Nye stood up, and did acknowledge that there was a plain disorder and miscarriage in their choice every way; but desired to know whether notwithstanding such miscarriages, the Brethren in our Name had power to enter: upon the debate. To which one of the brethren spake to this purpose, 'That they had several Reasons more to urge, and then they should make further answer. And liberty being granted, the bro∣ther who began proceeded to the next reason, viz. 2. That it seems contrary to Morality, much more of Christiani∣ty, for members of other Churches to enter into the debate of a Church-difference, when that part of the Congregation with whom the difference was, did not choose any of them; neither had they knowledge of the matter till the other part resolved upon it, and had sent their messengers to invite them thereunto. To this Mr. Nye stood up and said, That it was indeed contrary to the principles of Morality, and then was silent, whereupon the brother proceeded to the third Reason. 3. That We should betray the cause our Lord Jesus Christ, to give it up unto the Judgement of the Pastors, Elders, and Brethren then present; First, In regard they came not with our consent. Se∣condly, For that against some of whom We might have just grounds of exceptions if it were meet to speak of it at this time. 4. It seems to us preposterous to enter upon such a Work till We had the result of the whole Congregation about the matter in que∣stion, or of that part at least from whom We are withdrawn, which We have not had, though We often intreated, and sent to them a∣bout it. 5. The foregoing Reasons being true, we humbly conceive that if a debate of the matter in difference should at this time be admitted, we should walk out of Gods way, and so not obtain the promisedIsa. 64.5. blessing in matters of that nature.
These Reasons were no sooner given in, but the Pastors, Elders, and Brethren of the several Churches there met together, rose up suddenly, to goe away; which Mr. Sympson observing, he asked them before they were gone, Whether they would give them no advice in the present business: To which Mr. Nye made answer, That they were not in a capacity, as things stood, to give any advice. To which Mr. Sympson said, What? no advice! VVhereupon Mr. Nye replyed, That the least they could do was to make a tender unto us whether we would joyn with them in sending to the Churches; and this was all the advice they could give; and so they departed; and presently after those brethren sent by us came away also; but as they were go∣ing, one of the other part that sate in the speaking-place, asked the brethren sent by us, whether they would embrace the advice given? To which answer was made, That they were no more then six brethren intrusted by us to give in our dislike of what they had done, but were not impowred to meddle wth any thing else; but if they had any thing to offer, they knew our time and place of meeting, when, and where the whole being present, they might if they pleased tender any thing they thought meet, & so those brethren came away. But the same day in the Afternoon being our time of meeting to edefie, and build up one another in our most holy faith, two brethren came to us from them with the same Message, which was received in love, and this onely given in answer, That we should consider of it, and return an answer so soon as conveniently we could. And accordingly either the same day, on the next first day following we concluded upon a day to spread their Message before the Lord, which when done, we sent them a return within a fortnight after by messengers of our own; the answer to their message should be here inserted; but being contain'd in our next Paper, we shall here omit it. Now the Reason why our Answer was given in writing was, for that those our brethren who declared the same verbally, brought return unto us, That they desired it should be so, pretending that they did not understand it, or rather (as we may say) it not suting with their desire, they would not understand it; but however upon this report unto us by those brethren who were sent in our Name, some from amongst us were appointed to draw it up in VVriting, and present it to the whole for their approbation, which vvas accordingly done; but the same day it should have been brought in to us, vve received another message from the other part of the Congregation, vvhich should be here inserted; but it being al∣so contained in our next Paper, vvith our Ansvver thereunto, vve shall purposely omit it, and refer the READER to the same.
Our Answer about sending to the Churches in the the City, to hear the matter in difference between us; Together with another Message from the other part of the Congregation, wherein they desire us to joyne with them in keeping a day of fasting and prayer, with our Answer thereunto. Dear Brethren and Sisters in our Lord Iesus Christ, UNderstanding by the brethren who were sent in our Name un∣to you, to give a return unto your last Message, that our An∣swer was very ill resented; and because it was not in full compliance with and according to your expectation, they were not suffered to speak out what was upon their hearts, without much interruption by some amongst you, as it hath been customary for the most part since our withdrawing from you, which We cannot but look upon as arbi∣trary amongst men, much more unsavoury among Saints, though you seldom received such unkindness from us, as we can remember; and not onely so, but We our selves are looked upon as such who act in hypocrisie which We hope the Lord hath; & will preseve us from, for such shall be sure to finde the weight of his indignation at this day, Isaiah 33.14. The consideration whereof, together with that invitation We re∣ceived from some amongst you, not opposed by any, hath engaged us to send the same in Writing, that so there might be no mistakes or still interpretations of what was then spoken, or advantage taken through our weakness to blemish so blessed a Cause; and we trust, that upon looking back into our own hearts, there is found a root of uprightness in the management thereof, and that it is not wilfully in our hearts to speak or act hypocritically, whatever some amongst you do says or apprehend. But before we come to the Answer it self, be∣ing the chief drift and scope of these lines, we humbly apprehend it necessary to lay before you the several Reasons last given in, when without our consent desired, you were pleased in the Name of the Church to send for several brethren to determine and udge of the matter in difference between us. The Reasons as they were laid dovvn in this Paper, being already inserted in theViz pag 38. of this Book. foregoing Leaf, vve do here purposely omit them, as being a needless repetition. These Reasons you very wel knovv the Lord did make so convin∣cing to those brethren vvho came at your request, that upon knovv∣ledg thereof they absolutely refused to meddle therein til such time as
you had advised with us, or the least asked our consent: Now We hoped, that before you had made any further progress, you would have laid before the Lord those r The Readen may remember that in pag. 22. se∣veral Brethren of other Churches were sent for by them to hear the matter in difference, which they re∣sused till our first Paper given in, was debated in the Church; likewise the other time mentioned in this Pa∣per, which are the two disappointments spoken of. two disap∣pointments you had received, and in a due fence thereof, en∣quired into his mind and will; but instead thereof at the same time, without so much as the leastly∣ing low before his face the same, did forth with send your Messen∣gers unto us, to know whether we would join with you in sending to the several Churches for hearing of the matter in difference, Who were some what pressing upon us to have a present return one way or other which We durst not adventure upon for two Reasons; First, in respect of our own weakness and insufficiency, being poor foolish creatures. Secondly, In respect of the weight of such a Work, not being to be done without solemn seeking to the Lord, that being the Way he hath appointed to lead, advise, and instruct his people about any bu∣siness they are dark in; and accordingly We did send Answer by your Messengers to that effect. The next first day being a full meeting of the Congregation withdrawn from you, We did spread your desire before the Lord, and sought of him a right Way, how far We might comply with you therein; and in the close of the day after much dis∣course course about it, judging likewise that We had the Mind and Will of God, came to this result, That before We could give a direct answer to you desire, that you would be pleased to give us your positive judgement, Whether those Brethren of the Army were guilty of those sins laid to their charge by us, or no; which We have often de∣sired, intreated, and sent to you about, but could not obtain it to this day, as is expressed in our fourth Reason before mentioned, to which We then received this return, That you were not in a capacity to answer us therein, because you were divided into three parts, some judging they were under those sins; others, that they were not; and a third party could not tell whether they were, or not. This Answer thus returned, with some other circumstances not considerable here, to be inserted, We did spread it before the Lord, together with your former desire, and in the end came to this con∣clusion, That We were wholly dis-satisfied with your Answer to our last request, apprehending it somewhat strange that you should be unanimous in revoting communion with them after so plain proof of their sin laid to their charge, especially some of them, and yet
not be united in your judgments whether they were under those sins or not: And though We might hereupon wave any return to your desire, till We had your plain answer thereunto, yet least it should be judged that We were unwilling, or fearful the Cause of Christ We are engaged in, should have the hearing amongst other brethren, We did thereupon for the Name and Honour of God, and clearing up our integrity herein, and for the further manifestation of truth, with a due saving to thoseThose two Ad∣monitions are con∣tained in our first & second paper delivered in unto them two Admonitions, already given, conclude, That We were, and are very willing, and shall rejoice therein for Truths sake, to comply with your desire with this limitation, That We might according to our Christian liberty in this extraordinary case, choose on our part faithful Brethren, many of which had ha∣zarded their lives for the Name and Cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, so openly betrayed at this day, against whom We trust there shall be no just grounds of exceptions as to their lives and conversations; and you may proceed to send unto the Churches on your part, as you shall think meet: Now least the objection you made when the Brethren were last with you by our appointment, to wit, That by this Answer we do wave that our sleves which we have pressed upon you, about sending to the neighbouring Congregations, when we were not willing to join therein; Which we do plainly deny; for we never moved it unto you, much less pressed it upon you; but your proceeding herein hath been your ovvn voluntary act without us, though indeed we excepted a∣gainst your practice as it was by yourselves without our consent, therewith also apprehending your present estate to be no less then the plain fruit of open backsliding from the Cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, though we desire to mention it with fear and trembling and due respect unto some amongst you, as not so guilty herein as others are; likewise we have ground to fear, that most of the Churches of Christ in this City are more or less tainted with the sore Apostacy of this day; not that we delight in such reflections, but desire to speak it with humility, grief, and sorrow of heart, and should be glad there vvere no just ground for such a jealousie. This pre-considered, it seems more obliging unto you to follow that practice, then unto us at this time, and may excuse the formality of the practice on our pare, and the rather, when you proceeded in such a VVork not onely without the consent, but without so much as a tender thereof unto your brethren and sisters, joyntly concerned therein, until this last time, which was not so much of your selves, as seemingly necessitated thereunto by those Brethren of other Churches, who refused to ad∣vise you in, or hear any thing of the matter in difference till at least
you had asked our consent and approbation thereof; and therein you may please to remember the stress of their, refusal did lye to heare ought you had to say; and if so, we humbly apprehend it will take off that scandal of hypocrisie and changedness of mind, laid to our charge by some amongst you. Thus having given you a brief account of our last Message, together with what hath passed between us and you since our last Paper was given in, having therein unfeignedly, and in all plainness opened our hearts unto you, we shall not add more, onely desiring, That in case you do not think meet to receive our tender herein, but proceed as formerly yon have done that then you will favour us so far (or rather the Truth) as to let this Paper be read unto the Brethren you shall send for before any proceeding be, & af∣terward the other two in their order, as your intention was the last time the Messengers of other Churches were with you. Intending here to conclude, not having ought considerable to add, some of our Brethren inform us of a Message received from you the last sixth day was a seven night, to be communicated to us in words to this purpose, That you did think meet to offer unto us, that there might be a day of solemn fasting and prayer unto the Lord, wherein you de∣sire our conjunction, the chief end of the duty being upon these three ac∣counts; First, That both you and we might be deepely humbled before the Lord, and be made sensible of all our evils and miscaerriages, especially as they do relate to the present difference between you and us. Secondly, To enquire of the Lord a right way, what you and we ought to do for the heal∣ing of it. Thirdly, That if there were any other thing we: bought necessa∣ry to be put in, we had our freedom to add thereto. The consideration whereof hath put us upon a further enlargement in writing by way of answer, and to which we desire to give this humble Reply, That as to the VVork of humiliation it self, and a day to be appointed in order thereunto, we do fully approve of, as being not onely a Gospel Ordinance, but also incumbent on the Lords People in this day of sore affliction, and time of Jacobs Trouble, not onely as it may re∣late to our miscarriages & evils committed since our first withdraw∣ing, wherein we desire to acknowledge before the Lord and you, that herein we have ground sufficient to lie low before him, and cover our Faces with shame in the sence thereof, so far as it may not eclipse the riches of Grace in our Lord Jesus Christ, but also in respect of the crying evils, through the backsliding of professors under so great light, which we fear doth fore-run some sore judgement upon this Nation in general, and upon professors in particular; but how to join with you as the case now stands between us, we can see no Scripture-bottom,
or rational ground for the same, it being pre-supposed, first; That you have amongst you those that are guilty of gross and scan∣dalous sins, upon which account. We are withdrawn from you: Se∣condly, that you have not onely voted communion with such per∣sons, notwithstanding their sins, but by a second Vote, and continu∣ed practice, justifie them in their evil; and so many of you are be∣come greatly partakers with them of their evil deeds, and the rest al∣so, though less guilty. Thirdly, That you have so far own'd and ap∣proved of them, as to forget their evil, and charge us your poor bre∣thren and sisters with making a rent and division for doing our duty, when they indeed are the persons from whom the offence first came, and some chief among you as greatly guilty as they, by pleading for, and excusing of them, and so properly to be charged with making a rent and division in the Church. Fourthly, You have endeavoured to carry it on against us, so as to take upon you the power of the Church without us, and thereby would have proceeded to admonish us son making air out (as you say) in the Church, had not the Lord wonderfully frustrated you in all your endeavours that Way, though We should have rejoiced therein, being comfortably satisfied that it would have been for his Namesake, because We are contending for truth against the great iniquity among you, and so the persons offen∣ding, with their Abettors, (though the greater number) to be ad∣monished, and withdrawn from by the lesser, which if true, then the power of the Church resides in the Lesser number; and this in effect is no more then according to theNote. practice of all the Congregational Churches in their withdrawing from the Parochial Chur∣ches. Dear Brethren and Sisters, these things are plain and true, and therefore bear with us, for We have yet longings of heart after you, and desire to mourn and grieve for you, that if it were the Will of our heavenly Father you might be recovered out of the Snare, and do trust many of you will; but in case We should join with you before the least acknowledgement of your evil, should not we return to you be∣fore you return unto the Lord? and so come under the reproof of that. Scripture, Jer. 15.17. and that also in 2 Cor. 6 17, 18. Yea, Would it not rather be a grieving of the Spirit, and making light of so preci∣ous an Ordinance as Prayer is? Have We not some sad experience hereof already, in that dya of Prayer kept with you when our first Paper was to be debated? What contrariety of spirits did then ap∣poar? Were We not in the duty deeply judged and censured by one of the chief amongst you, when We came to lay the matter in differ∣ence
before the Lord? If so little confort then, sure less now; Can two pray together except they be agreed? We do therefore humbly apprehend before any such conjuction be, that you will first inquire into the great evil amongst you, and not to eat with such persons, but in brotherly love to admonish them, and then to waite and see whether the Lord will humble them in the sence thereof; if this were done, We know that the consequence on your part would be to lye low before the Lord for complying with them to this day; and when you shall minifest repentance by such a Work, then We should have joy and confort in joyning with you, to be further humbled before the Lord, and also to lie at the Lords and your feet, as to any other thing you should desire of us for his Name sake; for We hope it is not in our hearts to be lifted up above our Brethren, but onely to be faithful unto the Lord in a day of so great Apostacy. Now as to the second thing, about seeking to the Lord for a right way what you and we ought to do for the healing of the breach between us; This seems to turn the goodness of the Lord upon himself, and to forget his loving kindness, yea, to deny that We have been in a right Way, after so much seeking unto, and waiting upon him for direction and counsel from time to time; yea, give us leave to say, That we humbly judge the Lord hath led us in a right path to this day, and hath made darkness light, & crooked things straight before, as well as since our first withdrawing. Moreover, wholly to question the ground of our pro∣ceedings to this day, would be also of great reproach and dishonour to the Name and Cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, and pre-declare to any discerning eye, that We are returned from whence We vvere withdrawn, upon no solid substantial grounds. To the third, namely, That if there were any other thing necessary to be added, we might have our freedom. This we conceive needs little re∣turn, respect being had in our answer to the two former propositi∣ons. Thus desiring a tender construction (if it may be) of what is here laid down, as to your last Message, and chiefly to eye the first part, as it relates to the choice of persons for clearing of the differ∣ence between us, We remain. Dated the first day of the first Month, 1657. Your poor unworthy Brethren & Sisters mourning for you, yet apprehending, that as truth is with us, so the Power of the Church rests in us. Signed in the Name and by the appoint∣ment of the whole, none contradicting John Proud, Tho, Cary, Caleb Ingold, John Sealey.
AFter the delivery of this Paper; We continued waiting upon the Lord as formerly, expecting a return, as to the contents of the first part thereof, relating to the choice of persons by us and them to hear the matter in difference, which many of us did the more ear∣nestly desire, not onely for the further manifestation of truth, but also to take off that scandal laid by them upon us, That we were altoge∣ther Judges of our own cause, and would not admit of the hearing of it by others; but three months time expiring since the delivery of our said Paper, or thereabouts, and no return given unto us one Way or o∣ther, it seemed to many of us that their silence was a flat denyal to our render to the first part of our said Paper, which put us upon fur∣ther inquiry into our duty; and to that end a day was set apart to seek the Lord for advice and counsl, and the greatest part whereof being spend upon that account, we then came to enquire of each o∣ther what the Lord had set upon our hearts as our further duty; and after some discourse about it, came to this result, That having made so many tenders unto those from whom we were withdrawn with so little effect, we had hopes to obtain our reasonable desire from them, and therefore judged it our duty to proceed to the work of separation. And accordingly some Brethren were chosen out from amongst us, to make a draught thereof as the Lord should direct them, and yet hereby not to ex∣clude any Message that might come in the mean time from the other part, neither to be too sudden about it, so that it was about five or six Weeks before the draught of separation was brought in; but after it was presented and agreed upon, it was questioned by some whether it should yet be given in for some reasons urged by them, unto which it was answered by others, That they conceived the Lord would be much glorified in the delivering of it in as the unanimous consent of the whole. But some again stood up and said, That they conceived this would most glori∣fie God at present, (to wit) that we should revive the tender make in our foregoing Paper, notwithstanding their by their practiso to this day. But this was opposed again by others, judging that it would be little ef∣fectual, considering how we had been dealt withall from the first day of our withdrawing, until now; however it was udged meet this being our last step towards those from whom we were withdrawn, to be very diligent and watchful, least Satan should take advantage upon us at the last, and the Lord thereby be dishonour; to take the advice of some upright and grave brethren who were faithful unto the Lord in this day of apostacy, and pre∣sent our Paper of Separation unto them for advice and counsel, so far as the Lord should administer unto them, Which was accordingly concluded bernard
upon, and the Brethren aforementioned, (to wit, Mr. Cann, Coll. Danvers, Mr. Squibb, &c) who accompanyed us as Witnesses when we gave in our Admonition at London-House, were sent unto, and upon their Meeting the Paper of Separation was delivered unto them, who received it, and in brotherly love took the matter into conside∣ration, taking their times and seasons of meeting together, spread∣ing it several times before the Lord in prayer, as we have been credi∣bly informed; upon their desire we did also diliver in to them all our Papers, containing the sum and substance of what had been done by us, as to those from whom vve vvere vvithdrawn; that so they might have the clearest knowledge of things as we were able to give them; and after some VVeeks we received this return from them, viz. That according to our request they had been meeting together, and wai∣ting several times upon the Lord, that they might be able to give us such advice as they might judge to be of the Lord; and that as to what we had already done, they did conceive we had been graciously led by the Lord, and could not but own and approve of our proceedings hitherto but withall, did apprehend before any further proceeding should be by us, (wherein they were very unanimous) namely, That we should yet once more make a fur∣ther tender unto those from whom we were withdrawn, about hearing the matter in difference between us, as formerly we had done, for these following Reasons, viz. 1. To the end that those Brethren and Sisters of whom we write so tenderly in our Papers, might thereby be brought off from those disorderly persons, or else be the more without excuse, if after such a tender made (though refused) they shall yet continue vvith them. 2. In case such a debate be granted, it is conceived, that Truth of the one hand, and Iniquity on the other, will be thereby discovered, and the eyes of many opened, to whom the knowledge thereof shall come, or else we thereby the more vindicated, as to any further pro∣ceedings, if such a tender should be refused. 3. That those Brethren whose advice had been desired, will be the more cleared and justified in any further proceedings, whether a de∣bate be granted, or not. 4. That the Messengers of the Churches called in by the other part of the Congregation, were so tender, as not to proceed without the consent of both parties; therefore those brethren whose advice we have desired, could do no less then make such a proposal unto us, that if possible, a debate of the matter in difference my be obtained.
5. That though it is believed what is contained in our Papers be true, yet by such a debate truth will be made more plain unto those Brethren whose advice we have desired for their further proceeding, and justification before others. 6. That this VVork being of Concernment unto all the Congre∣gations in the Nation, ought therefore to be done with as much con∣sideration as may be, in regard the issue of it (if done in the spirit of the Lord) will be much for his glory, and the advantage of his de∣spised and reproached Cause and People at this day. After these Reasons laid before us, a Brother stood up in the Name of the whole, and gave them a kind acknowledgement of their brotherly love, That there were any who would own and stand by the truth in such an evil day as this is; and for what they had offered con∣cerning another tender to be made unto those from whom we were with∣drawn, we should consider of it, with their Reasons inducing thereto, and according as we should be directed by the Lord, so we hoped it was in our hearts to preceed, and no otherwise. And so those Brethren departed, after which a little time was spent together, and a day concluded up∣on to seek the Lord by prayer, as to what they had offered unto us; and accordingly at the time appointed we met, and in the conclusion of the day came to this result, That it would be much for the glory of God, respect being had to the foregoing Reasons, to make another tender un∣to those from whom we were withdrawn, and that two brethren be forthwith chosen to acquaint them therewith. The substance of the Message delivered to the other part of the Con∣gregation at Allhallovvs, the sixteenth day of the fifth Month, 1657, by the two Brethren appointed thereunto. That they were sent in the Name, and by the appointment of the Brethren and Sisters withdrawn from them to present a Message un∣to them after seeking the Lord, as being that which they judge to be his mind and will concerning them, and is to this purpose. Notwithstanding we had two several times already offered unto them for the further manifestation of truth, and clearing up our in∣tegrity in the matter and ground of our withdrawing, we did hereby once more make this further tender unto them, that according to the tenure of our last Paper given in, we might, according to our Gospel-liberty in this extraordinary case, choose on our part men fearing God, and working righteousness, and faithful to the Cause of
Christ, in this evill day, and such who have hazarded their lives for the same whether in Churches, or out, to hear the matter in differ∣ence between us, and they might on their parts take the like liber∣ty if they thought meet, there being no command, forbidding, or injoyning us to send unto Churches onely, in matters of Church difference, though we conceive it be a very equitable way, to send unto Churches, did it not appear the generality of Churches are either silent under, or complying with the Apostacy of this day, and in regard we had already waited about three, or four monthes, since our first tender in this kinde without any return, we judged it meet to offer, that we might receive your answer one way or other, by this day fortnight. And so the two Brethren intrusted with the delivery of the said message came away, leaving it to their consi∣deration. About twelve dayes after, Master Jessey accompanied with Brother Palmer, and Brother Marsh brought us an answer to the said Message, which is inserted in our next paper, it being thought meet to be given in writing that they might the more plainly judge of our Reasons; why we could not condescend thereunto, and likewise that it might either be a witness for, or against us for the time come. And is as follows. A paper Containing our Reasons why we could not con∣discend, unto the message, brought by Master Jes∣sey, accompanied with Brother Palmer, and Brother Marsh. Dear Brethren, and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ, VPon the 28th. of the Last moneth, we received a return to our last message by Master Jessey accompanied with brother Pal∣mer, and Brother Marsh, and was in words to this effect. That himself with Master Knowles, and Master Barebone, were by you acquainted with a message, received from us, being the same we had formerly delivered. And in regard the matter in difference, was by you referred to the members of several Churches, to do therein, as they think meet of whom they were a part, they did
thereupon give notice to the rest of their Brethren; intrusted with this businesse, who meeting together came to this result, to which they had also received your consent, to wit, That they thought it but reasonable; we should have the liberty of our choice, provided those we sent unto be Church-members, chosen by the consent of their respective Congregations; if so, they were to have the like liberty, with those chosen by you, to speak what might be upon their hearts, as to the matter in difference. But in case they were not so chosen, although they might be Church-members, yet they might not have liberty to speak any thing as to the matter in difference, yet he said it was very likely that upon our request some liberty might be given in that kinde. But in case any chosen by us should not be actuall Church-members, though it may be granted for them to hear what was Contro∣verted; yet no liberty for them to speak any thing at all. Like∣wise such persons, so chosen, their names should be given in to you, for approbation, as to their Principles, and Conversa∣tions. Now the Reasons why we cannot condiscend hereunto, are these following. 1. As being directly contrary to the end of our message more at large contained in our last paper, not having therein exceeded our Gospel-liberty. 2. It is altogether needlesse to make choice of persons to hear a matter in controversie, and deny them liberty to speak unto it, if they have any thing upon their hearts to say. 3. To bind us up not onely to Church-members, but also in a great measure to the Churches for their choice, when it is very plain that the Apostacy of this day hath reached to the generallity of the Churches, whereby there are few Zealous in the cause of Christ, though many faithful ones in other things, is to exalt the form above the power of Godliness. 4. That it seemes to us directly contrary to the Principle of the Congregation, you so much pretend unto, which is, To receive Saints, as Saints, and not as bound up to this, or that form. 5. To condescend hereunto, is to undervalue the Spirit of the Lord breathing in severall of his servants, who are not enemies but friends to Church Communion, though not formal Church-mem∣bers,
by reason of the foulnesse of the waters, of the San∣ctuary at this day, and whom we desire to esteem far better then our selves. 6. As there is no command in joyning us to Churches alone in this Case, neither is there any against it, therefore we humbly conceive our Gospel Liberty cannot be denied us. Moreover there is but one example in all the New Testament as we can remember which was in the Church at Autioch sending to the Church at Jerusalem, Asts 15. About the matter of Circumcision, neither was there any visible Apostacy among the Churches at that day, as now is, else we conceive that the Church at Antioch would not have sent unto them about it. These Reasons being premised, and the substance of our last pa∣per relating hereunto considered, we do humbly declare, That we can in no wise condiscend to a debate upon those conditions received from you, neither upon any other terms, then is mentioned in our last paper, and upon which account we refused at first, not that we desire to stand upon terms of advantage for our selves, were we not ground∣edly perswaded, the name and cause of Christ we are ingaged in, would very much suffer thereby. Thus desiring to hear a return from you, if a debate of the matter in difference be really intended. And that we may have our free choice, without any bonds imposed upon us, or them, we shall chuse, provided they be men fearing God, and working Righteousness, any more then we desire to impose bonds on you, or whom you shall chuse, for which we shall wait 14. dayes from the date hereof, and in case of no return by that time, we shall be in no longer expectation thereof. We remain, Your unworthy Brethren and Sisters, mourning, and praying for your return, yet apprehend∣ing that as truth is with us, so the power of the Church rests in us. Dated the 4. of the 6. Moneth. 1657. Signed in the Name, and by the Ap∣pointment of the whole, John Proud. Caleb Ingold
ACcording to our promise we waited for a return till the ex∣piration of the time mentioned in the said paper, but having no Answer, neither any intention thereof, so far as we could un∣derstand, but rather an aversness thereunto, considering that they had committed our said paper, to the perusal of the Pastors, and Elders, of several Congregations, to whom, they said, they had gi∣ven up our business, and to be directed according to their advice; Who upon perusal thereof, apprehended our desire and tender therein, to be but reasonable. Yet was their advice, and proposition refused also. A coppy of the agreement of the messengers of the Chur∣ches met at Allhallowes the II. of the 6. Moneth, 1657. At the request of those from whom we are withdrawn about our paper, Dated the 4. of the 6. Moneth, 1657. 1 1. That Persons of approved Godliness may be endowed with wisdom, to advise, and to help to heal breaches, as well as others. 2 2. That the Persons that the dissenting Brethren had cho∣sen which were not Church-members were well approved of for Godliness 3 3. For peace sake, which we are to follow after, we judge it not unlawfull, but convenient, that such Godly, and approved persons, as are mentioned in the last paper, Dated the 4. of this Moneth, may freely be admitted, to hear, and advise, in the matter propound∣ed, with the like number of such, as the Church with Mr. Sympson did choose. 4 4. Our advice is, that the number of Persons so chosen should not be many, not exceeding ten of a side at the most. Now it being so obvious that they not onely refused our ten∣der, but theirs also to whom (as on their parts) they had committed the matter in difference, we judged it our duty to wait no longer upon them, being without hope after so ma∣ny denialls, and therefore the Brethren to whom the order∣ring, and managing the affairs of the Congregation, was commited were appointed to perfect the draught of Separa∣tion, intended, and present it unto us, with all expedi∣tion:
which was accordingly done, a Coppy whereof is as followes, Our last Testimony, or separation from the Souldiers of the Army, being guilty to six scandalous sins; like∣wise, from Mr. John Sympson, their chief Abettor, and others with him; As also from the rest of those Brethren, and Sisters, we formerly walked withall, whom we desire to mourn for, yet, as they hold Com∣munion with those scandalous sins, and Persons, must se∣parate from them. IT is we trust some grief, and trouble of heart unto your poor un∣worthy Brethren and Sisters, that notwithstanding the Lord hath cast us into dayes of so great light, and profession, wherein he cal∣leth upon all to repent, without excuse, or pretence of Ignorance, you should to this day not onely hold Communion with, but be ju∣stifiers of severall persons amongst you, that are guilty of such sins, as are not commonly named amongst men: which is the more considerable, in regard they are the sins of the last times into which we are fallen; yea your continuance therein, seemes to speak unto us, as if the custom of sin, had taken away the conscience there∣of, in many of you: Indeed we have ground to fear, that many of you are so far become guilty, as to call their evil good, and our with∣drawing from them, and you, upon this account evil; And although we have been now one whole year and half, or thereabouts, wait∣ing upon you in the Lords way, by our withdrawing from you, wherein we have been desirous to exercise patience and much long∣suffering, and as we hope, with yearning bowels towards you in some measure, willing to have compassion, of you, as of our own soules, left we should also be tempted; Likewise a year and half be∣fore our withdrawing, bearing our Testimony against the evill amongst you, so that had there been any heart in you to purge out the old leaven you might have become a new lump unto the Lord in so long time, and thereby have been a vessel of honour, meet for the Masters use in your generation; but notwithstanding their sin hath been so often laid before you by us, since, as well as before our first withdrawing; and having we hope out of love to your soules, as well as for the glory of God, in discharge of our own duty, ad∣monished
the Souldiers of their evill, and your selves, as their Abet∣tors, according to the Rule of the Gospel, that if it had pleased our heavenly Father, you might thereby have been duly humbled, un∣der his mighty hand, by smiting upon the thigh, saying, What have I done? and each one have considered, from whence you are fallen and done your first works, Moreover in regard it was imputed to us, That we would have none to Judge of, or hear the ground of our with∣drawing but our selves; we did thereupon offer unto you, that we were willing others should have the hearing of our Cause, or rather the Cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein such poor worthlesse wormes as we are ingaged; Provided we might have Liberty on our part, to choose Persons of known Integrity, and Godliness, of whose faithfulness to the cause of Christ, we might have good ground of Assurance in such an evil day, as this is; which by your practice you have absolute∣ly denied us, and in stead thereof have sent a third time to the se∣veral Congregations, in, and about the City, without our consent, or approbation, that they might by their messengers, hear, and judge of the Matter in difference between us, though they have refused to meddle with it; And Oh, that the consideration thereof, might yet at the last, put you upon some serious inquiry, what should be the minde, and will of the Lord concerning you therein, and whe∣ther a third denial of this kinde, doth not speak that you have so often gone out of the Lords way about that work, and have refused susch equal wayes, as might tend to the fur∣ther discovery of truth as we humbly apprehend. Likewise about 7. or 8. weeks since, after seeking the Lord, and receiving advice from such as were faithfull to the cause of Christ in this day, we did judge it our duty, notwithstanding your refusall to this day, yet once more to make the same tender unto you, as we had done formerly; That the matter in difference might be debated, in the presence of a cer∣tain number of godly persons, one half chosen by you, and the rest by us, and all of them having equal liberty of speaking, as occasion might re∣quire. To which we received Answer, being little less then a plain denial of our tender, however we make a speedy reply in writing, that our willingness to such a work might appear, for answer whereunto we have been about four weeks in expectation, but ha∣ving no return, we do discern that the Lord hath shut up your hearts from it; which doth the more plainly appear; for that we are informed, those Members of Churches, to whom you have com∣mitted the perusal of our last paper, did give in their Judgement, That our desire therein was but reasonable, and ought to be condesscended
unto, Now we could wish that the sence of your great evil might lie more upon our hearts, wherein we would also not be unsensible of our own miscarriages in the management thereof, desiring we hope to mourn before the Lord for the same; yea we desire not onely in the words, but Spirit of the Prophet Jeremiah, to say, Oh, that our heads were water, and our eyes a fountain of tears that we might weep night and day, for our own sins and iniquities, as well as for the great abominations of this time,(being an open Apostacy, from the Cause of Christ, and this Nations freedom sealed unto in the late Wars, by the Faith, Prayers, Blond, Tea's, and Estates of many thousands, of whom not a few were Saints) whereinto you are so greatly fallen; and it is upon the hearts of some of us, that if the Lord shall not mercifully, yet at the last send his Angel, and pull you out from amongst this Apostatizing generation, this may probably be your portion; That Partaking of their sins, you may partake of their Judgements. An therefore that we might be re∣misse in nothing, so far as the Lord hath discovered it to be his minde and will unto us; It is after seeking of his face, for Councel and direction, and some searching of our own hearts, judged to be our duty to leave this paper with you as our last Testimony, against the crying evils, and abominations amongst you, and cleaved unto by you, some more, some lesse, as is hereafter men∣tioned, First, As to our Brethren the Souldiers, We humbly declare, and testifie, in the Name, and fear of the Lord, who is the searcher of all hearts, they do appear unto us very manifestly guilty of those several sins laid to their charge by us, as being principall Abet∣ters unto, and Supporters of the Apostacy of this day, headed by the Person now in Power, by whom our Brethen stand, and so stiffly, contend for, as if they would justifie him in all his Op∣pressions, wherein he ariseth, and higher, to the great reproach of the Gospel. The sin we shall onely name being more largely set down in our first paper. First, Treason having betrayed the Cause, and Intrest of our Lord Jesus, Christ, and the Nations Liberty, contended for in the late Wars, which did maniselt it self. First, In pulling down
all Antichristian laws, Statutes ⋆ Having before proved that there is an Apo∣stacy, we now come to shew the rise of it; and is as follow∣eth, When the War was ended at Worce∣ster, the Lords people ex∣pected that the good things the Army de∣clared for, and pro∣mised should be brought forth. Also, the man in Power, and the Army appear'd in words to do so to; And do blame, and pretend they dissolved the old Parliament, for not doing those good things, and likewise to call the Little Parliament, as men fearing God, and Principled to bring them forth, as also to Act for the Advancement of Christs Kingdom. And go on to say, that some∣thing was at the door, and that we were at the edge and threshold of the Promises and Pro∣phesies, and therefore should lift up our hears and rejoyce, however, if there were neither pro∣mise for this nor prophesie, we should covet, and endeavour after the best things, and do speak as to purity, in Magistracy, and Governments; as if none but who had the Spirit were fit to Act upon Christs account at this day. And likewise hint, as if themselves were a part, or at least had the Spirit of the Stone, which shall break and consume all other Kingdomes, &c. And as if the Call of the Little Parliament was a fruit of the Stones smiting, (quoting Dan. 2.44.) With many other excellent good words relating to the Calling of the Jews, and the glory that will be in that day; See his speech, to them, either by it self, or in pag. 56. to 63. of book called the Looking-glass. Now what did this hold forth, but that they would endeavour to bring things as near as might be, before Christ comes, to what they shall be when he is come, Isa. 32.1, 2. Mich. 4.1, 2. Psal. 72. But all this as we have too just ground to fear, and by what hath since appear'd, was but to cover the designe of self Advancement. For when those who were faithful in the Little Parliament, came to do those good things, and to take away all Antichristian, and Oppressive Lawes, and Customes that were, and are yet re∣maining among us; Several self intrested men among them, and others easily led by them, per∣ceiving that if they went on, it would go ill with be Lawyers, Clergy, and other Corrupt Intrests, took Counsel together how they might dissolve that Parliament and in Or∣der thereunto, came to the Parliament. House in a morning two hours sooner then usually, and moved tho, resigning their Power, But some of the other party coming in, opposing it, they durst not venture to put it to the vote, but with the Speaker rose up and went away, leaving a considerable number behinde them, who were soon after turn'd out by Collonel Goff, Lieu∣nant Collonel White, and Musquetteers, thereby putting a stop to the Work of God; and the aforementioned Persons going to White-hall, and signing a Paper, whereby they pretended to resign their Power to the Man who is now in Power; Is the foundation of this present Go∣vernment, and so of the Apostasie. and Customs any ways intrench∣ing upon the Consciences of the Lords people in their publike Wor∣ship. Secondly, To prevent making any such Lawes for the time to come. Thirdly, To pull down all lawes in any measure op∣pressing the bodies of the Lords people, or any others, that vio∣lence may be no more heard in our Land. Fourthly to deliver the Spiritual Church of Christ from the like oppression of Body, or Spi∣rit, in any of the Dominions of Antichrist. Fifthly, To execute the Judgements written upon the great Whore who is drunk with the blood of the Saints. Sixthly, That Christ might be King in these Nations, and his Lawes our Rule to walk by. Seventhly, that Monarchy, or the power in one single Person might be extirpated, because opposing Christs Dominion, and utterly inconsistent with Common Freedome. Eighthly, That men fearing God, and hate∣ing Covetousnesse might be in Authority, and no other. Now whe∣ther Treason be not comitted in all these respects at this day, and our Brethren therby become Traytors in abetting thereto with their swords in their hands, we shall leave unto the Lord who judgeth Righteously, and one day will make it known, when the thoughts of all men shall be revealed.
Secondly, Covenant breaking, and false Swearing, there being many Engagements and Declarations of the Army, (wherof, our Brethren were, and now are Actual Members,) for removing the evil, and establishing the good mentioned in the foregoing Head. Thirdly, Oppression of the Bodies and Consciences of the Lords People, and others well affected in this Nation, by Tythes, Taxes, and Illegal Imprisonments. The Latter of which the Army formerly. Declared so much against, as being very Oppressive, that any man should suffer Imprisonment without any Legall cause ⋆ See Looking-glass, pag. 7. (Say they,) that no man be kept in Prison above a moneth, but in that space to be brought to Triall, by a law∣full jury of his equalls, or else be discarged of Course. There are many the like expressions in other of their Declarations. shewed for it, and keeping them there at will, and pleasure, and how frequently this hath been practised since this last Apostacy, and is still continued, we leave to all unbyassed persons to judge. Fourthly, Persecution of Saints, twoCaptain Harrison, kept Ma∣ster Symp∣son. Major Strange, kept Major Generall Harrisou. of them having been jaylors to their Brethren, and the rest standing by, in the day of their Bro∣thers Calamity and Justifying the Persecutors, by saying, It is possible a Saint may suffer for evil doing. Fifthly, Maintaining Antichristian Lawes, by which the Saints of old have suffered, and do now suffer, though so much blood and treasure, hath been spent, for the abolishing of them. Sixthly, Hereby they are the cause, of sadning, and grieving the hearts of the Righteous, whom the Lord would, not have sadned, though our Brother Kelzey was, and herein is more particularly guilty above any of the rest, as hath been plainly proved, which at first he denied, yet afterwards confest, at Brother Sampsons house, much more then could be proved against him, not with any
sense of his evill therein, but said, It was his Judgement and Con∣science to do what he had done. And, Notwithstanding that many of us, had been labour∣ing to Convince them, (and inform the Brethren, to whom the ru∣ling part of the Congregation was committed) of their evils up∣wards of a year and half, before our withdrawing, who at first joyned with us, and were more ready to be active herein, then our selves, yet afterwards declined for no other reason (as we know) but because their sin being of a publique nature, was like to receive more then an ordinary countenance, and so the more difficult and hazardous, if they, with us should be found doing our duty impar∣tially, & not fearing the faces of men, but it being to our labor pro∣ved fruitlesse, and those who before were forward in the work of the Lord, now became backward and not onely so, but many of them excusers, and Abettors, in a very great measure, to the grief of many of our hearts: However that we might keep in the Lords way, it was, after solemn waiting; upon him, judged our duty to bring their evils before the Church, that so if possible they might thereby have been brought to the acknowledgement thereof. And here we hoped that iniquity shold have bad it's mouth stopped, and truth have had the preheminence, in such a Congregation as this had been, for so many years, being like a Beacon on the top of a Mountain, but instead thereof, the greater part votes Communion with them, notwithstanding their evil laid before them; which is to be mention'd, not with joy, but with grief, and sorrow of heart, though we conceive that vote was chiefly occasioned by our Brother Sympson, thorow his constant pleading for; and excusing of them; and by his suddain starting such a question, of Non-communion, without serious consideration, whereby many Brethren, and Sisters were ensnared, as they afterwards confessed; and not∣withstanding that truth had such hard usage from the beginning, almost to that time, yet we have since our withdrawing, been wait∣ing upon the Lord, almost one whole year and half, thereby bear∣ing a more particular Testimony against their evil, also by admo∣nishing them twice, according to the rule of the Gospel, but no re∣pentance (as we can discern) apprearing, but rather hardness of heart, and their sin every day more and more manifesting it self, to the great dishonour of God, and reproach of his Name. We do therefore hereby declare, That we can have no more fellowship and Communion with them, then with Heathens, and Publicans, till the
Lord shall give repentance unto life, by acknowledging, and forsa∣king their iniquity, and do hereby humbly Testifie our separation from the accordingly. Secondly, That our Brother Sympson, whose condition we desire to mourn for, yet can but humbly testifie, that he hath been for ma∣ny moneths, a secret opposer of those Brethren that prosecuted the cause of Christ, against the evils of those Brethren of the Ar∣my: and every day more and more, did, and doth stand by, main∣tain, and plead for them. Nay more, he is not afraid, nor ashamed, to plead for those very evils, which he himself hath declared against openly, and for which, he for sometime suffered very boldly, so that we can do no less then declare, before the Lord, Angels, and men, that he is now become guilty with the other Apostates, to build again the things, which he and they formerly destroyed, and is be∣come very skilful, to cover the iniquity of this day, which appear∣eth to all unbyast persons, But least any should think that we had neglected our duty in not admonishing him privately, before this publique testimony against him; we answer, That several Brethren had been with him privately upon that account. Moreover, we did at another time by several Brethren in the name of the whole, ap∣ply our selves unto him, intending particularly in love, and due re∣spects, to have opened our hearts concerning his evil, but in stead thereof, he absolutely refused to give the least entertainment unto us, as Brethren, and Sisters, or to hear any thing we should say unto him, upon that account, but looked upon us, as Heathens, and Pub∣licans, and thereupon refused so much as to pray with the Brethren who were sent by us. Adding hereunto, that thorow his pleading for, and excusing of them, he hath been the Instrumental Cause of this breach, and separation, and hardning the hearts of the Souldi∣ers, when some of them, were in some measure convinced of their evil, (as we thought) saying, That if it were a sin to have Commu∣nion with them, let it be charged upon himself, and such as were satisfied with them, as they should answer it, at the day of the Lord Jesus. For which, and much more, (if needful at this time to de∣clare.) We can have no more fellowship with him, nor scarce so much, as with those Brethren among you, that wear the sword, whose wickedness we have been so long contending against, onely leaving him unto the Lord, who can when he pleaseth, convince him of his evil, and give him grace to do his first works.
Thirdly, That several other Brethren whom we could Name if need require, have likewise much abetted, excused, and pleaded for this iniquity, and particularly one of them, who was formerly so convinced, of the Soldiers evil, as being the first person, that put pen to paper, to draw up Articles against them, who said, It was true but he thought it would not come to this. And therefore we do judge it our duty, also humbly to Testifie against them, and sepa∣rate from them, as such, who are greatly partakers of the Souldiers evil, though it is possible, that they may be much oversway'd in ther judgements by our Brother Sympson, and cannot have Com∣munion with them till such time that the Lord doth convince them of their evil, and cause them to return from whence they are fallen, and do their first works. Fourthly, That many other Brethren, and Sisters, though they have little to plead for the Souldiers, as under those sins laid to their charge, yet care not for inquiring into truth, neither considering that Scripture, 1 Cor. 5.6. Know ye not that a little leaven, lea∣veneth the whole lump, purge out therefore the old leaven, that you may become a new lump: But are willing to have their judgements byassed, thorow affection to our Brother Sympson, and so are wil∣ling, to stand, or fall in his bottom, as we have just ground to fear, and thereby become partakers of their evill deeds; and if the Lord do not in time graciously awaken them out of this drowsie, sleepy frame of Spirit, we fear they may in time feel the sorrow of that Scripture, Isa. 9.16. For the Leaders of this people cause them to erre, and they that are led of them, are destroyed. And therefore hereby testifie, and declare, that we cannot hold Communion with them, till the Lord shall discover unto them their evil therein. Fifthly, As for those Brethren and Sisters amongst you, that groan, and mourn under the sense of those crying abominations, that our Brethren the Souldiers with their Abettors, are guilty of, we do de∣sire to open our hearts to them with all bowels of tenderness, and compassion, declaring that although we can see no Scripture ground, or bottom for their present practise, and the rather when the Lord hath enabled their poor unworthy Brethren and Sisters, though but a remnant, to withdraw, and separate from the evil doers, whereby the decission is made; And that Scripture, Psal. 26.4, 5.6. Seems unto us a plain word of Instruction for them in these words: I have not sate with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissem∣blers.
I will wash my hands in innocency, and so will I compass e Altar. Whence the Spirit of the Lord seems to hint himself not in∣nocent, had he not refused Communion with dissemblers, and vain persons, without having respect whether they were the greater, or the lesser number. And how they can call that part of the Body a Church, when those they joyn with, are onely the disorderly walk∣ers; for those who bear the Testimony, are withdrawn, we do not well understand: which is the more considerable, when they are commanded to withdraw from every Brother that walks disorder∣ly. However, we judge it our duty to continue our prayers for them, and to spread their condition before the Lord in secret, as if it were out own; that he would enlighten, and inform them in their duty, and give them obedient hearts thereunto, that the Lord would deliver their feet out of the snare, and do hereby intreat, exhort, and desire them, as they tender the glory of God, and the comfort of their own Souls in the time of Tryal, and Temptation, to come out from amongst them, and separate from them, trusting that the promise of grace, mentioned 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. In these words, Where∣fore come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and be a Fa∣ther unto you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. We desire also, for their and our encouragement, to leave with them that Scripture, Psal. 9.4. Hos. 11.12. to be theirs, and our portion also; But till then, we do also hereby humbly te∣stifie, and declare, that as they now stand, we cannot have Commu∣nion with them, as otherwise in the uprightness of our hearts we desire to have, and should much rejoyce in, were they clear from the evil of this day, and withdrawn from amongst those disorderly per∣sons till then, we have just ground to believe they are in their de∣gree partakers of their evil, according to that Scripture, 1 Tim. 5.22. Be not partakers of others mens sins; keep thy self pure. Now to conclude and end this our Testimony, we do in the Ge∣neral, and to each one say, and humbly declare, That we cannot di∣scern the power of the Church rests in you, as under those sins you are now guilty of, and fallen in with each one in their degree, but ⋆ Only Moses, Aaron, Caleb and Joshua &c. Who followed the Lord and had truth on their side, and separated from Corah, the Princes and famous men of the Congregation, were owned by him, and had the power with them, as also to prevail, that the grea∣ter part of the Congregation might not wholly be destroyed, Num. 14.19, 20. compare ch. 16 41. to 50 ca. 262 which notably agrees with Matt. 18.18, 19. Whatsoever ye shall binde on earth, shall be bound in heaven, &c. Again, if two of you, (viz. having the truth) shall agree on earth as touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done unto them, &c. And upon this account (chiefly) it was that they had the power, and this presence with them, and not so much because the one was the Leader, and the other as it were the Pastor of the Congregation; for if with the others they would have made a Captain to re∣turn to Egpt, as also have stoned Caleb, and Jo∣shua in all likelyhood they had perished with them; yea, we finde that because the did contrary to the minde of the Lord at the waters of Meribah, they must die by the way, and not go into the good land, and the power they had deliver'd unto others, and onely Joshua, and Calch, &c. who followed the Lord fully, have the power, and his presence with them, Numb. 20.12, 24, 26. Deut. 3.27. compare Chap. 34.4. By which it plainly appears the Lord would have the power to reside with those who follow him, and have truth on their side, though the lesser number, and not with the greater, though the Pastor be with them that are declined, and so have not the truth with them. We also finde, Revel. 2.7, 9, 10. Revel. 3.4, to 10. That one∣ly the Churches of Smyrna, and Philadelphia, and the few names in the Church of Sardis who follow∣ed the Lord fully, and kept close to truth, and had not desiled their garments, and such as overcome and keep close to truth to the end, are own'd by Jusus Christ, and shall inherit the promises; but he threatens to remove the Candlestick from the Church of Ephesus, and to come upon all those of the Churches of Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, (though the greater number) as a Thief, and to fight against them, and kill them with death, unless they repent and return from the evil among them; And the Church of Laodicea the worst of them all, are for their Lukewarmness threatned to be wholly spu∣ed out of his Mouth, Revel. 2.5, 16, 23. Revel. 3. 3. Which things are not written as onely belong∣ing to that time, but are also a prohesie of what shall be among the Churches a little before, or about the time the promises, and prophesies rela∣ting to the Kingdom of Christ and Zion shall be fusilled, See Revel. 2.26, 27. Revel. 3.10, 12, 21. in your poor, unworthy Brethren, and Sisters, in whose name this comes, though the lesser number. Which we desire to mention with all Humillty, and not in
vain-glory, knowing that we have no cause to be high minded, but fear, that such poor shrubs as we, should stand, when so many tall Cedars fall; It, being no where recorded in Scripture that the power of the Church, rests in the greater number, (as under that Denomination,) but in those, who according to the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, do withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, be they the less, or the greater number, for where truth is, there is the true-Church power, accor∣ding to that in Matt. 16.18, 19. in these words, Thou art Poter and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, &c. Whence we desire to observe, that although our Lord Jesus speaks to Peter as a single person, yet layes the weight of the Church upon him, not as Pe∣ter, but upon the truth, whereof he made so upright a Confessi∣on; whereby it seems plain unto us; That where truth is, not one∣ly in the judgement, but practice, there is the Church, with the Keys, to wit it's power. And this our Brother Sympson hath for∣merly declared, saying, That he should judge it his duty, to joyn with a little number, were they but 30 or 40. in number, against 500. being perswaded that the Keys of the Church were truly there, where the truth appears, not onely in the doctrine, but practice. And yet we would say, That where the greater
number oppose the truth more caution is to be used, more humili∣ty, and brokenness of Spirit manifested, and much looking up unto the Lord to be guided aright, by the seffer number, wherein we must acknowledge we have been too remiss, & desire to be humbled before the Lord for the same, in the face of Jesus Christ. Thus de∣siring that this out last Testimony may be received in love and be of that use; and weight, as to provoke you to a godly jea∣lousie, as Pauls Epistle did the Corinthians, about the Incestuous Person, that we may have cause to rejoyce upon the same account, as he had, which could we once see, we should willingly lie at your feet for truths sake, and be more glad thereof, then of our daily food; till then, we desire to mourn, and pray for your return. Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the whole, John Proud. Tho. Cary. Caleb Ingold. James Chadwick. Humphry Hathorn. John Portmans. Dated the 1. of the 7. Moneth, 1657. THis Paper was committed to the custody of six Brethren chosen from amongst us, to present, and deliver it according to direction; and if it might be obtained, that some one of the six might have liberty to read it in the presence of them all, but when they came, they were denied the liberty of reading it, some of the Chief amongst them, saying, That is ought first to be perused, by the Brethren amongst them at their usuall meeting, and if they thought meet then to have read it, otherwise not, or else if we would stay till the next fourth day of the week, it was possible we might have liberty to read it our selves. But this was not
thought meet to be embraced; but since they denied us the present reading of it, to leave it with them, to do therein as they should think fit, onley a Brother stood up, and declared, It was our last te∣stimony of Separation, against those scandalous sins and evils which many amongst them are guilty of; and that it was our prayer, that the Lord would please to sanctifie it unto them. After this the Brethren took their leave, and departed. And so ends this Nar∣rative, Signed in the Name, and by the Appoin∣ment of the greater Number of the Congregation, who have separated from those now walking with Master John Sympson. Humphry Hathorn. John Seely. John Portmans. Caleb Ingold.
A Preambulatory Epistle to seven of the Letters, which Master Sympson wrote to the Congregation whilest he was a Prisoner for Truth in Windsor Castle. IT doth much concern every true Believer in such a day as this, When darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the peo∣ple, to be watching narrowly to their paths, lest they turn aside from the holy Commandment delivered to them, as many have sadly done in this day, which is to be bewailed, with a bitter La∣mentation, had we a suitable Spirit thereunto, when the Father is dishonored, Christ reproached, and the Spirit blasphemed, and all un∣der a form of godliness; were we Baptized into Jeremiahs Spirit, we should in the sense of the back-stiding of Professors, say. Oh, That I had in the wilderness a lodging place of way-faring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them, for they be all adul∣terous, an assembly of Treacherous men, they bend their tongues like a bow for lies, but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth! Jer. 9.2, 3. Many of us have had no small Wrestling in our own Spirits, whether these Letters of Mr. Sympsons should be published or no, chusing rather to have silently Mourned over him, in the sense of the loss of that Spi∣rit, he seemed to be anointed with, whiles he Continued in Windsor Castle, as by his following Letters dated from thence will appear; But considering what a Noble, and Honourable Testimony he hath born against the iniquity of this day, and that from the Spirit of God, (as he profest) and since that to be as highly professing on the other hand, saying, That it was his errour, and evil, drying down all his former professions, & visions, as delusions, and of flesh. Which hath stag∣gerd some, as to the very Principles of Godliness; Likewise consider∣ing, how he is fallen in with the present Abominations he hath former∣ly so witnessed against. Adding hereunto, that he hath been the in∣strumental cause, of our Breach, and Separation, by falling in with, and pleading for the Souldiers, and present Power; Which had he not done, for ought as we know, they might have turned from their evil
way, and thereby the Congregation, having purged out their old Leaven might have become a new; and pure Lump, to the glory of God, and comfort of each other in this evill day. Likewise his owning of the Tryers by sending to them, as well as others, for advice, how there might be a proceeding against us for our withdrawing. Also to take a Commission from the Person in Power to Preach at All-gate, though he hath former∣ly declared very highly, as well against the Tryers, with their Practice, as the present Power, we humbly, apprehend, may so far silence any Persons, as not to Judge any thing before the time, lest they be found Judging their Brethren, or the work they are upon, without a thorow knowledge of the cause, or Spi∣rit leading thereunto. Yea, give us leave humbly to say, That the sense of the former Courage, Life, and Zeal which was in him for the truth, (wherein we cannot but Judge, that the Spi∣rit of the Lord, was eminently manifest in him, as to the matter of his Testimony, though as to the manner most of us in many things were not so well satisfied with it) seemes unto us to be rather a provocation, then a discouragement in this work, for we do not hereby publish his failings, but onely by his naked Letters, without paraphrasing upon them, give a taste of that Spirit which formerly appeared in him, for Christ, against Anti∣christ, and all evil doers, Psal. 94.16. And let the Reader Judge though it seemed unto us, much like that Spirit the Church is found in, Rev. 12.1. Which every true member ought to be Clothed with, being Clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feer. All sublunary Creatures appeared no∣thing to him, he seemed unto us like unto Paul, Acts 20.24. Tell him of troubles, likely to fall thorow his faithfulness to Christ, and his despised Cause, and none of these things move him. Moreover we are provoked hereunto, considering how much Life, and Courage, was Administred unto us in the hear∣ing of them read, which we trust, upon perusal of them by others, may be useful unto them, as well, as unto us. And shall truth die, for fear of displeasing, a man, or men, that are gone
off from the work of Christ in their generation? surtly no; yea, we trust that the publishing of them, may be to the reviving of his Spirit again, that he may consider from whence he is fallen; and do his first works, and then we shall rejoyce it may appear, that he is in the number of those mentioned, Dan. 11.35. Some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, &c. And we should much rejoyce if the Lord should make this way, in any measure Instrumental, to eat out that core of Apostacy, which more gentle meanes though applied would not do, or deliver the feet of any out of the snare, who by reason of him, are fallen from their own stedfastness; however this is our rejoycing, the Testimony of a good Conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sin∣cerity, we have been exercised herein, and not out of malice, strife, or vain glory. Signed in the Name, and by the appointment of the greater Num∣ber of the Congregation, who have separated from those now walking with Mr. John Symp∣son. Humphry Hathorn. John Portmans. John Seely. Caleb Ingold. Here follows the Letters themselves.
JOhn a Prisoner not of Cromwel, and his Council, but of the Lord Jesus Christ, unto the Saints, and faithful Brethren, which meet at the place, which is known by the name of Great All-hallows, London. Grace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ; Blessed be the Name of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who dayly loads you with his loving kindness, and tender mercies in Christ, and for ever let his glorious goodness be honoured, who at all times, and in all ages, hath, doth, and will hear, the prayers of his faithful ones in Christ, we have cause mutually to rejoyce that God hath heard your pray∣ers for myTo wit Mr Ecak at that time a Prisoner there for the same cause of Christ with him. fellow Prisoner, and me, and that God hath heard our prayers, for you. At my meeting with you I shall see more of God in some of you then ever I saw, though some may wither away, and come to nothing, and I am confident that you shall behold the Image of Christ more plainly in me, then ever formerly you beheld it, God doth still, notwithstanding many infirmities in me, shine upon the Soul of his unworthy Servant, in the face of Jesus Christ. I shall grow in grace, my faith is quickned, my repentance shall be encreased, my love will abound, to you, & to all Saints, my hope shall be lively, and my joy shall be full; And I shall never be ashamed, that I have given you an Alarm, of Christs comming in the Spirit among his People. I do yet by free grace, glory, that I shall re∣ceive more of the Spirit, in gifts, and graces, then yet is given unto me. Isa. 45.11. God hath commanded me to ask him of things to come, Christ hath perswaded me, that this Prison, is a Jerusalem, where I must wait for the promise of the Father, Acts 1.4. Pray therefore for me, for your selves, and for all Saints, that they, and we may be Baptized with the holy Spirit, not many dayes hence. The Spirit will return again unto believing Saints, and the Churches of Christ, according to the New Testament institution shall be the Schools of the Prophets. Universities as now they stand upon an Antichristian foundation must be tumbled down, Antichrist hath set up those Cages of unclean Birds, that they who go thi∣ther may learn to sing the whores songs, but not the songs of Zy∣on; what the Spirit shall be to the Spiritual Church, those places have been to the Carnal Church, when Antichrist forced the Wo∣man into the wildernesse, and taught men to believe that the Spirit was not to be expected any more, but that was to cease in his gifts, and to supply the want of the Spirit, which was in the true Church, he laid the foundation of Universities; and from them, and not from the Churches, and Spirit of Christ, he taught Men to
expect a Ministry. But these Monastries must down, Down with them sweet Jesus, and lift up thy self in thy Spirit, among the Congregati∣ons of thy Saints. The Ministry likewise must down which stands up∣on a PopishThe Man in Power judged the Ministry of England stood upon a Popish Bot∣tom, and none to be Christs Ministers, but those who had received the Spirit for that use, See his speech to little Parliament, in Looking-glass Pag. 60. foot and Antichrists foundation, yea the best of Mini∣sters must be thrown down, so far as they stand upon an Antichri∣stian Bottom, though God will own what is of his own Spirit in them; And God will most eminently appear against those sons of Hophnye, and Phineas, as he did against their fathers the Archbishops, and Bishops, 1 Sam 2.16. Who say unto the People, as they did, Nay but ye shall give it me now, and if not, I will take it by force. The Judgement is gone forth from the Mouth of the Lord against them, and all the Babylonish Protectors in the world, shall not be able to defend them, and to maintain them, in the enjoyment of their An∣tichristian maintenance. But Jehovah shall Arise, and have mercy upon Zyon. Psal. 103.13. For the time to favour her, yea the set time is come, for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. The Spiritual Saints which are the stones of this Zyon, begin to delight in one, another, and as they do abhor what is most glorious and seemingly Spiritual in Babylon, so there is no∣thing so mean, no outward Ordinance of Zyon so base, and con∣temptible, but they do honor it, and thus they favor the Dust there∣of. Wherefore my Brethren if you are perswaded, that this will be the work of God in this Generation, night, and day pray down those things, Persons, and Places, which are Antichristian,Note. and yet standing in England; Come out, and be seperated from the wis∣dom, and Spirit of the world, and come up with me into the Spi∣rit of the Lord Jesus; Labor to practise the Lesson, of self denial, in opposing those Errours, and sins, which are pleaded for by the world, and some Saints, in these times, as truths, and vertues, and so with Noah, you shall be upright in your Generations; Indeavour to know, what are those truths which God will now bring forth to Light, and not suffer them any longer to lie under the Cloud of Antichrist, and resolve to overcome your enemies, either by doing or suffering, And not loving your lives unto the death;Note. give all dili∣gence that you may be Christians in power, and not in form onely; disclaim your own strength every day; value not a faith, repentance, love, or hope, of your own working, it is not worth a rush; But look up unto Jehovah, to work all grace in you, by the operation of God. Pray for me that I may have a more glorious Mission and Commission from Christ, to Baptize and Preach the Gospel; Isaiah had a more glorious Call, at the second time, then he had at his
first calling, Isai. 6.1. though to the glory of grace I do acknow∣ledge that I have had a sufficient call, yet for the exaltation of grace I beg a more glorious Call to Preach the Gospel; Oh, that I might Preach as one having Authority, and not as Ʋniversity men! Oh, that I might have more of the Spirit, that I might serve you better, then ever I have done, and might in some measure be enabled to re∣quite you for those pledges, and expences, of love, which I have received from you. I am for many favors in the Spirit engaged un∣to you, Particularly for your great gift of love which you sent the last week by some of our Brethren, you have obliged me unto you, beyond my desires, and expectations. The Lord knoweth that I sought no such thing from you, directly, or indirectly, I was very well content to spend onely out of my own purse in this Prison, but seeing God hath drawn you forth to express your love this way, I am bound thankfully to accept your gift, and do profess, that if I know my own heart, I am more taken with your love then with your gift, or should be taken with it, if it were a hundred thousand times more then it is, and shall pray that my God may sup∣ply all your need, according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all Amen. Windsor the 12th. Moneth. 4th. day 1653. This is a true Copy of the Originall. examined by us Tho. Cary. John Clements. Brethren of the Lord Jesus, SInce I did write unto you, as the Lord did move Elijah to write unto Jehoram, so I do apprehend that the Lord did stir me up to write unto the Lord General, and contrary to my own resoluti∣ons, the Lord did presse me to put my life into his hands, by deal∣ing faithfully, and plainly with him, in setting his sins before him. The Lord is still very gracious, and favourable unto me, Oh, blesse the Lord with me for his unspeakable grace to me, in accounting me worthy to suffer any thing for Christ, in bearing witnesse against the sins of men, which fight against his glory, and interest; when I consider what a base vil'd filthy Creature the Lord hath honoured, in calling him to suffer any thing for him, my soul is melted, and humbled within me, I do plainly perceive a plot of Divine Love, in
bringing me unto this place; Jehovah is here fitting me for some other service I have not had such a constant uninterrupted Commu∣nion with God, in glorious light, love, and joyes all the days of my life: (as I can remember) as I have had since I came hither. Oh, how sweet is Communion with Christ in a prison, I should be viler then the vildest upon earth, if I did not prefer these Spiritual enjoy∣ments, before all the pleasures, riches, and honors, of a thousand worlds. I am now wrestling with God, night, and day for his Spi∣rit, for my self, and all Saints. O help me in your Prayers that I may not be ashamed for waiting upon him for his Spirit. Of a truth; the Spirit is at theThe Man in Power was of this minde al∣so. See his Speech to Little Par∣liament. Looking-glass. p. 62. door, I shall receive him more gloriously then yet I have received him; for the present the word of the Lord is preci∣ous, there is no open vission, 1 Sam. 3.4. God calleth to us, as he did unto Samuel but we know not infallibly, and in the De∣monstration of the Spirit, who it is that speaketh, unless it be con∣cerning our Salvations, but he will speak, and we shall know that it is he that speaketh in us, Isa. 52.6. He hath spoken unto us, in as it were parables, but he is shewing us plainly of the Father, John 16.25. The Spirit will shew us things to come, John 16.13. I am perswaded particularly concerning my self that I shall receive some gifts of the Spirit, which I have not yet received. If you shall desire to know the grounds of this perswasion, I shall lay them down, I am not afraid that they should be tried First, I have a Spirit in this thing to teach me self denial, I do plainly see that no strength, or endeavors of my own, will do any thing, I must be dead unto them; a faith of my own working will not remove a molehill, power must be given in by Jesus Christ, for the gloryfying of his Name, Mark 6.7. Se∣condly, I do expect Spiritual gifts, by the Gospel, and not by the Law, Gal. 3.2. Though I have been a vile Creature, yet the Lord Jesus Ascended, that he might give gifts to the Rebellious. Thirdly, the grace of God will shine more gloriously in giving gifts unto me by so much as I have been vilder, then other Saints, before, and since my Conversion, Rom. 5.20. Fourthly, I have faith according to the Scriptures, that the word of the Lord will come untoNote. some Saints, to inform them concerning the work of their Generation, as it did unto Isaiah, Jeremiah, Agabus, and others, Because God will do nothing, but he will reveal it unto his Servants the Prophets, Amos 3.6. Fifthly, Many Saints do pray that God would fill me with his Spirit, and do believe that God will hear their prayers, for me, and I do not doubt, but it shall be unto me according to my Faith. Sixthly, I am commanded to Covet earnestly the best
gifts, which by grace I do, and shall do by the help of your pray∣ers, 1 Cor. 12.31. Seventhly, I am humbled for anything of flesh which might move me to desire the Spirit, and I desire gifts in the Spirit upon this Account, 1 Cor. 10.31. That the Father may be glorified in the Son. Eightly, I look upon Christ as powerful, so that he is able, as gracious, so that he is willing, as true, so that he will be faithful in making good that promise, John 14.13, 14. Which I have by grace applied in this particular case; Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son, If ye shall ask any thing in my name I will do it, Christ cannot be unfaithful, John 14.15.16. Ninthly, Christ saith, If you love me keep my Commandments and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, I believe therefore have I spoken saith the Psalmist, Psal. 116.10. So say I, I do believe, therefore have I written these things unto you, And the God of bowels will never cover me with shame, for making this profession of my faith, in the bosomes of the Saints. I have been sensibly present with you in the Spirit, though I am in body absent from you; And I hope that when God shall bring me again unto you, that I shall come in the blessing of the fullness of the Gospel; in the mean while I shall in the Spirit of grace make my supplications for you at the throne of grace, that you may flourish in faith, grow in love, abound in lively hope, and that the peace which Christ hath bequeathed his Disciples, may be with you, and shall beg your prayers, for me night, and day, that the Father of lights from whom every good, and perfect gift comes, may give the gifts, and graces of the Spirit, which I expect, who by grace may sub∣scribe my self. Your Servant in Christ, and a waiter in the Spirit, for the Spirit. John Sympson. From Windsor the place of my great liberty, and Imprisonment, the 9th day of the 12th. Moneth. 1653. This is a true Copy of the Originall, examined by us, Tho. Cary. John Clements.
Dear Brethren, WHen I resolved to write unto you, I was thinking with my self unto what Churches of the seven Churches of Asia I might compare you. If I had compared you to Smyrna and Phila∣delphia, which are not reproved, but commended by Iesus Christ, you might have concluded that I did flatter you. If I had compared you to Laodicea, some might have thought that I had wronged them; and therefore I think that I cannot more truly speak of you as a Church of Christ, then by acknowledging that some of the good things, for which some of those Churches are commended, may be found amongst you, and that some of the bad things, for which some of those churches are blamed, may be found among some of you: I am perswaded that Christ hath somewhat against some of you, Rev. 2.4 Because you have left, and in part lost your first love, which you had to Christ, his Gospel and people; The Lord awaken you, and help you to recover that unfeigned repentance, lively faith, flaming affections, and soul-ravishing hopes, which once you had; what have you found in the wayes of sin; and the world which can countervail the loss of those sweet and heavenly enjoy∣ments, which once you had in God: Return unto your first husband, for then was it better with you then now, Hosea 2.7. Secondly, I know that Christ knoweth the poverty of some of you, but you are rich, Rev. 2.9. The Lord hath left in the midst of you an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12. Woe be unto the full, for they are empty, blessed be the empty, for they are full. Woe be to the rich for they are poor. Blessed are the poor in spi∣rit, for theirs is the kingdom of God. Labour therefore to be poor, that you may be rich, And if any man seem to be wise among you, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. He that will be nothing, shall be something, and he that will be something, shall be nothing, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what Christ saith unto his Church. Thirdly, some of you live where Satans seat is, and yet hold fast the Name of Christ, and do not deny the faith of your King, Rev. 2.13. Some are labouring in spirit to help Christ to the throne of England. Others, if you can but give them some comfortable hopes of aNote. place, or preferment, or some other worldly thing, they care not whether the interest of Christ sink or swim; they are content∣ed that Satan shall keep his seat and the throne, if he will but gra∣tifie their lusts. But the Kingdom of England shall be the King∣dom of Christ, let Souldiers, and Devils, and carnal Policy do what they can to hinder it: For the Kingdoms of this world are become al∣ready
to out saith, Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. Fourthly, There may be some among you, (though very few) of whom Christ may say, I know thy works, and love, and service, and faith, and patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first, Rev. 2.19. Hold fast this Crown, the Lord Jesus doth lay none other burthen upon you, and there∣fore I will not. That which you have already hold fast til he come, Rev. 2.24, 25. But fifthly, I am afraid that Christ may say to some of you, as to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Thou hast a name that thou li∣vest, but thou art dead, Rev. 3. There may be dead sinners in a con∣gregation of Saints, Oh! What will it advantage you to be in Church Communion with Saints here, when you shall keep compa∣ny with Fiends, and Devils andNote. Judases in hell to all eternity. Ex∣ternel priviledges, and common gifts in the kingdom of heaven here, will but agrivate our condemnation in hell hereafter, unlesse. Christs findes burning oyl in our Lamps, internal and unfeigned graces in our souls. Lay a carkass in the midst of a congregation of living men, and will the carkass be enlivened by it? so the pre∣sence of living members in a Church; cannot quicken Church mem∣bers, who are dead in sins and trespasses; strive therefore rather to be, then to be accounted living Christians. Sixthly, There are some of you, concerning whom Christ in the spirit doth inwardly give this testimony, that they have a little strength, Rev. 3.8. As Christ gave the same testimony concerning Philadelphia's Angel. To you that have grace in truth, more grace shall be given, the weak shall be made strong, grow therefore in grace, and in the knowledge of the mystery of the Father, Son, and Spirit. And while the lusty youths who are strong in their own strength, shall faint, and be weary, and utterly fall, They who have no might shall encrease their strength. And they who wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings, as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint, Isa. 40.29.30. Seventhly, I would that I had no ground to fear that there are some lukewarm Laodiceans among you, whom the Lord will spue out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. One end of our redemption by Christ, is zeal in good works, Titus 2.14. He who is a professor in these dayes without zeal,Note. will not be a professor long. The Lord will suddenly bring his furnace to Zyon to burn up the hypocrites, and refine the true Saints. I do beg this at the hand of my God, that you may all in this Looking-glass behold the graces and spots of your souls and behold your several conditi∣ons I shall reminde you of that which I moved, when I last spake
among you, That our Brother Wise may be called forth from among you, to be a teaching Elder. I apprehend, that by the grace of God, it may be to Gods glory, your edification and confirmati∣on in faith, and love, and my great comfort, and refreshment. And likewise desire, that you will endeavour to walk in the order of the gospel, as becomes the Churches of Christ. A City may as well be without Government, an Army without Military Discipline, as a Church of Christ without discipline and government; the Lord compleat you in graces, gifts, and officers in the knowledge, and practice of all the ordinances of Christ our Saviour, and in the ful∣ness of his Spirit; which in the Spirit is, and shall be the prayer of him, who by grace am made, Your Companion, and Brother in the king∣dom, and patience of Jesus Christ. John Sympson. 16th. day. 12th. Moneth, 1653. from my Prison in Windsor Castle. This is a True Copy of the Original, Examined by us. Tho. Cary. John Clements. Brethren in Christ, GRace Wisdom, Discretion, Valour, Gentlenesse, Meeknesse, Zeal, and Peace be multiplied upon you, through the Knowledge of God, and our Father, who is God, Blessed for ever. Amen, Rom. 9.5. The word which I have from the Lord unto you at this present, is to direct you in the right manner of doing that which is good, unto the glory of the Father. When we seriously consider how many in these times have held forth most glorious truths, and done many righteous things, and afterwards haveNote. apostatized from the way of truth, and righteousness; we cannot but conclude, that they never did any of them well: the heart of foolish man doth not deceive him more in any thing, then in holding forth truth, and in doing that which is good in it self: if we are for truth, and do that which is good, our deceitful hearts are ready presently to canonize us for Saints, when in the mean while we may be rotten hearted Hypocrites. It is not enough to do that which is right, and just, but that which is good must be well done; any defect, though never so small in an action, may make it evil; but there must be a joynt concurrence of all Cau∣ses
and Ingredients to make an action really good. There is a broad way to hell in doing that which is materially good, Praying, Preach∣ing, Fasing, meeting with the Saints, breaking of Bread with them, and to them, may be a stage, upon which a man with the approbation of the Saints may act his lusts, and the truths of God in all ages have never suffered more sadly, then by some zealous and religious Stage play∣ers, who for a time have acted their parts with applause upon this stage. How bravely did Judas act his part in praying, preaching, working of miracles by Christ, and afterwardNote. betrayed his Ma∣ster? How well did Demas manage his businesse before he embraced this present world. Alexander the Copper-Smith, who did much wrong unto Paul, and against whom he prayed in the Spirit of the Gospel, that God would reward him according unto his works, had almost suf∣fered death as a Martyr for Jesus Christ, Acts 19.33. May we go so far in paths of light and righteousness, and afterwards prove like the Renegado Turks, the greatest Persecutors of Christians in the world. Oh! Then how ought we to examine our works, our pray∣ers, our hearing, our speaking of the things of God, lest there should be any root of bitternesse in them, which at length springing up, should discover us to be Liars, Impostures Mamonists, Hypocrites before God, Angels, Saints, and sinners. My Letters unto you as yet have been as suits of clothes made up, but not fitted for any parti∣cular person, if they fit any Men, and their guilty Conscience, do apply particularly unto themselves, the things spoken and prophesi∣ed of in them in general, I shall begin to be perswaded that I do not drop Ink upon paper in vain; give me leave therefore to come home into your bosoms, hearts and consciences, in a word of Trial of your works, gifts, duties, actions, professions, performances, and the like. First, try the original of your Actions, if the spring of your Acti∣ons be poysoned, the streams cannot be healthy: if flesh be the fountain, whatsoever proceeds from it is fleshly, If the tree be evil, the fruit cannot be good. Ask thy soul this question, dost thou pray and speak of spiritual things, by a gift, or by the Spirit of regene∣ration, the prayers of the Formalists, though never so well guilded, are abominable unto Jehovah, because they are not from the spirit of the New Creation. Secondly, Try the rule of thy Actions, Christi∣ans are to walk exactly by rule, and by line, darest thou bring thy heart, and thy Actions to be tryed by the good light of the word of God. Thirdly, Try thy wayes by the good example of Saints, and prophets, Take my brethren the prophets for an example, Jam. 5.10.
Not the court Chaplains,Note. and Temporizing Demases of this back∣sliding generation. Fourthly, Try thy Actions by thy faith, two men may do the same thing, Abel; and Cain, the one doth the will of same thing, it is not the same thing which they do. One man Preaches Free-grace, and the Interest of Christ, and Saints, in the flesh,Note. and then abhors his own Preaching, the other doth Preach the same things in faith and hath the smile of God, for the present, and his Crown of glory hereafter for a reward. Fifthly, Try thy wayes by the sincerity, and uprightness of thy heart, upright walking is sure walking; Let Jehu say, Come see my Zeal for the Lord of hosts. But be thou able to say with Hezekiah, Lord thou knowest that I have walked uprightly before thee. Sixthly, Try thy Actions by thy affectionate willingness, to do, or suffer for God, Gods people are a willing People in the day of his power, Psal. 110. Christ loveth chearfull, and obedient Servants. Seventhly, Try thy Actions, by the Testimony of a pure, and en∣lightned Conscience; Beloved if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God, and whatsoever we ask we receive of him because we keep his Commandments, and do those things, that are plea∣sing in his sight, 1 John 3.21, 22. Lastly, that my Letters may not be burthen some, try, and search your wayes by your aims, and ends, do nothing as to man, or to your selves, but all as to God, and the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. I put you not to a harder task, then by the help of Christ I have done many times since I came into this place; And after my most exact scrutiny, and search into my own heart, the Spirit of truth bearing me witness. To me it is given not onely to believe, but to suffer as a Prisoner for Jesus Christ. By the light of the Spirit I do like my Cause in which I suffer every day better, and better; I do rise higher in my faith for ob∣taining promises, Heb. 11.33. That God will bring down Ty∣rants, and Persecutors, new, and old. I do not repent, but rejoyce in the things, which I have delivered and am confi∣dent that within a few years, not to say moneths, I shall be found, without Cromwells timely repentance,Note. as true a Pro∣phet unto him, as I was to the long sitting Parliament. In the mean while abstain from all appearance of evil, abhor Jezabels Fasts, pray down the Antichristian Clergy, and their Nasty Nests the Universities; Believe down Antichrists High Com∣missioners, with Patrons, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and their Tythes, and all things belonging to that New Hierarchy; wait
for the pouring forth of the Spirit in grace, and gifes, and the power of God, and the grace of Christ shall be with you, and him who is Christs Prisoner, John Sympson. Windsor the last day, 1. Moneth. 1654. This is a true Coppy of the Original, examined by us, Tho. Cary. John Clementa Brethren in Christ, GOd hath brought you upon the stage of this world, to live in such times in which the hearts of many Hypocritical Profes∣sors shall beNote. discovered, and the inward parts of all Saints shall be very much tried; And thereofre it doth con∣cern you all, to be much in Trying, and Examining your base deceitful hearts, lest any of you having walked a great way hand in hand with the Saints, should at LengtNote. shamefully, and wrectchedly forsake them, and with Demas imbrace this present world. If ever the Devil had an advantage against Professors, he hath an ad∣vantage against them in these times; He cometh unto them, as he did unto Christ, with his last, and strongest temptation, Matth. 4. 9.Note. These things will I give you. How many eminent Professors, doth the Devil swallow down his wide throat, and doth bury them alive in the belly of this world? Secondly, How evident doth that truth of Christ shine forth at this time? Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon. Your gilded Mamonists in London, will not be able to hold long their profession without wavering, but will basely, and unworthily, desert the Cause, and Interest of Christ, and his People. for a morsel of Bread. You will finde that many who were very Zea∣lous for the interest of Christ when it was calm, will not be able to hold it out in a storm. They that pleaded for Christ, and his In∣terest in the Sun-shine day, will in the clouldy, rainy, and stormy dayNote, who doth so now? plead against him, and his People: such Christians who have not learned to deny themselves daily, and to take up their Gross, and follow him, will forsake him. The whole world will wonder after the Beast, and his horns. Rev. 13.3. If God doth not put you among the Lambs company upon Mount Zion, you will never be able to fol∣low
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, Rev. 14.4. The very noise, and rumout that Christ is going unto a Prison, and that we shall not be able to keep Company with him, and minde his Interest vigo∣rously, unless we are made willing to follow him into a Prison will make some recant, and rather blasphemously, Father the Issues,VVho doth so now? and births of the Spirit in them upon the flesh, then run the hazard of suffering persecution, for the Truths, concerning Christ, and his Interest, which they have declared; But you will say, Why do you send these lines unto us? are we not all for Christ, and his People? their Cause, and Interest? I answer, with Paul to Agrippa I wish that you were not almost, but altogether all of you such as I am,Note. except those bonds. I wish that you were all as really for the Cause of Christ, and his people, against all Antichristian Spirits whatsoever, as you seem∣ed to be when the Churches at the first met at All-hallows. But know, that men do easily deceive themselves in generals: In ge∣neral, Papists, carnal Protestants, all Professors of Christianity, are against Babylon, and Antichrist; the man of sin, who professeth himself to be Christs Vicar, will say that he were not worthy, to live, if he were not against every Antichristian Spirit. And therefore come to particulars if you will not be deceived, and de∣luded, by your own hearts. Again, if you will not be deceived by the great Cheaters, Jugglers, Impostures your own hearts, do not onely try your selves, in particulars, in which all men, Saints, and sinners agree, and which you may agree with them in, without suf∣fering persecution, but come to particulars, in the profession of which you may suffer persecution;Note. The word of Christ in our ge∣neration may be a word for a while, for which we may suffer. Christ had never had any Martyrs, if there had not been some rai∣sed in Spirit, to hold forth something in opposition to the judge∣ment of the powers of the world under which they lived; It is an easie thing to Preach, and maintain a thousand truths without suffering. And it may be that Christ would have oneNote. truth preached, and witnessed unto, which will certainly bring perse∣cution at the heels of it. You may Preach, and speak against ten thousand sins, and not suffer the loss of one hair by it; And yet there is one sin which Christ will have his People speak against, which may cost them their lives, which I could easily demonstrate; but the messengers departure doth inforce me to break off ab∣ruptly. The Lord preserve you in wayes of truth, and peace, and make you more willing to suffer with the Interest of Christ, then to raign with a base, beggerly, and proud Interest
of men, which shall be the prayer of him, who in the Spirit of truth can subscribe himself, Your Brother, and Christs Prisoner, John Sympson. Windsor, 1. Moneth, 25. day, 1654. This is a true Coppy of the Originall. examined by us, Tho. Cary. John Clements. Brethren in the Lord, IF I am not mistaken concerning the time, in which we live, the next eminent work of God, which will appear upon the stage, will be the filling of his Temple with smoke from the glory of God, and his power, Rev. 15.19. And therefore it will not be an unseasona∣ble word to stir you up to pray for the Accomplishing of it; there will not be any great thing done, beyond what you have seen with your eyes, until the Angell of the Covenant, come into his Tem∣ple, to fill it with the glory of his Spirit, surely the Spirit is upon his return to the Churches of Jesus Christ. During the raign of the man of sin, the Learned Impostures of the world, with their Acca∣demical Anointings have ecclipsed the glory of the Saints, but when the promised Spirit of glory in Graces, and gifts, shall dwell among Sions Congregations, the learned wisdom, and policy of the car∣nall Church will be confounded. As yet, as I humbly conceive, one vial hath not been poured forth, But suddainly a great voice will be heard out of the Temple saying to the seven Angels, Go your wayes, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth, Rev. 16.1. As when the Temple of Solomon was Consecrated fire came down from Heaven, and the glory of the Lord filled the house, and the Priests could not enter into the Temple, 2 Chron. 7.1, 2. So Christ of whom Solomon was a Type, is about to Consecrate his New Te∣stament Temple, which Antichrist hath profaned, and polluted. And suddenly the glory of Jehovah will fill his Churches, fire will come down from heaven upon his beloved ones. The Angel will fly thorow the midst of. Heaven preaching the everlasting Gospel, and the earth will be enlightned with his glory. Hitherto onely some of Anti∣christs body hath been destroyed, but then his Spirit will be con∣founded, and destroyed. It was the speech of Luther concerning
King Harry the 8th. that he hated the body of Antichrist, but lo∣ved, and lived in his Spirit.Note. So there are many in these times who hate the body, but love, and live in the Spirit of the Whore. The Spirit of the Whore is exalted in England, and though few can see Spirits, yet blessed be God there are some who have Eagles eyes, and behold the Spirit of Christ, and Antichrist, combating upon the stage of England. As blinde as I am, who am not wor∣thy to be accounted a spiritual Saint, from Windsor Castle I descry and behold the Spirit of Babylon, gotten upon the throne in England; yea, I behold a Beast risen in England, with two horns like a Lamb, but he speakes like a Dragon. It was the speech of a Pope concerning an Archbishop of Canter bury, That he was a Pope of another world: Alterius orbis Papa. Meaning of England. I tell you the truth, there is not onely a Pope of Rome, but there is a Pope of another world, but by faith I do behold his hornes dropped off. And I pray to my God, that that may happen unto him, which befell the Caldean Lion, Dan. 7.4. That his wings may be pluckt, and he made to stand upon his feet, and that a mans heart may be given unto him. Oh, that he might cease to be a beast, and become a man. If the Spirit of Antichrist be in the Pope, and his Cardinals, he is in this Beast, and his Delegates; The Lord Jesus hath set in his Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers; after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, Helps, Governments, diver∣sity of Tongues. But this Beast by his Ecclesiastical, Antichristian power, hath set up Commissioners, Patrons, Parsons, Vi∣cars Curates, and Lecturers.Who is a Lecturer now. The Lord Jesus doth make Mini∣sters by the Unction of the Spirit: But this Beast doth make Mi∣nisters by a Sealed Instrument. The Lord Jesus hath appointed that his Ministers should live by the free contribution of the Peo∣ple: But this Beast will maintain them in the injoyment of a maintenance which by the Mother of Harlots, is inforced, and compelled from the People. Sweet Jesus open the eyes of the Peo∣ple of England, that they may see themselves in the midst of Ba∣bylon. Dear Brethren be not offended with the subject of this Letter, I am bound as a Watchman to give you notice of the ap∣proching of the Beast, and be not offended, with my manner of expressing of my self. It is best to speak of Christian, and Antichristian things, and persons,Note. in the language of the Scripture, or Scripture like words. What I write, I write with a good conscience, without doubting, or wavering, blessed
be Jehovah for it, and therefore receive it in love, learn to love every truth of God, if any of you be otherwise mind∣ed, concerning this matter, God shall reveal even this unto you, in the mean while whereunto you have already attained, walk by the same Rule of Christ, and minde the same things. Pray to God that he may keep you sound in the Faith, which I hope you have received from Jesus Christ; and take heed of those deceitful work∣ers, who overthrow the plain, and simple gospel of Christ. Do not hazard your own soules, endamage the soules of others, not encourage them by lending an ear unto their Sermons and discourses, beware of familistical, and notional wolves in sheeps clothing; remember that victory over false Teachers, is part of that victory which we have by Christ. Ye are of God little Chil∣dren, and have overcome them, John 4.4. Because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. If any therefore come into your City, and bring not the plain Doctrine of Faith, according to Godliness, bid them not God speed, for he that bid∣deth them God speed, is partaker of their evill deeds, 2 John 10.11. Do not murther Soules, by encouraging Soul-murtherers, by hearing of them, but beware lest being led away by the errour of the wicked, you fall from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.16.17. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, To him be glory both now, and for ever. Amen. Your Brother in the Spirit of Jesus, John Sympson. Windsor the 2. Moneth the 8th. day 1654. This is a true Coppy of the Originall, examined by us Tho. Cary. John Clements. Dear Brethren, I Have thorow mercy a whole week together tasted the sweet∣ness of God in close Imprisonment, it is nothing to be alone, if it be for many years together, where there is a gra∣cious presence of God: he that with Enoch walketh with God, can never be alone. It was the speech of an heathen, I am never less alone, then when I am alone, how much more may a Christian
say, who in truth can say. Truly my fellowship is with the Fa∣ther, and with his Son Jesus. Unless the New Courtiers, did love me very well, they would not deal with me as they do. If they knew what an Advantage close Imprisonment were unto me; That my Faith, Joyes, Hope, Sanctification, might arise higher, my Father gave forth his Orders that the under Gaolers, should keep me close Prisoner, Father if thou wilt be so sweet in all thy dispensations to thy worthless and vile Creature (though by grace thy Son) it shall not be grievous unto me; If it shall please thee to suffer them to deal more roughly, and barbarously with me, God is so sweet that I cannot but glory in Tribulations. I have my wife and children about me, while I am alone, be∣cause my Jesus is with me: My personal Communion is so sweet with God, that were it not that I would not live onely to my self, and my own comforts in glorifying God, but do de∣sire to be usefull unto others in glorifying God, I should ne∣ver desire more external Liberty. God doth smile upon me, yea that you may wax confident by my Imprisonment, and not be ashamed of my reproach: I must tell you the cause for which I suf∣fer doth smile upon me. Who am I, that God hath so highly ho∣noured me, in thinking me worthy to suffer for Righteousnesse sake, in bearing witness against theNote. Covetousnesse, Lies, Per∣juries, Hypocrisies and Tyranicall Practises of Men, I would not change my Imprisoned condition with the highest condition of my persecutors and oppressors. How much is it better to be a per∣secuted Saint, then a Persecutor? The Lord will succour, and relieve the oppressed, but will break in pieces the oppressor. I begin to be per∣swaded that there is some truth in the things which formerly I spake doubtfully of. About at twelve moneth since in Martins fields, I was transported into a Spirit beyond my own, and in it the down∣fall of great O. was revealed unto me. About the dissolution of the Parliament, I saw great O. four severall Mornings Intellectual∣ly. In the first, he was hastily running towards a Crown; In the se∣cond, he sat in a Chair of State, In the third, he was presented with a part of Horns upon his head; and in the fourth, he was shamefully tumbled from his Pomp, and Glory. I have seen the three first come to pass, and for the third I do now more fully understand it then ever I did. His two Horns are his Tyrannical Power, by which he doth push at, and persecute the poor Saints; and his Antichristian power, by which in things Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, he doth op∣pose Christ in his Royal Prerogatives, as he is King of Saints, and
an appointer, and ordainer of Preachers according to his own Laws. I pitty the man in the place in which he is now seated; If he were an Angel in his present place, and feat, he could not but be a persecutor of the Saints,Note. for he is one of the ten horns of the Beast which must make war with the Lamb; but he shall overcome him, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with him, are called, chosen, and faithful; Rev. 17.14. I had an impulse of Spirit, in which I was strongly carried to believe, that that Bastardly Government, in the setting up of which, the mouthes of Gods enemies were opened to blaspheme, should die, and not live, though in it self it might be good enough, and too good for us, un∣less we did walk more worthy of our mercies; yet considering it, as set up by them, who declared so much for the Liberty of the free born people of England, and the Interest of Christ, it is a bastard begot∣ten, & conceived in a night of Hypocrisie, and brought forth in a day of bold faced impiety, and the Lord will make a grave for it, for it is vild. I did apprehend that great O. was set up by God permissive∣ly, by the Dragon voluntarily, by himself ambitiously, by the Army cowardly, byIs not Kelzye, Strange, Harrison, Ducker, Sumner, whom we have charged with this, And others the willing Traytors, according to his own words. willing Saints Trayterously, and by unwilling Saints passively, & mournfully. I do repeat these things that you may know I am confirmed & not weakned in my perswasions, & that you may know what comfortable ground I have to wait for the accomplish∣ment of what is behind. It is sweet to me now in this confinement to consider, that I had a hint of these things, by Intellectual vision, or dreams before they came to pass. In a slumber, about Worcester Businesse, I saw great O, lying upon the ground, with most of his great Officers, and their mouthes stopped with clay, by which I was perswaded, that they should not be able to act any more for Christ, or fetch breath in his cause, which is come to passe. Before the dissolution of the long sitting Parliament. In a dream I be∣held some lusty fellowes binding an old man, who when he was bound, his cords did break, but he was so feeble that he could not rise again, and presently after they had left him; they caught hold of me, and apprehended me. It was given in, that the Parliament was the Old man, and that after they had dissolved the Parliament, they should persecute me; which I charged upon the memories of some friends to remember. I scarce know how to speak of these things, because some may think that I speak in wrath, when I speak upon a more noble account, for the glory of God. But let truth be spo∣ken though I suffer in the opinions of some Saints. I shall conclude with desiring your Prayers, for these things, first, that I may op∣pose
the enemies of Christ, as his, not mine, hating their wayes yet loving their persons as my own. Secondly, That I may pray in faith with the Psalmist, Psal. 119.134. Deliver me from the oppression of man, so will I keep thy precepts. Thirdly, That God might strike my strongest corruptions under the fifth rib by this imprison∣ment. Fourthly, That God would anoint me with fresh oyl, to Preach and Baptize, Fifthly, That God would teach me to see how far my suffering may be accounted a Martyrdom, in relation to Christs good cause, and a Judgement, in relation to my unprofitable walking before God and his people; for the same suffering may be a Martyrdom for Christ, and a judgement to our flesh, 1. Pet. 4.16, 17. The Lord enable you to ask these things in faith, and tho∣roughly enable you to every good work, through Christ, to whom be glory everlastingly. Amen. J.S. From the old Steeple 4th Moneth, 3d. day. 1654. This a true Coppy of the Originall, examined by us, Tho. Cary. John Clements. Severall Objections against the Printing and Publishing of the aforementioned Transactions, relating to our with∣drawing and separation from the Soul∣diers, and Mr. Simpson, &c. As also Mr. Simpsons Letters weighed, scanned, and answered. WE finde a certain rule in Scripture, that where a Bro∣ther or Brethren walk disorderly they are to be admi∣nished and withdrawn from, 2 Thes. 3.6. And in case of perseverance in their evill, after admonition, to he saparated from; and all Church relation disowned with them, accord∣ing
to Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. Cor. 5 5.2 Cor. 6.17.2 Tim. 3.5. And when this is done, they are to be unto us as those that are without: but we see no Scripture warrant leading us to publish the sins, and evill practices of such persons, but rather to leave them unto the Lord to be converted, or otherwise, as he in his secret will hath determined: yea, it seems to us rather to savour of malice and revenge, then of a Gospel frame of Spirit. Answ. There are two things to be considered for the making a righ answer to this objection, which we desire may be weighed. First, the nature of the sin such persons are guilty of, that is to say, whether it be of u private or publique concernment; for according∣ly the Lord is either more or lesse dishonoured, and therefore the Apostle speaks concerning some in this kinde, I Tim. 5.20., in these words, Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others may fear: painly intimating, that if persons, who are called brethren have such fore∣heads of brasse, as to commit sin in the face of the sun, whereby God is not onely dishonoured in respect of the sin it self, but others undone thereby, as the sin of the Souldiers is by Treason, False-swearing, Oppression, &c, And that not to the ruine of a few, but the whole Nation: yea, to the crucifying and destroying of the Cause and Interest Christ contended for in the late. Wars, with the losse of so much precious blood, we do then conceive that they ought to be rebuked before all, that the Nation, against whom they have sinned, may know that we disown such wicked practices, be∣ing contrary to the light of nature, much more of grace, which is also the more to be weighed in regard that Publique Sinnes, brings Publique Judgements; so did the sins of theAmong other Scri∣prures, see 2 Kings 21.11, 12. Jer, 15.4. Hos. 1.4. Rulers in Israel upon the whole mation: And therefore Pilate himself being forewarned by his wife, not to have a hand in the death of our Lord Jesus, being an innocent person, without doubt did foresee how sad it would be with the Nation upon that account; and thereforeMar. 27.19, 24 took water in the presence of the whole Court, and published before them all, that he would have no hand in his death; and what a Judgement hath there been upon the Jews ever since for that publique sin? And how did the Apostles afterwards, testifie against the Rulers publique∣ly for their sin in so doing? And if lawfull to speak in that man∣ner against them, then certainly it cannot but be as lawfull to write. In the next place, as the sin is to be considered, so the Estate, Quality, and Officer of such persons who commits it: And herein also sinne is the more aggravated, for when Souldiers or Magi∣strates have professed before God, Angels, and Men, what they
wouldAs by their De∣clarations doth ap∣pear. do for Christ, his glory, and poor afflicted people, in ad∣ministring of Justice, and Righteousness, relieving the oppressed and breaking yokes, as also to improve all their Military, & civil power for the same whereunto they were called and intrusted both by God and man, shall instead thereof, take the Crown from off Christs head and put it upon their own, and make use of their Power, and Force to oppresse a Nation, and do violence to all that will not bow down to their Lusts; Also maintaining Antichristian Laws, to force the consciences of the Lords People; and all this contrary to their professed, and declared light, which is the more considerable, in re∣gard they have been Instruments in the Lords hand, to pull down the late King, with his Son, & other abettors, for the like abominati∣ons now committed by themselves; we then do humbly apprehend, that not onely a Personal, but National reproof, is to be given them according to the nature of their offence, and the capacity wherein they stand, so that it seems to us not onely to be our Go∣spel Liberty, but our Gospel Duty, to publish by whriting the sin of the Souldiers with their abettors. Objection, The aforesaid Scripture although it speakes full as to their being rebuked before all according to the nature of their offence, with the capacity wherein they stand which we must confess doth weigh in the ballane of truth, yet this doth not prove that we ought to publish their sins by writing, and therefore we would gladly hear what Scripture you have for the same. Answer, In case it appears, that according to the nature of their sin, and the capacity they stand in, they cannot be rebuked before all, but by publishing them by writing, then we think it cannot be supposed, but that it is our Gospel liberty so to do, or otherwise, as may most answer the end of the Scripture, that their folly being manifest to all, they may proceed no further; else how came Pauls epistle about the Incestuous Person to be published; surely none will Judge that the Apostle did write out of malice, or revenge; But further we desire more particularly that that Scripture in Isa. 30.1, 2. and 8. verses,Isa, 31.1. Hos.8.3, 4 Hab. 2.6, 9, 15. Amos 6.1, 3, 4, 5, 12, 13. Hos. 5.7. Isa, 19.15, 21. Isa, 30.9, 10, 11, 12, 16. 2 Chr. 36.16. Mat. 2.24, 48, 49. together with the Scriptures in the margent may be compared, and it will appear, that the sin of Israel in that day runs parallel, as face answers to face in a glass with the sin of our day, as if it were the very time he prophesied of. In the first and second verses, after he hath laid down their sin, with the aggravations of it, he is commanded in the eigh verse to write it in a table; and note it in a book that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever. And the sin of the Souldiers in this day seemes to run
in a line with the sin of Israel in that day; and without doubt the Propher by the Spirit of the Lord was directed to foresee our very day, that what he then writ might be a word of Instruction for af∣ter ages. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were writ∣ten for our learning, &c. Rom. 5.4. Object. The end of Pauls writing about the Incestuous person, was not so much about publishing by writing the sin of such a person, or persons, in the like maner guilty, but rather for direction unto the Church∣es, how they ought to proceed against persons guilty of such gross sins, Because a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. And for that Scripture in Isa. though it be full unto the purpose for which it is urged, yet we conceive he had an extraordinary command for it. Also the Church of the Jews being National, it was no more then a publishing their sin in the Church. Answ. We do grant, as is laid down in the objection, that one end of the Apostle, was to give direction, how brethren, in Church re∣lation, guilty of grosse sins, ought to be proceeded against; yet this doth no ways weaken the other end the Apostle might have, in lea∣ving this Epistle upon record, that, if God may be glorified by it, to publish by writing the sins of such persons for generations to come, which being compared with that in the 30. of Isa. aforementioned, seemes unto us strongly to warrant such a practice. And although it is urged in the Objection, that what Isaiah writ, was by an extraordi∣nary Spirit, and unto the Jews, as a National Church: So was all the Scripture writ with an extraordinary Spirit, wherein are some things for our positive Rule, and the rest, as words of Instruction, for the people of God in after ages; that they might with that ordinary portion of the Spirit given forth unto them, with the help of the Scripture, be throughly furnished to every good work. And for what is further urged, That it was a Church Act, they being a National Church; That we conceive is a mistake, or at least much shortning the scope of the Spirit thereby intended; for in the 9. verse of that Chapter, the Prophet is directed to write down their transgression, not onely as a Church, but as aThe Judge∣ments against Judah, were written in a Roll, and published, in the Lords house, and abroad to the people. And their fins, like∣wise, the cause of those Judge∣ments were there with de∣clared, see Jer. 36.2, 4, 6, 28, 31 32 comp. with chap. 35.13.15, 17. Nation, in these words, This is a rebellious people; there is their national state: and in the next words, lying Children, there is their Church State; so that we conceive this Scripture stands firm and unanswerable. Object. Was not Ham, Noahs son, reproved for uncovering his fa∣thers nakedness, though guilty of the sin of drunkennesse, Gen. 9.22. And if they should be published, this Scripture would reprove us, for hath not Mr. Sympson been as a father unto us.
Answ. Noahs sin was private, committed in his cent; Noahs sin was not Wilful, but Ignorantly; for he being the first that planted a vine, (as we read of,) wasGen. 9.21, 22. drunk with the wine, not knowing the strength thereof. Also Ham uncovered his fathers nakedness, be∣fore fore he had humbly laid his evil before his father, for else we con∣ceive, that if Noah had persevered to justifie himself after admoni∣tion, once and again, (as the Souldiers and Mr. Sympson do, and con∣tinue in their evil,) Ham would not then have been charged with uncovering his fathers nakednesse. Now the sin of the Souldiers is a National sin, in turning aside to the old Abominations after many out-goings of God to the pulling them down, and solemn Decla∣rations, Ingagements and Promises to the Contrary. And for Ma∣ster Sympson; We conceive that in publishing his Letters; we rather cover, then uncover him; by holding forth to the view of all, what and excellent Spirit was formerly in him for Christ, and his Glory. But further we meddle not neither in the Narrative preceding, otherwise then in our proceeding against the Sonldiers he comes in as their Abettor. Object. Was not the sin of Judas in betraying Christ a publique sin yet we do not read that the Disciples ever made mention of him, except it were in the choice of another Apostle to take his place; and therefore we do conceive that although their sin be publique, and they in a publique capacity, yet it ought not to be published. Answ. This Objection seems unto us to have no weight in it, in case it were so as you assert: For Judas went and confessed his sin to the Chief Priests, and Rulers and then destroyed himself, as the just Judgment of God upon him for his great iniquity, in Betraying our Lord Jesus; And therefore not so needful to testifie against a person who was taken out of the world by so eminent a Judgment. But yet we finde that as the Lord by his Spirit in his faithful ones, hath Recorded, and published the sins, of Asa, Jehu, Hazael, and other Rulers, as also the sins of his own people in the old Testa∣ment: So by the same Spirit hath the DisciplesMatth. 26.15, 16, 25, 47, 48, 49. Mark 14.10, 11, 43, 44, 45. Luke 6.16 Chap. 22.47, 48. John 18.2, 3. 2 Tim. 4.10, 14. Recorded the sins of Judas in the New, and to his perpetual infamy, published him to the world as a covetous, and treacherous person, in betraying our Lord Jesus. As also, the sins ofActs 7.51, 52. Demas, and Alexander. Likewise have the Apostles persevered in their ⋆ publique testimony against the Scribes, and Pharises, &c. for continuing in, and justifying of the sin of their forefathers in shedding of innocent blood. And do not the Souldiers by their sin in upholding the Oppression, Tyranny, and Persecution of this day, also justifie the former Oppressors, Ty∣rants,
and Persecutors in their sin, adding thereunto more and more to the shame of Profession, not onely in this, but other Nations al∣so? Wherefore it is much upon the hearts of some of us, That if our Transactions in this kinde had not been published, we should not have been able to free our selves from the guilt of the blood shed in the late Wars; In regard we have hereby a price put into our hands, and so are called to serve the Lord there with. Object. Notwithstanding what hath been spoken, we are not satisfied as to the Printing and publishing of the said papers, for it seemes to us to savour of vain∣glory at the least, and therefore were desire that, 2 Sam. 1.20. concerning the death of Saul may be considered, where David makes use of these words concern∣ing him; Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoyce, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised tri∣umph, Now if Sauls iniquity ought not to be published, who had so foully, back∣slidden from the Lord, lest the enemies of the Lord should triumph, then surely the Souldiers evil ought not to be published, which we think doth not exceed Sauls, though we are satisfied that the Lord is greatly dishonoured by them. Answ. For a right understanding of this Scripture, and thereby a due answer unto this objection, we desire, that 1 Sam. 31.8, and 9, verses may be weighed; Where it will appear, that the Phili∣stines the next day after the battel, finding Saul among the slain of Israel, out off his head and sent it into the Land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their Idol Gods, and among the peo∣ple, so that Sauls death was alreadly published all over the land of the Philistimes; and therefore as it ought not, so it needed not to be published by Israel, for he had not sinned against the Philistines. But the Souldiers have sinned not onely against the people of God, but the whole Nation; and in this wickedness, keep the Nation un∣der their oppressive power; and not onely so, but cover their evill to many Godly as well as Carnall men, saying, They have done no evil, and therefore their iniquity ought to be published to unde∣ceive the people, and many gracious hearts, who still follow them, as some did Absolom that rebelled against David. In the next place, though Saul had back-slidden in a particular command about saving Agag alive, and preserving the Cattell of the Amalekites to offer Sacrifice with, yet still he fought the Lords battells, and rul'd by the same Lams as before; so that though his sin was known in the Nation where he dwelt, yet it was not, as we can read known to any other Nation, for Israel held correspondency then with no Nation, but were a distinct people separate from them all; so that it would indeed have savoured of vain-glory to publish his evill to such. But the Souldiers have ingaged to stand by the grand Apostate, who hath sworn to maintain the body of the old Beastly Antichristian Laws,
contrary to the end of the Lord and his people in the late War, and their own Declarations and Ingagement so solemnly made in the day of their straits. Also, they fightRev, 17.13, 14. compared Jer. 51.56, 57. Antichrists battells, and not the battell of our Lord Christ, and so their sin exceeds Sauls; and if they persist therein, so also wil thei Judgement. And therefore may, and ought to be published within the bounds of our own Na∣tion, against whom they have sinned. Moreover Saul was Gods anointed, and therefore he was ingaged to stand by him against his enemies, had he not back-slidden, so that had they published his death, it was in a manner to have disowned the Lords Anointed; upon which account it was (as we conceive) that David mourned for him after his death, as being the glory of Israel; but we hope there is none will be so void of understanding as to make such a comparison be∣tween the Souldiers and Saul. Adding hereunto also, that Saul by his death (as the just hand of the Lord upon him) was removed from any further dishonouring of his Name by his Apostacy. And so there needed no testifying against him, which was not in being, no more then against Judas after the just hand of the Lord had reached him for his inquity. But the Souldiers have the Power of the Nation in their hands, and stout it out against the Lord and his People, persevering in their evil, and adding more and more to the dishonor, &c reproach they have already brought to the name of the Lord, by covering their iniquity, under a2 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Form of Godlinesse and therefore their iniquity ought to be published to unvaile their hy∣pocrisie, and discharge a good conscience by a sutable testimony against them. FINIS.
