P1121 12669929 65469
NEW PROPOSITIONS. Propounded by The Earle of Pembrooke. The Earle of Northumberland. The Earle of Essex. And the Earle of Holland. To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Councell of the City in Guild Hall▪ On Saturday being the 11. day of June, 1642. In the behalfe of all the Commons in England. Whereunto is annexed many Remarkeable Passages With the numbers of Horse that they have underwrit. Together with the substance of a Letter sent from Holland. Wherein is declared that there are many hun∣dreds of Carbines, 3000 great Saddles, 300 Barrels of Powder, 8. Pieces of Ordnance, which is concei∣ved to be bought with part of the money borrowed upon the Jewels of the Crowne, and to be transported to England. Also a Declaration from both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Ordering of the Militia, directed to the Deputy-Lievtenants of the respective Coun∣ties throughout all England, and Dominion of Wales. Ordered that this be Printed and Published. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed by T. Fawcet. June 14.▪ 1642.
New Propositions. SEverall Propositions have lately been propounded by the Lords and Commons in Parliament to the Kings most Excellent Maiesty, they leaving no way unat∣tempted, to gaine his Majesties Royall favour, and the peace of the Kingdome, witnesse those 19. Propositions lately sent to Yorke and presented to His Maiesty, yet neverthelesse all their endeavours find a bad successe and all their care is rewar∣ded with discourtesie, for it is too appa∣rent that His Maiesty intends to raise Warre against the Parliament, for infor∣mation is given to the House that seve∣rall
Persons have endeavoured   Forces, promising great rewards to those that would be ayding in that service, Likewise the Lords and Commons re∣ceived a Letter from Holland, which the Eare of Northumberland read in Guild-hall, that there is at this time at Amsterdam many thousands of Carabines and Pistols. three thousand great Saddles, 300 Barrels of Powder, 8▪ pieces of Ordnance, ma∣king ready to be sent to England, for this designe, and it is thought to be bought with part of the mony borrowed on the Jewels of the Crowne, likewise a Chaine of Pearle and other Jewels sent backe, money being denyed to be sent on them, by reason of the sate Order made by the Parliament to the contrary. These and the like Assurances of dan∣ger, caused the Lords and Commons now resident in Parliament to publish severall Propositions in generall, to all the King∣dome.
This was also the  that dduced these Noblemen to make these other pro∣positions to this Honourable Citie, that being cheifely concerned in this businesse. The above named Earles, comming to the Hall where the Lord Major and Al∣dermen, with the Common Councell of the Citie were assembled. The Earle of Northumberland read those Propositions which were published by the Authority of Parliament, after which the said Earle declared upon what grounds they did proceed, and their causes of feare, which were cheifly these. 1. Because his Maiesty by the perswasi∣ons of the malignant ▪ doth endeavor to force a dissolution of the Parliament, to which end, by severall Persons, and in severall Counties, he hath endeavoured to raise Armes. 2. That these Forraigne preparations of rmer, purchased with the Iewels of the Crown, can portend nothing lesse then such a dangerous designe.
3. That those armed Cavaleers at Yorke committing severall outrages already on his Maiesties Subiects, giving out severall words against the Parliament, both dan∣gerous and scandalous, is a free Declarati∣on of their intents, what they intend to put in Act, if they once gaine strength by their supposed Forraigne supplies. To these they added these Propositions. 1. Whether it stood not for the better security of the Citie in generall, to ven∣ture a proportionable Stocke for the maintenance of forces to defend and se∣cure the generall from the danger of such intended Stratagems. 2. Whether it were not much better for those that had Plate or Money to put it into a generall stocke, the faith of the whole Kingdome being ingag'd for the returne of it, then to let such Plate or Moneys be made pillage and prey to the enemies of the Kingdome.
To which Propositions they added these Reasons. That for such Moneys or Plate so ven∣tured if the Kingdome stood, they were assured to receive the value againe with Interest, and the rest of their estates secu∣red, but on the contrary they could nei∣ther keepe that, nor ought else, their lives and estates running on equall ha∣zard. These Propositions with the Reasons were generally liked, and condiscended unto. Likewise the said Earles declared that they have underwrit for foure hundrd Horse,
Die Sabbati 4. Junij. 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament▪ That the De∣puty-Lievtenants of the severall and re∣spective Counties within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wale,  Mem∣bers of the House of Commons, be hereby required and enjoyned to be present at the dayes, and places which are, or shall hereafter be appointed by the Lord Lievtenants, or their Deputies, for the , Mustering, and Exercising of the Inbitants of the said Counties, according to the authority given unto them by an Ordinance of both Houses of Par∣liament. And it is further Ordered, That all Deputy-Lievtenants, aswell those that are Members of the House of Commons, as others, shal give such dispatch by preparing of Warrants▪ Commissions▪ or Letters, and subscribing of the same as the service shall re∣quire; And that such as shall refuse, or neglect so to doe, that their Names be certified unto us by  fellow-Deputies, or any one of them that shall or doe performe the said Service. And it is further declared▪ that it is the intention of both Houses, for the better incouragement of so good a Worke, so much conducing to the safety of his Maiesties person and King∣domes that some of their Members at the times and places appointed, or to be appointed for the execution of the said Ordinance, shall be sent down to give their personall atten∣dance upon the said Service. Ordered to be printed▪ Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
