p2416 13732725 101609
THE LOYAL SPEECH OF GEORGE PLAXTONE, M. A. Minister of Sheriff-Hales in Shropshire; Spoken at Shif∣nal, in the same County, upon the Proclamation of his Sacred Ma∣jesty, King JAMES the Second, &c. Gentlemen! YOU have laid the greatest Task upon me, that I ever under-went in all my Days: You have obliged me to speak of the most important Matters of our Nation, and allowed me scarce one Minute for Thought or Premeditation: But may that Almighty Power, by whom Kings reign, instruct me! and may an Heart and Soul full of Loyalty, furnish my Tongue with Argument and Elocution! My Undertaking is great and difficult: Who can speak of Kings, with∣out Awe and Reverence? Or, Who can be an Orator, when those Two contrary Passions of Grief and Joy, at once struggle in his Breast? I can∣not look back to the Peaceful Days of Charles the Second; I cannot re∣member the lasting Happinesses of his Reign, but I must drop a Tear up∣on his Hearse: Nor can I look forwards, towards the present Glories of James the Second, but I am overwhelm'd with Joy, and a Loyal Transport seizes me. We have lost One of the Best of Princes, which ever sway'd these Bri∣tish Scepters, Charles the Gracious; a Prince, who was the Care of Heaven, the Darling of his Subjects; whose Life was a Miracle, and his whole Reign one continued Blessing: Mercy and Justice were the Supporters of his Throne; and Peace and Good Wishes the Legacy he has left us. I cannot relate the last Words of that Incomparable Prince, without a Sigh; I dare not name them, without Tears for our general Loss: Thus he remembred us in his dying Words, if such a Prince may be said to die: Brother! I am now going to resign up my Self to God, and my Crown and Government to You; Grant me these few Requests. I. In all Your Ʋndertakings, set the Fear of God before Your Eyes, and let that direct you. II. Remember to maintain the Church of England, as now by Law Established. III. Govern Your Subjects with Mercy, Ease and Peace. IV. Be good to my Queen, and Children. This was the Royal Legacy which he left us; a Legacy, truly becom∣ing such a Prince as Charles the Second. But this is not all, though a great deal more than we deserved, the greatest Blessing is still behind; He has Jest us his Royal Brother, JAMES the Second, to Succeed him in his Throne, and Vertues: This must wipe away all our Griefs, this must make our Joys Perfect, and Crown our Lives with a lasting Happiness. The Sun is set with us; but no Night follows: Charles the Gracious, is only ex∣chang'd for JAMES the Just: And though our King be dead, yet the Monarch lives. We are blest again with a Gracious Prince; A Prince, whose Vertues need no Panegyrick; and to Praise him according to his most Excellent Greatness, is above the feeble Power of Oratory and Eloquence. What Vertues can we wish for in a Prince, which our present Soveraign brings not to his Throne? What Joyes are wanting to make us Happy, which he will not bestow?
Would we have our Religion secured? We have the Laws on our side, and the Royal Word of a King for't: The King has declared, That he will maintain our Religion, as now by Law Established; and do what in him lies, to make the Church of England flourish. Gentlemen! Where the Word of a King is, there is Power: And what the King hath declared, he will make good; for no Prince is juster to his Word, than he is. Would we have our Rights and Liberties preserved? We have a Prince of the greatest Justice upon Earth. Whil'st he was a Subject, he was the most Faithful Friend, and the Best of Masters to his Servants; and, I hope, a good Master will never make an ill King. But more; We have his Royal Promise, That he will walk in the Steps of his dearest Brother. Would we have the Glories of our Kingdom maintain'd; would we see the Old English Bravery once again Flourish! We have now the most Victorious and Warlike Prince in Christendom; a King, who dares attempt any thing, but an ill Act; a King, who has been a Souldier almost from his Cradle. I need not tell you, how he signalized his Valour under the Protestant Ma∣reschal Turenne in France: I need not speak of his Magnanimity under Don Juan of Austria, against the French King then in League with the English Rebels: I need not remember you of the Extraordinary Hazards of his Royal Person, in the Dutch Engagements, fighting for the Rights and Honour of our Nation, and exposing himself in a Shower of Fire and Bullets; Bullets, which distinguish not the greatest Prince from the meanest Souldier. Gentlemen! He was then the Joy and Treasure of our Nation; and our Representatives in Parliament, did not only gratefully acknowledge his Ser∣vices; but did almost Loyally chide him, for hazarding his Royal Person in War, in whom all our Hopes and Expectations were center'd. He is still the same JAMES the Just, the Valiant, and the Brave; though we (I wish I were not to name it, for the Honour of my Nation) ingratefully revolted from him. Away then with all Phanatick Fears and Jealousies! Can the Grand-Child of James the Peaceful, can the Son of Charles the Martyr, can the Brother of Charles the Gracious, can the Victorious and Just James Duke of York and Albany prove an ill King? It cannot be. Can he, who has been an Obe∣dient Subject for Fifty two Years together; can the justest Master, and the firmest Friend, and the most Faithful Brother, prove an ill King? It can∣not be; and God forbid, that any one should think it. Gentlemen! Let us remember our Duties, and endeavour all we can to be Loyal; and then we need not doubt, but God will bless us with a Merciful and a Gracious King. Our Submission to his Rule, our Content and Chear∣ful Obedience under his Government, will return to us in Showers of Mercy, Kindness and Justice. Good Subjects do generally make good Kings; and if our King should prove otherwise, it will be our own Faults. What shall I say more? Charles the Gracious still lives in JAMES the Just. We have only chang'd the Name, not alter'd the Sovereign. Away then with those odious Names of Whigg and Tory; let'em be for∣gotten and buried: Let us remember, that we are Christians, and English-Men; the former will teach us Loyalty and Allegiance to our King; Love, Unity, and Good Wishes towards one another: the latter will engage us to maintain the Glories and Peace of our Church and Nation; and to preserve the Best of Kings, and the Happiest of Governments. Let us all, with one Heart and Mind, Bless God for these Mercies; and say, God save King JAMES the Second. LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Richard Grosvenor, Bookseller in Wolverhampton, and are to be sold by A. Jones, at the Flying-Horse in Fleet-street, 16
