P2987 13621791 100845
THE LIFE OF Mr. John Hieron. WITH THE Characters and Memorials Of Ten other Worthy Ministers OF JESUS CHRIST. Written by Mr. Robert Porter, late Minister of the Gospel in Nottinghamshire. Published by D. BURGESS. Exempla movent. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in  near Mercers-Chappel. MDCXCI.
To the READER. IN complyance with the desire of Reverend Mr. John Barret of Nottinghamshire, I send abroad this Treatise and prefix▪ my Thoughts (quales, quales) thereof. I conceive it well worthy of its very Eminent▪ Athor, Mr. Robert Porter; who also now sleeps in Christ. The Matter, Language and Method are▪ worthy of him. Who hath herein, like himself, joyned brevity with sweet∣ness; given the Memoirs of many worthy Men in a nar∣row room: And laudably performed the Historians part in Relations, and the Divines▪ part in Reflections. To me it seemeth no small Duty, (as I hope▪ father to express in due time,) to publish the Lives and Praises of Holy Men. It is the Will of Him, whose Will ought to be ours, that the Memory of the Just should be bles¦sed: And the praise of such, is more Gods praise then theirs. As for themselves, Saints need no Monuments▪ And no one▪ of them desires a richer Encomium than La∣zarus had; The poor man dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abrahams bosom. But the Church and World do need their Memorials: For exemplifie Sanctity, is the most Noble, Beautiful and Perswa¦sive. The Holiness that is in Gods Children, is of  more excellent kind, than that which is in his Holy Bibl
It is a livi image of God; and that which is the transcen∣dent End, of which the Scripture it self is but a Means. Such Narratives as this, do shame and wipe away the Calumnies which Ignorant Men drivel, and Malicious ones do foam out against the Excellent of the Earth. They do convincingly prove, what many will not think: That there are really very Illustrious Gifts and Graces, where no such things are seen as Copes and Miters. And that it is not among such as the Prote∣stant United-Brethren, that a godly, painful Mini∣ster is a rare thing: Whatever be suggested to the con∣trary, by those that still judge us fitter for Prisons than Pulpits. Great Hugo Grotius, when Dying, would have given all that ever he had, to be plain, godly John Urick. They whose hearts are cleansed by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, do surely expect the day, wherein the most Dignified Drones will wish they had been (what they do now malignantly name) Drudging Divines. The Lord make us all more Pure and Holy; and fol∣lowers of them who are now inheriting the Pro∣mises. That our Burning Bush may not be consumed; but our Jerusalem be yet made the Praise of the whole Earth! So Prayeth, Daniel Burgess.
THE LIFE OF Mr. Hieron, &c. CHAP. I. Of Mr. Hieron's Parentage, Birth, and Childhood. MR. John Hieron was a Prophet, and the Son of a Prophet. His Father was Minister at Stapenhil near Burton upon Trent, a Vicaridge it was, and in that Vicaridge-House he was born in August, 1608, and baptized the 28th day of that Moneth. His Father being puritanically inclined, had no great things in the World; but he was a good Man. I have heard his Son John say of him, that he was well esteemed of by Mr. Hildersam and his Hearers: And that he did believe that he was found in the way of Righteousness. It hath been the sin, and the shame of this Nation, Oh when shall we be cleansed! that the least scandalous Ministers have been forced to take up with most scandalous maintenance. They then made sure to make Old Nonconformists poor, and to keep them so: But through frugality, and Gods Blessing they lived, and brought up their Children well. Since the Year 1662 they have used a Method quite to starve Nonconformists. Not a poor Vicaridge, not a blind Chappel, not a School, nor any visible way of maintenance for them, and yet they have lived. Providence is kind
and tender! handfuls of Meal are growing, and we almost think we may some of us live to see Puritanism better thought of, and provi∣ded for in England. I know many Nonconformists pinched, but none starved. Though neither Purse nor Scrip, yet no insupportable tempting wants: When Bladders are pricked, yet they can't sink whom God will hold up by the chin, and teach the hand of Faith, the true swimming stroak. In his minority he went over Trent, both going to, and coming from School, and was once or twice endangered thereby. In a Note found under his own hand, it is thus said: Deliverances to me vouchsafed, à teneris annis. 1. From a Cow in his Fathers yard, that took him on her horns, and threw him a great way, yet without any harm. 2. Falling out of a Chamber into a dry Fat in the lower room, yet no harm. 3. Fell out of a Boat into Trent, yet not hurt. 4. Once ventring into the Trent-boat himself, and not being able to manage it, and the wind high, he was carried down the River towards some deep place, and at least one whirlepit, where he had been in danger to have been lost: But one seeing it, took a private Boat, and stopped him, and his drowning was prevented. These he recounts, and adds a good note, The Lord expects we keep a chronology of remarkable things done by him for us. Greenhil on Ezek. 24. 2. In these things we may note, That these preserva∣tions were presages of something more than ordinary, that God had for him to do. Where such notable things occur, they signifie some eminent Evil the Persons are reserved for, or some eminent good pre∣served for. Moses drawn out of the Water was a deliverer. There is a passage in the minority of Ambrose, That there was a swarm of Bees setled on his Face in his Cradle, and flew away without any hurt to him: Whereupon his Father utter'd this saying, Si vixerit in∣fantulus iste, aliquid magni erit, If this Child live, he will be some great Man. Again, since you see he laid these in his Records, kept them as the Pot of Manna, let us rehearse and record Gods goodness. It's a real wonder any Child lives to be a Man, or if they do, they are not all Mephibosheths, through folly. It must be ascribed to God and his Providence, without which all our Watchers and Keepers would be in vain. There are many places that give us occasion to call them as Hagar, Gen. 16. 13, 14. did the Well Beer-la-hai-roi, places where
we have found God seeing for us, and looking after us, where we have not looked at him, nor for him. CHAP. II. Of his Country Education. MR. Hierons father removing to Chelaston, he was with several Masters, but at length he placed him at Repton-School, after Mr. Whitehead was come thither, with whom he continued Five years. Mr. Whitehead's Abilities, and Method of Teaching, and Diligence were so great, and his Conversation so good, that the School obtained a great Name, and bred many worthy Men. It was an ex∣cellent Seminary; and here Mr. John Hieron got that true foundation of School-Learning, that bore a very great Superstructure of Divinity, History, and Philosophy. He was a very great Critick. Oh! the mercy of a good School, and Schoolmaster where the first Elements are well learnt; they give great capacity, and are an happy introdu∣ction to all kind of Learning. Let the World speak as contemptibly as they please, a good School-Master is one of the fundamentals of the Learned. World▪ A good School-Master makes all his Schollers his Debtors; and I do not know who can be thankful enough for them. CHAP. III. Of his going to the Ʋniversity, and continuance there. HE went to Cambridge, and was admitted into Christ's Colledge, May 2. 1625. under the Tuition of Mr. William Chappel, after∣wards Bishop of Cork and Ross in the Kingdom of Ireland; for whom he had an high veneration to the day of his death, and never mentioned him without honour, as being a Learned, Painful, Careful Tutor, and very faithful to his Trust, and constant Expounder of Scripture in his Chamber at Night when his Pupils came to Prayer, shewing them the Logick of their Bibles; which Mr. Hieron alwayes accounted very advantageous and beneficial. On the Lords-days Sermons were re∣peated, and an account taken of his Pupils, how they spent that day.
And if any of them walked disorderly, and persisted under Admoni∣tions, he would acquaint their Friends, and send them home; resol∣ving to keep none, who answered not the ends of their being sent thither. In this Colledge he was chosen Schollar of the House, and in the Colledge he continued, without ever absenting himself (except once three Weeks) until Jan. 1628, when he commenced Bachelour of Arts. About March 25th. following he went to Dis in Norfolk, to teach School. The profits of the place he found might have been considerable, but some other things not so well suiting: At the Com∣mencement he returned to Cambridge, and continued in the Colledge until September, when he went into York-shire to an Acquaintance of his Tutors Mr. Thurscrosse, a Prebendary of York. At which place, called Kirkby-Moor-side, he had his Table in Mr. Thurscross's House, and some other small matters, Reading Prayers for him, and teaching School in the Town. Thus that Colledge, famous for Worthy Men of old, and of late Mr. Mede, and Dr. Hen. More, received no small honour from Mr. John Hieron, an honourer of his Colledge and Tutor, and an honour to them. He brought from thence Gold and Ivory; but no Apes and Peacocks; solid, no useless Learning. CHAP. IV. Of his entrance into the Ministry at the Door of Ordination. BEing devoted by his Parents to God, and Educated for the Mini∣stry, and God having given him an heart to improve the Advan∣tages of his Education into a preparation for that great tremendous work; he was willing to consecrate and dedicate himself, and desiring that good work, he (a lover of Order and sensible that no advised Man dare take that honour to himself) did address himself to Dr. Morton, a Learned Man, then Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, who upon Examination found his worth; which he readily did, about Baptismal Regeneration, which he so strongly argued out of the pas∣sages in the Service-Book, that the Bishop was put to his distinctions, shewed himself much pleased with him, and wished he had known him sooner, that so he might have bestowed on him something that he had lately disposed to another. His Ordination proceeded, and on Trinity-Sunday 1630, he was ordained both Deacon and Presbyter. Thus this good Man entred regularly, put his hand to the Plough, and ne∣ver
looked back. This his Ordination he was well satisfied in, and so well, that when some (run into Errors) would speak of renouncing it, he did with much abhorrency reject such a motion. And yet on the other hand, he was far from thinking Ordination by Presbyters invalid, or a nullity either in the Reformed Churches, or in England. His Acquaintance were most of them Presbyterians, and he ever em∣braced them as the Ministers of Christ: He needed no Reordination because he had Episcopal. He never open'd his mouth to encourage any of his Brethren to seek Reordination, which Laws (made as hard as uncharitableness could make them) required of the Presbyterians. CHAP. V. Of the places where he exercised his Ministry, and some few Occurrences mentioned that betided him in those places. MR. Thurscrosse was very desirous of his stay, and gave him some prospect of preferment by or from him, yet that place being at so great a distance from his Father, he would not bear his stay there, but after he had continued about a year and half, called him home to him. Sect. 1. His next place was Eggington, where he was Houshold Chaplain to Sir H. Leigh, and did preach at Newton-Sulney, which was very near him, where Sir Henry was to procure a Minister, for which he had his Table, and the keeping of an Horse, and Ten pounds per Annum. Sir Henry was a discursive Man, and sometimes detained this studious Man too long at Dinner, who yet a little against his temper concealed his uneasiness, and wrote thus in his Almanack against the day of his coming to Eggington, Accessus ad Prosopopaeiam, Apr. 29th. 1631. By which he meant he must now personate ano∣ther Man, and not act like himself, nor follow his own Genius. He was not for meals to be devourers of time, nor converse to swallow up study. His Study was his Paradise, and the swallowing of Books his most delightful Meat and Drink. Sometimes when long sitting at Table was wearysom to him, he took the liberty to leave them, and to walk into the Garden, or to go into his Chamber. Sir Henry va∣lued him much, and was ready to testifie it; and now 1632, his time of Commencing Master in Arts being come, he went to take his De∣gree, and Sir Henry by Interest procured him a Buck, to be sent to
him to entertain his Friends, which the Lord tague did out of a Park of his near Cambridge, and sent it by his own Servant to prevent further charge. And Sir Simon Every (who marryed Sir Henry's Daughter) gave him something towards his Charges. Upon his re∣turn he was sought to by the good Lady Heyrick, to whom he went and paid his respects, but would not leave Sir Henry (though he had the offer of a double Salary) who was a noble generous spirited Gen∣tleman, and had obliged Mr. Hieron by manifold Conveniences, gi∣ving him much liberty, and all the respect that might be. About this time Catharine Countess of Chesterfield, a Religious Lady of Noble Extraction sent to him to preach her a Fryday Lecture (though I think the Countess kept it as a Fast upon account of the Death of her Eldest Son the Lord Stanhope) every Week, which was preached ei∣ther in the Hall, or in the Chappel at Bratby, which he accepted. She gave him great respect, allowed him to use Ministerial freedom, which he took, being no flatterer, and she bore, being a good Chri∣stian. One instance may be worth noting here. A difference arose about precedency, the Countess judged her Gentlewoman ought in right to take place of a Baronets Daughters, and expected they should acknowledge it, and then said, She would put her Maid in her Pocket rather than she should give them any offence. But they not willing to yield it, the Countess sent to the Earl Marshal to decide it, who said the Countess was in the right. Mr. Hieron being to preach at Repton Exercise (famous not only for a Sermon, but also for the work of Prophecying, by one Minister after another opening Scripture) the Countess being there, he preached on that Text, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. And in an use of Instruction he commanded them that were there present to hear Gods words, stri∣ving for the good of their Souls, whilst others were striving for pre∣cedency on Earth, &c. This the Countess was so quick as to observe, and speak of it to Sir Henry Leigh, who had taken no notice of it, but so humbled her self before the word, thatReader, Noe, Great Persons did not think it below them to frequent cturs in thse dars. she never spake of it to Mr. Hieron. Their Memory is precious that did so, their names and memory will rot, that are above, against, neglect, and contemne such practices. If great people be good, they will heed what they hear and bear reproof. And let all Christians and Ministers believe that faithful dealing is the true way to respect, and that of the wise Man will be verified, Prov. 28. 23. He that re∣buketh a man shall find more favour afterward than he that slattereth with the tongue. A wound that's friendly is better than a deceitful kiss. Prov. 27. 6.
Here again he had some calls a way by persons of Great Note, but he continued at Eggington, until Michaelmas, 1633. Sect. 2. From Eggington he removed to the Town of Ashborne. Mr. Joseph Taylor Lecturer and School-Master there, falling into weak∣ness, was disabled from his Service, and being a weighty honest Man, much desired to have the School and Lecturers place well supplyed. Pursuant to this design Mr. Lees of Ashborne (every way a substantial man) took a journey to enquire after one Mr. Patrick, then, I sup∣pose, Schoolmaster at Leicester, motioned to Ashberne School. And in the Crown-Inn-gate at Derby Meeting Mr. Hieron, and one Mr. Wheeldon, who had been enquiring for the Cambridge Carrier, asked them, Whether they were Leicester-shire Men? They answered no. In∣quired, Why he asked that question? He replyed that one Mr. Patrick was motioned to Ashborne as a Sbhool-Master, and he knew not but that one of them might possibly have been the Man. Mr. Hieron went on, but Mr. Wheeldon stepped back to him, and told him, if they wanted a School-Master, they could not have a fitter than his Friend there, meaning Mr. Hieron. And gave a character of him, which so well pleased Mr. Lees, that at his return home, he acquain∣ted Mr. Pegge (an Attorney of great note and business, and inclined to good men, an Inhabitant in Ashborne) and Mr. Taylor with what he had heard, They took notice of it, and Mr. Pegge wrote to Mr. Gilbert Ward of Tickenhal (an Ingenious man, a man of Wit, Worth, and Business) who knowing Mr. Hieron well, gave an account of him to satisfaction. Which being received, Mr. Taylor wrote to Mr. Jackson then Minister of Sutton, (a learned, sober, grave, and weighty man, of whom Mr. Hieron used to say, He was Logical in every thing) to desire him to bring Mr. Hieron to Ashborne, which he did, and there they offered him the School-Masters place at Ashborne. He promised to accept it, if they could and would fairly procure it for him. Thus by a passage, which to us is accidental, and a meer contingency, was this worthy man brought into their thoughts at Ashborne, but an higher Hand, and a wiser Purpose directed it. Mr. Taylor (then grown unable for the School and Lecture both) set himself to work, and improved his Interest in the Company (consi∣sting of Three Governours, and Twelve Assistants) in whom the Right of Election lay, and ingaged Ten of them for Mr. Hieron. But now it beginning to be noised abroad that the School would be va∣cant, one Mr. Cox put in for it, who, though he could not gain the Majority of the Governours and Assistants, yet having got some of them, and some Interest made by some great Neighbours who influen∣ced
upon the Heirs of the Founders of the School (who had a kind of a Negative Voice) Three whereof were then remaining, two where∣of were gotten for Mr. Cox, and the third for Mr. Hieron. The Ma∣jor part of them had power to stop the Election, and so it occasioned a great contest. When Mr. Taylor saw what opposition they were like to meet with, he would not have resigned until the Coast were cleared, and therefore procured Mr. Whiting to teach School for him. But he perceiving there was no hope that he should be the man chosen, withdrew his hand, and left Mr. Taylor (by reason of his weakness) under a necessity of resigning. Which he did, and two more of the Governours and Assistants being brought over, Twelve of the Fif∣teen chose Mr. Hieron. But the Heirs of the Founders not consenting, the Election was not ratified, and so it fell to the Bishop of the Dio∣cess to choose. Mr. Hieron by the Bishops Order was examined by Mr. Basier the Bishops Chaplain, who commended him much for his skill in the Tongues. The Bishop readily gave him his Title. But then a question arose, whether Bishop Morton being now Elect of Durham, could act as Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield: Hereupon Ap∣plications were made to Arch-Bishop Abbot, who in the vacancy of the Bishoprick was Bishop of it. And the Arch-Bishop gave him his Title. But then it came to a new Dispute, that it must be the Bishop of the Dio∣cess that only could give a Title, and therefore it could not be done until the Bishopprick were filled. By and by it was, Bishop Wright was installed, then each side applyed to him, and neither side appeared empty; for so was the manner then. He deferred the decision until he should in his Visitation come to Ashborne; which he did, and when there moved that they should wave Mr. Cox and Mr. Hieron, and by a great Neighbour one Mr. Mountney was propounded, and both sides sat down. Mr. Hieron was content, he was at ease where he was, and having the Lecture at the truly Honourable the Countess of Chesterfield, for which she promised him but Ten pounds per annum, but gave him Twelve; he judged his Salary competent, and so was satisfied. But the Lord had higher business at Ashborne for Mr. Hieron, than a Free-School Tho▪ when the Election of the Governours and Assi∣stants was made void for want of Confirmation by the Heirs of the Founders, when Bishop Mortons▪ Title was questioned, and the Bi∣shops would not satisfie neither, Mr. Hieron could have been content to have declined all further prosecution of the business. But he was desired still to stand for it, and his Friends promised that if he went without it, they would choose him Lecturer, and they proved as good as their words. Men wise and unbiassed pitched upon him, in whom worth was, and after the Lecturers place was void by Mr. Taylors
death, the Trustees for the Lecture chose Mr. Hieron Lecturer. Mountney proved bad and immoral, a great dishonour to the School, and a vexation to the Town, who sought to the Bishop to remove him, who alledged he could not. Then the Governours of the School stopped his Sallary▪ and after articled against him in the High Com∣mission, but that way giving them no Relief, they were at last forced to sue him at Common Law, and it came to a Tryal before Judge Hutton (or his Collegue) and they cast him and ejected him. But while Mountney proved so ill, and such a vexation, Mr. Hieron proved like himself, and an honour to his place, and satisfaction to the Town. He built upon Mr. Taylors foundations, and both preached and lived as that Worthy Predecessor did. And though Mr. Taylor was dead, yet he lived, and the work was carryed on by his Successor. Here Mr. Hieron continued, labouring in Word and Doctrine, and procured from Bishop Wright a Licence for a weekly Lecture to be preached at Ashborne, which was upheld by many very able men, that so by the mouths of many Witnesses what was preached on the Lords day might be confirmed, and that by mutual converse Ministers might be edified and comforted, as well as people advantaged. I suppose it was about October in the year 1635, that he married the Relict of Mr. Taylor, who had then, by her former Husband two Children, a Son, and a Daughter. An happy Choice he made, and very happily they lived together. She was an holy Soul, understand∣ing and prudent, loved her former Husbands good Acquaintance, and brought them to be Mr. Hieron's Acquaintance. Those of them that I knew honoured her indeed, and so did all that knew her. She was the Daughter of Parents▪ that were considerable, and of very good reputation in Ashborne. She had many Brethren and Sisters, (some of whom I knew) and I think I may truly say, that few Families produced more persons of good brains, and excellent behaviour. I knew none of them mean in the World, and some of them made a considerable Figure in it. Here Mr. Hieron pitched, and staid till the Civil Wars came on in England, and then, though a quiet Man, and fain would have con∣tinued at his work, yet could not, but was forced to make many withdrawments for security, which did much disturb and tire him, and his Family were put into many ghts by searches for him; ill Neighbours informing them of Tbury, and solliciting them to take him (who had no other provocation for him, but only the faithful discharge of his duty) He loath to live a Prisoner in a place so like Hell, where his Righteous Soul must have been upon a pepetual rack, resolved to remove himself and his Family, with some part of his Goods
to Derby. And no sooner was he and his Family gone, but his House was plunder'd, and his Books (hidden securely as he thought) discovered by some ill Neighbours taken likewise. This was in the year 1643. Sect. 3. About two Moneths after his coming to Derby, the Inhabi∣tants of Breadsall, a Town two little Miles distant from Derby, being destitute of the Exercise of the Ministry among them made their com¦plaints to Sir John Gell, then Governour of Derby, who answered them, Find out any sit man, and I will put him in. They applyed themselves to Mr. Hieron, he answered, He was out of employment, but would not move a foot toward getting the place. They returned to Sir John, who offered the place to Mr. Hieron's Father occasionally there; but he desired Sir John rather to bestow it on his Son, which he immediately did, and caused an Order of the Committee to be drawn for that End; and sent a Command to the Constable of Breadsal to come on the Sabbath morning, and convey him to the place, and se∣cure him. They went back to him to acquaint him with what was done, he told them he would not go, unless the Order was sealed to take with him. The Order was perfected, and the Constable came on the Lords day, and took him with him to Breadsall, where he per∣formed the work of the day, and returned to Derby at night. Thus he continued about ten moneths going to Breadsall on the Sabbath days, officiating there all the day, returned to his Family at Derby at night. But after that time, having some more probable prospect of Safety at Bradsall, he removed his Family thither, November 1. 1644. And there continued quietly during the War, and afterwards till the 24th. of August, 1662▪ that setled Uniformity by so many breaches, and rendings of Ministers and People, as the Protestant part of the World never saw before. Amongst the rest this conscientious Minister of Jesus Christ was catched in the Noose; for no better are such Impo∣sitions than snares to the truly conscientious, who are not for leaping from one mode of profession to another, are not for wriging out themselves by distinctions and evasions, but would do all in simplicity and godly sincerity, without any equivocations, endeavouring to maintain a principle of honesty in the World. I shall close this Section and Chapter with a few remarks. Here may you see how Gods Providence finds work for them that have a mind to work, willing minds do not ordinarily want opportunities long, but God opens a door for them. See again how God dispo∣seth the forced flights of his Ministers to spread the Gospel into other places. He that must not preach at Ashborne shall preach at Bradsall; when his seed-time was over at Ashborne, God d this Spiritual
seeds-man another field. God distinguisheth betwen flying Hirelings, and Shepherds that are forced away. God seemed by this Provi∣dence to approve his flight. And you lastly see how seekers after the word do find it, here was a people that could not live without the Ordinances, and God cast upon them not a bare Doer, but a Work∣man, not only a man in a Ministerial habit, but a man of a Ministerial Spirit. The greatest mercy that ever befel Bradsall, if they did know in his day the things of their peace. It was his day of Ser∣vice, their day of advantages: a price indeed was in their hands, happy they that had hearts to it, as some of them I hope had. CHAP. VI. Of his Ministerial Endowments, and of the discharge of his Ministry. THE qualifications of this Worthy Man I shall giveSect. 1. you summarily. He was a good Man, as it's said of Barnabas, he was a Learned Man, he had much of Egypts Gold and Treasure, and brought it all to Gods Tabernacle. He was well read in Books and good Authors, a very studious man: He was well seen in History, and very frequently in converse made an excellent use thereof. He had a sharp judgment, he was a great Master of Me∣thod, had digested his Tutors Method of preaching thoroughly: He had a very strong memory, which continued to the last; so that if there were any doubt about the quantity of any Syllable, he had a Verse ready to shew what it was. He had searched into Chronology of Scripture, knew much about it, and was ready in it. But he was almost a Non-such in his Bible; you could not name a difficulty, but he was ready to give the unfolding of it, or what was said to it. He was most ready in the references of one Scripture to another, and could readily turn to them. He had an excellent faculty in expound∣ing Scripture, in opening a Chapter, he opened his Text with great clearness. He had a gravity in Countenance and Carriage, and in his Delivery. He was a Mall of unsound Opinions, though he did not delight in preaching Controversies, yet when it fell in his way, his matter naturally leading to it, he would so distinctly state Contro∣verted points, and leave them so clear, that there would scarce seem to be any thing of controversie in them. He was a close and wise reprover. He was a powerful presser to duty; he was excellent in
Instruction, skilful to direct to means, very compassionate in dealing with tender, troubled Souls, able to give strong Cordials, and very discerning to know to whom to give them. In a word, he was a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God, had Treasures, and could bring forth things new and old. He was a good and faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God; he was able and apt to teach, furnished both with an Heart well headed, and an Head well hearted; he was skilful, and faithful, a sound Believer of what he preached, zealous for God, no body that heard him could suspect him of being in jest, all must conclude he was in earnest, and that his words were in his heart, and that they came out thence. His breath was warm, which testified Life within, and heartiness for God. Sect. 2. As to the discharge of his Ministry I must be a little more particular. He did shew his qualifications, his sincere ends in entring into the Ministry by his conscionable fulfilling his Ministry received of the Lord, doing the work of a Minister, making full proof of his Mi∣nistry, he▪ was a Workman, and a working man, a dextrous labou∣rer in Gods Vineyard, a painful and skilful Husbandman whom God had instructed to discretion, and had taught him. He dispensed Ho∣ly Mysteries, the Word and Sacrament as a Minister of Christ; and a faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God. 1. He was well satisfied about the Doctrine of the Lords day, as a Christian Sabbath; and accordingly he did earnestly contend with the Profaners of the Lords day, zealously prest its sanctification, and in his own practice was a practical Sabbatarian. This would appear both from what he did at Ashborne, and also after at Breadsall. But take for proof what follows. Some time after his setling at Ashborne, the Book for Sports on the Lords day came forth; and presently was the fear of Gods Commandment cast off (the applications of the Sabbath to the ends of it's institution being one of those bands and cords, that corrupt nature would fain break, and is glad of any pre∣tence to cast away) Unbridled youth presently took the liberty gran∣ted; and Tidings being brought to Mr. Hieron, he got to Mr. Pegge, a Man of Authority in Ashborne to accompany him▪ and coming to them, they found Boys and Youths shooting at the Butts, and only one man with them; and being demanded why they did so? The man answered that the Bishop gave them leave. How doth that ap∣pear said Mr. Hieron? The man answered; on such a Sabbath day I came through Eccleshall (where then the Bishops seat was) and saw there a Bear baiting▪ Mr. Hieron rejoyns, that's no proof, for the Castle is at some distance from the Town, and the Bishop might be
said, If it offended them he would forbear, and so the Company parted. But a while after he went to another Company, got together on the like occasion, where he met with a man who argued the King allowed it, and those would not part. Mr. Taylor in his Life having preached about the Observation of the Lords-day, and therein reproved that bad Custom which the Butchers of that Town used of selling Meat on the Lords-days in the Morning. When Bishop Wright afterwards came to visit there, some, who were loath to for go that bad Custom, dealt with him in private about it, and so far gained on him, that in his Charge or Speech he mentioned it, and used this instance, Suppose a Labouring Man receives his Wages so late on the Saturday night, that before he can get home, the Shops are shut up, and no Meat then to be bought, shall not the poor Man therefore have a chop of Meat to his Dinner the next day (with great noise the Bishop added) God forbid. Mr. Hieron, well understood this reflection, and others took so much notice of it, as to take en∣couragement from it. Yet notwithstanding Mr. Hieron preaching up∣on the Commandments, when he came in course to the Fourth Com∣mandment, returned upon the reproof of this sin; and raising an Ob∣jection, but some may say my Lord Bishop gives us leave. He an∣swered, Suppose that were so, Whether is it reasnable to regard what one Bishop might say in a private place, more than what that Bishop, and all the Bishops in England had said in Parliament And ha∣ving the Statute of 3. Caroli with him in the Pulpit, he read it to them, and told them, there were but so many years passed, since this was enacted by Kings, Lords, and Commons; and that this Bishop on whose Authority they so much relied, was one of the Number, being then Bishop of Bristol. This put them a little to a stand, yet one of them said, he would notwithstanding hear what such a Gentle∣man, not far distant, would say to it. Whether they reformed or not, I cannot well say, but Mr. Hieron did his duty with Zeal and Courage These instances may suffice to illustrate and prove this head. 2. He was a Man that filled the Sabbath with its proper Exercises. It was a painful day to him, yet not▪ grievous, because the day was his delight, and holy employment was his refreshment. He prayed, he read the Scripture, and expounded it; he sung Psalms, he cate∣chised and expounded the Catechism, he preached twice a day, and this he did with that holy zeal and earnestness, that sometimes (espe∣cially in the spring of the year) he hath been so sore upon the Mon∣days, that he could not endure to sit; but was forced to walk about
in his Room, whilst he was able, and then to try if he could find out any other postures which might be more easie to him than sitting was. He stuck close to his people, gave them their full provision, and when the necessitics of some Neighboring places called for a supply, he hath sometimes preached thrice a day rather than his own people should be shortned. He very rarely exchanged with any body on the Sabbath, kept his own Vineyard, and kept to it. Breadsall wanted preaching when they sought for him, but never wanted after they found him. He administred both the Sacraments in their Seasons, and for the instructing and admonishing part of discipline he was abundant in it. He taught publickly, and from house to house, warning every one, and teaching every one. The younger he catechised in the Con∣gregation, the elder at home went to their Houses, called them to his. The Sermons preached at Church were repeated in his house, all his willing Neighbours were welcome, and for some time considerable numbers did frequent those repetitions. And for their encouragement so to do, he would sometimes in the week-day invite to Supper such as came to Repetition and Prayer on the Lords-day, and after Supper let them play and use some fit Recreations, and be innocently as merry as they would, being no enemy to harmless mirth in its own proper season. He took all occasions to do them good. I have cast some sorrowful looks at that place since he was thrust out of it, as fearing that Vineyard was like to become as the Sluggards field, having loft his cultivation of it. 3. He confined not his labours within his own charge and precincts, but was ready and frequent in week-day work abroad. His Fountain was dispersed abroad, and Rivers of Waters in the Country Villages. He assisted in upholding most Lectures, and then there were many, by putting his hand to them. He set up a Monthly Lecture at Dale-Abby, which for some time he only preached at himself, but after∣wards a Congregation being there gathered by him, other Ministers came in to his assistance, and made that single Lecture a double one. This Exercise was kindly embraced by the people at Dale, and was well frequented, till the anti-religious Spirit arose in 1662. and then the Ministers who were to preach hearing of an armed Rabble coming from Derby to break them up; after they had advised with the people, resolved to desist and desperse themselves, and so gave way to those furious Bigots. Let a Bear robbed of her whelps meet a man rather than a Fool in his folly, Prov. 17. 12. This glorious Victory they obtained, to scatter a Meeting whose only crime was serving God, and to put an end to a Meeting there, where Vision was very rare, and Preach∣ing much needed. So ended this, and most of the Meetings in the
Countrey. This was about July, I think, and in August following, the Ministers now disturbed were silenced, not by a rude self-calling, and self-raising Rabble, but by a formality of Law, which in Gods time I hope will appear to be according to that phrase, Psal. 58. 2. a weighing of the violence of Mens hands in the earth, an holding balances in hands, the emblem of Justice, as if they would propor∣tion punishments to faults, but tilled and turned the Scale by revenge∣ful malice, and to curry favour with the Enemies of all Righteousness, sentenced an Innocent, useful Seed of Men, whom God would ne∣ver cast off, though they cast them out. And I am not without hopes that some of them may live to have a Paphnutius's kiss from a Constan∣tine's mouth, Amen, if God see that good. 4. Where ever he preached at home, or abroad, he preached the Word, he was a Scriptural Preacher, not Chaff, but Wheat was sown by him; not Niceties and Subtilties, but sound Doctrine, well digested truth in significant words was delivered by him. Gingling, tickling the Ear, patching and painting the Face of Truth, daubing with intempered Morter, were things he practised not, yea, he ab∣horred them. His Sermons were no flattering glasses, but true clear Mirrours to shew Men the true Complexion of their Souls. He had Art enough, but he concealed it, he had much Learning, but it all served Divinity; he had Logick and Philosophy enough, but he planted no Aristotles Grove by the side of Gods Altar. He had method enough to divide a Text, but he never crumbled a Text; he divided the Word into fit Portions, he never strained a Text, but would be sure to give you the proper fruit from such a branch of Scripture. I never knew him impertinent. Indeed if ever Man pro∣phecyed according to the proportion of Faith, if ever Man compared Spiritual things with spiritual, if ever man spake as the Lords Mes∣senger, in the Lords Message, as is said of the Prophet Haggaii; Hag. 13. if ever man filled his Vessel at the Holy Fountains, if ever man took his Words from one Shepherd, if ever man brought light to Scripture from Scripture, and made it to interpret it self, he did. Blessed be God there are many such, and he must be ranked amongst such men. His Sermons on heads of Divinity, his Discourse of Spiri∣tual joy, prove what I say. 5. He managed the Holy Sacraments with a great deal of care, fear, pains, and circumspection, according to the weight and worth of those high and Holy Misteries. As for Baptisme he very rarely administred it in private, and never but where necessity and charity required it. His constant way was this, The second Lords day after the birth, he appointed the Children
to be brought to the Church, and there after Evening Sermon made all the Congregation Witnesses; and if any had offered to go out, he would call to them, and tell them there was great need they should all understand the Baptismal Covenant. He never opened the Service-Book after the Ordinance of Parliament required to shut it, and ap∣pointed the Directory to take place; yet I doubt not, but he gave as clear instructions, as powerful exhortations and charges, and put up as pertinent Prayers, as that Book or any other Form for that Office, doth or can afford. As for the Supper of the Lord he administred it quarterly; had alwayes a preparation Sermon, and many times two, when he could procure help; he took great pains in taking an account of, and in∣structing his Communicants: If any had miscarried, he failed not to admonish them: He made great Observations how he found them: He had his searching Questions about Conversion, about Title to Eter∣nal Life, about Repentance, Do not all acknowledge it necessary? Have you repented? If not, why not now? Are we not frail? Time short and uncertain. He had his excitations to the cure of Souls, and indeed he was no way wanting to help his People to san∣ctifie God in their near approach to him. 6. He was very exact in performing his duty to his People, but very moderate in requiring his legal dues from his People: He took little of the Poor, and gave them much: And for others in lesser things he took what they brought, and made no strict inquiry: He forbore some smaller things till some took occasion to deny them to be due, and then being obliged to maintain the Rights of the place, he ordered his Clark to demand them: He was forbearing; After his ejection he found many had not reckoned with him of several years, he sued only one, (not of his Parish that denyed any Tithe to be due to him, and led away as much at one time as was of a considerable value. This he might not bear, so applyed to the Justices, who up∣on the hearing adjudged him his own with the penalty upon the un∣just with-holder, but he only took his own and what he had spent, and a Shilling to his Servant, and returned the rest. If it might not have been a detriment to the place for the future, I am apt to think he would have sitten down with loss, for his design was the Peoples benefit; he sought not theirs but them, and that he might gain upon them, he ws content to be a Looser. He was a good Towns-man as well as a good Minister. There are two clear Instances. (1.) He procured a Relaxation and Mitigation of their Assessments by clearing it to them then in power, that there was reason for it, and improving his interest in them, procured ease.
(2.) There was a Town-Stock in Breadsall, which being sent out among them in small summes, was frequently endangered to come lame home: Mr. Hieron oft advised, it might be laid out in Land, which they never would yield to, but when there was a prospect of his going out (he having promised them Ten ounds if they would buy Land) they accepted, and he as good as his word gave them his Ten Pounds, and so there is Land that yields Three Pounds per An∣num, setled on Trustees for the use of the poor of Bradsall. 7. His Heart was much set upon Success and Fruit among his own People, that in that place he might be able to say that there was Fruits, yea, all manner of pleasant Fruits, new and old, laid up for thee, O beloved. Cant. 7. last. This appeared sundry ways. (1.) He was pleased that God had given him a People that were frameable to an outward conformity; but Oh! where is the Jew in∣wardly? The power of Godliness? He was no Formalist himself, and he could not take up with shapes of Christians; but longed to see real Heart-Christians. (2.) He was full of thoughts of heart when he found not his desi∣red success attend his work, and would break out thus; How shall I do more? How shall I do better? How shall I pray more? How shall I preach better? (3.) The Fruit he had in Breadsall, (as blessed be God he had some.) Oh! it was as the first ripe Fruits: Oh! a Breadsall-Chri∣stian was as a Joseph, as a Benjamin to Old Jacob: They were in his Bowels; his Soul cleaved to them; they were his Joy and Crown. 8. He was a man of Hospitality and Charity▪ Strangers and Friends found him so in courteous entertainments: No good man needed to seek a publick House in Breadsall to lodge in, nor strain to reach Derby. The Church had a Gains at Breadsall. And for his Charity; his lending and his giving was considerable: It extended it self to all the Poor in Breadsall, in Bread, in Coats, in Corn, in Mo∣ney; yea it extended to poor Christians distant from him. After he had left Breadsall-Living he sent Money thither to be disposed as he directed: He devised liberal things, forecasted in hard years to re∣serve Corn for the poor; though it sometimes proved to his outward loss. Thus was he full of the good Word of God, and of good Works. His Acquaintances, Neighbours, Kindred, will testifie these things. I could on this head be more large and particular, but this taste may suffice; they that knew him can inlarge upon these hints; they that knew him not may take their measures from these short touches. To conclude, he was a good man, and that his Re∣ligion
was not barren, but had the most undeniable Evidences, even those that Jesus Christ will go upon in the day of Judgment. 9. He was a bold, sharp, close reprover of sin, and yet very tender and compassionate in dealing with tender Consciences, afflict∣ed, wounded Spirits. Some of his great Neighbours while at Ash∣born did profane the Sabbath, and openly drunk healths in the Market place; he as boldly reproved it, as they did impudently commit it; and this when the War came on, made him to be represented as a Round-head, and by the instigation of those Neighbours, he was one of the first in Ashborn that had his House broken in upon by Sir Francis Wortleys Party, he taken, and imprisoed by them; and as by the words they let fall, he understood, it was in revenge of his Reproofs. He was an hearty enemy to sin, struck at it with his spi∣ritual weapons with all the strength of his arm: He launced festered sores: He attacked sturdy resolved sinners with resolute charges: He beat down sin so, that some touched with Antinomianism, thought him too legal, and aked him, by what warrant Ministers under the Gospel preached the Law so much; he readily answered; The words of their Commission were a sufficient warrant, citing that Scripture, Mark 16. 15, 16. and added, Is not that as terrible a preaching of the Law as any Minister now doth, or can practise. To which the Objecter made no reply. But on the other hand, though he lifted up his voice against sin, like a trumpet, yet he neither cryed nor lift up his voice, when he had to deal with bruised reeds, then he bound up their Wounds charily, and had the Oyl of Joy for them that were in the Spirit of Haviness: He feared to make the heart of the righ∣teous sad: Here he preached the Gospel, he beat down profaneness, but lent an hand to them that were cast down for sin, to lift them up. Many disquieted hearts would make to him, and he would coun∣sl and comfort them, and shew them where the Rest for their Souls was. 10. He backed his Doctrine with a good Life: He was the same man out of the Pulpit, that he was in it: He was a Preacher, and a Pattern; what People heard from him, they saw in him: He was all Voice, Mouth, and Life, his Conversation was a visible Sermon: He was a follower of Christ, mighty in word and deed. He mani∣fested a spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. We may say of him, as the Woman of her dead Husband, Thou knowest that thy Servant did fear the Lord. No profaneness went from him into any place where he taught: His Doctrine was a pure lip, and his Life exemplary; his Doctrine was pure and savoury, his Breath sweet, and his Life tinctured with holiness in every turn of it. He
came, as John Baptist, in the way of Righteousness; he lived in all good Conscience; his walking was in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom. He condemned not, confuted not, his Do∣ctrine by contrary practice; but he confirmed it, established it, and justified the Wisdom he taught. He wrought with both hands ear∣nestly, as some are said to sin. He pulled not down with one hand, what he built up with the other; he spoke with his feet, and taught with his fingers. He spake convincingly sound Doctrine, stopping Gainsayers mouths, and he lived convincingly: They could not re∣tort, nor reflect, nor say, Physician, heal thy self. His blameless Life stopped the mouth of iniquity. 11. He was a man of much Prayer, and so a man of much Grace. He pressed Prayer much, he practised it more. He gave himself to Prayer. His Grace exceeded his gift, though in the gift of Prayer he was very great. He prayed with all Prayer, Publick, Family, se∣cret Prayer. He went through the parts of Prayer, was large in Confession of Sin, was very particular in thankful acknowledgment of Mercies, and an earnest Petitioner for Grace and Mercy, for all Spiritual Blessings; a pleading Intercessour for all that he was bound to pray for. He not only prayed, but made a Collection of Prayers, called sober People together, and went to them where Prayer was made. He called People frequently to days of Prayer. He carried the Churches abroad, and our Kingdoms and Churches upon his heart, and spread their case before the Lord. He was an hearty Protestant, and a true enemy to Antichristianism. He was a Prophet in Sack-cloth; because of the great Apostasie. He was very sensible of Romish Idolatry. Oh! how much of his heart might one feel, when he prayed, Down with Babylon. Oh, how have I heard him lay his praying hand upon Babylon, and cry, as if he would not take off his hand, till he had pulled it down, pleading from their Heresie, Tyranny and Idolatry, as if he would have no denial. He was very serious in Prayer, and a great admirer and acknowledger of Grace, when he mentioned any good in himself, or them that joyned with him, it was with much humility, and alwayes spake thus, or to this purpose: And if there be any good in us, not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Grace be the Glory. From a thread to a shooe-latchet he would not take from Grace. 12. He magnified and dignified his Office by humility, by great moderation in things that are Problems amongst good men, by a great steadiness. When any body mentioned any good done by him, he would say, Give Glory to God, this man is a sinner. I never knew that he estranged himself from his Conforming Brethren, that were
before his Intimates; but he kept up his honour of them, and love to them. He kept his post, was no bending Osier; he deliberated mch, and then fixed. He had been conformable; but I believe, not with any great liking, and was not willing to choose that way a∣gain, and condemn his laying it aside, and therefore would do neither less nor more, but put himself into Gods hands; and chose to keep his peace, though he lost his place; and for any thing that ever ap∣peared, never repented; nay, he had great satisfaction. One once asked him, Do you not repent? What do you mean, says he, the leav∣ing of my place? No; I am far from that, for I have done nothing therein, but what I have taught you to be your Duty. Rather lose all, than sin against od; and if▪ Breadsall Parsonage was the best Bishoprick in England, I must do again what I have done. And thus he said more than once; for my part I never knew him staggered. 13. In the works of his Ministry, which are not to me so clearly Ministerial works, he went further than most other Ministers.—I shall instance in Marrying people; he stood upon it in very great strictness to have a full assurance of Parents consent, and a due pub∣lication of the Marriage intended. And in Burials his way was, if he preached a Funeral Sermon, for which he had Money, he would (sometimes at the least) give it to the Poor. If no Sermon were be∣spoken, he would take the People into the Church, and give them an Exhortation of the length of some ordinary Sermons; and this he did, because People at such times are more serious and impressible, and he was for catching hold of all opportunities, as impotent People were at the troubling of Bethesda's waters. 14. In the places of his Ministry he had great respect, and ever bore great affection to those places; the care of them lay upon him. He had a great regard to Ashborn all his time, and a mighty concern for Breadsall. The Cures passed into other hands, but the Care was upon him. He would go to Breadsall, while he was near it, though called a Wolf for his pains by his successor. He put himself to many inconveniences by his first remove, that he might be near them; he took up with a strait house, that he might be at hand for his Peoples service, and that he might live among a People that were his Hearers, though not his Parishioners, namely at Little-Eaton.
CHAP. VII. Of the Occurrences of this Good Mans Life, his Tryals, Afflictions, Oppositions, and the Mercies mixed with them all. Sect. 1. THE grudge about Mountney the School-Master before mentioned, and the cancered Spirit of his partakers, occasioned Mr. Hieron his first trouble. About December the 13th, 1637. Mr. Hieron and Mr. George Lees of Ashborn above-mentioned, were summoned to appear at the Mannor of Lambeth, on the first of February, between the Hours of One and Three in the Afternoon, to answer to such Articles as were or should be exhibited against them. A Pursivant was sent, who had his Fees: Mr. Hierons part, as my Author remembers, was Four Pounds paid down; Mr. Lees not be∣ing at home, some other paid his part, and got a Noble abated.—To London they went at an ill time of year, made more dangerous by reason of Floods, they made some way to Holt, who was Appa∣ritor Apparitorum. He treated with Sack, and feed with Gold, shewed them the Articles, which contained no Capital Crimes de∣serving a Pursivant, but trivial things and uncapable of proof; a∣gainst Mr. Lees was objected, that when he was Churchwarden, he had brewed Ale in the Church, which had no other colour then, that the Workman that pointed the Steeple, advised the Mortar should be tempered with Liquor made of Malt.—Against Mr. Hieron that preaching on that Text, [Fear God, Honour the King,] he had said, there were some that neither feared God, nor honoured the King; but walked the streets with impudent faces, whereby he meant, (as they suggested) my Lord Bishop and Andrew Kniveton. And that he had used the expression of removing Mountains; whereby he reflect∣ed on Mr. Mountney and reflected on him, the Governours of the School having removed him, as is abovesaid.—This they looked on as Mercy, that having seen the Articles of their charge, they might safely take the Oath ex Officio, the refusal whereof would have sent them to Prison.—. No Prosecutor appeared, they feed a Pro∣ctor to make a motion, that since no Prosecutor appeared, the Court would please to dismiss them; he like a Proctor of such a Court, moved that the Court would appoint a Prosecutor; so they were not dismissed.—They therefore applyed themselves to Dr. Bakr, the
Bishops Chaplin; but he did decline them, but Mr. Hieron procured a Letter from Mr. Jackson before mentioned to Dr. Bray the Arch-Bishops Chaplin, who courteously received them, and went with them to Sir John Lamb, and obtained their discharge. Oh how good was God, when he took away the High Commission! And again, how good is God, when it was rising again in the Ecclesiastical Com∣missioners, threw it down, never (I hope) to rise more. Amen. The Lord say so. Sect. 2. The next disturbance of this Worthy Man was in the be∣ginning of the War. Sir Francis Wortleys party coming to Ashborn, one Captain Bard and Dennis in the dead time of the night, broke in∣to his House, took him out of his Bed; Captain Dennis said, Gen∣tlemen cannot drink the Kings health, but you must reprove them for it: Oh, said Mr. Hieron, Sir John Fitz-Herberts hand is in this. They carried him to their Court of Guard, and kept him there till morn∣ing, where urging him to speak of many things, lay at catch for matter to accuse him: Sir Francis Wortley charged him for preaching against Episcopacy; he answered, never; but against the exorbi∣tances of it.—His Wives Father passed his word for him, which was at present satisfying; the next day he appeared, Sir Francis in∣clined to release him; but would have him call the Parliament a com∣pany of dissemblers, but he would not. In the upshot they discharg∣ed him; he desired his Horse and Saddle to be restored: Nay, saith Sir Francis, you may be glad you are at liberty your self.—During this Imprisonment, one of the Captains, (viz) Captain Bard had been with an Honourable Person, then living in Ashborn, Mrs. Cockin, half Sister to Philip Earl of Chesterfield, a Royalist of highest ele∣vation, yet a Woman of Sense, that knew Mr. Hierons worth, bare a fair respect to Mr. Hieron, and represents him in his true Character to the Captain, which he credited, and was so convinced, that he came to excuse himself, and told him, they did not meddle with him, until they had received some scores of Complaints against him; through which looking at him, they thought him to be one that had no fellow; but now he perceived his mistake, was sorry for what he had done, promised, if he came thither in peace, he would see him; did all he could to restore his Horse; but not able to effect it without payment of Twenty Shillings for him. Captain Bard was so ingenu∣ous, as that after his marching thence, wrote to Mr. Hieron, begging pardon of him and of his Wife. Thus God brought forth this good Mans Righteousness, to the shame of all his false Accusers.
Sect. 3. After this Storm he had some quiet, till Tutbury became a Garrison for the King. Whether some ill Neighbours going to create him trouble, mistook the Party, and told the errand to a very Friend of Mr. Hieron's, who sent him Prisoner to Derby, but the ill success of this first attempt did not deterr others: But still others arose, and a Party beset the House, entred and searched, but by Gods good pro∣vidence he was not at home, and so they returned without him, af∣frighting his dear Wife, and pilfering some few things. This bred great uneasiness in Mr. Hieron, and at length forced him to Derby, which at present was a place of Retreat, a Zoar to him, secured him and his from fears in the Night, and in a very little time after his com∣ing thither, God provided a Laboratory, a Work-house for him. Sect. 4. After this he had a serene time at Breadsall. No alarm but once, and then no danger followed. Peaceable Sabbaths, here he met with no War, but did himself war against the Devils Kingdom. Lusts of Men, and Wickedness of Times, contentfully seated and setled working hard, had great measures of health, though mixt with some Feavors, which were mostly the effects of his extraordinary pains, and went off without any very long deteinures from his Work. Here he enjoyed a good Living, conversed with a very precious Wife, li∣ved among his Children. Here he and she shewed themselves Lo∣vers of Hospitality, Lovers of good Men, Sober, Just, Holy, Tem∣perate, wone much upon some that had prejudice against him; Thus the Lords Candle shone upon his Head for many years—But in the year 1657, his sprightly, his lively Wife fell ill of an Ague, and a perverse one, which being a double Tertian, and mixt with an high degree of the Scurvy. No Physical Applications, no Change of Air would prevail for (whither she went for Air, viz. to Sir John Gells of Hopton, then John Gell, Esq;) who with his Wife loved and honou∣red all good people, and had a special Respect to this Matron and to her Husband, there she expired, and by her desire, or her Friends, was interred at Ashburne with a due Solemnity, chargeable to her Husband, but not begrudged, for great was his Love to her, and esti∣mation of her, which appears by his own record of her death, July 10th 1657. Mortem obiit Ʋxor mihi carissima Nunquam satis dilecta quâ ego non fui dignus▪—And adds that Scripture passage, Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all: This Death of hers was something surprizing because her Distemper being an Ague, most thought her bailable: but it proved otherwise. And it was very deeply resented by her Husband. She brought him Two Children, Samuel and Anne Taylor, Samuel dyed young, but Anne out∣lived
her Father, of whom I shall speak hereafter. She bore him Two Children, Joseph, who is alive, the genuine Son of a Worthy Father, He was alive when this was written: is now translated to a better Life before this comes to be published: And Rachell who dyed before her Father, one that was glorious within, of excellent Un∣derstanding, Wit, and Memory, a Lover of every thing that was good. Now though this affliction was very grievous, yet was it to my ob∣servation wonderfully sanctified, greatly sweetned and alienated. In my thoughts that Rod blossomed, it was a growing time with him in Grace from that time, he was alwayes above his Fellows, but then a∣bove himself, made sensibly a partaker of Gods Holiness, and received the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness by that his Exercise—And it was greatly sweetned and alienated by his Daughter in Law, Mrs. Anne Taylor, the true Daughter of her Mother, who was a Mary in her choice of the better part, and bore that Affection to her Father in Law, which few Natural Children equal, and scarce any exceed; she was as a Wife to him, as a Mother to his Children, a Governess to his House. She took all the Family Burdens on her self; that he might be void of care, and serve God in his own business without di∣straction. She lived single, she cumbred herself, would put her hand to every thing, she was frugal, but not sordid; she was a Restorer of his Life, and nourisher of his Age: So that two great and Singular things may be said of her, that never Man had so great a loss in a Wife made up in a tender, prudeut, provident Daughter in Law; she did the Duties of a Wife, a Mother, and yet lived and dyed a Virgin: Oh this many a time warmed this good Mans heart, and he would men∣tion as a great and good Act of Providence—Again all this she did for his Works sake, for Gods sake, for the Gospels sake, in my appre∣hension what she did is a good gloss upon that Text, Philip. 4. 3. Where Paul mentions Women, that laboured with him in the Gospel, not in preaching, which is forbidden: but in good Offices in ministra∣tions and services proper for that Sex. Such an one was Mrs. Anne Taylor, a Phebe, a Priscilla, a Mary. She out-lived her Father; but I am apt to think a great part of her Life dyed with him; because it was so much bound up in his. Sect. 5. His next Tryal was his divorce from his beloved People, Place and Work in publick, August 24. 1662. Bartholomew-day was black by the destruction of the Temple by the Chaldeans, about that time of the year—It was black by the Massacre in Paris, commen∣cing that day called Clades Bartholomaea—It is further black, by the expulsion of Ministers, stopping their Mouths, stripping them of their
Livelyhoods, turning them into the wide world without any thirds or visible way of subsistance—This day Mercy forsook the Earth; sure, when so many of liberal Education must be put to dig, beg, or Starve—Hear O Heaven, be astonisht O Earth, Matth. 23. 37. CHAP. VIII. Of his Behaviour when and while an outed Minister which he was to the day of his Death, of his Removes, of his Way and Work, and of the various Providences, that betided him in that part of his Life. Sect. 1. HE supplicated Bishop Hacket (whose visitation was not long after) that he might have liberty to preach gratis, at Dale Abby. He pressed him to conforme, he answered his place was disposed off, and could I have been satisfied to conforme, I should not have left my own People; but the place I mention having no Maintenance, is like to have no Minister; unless some body be suffered, whose Charity will send him out at his own Charge, the care of that, saith the Bishop, must lye upon me, which if it did, he hath given account of it, for of any Minister sent thither, I can give none ac∣count. Sect. 2. At Michaelmas after August 24th, he removed to Little Eaton, a Town contiguous to Breadsall: Being loath to go far away, he took up in a place where he conflicted with some difficulties; but bare them, and (under some offers of greater Conveniencies) pitched his Tent there, and enjoying peace and quietness abode there three Years and an half, doing good according to his opportunities; till a new publick storm arose, even a rough Wind in a day of the East-Wind; wherein man did not imitate God, who stayeth his rough Wind in the day of the East-wind. Isa. 27. 8. Sect. 3. And now comes the hurricane of the Oxford Act, to scatter them, whom the Ʋniformity Act had removed, violently to toss and turn them like a ball, to make them like Chaff before the Wind, and as a rolling thing before the Whirlwind. Thus did Re∣venge pursue, without any new crime, or provocation, smiting with a rage that reached Heaven: And thus they that were quiet in the Land, must have no quiet in it; but must be made as Vagabonds in
the Earth, and be like Dogs that have a twitch set upon their Tails, that cn rest no where, but must to their sorrow, be put to find out the perpetual motion. Under this Act Mr. Hieron fell; was not like to swear what he could not, durst not say: So upon March 24. 166 he withdrew, leaving his desirable Neighbourhood, and his beloved Family, and sojourned at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, and in other places a∣mongst his Friends, till Midsummer: Then removed his Family, and with them went to Newthorp in Nottinghamshire, June 29. 1666. that House had inconveniencies, but the opportunities of Service over∣ballanced, and there had some Souls (its hoped) cause to bless God for his coming thither—But the House not being Healthful, he made another remove back again into Derbyshire, taking an House at Losco; after which remove he made none till carried to his long home.—. Sect. 4. April 29. 1668. He came to Losco, and there sat down, and fell to his work—He had some substantial, sound good men in this Neighbourhood, who did prize him, and whom he prized—. Now upon this Section I must dwell a little; and here 1 I find him at Little-Eaton, Newthorp, Losco, &c. preaching the Gospel as he had opportunity, yet oft joyning in publick Worship. He could be satisfied to be present at that Mode of Worship, wherein he could not officiate. He made his Moderation known; his Suffer∣ings did not exasperate him. 2. When May 10. 1670. was come, which made Conventicles a great crime, and any number above Five, besides the Family, a Con∣venticle, he Preached twice a day in the bigest Families, and Four Persons, with as many under Sixteen Years of Age, as would come, and then Repeated at home at night. 3. In the Year 1671/2. the Declaration for the short lived Indulgence came out, he was then set free, and had full Meetings. 4. When that Declaration was recall'd, he held on doing; but with the Caution which the Times forced him to, and his Prudence directed in apparent danger; forbearing, but yet never desisting, nor giving out; and by this means he kept work on wheels, and exposed not his Hearers. 5. About those times he Printed his first Book, or Sermons, being urged to Print something—And his latter Book he Printed, because many Christians acquainted him with their troubles, whom he always comforted, and wrote that Book to chear the Hearts, and lighten the Countenances of them that walked droopingly—He himself would be chearful in Company, to wipe off the slander cast upon Religion, that it makes men sour, morose, and spoils good Company.
6. Here he did many good Offices, and was ready to do Civil, and much more Spiritual Kindnesses; though to his own trouble. 7. He was Temperate in all things, in Meat, Drink, Sleep, Eat competently at Noon, sparingly at Night—Used not to Drink be∣twixt Meals, nor after Supper—A very close Student; a great ob∣server of what he read, and a careful collector of most material pas∣sages which he could readily repair to, and would upon occasion of Speech impart to his Friends—He abridged Mr. Pools Criticks, and added his own Excellent Collections, and under his hand are there two Volumns upon the whole Scripture, in which I doubt not but there are things that entred not into the heads of Criticks; Rare things out of our best practical Divines, Spiritual Glosses, and most pertinent ferences; for they that knew him, did know that he had an excel∣lency this way—. I have sometimes mentioned my own thoughts about some Scriptures, and he would read me out of his Books what his sense was to very good purpose. 8. He was Gray by that time he was Forty or before, but though the Almond-Tree flourished, they that looked out of the Windows were not darkened. His Sight was something short; but it held long, exceeding good to the last; he never used Spectacles, could read a little Print without difficulty, wrote by an indifferent Light, readily and well. 9. He was swift to hear his Brethren, took heed how he heard. He would tell his very friends, that never any could take any thing ill from him, where they missed it in any passages in a Sermon; and some that now live, acknowledge themselves much beholden to him; for they knew he was accurate, though not nice; truly critical, tho' not censorious; exactly methodical, though not limiting others; but left them to their own method and way. In one of his new Books he sets down thus, Graces eminent in Mr. Martin Topham, mentioned by Mr. John Oldfield, in his Sermon at his Funeral, No∣vember 3. 1658. which I desire to imitate, the particulars follow in the close,—Go thou and do likewise: Subscribing J. H. A like ex∣tract there is out of Mr. Ashes Funeral Sermon. 10. He was zealous for God, and his motion like natural motion, was quickest in its end. In many of his Books where he writ his Name, he adds to it, , be zealous; which considering the man, and his course, shewed the temper of his heart. 11. At Losco he saw his Son disposed to a Branch of a Religious Family, and she her self truly so, the Daughter of an old Puritan, the Sister of the very searching Mr. Joseph Truman. A Woman of Vertue, considerably endowed as to Worldly things; and very happy
they were in each other—God hath made her fruitful. Her Father in Law had great content in her, and was very sensible of this good Providence - He saw a Child Born, that bears his Name. 12. This Losco remove was a very happy one to Mr. Hieron, and was a matter of Song to him in the house of his Pilgrimage—Here was a great gathering to him from many quarters. To the Carkass the Eagles gathered. He was next to a publick place here, had great numbers, and preached as in his former dayes. Here in a little time he had a choice Society of serious Souls; amongst whom he admini∣stred the Sacrament in its stated times, with its wonted preparations; amongst these he had constant dayes of Prayer, which upon emergent occasions were multiplyed, and very frequent—Here God gave him much success, the Gospel got much ground; some brought in, and others brought on; many that were bad made good, and the good much better; some were planted, and others watered; some got root, and others better rooted. He was as Joseph, fruitful in a strange Land; and because of this forgot his sorrow; he saw God had directed his removes for the furtherance of the Gospel; led him not amongst heaps of stones, as it's said, Beda's Lad led him, but was sent into several places to help them. God led him into places, where were well affected people, willing to hear, and were glad at heart of him—They flocked in as Doves to the windows, and many were the Children of this desolate Man, he laboured not in vain, he sacrilegiously deserted not his Ministry, and the Lord forsook not him. It may be said of him in a proportion, as was Prophetically said of John Baptist, Luk. 1. 15, 16, 17. and actually of Barnabas, Acts 11. 24. he turned many to the Lord, much people was added to the Lord by him. Acts 11. 21. The hand of the Lord was with this scattered Servant of God, and some numbers believed, and turned to the Lord. 13. From hence he wrote many Letters, upon divers occasions, to several persons to very good purpose; they are of the same make with his Sermons as he Printed; so his constant Preaching was; he went abroad in the same Cloaths he wore at home. As he Preached, so he Wrote; such as his Sermons, such his Letters; proving him∣self, as was said of Ezra, a ready scribe Ezra 7. 6. in the word which the Lord had given. A great wisdom he had in bringing down gene∣ral Rules to particular Cases; he manifested in them great concern for Souls, and faithfulness to them. Some of those shall be inserted in the last Chapter of this Treatise 14. Here God much appeared to him in many shines upon his Heart—The inward movements of his Soul I have shewed in the
outward Indications of them; but there are some short hints of Gods dealings with him, left under his own hand, which spake him to be a Man of Communion with God, that there were exchanges of Love betwixt God and him. Some of them were before his coming hither; but most of them at Losco—Some of them the actings of Grace in his own Heart, and some of them Gods gracious dealings with him in wayes of quickenings and comforts. A Catalogue of Deliverances, since 1642. 1. From my Imprisonment by Sir Francis Wortley, from Plunder∣ing my House by Sir Rich. Fitz-Herbert, when his men Plundered some in Ashborn 2. From being taken at Chillington, it being taken, when I was with Captain Jackson on our way thither. 3. From Wingfield Mannor, which stood nine Moneths after my coming to Breadsall; from Ashby, Tutbury, and all Enemies; I be∣ing setled at Breadsall a Year and a half before those Garrisons were taken, yet all the time never affrighted. Laus Deo: i. e. Thanks to God. 4. From Mr. H. who oft pushed at me; yet the Lord upheld me. 5. My Hay was preserved, when others had theirs carried away, 1648. 6. My Sheep narrowly escaped in a Flood. 7. The Hovel fell, my Carts under and Corn above all saved. 8. The Outhouses fell, May 1. 1655. many Cattle and some Horses in them, yet none killed, nor had any considerable hurt; a small matter keeping the fallen Timber off them. 9. My House and Goods preserved from Thieves all along for seve∣ral years. 10. Rachel, i. e. his Daughter in eminent danger of Death, rescued by Prayer. 11. My Wife filled with Joy at her departure. Laus Deo. 12. My Mares feet shot from under her upon an Ice, suddenly she fell one way, I another: No harm. Laus Deo. 13. Mare fell with me coming from Wicksworth. No harm. Laus Deo. 14. Feb. last, 1670. as I went to Nottingham, Mare fell on me, lay on my Leg long, it swelled, no Bone broken. Laus Deo. Thus much of Deliverances Noted and Recorded: And then come Mercies which he ranks thus: Mercies Publick; Peace, the
Gospel. Domestical; What Parents Education, Wife, Children, Servants, God hath blessed me with—Personal Privative Dangers, Sickness delivered from—Positive Health—External Wealth—Repute—Of Mind—Commonly my Eye-sight is good. Laus Deo. Saving Conversion, encreased Grace, Victory, what gain Glory to God—Edification to others, what Almes—What shall I render? Further in his Private Notes. A Catalogue of Sins—Sins in Youth- In another place Sins to be reformed by Grace, walk humbly, thankfully watch, return not to folly after peace spoken—May 16. 1658. If overtaken with Anger after a Sacrament. A note thereon, and once followed with a Mise∣rere mei, Deus. These are things that discovered Grace, and were exercises of it. I now come to Experiences mentioned in his secret Record. Octob. 27. 1658. I was not well, had a pain in my Belly from side to side in the beginning of the Night, I feared falling into Sick∣ness—Communed with my heart upon my Bed, had thoughts of Death, my Conscience spake peace to me, the light of Gods Coun∣tenance shone into me, I was fully assured of Gods Mercy to me, if I had dyed at that time. I had no doubt of my eternal happiness for which Mercy I give God praise, and desire to record it, with much thankfulness. But I slept well that night, was well next day, continued well, for which Mercy, double Mercy, the Lord be magnified. January, 1650. By night on my Bed I awaked, had sweet com∣fort, the King led me into the Wine-cellar. Bless the Lord, O my Soul. April 10. A Communion in nostro Thalamo; i. e. in our Bed-Chamber. April 8. We fasted, I was in a reasonable good frame; but had some disturbance: April 9. I was very dull, no quickening, no comfort; I read, I reviewed the Catalogue of my Sins, but was still dull. After five a Clock I went to secret Prayer for less than half an hour; after which I was chearful, full of comfort, so con∣tinued that night and next day, much enlarged in comfort, God spake peace to my heart. I was lively in Prayer, in Administration, in the whole Service. Bless the Lord O my Soul! August 2. 1664. I went to Bed with some pain, slept not, had no ease, walked in the House all night, dull at first, but after chearful, had some good thoughts, the light of Gods Countenance shone on my Soul all night, I was
willing to dye, not questioning my estate; but if I dyed I should be happy. About four a Clock in the Morning I had ease, was well pre∣sently after, fell to work all day, at Night voided a Stone, slept all Night very well, so continue to this day, August 10. Immortal Praise be to God that healeth me; but I render not to God according to his benefits. Decemb. 2. 4. 8. 1664. We sought God, received Sacrament, returned Praise, I was dull before; was graciously enlarged in Prayer, in Administration, had Comfort in Receiving, I was dull again before Thanksgiving, Read a while in Baxter and Harris, and much enlarg∣ed in Duty, had sweet Peace at Sacrament, and after Praise, the Lord sealed to me Jesus Christ, Covenant of Grace, and Pardon of Sin. O bless the Lord, O my Soul. March 1. 1664. We spent some time in Humiliation at our House by Night, was in some good measure enabled; in the Morning in a good frame, poured out my Heart in secret, had much Comfort and Peace, bless the Lord, O my Soul, and so have had ever since.: Also at Sacrament, April 2. 1665. What shall I render? So January 16. 1665. At Sacrament much enlarged in Administration and Comfort. Praise to God. June 6. 1666. Early at five I awaked, had sweet Meditations of Gods Love and great Comfort, after some clouds and scruples, God enlarged my Heart, and put gladness, more then when Corn and Wine encreased. Lord grant I may abide in his Love. April 2. 1667. An Ague siezed me after four fits, sent for Mr. Cranwell, he gave me a bitter Draught, which sweat me an hour be∣fore the Fit: I had no more Fits, nor Relapse, I bless God. In the beginning dull and dark, but after a Night or two sweet Comfort, and so continueth to this day, blessed be God;—May 2. 1667. I returned thanks among Christians on this Text, Psal. 103. 3. Who healeth all thy diseases. July 5. 1668. A Sacrament at our House, I was much enlarged in Administration, in Receiving, in Meditation, Examination a day or two before, had sweet peace and full assurance. Praise be to God. March 3. 1668. I awoke at four in the Morning, had sweet Me∣ditations and Communion with God, Peace and full assurance. Blessed be God. Feb. 11. 69. I awoke at six in the Morning, had Peace, full Assu∣rance, Joy in the Holy Ghost, that God was mine, all his Attributes, Christ, his Blood—Holy Ghost, Word, Promises, Providences, Comfort in all, in Death it self, and Christs coming to Judgment. What shall I render to the Lord.
Feb. 8. 12. 1671. I prepared according to my wonted manner, was assisted, enlarged, had a good day. Praise to God. May 12. 1672. I meditated on Gods Presence, was Chearful and Heavenly, enlarged in Heart all day; it was Lords day. Praise to God. June 30. A Sacrament enlarged much, had a good day. Praise to God. August 31. At Morning Prayer in the Parlour I was much enlarg∣ed, with broken-heartedness; had Joy and Peace of Conscience gra∣ciously. Ever bless the Lord, O my Soul. Aug. 3. 1673. Sacrament, as also April 13. in both I was much enlarged, had sweet peace, a good day. Ever blessed be God: Praise the Lord. And watch (O my Soul!) against passion, idle words, vain thoughts in Prayer. Novemb. 2. God graciously enlarged me in Administration, Sealed me, &c. What shall I render to the Lord? O bless the Lord, my Soul: See, walk worthy of God. So in Feb. 8. 1673. and May 24. 1674. and August 16. God was gracious to me then. Decemb. 6. 1674. How excellent is thy loving kindness! A good day. Praised be God. Jan. 11. 1676. A blessed day. Praise to God. June 13. 1680. A joyful day. Praise to God. These are some hints: But Oh that I had his enlargements upon them to impart! Surely these things are like small Points and Marks in Maps that stand for Towns and Countries: But Spiritual Eyes can in these discern what Spirit Mr. John Hieron was off. A Man that lived near himself by Observation, and near God by Communion: A great receiver from God, and yet never so much as fingering any part of the Honour due to God. CHAP. IX. Of his drawing to his end, of the Sickness of which he dyed, of his Death and Burial. DEath threw not this good Man down the stairs, but he was led down by many declining steps. He had little Deaths, that were forerunners of great Death; decayes before dissolution. The foundation of his Distempers began in that sore Feaver, which he had in Winter, 1661. which followed an ill Fit, which he brought
upon himself by overdoing in Jan. 1655. The Feaver did in the thoughts of some endanger him; but he broke through that brunt. He had a second fit of the Stone 1664, and a third 1665. In April, 1667. some fits of an Ague. In March, 67, 68. Not well after his pains, had two fits of an Ague; yet in a Fortnights time returned to his work, and Preached twice, on 15 March and the 22th. he spent himself, that he quite lost his Voice. In Feb. 68. 69. Humours stirred, as the year before, his pains made his Throat sore, and the Ague was feared; but by Gods Blessing on some means used, pre∣vented It was observed about this time of the year, he could worse bear his pains, than at other times. Jan. 77. Want of Health for∣ced him to take up, and to Preach but once a day. March 78. He swooned once, or twice, was sick after, had two Ague fits, was for some time disabled wholly. April, 81. An Ague, though not many fits. July 27. A sore Ague fit; but it was but an Ephemeris, (as the Physitian called it) but had no more fits. August 7. He returned to Preaching once a day, and so continued (though under an Epide∣mical Distemper which was in October) till the 26th of February when he preached his last Sermon: For March 2. he was forced to rise to get breath: The humours, that stirred in former years at Spring in Agues, now appeared in a worse form, differing from former Di∣stempers: Some thought it a Dropsie, some a Tympanites; but Ju∣dicious Mr. Cranwell said from the beginning, it was a decay of Na∣ture, whereby his Blood was stagnated; and so it proved. All Win∣ter before his death he came down stairs puffing and blowing; and said one Morning, (when disturbances in Religious Exercises were much expected) If they will let me alone a while, I shall not trouble them long. His greatly concerned Society came to his House, and spent a day in Prayer, his weakness would not admit him to be in the room with them; yet would he come to crave a Blessing; and did so; and then said to them, If you put up any Petition for me, Pray that God would give me Patience; we are apt to faint under long weakness: And then left them, and returned to pronounce the Blessing, and gave them this farewel Speech; I thought to speak to you, it grives me for your sakes: But if God have any more work for me to do, he is able to raise me up again; if not, as David said, here I am, let him do with me what seemeth him best: I desire to submit to his will whether for Life or Death; but I would have you still be earnest after the Word; and if you cannot enjoy it powerfully Preached at home, you must be content to take pains for it; as an hungry man will do, if he want bread; travel for it, and do not think your labour ill bestowed. Remember you have
enjoyed the Word along time. Now twice seven years and upwards I have been continued with you, and for the most part with great liberty, and I hope not without some good effect. Oh bless God that you have enjoyed the Gospel so long. It hath been your priviledge to have the Word nigh you, when others have travelled for it; and now if it be your lot to take pains, be not weary of well-doing, knowing, that in due time you shall reap, if you faint not. Go on as you have begun. The Promise is to them that continue in well doing; Be faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. This was June 21. 82. June 22. He had an ill fit of the Stone which he never recovered; but declined fast after it; much faster than any time before. June 25. He had a touch of the Apoplexy or Palsie, for his Speech faltered. He spake not right, 26.: He was dull and sleepy, 27: On 30. an ill fit of the Stone. Beginning of July, grows restless, weary of all postures, Sleep went away, Hands swelled, looked blackish, his Pulse so low that it was not perceived, weary of bed, weary up. A Neigh∣bour bidding him farewel, and wishing him a good night; he added himself, ad an happy dissolution, when the Lord pleaseth. Thus it was, 1. 2. 3. 4. of July, the 5th they expected, that watched, he would have dyed, went not to Bed; the 6th he blew short, ask'd how he did, he said, weak: Asked his dear Mrs. Anne Taylor? will you go to Prayer? which they did; and returning, found him in ap∣pearance as we left him; but he changed his Colour suddenly, and dyed in his Chair, something before Nine in the Morning, being within Two Moneths of Seventy Four Years of Age. He dyed in the Commencment Week, when he had been Master of Arts just Fifty Yeas; and an Ordained Minister above Fifty Two Years; in which time he hath Preached at Sixty Six Churches and Chappels in Derbyshire; and at Thirty out of Derbyshire: And at little Sanctua∣ries, since his exclusion from the publick exercise of his Ministry, who knows how many. He lyes Interred in the Chancel at Heanor, where Jesus Christ is the guardian of his Dust, till the Resurrection of the Just, to consummate Happiness of his whole Person. Thus is his course fulfilled, his good fight is fought; he so run that he hath obtained; he i gone into that Heaven which came down into him here: He lived not to be restored to Breadsall Parsonage; but he is preferred to a Dignity far exceeding all Ecclesiastical Dignities here He hath a City instead of a Country Town. He hath a Re∣ctory over many Cities, Lue 19. 17, 19. For he was a good and faithful Servant; he had Talents and improved them for his Master. He did win Souls, and now wears a Crown. He was disseaised of a good Ministerial encouragement, but preached on, laboured on, and
now he hath a Prophets Reward. Matth. 10. 41. He abounded in the work of the Lord; and now God hath his Medals for such, Dan. 12. 3. high degrees of Glory. He was a Vessel of big size and bore. He had a great measure of Grace, and laboured much in the Lord, and for the Lord; and therefore his measures of Glory, his Reward is accordingly: 1 Cor. 3. 8. Every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own labour, not only in kind, but degree. He was a plentiful Seedsman, and his reaping is accordingly. He hath passed the pikes, served the will of God in his Generation; he is fallen asleep; he is gathered to his Fathers. He was not found naked, but in the Ornaments of Christs Righteousness and Grace; and therefore we may express a confidence concerning him, that he is cloathed upon in his Soul with his House from Heaven, and that his Dust rests, his Flesh rests in hope, &c. Non-Conformity cast him out of the Publick Service of the National Church; but is no bar to his admissi∣on into Heaven; for he did assent throughly, and consent cordially to the Covenant of Grace. He did depend on Christ entirely, did obey sincerely, and the Covenant of Grace (like the Ark standing in Jordan, till all the Israelites were passed over) hath landed him safe in Heaven. The sure Mercies of David have not failed him, nor will fail us, if we follow his Faith, his Practice: Which I hasten to. CHAP. X. Of the Ʋses to be made of the Life of this Man of God, in certain Reflections and Corollaries. Sect. 1. MEthinks, I should be greatly wanting to my Duty in writing this Life, if I should not add something by way of Improvement of it. I have endeavoured to make this good Man known to them, that knew him not; and to make him better and more fully known to them that knew him; but what is all this to the main purpose, if I should not say something to make him known for good, that we may be something bettered by this know∣ledge? I have ever judged a Sermon lame, let the Doctrinal part be never so well handled, if it wanted its Application. I know this Narrative, that speaks of him, speaks to us; but alas who is not wanting to himself in Applicative knowledge! What a vast distance do many of us find betwixt our Heads and our Hearts? How little
do we carry on of a practical design, in our reading of dead Mini∣sters, or in our hearing of the living Ministers? The Man here mentioned (Reader,) is a part of the Cloud of Witnesses, wherewith we are encompassed. Suffer me to do what I can to put some Life into this Life. I know I cannot do it; all quick∣ning comes from God; yet in Ministerial Excitations God many times shews himself a quickening God: I will lay my Wood in or∣der, and wait for Heavens Fire: I will prophesie according to my slender proportion, and will hope for Gods commanding the Wind to blow, that brings the Breath of Life with it. I know every Let∣ter I have written, or can write, is dead; but whilst I am stirring up my self and you, God can (if he so please) make words spirit of Life, make them quick and powerful. I fain would speak, write nothing, but words of truth and soberness. I am sensible in some things I must say, I shall not please some; but I must please God, in uttering the deep thoughts of my heart upon this occasion. Bear with me, suffer my heart to have a little vent. If you will interpret as charitably as (I hope) I mean honestly, you will take no offence at any thing that falls from my Pen, who have followed inoffensiveness, so far as I could do it with faithfulness. COROLLARY 1. Sect. 2. Suffer me to prevent prejudice, and anticipate some Obje∣ctions or Exceptions that I easily foresee may be made. Obj. 1. Oh, may some say how do you know these things you write of Mr. John Hieron? Answ. Many things I know of mine own knowledge, and for things that I do not know, I have very credible Information from them, that have reason to know: My minutes concerning him are from a very knowing friend, one of highest advantages to know, a Man of great Observation and hath a good Memory, but trusts it not; one of great veracity, that is too well bred a person to use any impious frauds, and so much an honest man and truly tender, that he dares not use any of those that are called (though miscalled) Pious Frauds, de∣ceitful talk for God. He cannot, dare not love, nor make so much as an officious lye. Obj. 2. Oh, but you Nonconformists lean to your Party, and magni∣fie your own out of measure. Answ. 1. We love our Party; but we confine not our love within our Party. We love all good men, and do them right; own that of God that is in them. We love the amiable according to the degree
of Divine Goodness that is impressed on them. We should not love God sincerely, nor them aright, if we did not do so. We never had been a distinguisht Party, if you had not forced us to be so, by im∣posing terms we cannot bear. We stand to it, we are no Sectaries, nor Schismaticks: In Gods Judgment we shall not be called so. Answ. 2. We love dear (now blessed) Mr. Heron; he was a glory to his younger fellow-sufferers, his gray head was a Crown to our green hads; but yet we love the Truth better▪ We can do nothing against the Truth, ought to say nothing prejudicial to Truth; we will not break a Commandment of God to set off a man▪ Answ. 3. My Heart reproacheth me not about this Life of his, that I have drawn any Line, but what was in his Face: That I have laid on any false Colours, but what were agreeable to his Complexion. Look how much I have fallen short, I am not sensible that I have ex∣ceeded; we must have leave to magnifie them, that God hath mag∣nified; we must not obscure them, that God hath made to shine. I have only transcribed my own apprehensions of him, without any love of error, and as far as I could, have kept from errors of love. I must confess my great affections to him, and veneration of him; but I have watched against my Affections bribing, or byassing my Judgment. COROLLARY 2. Sect. 3. Let me hence plead with men of Antiministerial Principles: If this Book fall into your hands, read and consider to your Convicti∣on. Oh go not on to deny and decry the Office, and the Officers. Lay your hands upon your mouth. Cease to vilifie Gods Ministers, and the Ministry. Let your Ignorance drivel no more. Let your rancorous Minds vomit no more Reproaches. Let your spightful, envious Minds, full of malignity, belch out no more unsavoury, noy∣some Language. Lo, here is a man that we offer to you as a proof of the Ministry. We have many such as he. Our Quiver is full of such, who make us not ashamed to speak to the enemies of the Mi∣nistry in the gate. Will you call Mr. John Hieron a Wolf, that did so feed the Church of God? Will you call him an Hireling, that Preached as many Sermons for nothing, as when he had his place; that made the Gospel without charge? Will you call him a limb of Antichrist, that was a pleader against Babylon? Will you Blaspheme the Holy Ghost in the Gifts and Graces bestowed▪ on him, the appa∣rent fruit of Christs Ascension? Will you say he cast out Devils by Beelzebub? Will you question his Call, that Heaven hath put so many
Seals to? Shall a Man of God be called a Priest of Baal? Shall a Priest cloathed with Salvation by God, be called by you a Chemarim? Do you seek a proof of Christ speaking in a man? Lo here it is! Do you not know, he was no reprobate; however he and others have been reprobated by you? Oh, return to more sober Minds, and pass a better Judgment on the Ministry▪ Why will you be guilty of so great ingratitude, as to account this great gift of Christ as filth, off∣scouring, refuse? Why will you strengthen the prejudices of a carnal corrupt World, against those that would awaken and mend them? Why will you lend your mouths to Satan, to reproach the Servants of the most high God? For if your Language be not the hissing of the Serpent, I know not what is. Can wrath, clamour, bitterness, be from the Holy Spirit, who expresly declares himself grieved by it? Do you not quench the Spirit, by despising Prophets, and teaching others to despise Prophesying? Whose Errand are you on? Whose design do you drive but Papists, who have transformed themselves in∣to various shapes; but agree in this, to wound the Ministers? Whence do you fetch your Arguments against the Ministry; but from Socinians, which deny the Deity of Christ? Why will you credit them against the Ministry, that destroy the Foundation-stone of Christianity? COROLLARY 3. Sect. 4. Give me leave, O you, that had an hand in contriving, in forming, in establishing the Act of Uniformity, to shew you what manner of Men fell by it, and before it; the Man whose Character I have given you, and many of the same Spirit and Character, were driven out of their places by the Act of Uniformity, fled before the Oxford Act, and were all endangered, and many of them were malled by the Conventicle Act. What evil had they done? Surely, nothing that God had declared to be Sin; but what those Acts made Crimes. Were the Penalties proportionate to the Crimes? Did you indeed speak Righteousness, O Congregation? Did ye indeed judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? Do you know what Spirit you were of, when you raised such a Storm, such a dry Wind, not to fan, nor to cleanse the floor of Chaff; but to blow away the Wheat? When you threw this fire into the Sanctuary, where was your Christian Cha∣rity? From whence were your Politicks fetcht from, to begin so fiercely to lay the foundatons of restored Monarchy, and restored Prelacy in the civil death of so many, and disobliging so considerable a number of the stanch men of this Kingdom, that had these Ministers in thier
hearts? Was this a winning way? Did this commend the Govern∣ment in Church or State? What so dear to the sober part of men in this Nation, as their good Ministers? When men take them away, they are ready to say, what have we more? Better the Sun did not shine, then Chrysistome not Preach. Who can read love to a Nation in ruining of Synagogues? Brown bread with the Gospel is better to serious Souls, then white bread without it; yea the bread and water of Affliction, is good fare to them that can see their Teachers: Oh that you should stretch out your hands to vex certain of the Church! Such work should be left to such as Herod was. Why would you make so great a cry in the houses of Israelites? Why would you put the praying seed to make so many complaints in Heaven to their Fa∣ther against you? Why would no petitions for peace (so pathetick) move you? Why would no considerations of the mutability of Humane affairs, the sight of the turnings of the wheel of Providence, the sence of your own past sufferings, which possibly might return again, soften you, moderate you? Why had you no prospect of the evil that might be upon the Earth, to induce you to shew Mercy, and store up Mercy for your selves against such a time? Did you do as you would that men should do to you? Oh, if into any of your hands, whom this Corollary concerns, this Book falls, I entreat you to give my words an impartial Reading, tread your violent steps back in great indulgence. If there be any thoughts of comprehension, let there be no snares. Let the Rules of Christianity make it, we that are old, shall make no strains of our Consciences, we will lye in our Irons still, knowing Death will ere long release us; rather than have our liberty, by yielding to say or do things that cannot be done with∣out a great many distinctions. We desire to be dealt plainly with, and to deal plainly with all the World. We are resolved against all conditions that are sinful; and we shall not willingly do any thing that is doubtful, or carries an appearance of evil, or may give any co∣lour of suspicion, that we do depart from our Principles; we would advance in Reformation, and not be tempted to any retrograde steps. If you will lay the Bible betwixt us and you, it shall, like an enqui∣ry at Abel, end the matter. If our Bible lead us to you, we will follow it: We have heard of late dayes some speehes of tenderness to Dissenters, when our cup seemed to pass over to you: Now we are waiting to feel it. If any true remorse do touch your hearts, you will become good Samaritains, and your kindness will exceed your rigours, you will pour into our wounds Oyl and Wine instead of Vinegar. Oh, I beseech you think, (as I may allude to a Scrip∣ture Historical passage) what manner of men you flew (civilly) at
Bartholomew day: Lo, here I have presented you with one, that resem∣bled the Apostles, the Evangelists, yea imitated the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls. This Man, and many such you set aside, the precious Sons of Zion, comparable to fine Gold, how were they esteemed by you as Earthen pitchers? Yea, the Nazarites purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, more ruddy than Rubies, their po∣lishing of Saphire; their Visage made as black as a Coal by you, they are not known in the streets; will you not remember the Battle, and do no more. Again, do not you see who have practised upon you, whose Agents you have been, whose hand is in these things? Have they not been services to Rome, disservices to the Church of England, made her appear as a Stepmother to her best Children? As if she was become cruel, like the Ostriches in the Wilderness. Hath not this strictness about Ceremonies been managed by Papists in disguise? Have not the same hands inlarged that strictness? And shall we still go on? Is it not enough that you have done their jobbs, till they had like to have served all our turns? (Blessed be that Providence that prevented it in the nick of time) but must we, will we go on now our eyes are openeed? Oh, work not with them, but counter-work them. Be not tenacious of what is theirs, cast out their houshold-stuff. Botch no more in Reformation, purge out the old leaven and let us be made a new lump: Let us keep the things wherein the Kingdom of Christ is, and part with those things where∣in it is not. Take not of Babylon a stone for a corner, a stone for foundations, dash her little ones against the stones. Let the observa∣tions go, wherewith the Kingdom of Christ comes not. Are all the significant Ceremonies so significant, as one Sermon of Mr. John Hierons? Have they that in them to excite, that energy, that Ministe∣rial excitation hath? Where's the promise of Gods presence with them, that the qualified, sent, Ministry have and can plead? Were it not much better that (like Pollio's glasses) they were broken to pieces, than that one good mans mouth was stopt, because he cannot swallow them? And further, are we so full of Ministers, truly so called in England, that we can spare so many of our Labourers, and turn them off at once? Many thinking men judge a plurality of Minister's need∣ful in most places, and know not how any Minister of Conscience can accept plurality of places; but it seems you thought, there is such plenty of Ministers, as to disband so many good Souldiers was no loss. When in Queen Elizabeths time she was instigated by some ill affected to the Ministry, (very probably the disguised Papists, that the Re∣verend Dr Burnet suggests) to abridge the number of Preachers; E. G. then Arch-Bishop of Canterbury was much troubled at it, and
wrote a serious, zealous, learned, strenuous, sinewy Letter to her, urgeth the many hands used about Solomons Temple, and many very pertinent Scriptures, to prove that the Gospel should be very plenti∣fully preached, and that plenty of Labourers should be sent into Gods Harvest; so great and large, as that it requires not few, but many Labourers. Oh cast your eyes upon that Letter, it may make you mourn for what you have done, and melt you into great tenderness. Furthermore, perceive you not how unprosperous your method hath been; see you not how you prevail nothing: If you thought to rip up the womb of Puritanism you have but made it more fruitful. There is ten of the Puritan perswasion for one formerly, (I wish though, that one of the ten were the true old Puritan). See you not since this Liberty what flocking there are to the Ministry? And if People were freely and fully at liberty to act according to their Judg∣ments and Inclinations, you would soon see a very great encrease of these numbers. See you not how many young men God hath raised? How he hath blessed their private Education? And what gifts they are enriched with? See you not, that Providence hath been instead of Livings to those, whom you cast out of Livings, drove from Corpo∣rations, from their kind Neighbours, entred Cautions against them in all wayes of Livelyhood that they were capable off, left many no way, unless they could dig in the Town-ditch? Ye dealt worse with us, then Josiah did with the Priests of high places: 2 Kings 23. 9. They did eat of the unleavened bread with their brethren; but for us, we must neither have Altar, nor Bread. The Priests of the high places had broken a positive Law of God; yet Josiah moderated their punishment, though he shut them out from Spiritual Services; yet he allowed them Natural and Necessary Provisions; I do not know that our crime was so great, but our punishment was greater. We found no such moderation; yet we have found Mercy from God, we have turned no stones into bread. View our faces, we are fair liking; Mr. Hieron had an Estate, and God gave him an heart to live on it, and no need, nor mind to be burdensome; and for others in meaner circumstances, yet God hath abundantly blessed their provision, and hath satisfied his poor with Bread. Nay, let me close this Corollary with that, which may most convince, and melt you, and make you smite upon your thigh; hath not God been near them? Hath not God met with them, whom you have cast out of the Synagogues? Have not their parts been increased? Have not their Graces flourished, hath not God spoken peace, and lift up the light of his countenance upon them? See you not in Mr. Hierons Life an intercourse betwixt God and him? How did his beloved Jesus show himself, yea, flourish thro' the lattess.
COROLLARY 4. Sect. 5. O you, that are the Ministers of God, let me call your eyes to behold Mr. John Hieron. Mr. Bowles hath written an excel∣lent Book for Ministers, called Pastor Evangelicus; lo, here I present you with a Ministers Life, that wrote after that Copy, and his Life is a praxis upon the Book. His Preaching was the praxis upon Bi∣shops Chappels, Methodus concionandi; an accurate Ramist Mr. Hieron was, and his management of his Ministry was a Transcript of Reve∣rend Mr. Bowles his Pastor Evangelicus, and those few hints that we have of his converse with his heart, and God give us some resemblan∣ces of great and good Mr. Corbets Self-imployment. Brethren, I do not ostentare virum, sed ostendere, I do not make a proud ostentation of Mr. Hieron, but I do shew him as a good pattern to Ministers. I presume not to teach you; but I may be allowed to be your Remem∣brancer: I may stir up your minds, and I do beseech you mind his Qualifications for the Ministry, and labour you to be so qualified; this will make your inward call clear, and without that your outward call will afford your minds little satisfaction; nor can you with that confidence expect a Blessing. You have the same Father of Lights to go to. All his Gifts and Graces were borrowed. Where he borrow∣ed his, you must borrow yours. If good men, much more a good God, is ever merciful and lendeth; he gives Wisdom liberally, and upbraids not. You may light your candle, fetch fire to warm your heart from him, whose fire is in Zion, and furnace in Jerusalem. Isa. 31. 9. The better qualified, the more hopes of success. Qualifica∣tions beget us a Reverence in People. The Sanctuary Weights and Measures were bigger. Ministers should out-part their People, else they are disdained. Qualifications approve the Minister a workman in his Ser∣vices. God ordinarily works according to the aptness of means; good men full of the Spirit of God, have the presence of God ordi∣narily most with them. I further exhort you to have an outward Call, the People have a right to choice, the Ministry a right to exa∣mine, judge and separate. The Magistrate may claim confirming. And oh that the Spirit of this Worthy Man was in us, that though he doubted not of his own Episcopal Ordination; so he questioned not Presbyterial Ordination: I wish moderation in this point. The Younger Clergy are very intemperate: But I pray you, if you do read what I write, consider that they that are much Elder than you, are convinced by their Bibles, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are the same Office. And let me add, they that have searched into true An∣tiquity,
and have perhaps read more Books, then either you, or I have ever heard of; dare assert, that they find no evidence of Dioce∣san Episcopacy. I should much question Episcopal Ordination, if Bishops were not Presbyters. But above all, I desire all Ministers to mind and follow his Exercise of his Ministry; I have laid before you his Diligence, his Faithfulness, his Laboriousness; I have shewed you how instant he was at home and abroad, Preaching in season and out of season. When he was fixt, he setled to his work; when tossed, he was fixed for his work; throw him as men would, he fell upon his square; he run all hazards, endured hardship as a good Souldier of Jesus Christ: O follow him. You find in his Life, that when he heard of Grace eminent in a Minister, or read of their Graces, he be∣spoke himself to go and do likewise: So let Ministers that read his Life, charge themselves to Preach, as he did; Converse profitably with your people, as he did; Admonish, Reprove, Exhort, as he did; endeavour to prepare People for the Sacrament, as he did. When his Breadsall Neighbours met frequently at the Smiths Shop, and there, as he feared, spent too much time unprofitably; he ob∣served it, and would send a good Book amongst them to read. Oh thus it is, say you to your own Souls, and thus it will be with them that have a care of Souls. I have represented to you his converse with his own Heart, his looking to and keeping his own Vineyard. He was for saving himself, and those that heard him. Oh be not you content to be as Noahs Ship-wrights. Remember the solicitude of Holy Paul, least by any means when I have Preached to others, I my self should be a cast away. 1 Cor. 9. 27. He looked after his Ser∣mons; he listened not who commended his Sermons, but who made good use of them, bewailing the sins of their hearts and lives. Not who, after his Sermons, cryed, how well hath he Preached; but how ill have I lived, what a vile carnal wretch am I? He longed for suc∣cess, so do you travail in birth. Pray that your Sermons may be the Arrows of the Lords deliverance; that as the Row of Jonathan turn∣ed not back, as the Sword of Saul returned not empty; so it may be in your Spiritual Warfare. What shall I say to excite Ministers? By long and sad Experience I have found, I need it. I have had some reflecting thoughts upon that passage Isa 42. 19. Who is blind, but my servant, or deaf as my messenger that I sent? Who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords servant? Do you think he did more than his Duty, more than needs? Sure you cannot think so, when you read Acts 20. 28. that a double [Take heed] is the Ministers charge: Can you think it was more than needs, when Jesus Christ spent his Blood for the flock? Can you think it more than Duty,
when a double dedication is upon you, your Baptismal Devotedness, and your Ministerial Consecration. Can you think it over-doing, when such a Worthy as Arch-Bishop Ʋsher breaths out his dying breath, O Lord, forgive my sins of omission? Can you think it more than needs, when you know the worth of Souls, the terror of having the Blood of Souls required at your hands? If he did not, the obliga∣tion is the same upon you and him. 2. Would you have Honour and Respect in your places, follow your work, as this faithful man did, Honour will follow you as it did him. Herod reverenced John. Ho∣nour God, he will honour you. Seek not the faces of men, fear not the faces of men, do nothing that may make men despise you, depart not out of the way, cause none to stumble at the Law, corrupt not the Covenant of Levi, be not partial in the Law; lest God make you contemptible and base before all the people. Malachi 2. 8, 9. Fawn up∣on no body, flatter no body; fidelity commends it self to Mens Con∣sciences. 3. Would you have his success? He had a Seal in the Con∣sciences of his Hearers, had Letters of Commendation; would you have so? Use no Leaden Daggers, but wield the Sword of the Spirit, let not the weapons of your Warfare be carnal; but those that are mighty through God. He was an able Minister of the New Testa∣ment, not of the Letter only. He was full of might by the Spirit of the Lord, drew the bow with his full strength, did not do Gods work negligently, served God with his Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, and he was full of Souls given in; He will appear with a Lo! I, and the Chil∣dren thou hast given me. Be you travelling in your Souls, and you shall see of your travel and be satisfied; carry forth your seed weep∣ing, your bosoms shall be full of joyful sheaves. 4. Would you have his peace, his visits of God, his shines, his assistances, his com∣forts in the way, his serenity, his satisfaction in the end? Follow his Integrity, mark this upright Man, tread after him in Zeal for sub∣stantials, Moderation in doubtfuls, in Charity, Hospitality, in study∣ing all the holy wiles of winning Souls, in losing something of your own to gain them, with meekness instructing opposers, restoring the lapsed, in puting your stronger hands under feeble hands, &c. COROLLARY 5. Sect. 6. To you O Men I call, to you O people I address my self, at Newton Solney, at Ashbourn, at Bredsall, at Little Eaton, at New∣thorp, at Losco, you that enjoyed his younger days labours, his Mid∣dle Age pains, and the service of his mellow years, his last Labours, which were better than his first, though all was good you that heard
how he preached, and saw how he lived. If I did think any of the Neglecters of him would read this Life of his, I would give them a Severe Repremand. Were you prejudiced? Why did not you go and see? John 1. 46? Were you frighted? Durst he preach at so great an hazard, and would not you adventure your smaller penalty? Did you judge your publick Ministry sufficient? Would not his help have done well to have given your Souls a lift? Had it not been wisdom to have twisted his Cord with your publick advantages? Was it care∣lessness, Oh, know, that is an ill Sign. It's well if any Spiritual good come to you. If God have People in a place, God brings them to the means, he sends among them: If any of you do read these lines, I intreat you to know, to your Conviction and Humiliation, that you had a price put into your hands, lest you know, to your cost and shame, that a Prophet was sent among you, Ezek. 33. 33. But I leave these, and come to you, that heard him, but your profiting by him doth not appear. You were the Reproach, not the Credit of his Mini∣stry, he fain would, but could not cloath himself with you. Let me lay before you a few awakening things, if God will bless them to you. 1. How can you think to be wrought upon, when you have been under such a skilful hand not healed? What can they do that come after him? If you have got no Light, no Zeal under such a bur∣ning and shining light, if from the dayes of Mr. John Hieron you have not been violent for the Kingdom of God, if not awakened▪ under so Rousing a Ministry, how must the hands of others be weakened, and their hearts discouraged in their labour amongst you? Where he plowed upon the Rock, What other of Gods Husbandmen can hope to make any thing of you? If such a Soul-searching, Heart-ripping Mi∣nistry could not get within you, how little can others hope to give you any light into your hearts? 2. How speechless will you be when the Fruits of his Labours up∣on some of your Neighbours will be brought forth to convince you? You had the same mean, the same pains▪ bestowed upon you. You had the same Tillage, the same Rain came down upon you. Sure your destruction is from your selves. I did more for them, than for you; but the denyal of my Grace is not the Cause of your perishing; but your own sinful, wilful forsaking of your own Mercies. 3. Do you not believe that he who testified Gods mind to you, must one day come forth at the Call of God to testifie against you? And they that have not nned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God, will be as full in their Testimony against you: For they will be so swallowed up with the Glory of God, that they will speak out even against the dearest Relations they have. And those, that while
they were here, they could have gone upon their knees to, to beseech them to be reconciled to God, they will then have no such tenderness for; but utter every whit that God may be justified when he speak∣eth, and clear when he judgeth. I pray you accommodate that part of Josephs Story, Gen. 45. 3. when Joseph discovered himself, his Bre∣thren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence, how will it be at the great day with all his People in all places, when you stand at the barr, and this Witness is called against you? Oh what trouble, what consternation will you be in, when Conscience within, and such a Witness without appears against you and such a manifest∣ing light is round about you? But I do betake my self to you that made a good use of him, that neglected him not, but attended on nis Ministry, that esteemed him highly in love for his Warks sake, that gave your own selves to God, and to him by the Will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. To you I give a few hearty Advices and Counsels. Advice the First. 1. Admire that wise Providence of God, that good Providence of God, that ordered a tempest upon the Church to bring Mr. Hieron (like the Goods of a shipwrackt Ship) upon your Coasts. The loss of other places was your gain. An Instance you have which calls your thoughts to it, Acts 8. 4. Acts 11. 19. 21. Philippi 1. 12. It was in greater Mercy to Greasley Parish, that was first blessed with him; be∣cause precious Mr. Smally outed of that place, A man in whom a very found Judgment and lively Affections met▪ finished his course some∣thing sooner than divers others of his Brethren. Now for God to provide such a stake, was an admirable Mercy. And though he re∣moved from you; yet to be still within the reach of many of you, was still more Mercy. And that God found a resting place for him at Losco, was a very great Mercy to them, and that Parish, and Neighbour places. Second Advice. Remember how you have received, had heard, and hold fash▪ He gave you sound Bottoms, continue upon them▪ It is very grievous to hear of the waverings of some in Greasly, Parish, so well instructed by Mr. Smally built up by Mr. Hieron. Let Children be tossed: Let not Men of understanding be so, Beware of defection. Have you attained no discerning of Spirit? Have you lost your Palate? Cannot your taste
discerne, perverse things? Will you bid them God speed, that teach other Doctrine? Have you not said, when you have heard Mr. Smally, Mr. Hieron, Oh the Blessedness! Shall any Body have occasion to say to you, Where is the Blessedness you speak off? Do you think, if such things had been Truths, that your dear, faithful Ministers would have hidden them from you? Do you not know they were no igno∣rant Men? Do you not believe they were faithful Men? Surely if such things had been bread, they would have broken it to you. If they had been food, they would have set it before you. Oh, I beseech you believe, that Doctrine can never edifie you, that under∣mines the Doctrine taught you. Believe all the Doctrines Strange, that your Teachers did never acquaint you with. I am well satis∣fied their Doctrine remembred, believed, and practised, will bring you to Heaven. Read and Apply, John 6. 67, 68, 69. Third Advice. Remember what of a Christian you saw in Mr. Hieron, and imitate him. Much of a Minister, much of a Christian was with him. When his heart was dull, he went to some good lively Book, so do you. He went to Secret Prayer, and found God answering by Fire, so do you. He kept by him a Catalogue of Sins, to renew his Repentance for them before Sacraments, so do you. He had a Catalogue of Mercies, he looked back even to his Childhood, to stir up thankfulness, par∣ticular thankfulness, herein follow him. He communed with his Heart in his Solitary Houres, he looked up his Evidences, and kept them fair, he entred protests against special Sins upon special occasions, and took notice how he kept touch with God; follow him. He never met with any Experience either in a way of quickning, or comfort, but he made quick returns of Praise. Let every descent of Mercy return back in the quick ascent of Praise: What shall I render? Was his question; let that be more familiar with you. Teach your Tongues to praise, as some teach their Tongues to lye, and blaspheme. He was a close walker, an unblameable Conversation was with him, turn not you loose Libertines, now his Eye inspects you not, Gods doth. Do not that in Gods Eye you would not, durst not have done in Mr. Hieron's. If you feared his reproofs, how should you dread the Re∣proofs of God? Let that comprehensive Rule be before you, Phil. 1. 27.
Fourth Advi. Follow after all those wayes, wherein he led you, and accompanied you. Meer still in days of Prayer, keep up your Sacraments, your Sabbaths, as far as you can. And if the Word be not so nigh you, as it hath been, make out for it as health and stength will permit. For∣get not the last Exhortation he gave you, his farewel Speech. Tho' you may go far and not meet with a Preacher like Mr. Hieron; yet honour the Ordinances, be thankful for meaner fare. Ordinances Blessing is from their Institution and not the Excellency of him, that administreth them. Gods Blessing will be upon honest Endeavours, and honest Attendances upon God in them. If you were truly fed by him, you will hunger after the Word. The Thirst of Total Indi∣gence is taken away by the Well of Water in your springing up, by your first draughts of the Water Christ gives you; but not the Thirst after sweeter and fuller Enjoyments. David's sights of God in his Sanctuary set him a longing, to see as he had seen; Spiritual satis∣factions satiate not, glut not Gods people. They rise with most appetite from their fullest meals. Fifth Advice. Pay your respects to his Name and Memory, keep up Communi∣on with him in your Thoughts and Mind, cast no Reproach upon him by looseness, lenity, infalibility, give no Body occasion to say with scorn justly, This is a Hearer of Mr. Hieron's. Loose not the things you have wronght. Be not as Joash, or Jehoash. 2 Kings 12. 2. 2 Chron. 24 2. 16. that did what was right in the sight of the Lord all the dayes of Jehojada's Instructing him: But fell off at his Death, you must expect Temptations as Joash had: But pray that you may resist and overcome them. Sixth Advice. Long for that Blessed day when you, and your Dear Mr. Hieron and your good Neighbours, and whole Society shall meet again and part no more, have and keep an Eternal Sabbath, eat Bread, and drink Wine in your Fathers Kingdom, of which your Sacraments here were but an Antepast; have the Harvest of your first fruits, the whole sum of which here be but earnests; when all you that received him as a Pro∣phet
of God, shall share with him in his reward, even a Prophets re∣ward, as I told you upon the occasion of his death. You have not my word for it, but Christs word for it, who is the Amen, the true and faithfl witness; Matth. 10. 41. and so I come to my closing Corollary. COROLLARY 6. Sect. 7. And now my Pen is expressing my sad thoughts about our great loss of Mr. Hieron, let me lead my Reader a little further on; to weep upon the Graves of some other Derbyshire Ministers. Oh my Derbyshire Friends, bear with me if I go on, and give my mind a little vent upon this doleful Subject. Derbyshire is a beloved Country to me; I am no Native of it, but it being the Country wherein I began and ended my Publick Ministry, I am as it were Naturalized of it. By my great affections to it, my heart points towards it. And when I can breathe in that Air, and breathe out my self amongst them, I am refreshed, and in my Element. I desire my Limbs, that I might get over to them, and help them. Besides, unworthy I am survivor to divers of my Brethren there, their memory is precious to me. I cannot but build some little Monuments for them, and set them about this larger Monument of Mr. John Hieron; they wrought the work of God, as he did, they were his Companions in labour, his fellow Souldiers: They were driven into corners, lived in obscurity, dyed in obscurity, so far as men could cloud them, they were lights put under bushels, but they were lights. These Candles were not extin∣guished, when men put them into dark Lanthorns; as the Blessed Jesus, in his state of Humiliation, his Deity in its Glorious Rayes did dart forth: So these Holy Servants of God did (as they had oppor∣tunity) manifest their graces and gifts, though covered with a cloud by the just anger of God, (Adored be his Justice!) and by the cause∣less displeasure of men (Cursed be their Wrath!) These I think I am bound to give some short account of. To awaken my Derbyshire Friends to bethink themselves what a Ministry God hath blessed them with, and hath bereaved them off, it well becomes you, Oh my Friends, to reflect, whether you be Vines so flourishing, so fruitful, as answers such Vine-dressers? Whether you were a Crown to them, that were a Crown to you? The staple Commodities of your Country are Wooll and Lead: You are Tra∣ders in these many of you, and are grown up to great considerable∣ness. Let me tell you, the Ministry of Derbyshire was a more ad∣vantageous price than them. Your Shepherds were far beyond your
Sheep. And those Earthen Vessels, your Ministers, had such an ex∣cellency of treasure, as is of more value, then your rich Mines. Oh have you traded with them? You have cause to suspect it, because these Shepherds are smitten, these Vessels are broken, these Mines fail, these Crowns are fallen from your heads. Again, I do it to enlarge those short hints in Mr. Hierons Life, wherein I have said that we have not only him, a single Minister to produce; but we have many like him in Parts, like him in Fidelity, like him in Laboriousness, like him (though few equals to him) to shame the contemners, and to si∣lence the silencers of them. And lastly, to preserve their Names and Memories, and to provoke the Ministers, that yet are in the Vine∣yard▪ to quit themselves like Ministers, to play the men for the Con∣gregations of God, to emulate their gifts and graces; that so people may not be straitened in their Ministers, that the loss of such Wor∣thies may be lessened, that the decay of the bearers of burdens may not wholly discourage, nor make the work to cease. Let no offence be taken if I do not mention all. It is not disrespect to any good man; but only forgetfulness, and the want of some good Remembrancer at my Elbow: For I am in the stocks, shut up, cannot go out to others, and few have the kindness to come at me. 1. After the killing Uniformity Act had disseized Mr. Thomas Shel∣merdine, Death followed; he was Lancashire: born, bred in Christs Colledge, Cambridge, served God in the Gospel of his Son▪ was a di∣ligent Preacher at Criche divers yeas, where he was encompassed with many good old Puritans, that lived in that Parish and about it, who did strengthen his hands much in his work; he was a man very chearful in converse. He was a kind Husband to an holy, but very melancholly Wife. From Crich he removed to Matlock, where he did the work of his place, lived peaceably with his Neighbours, and found more benefit by his peace, than his successor found by his con∣tention. From Matlock, after Aug. 24. 1662. he removed to a dwelling in Wicsworth, where he lived not long; but fell sick of the sickness of which he dyed▪ In his sickness he would say to his very Friends, that he was going to his Preferment, and some few dayes be∣fore his death, he said to an Honest Soul that informed me, that next to my hopes of Heaven, I rejoyce that I turned out of Matlock. He lived not to have any more removes by renewed violence; but was housed and laid in his bed of rest at▪ Wicksworth, a place that he had laboured much in, being one of them that kept a Weekly Lecture there; and lives in his Son Mr. Daniel Shelmerdine, who is an active spirited man in the Ministry, and goes about doing good.
2. After him went Mr. Stanley of Eyam: A man of worth, and had been long a painful Minister in the eake. After he was outed, the Plague siezed that place▪ and there (if I do not mistake) he conti∣nued, and (though not then a Minister of that place,) yet he shewed himself both a Minister, and did many good offices to that place, during that ore and very mortal Visitation. My acquaintance was slender with him; but they that knew him spake very well of his Praying and Preaching. I am not certain what year he dyed. 3. Mr. John Oldfield or Oefield, born near Chesterfield, brought up at Dronfield School, at that time famous. He was outed from Car∣sington. A general Schollar; a great Master in the Tongues and Ma∣thematicks. He had a Mechanical Head and Hand, capable of any thing, he had opportnity to get insight into. I mention not his Uni∣versity Education: For what some would reflect upon him, as a dis∣paragement, was really his great honour; that he was a man of so great Learning and worth, and yet beholden to no University for it. It is manifest to all that knew him, that he was a Judicious Divine, a good Casuist, a workman in Preaching that needed not to be asha∣med, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, he was pertinent, me∣thodical, a man that was clear in opening his Text, and spake very close to Conscience from it. He knew well the inside of Religion. Few that heard him, but they did discern his understanding of the my∣stery of Godliness, that he spake from his Heart, and they felt his words come to theirs. He was of few words and reserved, not at all talkative; but give him but occasion by starting Discourse, get him but upon his Knees, or put him upon Writing or Preaching work, and then you would soon find he wanted neither Words nor Sense. Oh, he was a Man of Prayer; some dear ones that are left behind, and have had no small burdens of Affliction since they lost him, do feel the want of his Prayers, to lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees. He was of a very quiet Spirit; a people amongst whom he laboured very ticcle, very capricious, very hard to be pleased in Ministers, yet centered in him; and I am sure his Name is precious amongst them: And well he may; for I am sure amongst them, and some Neighbouring Meetings to them, he spent himself, and was spent by his great labours, in dispencing Holy Mysteries, Word and Sacraments amongst them. This good Man had many re∣moves after he was outed, but God told his wanderings, and he had Songs in the Houses of his Pilgrimage. At length he pitched at Al∣freton, from whence he took many weary steps to serve his Master, and was very useful in that Neighbourhood; but at last was forced by his Infirmities to cease from his Labours, and now rests from them,
and those works follow him. He hath built himself a lasting Monu∣ment in his small piece about the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pha∣risees, the substance of some Lectures at Wicksworth. And in his larger piece about Prayer: Those things are discoveries of the Man: Yea, God hath built him a Monument in such a set of Children, as God hath blessed few with, Mr. John Oldfield lives in three Sons of the Fathers Principles, actually in the Ministry, whose parts are above the common rate of most of their years, and their Piety, Zeal, and Industry answerable to their Parts. He dyed June 5. 1682. in the 55th. year of his Age. 4. Mr. John Billingsley, Kentish Man, born at Chatham, educated in both Ʋniversities, outed from Chesterfield, an ingenuous Man, strict to his own well understood Principles, an accurate savoury Preacher, an exemplary walker, a Man elegant in every thing, a di∣ligent Reader, and observer of what he Read, ready with his Pen. Few men have left more excellent Collections behind them than he, which are happily fallen into his Sons hand, that knows well how to use them. His outward Bodily appearance was small and mean, but he had a great Soul, rich in Grace and Gifts He left his place at Chesterfield, because he could not keep his Place and his Peace, but he kept his Affections and Care over them; hazarded his Health and Li∣berty to serve them. If Chesterfield People would reflect upon his Labours amongst them, and his warm Letters written to some of them, they must needs know that a Prophet was amongst them, both able and faithful. The Pin of the Uniformity Act, driven by hands that were fit tools for such mischievous work, pushed him out of his Pulpit and House, and the hurricane of the Oxford Act drove him from his hired House and Town to Mansfield; in which he passed the residue of his sojourning time in fear, wrought for the Salvation of others, and wrought out his own, was ever serious and laborious: But towards his latter end his Motion was very quick, made actual preparation for Death, desired his poor outed Brethren, cast into Mansfield, (as he was▪ to come together a little before his Death, to put him into the hands of God by Prayer, made a short Confession of his Faith in, and sole dependance on the alone Righteousness of Christ; and not long after went full sail into the Kingdom of God: He dyed May 30. 1683. He writ something against Quakers, and Printed a Sermon with it, which gives the World a taste of his Abilities. He lives in his Son, who bears his Fathers Name, and hath his Fathers Spirit, the true Son of such a Father, filling up the vacancy by his Fathers death in Ministerial Labours; in which (in my Judgment) he gives no just occasion to any to despise his Youth.
5. Mr. Luke Cranwell, born at Loughborough, in the County of Leicester, Educated in Christs Colledge, outed from Peters Parish in Derby, a knowing, a couragious, zealous, and a very upright Man. Some now alive knew how deeply he engaged to restore Monarchy, but when restored it engaged not for him. He fell by the Decree of Uniformity, that spared not Age nor Parts, nor considered any Ser∣vice done, but levelled all that lay in its way, and spake no other Language, than bow or break. He was not very ready in Elocution; but very Scriptural, solid, and substantial in all his Discourses; his Sermons when looked over by Writers, or thought over by under∣standing Hearers, were found to be full of Divinity; weighty and rational good matter filled them. He had some competent Skill in Physick before he was outed; and when he perceived, he must no longer trade his Ministerial Talents publickly, he resolved to try what he could do in his other faculty. Since he was cut off from the pub∣lick service of Souls, he betook himself to serve Bodies, (though not deserting his Ministry, neither in his Affection, nor as to its Exercise). In this Imployment he grew presently very Judicious, Skilful, Useful, and by Gods Blessing very Successful. By this he maintained himself and his Family very comfortably, kept good Hospitality, did as rea∣dily help his Brethren, and the poor among his Neighbours, without any desire or expectation of Fees, as he did the rich and greatest. He had a working head. He understood well what he read, and did find out some Magistrals of his own; many happy and effectual Medicines. He was a chearful Man, and to appearance very strong; but after he began to decline, he run down speedily. His loss was, and is much lamented: He was indeed a beloved Physitian. That he might be out of the reach of the Oxford Act, he went to Kegworth in Leicester∣shire, and there lived and dyed Nov. 11. 1683. on the Lords day. 6. Mr. Joseph Moore, Nottingham born, Educated in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, in the best dayes of that Colledge, when the truly Reverend, singularly Learned, and eminently Holy Dr. Tuckney presided there, a Man fitted for wise and holy Government. He was sober minded from his Youth. He entred young into the Ministry; but his Youth was not despicable; being grave, serious, and savoury. He was forced from his publick Ministry, which he exercised at San∣diacre; by the Act of Uniformity, spent the residue of his time in di∣vers private Families, in Praying, Preaching, Catechizing, all which he performed far beyond what might be expected from his years. He was an hard Student, a searching Man, a pertinent profitable Preacher, lived well, and dyed happily, Novemb. 27. 1684 Interred in Car∣sington Church.
7. 8. The two Stanyforths, Mr. Jonathan and Mr. Timothy, one served Jesus Christ in the Gospel at Allestrey, the other at Hogneston; both their mouths stopped by the Act of Uniformity. They were the Children of an Antient Godly Minister, and an eminently pious and found Mother. They were two good Men, gave much attend∣ance to Reading, had a good Library. After their outing, and the en∣trance of the Oxford Act, they were driven from pillar to post, yet I find that in all places they were at work, and the Lord gave them success. I hope there are divers about Heage will bless God for their Night-labours. There are some that look white for the Harvest, and several Families long, and follow after the Word. These two Bro∣thers lived some years together, and dyed very near one to another. They made their last remove to an honest, but an obscure Family: And from thence they took their flight one after another, from that obscure corner to a lightsome and large place. They dyed both of them with much inward satisfaction, that they were going to that Heaven they had chosen and long laboured for. They had lively hopes in their dying Moments. 9. Mr. Samuel Hieron, Brother to Mr. John Hieron, made no great figure in the World, but was an honest man, and an useful Preacher; he had a room in the hearts of Gods people amongst whom he la∣boured. Few mens outward circumstances more pressed their Con∣formity, than his did; yet he followed his Conscience, and left a pretty Living at Shirley, upon August 24. 1662. and threw himself and all his, into the hands of Gods Providence. And though he re∣moved from place to place, and every where met with hard penny∣worths; yet he found God pityful, and of tender compassion; had enough to carry him to his Journeys end; and (through the workings of Gods good Providence) his, that he hath left behind him, I hope will not be exposed to poverty, or coutempt. He dyed March 24. 1687. 10. Mr. Samuel Wright, outed at Heanor, a good Man, a very able Preacher: Lived in much weakness for divers years after his outing. He could not preach, as the rest of his more healthful Bre∣thren; but when he did, he preached to very good purpose. 11. Mr. John Bingham, outed from Marston upon Dove. A Man of much Integrity, Zeal, and Faith; hearty for God, and in worst of times and things kept up his heart, waiting for, and confidently expecting the Salvation of God. Thus he hoped to the end, and lived to see some dawnings of light, which he hoped would grow to a more perfect day; and so departed in peace.
12. Mr. Joseph Sweinam was not formally put out by the Act of Uniformity, but really he was, for foreseeing that Acts commence∣ment at Bartholomew day, he thought good to make a mixtly volun∣tary secession sometime before its taking place, and so was not, and yet was expelled by it. He was a Man very well qualified to fill so august a place as Allhallows in Derby, a very able Preacher, a great Master of Language, and lives in his Son Mr. Thomas Swetnam, whose abilities are well known by some few Sermons he hath Published, and by his frequent labours. 13. I mention not divers driven out of the Country, men very va∣luable; viz. Mr. S. B. Mr. R. M. Mr. S. C. who (though they be alive) yet are dead as to the Country and Places of their usefulness. Thus have I done something to do my dear Brethren right, and pay my respects to them. And this I have done, partly to provoke others to do the like in other Countries, and especially to stir up those that are able to decypher the Brethren I have mentioned, or any of them; to write their Lives more fully than I have done. Partly to stir up Derbyshire Christians, to dear remembrances of their dead Ministers; to reflect upon their Doctrine and Life, and to stir them up to a Duty (which I fear is much neglected) of visiting their Fatherless and Wi∣dows in their distress. Read the History, 2 Kings 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. They were offered upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith; in some sense you ought, (as David once did) Ask whether there be any of theirs who need your kindness, and show the kindness of the Lord unto them, for their worthy Husbands, and Fathers sake. Their love to you (like Jonathans to David) passed the love of Women. And furthermore to call upon you to adore and admire Gods goodness, that hath raised you up many young Men that preach, pray, and live at a great rate; that hold fast, and hold forth the form of sound words, which they have heard of Gods Servants in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. Oh when you consider this, Sing, because so many are the Children of the desolate Ministry. Their Rod hath blossomed, and brought forth Almonds: Say in your hearts, who hath begotten me these? Who hath brought up these, seeing I am desolate, a captive, removing to and fro, left alone? Isa. 49. 21. Oh you are not straitened in Ministers: Cry to God that you may not be straitened in your own Bowels. Yea lastly, (If it were possible) to bring the rigid Men for Unifor∣mity to repent of their great sin in composing and imposing such things, as stopped the mouths of such Servants of God. I have shew∣ed you what mouths it stopped in Derbyshire; and if you ask what it hath done in other Provinces, Cities, Towns, and Counties▪ you
will find alike, if not a sadder account. So that as one opening the mischiefs of War, concludes his paragraph, hc sunt Belli Decora; so I may say, when I have mentioned the outed Ministry, these are the Decencies, the Graces, the Triumphs, and Spoils of Uniformi∣ty. What hath cast away vilely the shields of the mighty? Unifor∣mity. What hath slain the Beauty of England, and made the mighty fall? Uniformity. What hath despoiled the neck of the Church like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury, whereon their hangs a thousand Bucklers, all shields of mighty men? Uniformity. When the very ingenious Esquire Evelin, in his Book of Forrest-Trees, mentions the goodly Oaks of England, he cannot forbear to pronounce his Dirae upon Iron Masters, and Iron works in England, that have made such wasts. I am for no imprecations, but expostulations with Men for rigid Uniformity. And give me leave to close this Discourse, by laying before you some sober thoughts by way of Question. Quest. 1. Where do you find in Scripture a power given to man to make additions to Religious Worship? Do you not find the con∣trary in those Scriptures; Deut. 4. 2. Deut. 12. 32. Prov. 30. 6. Who gave Man power to adopt unnecessaries into Religion? What bottom stands Magisterial Authority upon? Ministerial Power is of God, but for this Magisterial, it wants Commission. Matth. 23. 8, 9, 10. Quest. 2. Is not the power of imposing, as dark to thinking men, as the power of inventing? Whence did you learn to make burdens? Whence to lay them on, and bind them on? We are tempted to think your Masters are, Matth. 23. 4. Hath God given you power over the Consciences of men, to ransack their Judgments, and wrack their Consciences, to ruin all that cannot agree to your Sentiments, to undo all that cannot do what you will have them? Do you not in this strike down the pin, upon which the Law and the Prophets hang? Would you that others should do so to you? What stricture, or beam of right Reason leads you to make your Judgment the publick standard. Quest. 3. What branch of Justice or Equity is there in so grievous Penalties for not conforming to such Impositions. The fault is small, if it be a fault. Should mens brains be knocked out, to kill a Fly on their forehead? But the Dissenters judge it a Duty to witness against usurpations of Men. They think they are bound by Gods Law to preserve the purity of Christs Worship. They think that a yielding in some things was as a stirrop, by which Antichrist got into the saddle. Are not these things judged by you indifferent? And must men be
punished, as if they had denyed and razed the Fundamental Articles of Faith? Should you make men spectacles, the filth, and off-scouring of all things, upon these accounts? Who can read either Christianity or Humanity in such severities? Quest. 4. What awe can be impressed, or obligation fastened on a well informed Conscience, from Humane Laws establishing, backing, and enforcing such Impositions? Have not Magistrates supream and subor∣dinate, their Lines and Limits, Provinces and Bounds set them by the God of Heaven? Are they makers or only keepers of Gods Tables? Did the People of England trust their Representatives to make snares for their Ministers and yokes for the People? Were they impowered by them to prescribe, and write the grievousness they had prescribed? They were entrusted to be shields, not swords; healers, not woun∣ders; they said to them, Let our ruins be under your hands; they never put themselves into their hands to ruine them. Quest. 5. What Spirit are you of, when you make all Assemblies but your own, Seditious Conventicles, Schismatical Meetings, Routs▪ Riots? Know you not, that they which acknowledge God, are bound to assemble to worship him? Do you, can you think it is better not to worship God at all, then not to worship him in your way and mode? Dare you undertake that this shall hold in the day of Judgment? Are not you told by some great men of your own, That he that gives the cause of the Schism is the Schismatick? Do you think, those you dis∣placed took themselves to be disofficed? Did their People desert them, when you ejected them? Was the Word of Truth utterly taken out of the mouths you stopped? Was not Gods word in their hearts, as a burning fire shut up in their bones, so that they were weary of forbear∣ing and could not stay? Did their Breasts ake, and must they not draw them out to the Babes, that desire the sincere milk of the Word? You have some of you called Conventicles, the crying sin of England: Oh! How crying a sin is it in you that have occasioned them; yea, necessita∣ted them? A Natural Mother turned out of her own House, will suckle her Child in the Field, or in the meanest coat, or shed she can set her foot into. Corners are not our choice, but your force. Quest. 6. Have not you cause to fear, that the blood of some of these dead Ministers will be upon you? You judged them unworthy of the World, and God hath thereby been provoked to judge the World not worthy of them. You made their work much harder to them, and by their journeyings and fastings, and watchings, in all likelyhood you did hurry and hasten them out of the World. Oh that some of us might live to see a relenting Spirit in you! It would be a joy to me, and a token for good to you, for otherwise I am greatly perswaded Judgment is towards you, because Mercy is the promised portion of the Merciful;
and Judgment without Mercy hangs over the heads of them that shew▪ no Mercy. And so I have finished my Historical and Practical part of this Book: And shall conclude it with only adding one Chapter more in communi∣cating to you some Letters written by this Eminent Servant of God Mr. John Hieron, which are as a Mirrour, wherein you may see the Ability and Fidelity of the Holy Man of God. CHAP. XI. His Letters. OF his Letters I promised to give some taste, and make them the Coronis of this Work: In publishing of which I conceal Names, that I may not reflect upon the dead, nor justly offend the living. Again, Let not the living be disturbed; for though the Letters be published, their Names are not exposed: It will do them no hurt to read those Letters in Print which they have in Writing. It may do others good to read Letters that were written to others, possibly they may reach, teach, meet with others, Hearts being much alike, and the same Corruptions, Temptations in one and another. First Letter. Christian Friend, YOU desire that I would write to you about your Spiritual Estate, which I take to be safe and comfortable, so far as one is able to pass Judgment of another; But no man knoweth certainly the things of another, save the spirit of a man, which is in him. 1 Cor. 2. 11. You are then to commune with your own heart, to search and try your wayes, whether you walk after the Spirit, be led by the Spirit Rom▪ 8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. If you ask, How shall I know whether I am led by the Spirit? I Answer, If you bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, if you follow after Holiness, sincere Obedience to all Gods Commandments, patience in Affliction, love to God, Christ, all Saints, love to the Word, fear to offend God, a care to please God, and keep Conscience pure and void of offence toward God and Man, Godly sorrow for sin, forsaking every evil way; and above all, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, rest upon him, trust in his all-sufficient satisfaction for pardon of Sin and Eternal Life. And all
this I doubt not but you do in some measure, so that you may conclude, as the Apostle doth, Rom▪ 8. 1. There is therefore no condemuation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. May you not comfort your self with these words? Do not hearken to Satans suggestions to the contrary, he is an Adversary. If he cannot hinder your Salvation, he will do what he can to damp your joy and peace in believing. You ought not to give heed to him; but to repel him as our Saviour did, Get thee behind me, Satan. Your own unbelieving Heart (for Faith is mixed with unbelief even in Gods Chil∣dren) also will raise Objections against you thus: I have many Corrup∣tions in me, unruly Passions, I am hasty to Anger, Ignorant, have little Knowledge, considering the time and means I have enjoyed; I am dull in Duty, I Pray without any life or heat, I am cold in love to God and Jesus Christ, I grow not in Grace, I am blockish, and remember nothing I hear: And many such things you have to say against your self. To which I Answer, Grant all this to be true; These are Sins of Infirmity, which may consist with true Grace: Psal. 40 12. David saith, My sins are more then the hairs upon my head. Psal. 73. 22. So foolish was I, and ignorant, even as a beast before thee. Read Heb. 5. 11, 12. Ye are dull of hearing, &c. whom yet he highly commends; Heb. 3. 1. and 6. 10. So long as sin reigneth not, hath no dominion over you, you need not question your interest in Christ; and you may know, that sin reigneth not when you are grieved for it, confess and bewal it, and pray for grace and help against it; strive and watch against it, and do what you can to keep your self from your iniquity. Psal. 18. 23. Consider that none are justified or saved, because they are sinless, pure and perfect; but blessed are they whose sins are forgiven. Psal. 32. 1, 2. And to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the un∣godly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. Rom. 4. 5. What was the end of Christs coming but to take away sin? Mat. 1. 21. Joh. 1. 29. Also a chief branch of the Covenant of Grace in Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness. And therefore be not faithless but be∣lieving, as Christ said to Thomas, John 20. 27, 28▪ And let your heart make the same Answer, that he did, My Lord and my God. It may be, that your present condition is a grief to you, that you cannot wor∣ship God as you desire, or as in your Health; you can do God no ser∣vice. Let not your heart be troubled at this; for God requires no more than he gives. And it may be no small comfort to you, that you were diligent to attend upon God in your Health, and when you had Legs, you used them to Gods glory. And now you are serving God in another way, in the way of Passive Obedience, in which if you submit to Gods will with Meekness and Patience, you may do God as good service, as they that preach▪ or hear▪ or travel far to the Word
will conclude with those sweet words of Christ: John 14. 1. Let not your heart be troubled: Believe that God is yours, Christ is yours, the Covenant of Grace is yours, your Sins are forgiven, the Promises are yours, even the great Promise: 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a Father to you. And that also, Rom. 8. 28. We know that all things shall work together for good to them that love God; Even all the exceeding great and pre∣cious promises in Christ; 2 Pet. 1. 4. which are yea and Amen, true and faithful. O bless God that ever you were born Spiritually, that you were born again. Say and sing with David, Psal. 103. 1. 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul! And Psal. 32. at the latter end, Rejoyce in the Lord ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Psal. 48. 14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide unto death. And with the Church: Isa. 25. 9. Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoyce in his Salvation. But I may save further labour, and indeed might have spared this pains; for you have a Book by you, which contains all that I now write, and much more to the same purpose. The scope and substance of it is to chear up and comfort poor Souls, that walk sad and sorrowful; when they have no other cause but to rejoyce and serve the Lord with glad∣ness; in which kind of service the Lord is well pleased. I pray you peruse it, and read it through, till you have got your Heart into a joy∣ful frame. Now I pray, (and let it be your Dayly Prayer) That the God of Love fill you with Joy and Peace in believing, to whose Grace I commend you. Yours Ʋnfeignedly. IT grieves me much for your sake, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against you in so dreadful a rovidence; that it puts me hard to it, how to minister a word of Consolation to you in this your sad con∣dition. A wise Son maketh a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the heavy∣ess of his Mother. I have no greater joy, than to hear that my Chil∣dren walk in the Truth: So I know no greater affliction that can befall Parents, then to have Children walking contrary to the Truth, and dy∣ing in their Sins. Yet is not your Case in this respect singular. No Temptation hath befallen you, but what is common to men, to good men; witness Aaron, Ely, David, with many others, whom I could name, known both to you and me. You are to acquiess in Gods Provi∣dential Administrations, and not to disquiet your Soul with the doubt∣fulness of his Eternal Estate. But to ascribe Righteousness to your Maker; and say with the Psalmist, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and up∣right are thy judgments. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his aes past finding out? Take the Example of the Prophets, and other
Holy Men in Scripture, for an example of suffering Affliction, and of Patience. Set before you the Patience of Job, who besides the loss of so great an Estate, lost all his Children, seven in number, cut off by untimely death; yet how Religiously doth he demean himself, how Pa∣tiently to admiration? Two of Aarons Sons in the flower of their Age, and in the beginning and very first entrance upon that Sacred Function, perish by fire from Heaven; a heavy stroke, arguing great indignation; yet mark the Fathers pious behaviour under such a mark of Gods dis∣pleasure, [Aaron held his Peae.] As for Davids lamentation over Ab∣salom, it is not to be drawn into imitation: For the bottom of his grief was not purely, nor chiefly (as far as appears) sorrow for his sin, and the eternal condition of his Soul; but rather proceeded from Natural Affection, and over much fondness and indulgence, because of his ex∣quisite Beauty, which the Scripture doth highly extol: For he takes not one sigh at the death of Ammon, who also dyed in his sin, and also by a violent death by the hand of his Brother. At other times, and in other cases his Carriage was commendable. Psal. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it. If you say, this is not to the purpose, this cometh not home to the point, what comfort can you afford me touching my Sons Salvation, or what ground of hope? Here I confess I am at a loss, and must say, as the King of Israel to the poor Woman, crying, Help, O King. If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? If the Word yield thee no hope, or solid ground of Comfort, I should but proffer flattery, and visions of my own heart; if I should offer to give Topicks of Comfort out of my own Invention. You are not without hope, that God might give him Repentance, to recover himself out of the snare of the Devil, if your intelligence be not to the contrary. There is place left for hope. Ad∣versity often opens the eye that sin had shut; as we see in Josephs Bre∣thren, who had lain in their sin above twenty years, without remorse, till Affliction awakened them: The like we see in Manasses; when he was in affliction, he humbled himself, and besought God, who was in∣treated of him, though he had been a prodigious sinner. So the prodi∣gal Son by straits, and other awakening afflictions, came to himself, and returned to his Fathers house. And the example of Rochesters Re∣pentance is remarkable. You cannot say you were sure his Repentance was true; neither are you sure of the contrary. So you are between hope and fear; let that keep you from despair. But suppose the worst▪ to use the words of Bildad to Job, If thy Children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away for their transgressions; (by the way this was a harsh censure) if it should be thus, yet here is this Comfort▪ that he dyed in his Youth, not a sinner of an hundred years old, but  young, vain, ignorant, seduced person, to use your own words: An
so his punishment will be less, than if he had lived to gray hairs, and al his life had walked in the way of his own heart, and so had served di∣vers lusts and pleasures. You have parted with some Children before now; these you make no question, but are▪ in Heaven; you have others living, (I know not how many) they will strive to be a Comfort to you, (I hope) by walking in the fear of God. And it is a rare thng, and not often seen, that al a Mans Children, where thy be numerous, do make good proof; but one, or more of them go astray: I mean, where Parents are Godly and careful. Corruptions too often prevails above Education. Imitate David, not in his immoderate mourning for Absalom; but in his moderation touching Ammon, he was comforted concerning Ammon, seeing he was dead. And at the death of the In∣fant, Now he is dead (saith he) wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. Which of you by taking thought can add to his stature on cubit? Put away ex∣cessive grief from your heart, and rejoyce in hope of Glory to come. Be thankful for the work of Grace in your own heart, that God is yours, Christ is yours, all things are yours, Life and Death, things present, and things to come. Now the God of Peace fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing; to whose Grace I commend you, and rest Your unfeigned Lover. SIR, OUT of a deep sense of your Affliction, and tender commiserati∣on of your great loss, in parting with your dearest Daughter, I write these Lines, to testifie our compassion and fellow▪ feeling of your sorrow; which to do is every Christians Duty; much more the Duty of near Relations: The same which Job calls for from his Friends: Job 19. 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends; or the hand of God hath touched me. That you are full of heaviness, nd have great sorrow of heart for the loss of so sweet a Child, I make o doubt, nor do I at all blame you for it; so that you mourn mode∣ately, and after a right manner. 1 Cor. 7. 30. Let them that weep, be s though they wept not; but I desire you may sorrow after a Godly sort, ith Godly sorrow, which worketh Repentance to Salvation not to be re∣ented off; but the sorrow of the world worketh death. 2 Cor. 7. 10. That you may mourn aright, you are to look up to God, and see his and in this stroke. Ezek. 24. 16. Son of man, behold I take away he desire of thine eyes with a stroke. And remember God is wise, the nly wise God. And wise Agents act for some end, some wise and reat end. God doth nothing in vain; but the skill is to find out the nd of Gods chastisement. He is a wise man, that can do that, can
know the meaning, and understand the Errand of Gods Rod, and see his Name written upon it▪ Mich. 6. 9. for this let us search the Scrip∣tures, which make known to us Gods mind, and our Duty in such cases. Let us consult the Word, make it the men of our counsel, as David did, Psal. 119. 24. and pray with Job, Job 10. 2. Shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. To understand Gods meaning in his correct∣ing us, and the chief end he aims at, (though some other ends God may have, which for brevity sake I omit) read Job 33. 17. where you may see Gods end is to open mens ears to instruction, to with hold man from his purpose; namely, of sinning against God, to hide pride from man. Job 36. 8, 9, 10. If they be holden in cords of affliction, he shew∣eth them their work, their evil works, their transgressions, that they have exceeded; (i. e.) gone beyond the bounds, which God setteth in his Word: He openeth their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they turn from iniquity. To the same purpose you find in Isa. 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. Agreeable hereunto hath been the practice of Gods people, to humble themselves under Gods afflicting hand. Lam. 3. 39, 40. Where∣fore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search, and try our wayes, and turn unto the Lord. Micah 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him. Psal. 38. 18. I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. Where this Duty is neglected God complaineth of them: Isa. 9. 13. This people turneth not to him that smiteth them; neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Jer. 5. 3. Thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; (i. e. for their sins) they have refused to return. Ch. 44. 10. They are not humbled to this day. To the right performance of this Du∣ty gracious Promises are made: 2 Chron. 7. 14. If my people shall hum∣ble themselves, (under Judgments) and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evil wayes, I will hear from Heaven, I will forgive their sin, I will heal▪ their Land. Job 33. 27. If any say I have sinned, and perverted that which is right, and it profiteth me not, he will deliver his Soul from going into the pit. And this is the use you, and every one in your circumstances, should make of Gods Correction, to humble your self under his mighty hand: To say as Job 34. 31. I have born cha∣stisement, I will not offend any more: Ver. 32. That which I see not, teach me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Commune with your own heart. Psal. 4. 4. Ask your Soul how it doth, Am I in Christ? Am I born again? Is there a work of Grace wrought upon my heart? That will appear by your walking: Do you walk as becometh the Gospel? Phil. 1. 27. Do you live soberly, righteously, godly? Is this your constant walking? Do you pray continually in your Family? In your Closet? Do you sanctifie the Lords day duely? Do you teach
your Children the knowledge and fear of God? Do you Catechise them? Do you set them a good Example? Do you fill up every Rela∣tion with Duty? Have you not sat with vain persons? Psal. 26. 4. Are you a companion to all that fear God? Psal. 119. 63. Do you honour such above others? Psal. 15. 4. Do you delight in their company? Psal. 16. 3. This is that we are commanded to do, to bethink our selves: 2 Chron. 6. 37. To consider our wayes: Hag. 5. 7. To judge our selves: 1 Cor. 11. 31. To examine our selves whether we be in the Faith, or no. 2 Cor. 13 5. Now let Conscience speak, deal faithfully and truly with your self; and where you find Duty neglected, Sin committed, confess your faults to God freely; bewail them with a bro∣ken and contrite heart; pray earnestly for Grace, and a new heart; for power over your corruptions; resolve on a new course of life, to be∣come a new man by the assistance of Gods Grace. Abandon ill Compa∣ny, and all occasions of sin for the time to come; run not into tempta∣tion, but watch and pray, and keep your self from your own iniquity. Psal. 18. 23. If I regard iniquity in my heart, (i. e. allow my self in any one sin) God will not hear my prayer. Psal. 66. 18. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and offend in one point, (i. e. wittingly, knowing∣ly,) he is guilty of all; is obnoxious to condemnation, as if he had broken the whole Law. Jam. 2. 10. Let your future practice and re∣formation speak the truth of your Repentance. And if you thus turn to God with your whole heart, make application to Christ by Faith, and his Bloud shall cleanse you from all sin: So God will receive you to Mercy, as the Father received the Prodigal Son with all expression of Love. He that covereth his sin shall not prosper; but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall find mercy. Prov. 22. 13. If you dare not set up a Judgment-seat in your own Heart, and keep a privy Sessions in your own Conscience, how will you appear before the Judgment-seat of Christ, and give an account of all your Thoughts, Words and Acti∣ons at the great day? For then must every one of us give account of himself to God. Then blessed are they whose sins are forgiven: They may lift up their faces at that day with boldness, when impenitent sinners shall be confounded, and call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall on them. They who live in sin, are in danger to dye in sin, and to be damned eternally for sin. Sin will be sure to find them out to punish∣ment, who will not now search and find, and cast it out by Repentance and amendment of Life. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruine. Ezek. 18. 31. Thus I have shewed you the good and right way to improve this present cross, and to prevent worse things. Joh. 5. 14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come to you. If God give you an heart to imbrace and hearken to this advice, you will have cause to say with David, Psal. 119. 67, 71.
Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now I have kept thy word: And it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy sta∣tutes. And I beseech you, do not reject the Counsel of God against your own Soul. Put it in practice without delay. Break off your sins by Righteousness, forthwith to day, while it is called to day; lest your heart e hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 13. All flesh is grass: And no man knoweth the day of his death. But it may be said to any of us; This night shall thy Soul be required of thee. You seem to have a crazy Body. You have had divers warnings of late to mind you of your frailty: And it is an high point of wisdom to consider of a Mans latter end▪ Deut. 32. 29. What if Death should come like a Thief suddenly, and give no warning? Then happy are all they, who with the wise Virgins have got Oyl in their Lamps; saving Grace and Sincerity. If a Flood come, happy are they who (with Noah) have prepared an Ark for the saving of their Souls. Make sure of Christ; keep Conscience pure, so it will be peaceable; keep integrity and up∣rightness, so you may look Death in the face without fear. I will con∣clude with the words of Solomon; Prov. 19. 20. Hear counsel, receive instruction; that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end. Tender Love and Compassion to your Soul was the only motive, which set my Pen on writing these Lines. Take them in good part, and pass a favourable construction on them, peruse them, ponder them; for they are of weight, of worth, the very Word of God, useful, and necessary to be followed; nearly conducing to the Salvation of your Immortal Soul. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. 2 Tim. 2. 7. To his Grace I commend you, being Your Servant for the salvation of your Soul. BEcause my former Letter found so good acceptance with you, I am incouraged once again to write to you; to let you know how welcome, and joyful a thing it is to your Friends, to understand, that you are become a new man; that you have put off your former Con∣versation, and abandoned all vain Company; that you keep much at home, and take delight in your Wife and Children, (as you have just cause, for they are sweet Children, Dutiful and Obedient) also that you pray constantly with them, and frequent the most lively, and pow∣erful, and Soul-saving Preaching of Gods Word on the Lords dayes. Oh, how good and how pleasant a thing it is to all that love you, (that love your Soul) to hear these things of you! Now I pray you suffer a word of further Exhortation, and give me leave to beseech you, as Barnabas did those newly converted Christians; Acts 11. 23. That with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. Resolve by the help
of Grace, that you will never cast off your hopeful beginnings, nor turn aside to crooked wayes; but continue stedfast in the good way you have taken up unto the end. The end is that which crowneth all good actions; and to perseverance in well-doing are all the promises made. Rom. 2. 7. Mat. 10. 22. Rev. 21. 7. And our Baptismal Vow bindeth us to keep Gods Holy Will and Commandments all the dayes of our lives. Now that you have begun to forsake the broad way, that lead∣eth to destruction, and to enter into the strait way that leadeth unto life; (O think what a Mercy it is, that God hath awakened you (with Mary) to chuse the good part, that shall not be taken from you) you see the thing is feizable, and Godliness is not a thing impossible, if there be but a willing mind. If you should now, or at any time hereafter fall a∣way, it would not be a sin of infirmity, because you cannot help it; but of perverseness, because you will not be at the pains which a Godly life requireth: For use and acquaintance with a Christian life makes it much more easie to you afterwards, then at the beginning. For the greatest difficulty that is in a Godly life, is from custom to the contra∣ry; so that if after some acquaintance with it, when you have over∣come much of the hardness of it you should give it over, that would be utterly destructive. But I hope better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak. By all means be careful to set such a watch over your self, and so to avoid all occasions and temp∣tations, as may preserve you from all wilful breaches, and danger of Apostasie. And because by our own strength we are not able to stand, see that you be much in secret Prayer. Mat. 6. 6. Beg of God a new heart, a clean heart, an upright heart. Psal. 51. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 1. Grace is of absolute necessity to Salvation, if we believe our Saviour. John 3. 3. 5. and 7. A work of Grace renewing the heart will make Christs yoke of Obedience easie, and his burden light, so his Commandments will not be grievous. 1 Joh. 5. 3. It is by the help of the Spirit changing and sanctifying the heart, that we mortifie the deeds of the flesh. Rom. 8. 13. There may be an outward Reformation, where there is no inward work of Regeneration. So a man may be in the condition of the Scribes, Mark 12. 34. not far from the Kingdom of Heaven; yet never enter into it O wrestle with God in Prayer, as for Mercy to pardon sin past; so for Grace, and the Spirit of Sanctifi∣cation to renew your heart, and to reform your life; that so you may walk before God to all well-pleasing. If you would do so, continue instant in Prayer: Col. 4. 2. God will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it. Luke 11. 13. Christ assures us, That whatsoever we ask in his name, the Father will grant. Thus you shall become a good Tree, bringing forth the good Fruits of Righteousness, Holiness, and Sobrie∣ty, to the Praise and Glory of God, the Credit of the Gospel, good
Example of others, to the rejoycing of all good Christians, and the overlasting Salvation of your own Soul. Yea, there will be joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repenteth. Luk. 15. 10. So whether you live or dye, you shall be the Lords: And this is con∣siderable at such a time as this, when Sickness is so Epidemical, and many dye every where, and you your self seem to be of no strong Constitution, as it appears by your often Infirmities. I say it again, Regeneration is the one thing necessary, without which, outside Refor∣mation is but like painting a rotten Post, or making clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, when the inside is full of excess and extortion. Mat. 23. Though you know these things, yet I thought it not unuse∣ful to put you in remembrance of them; that you may be settled and established in the present Truth, and so may continue to the end: Which is the earnest desire, and shall be the Prayer of Your very Friend for the Salvation of your Soul. SIR, I Fully purposed to have given you a Visit; but hearing your Wife was so near her Travail I forbore till a fitter opportunity. And since I understand to my grief, that she is delivered of two Children, both dead; and for which I am informed, you are much troubled; for which I cannot blame you, for the Providence is sad: And a Christian should be a Man of Wisdom, to see Gods Name written upon the Rod. So was the Name of Aaron, for the Tribe of Levi, written upon his. Numb. 17. 3. And as his brought forth Buds and Blossoms, and ripe Fruits; so should Gods Rod of Correction yield good Fruit, in them that are exercised therewith, even the peaceable Fruits of Righteous∣ness and Repentance. Hear the Rod and who hath appointed it. Micah 6. 9. The Rod hath a voice: It cometh upon some Errand, or other, if we were wise enough to understand its meaning. Which that we may do, the best way is to Commune with your own hearts: Psal. 4. 4. To search and try our wayes, and turn to the Lord. Lam. 3. 40. And be earnest with God in Prayer, that he would open our ears to disci∣pline. Job 10. 2. Shew me why thou contendest with me. Job 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said to God, I have born chastisement. And I would not have you or your Wife give way to excessive sorrow in this case; but follow the Counsel of the Word (which ought to be the Rule of our Passions, as well as our Actions); Let your moderation be known to all men. Phil. 4. 6. And they that weep (for outward Crosses) be, as though they wept not. 1 Cor. 7. 30. Learn we must to exercise the grace of Self-denyal; which our Saviour hath taught us by his own
Example: John 18. 11. The cup which my Heavenly Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? And it was a very bitter one. Again, Now what I will, but what thou wilt. God is wiser than Man, he is God only wise. We see but a little way, Gods understanding is infinite. Times are ill at present, they may be worse; yea, so bad, that people may have cause to say, Luke 23. 29. Blessed are the barren, and the Womb that never bear, and the Paps which never gave suck. Yet if Children be a Blessing, as I grant they be in themselves, and desirable, there is no time over-passed; but you may have your Quiver full of such Ar∣rows, if God see it good for you: And if not, I hope you are more a Christian, than to desire them. Beware I beseech you both, of the least impatience in this case; and if any such bitter root should spring up in your hearts, check it, and chide it away, as Job did his Wives perverse motion; saying, Shall we receive good at the hands of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil; But this I advise you, assoon as your Wife is strengthened, appoint a solemn day of Humiliation, to entreat the favour of God, that this affliction may be sanctified, and the anger of God (if you conceive he be displeased) may be turned away from you, and from your Family: Which having done, acquiess in the good pleasure of God; Let him do to you as to him seemeth best: So said David in the like case, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. If I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will, &c. If he thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold, here I am, &c. This course a Kinsman of yours and ours, was advised to take after the death of all his first Children, and it pleased God to give issue, perfect Children; three at least, that are all alive, Men and Women at this day. One may be too impetuous in his desire of this, or the other Earthly Blessing, which desire God may grant in Anger. So we see in Rachel, who was faulty in this kind, and had a Son whom she named Bennoni, Son of my sorrow, which cost her her Life. Be you very thankful to God, that hath spared the Tree; though the Fruit perish. Resign your Wills intirely to the Will of God, which is a wise, just, rational, gracious Will, who doth all things for the best to them that love him: Whereas our Wills are crooked, unjust, foolish, and oft unreasonable. Also God is our Sove∣raign Lord, to whom we must all subscribe, as to his commanding, so to his disposing Will. These Lines I desire you to impart to your se∣cond self also, who may be therein concern'd equally with your self. Thus with my Prayers to God (who teacheth his People to profit, both by his Word, and Rod) that his hand may be sanctified to you (and sanctified Afflictions are better then unsanctified Prosperity, saith Mr. Dod) so as you may be able to say by good Experience, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. I commend you to the grace of God. Yours, &c. J. H. Sept. 30. 1680.
I Beseech you suffer a word of friendly plainness and freedom in a matter of deep concernment. I shall not play the Orator to make you a learned Speech, nor dress my words with Eloquence, where∣with to tickle and please you; but I shall write words of Truth and Sober∣ness, and that upon a weighty errand, to which I request your attention. How much better are the wounds of a friend, than the kisses of an ene∣my. The business of these lines is to desire you to reflect with serious∣ness upon your late piece of Justice in the conviction of those good Christi∣ans, who now by your means are sentenced to suffer, as evil doers; when yet you can find no Occasion against them, but what Daniel's Accusers (who were Heathens) found against him, concerning the Law of his God. Dan. 6. 5. Pray weigh this your act in the ballance of the Sanctuary, and try if it will hold weight there. For we must all appear before the Judgment-seat of Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. Rom. 14. 12. So then, if in this action you have dealt truly and sincerely with God and his House, you may re∣joyce and take comfort in it. If as a Magistrate you have spoken righte∣ousness, judged uprightly, as Psal. 58. 1. If you have judged Gods People with righteousness, if you have defended the poor and fatherless, if you have done justice to the afflicted and needy, if you have rid them out of the hand of the wicked, as Psal. 82. 3, 4. then shall you have peace in your own conscience, and a good reward at the resurrection of the just, when God will reward every man according to his works. But if you have judged unjustly, and accepted the persons of the wicked, if you have broken in pieces Gods people, and afflicted his heritage, if you have persecuted Christ in his members, if you have hindered the progress of the Gospel, and forbidden Ministers to preach to people whereby they may be saved: then know that God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he is Judge among the Gods, Psal. 82. 1. He is among them to approve, protect, and reward them, if they judge righteous judge∣ments; he is among them, as a curious observer of their judgments; if they corrupt justice and turn righteousness into gall, he will bring every of their works into judgment, and acquit such as they condemn, and pass a righteous Sentence upon their crooked and unjust censures. Magistrates are stiled Gods, Psal. 82. 6. because invested with Gods image above o∣thers, receive authority from God, and should act for God, judge as God himself would judge. But seriously Sir, do you think, that when God the Son, the Lord Jesus Christ shall come to judge the quick and dead, that he (I say) will approve those Judges, or Justices that passe Sentences and give out warrants to spoil Ministers, and Christians of their goods for preaching, praying, or hearing Sermons? Is preaching and praying now become an iniquity to be punished by the judge? By a Christian Mgiestrate? The Apostle saith, wo be to me if I preach not the Gospel;
but by such manner of acting it should seem to be quite contrary; wo to me if I do preach the gospel. And as I have hitherto considered you as a Magistrate, so give me leave to look on you a little as a Christian, and see how agreeable to the truth of Christianity this act will appear, how well it becometh a Christian Magistrate. Every Christian ought to pro∣mote Christs Kingdom, according to the Lords prayer, Thy Kingdom come. But suppressing of preaching is the direct means to overthrow Christs Kingdom, and to build up Satans. By these late actings, in which you lead the way, how many preachers have been silenced, how many hundreds of Sermons suppressed? by which who knows how many lost Sheep might have been found, how many sinners converted, Saints edi∣fied, the eyes of many blind opened, dead Souls quickened and eternally sayed? If it be so blessed a work to convert one sinner, Jam. 5. 20. whose work is it to hinder sinners conversion? What titles doth St. Paul give Elymas for an act of like nature, for endeavouring to hinder the preach∣ing but of one Sermon, see Acts 13. 10. He that with-holdeth corn, people shall curse him, Prov. 11. 26. much worse do they who with-hold the bread of life from people. I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, Mat. 25. 42. Will Christ say to the wicked at the last day; but what will he say to oppress∣ers, Spoilers, Sons of violence; may he not say to them, I had a little meat, clothes, money, and ye took them from me? sure, that is worse; and worst of all is taking away spiritual food. As the Soul is more excellent than the Body so much worse is it to take away the bread of life, far worse, than to take away corporal food. Pray consider how in consistent this is with love to God and Christ, which all Christians profess. Joh. 21. 15, 17. Peter, lovest thou me? feed my lambs, feed my sheep. A Mini∣ster can no way better testify his love to Christ, than by diligent and faith∣ful feeding the flock with sincere milk of the word, nor a Magistrate, than by incouraging the faithful dispensers of the word; whom to dis∣courage and punish for doing their duty, how highly displeasing and pro∣voking to the Lord is such an act? who rebuked even Kings for their sakes, saying do my Prophets no harm, Psal. 105 14▪ Nor can you al∣ledge justly, that you punish them not for preaching and hearing, but for transgressing the law, when you know, they have authority both to preach and hear by his Majesty's Declaration and License under his hand and Seal; yea and a Bill of ease is under consideration of this present Par∣liment to justify their proceedings. And doth it become inferiour Magi∣strates to interpose, or rather to oppose that Indulgence; which both King and Parliament have thought meet to grant? Nor need you to fear the loss of an hundred pounds, in case you had refused to act. For men of judgment are of Opinion, that the forfeiture is not at all reoverable in Law. And if it were, what Informer dare contend with you for it? But suppose the worst, read 2 Chron. 25. 9. What shall we do for the hundred
Talents? The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. Oh how vile a thing is the love of money, 1. Tim. 6. 9. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Joh. 2. 15. I will not be so uncharitable to∣wards you, as not to hope and believe, that you love Jesus Christ really; yet if you love the world, i. e. money, esteem credit or any thing in the world above Christ, you love him not sincerely; Mat. 10. 37. He that loveth Father, or Mother &c. more than me, is not worthy of me, is no good Christian. Give me leave to cite one passage out of Mr. Baxter—In Q. Mary's days, when Martyrs were condemned to the fire, there were many great men, who really loved them, and wished them well, and their hearts grieved in pity for them, as knowing them to be in the right. But they loved their honour, wealth, and safety so much better, that they would sit on the Bench, yea, and give Sentence for their burning, for fear of hazarding their worldly happiness, was this sincere love, &c. Mr. Baxter Saints rest. p. 3. pag. 238. Say not these men under conviction are Dissenters, Phanaticks, &c. I will not hazard my reputation to be esteemed a favourer of such. You know Christianity hath ever been reproached, and hath suffered under black names. Christ himself was blasted with the odious name of Samari∣tane. His Apostles and the first Christians were termed the sect of the Na∣zarenes, of which Paul himself was counted the Ringleader, Acts. 24. 5. an Heretick, v. 14. The Christians of former ages in England were called Lollards Hereticks &c. and in our age Puritans, Phanaticks. But what if Christ own them for his people and members, whom the world prose∣cutes with odious titles? What a case are they in then, that vex and spoil them of their goods? What if you had been ill thought of by some vile persons (for wicked men are vile, Psal. 15. 4. Dan. 11. 21.) you should the more be had in reputation of wise and good men. To be dispraised and disparaged by lewd men, is no disgrace, but a commendation; yea, God himself will honour them that honour him, 1 Sam. 2. 30. But Christ will be ashamed of them that are ashamed of him, Mark 8. 38. Oh! how fearful is their case, who fear men more then God, who will rather deny the truth, or act against a good cause, or a good conscience, than they will displease an Informer? Rev. 21. 8. The fearful are set in the fore∣front of the damned crew. Now, good Sir, consider your ways, look them in the glass of the word, not in the glass of this world; say what have I done? It had been better wisdom to have done so before the act, to have viewed the obliquity of it, the consequences with all the circumstances of it, and to have resolved with Joseph, how shall I do this? &c. Gen. 39. 9. to have said with Nehemiah, shall such a man as I do this? I whom God hath blessed with so great an Estate, invested with authority to sit in the Seat of Justice, should not I honour God with my substance, with my authority? Should I be instrumental in vexing good people for righteousness sake? Should I hinder the inlarging of Christs
kingdom by surppressing the Gospel? What evil hath the Gospel of Christ done? That the preacher of it, the professors of it should be thus despightfully used by the world, by professing Christians; What account can I render to the Lord of this, when it shall be said, give account of thy Stewardship, for thou maist be no longer Steward? Should I, that was looked upon with much respect by all sober Christians be the first of all those of my rank, and the leading Man in that action, which tends direct∣ly to the pulling down the walls of Gods Jerusalem, and make the builders thereof to cease by force and power, which was the work of Heathens and enemies to Religion? Ezra 4. 23. 24. Then ceased the work of the house of God. Think how many sighs and tears you wring from the mourners in Sion, how many prayers and cryes are sent up to Heaven for the enlargment of the Gospel and Gospel Ministers, by your means silenced, Acts 12. 5. And will not God avenge his own Elect, Luk. 18. 7. which cryed day and night, though he bear long? Is it good that you do, to in∣courage the Vipers and Caterpillars of the land, who thirst after the spoil and prey, that they may inrich themselves with the labours of innocent men? For which cause, even for filthy lucre, they act the Devils part, the grand enemy of mans salvation: They, as he, go about seeking to devour. To draw a conclusion, wherefore, O Sir, (to use Daniels words, Chap. 4. 27.) Let my counsel be acceptable, break off your sin by righteousness, and your iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of your Tranquillity. Do what lyes in you to deliver the oppressed from vio∣lence and spoill; let the Informers be checked and discouraged, by Missing their expected pray. Let reparation be made to the Sufferers, by causing that every man have his goods taken from him, restored again In cases of wrong and offences done to our Neigbours, repentance to God is not sufficient, without satisfaction to man, if there be ability, as I am cer∣tain there is in this case. You know August. saying, which is good divinity, The sin is not forgiven except restitution be made of that which is taken away. And now I have done, only let me give you an account, why I take on me this boldness to be thus plain with you. Surely it is because I honour you, as not only a Gentleman but a Christian; one who have good things in you, and a Conscience bearing witness to the truth, and will not rebel against the light, when it shines out, but will yield an obedient ear, as David speaks, Psal. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, &c. Prov. 28. 23. He that rebuketh, &c. Levit. 19. 17. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother, &c. By warrant of these and other Scriptures, I have adventured to deal plainly with you in this matter, assuring you that my hearts desire and Prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved. And if it please God to open your eyes, and touch your heart, then it will never re∣pent you, that you hearkened to the counsel of a poor Minister, but you will bless God for it (as David did for Abigails advice, 1 Sam. 25. 32.)
that you may make reparation for what is past, and be kept for the fu∣ture from work of this sort. Let the Devils Servants do their Masters drudgery, (for such it is, Rev. 2. 10.) but keep you your self pure. To conclude in the words of a wise Man, but no Christian; i. e. of Gamaliel, Acts 5. 38, 39. I say refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to nought: But if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest haply you be found even to fight against God. Now craving pardon for this tediousness and pro∣lixity, and your candid interpretation, I take leave, and commend you to God, resting Your Worships to be commanded John Hieron. Losco. Cozen, IT is now a long time since I saw you: But to me no little grief; I hear an evil report of your lewd and ungodly course of life, that you lead, to the great dishonour of God, the grief of your Friends, the danger of your Immortal Soul, and the ruine of your Family, whom by wasting, and your unthrifty courses, you must needs bring to Poverty here, and hazard their Eternal Salvation hereafter, by your ill example, and neglect of honouring and worshiping of God in your Family, as every Christian is bound to do. Now I pray you consider your wayes; whether is Alehouse haunting, keeping company with Drunkards, casting off Prayer and all Family Duties, the way to Heaven or Hell? Is this to walk as the Gospel teacheth, Soberly, Righ∣teously, Godly in this present evil World? Is this to follow the Exam∣ple, and Godly Education of your pious Friends, who brought you up in the fear of God? Is this to walk according to the Vow of your Bap∣tism, in which you were dedicated to the service of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and in which you promised to forsake the Devil and all his works, the vanities of the World, and the lusts of the Flesh? Pray, think how great a sin Perjury is, to be forsworn by breaking a solemn Vow made to God in the face of a Congregation, which God will require at your hands? And how fearful a sin is Apostacy, to fall away from your holy profession, which sometime you made. Read, and tremble at those Scriptures, Prov. 14. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 21. Heb. 10. 29. Will the pleasure of sin for a season make you amends for the loss of Heaven and Eternal Happiness? Can your good fellows and companions in wickedness save you from the wrath of God, and the vengeance of eternal fire? Will they, or can they comfort you in Sick∣ness, at the hour of Death or day of Judgment? Did the rich man Luk. 16. 28. think that his Brethrens company would be any solace to
him in Hell? Why then doth he request so earnestly, that a Preacher might be sent to warn them, that they might turn and escape the place of torment? Lay these things to heart, and remember your self in time, before it be too late. And as with the prodigal Son you have run away from your Fathers house, and from your Duty; so return with him to your Obedience. Confess and bewail your sins to God, as he did, and forsake them and you shall find mercy, as he did. But do it betime without delay, defer it not; lest your heart be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, or least death come upon you unawares. And if you dye in your sins, Hell follows after. Abandon the Alehouse and all wicked company, set up Religion in your Family, pray not only once on a Sabbath day, (I marvel where you learnt that) but every day morning and night; and break off all your sins by Repentance, and pray for a new heart; for why will ye dye? Ezek. 18. 31. Despise not this Counsel, but receive it as sent from God, least it witness against you in the great day, when every one must give an account of himself to God. And it may very well be the last, which you may ever re∣ceive from Your Ʋncle, which pityeth your poor Soul, and all yours. Octob. 20. 1680. BEcause I pity your Conditions, I thought good to give you some di∣rections in Writing, which you may read, and consider, and have them ready by you, and your Son may ponder them, as Mary kept the sayings of Christ, and pondered them in her Heart; because words of Advice, only spoken in the Ear, are soon forgotten, and become as water spilt on the ground. And what I write shall be words of Truth and Soberness, taken out of the Scripture of Truth, or agreeable thereunto. And therefore you ought to give the more diligent heed to them. In the first place, I shall direct my words to you and your Wife, and pray you to consider your waves, and search and try your Hearts, and see whether God hath not laid this affliction on your Child for the Parents sin; for though it become not others to judge unchari∣tably of them, who suffer such things according to our Saviours cau∣tion, Suppose ye that those Galileans were greater sinners, than all the Galileans; I tell you, Nay: Luk. 13. 3, 5. Yet it is our Duty to humble our selvés under the mighty hand of God; to judge our selves; to commune with our own hearts; to see Gods name written upon his Rod: Micah 6. 9. To hear the Rod, and who hath appointed it. Gods Rod hath a voice; it calleth to us; if we were wise enough to know the meaning of it, to understand its errand. Job 3. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more▪ That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I
will do no more. Imitate Rebekah, Why am I thus? And she went to en∣quire of the Lord. Gen. 25. 22. Shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. Job 10. 2. If your Heart do not condemn you for any particular sin; yet renew your Repentance for all sin; labour to excite and stir up the Grace of God within you. Be more fervent in Prayer, dili∣gent in hearing, more watchful over your hearts, and all your wayes, mortifie corruptions, and walk more closely with God, and pray that this Affliction may be sanctified to you, that you may come forth as gold, after God hath tryed you: Job 23. 10. That you may be able to say as David, Psal. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. This is what I thought good to say to you Parents. Now I speak to your Son: Though God does sometimes visit the iniquity of Parents upon Children; yet there is none upon Earth so just, or innocent, as to be Naturally pure, and free from sin. All are born in sin. The imagination of the Heart of Man is evil from his youth. You are therefore to be humbled for Original Sin, the Corrup∣tion of your Nature, the Mother of all abominations. And pray, that you may be born again with a new birth from Heaven. David con∣fesseth, Psal. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Every one therefore must be renewed; taken off the stock of old Adam, and ingrassed into Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Make sure of this, that you be in Christ. In him God is well pleased, and with all that are in Christ. If you may say with David, Psal. 118. 6, 7. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what men, or Devils, can do unto me: The Lord taketh my part with them that help me. Again, Psal. 56. 11. In God I put my trust, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Psal. 27. 1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is my strength, of whom shall I be afraid? Rom. 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son, &c. Make sure of Gods love, and then you need not fear the Devils malice. For first, the Devil is a conquered Foe. He is a Dragon, or Lyon in chains. Rev. 20. 1. Christ that owns the Cross hath overcome and subdued him. Heb. 2. 14. Through his death he hath destroyed him that had power of death, that is the Devil. He cannot go one link beyond his Chain. He could not touch one Lamb of all Jobs flock, till God gave him leave He could not enter into the Herd of Swine till Christ permitted him. He cannot appear to you, nor hurt you, except God suffer him. The very hairs of your head are all numbered. Matth. 10. 30. By fearing him, you do him too much pleasure and honour: And will you pleasure a cruel enemy? An enemy to God and your Soul By so doing you dis∣honour God and Christ, who is your strength and Redeemer. You do
in effect say, I doubt the Devil is too hard for God. I fear God can∣not deliver me out of his hands. Whereas it is promised, Rom. 16. 20. The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. 1 Joh. 4. 4. Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. How foolish a thing is it to fear that which never did befal you, nor any man, not one of ten thousand? What, did you see the Devil, or have you known one man or woman, that ever did see him; except Witches who call him in to their assistance? His suggestions, or temptations cannot harm you; but molest and trouble you. They are not your sins, you may still keep your integrity for all them, as Job and Christ did. And if God should suffer him to appear to you; yea, and carry your Body from place to place, as he did our Saviour; yet it is not in his power to hurt you. I have read of a Godly Minister, that for want of a better, was forced to dwell in a House that was haunted, and one night when he was in Bed the Devil appear'd to him, standing like a Man at his Beds feet: The Minister saw him, but was not affrighted; only said to him, If thou have nought else to do, thou mayest stand there still, I will betake my self to my rest; and so he did, and heard no more of his guest. The Devil is a proud Spirit, and loveth to domineer, and have men stand in awe of him, to fear him instead of God, and this he triumpheth in. But the best way is to slight and contemn him, as the Minister did; so shall you be sooner rid of him. Leave thinking of him, and have God more in your mind; his Mer∣cy, Love, and Care to all that fear him; his Promises, Providence: These call to mind Gods Attributes, his Allsufficiency, his Almighty Power. I am the almighty God; Gen. 17. 1. and Gen. 15. 1. Far not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Josh. . 5, 6. I will be with thee: I will never fail thee nor forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage. These Promises, though made to Abra∣ham, and to Joshua, belong to every believer. Believers are Heirs of the Promises. Heb. 6. 17. And Paul applies them to all believers; Heb. 13. 5. And so doth Peter; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Do you act faith in the promises, and reason thus; Is God my God, my Heavenly Father in Je∣sus Christ? Doth he love me? Psal. 146. 8. Doth he care for me? 1 Pet. 5. 7. Watch over me, is he my shield and buckler? Psal. 121. 3, 4, 5. Prov. 2. 7. My strength, rock, fortress, high tower, my deliverer. Psal. 18. 1, 2. Shall I then be so cowardly, as to fear a creature, the Devil, all the Devils in Hell, when God is for me? God keepeth, careth for me, watcheth over me night and day. Isa. 27. 3. Where is my faith? Check your self for unbelief, as Christ did Peter, Matth. 14. 31. O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? And as David did his own Soul: Psal. 42 Why art thou cast down O my Soul, &c. Lastly, If you are in Christ, then are you dear to God; though you be never
so poor, you are a member of Christ, of the family of Heaven, of the Houshold of Faith, a Lamb of Christs flock, a Child of God, an Heir of Heaven. Will God suffer the Devil to harm any, so dear to him. Joh. 10. 28. My sheep shall never perish, nor shall any man, or devils, be able to pluck them out of my fathers hand. Christ is a good Shep∣herd, Isa. 40. 11. He will gather the lambs in his armes, and carry them in his bosom. He will not quench the smoaking flax, nor break the bruised reed. As a Father pityeth his Children, so the Lord pityeth them that fear him. He may suffer men to ride over their heads, Satan to buffit them, 2 Cor. 12. 7. but still his eye of Fatherly care is on them; Psal. 34. 15. and all things shall work together for their good. Now lay all these things together. 1. Satan is a Conquered, a Chained Enemy. 2. By slavish fear you do him too much honour. 3. You wrong God and Christ, as if they were not able to save you. 4. Call to mind Gods gracious Attributes, Providence, Promises. 5. Your relatian to God and Christ, to whom in Baptism you were devoted; and so are a Member of Christ, one of Gods Children, whom he loves, pityeth and careth for. Say now, as Nehemiah, Should such a one as I flee, should I fear the Devil? No, fear God, fear to displease him by sin, by this immoderate fear. Resist the Devil by Faith and fer∣vent Prayer Lay hold on Gods promises. Apply them to your self by Faith, as if they had been made to you by Name. Hold no dispute with Satan; he will be too hard for you. But take the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. Answer his Cavils with that, as our Savi∣our did. Avoid solitariness, as much as you may. When you are a∣lone, yet remember you are not alone. Believers have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, by the Holy Ghost. And alwayes remember, that the Holy Angels encamp round about them that fear God. Turn to those Scriptures; Psal. 34. 7. and 91. 11. Get acquainted with Gods people, hear their advice, and beg their Prayers: Wait on God, be sure to keep in his way, and the issue will be good. Psal. 40. 1. So the God of Peace grant you Peace by all means; and the Peace of God which passeth understanding keep your hearts through Jesus Christ. To his Bles∣sing and Grace I commend you. Yours. Mar. 30. 1680. I Must desire to see you: but it is thought not advisable for me to take such a journey at first, not having been on horse back since my late sickness. I am sorry to hear you are ill again, being but lately recovered from an ill fit. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and is full of trouble. And because it is unknown to us, which sickness is, or may
prove our last, it is wisdom to improve the present, as a warning to us, So to number our dayes, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, to consider our latter end, and Eternity that follows after. Set thy house in order: for thou shalt dye, and not live, saith the Prophet from God to Hezekiah, much more should we set our Souls in order, and see that we be on good terms with God, ere we appear before his judgment-seat. Which we must do the first moment after the departing of the Soul out of the body. Heb. 9. 27. This is a work so necessary to be done in time, that it is not, ought not to be put off, till a sick bed; yet it must then be revived, and renewed, and then done in the best manner, as being the last time of doing it, and what is then done is like to stand for ever. In order thereunto reflect, and look back into the former part of your life. Begin at your birth sin, and corruption of nature. Bewail that, and lament over it, so go on to the sins of youth▪ and be humbled for them, and so come a long to the sins of age, and riper years, confess and bewail them with their agravating circumstances, as being committed against light, know∣ledge, and checks of Conscience, and done with deliberation. By this means you will find ease and rest to your Soul, according to that promise, Mat. 11. 29. If you cast your weary burden upon the Lord Jesus Christ, he will stand between you and his fathers wrath, he will take all your debts upon him, and say as Rebeckah to Jacob, upon me be thy curse, my Son. Fresh sorrow for old sins, Repentance renewed will make Christ sweet, and sin bitter to you, and affect you more in his love in dying for you. This will be a good evidence to you, that your sins are forgiven. Namely if you confess them with a broken and penitent heart, and for∣sake them with detestation. And now is a fit time for you to look up your evidences for Heaven, that so you may not be afraid to dye, but may look Death in the face with comfort. If you say how may I be assured, that my sins are forgiven, and that Christ is mine. To the first, I have answered already; He that confesseth, and forsaketh his sin, shall find mercy, Prov. 28. 13. If we confess our sins, (by faith resting on Christ for pardon) he is faithful, and just to forgive us. To the second, How may I know that Christ is mine? Thus, Are you you his? Are you willing? Do you consent to have him on his own terms, for your Lord? and do you obey him as your Lord? Do you take his yoak up∣on you? have you respect to all his commandments? Do you hate every evil way, John 15. 14. You are my friends, if you do whatsoever I com∣mand you. Do you chuse the Lord for your portion, Christ for your bliss and happiness? Do you more highly prize him, and desire to enjoy him more, than all riches? Do you account all things but loss and dung in comparison of him? Had you rather be the most holy person upon Earth, than the greatest, or richest, that ever was? And do you use diligence in the means of grace, to attain to more holiness? If so you
may without doubt, be well assured, your Estate is good and safe. For you could not have chosen God, and loved Christ, unless he had chosen and loved you first. Dwell therefore in the thoughts, and tastes of Gods love to you. Say, how wonderful is Gods love to a poor worm and silly dust! That the contrivance of infinite wisdom should be taken up about me! That the eternall Deity should consult about my salvation, ere the world began! That God should pass by many wise men after the flesh, many mighty, and noble, (who if they had been converted, might have done God better service an hundred times then I) and make choise of me, a dispicable sinner, to be an Heir of salvation. Lord what is man &c. Thus raise up your heart in thankful admiration of Gods wonderful love to your Soul. And Thirdly the assurance of Gods love will incourage your heart against the fear of death, and give you confidence against the King of terrors. I shall be glad to hear of your recovery; though I thus write, I commend you to God, and if I never see you in this world, I hope to meet you with other dear friends, who are gone before, in those mansions, which Christ hath purchased, and prepared for all those that love him, to whose grace I refer you, Yours J. H. May 31. 81. They are blessed that do hunger and thirst after Righteousness, af∣ter Christ for justification, and sanctification: Do not you so? Are not you empty, naked, barren of grace in your self, a dry tree? Are not you sensible of your your wants, and of your beggarly condition? Do not you not say with David, I am poor and needy Psal. 70 5. And with Paul, Rom. 7. 18. in me dwells no good thing? Is not your appetite and thirst after grace, as strong as Sampsons was for water, or Rachels for Children, give me Children or else I dye? Do you not thirst after more grace, and covet earnestly farther degrees of holiness, and wish you were the holiest, rather than the richest, or greatest, Lady, or Prin∣cess in the world? If so, then I question it not, but you are one of the blessed ones, in the judgment of Christ, who is infallible, and cannot mistake. What have you to say against this? I hope you rest satisfied about vile and vain thoughts, which do not lodge in you, but you repel them and reject them. These may be your grief and affliction, but are not your sin, cannot prejudice your good estate; nor ought your imperfecti∣ons, passions, corruptions (from which the best on earth are not free) to cause you to question your justification, or your being in Christ; So long as you bewail them, strive against them, and are humbled for them: your desire is to reach after perfection, and further Measures of holiness. These desires are of and from the Spirit of God. And he accepts the will for the deed, as was shewed in divers instances. Nay this to me
makes it clear, if God account impious desires, vicious, ungodly, in∣ordinate lusts for the sin it self, or deed done; as Hatred with him is imputed Murder: 1 Joh. 3. 15. Lusting after a woman, though she remain chast, is Adultery (in Gods account) in the man. So much more longing and thirsting desires after grace, are beginnings of grace; and such desires God accepts, and will fulfil them; Psal. 145. 19. provided they be gracious and holy desires, humble desires springing from a bro∣ken heart, from one that is poor in Spirit, if they be constant, unsatis∣fied, vehement in the use of means; and that a man so prize Christ and his grace, that he be ready to sell all to buy the Pearl. Now this being your condition, what cause have you to leave your doubting, and spend your dayes in rejoycing, and praising God for his singular Mercy in con∣ferring on you so excellent a gift, as is saving grace; which is so rare a gift, like gold to be found with few persons; but more excellent than millions of gold and silver. Let your meditation of God be sweet, and admire his wonderful love to you in Christ, and how great things he hath done for you. Yours. I Am sorry that the Sun and Stars are darkened with you, and that the Clouds return after the Rain: But be not discouraged; this is a case common to many good Christians, and no other than befalls the best of Gods people. Do not fear but the light will break forth again; though you be under a cloud at present. The Son of Righteousness will arise upon you with healing in his wings. Be sure you regard no iniquity in your heart. Keep you from every accursed thing. Wash you, make you clean, cease to do evil, learn to do well; and mark what follows, If your sins were as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; if they be as crimson, they shall be as wooll. If we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and the blood of Christ cleanseth us from all sin. Again, If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World. Now reach out the hand of Faith, and lay hold on the promises, and apply them, for they are ex∣ceeding great and precious promises; and they are all in Christ, yea, and Amen, true and faithful: And they are your promises, yea, di∣rected to you in particular, as if your name was put to them. O, be not faithless, but believing: And if you do believe with all your heart, then are your sins forgiven, according to the tenour of these promises. Now are you justified and at peace with God through Jesus Christ: O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? Doubts in Gods people may arise from one of these causes: The heinonsness of Sin, the imper∣fection of Duties, or the weakness of Faith. For the first of these
know, that the Lord thinks never the worse of any for what they have been, for any sins they have lived in, when once they have truly re∣pented of them Ezek. 18. 21, 22. You may observe in the Church, that Christ never shewed greater kindness to any, than to such as had been most notorious: As the woman of Samaria, Zacheus the Publican, Mary Magdelen. And whereas there is but four women mentioned in the Genealogy of Christ, Mat. 1. not one of them but the Scripture sets a mark of infamy upon them, for some notorious sins. Ruth was a Heathen, an Idolater; Tamar, Rahab, Bathsheba, you know what they were; yet these only have the honour to be upon record, when Sarah, and women though more spotless, are passed by in silence. What may be the reason thereof. Take it from Mr. Hildersam. To teach us that penitent sinners shall have never the less honour with God, shall be never the less esteemed for that they have done, after they have once truly repented, and turned to the Lord: So you see there is no cause, why you should be dismayed at the hainousness of your sins, having re∣pented of them For the next: True it is, that after Conversion we are but in part regenerate; and so our best Duties are imperfect, and stained with many corruptions; Isa. 64. 6. yet God doth not reject them nor us for these defects; but accepts them, 1 Pet. 2. 5. delighteth in them, Cant. 2. 14. will reward them; Col. 3. 24. Heb. 11. 5. and not so much as take notice of the blemishes, that are in our best servi∣ces, Mic. 7. 18. Cant. 4. 7. Thon art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee. Let not the poorness of your Duties discourage you: but re∣member, Christ sits at the right hand of God, to make intercession for you: By whose merits Saints Prayers are perfumed, as it were, with incense; and so are made a sweet savour to God. Rev. 8. 3. And for the third, know, that it is not the strength, but the truth of Faith, that giveth us acceptance with God, through Faiths acceptance of Christ▪ Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him, &c▪ Now a weak hand may re∣ceive a gift, as truly as a strong. A single penny may be as good and clear Silver, as a bigger piece. Among Believers, Heb. 11 some whose sincerity we should have doubted of, (so weak was their Faith) if the Holy Ghost had not put them in the Catalogue of the Faithful: As Gi∣deon, Barak, Sampson, Jeptha, Rahab. Him that is weak in Faith we are bidden to receive: Rom. 14. 1. Sure God will not reject such. And now what place is there left for your doubting? If God do not shine upon you, by the light of his Countenance, yet is he your loving Father reconciled to you in his Son. A Father is a Father still, though he do not alwayes smile on his Son. Go you on in your Christian course of Godliness, serve the Lord with chearfulness, and believe that your poor services shall, and do find acceptance with Christ. Observe that in Lev. 1. 7. So much as is said of the offering of the poor Mans Sacrifice, which was but two young Pidgeons.
Another to the same Person. IAm distressed for you. What shall I do for you? Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted! How shall a man comfort a Soul, that refuseth to be comforted? Your case is like Hagars, in the Wilderness, who was ready to perish through drought, when there was a Well of Water by her; but she saw it not, till God opened her eyes; Gen. 21. 9. like Mary, Joh. 20. 15. who stood weeping for Christ, who stood by her; but she knew not that it was Jesus. You have the Well of Water in you springing up to Eternal Life; you have Christ in you, the hope of Glory; but your eyes are held, that you perceive him not. Like those two Disciples, that went to Emanus, Luk. 24. 16. You are in Christ, there is no curse, condemnation, or wrath to come belonging to you, you are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. All things are yours, Christ with all his benefits, the Covenant of Grace with all its priviledges, all the great and precious promises of the Gos∣pel, which are yea, and Amen in Christ, sealed in his Blood, confirmed to you in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. God is your God, your loving Father in Christ. Heaven and Eternal Life is yours. Fear not poor Soul; it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. What shall I say more? What can you desire more; except you would have your name put into the Scripture promises? You believe you shall dye, because it is appointed for all men once to dye; your Name is not there. You believe the Resurrection of the Body; because it is writ∣ten, There shall be a resurrection of the just and unjust; yet your Name is not there. The Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth in Jesus Christ, shall be saved: i. e. Whosoever being truly humbled for sin, disclaims all opinion of his own Righteousness, and with Paul, desireth to be found in his Righteousness only, he truly believeth: And so do you; therefore you shall certainly be saved. The Scripture saith, Whosoever confesseth and forsaketh his sin shall find mercy. Whoso loveth God, the same is beloved of God. Prov. 8. 17. He that loveth the Brethren is translated from death to life. If you say these are general Promises; How shall I gather assurance from them concerning my personal estate? I Answer, By looking into your own heart, where if you find you are so qualified, and have these Graces of the Spirit wrought in you; viz. Faith, Repentance, Love to God, and all Saints, you may be assured of your Salvation, as certainly as if Christ had said to you by name, as he did to the Man that had the Palsie; Matth. 9. 2. Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven; or to Mary Magdalen, her sins, which are many, are forgiven. Mar. 7. 47.
As to your vain Thoughts, I can say no more, but what I have said; that neither they, nor any other sin of infirmity, which is your burden and trouble, shall hurt or indanger your Salvation. It's the common lot of all Christians to suffer Afflictions outward or inward, and some∣times both: 2 Cor. 7. 5. We were troubled on every side, without were fightings, within were fears. God is only wise, knoweth how to order all for the good of his people. Wait on him with patience, until he shine on your Soul with the light of his Countenance, and fill you with Joy and Comfort, according to the promise; Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Beware of unbelief, which maketh God a lyar. 1 Joh 5. 10. Believe his Promises, believe his Prophets; so shall ye be established: 2 Chron. 20. 20. Beware of entertaining hard thoughts of God, dark misgiving thoughts, as you seem to do, when you fear lest God swear in his wrath against you; he did so against mur∣muring, rebellious Israel, who despised the pleasant Land, and would appoint a Captain to lead them back into Egypt. What is this to your case? God is good and doth good, is Love, Light, Life, Grace to all that trust in him. Read Dr. Mantons first Sermon on Psal. 119. 68. where he gives a check to such as yours: Page 473. You say true, I have not prayed for you of late more carnestly, because I hoped you had been more settled and at peace, hearing nothing from you to the contrary. Now I shall tender your condition. I cannot as yet promise you a solemn day. I have been very ill since I wrote to you, and am yet far from well. I pray you have patience; and when God makes me able, I hope to see you. I am hasting apace to the Grave; my Legs swell, which together with old Age, tell me the Grave is ready for me; God grant I may be ready for it. I pray read these Lines, peruse them, and ponder them in your heart, and pray that the Holy Spirit may let you know the things that are freely given you of God. Yours, J. H. Mar. 9. 81. IAm not without hope to fall to work again shortly; I pray therefore in your next let me understand whether you continue in the same mind, to have a day kept on your account; or whether you have found him whom your Soul loveth; whether the Son of Righteousness be risen in your heart with healing in his wings; or the Day-Star from on high hath visited your Soul. I pray you, let me ask you one Question; Have you not received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that worthily? (i. e.) In a due manner, becoming that Holy Ordinance with Gospel preparation, and communing with your own heart in se∣cret? I know you have many times. Now what is a Sacrament, a Seal of the Covenant of Grace is it not? Well, then there must be
mutual Sealing on both parts. You put to your Seal, that you will re∣ceive Christ, with his yoke of Obedience, with his Cross, Persecution. Did you not mean thus sincerely, with a good and honest heart? This is your Covenanting for your part, which you will indeavour to per∣form faithfully all the dayes of your life; though in many things you fail; as in vain thoughts and divers other things. And God Sealeth to you for his part, that he will be to you a God allsufficient; will give you his Son, with forgiveness of Sins, and all things pertaining to Life and Godliness. Now is not here strong Consolation for a Believer, an Heir of the Promises, one of Gods Covenant people? Away then with all doubtiug and unbelief. God is a faithful God; he keepeth Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his Commandments. Can you desire better assurance, that God is your God, Christ is your Saviour, that your Sins are forgiven. That is one branch of the Cove∣nant. Heb. 8. 12. This Covenant is an everlasting Covenant, ratified and confirmed by the Bloud of Christ; and the Seal of the Sacrament. Think you that vain thoughts, for which you are grieved, and count them your great burden, that they can disannul, or make void the Co∣venant so established? Come, Come, take hold of Gods Covenant, which God that cannot lye hath made with you in Christ; who though you be never so unworthy in your own apprehension; in all your slips and failings have recourse to the Covenant; in all your wants and de∣fects of Grace apply your self to this Covenant, and it will afford you relief. Be not faithless, but believe, consider and meditate well on this: I say, though you know it already, yea, ruminate on it again; it is of great concernment Now the God of Peace and Consolation, grant you Peace and Joy in believing, to whose Grace I commend you. J. H. MY hearts desire, and prayer to God for you is that you may be saved. And that is the very end of these lines to contribute my best endeavour to the salvation of your immortal Soul. And if you will but joyn with me to lend an er, and the Lord please to open your heart, as he did ydia's, to attend to wholsome advice, I hope by Gods blessing the issue may be comfortable. So as I shall have no cause to repent of my labour in writing, nor you in reading according to words of truth and soberness—You have been known to me these many years, at least thirty years last past. You have requested a share in my Pray∣ers, that was your own expression in a letter from you above twenty years ago. You have been a great promoter of Religion by your pains, and purse, and constant endeavour to get a good Minister setled at the place where you live. You have been reputed a sober man, and
a godly Christian by all that knew you. Thus you did run well. You were in a right course, you were fair for the Kingdom of Heaven. But how is it with you now? It is no good report that I hear of you; you are I hear become an Ale house hanter a company keeper; Can sit and tipple with drunkards; Seem to take delight in bad fellowship; Else you would not visit the Ale-house several times in a day, and neglect your business at home; you decline in goodness, and decay in your out∣ward estate. If this witness be true, as I am credibly informed, then are you to be sharply rebuked, that you may be sound in the faith. O foolish man, who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth; you did run well; who did hinder you; hav∣ing begun in the spirit, are you now made perfect in the flesh; Have you done and suffered so many things in vain; if it be yet in vain? Thus you lose the things you have wrought, and fall short of the reward of godliness for want of perseverance, and holding out to the end. Remem∣ber, I pray you, whence you are fallen, and repent, and do the first works. You had better not to have known the way of righteouss, then after you have known it, to turn aside from the holy Commandment delivered to you; better not to have been washed, then return to the wallowing in the mire, and lick up your vomit again. Apostacy is so fearful a sin, that I tremble to think of the heinousness of it; how many woes and threatnings are upon record in scripture. Read and tremble: Prov 14. 14 Psal. 101. 3. 125. 5. Ezek. 16. 24 33. 13. Heb. 6. 6. 10. 26. 39. 2 Pet. 2. 20 21. Mat. 2. 45. What iniquity have you found in the ways of God, that you have forsaken the good path, the holy Brethren for the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season: for you cannot serve two Masters. You cannot keep integrity, and take pleasure in sinful courses, which are as contrary as light and darkness, fire and water. By your present practise, you proclame to world, that you upon long experience, and having made tryal of Religious courses find no profit, no comfort in them. And so renounce your part in God and Christ, heaven and happiness, and resolve to take your lot and portion with drunkards, and ungodly siners, both in this world, and that which is to come. Do you tremble at such a thought? This is the language of your Ale-house hanting. O what dishonour is this to God, that one that hath been his Servant so many years, should now at last revolt from him, and turn on the Devils side, and to professe to like the Devil better then God; his work, better then Gods; his wages, better then God; hell, better then heaven; the company of Drunkards, better then the society of Saints! For a Christian to turn Drunkard is the worst turn that can be. If you conceive this charge be to heavie, consider, that God makes no difference between drunkards, and the companions of drunkards. Compare, Mat. 24. 44. and Luke 12. 41. To sit, to
eat and drink with the drunkard, is all one with to eat and drink and to be drunken; And the punishment of both is alike; The Lord of that Servant will come in an hour when he looketh not for him, and shall cut him asunder and appoint him his portion with hypocrites: there shall be weep∣ing and gnashing of teeth: So in Prov. 23. 20. 21. Be not among wine bibbers, &c. for the drunkard shall come to poverty. By which it is plain that it is all one to be among wine bibbers, and to be a drunkard; keeping company with wicked men is forbiden as well as wickedness it self. Psal. 1. 1. A godly man, who is the only blessed man, is one that hath no fellowship with the ungodly, Psal. 26. 4. 5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with desemblers, I have hated the Con∣gregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked. Prov. 13. 20. He that walketh with the wise, shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. Psal. 119. 63. I am a compainon to them that fear thee. I need not multiply texts in so plain a case: And do I need to add, how offensive Ale-house hanting is to others? It brings reproach upon professi∣on, it verifies the prophane proverb, a young Saint, an old devil; it gives occasion to the adversary to blaspheme; it rejoyceth the ungod∣ly and hardeneth their hearts, and strengtheneth their hands, that they should not return from their lewd ways. It grieveth the good spirit of God, it makes sad the hearts of those that fear God, it is a sore affliction to your Wise, family, and relations, it impoverisheth your Estate, causeth a neglect of your business and calling, it unfits you for holy duties, though you do not altogether lay them aside. If you regard iniquity in your hearts? God will not hear your pray∣er, he heareth not sinners, that is not such as live in sin; for in prayer we are commanded to lift up holy hands: 1 Tim 2. 8. Lay all these toge∣ther in the ballance of the Sanctuary. Weigh your Actions. Do I well to turn from my Righteousness, and commit Iniquity? Do I well to forsake God the fountain of living water, and to dig to my self bro∣ken Cisterns, that can hold no water? Do I well to grieve the holy spirit, to bring an evil report on the holy ways of God? Do I well to run the hazard of damning my Soul? To encourage sinners in sin, to harden the wicked and offend the godly, to undo Wife, and Children, and make sad the hearts of my friends, will it not be bitterness in the end? I conceive you to be under a sore temptation. The hand of Joa, of Satan is in all this you are discontented and pressed with heavie burdens of debt, and some outward concerments; and the Devil draws you to the Ale-house, as a diversion; and to drive away sorrow. But this a sinister course, a remedy worse then the disease; as to be sure all remedies are of that enemyes prescribing. Will any wise man hearken to the counsel of an enemy? consult but your own reason. Is spending your money, and wasting your time laying aside care of
business, the way to lesson or encrease your debts? If there were no sin in it, it might divert your mind a little for the present. Just like im∣penitent sinners who are convinc'd of the necessity of Repentance; but because Repentance and Godly Sorrow is bitter to the Flesh, they de∣fer and delay from time to time, and singer as Lot did in Sodom, till a shower of Fire and Brimstone overtook them, to their eternal undoing. Be not so unwise as to make light of Eternal Happiness, by giving way to Alehouse mirth and merryment; which is a poor remedy, and to be sorrowed for with bitter tears: Prov. 14. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Now if you will hearken, I will give you advice, and the Lord shall be with you. Repent, and be converted, and return to God, from whom you are deeply revolted; bewail your backsliding, forsake your evil courses; Enter not into the path of the wicked: Prov. 4. 14, 15. Pray, lie at the Throne of Grace, beseech God with importunity, beg pardon for what is past, and Grace to keep you from the path of the destroyer for the time to come. Break off from all ill company. Say as Psal. 119. 15. Depart from me, ye wicked: I will keep the Commandments of my God. It may be said, he that hath drawn you into the snare, will discourage you from recovering your self by Repentance, by telling you, it is too late, your sins are too many and too heinous to be forgiven; but believe him not, he is a lyar, he is a murderer of Souls: Believe the Word of God, the God of Truth, which assures to repenting sinners, that there is hope in Israel; If we confess and forsake our sins we shall find mercy. Prov. 28. 13. Isa. 1. 16, 18. 1 Joh. 1. 7. Psal. 130. 4, 6. I will heal their backsliding. Hos. 14. 4. Jer. 12. This course if you will follow, to set about it without delay, then shall you obtain forgiveness, through the rich mercy of God in Christ. Read and con∣sider well the parable of the prodigal Son, Luke 15. and doubt not of Gods favour and reconciliation; and so the worst and most dangerous of your debts are discharged: And for your Money-debts, you may find a better way of cure for them, than the company of good fellows in an Alehouse. You have secret Prayer, a sweet solace for a Soul in trouble, Psal. 119. 4. you have good Books to read, you have Godly Ministers of the Word; you have Christian Neighbours, whose Society and Counsel you may make use of; you have Wife and Children, to de∣light and recreate your self in their company; you have Friends and Relations not far distant, who are able to give you advice, if you will make known your case unto them, and not smother your grief by re∣serving and locking it up in your own breast, which is not a good way. This is to keep the Devils Counsel, till you sink under your burden with despair. Take need of it. I know your Brother loveth you dear∣ly, and is not so far off, but you may have his help at hand, and assist∣ance.
to manage your Estate, so as to clear all your Debts in a  time; make him of your Counsel, and take his Advice, I am no Coun∣sellor in Worldly affairs: I pray you regard what I say from God con∣cerning your Soul; and let your Brother be of your Counsel, touching your outward Estate. And so I commend you to God, praying that you may duely weigh what I have said, that my Counsels and Reproofs be not as Water spilt on the ground; but rather as good seed falling on good ground, that by Gods Blessing it may bring forth good fruit, even true Repentance in you, and amendment of Life, &c. Your Loving Friend for the Salvation of your Soul; J. H. BEcause I have no Worldly good thing to present you with, I now and then let a word of Spiritual Counsel drop from my Pen. I de∣sire to commend to you one Scripture, which I pray you to meditate on frequently: Deut. 4. 9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently. Is there any thing in this World of equal concernment? If the Soul be safe, all is safe. It shall go well with the Body, if the Soul be saved. If the oul miscarry, we are undone for ever. Shall we be careful of the Health of the Body, and careless of the Immortal Soul? Shall we keep our Money safe, our Lands and Evidences of Estates, and not keep our Hearts diligently? Prov. 4. 23. Let us preserve our Mo∣ney, our Estates as charily as we can, Death will strip us of all; we must carry nothing away with us; no more than we brought with us into the World Naked we came, and naked we must return, as to the Body: But Spiritual treasure, Soul riches will accompany us beyond the Grave to Eternity; Our works shall follow us: i. e. The reward of them. O let us labour to be found in Christ, to be made new▪ crea∣tures, to be rich in good works; for as we sow, so shall we reap. I was hungry, and ye fea me; or, I was hungry, and ye fed me not▪ &c. According to one of these will the doom pass at the great day. Blessed is the servant, whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. At that day an upright heart, a Conscience sprinkled with Christs Blood, a Life full of good Works and Almsdeeds will be more comfortable in the review, than Lands and Lordships, and bags full of Money. et us be wise in time. Let us make to our selves friends of the unrighte∣ous Mammon, that when these things fail, we may be received into everlasting habitations There be dead at London, within twelve Moneths, twelve worthy Ministers of the Gospel; and Judge Hales, that upright Judge, that
scorned to take a bribe, the Honour and oracle of the law, is dead also pray that these deaths of righteous men resage not evil to come. Thus with due respects to you both▪ I commend you to God resting Yours J. H. Losco February 15. 1676. Because I have nothing to write to you about worldly matters, I would give you a word of spiritual advice; which as it is not to me any trouble; so I would hope, it is neither unprofitable, nor unaceptable to you. That which I have thought fit at this time to impart to you is the sinfulness of sin, the danger, and damnation that accompanieth every sin; every disobedience; which without true and sincere repen∣tance, and amendment of life, will be the eternal ruin of the Soul. One actual sin is enough to destroy a man as is apparent in Adam, Lots Wife, Ananias and Saphir a, And many others in scripture; and how much more then will a course of sin, a way of wickedness, as the love of the world, a form of godliness, hypocrisie, an unregenerate estate, if continued in, undo a man everlastingly? Yet how little is this laid to heart? What favourable thoughts do most people entertain of sin? As if it were at light matter, not to be so much dreaded; since Christ died for sin, what need we so much fear to live in it? Seeing God is merciful, why may not we take liberty to live as we list? As if the Son of God came down from Heaven not destroy the works of the Devil; but to establish the Empire of sin, as if God were not as just, as merci∣ful; whose most pure and holy nature can never be reconciled to sin. Sin is the transgression of law. And the great Lawgiver, who is able to save, or destroy, will never suffer sinners to trample on his authority, and cast his Commandments at their heels, and hold them guiltless. Sin provoketh God, the God of patience to anger. And the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against sin in all ages. What strange confusion, and horrid destruction hath sin introduced into the world, it cast thou∣sands of lapsed Angels out of Heaven into the dreadful Tophet, where they are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day. This viper stung our sirst Parents, outed them of Paradise, brought in sorrow, sickness, a thousand diseases, and death into the world, drowned all the Earth with a flood, turned Sodom to ashes, brought on Jerusalem such calamities, as were not inflicted on any Nation un∣der heaven. And which is more, what is it but sin, that kindles the flames of Hell fire and (which yet further declareth the hatefulness of sin) it crucified the Lord Jesus Christ; without shedding whose blood no remis∣sion. How much then is every one concerned to get out of a state of sin▪
to commune with our hearts and trye, if we be converted? And to see, that no iniquity have Dominion over us? Let us Judge our selves, that we be not udged. Make sure our eternal estate, live we not in sin, lest we dye in sin, and be damned for sin; let's follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. We are all in good health, blessed be God, to whom I commit you, and with all due repescts to you both rest Yours &c. J. H. Losco July 24. 1677. WE are all well praised be God, I have nothing of outward matters to present you with, which makes me fill my paper with better things. The going out of the old year should minde us of puting off the old man; and the coming in of the new year, that we put on the new man, that we purge out the old leaven of corruption, that we may be renewed in sincerity and true holiness. We are one year near∣er to our grave, and eternity, then we are the fast year at this time; have we got one years growth in grace? What progress have we made in sanctification, in mortification this year? What corruptions have we subdued? Have we put off our worldly mindness, luke∣warmness, formality in worship? Are we become more holy, humble, hea∣venly, have we added one Cubit to our spiritual stature? It is not un∣likely, but we can tell whether we decline and go backward; or whether we go forward and increase in riches and our outward estate. And the Soul is more excellent, then the body, and grace then gold. Let us take a view of the state of our Souls, and observe what mercies we have received this year; from how many evils and calamities we have been preserved; and sad breaches which have been made upon other families which we and ours have been freed from, that so we may be thankful, and give to God his praise. Let us review our sins of the year past, how many ways we have miscarried and offended God, that so we may be humbled and renew our repentance. How oft have we received the sacrament of the Lords supper? So many obligations we lye under; the vowes of God are upon us, and tyes to better obe∣dience. Thus oft reflecting on our selves is a good way to know our spiritual estates. A Christian should be no stranger to his own heart and state in reference to eternity, self-judging discovers our selves to our selves, encreaseth grace, inlargeth comfort, weakeneth corruption, keepeth peace with God and our own consciences, casteth out sin, pre∣vents mistakes which are dangerous in soul-affairs, prepareth to every good work. If we were, as the Apostle saith. Gal. 6. 14. Crucified  of the earth would affect and
afflict us less, and our hearts would be more above, where our treasure is, or should be. So wishing you a good new year; especially that your souls may prosper, I commit you to God, and with all due respects to you both remembered, I am Yours Truely J. Hieron. Decem. 28. 1676. My very good friend, I Understand that you and your whole family are in great sorrow and heaviness through your Wises miscarriage of a child, and truly I, and our family do grieve with you: for so we are commanded, to weep with them that weep, and be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love. But I pray, be wise and take heed lest you over-grieve, and so offend God by immoderate sorrow, which you may easily do, and so provoke his wrath against you; and bring a heavier cross upon you. Let them that weep be as if they wept not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. If it should please God to make a greater breach among us by taking from any of us a dear friend, we ought to submit to Gods will with patience and silence. As we see in Job, who beside the loss of all his cattle, had all his Children at mans estate taken from him by a violent stroak, yet how religious∣ly he behaved himself, under the hand of God you may read in his story. So let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due time: 1 Pet. 5. 6. What said the prophet to the King of Judah, asking how shall we do for the hundred Talents? The Lord is able to give the much more then this. 2 Chron. 2. 25. 9. Gods hand is not shorten∣ed. He can abundantly recompence a greater loss, then this. But I would not have you too earnestly set your hearts upon any outward blessing, nor too eagerly desire issue; but with submission to Gods will, so far as may be for his glory, and your good and comfort. For though Children are an heritage from the Lord, as it is Psal. 127. 3. that is, when God giveth them in love, and blesseth them; not when he giveth them in anger, as he gave Israel quails Psal. 78. 30, 31▪ and gave to Ephraim Children Hos. 9 13. for the murtherer: Better it is to be barren, then fruitful in Children, that may be crosses to fathers, and heart break∣ings to Mothers by their wickedness Prov. 17. 25. or by the evil of the times. If Popery should come in, or the sword of war should rage in the land, we know not what evil may be in the earth. But such times have been, and we know not what may be, when it shall be said, Blessed are the barren, that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck, Luk. 23. 29. Let me give you wholsome counsel which if God give you hearts to embrace it, will be to your comfort. And it is that
which you find, Lam 3. 9 40. Wherefore doth a living man complaint, a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search, and try our wayes▪ and turn again to the Lord. Leave off grieving for the affliction, and inquire into the cause of it; as Rebekah did being with child, she inquired of the Lord why am I thus? Gen. 25. 22. Go you and do likewise, pray to God as Job. 10. 2. Shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. Search your hearts and ways. Have you wrastled with God, in prayer for the fruit of the womb and for a blessing on it? Have you set up prayer in your family, or neglected it? If not; then have you rob∣bed God of his due; and no marvel, if he deceive you of your expect∣ed comfort. You know, or may know, that family prayer is a duty commanded of God, and put in practise by all Gods people. And those are no Christian families, that do not call upon God; nay, the wrath of God hangs over them Jer. 10. 25. pray turn to all these scriptures, and weigh them well Eph. 6. 18. Luk. 18. 1. Jos. 24. 15. Job 1. 5. Act. 10. 2. Gen. 18. 19. And mark this one Instance, Jsaac had a promise, that his seed should be as the Stars of Heaven for multitude: yet his wife was barren, and without issue Twenty years until he prayed more earnestly, and then Rebekah conceived, and bare twins Gen. 25. 22▪ As blessings are obtained by prayer so are they sanctified, to become blessings in∣deed by prayer, 1 Tim. 4. 5. It is sanctified by the word and prayer. Every creature is so, our meat, our labours, our enjoyments, our re∣lations, are sanctified to us by prayer. Otherwise the curse abides on them Prov. 3. 33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked; Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure: but to them, that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure. These things I pray lay to heart, and resolve to reform and amend whatsoever is amiss; as you would have Gods blessing and favour both here and hereafter. And consider whether this neglect of family-prayer he not the thing, which troubles M. and the grief of it be not the cause of her miscarriage. For I really believe she hath in all other things as much content as her heart can wish a loving Husband, a loving relation, and fulness of all things that the earth affords; but she cannot be satisfied to live in a family, where God is not worshiped, she with Mary in the gospel, having chosen the good part, which shall not be taken from her. Therefore I earnestly desire, she may be gratified in this one request; if you think I speak reason, resolve to put this advise in practise and begin presently, and continue to the end. They that call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved. pray, let this Letter be read to, or by your whole family. So praying God to open▪ your ears, and heats to hearken to the counsel of the word, I leave it and you all, to the blessing of God, and with my love to you all, I rest Your faithful friend I. Hieron. Losco Feb. 21. 1679.
THis is to let you know that your Aunt W. dyed yesterday, after about ten dayes lying sick. Thus we part with our loving Neigh∣bours and Friends, one after another; till Death at length knocketh at our door. And what better use can we make of every such occasion, than to consider our selves, and seriously to mind our own latter end? Let us put this question to our Souls: Soul, art thou ready to depart? Art thou in such a posture as thou wouldst be, to appear befoe the Tribunal of the great Judge? Hast thou on the Wedding garment? Take heed thou be not found naked to thy shame. O, put on the Lord Jesus Christ▪ his Righteousness by Faith to Justification, his Holiness to Sanctification. Every one would have comfort and hope in Death; but then we must lay up a good foundation of it in Life. No man is like to find that treasure at, or after Death, which he never laid up▪ in his Life time: For what a man soweth that shall he certainly reap. He that soweth to the flesh, or to the world, shall reap corruption, damnation eternal. O that we were wise! O that we would consider the end of our wayes! Whither are we going? Heaven or Hell is before us: To which of these doth my present way lead? Resolve this Question ere you sleep; because Time tarries for no Man, Life is uncertain, and upon this mo∣ment depends Eternity. Time is irrevocable: When once it is past, it cannot be recalled; not if you would give thousands of Gold and Silver for one day or hour longer. Let every passing peal you hear ring, every▪ Grave you see opened, preach to you this Doctrine; Be ye also ready. Those to whom those Skulls and Bones you see turned up be∣long, were in their time, as good Men as you perhaps. What we see them to be now, others will see us to be shortly. The fashion of this World passeth away; but Godliness, Grace, Holiness, endureth for ever. Choose with Mary that good part which shall never be taken from you. I know no business of greater weight than this is, therefore I beseech you do not slight it, but lay it to heart. Thus with due re∣spects to you, I rest▪ Yours truly John Hieron. Losco. June 14. 77. THE only intent of this Paper is to give you a word of Spiritual Advice and Direction to carry your self so in this World, that you may be happy for ever in the World to come. You know every one hath a Soul, an Immortal Soul, which must live ternally either in bliss or misery. And every one of us must be careful to save his own Soul. Deut. 4. 9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently. The more precious any thing is, the more careful we are to preserve it, and more fearful to lose it. In this respect the Soul deserves more care,
than all the things in the World besides; for it is infinitely more worth. What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and loose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Saith our blessed Saviour, Matth. 16. 26. Wherefore let my Counsel be acceptable to you, and I will shew you the right way, how you may save your Soul, and be for ever happy; which I shall do in two words. First, Be care∣ful to shun and avoid whatsoever is destructive, and dangerous to the Soul; and that is sin, and sinful lusts. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from flesh∣ly lusts which war against the soul. Dent. 23. 9. Keep thee from every wicked thing. Jer. 44. 4. Oh do not this aominab thing that my soul hates▪ faith the Lord God: For the soul that sinneth shall dye. Ezek. 18. 4 And as you must watch against all sin, so must you flee all occa∣sions and temptations to sin. Beware of ill example: Follow not a mul∣titude to do evil; Exod. 23. 2. for the way to Hell is broad, the gate that leadeth to destruction is wide, and many there be that go in thereat. Take heed of bad company, which are infectios. Shun them as you would shun the Plague: For a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. He that walketh with the wife, (that is the Godly) shall be wise: But a companion of fools (that is, of wicked men) shall be destroyed. Prov. 13. 20. Be not among wine-bibbers. Prov. 23. 20. Come not near the door of an Harlot, or Harlots house. Prov. 5. 8. Blessed is the man, &c. Psal. 1. 1. This is the first part of my Advice, which is the same you are engaged to by the Vow of your Baptism, wherein you renoun∣ced the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and are under a solemn obli∣gation to maintain a continual War against them, as being enemies to your Soul. And if you shall neglect to do it, you would be a forsworn creature. This is a consideration well worthy your laying to heart. In the next place, you must carefully use those means that God hath appointed to work grace and holiness in your heart; for by this we are saved. And without holiness no man shall see the Lord▪ or be happy. Heb. 12. 14. Let sin be the grief and burden of your heart; yea▪ sin original chiefly, as well as actual sins; for we are all born in sin, and Children of wrath by Nature; and must be born again; that so Natu∣ral Corruption, the plague of our heart, may be healed in us by a new birth from Heaven. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. For this you must pray to God earnestly, and with importunity; that he will create in you a new heart; Psal. 51. 10. and work in you a lively Faith, that you may kiss the Son, believe in Jesus. Christ for par∣don of Sin and Salvation. For this end you must diligently and con∣stantly attend on the Word, which is the ordinary means which God hath appointed to beget and increase Faith. Rom. 10. 17. Faith cometh by hearing. Have a care to keep holy the Sabbath day constantly; and no day neglect reading the Scripture: And let fervent Prayer be your
Morning and Evening Sacrifice continually; and pray God to put his fear in your heart, that you may never depart from him. Blessed is the man ta fereth alwaye. Prov. 28. 14. Daily be faithful and diligent in your Calling; he courteous to all men; do evil to none; speak evil of no man live soberly, be temperate in all things. Let the chief care of your heart, and endeavour of your life be to serve and please God; that he may bless you here, and save you hereafter. So God shall have Honour, your Friends Comfort in you, and your Soul be eternally ∣ved; which is the desire of Your true Friend and Lover, John Hieron. Losco June 19. 1680. Thus this Holy Man was taking and making opportunities of doing good to Souls. The conversion, quickning and saving of Souls, was the desire of his Heart, what he earnestly prayed for, and the design of his Sermons, and of his Letters, and of his private Discourse too, and that to the last. As a Kiswoman coming to visit him, (not long before he dyed) and staying all night; when she came into his Chamber to take her leave, after much good Counsel given her, (sayes he,) Are you going? But who came along with you? (She answered,) Her Man. And (Payes he) where is he? I have something to say to him. Then he was told, that the Man was on Horse-back, waiting for his Mistress. He replyed, Call him up. Shall any one come, and lodge a might in my House, and I say nothing to him concerning his Soul? Bid him alight and come to me; for I must speak to him. Thus he shewed his Care for the Soul of a Servant, as well as of the Mistress; his Love to the Soul of a Stranger, as well as to any of his own Kindred. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chapel. A Second Volume of lives of sundry (eminent) persons in this latter agae, in two parts, I. of Divines II. of Nobilicy and Gentry of both Sexes. By Samuel Clark M. A. sometime Pastor of Bennetsink in London. The life and Death of Edmond Staunton D. D. to which is added I. his Treatise of Christain conference II. His Dialogue between a Minister, and a stranger, Octavo. The true Dignity of St. Paul's elder exemplefied in the life of that Reverend, Holy. zealous and faithful Servant, and Minister of Jesus Christ. Mr. Owen Stockton M. A. some∣times follower of Gonvile, and Cjs Colledge in Cambridge, and afterward Preacher of Gods Word t Colchester in Essex. With a Collection of his observations, Experiences and Evidences, recorded by his own hand; to which is added his Funeral Sermon by John Frfax, M. A. sometime Fellow of C. Colledge in Cambridge, and afterward Rector of rking in Sffolk. Invisible Realities demonstrated, in the Holy Life and Triumphant Death of Mr. John Janeway, Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge. By James Janeway Minister of the Gospel. A Narraitive of the Holy Life and happy death of that Reverend faithful, and zealous man of God Minster of the Gospel of JesusChrist, Mr. John Angier many years Pastor of the Church of Christ at Dunton near Manchester, in Lancashire: Wherein are rela∣ted many Passaged that concern his Birth Education his entrance into the Ministry, dis∣charge of his trust therein, and his Death, Octavo▪ A Believers Triumph over Death, exemplified in a relation of the last hours of Dr. Andrews River, and an account of divers other remarkable Instances, being an History of the Comfortable end and dying words of several eminent Men. With other occasi∣onall Passages attending to comfort Christians to the fear of Death, and prepare them for a like happy Change. The Life and death of Mr. To. Wilson Minister of Maidstone in the County of Kent M. A. A True History of the Capivity and Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson a Ministers Wife in New England, wherein is set forth the cruel and Inhumane usage she under went amongst the Heathens for cleven Weeks time, and her delieverance from them. Writ∣ten by her own hand for her private use, and now made publick at the earnest desire of some friends for the benefit of the Afflicted; whereunto is anexed a Sermon of the possibility of Gods forsaking a People that have been near and dear to him preached by Mr. Josph Rowlandson Husband to the said Mrs. Rowlandson, so it being his last Sermon. Carracters of a Godly Man both as more and less grown in grace, By Daniel Burgess Minister of the Gospel, Octavo. Of National Churches their description Institution, use, preservation, danger, Mali∣des and cure partly applyed to England, quarto. Again the Revolt to a Forrain Iurisdiction which would be to England, its Perjury Church R un and slavery in two parts, I. the History of Mans endeavours to Introduce it: II. the Confutation of all pretences for it. Church Concord containing I. A Diswasive from unnecessary Division and Separation, and the real concord of the moderate Independants with the Presbyterians, instanced in ten seeming Differences. II. the Terms necessary for concord among all true Churches and Christians. These three By Richard Baxter Minister of the Gospel. FINIS.
