p3195a 12088514 53805
PRAYERS FOR THE KING; To be used in all Churches, and Cha∣pels immediately before the Prayer of S. Chrysostom, both in the Morning and Evening-Service. during the sicknesse of King Charles the 2d. ¶ The Minister standing up, shall say, BRethren; Although it hath pleas'd Almighty God to be very gracious to these Three Kingdoms, in giving us so good Popes of His Maje∣stie's Recovery from His late dangerous sickness; Ne∣vertheless it is thought fit, that, so long as his weakness shall continue up∣on him, Prayers be made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. Wherefore I be∣seech you, to joyn with me in offering up Sup∣plications at the Throne of the heavenly Grace for the restoring of him to his perfect Health. ¶ Then, all kneeling down, the Minister shall say, REmember not, Lord, our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers. Spare
us, good Lord, space thy people, whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious bloud, and be nor angry with us for ever. Answer. Spare us, good Lord. ¶ Then the Minister shall say, Let us pray. Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. OUr Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen. Minister. O Lord, save thy servant the King. Answer. Who putteth his trust in thee. Minister. Send him help from thy holy place, Answer. And evermore mightily defend him. Minister. Let the enemy have no advantage of him; Answer. Nor the wicked approach to hurt him. Minister. Be unto him, O Lord, a strong tower, Answer. From the face of his Enemy. Minister. O Lord, hear our prayers. Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.
Minister. O Lord, look down from heaven, behold, vi∣sit and relieve thy servant, the King. Look upon him with the eyes of thy mercy, give him comfort and sure confidence in thee, defend him from the danger of the enemy, and keep him in perpetual peace and safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. HEar us, Almighty and most merciful God and Saviour; Extend thy accustomed goodness to thy servant who is grieved with sickness. Sanctifie, we beseech thee, this thy fatherly correction to him; that the sense of his weakness may add strength to his faith, and se∣riousness to his repentance: That if it shall be thy good pleasure to restore him to his former health, he may lead the residue of his life in thy fear, and to thy glory: or else give him grace so to take thy visitation, that after this painful life ended, he may dwell with thee in life ever∣lasting, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ALmighty everliving God, maker of man∣kind, who dost correct those whom thou dost love, and chastise every one whom thou dost receive; We beseech thee to have mercy upon thy servant visited with thine hand, and to grant that he may take his sickness patiently, and recover his bodily health (if it be thy gra∣cious will) and whensoever his soul shall depart from the body, it may be without spot presented unto thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Saviour of the world, who by thy Cross and precious bloud hast redeemed us, save us and help us, we humbly beseech thee, O Lord.
THe Almighty Lord, who is a most strong tower to all them that put their trust in him, to whom all things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth do bowe and obey, be now, and ever more his defence, and make him know and feel, that there is none other name under heaven given to man, in whom, and through whom he may receive health and salvation, but onely the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen. UNto Gods gracious mercy and protection we commit him. The Lord bless him, and keep him. The Lord make his face to shine upon him, and be gracious unto him. The Lord lift up his countenance upon him, and give him peace, both now and evermore. Amen. London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Febr. 4. 1684.
