R1025 R2663 12266345 58094
A REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION TOUCHING The Re-Establishing and Sitting of the Parliament at Westminster; And the proclaiming thereof on Saturday last, by the several Regiments of Horse and Foot, at their Rendezvouz in Lincolns-Inne Fields. With the Names of the Honorable Members of Parliament that have secured the Tower of London; And the Resolve of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Council at Guild-Hall, in the Name and behalf of the Citizens: As also the Names of the New Colore's. Published by Special Command, for general Satisfaction of the Nation. London, Printed for Nathaniel Williamson, 1659.
RESOLVES FOR Good Government; And a Crown for England, in∣stead of a Cross. A Tyrants Test, and a good Magistrates Pourtraiture, are worthy our contemplation in these froward times; in the one, we may read what our condition had been through God's most righteous severity: had he not graciously interposed in the other what our condition is, and may expect to be through his meer mercy so interposing. Ty∣ranny makes Earth a Hell, and a Tyrant is a Devil incarnate. Just Government, is a Crown to the People, instead of a Cross, and makes Heaven on Earth. Bad Government, is Hell broke loose, where all would rule, and none be ruled; every mans lust would be every mans law; his wants measured by his will, and his de∣serts by his desires, which would render men Furies in flesh, and daily Tormenters to themselves and others; and therefore a Parliamentary Government, the onely Remedy, for the Peoples Malady: For note, Usurpers Tyranny is a Complication of Ini∣quity; whereby Men (being Gods in power) become Devils in practise to terrifie & torture all that withstand them in their wic∣ked Actions. The tender mercies of Tyrants are cruel; for he is
a Devil in heart, though a Man in shape; a Lyon in power, and a Bear in practise: From which Good Lord deliver Us. And may we not conclude, that the good Hand of Providence, and the Christian Care, indefatigable pains, and unwearied La∣bours, of the never to be forgotten Members of the famous long Parliament, hath opened the mouthes of Many Saints of diffe∣rent apprehensions, agreeing together as one man, with one Heart and Lip, in prayers and prises to God, for the happy and timely restauration of them, to the Exercise of the great Trust reposed in Them by the people, in these perilous dayes of trou∣ble and desolation, when the Sword began to rage, and many Exorbitant Spirits endeavouted to raise themselves by the ruine of others. But as God is pleased to divert and lay low the De∣signs of the Haughty, so he raises and lifts up the Hearts of the Lowly: as the lower the Ebbe, the higher the Tide; so his Hu∣miliation shall not exceed his Exaltation, he looks not so much upon his fine Feahers, as his foul Feet, which is ballace to his Bottom, and prevents the danger of his Broad Sails, in the swel∣ling and surging Seas of outward pomp and greatness. Righte∣ousness is the way to Riches; Goodness makes men glorious: May the Wisdom of Slomon possess and render our Represen∣tatives more glorious, than all the glittering and golden Dia∣dems either of the greaest Princes or Potentates. The Order of Nature is inverted, when vie men are exalted. It is a foul Incongruity, and of very evil consequence, when English men shall turn Apostates; of which we have had both sad and woful Experience, especially in these latter Times. But the good Hand of Providence having in a most high and wonderful manner appeared in the Issue of these late Chan∣ges Oveturnings, Mutations, and Confusions; and in the midst of our great Fears, Dangers, and Calamities, miraculously to work and point out a signal Deliverance for these distracted languishing, and, woful afflicted Nations; by raising up some no∣ble and faithful Patriots, true spirited English men, and renow∣ned Assertors of the peoples Rights, Liberties, and Freedoms, standing up in this great Day of Englands Tryal and Trouble, even in the very Gap and Gulph of Desolation threatning the inevitable uine of many Thousands, who desired nothing
more then a true settlement of the publique peace, upon a firm Basis, and irremovable Foundation, of Truth and Righteous∣ness, and to preserve a good Conscience, in casting off these ig∣nominious Reproaches, of breach of Faith to their Representa∣tives. And thereupon divers Honourable Members of Parliament, being spirited to stand firm for the Interest of this Common∣wealth, (being warranted in their present actings, by especial Commission and Authority from the Council of State) unani∣mously declared their Resolutions and Concurrence, to hazard All, even Lives and Fortunes, for restoring of the Parliament and People to their ancient Rights, and undoubted Freedoms: In pursuance whereof, it pleased God to raise up Deliverers, both by Sea and Land, having by admirable providence put an opportunity into the hands of General Monck, a most able and experienced Commander of the Parliaments Army; Vice-Ad∣miral Lawson, Commander in chief of the Fleet under his im∣mediate Conduct; and Colonel Whetham, Governour of Ports∣mouth; whose Actions and Undertakings have been so Hone-and Honourable, as that they have given an absolute Check to the Exorbitances of such who have betray'd their Trust, & wal∣ked contrary to the Light of Knowledge, in these late and glo∣rious Dispensations, and so to become Instruments of some mens ambitions, by making the good people of England their Enemies, and exposing the Nation again to the hazard of a new War and intestine Troubles. But blessed be God, these Clouds are extinguishing, and the black Vizards of these dark and obscure Tyrannical Streams, be∣gin to run and center in their proper Current: For, not onely Colonel Riches Regiment of Horse have deserted the Army, and returned to their former duty of obedience to the Parlia∣ment, but also some of Colonel Berry's Regiment of Horse, in all Nine Troops; and several Companies of Companies of Colonel Lago's Regiment of Foot are gone into Portsmouth, marching with Drums beating, and olours flying, where they declared for the Parliament, and their Resoluions (by the help of GOD) to stand by and assist them with their Lives and For∣tunes, and to hazard all that is near and dear unto them, in de∣fence
of the Parliament, and the security, service, and peace of this Commonwealth. Upon the coming in of the said Nine Troops, and five Com∣panies of Foot, Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, Colonel Morley, Col. Walton, and Colonel Whetham (the Governour) sent out a party of Horse and Foot to make a discovery of the remainder part of the Army; and having good intelligence amongst them, and of their motion, upon their approach near, it pleased God the whole party came in, some few Officers onely excepted; so that the Siege was raised, and the Town at liberty, without a drop of bloud. The Town is very strong, and the Souldiery unanimous, Sir Arthur, and Col. Morley having behaved themselves very gal∣lanly. This Western Brigade being so providentially reduced to the Obdience of Parliament, 'tis said, that several Regiments of Horse and Foot are upon their march from Portsmouth toward London under the Conduct of Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and other faithful Commanders; and that there are four Troops of Horse, and four Companies of Foot raised in the Isle of Wight, for the service of the Parliament: bsides, it is ascertain'd, that two Troops of Horse, and two Companies of Foot in the said Island, have also revolted from the Army; and likewise Carisbrook Castle Hurst Castle, and all the rest of the Castles thereabouts, except Cowes Castle, which is blocked up, and a speedy reduce∣ment thereof is suddainly expected. For the carrying on of this great Work so happily begun, and for a timely deliverance of these almost destroyed Nations, it is the Duty of every English man to assist, that Posterity may be happy under a Succession of Parliamentary Authority, derived from a Civil, rather than a Military Foundation, from whence floweth nothing but unlimited and arbitrary streams. In or∣der whereunto, a Letter hath been sent from Sir Arthur Hasil∣rigg, and the rest of the Parliaments Commissioners at Ports∣mouth, to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London desiring them to con∣tribute their aid and assistance, for restoring of the Parliament, and setling the ancient Rights, Charters, Liberties, and Funda∣mental priviledges of these Ntions.
In pursuance whereof, Vice-admiral Lawson hath also repre∣sented to his Lordship, the state of affairs with the Fleet, impor∣ting, That they were resolved (through the Lords assistance) to stand to their Declaration, and with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, to endeavour the Re-establishment of the Parlia∣ment, interrupted the 13th of October, 1659. to the Exercise of their Trust: Not doubting, but to find the assistance and concur∣rence both of them and others, in this Undertaking and Reso∣lution: And in confidence of their Complyance herein, he assures them of all assistance for the advancement of the Trade, Free∣dom and Safety of the City in particular, and the Nation in ge∣neral. Hereupon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Coun∣cil, assembled at Guild-Hall, London, on Thursday the Two and Twentieth of this instant December; where, after reading of the said Letters, a Committee of Safety was chose, who are forth∣with to consider thereof, and to return an answer unto Vice-admiral Lawson: as also unto that which came from the Com∣missioners at Portsmouth. The said Committee is also appointed to consider of setling the Militia of the City, to the end, that the peace and safety ther∣of may be inviolably preserved, and the Exorbitancies of all per∣sons whatsoever (for the future) prevented. Which will be the onely means (under God) to prevent Confusions and Desola∣tions, the sad Companions of Civil Discords, and to establish Peace and Truth throughout Her Confines. Guild-Hall, London, Decemb. 23. This day the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, resumed the debate of setling the Militia of the City, and re∣solved upon severall Officers of approved Trust and Fidelity, there being a singular choice, by free Election, of such Gentle∣men, and persons of quality, as do, and with God's assistance will always adhere to their former principles and Declarations, in the use of all lawful means for the maintainance of the true Re∣formed Protestant Religion, the support of a setled lawful Ma∣gistracy,
the preservation of a learned pious Ministry, the re∣storing of the ancient Fundamental Laws of the Nation, and the just Rights, Properties, and Liberties of the people. The names of the new Colonels chose for the Militia, are, Alderman Ro∣binson, Ald. Tomson, Ald. Bateman, Col. Gower, and some others. Since the Revolt of the Western Army, and the advance of Sir Arthur from Portsmouth towards London, Col. Packers Re∣giment of Horse, Col. Okeys, and Col. Hewsons Reg. of Foot, with the Lord Fleetwood, and the Lord Lamberts Regiments, & the rest of the Forces in the City, have also declared for the Par∣liament, who on Saturday last rendezvouzed in Lincolns Inne fields, where Col. Okey headed them, divers of their chief Offi∣cers dissenting: Col. Allured had the conduct of Packers Re∣giment of Horse; and upon their march down Chancery Lane, they yielded Obedience to the Speaker, owning the Authority of the Parliament of England. After which, the Right Hono∣rable Mr. Speaker, accompanied by Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Mr. Weaver, and Mr. Josias Bernard, Esquires, Members of Par∣liament, went to the Tower, and demanded the Keyes of the Lieutenant, which accordingly was delivered; and having com∣mitted the Trust thereof to the aforesaid Gentlemen, till the further pleasure of the House be known He returned, giving the Souldiery a great sum of Moneys, who received him with great acclamations and anthems of Joy. Col. Hewson (we hear) hath made his Recantation, and taken his Farewl of the City: divers others are also fled; A fair riddance. Sir Arthur is expected this present Monday, and the Parliament will assem∣ble at Westminster very suddainly. FINIS.
