R774 R3393 11880901 50330
prisoner flanked by two guards with axes on a cart drawn by three horses, whose reins are held by a man wielding a whip; at lower left, another prisoner, his brother, chained to back of cart by the neck; at upper right, inset portrait of the rebel Stepan Razin RAZIN the Rebell his Brother
A RELATION Concerning the Particulars of the REBELLION Lately raised in MUSCOVY BY Stenko Razin; Its Rise, Progress, and Stop; together with the manner of taking that REBEL, the Sentence of Death passed upon him, and the Execution of the same. Published by Authority. In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1672.
A RELATION Concerning the Particulars of the Re∣bellion lately raised in Muscovy by Stenko Razin. THere are two sorts of Cosacks, some are call'd Saporogsky, and others Donsky. The former do from antient times belong to the Dominions of the King of Poland, and have their ordinary abode in the Isles of the River Borysthenes or Nieper. At a good distance from the Town Kiof, in the same River, is to be found a Rock, from which the Water falling with great violence, maketh above Fifty Isles; and this Rock, whence the Water falls, is called Poroch, and giveth to those Cosacks, which are seated in those Isles that lie behinde the Poroch, the name of Saporogsky. Their business is, to be watchful against the Incursions of the Tartars, and other enemies of the Kingdom of Poland. The Name of Cosack is said to be derived from the Sclavonian word Cosa, which signifieth Spirit; and it is thought, that that name was given to that people by reason of their Agility or Nimbleness. The Donsky-Cosacks are those that have their habi∣tation upon the famous River Don, antiently called
Tanais, and belong to the Czar or Emperor of Muscovy and Russia, to whom they yield a voluntary, rather than a compelled obedience. They are by the said Czar endowed with many Priviledges, enjoying their own Laws, and chusing their own Governor. They have so great Priviledges, that if any Slave run away from a Russian Nobleman or other great Person, and come unto these Cosacks, the Proprietors loose their claim to them. Of these Donsky-Cosacks was Stenko Razin, the Per∣son that four years since rose up in Rebellion against the great Czar Alexis Michalowitz. The reason or rather pretence of that Insurrection was, the death of the said Razin's Brother, inflicted by the Bojar Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek. For in the year 1665. he was with an Army in the Field, about the Town Kiof, against the Polanders, having under him, among others, a Troup of Donsky-Cosacks. Autumn being come in, and that Troup esteeming to have done good service against the enemy, desired to be dismissed by the said Com∣mander Dolgeroek, who possibly standing yet in need of their service, would not consent to it. Where∣upon these Cosacks, unwilling to hearken to the com∣mand of their General; but following the perswasi∣ons and example of their chief Officer, which was the Brother of Stenko Razin, did disband, and went every one to his home. Dolgeroek being extreamly offended thereat, gave order, that this Ring-Leader should be taken; which being done, he commanded him presently to be hanged. This is the cause, pretended by Razin, when he was upon the Rack, of his raising this Rebellion, to re∣venge the death of his Brother, innocently executed,
as he understood it. But that this was but a meer pre∣text, is sufficiently apparent, in regard that this Insur∣rection was made not onely against the Czar, but also against the King of Persia, from whom he never could alledge to have received any injury. So that nothing but his malicious, and rebellious temper, hath impel∣led him to this infamous undertaking. The beginning of his villanous attempt was, his robbery upon the River Volga, An. 1667, where he took several great Boats laden with Commodities, belonging partly to Cloisters and Ecclesiasticks, part∣ly to private Merchants of Jereslaf, Wologda, and other places. Thence he went to the Town Jayck, which he took by force, assisted by his Cosacks. Soon after he proceeded to the Caspian Sea; and from thence he returned to the Volga, where he did great mischief in giving interruption to Fishing, and in ruining many Houses. Thence he marched to the Town Teock, and further to the Frontiers of Persia, where he did great damage to the Subjects, both of the great Czar of Muscovy, and the Chach of Persia. The Inhabitants of a certain small Persian Town, be∣ing informed of his approach, betook themselves to a Neighboring Fort for security. Whereupon Stenko sent them word, that they had no reason to fear, and invited them to return, assuring them, That he and his Men were not come to do them any hurt, but for Money to buy Provision, and other Necessaries for his Troups. They came back with great confidence to their Town, and opened their Shops, where Stenko and his Soldiers bought what they needed, and paid for what they bought that time; but afterwards he gave a sign to his Cosacks, that passing over the Market∣place,
when he should put his Cap into a certain posture, they should fall upon and kill all the Inhabi∣tants; which was executed accordingly, and practi∣sed in several other places upon the Borders of Persia. To stop these cruel actions, the Kneas Jwan Simo∣newitz, then Waywode or Governor of Astracan sent some Troups against him. Whereupon Stenko, finding himself too weak, and apprehending a bad issue, asked pardon; to which, the said Governor returned this an∣swer, That if he would desist from his violence and robbery, he doubted not but the great Czar would shew him Mercy. He came with his companions to Astracan, almost all sick and swelled, because having been a little before, upon a certain Island in the Caspian Sea, beset by the Persians, they had been necessitated to drink Salt-water. And he at length received par∣don from the Czar for his crimes, and promised, That he and his Company would henceforth serve him with all faithfulness, nor exercise any robbery on the Volga, or the Caspian Sea, or elswhere. Stenko being recovered, shewed his generosity to the Inhabitants of Astracan. For as he was walking thorough the Streets, he scattered among the people store of Ducats and other Coyn he had robbed, and thereby was applauded by all; which then sufficiently manifested his aim. And so he, with his associates, went away to their own Countrey about the River Don; where he began to act afresh his villainy in Ec∣clesiastical Matters, driving away many Priests, and hindring Divine Service, and intruding himself into Church affairs. For a pattern of the glorious Cere∣monies, which this Cosack-Pope introduced, take this,
that instead of the usual Ceremonies of Marriage per∣formed by the Priests in Russia, he made the contract∣ed couple to goe several times round about a Tree dancing, and thus they were married after Stenko's mode. He also cast out blasphemous words against the Saviour of the World; and scrupled not forth∣with to break that Oath of Fidelity, which a little be∣fore he had sworn to the Great Czar; and put to death divers ancient Cossacks, that had more integri∣ty than to combine with him in his rebellion. The like he acted upon the Waywode of the same place, and up∣on those that had been sent by the Czar with Letters of Grace and Pardon, and others. From the River Don he return'd to the Volga, toge∣ther with his Associats, and came to the Town Saret∣za, where he perswaded the Inhabitants, that the Ar∣my of the Great Czar was at hand to put them all to death; whereas on the contrary that Army was come to assist them against Stenko: and thus the Town was surrendred to him; and he having made his en∣try, killed the Commander and all the Citizens that refused to joyn with him. He marched out again to meet the Army of the Czar; which he defeated, ta∣king and putting to death the General, with many o∣thers. He took also the Town Sionejaer; where he put to the Sword the Governour, all the Officers, and many Muscovian soldiers. Thence he marched to the City of Astracan, seated at the mouth of the River Volga, not far from the Caspian Sea, walled about, and having in compass more than two miles. The Suburbs lying round about it, are most of them bare, and exposed to the incursion of any Enemy. Some years since was this
Town possessed by the Tartars, from whom it was ta∣ken by the Czar Jwan Waselowitz, An. 1553. About it grows no Grain at all, but 'tis provided from above. It is rich chiefly in Salt and Fish; the Caspian Sea fur∣nishing the people, living on that shore, with store of Salt water, of which they make whole mountains of Salt. And the Volga about Astracan abounds in Fish above all Rivers. There they catch those great Fishes, Ossotrina, Belouga, some of the latter being three fa∣thoms long, one of which can hardly be carried by thirty men. In Astracan is great Commerce, managed by forrain Nations, Persians, Indians, Boucharen, Ar∣menians, and others, it hath for its ordinary Garison Twelve thousand Soldiers. Stenko Razin coming to this City, sent some of his Cossacks into it, to stirre up the Soldiers against the Governor; which wrought so well, that it was concluded the Town should be deliver'd to him, and he received into it: which was executed according to his wish. Kneas Jwan Semenof Prosorofskie, being at Church, in the midst of Divine Service was thence pull'd away, and made to goe up that high square Steeple, which stands in the midst of the Castle of Astracan, for a Beacon to direct those that Navigate the Caspian Sea, or travel in the vast and little frequented fields called Steep. From this Steeple the said Governor was cast down head-long. 'Tis said, that Stenko a little before whisper'd him something in his ear, at which he shook his head, being doubtless tempted by this Traytor to take his part, which the Kneas refusing to doe, was forced to make this high and Tragical leap. Stenko Razin immediately hereupon committed great slaughter and robbing. The Brother of the Governor,
and many Noble-men and others, that would not come in to him, he put to the sword, as also many Dutch and other Officers, and some Holland Mari∣ners, which though they run into the Caspian Sea, yet are said to have been fetcht back and killed. Colonel Thomas Bely, and Lieutenant-Colonel Jacob Wanderow, and others, were put to the Sword, being in Arms up∣on the walls of the Town. The Churches, Cloisters, and the Houses of the richest Citizens were plunder'd; the Writings of the Chancery burnt, the Czar's Trea∣sure of the Kingdom of Astracan carried away, many Merchants strangers, being there at that time, as Per∣sians, Indians, Turks, Arminians, and others, were put to death with the rest: both the Sons of the Go∣vernour Prosorofskie he caused to be hung up by the Legs upon the Walls of the Town, and to be taken down again, putting one of them, after much torture, to death, and causing the other to be beaten half dead, and so carried to the Metropolitan. His Lady and Daughters he delivered to the Soldiers, his Compa∣nions, to take them for their Wives, or, if they pleas∣ed to abuse them. This taking of Astracan happen'd Ju∣ly 28. 1670. After this, Stenko marched to Tzaretsa, and thence to Tzarataf, which were also deliver'd to him, and the Governors of them put to death, together with many Noble men; and the Treasure carried away. The like happen'd to the Town Tzamatof; from whence Stenko went to the Town Simbierske, which he besieged, took by storm, and burnt to ashes, af∣ter he had lost a great part of his Cossacks before the Castle of that place. The Governor of it was the Lord
Jwan Bochdaenwitz Micoslafsky, who with extraordi∣nary courage defended it against this Traytor: so that Stenko, conquerour of all the places upon the Volga, was stop'd here from going further; without which he was resolved to have marched to the Royal City Casan, not far distant from Simbierske. Although Stenko was now hindred to pass further, as being beaten, and wounded himself, insomuch that he was constrained to return to his Astracan-Quar∣ters, yet did he much mischief in Russia by his Emissa∣ries, who here and there stirr'd up the people to insur∣rection. In Galitz the fire began, but was soon quench∣ed. About the Town Oestiga some of those Emissaries were caught, taken, and hanged. Every where he pro∣mised Liberty, and a redemption from the Yoak (so he call'd it) of the Bojars or Nobles, which he said were the oppressors of the Countrey; In Mosko it self, men began to speak openly in his praise, as if he were a person that sought the publick good and the liberty of the people; for which cause the Great Czar was necessitated to make a publick example of some, to deterr the rest. A certain aged man being asked, what should be done in case that Stenko should approach to the City of Mosko, answered, that the people should goe and meet him with Bread and Salt, which among the Russians is a token of Love and Friendship. For which this man was taken and hanged. About the same time, there was brought into the same City, one of the principal Associats of Stenko, that had undertaken to debauch the people up and down in the Countrey from their obedi∣ence:
but he had his due reward; for one of his Arms, and one of his Legs were cut off, and he presently hanged on the Gallows. All sorts of imaginable mischievous devices were set on foot by Stenko to ruine the Russian Empire, and to seduce the common people. Amongst other Artifices, he had prepared two ships, one of which was lined within round about with Red Velvet; and he gave out, that in it was the Lord Czarawitz, of Glorious memory, Alexis Alexewitz, the Great Czar's eldest Son; who yet in the year 1670. on the 17th of January in the presence of his Father, in the Pallace of Mosko, departed this life, and the next day was buried in the Metropolitan Church of S. Michel. Stenko boldly pretended, that this Prince was yet alive, and with him. And to colour this lye the better, he kept in the said ship a Youth of about 16 years of age, descended of one of the Peregorsky Circassian Princes, whom Stenko in his former depre∣dations had taken prisoner: which young Prince hath received the Great Czar's pardon, because he was compelled to act such a person; and he is still in Mosko, at the house of Kneas Jacob Codonietewitz a Circassian. And to drive on these devices, he spred abroad, that this Lord Czarawitz had made an escape from the vi∣olent hands of the Bojars and great Lords, and taken his refuge to him; adding, that he, Stenko, was come by order of the Great Czar to put to death all the Bo∣jars, Nobles, Senators, and other great ones, (that were too near to his Majesty,) as Enemies and Tray∣tors of their Countrey. By these base practises invent∣ed and push't on by Stenko, the ignorant people was inflamed to fight furiously, and those of them that
were taken prisoners underwent death with a won∣derful resolution, as being possessed with the perswa∣sion of dying for a good cause. At Smolensko was hanged a certain person, who said, that he died upon having seen with Stenko the Prince Czarawitz, whereas he saw but a counterfeit one. The other ship, that Stenko had, was lined with Black Velvet, and he gave out, that there was in it the late Patriarch Nikow, who in the year 1666. was, upon the Condemnation passed by the Patriarchs of Alexandria and of Antioch, by his Majesty, the Great Czar, deposed from his Dignity, and sent to the Mo∣nastery of Belooser, where he is yet at this day. By these Arts Stenko had so far advanced his design that the whole Tract of Land about the Volga and far∣ther up into the Countrey was engaged in this rebel∣lion, as far as to the Towns Accateur and Arsa: And the number of the Rebels was augmented to two hun∣dred thousand, and part of the Czernische Tartars, and all the Ruffian Countrey-men living in this Tract, and belonging to Muscovian Lords, rose up against their Governors killing and hanging them; and the fire of this Rebellion gained at length so much ground, that it began to burn not above twelve miles from Mosko it self. Hereupon the Great Czar raised a great Army, and under the conduct of the Noble Kneas Jurge Alexewitz Dolgeroek sent it, about the end of September, against the Enemy, of whom he met a party of Fifteen thou∣sand men, who though they fought resolutely and rallied three times, yet were at length beaten and put to slight, very many remaining dead upon the place,
and a great number being taken, who were immedi∣ately executed. Six Field pieces fell into the hands of Dolgeroek; who encamped under the Town Arsa∣mas, where he exercised severe judgment upon these Rebels. The place was terrible to behold, and had the resemblance of the Suburbs of Hell. Round a∣bout it were Gallows, each of which was loaded with Forty or fifty Men. In another place lay many Beheaded and covered with Blood. Here and there stood some impaled, whereof not a few lived unto the third day, and were heard to speak. Within the space of Three Moneths, there were by the Hands of Executioners put to death Eleven thousand Men, in a legal way, upon the hearing of Witnesses. Dolgeroek himself remaining upon the place of Judg∣ment, sent his Army out by Parties, that found out, defeated, and dispersed Stenko's forces. It was of great importance to Russia, and a great Mercy of God, that the Rebels lay here and there divided; as also, that they could not agree amongst themselves, about the Supream Command. For if this power of the Rebels, consisting of Two hundred thousand Men, had been united and unanimous, it would have been difficult for the Forces of the Czar to have resisted and mastered the same. The German Officers were highly applauded by His Majesty, for having acquitted themselves so well in leading on their Men. The most resolute of the Re∣bels, were those of the small Towns of Lisko and Mo∣rasko, who had more than once attempted to take by storm the Cloister of Macariof, and lost a great number of Men before it, taking it at last by the treachery of a Jew, and putting to death all the Monks that were
found in it, and carrying away a rich prey, because the people living thereabout had carried their Goods thither for security. Morasko held out; but those of Lisko rendred themselves in good time, and delivered Thirty of the Rebellious Cosacks, together with a Nephew of Stenko Razin, and so they were pardoned. Amongst the Prisoners, there was brought to Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek a Nun in Man's habit, put over her Monastical dress. This Nun had commanded Seven thousand Men, and done bravely in this War, till she was taken prisoner. There appeared not any altera∣tion in her, nor any fear of death, when the Sentence of being Burnt alive was pronounced against her. Amongst the Russians the deserting of a Monastery, is esteemed a black and capital crime. A little before she died, she wished that many more had behaved themselves, and fought as couragiously as she had done; that then certainly Kneas Jurge would have found his best safety in his heels. Being now to die, she signed herself after the Russi∣an manner, with the cross on her forehead and brest, and so laid her self quietly down upon the Pile, and was burnt to Ashes. There was also brought to Judgment, one of Stenko Razin's Confederates, and his best Counsellor, who had been his right hand. His Arms and Legs were cut off, and so he was Beheaded and Hanged. The Prisoners were commonly put upon the Rack, and being examined, what they designed in this Re∣bellion; they answered, That they intended for Mosco, and would have the lives of the Nobles, and other great ones, Their word was Not'schay, that is
to say, Ʋnexpected; intimating, That the Czarawitz Alexis Alexewitz was come as it were from Heaven, besides their expectation. Thus hath Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek in the space of Three Moneths made an end of this Rebellion, in the Quarters about the River Don; but in other places the Fire was not yet extinguished, when the Czar called him back with his Army. Mean time Kneas Constantine Czarbatof was by His Majesty commanded to march towards Taneboef, there to subdue the Rebels of those parts; which also by the assistance of God was effected. So that all the Disquieted and Rebellious Countreys have been, by Hanging, Burning, Beheading, Slaughtering (besides the Eleven thousand Executed by the Hands of Hangmen,) and by killing in the Field above an Hundred thousand Men, reduced to their former obedience. But to return to Stenko Razin; after that he had been routed about Simbierske, and was retired down∣wards, he chose a freer Air for his abode, and remain∣ed for a while in the Wilderness of Steep, leaving to one of his Confederates, call'd Sjorte-Ous, that is the Divels Knuckle, the command of Astracan: Stenko in the mean time, wandring up and down, until at length by the Captain Cornelius Jacolowitz, and those of the Donsky-Cosacks that had remained faithful to the Czar, he was secured and brought into Mosco. This Corne∣lius Jacolowitz was God-father to Stenko, and always honored by him, as if he had been his Father; whence he never in the least imagined, that that per∣son should contrive any mischief against him. But he
that was so perfidious to his Prince, deserved no better recompence. He was laid hold on about Tzarietza, and carried that long way of Two hundred Miles to Mosco, en∣tertained all along with the hopes, that he should speak with the Great Czar himself, and before him, by word of Mouth, plead his own cause, he always imagining, that he had many things to say, very im∣portant for the Czar to know. His Brother Frolko was extreamly sad on the way, and, it seems, of a better nature than Stenko, whom he charged with all he had done. And Stenko seeing his Brother at a certain time more than usually troubled, comforted him by representing, that coming into the City of Mosco, they should receive great honor, thousands of people, and the greatest of the Land being (doubtless) ready to meet, and to see them. Stenko coming within a mile of Mosco, the Waggon met him that had been made to bring him into the City according to his deserts. In the hind-part of it was erected the Gallows; himself was stripped of his Silken habit, which he had worn hitherto, and an old ragged Sute put upon him; and so he was placed in the Waggon under the Gallows, with an Iron-Chain about his Neck, fastned to the top of the same. Both his hands were locked fast to the Side-beams of the Gallows, and his Legs divaricated. His Brother Frolko was with an Iron-Chain fastned to the Wag∣gon, and went a foot on the side of it. Thus entred Stenko with his Brother into the City of Mosco, Thousands of People, of great and mean condition, beholding them, and so fulfilling his Pro∣phesie
of the honor he should have in entring this Town. And though he comforted his Brother with this honor, yet himself standing in the Waggon look∣ed on no body, but held his Face continually down∣ward. They were both put to the torture, but what they there confessed, is not well known; onely that Stenko did very much lament the death of his Brother, who by the command of Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek had former∣ly been hanged. His Brother Frolko behaving himself most pittifully under the torture, Stenko went about to comfort him again, and said, That he must remember the good things he had enjoyed; that he had lived so long among his Friends with great credit and reputation, and had commanded thousands; and therefore he was now to bear this hard fortune with patience. The Russes use this manner of Torture; they shave the Crown of the Head of a Malefactor, and drop cold Water upon it, which they say causeth very great pain. It is related, That when the Crown of Stenko, and his Brother was shaved, Stenko said to his Brother, I have often heard, that none is shaved for a Priest, but he must be Learned; we are both un∣learned, and yet they do us the honor of shaving our Crown. Four days after that he was brought in, he was with his Brother carried to the place of Execution in the Cittadel. The Sentence of Death was read be∣fore him, wherein were expressed the Principal Vil∣lanies he had committed. He seemed not at all concerned, and spoke not a word, but stooped. And when the Executioner was going to do his office, he
crossed himself several times, directing his face to∣wards a certain Church, called Pretsietse Bogorodietse Casaneche; that is, The most Holy Mother of God of Casan. And thereupon he bowed his head thrice to∣wards three several places of the people assembled, saying, Prostie, that is, Forgive me. And presently he was laid down between two Beams, and his Right Arm cut off to the Elbow, and his Left Leg to the Knee. After this, his Head was cut off with an Hatchet: All which was done with great speed in a very short time; and Stenko gave not the least sigh, nor shewed any sign of sense. His Brother coming to the place of Execution, cry∣ed out, That he had the Czar's word; a manner of ex∣pression, when a person hath any secret to reveal, which is to be manifested to none, but to the great Czar alone. Being asked what it was, he said, It was to be told to none but to the Czar. Whereupon he was reprieved; and they say, That he hath discovered the place of the Treasure digged under Ground by his Brother Stenko. This was the end of Stenko Razin; his Deputy Sjorte-Ous whom he had left to command in Astracan, is said to have raised new commotions; putting to Death the Metropolite, and others that are contrary to his design. God Almighty give to the great Czar, Alexis Michaelewitz, the Victory over all his Enemies. Arch. Angel, Sept. 23/23. 1671. on Board of the Ship, the Queen Esther.
The Sentence of Death read before STENKO RAZIN, on the Place of Execution. June 6. 1671. THou Villain and Renegado Rebel Donsky-Cosack Stenko Razin, in the year 7175 alias 1667. aban∣doning the fear of God, and for∣getting thy Duty and Oath, where∣by thou art bound to His Majesty the great Czar Alexis Michaelowitz, Emperor and Defendor of the Greater and Lesser, and the White Russia, hast Rebelled against His said Majesty; and having raised other Cosacks, hast marched with them to the River Volga, there to act thy Vil∣lainous Designs: And coming there, thou hast done great mischief to much people, taking the Nasaisky great Boats, laden with Salt-fish and Salt, belonging to the Patriarch, Cloysters, and others: As also the Boats of many Merchants: Which Violence and Robbery, thou hast acted as far as to the very Walls of Astracan.
Again, Thou Villain, hast, betwixt Astracan and the Sorneiner, Robbed, Killed, and Thrown into the Water, the Waywood of the great Czar, Simon Bellemisch, who was sent to speak with thee. The like villainy thou hast commit∣ted upon the Muscovian Officer Susover, that was likewise dispatched to thee for the same end. When out of Astracan to the Town Jayck were sent a Waywood, and two Russian Colo∣nels, with some Soldiers, to confer with you in an amicable way, and to perswade you to desist from your Villainous attempts, and to beg his Majesties pardon, thou didst hang both the Colonels, and betake thy self with thy Cosacks to Sea from Jayck, and return from Sea into the Volga, ruining all places of Fishery, and burn∣ing the habitations of the Tartars. Thou Villain hast also been under the Town Tarchi, and hast exceedingly endamaged the adjacent places; as also part of the Dominions of the King of Persia. Being upon the Caspian Sea thou didst rob the Subjects of Persia, and take away the Goods of Merchants, and their lives also▪ Thou hast also ruined several Towns in Persia, and thereby caused great difference
between the Two Empires. Besides, the Sol∣diers of Astracan upon thy orders, have killed their Colonel, and joyned themselves to thee, doing great mischief in many places. An. 7177 alias 1669. The Governor of Astracan, Kneas Jwan Simonewitz Prosorofsky sent against you the Waywood Kneas Simon Leibof with His Majesties Army, who had girt you all about; which thou Villain seeing, didst dispatch to that Waywood two of thy chief Confederates, praying in the name of all the Cosacks, that His Majesty would please to pardon them, promising, That thereupon you would return home, and act no more mischief, but serve the Czar with all Fidelity, without occasioning any difference between His Majesty and the King of Persia, as also without taking any thing upon the Volga, or the Caspian Sea: Whereupon those two Cosacks having taken an Oath in the name of the whole Body, and sent to His Majesty Seven persons to implore his pardon (which was granted,) and your Forces being permitted to go with safety from Astracan, to the River Don, the place of your dwelling; notwithstanding all this, thou Villain hast forgot the Grace and Favor of the great Czar, and hast
by the way exercised on the Volga, great rob∣bery, and coming to Tzaretsa, beaten the Way∣wood, and committed enorm outrages. An. 7178 alias 1670. Thou Villain, together with thy Companions, forgetting the Fear of God, and deserting the Holy Catholick Apo∣stolick Church, didst, when you were upon the Don, speak blasphemous words against our Lord Christ, and prohibit to build Churches, and to perform Divine Service in those that were in being; driving away all the Priests, and making such people, as would marry, instead of practising the usual Ceremonies of Marriage, to go round about a Tree. Thou Villain also, slighting the Grace of the great Czar vouchsafed to thee and thy Associates, hast afresh rebelled against His Majesty, and re∣turned to the River Volga, acting the like vil∣lainies, with Robbing and Killing as formerly, and particularly plundering and putting to death some honest antient Cosacks, that refused to joyn with you, and to approve of your Actions. Thou hast likewise killed and cast into the Water, those that by the great Czar were sent with Letters of Pardon to the Captain Cornelius
Jacolowitz and to other Donsky Cossacks; and caused the rest to be so beaten that they died of it. Marching from the River Don with thy con∣federate Cossacks, and coming to the Town of Tsaretza, thou hast fraudulently perswaded the people of that place, that the Czar's Army was coming to put them all to the sword; where∣as on the contrary his Majesties Army went to assist that Town against thee and thy villainous practices: upon which ungrounded perswasion the said Town surrendred themselves to thee, and received thee amongst them. Entring in∣to it, thou hast put to the sword the Command∣er Turgonova, and all those Citizens, that would not be partakers in your villanies, and thrown them into the water; and thereupon thou didst march out against the Army of the Great Czar, and by fraud rout the same, and didst fling into the water their Colonel Jwan Lapatin, and their Lieutenant-Colonel Tedor Jeckschym, and others, after having put them to very great tor∣ments. Besides thou hast taken away the Czar's Boats laden with Rye, and robbed many Mer∣chants; and after that thou didst march to the Town Tzornojaar, and there kill the Governor
Jwan Sergeof and all Officers, and many Mos∣covian Soldiers. Coming before Astracan, thou madest some of thy villanous Cossacks enter into it, and by them induce the Soldiers to deliver up the Town, and the Bojar and Waywood into thy hands: which was done accordingly; the Astra∣can soldiers thereupon joyning themselves with thee, and upon thy Orders pulling the Bojar, Kneas Jwan Simonowitz Prosorofsky, out of the Church, whom thou didst cast down headlong from a high Steeple, commanding also his Bro∣ther, together with many Noble-men, Officers, Soldiers, and Merchants, after grievous Tor∣tures, to be put to death; and robbing the Houses of God, Churches and Monasteries, as also the Czar's Treasure, and many Houses of the principal Citizens, and burning all the Pa∣pers of State in the Chancery, with the additi∣on of such scoffings as cannot be parallel'd. Moreover, thou hast caused, without any shame, many Priests, Monks and Nuns to be stripp'd naked, and many other people be∣sides. Thou hast also commanded most inhu∣manly to be beaten very many, to make them confess, where they had hid their Treasure,
without sparing little children. Further, thou hast put to death some of the chief Merchants of the King of Persia, and many other Mer∣chants strangers, Perfians, Indians, Turkish, Arme∣nians, and Boucharen, who upon the account of Traffick, were at that time in Astracan; robbing them of their Goods, and occasioning matter of discontent to the Great Chach of Persia. Again, thou Villain hast been insatiable of Blood, and continued to spill the most inno∣cent; and thou hast not scrupled to hang up by their Leggs upon the Wall both the innocent Children of the Bojar, Kneas Jwan Simonowitz Prosorofsky, and after great Torture to worry the one, and so to beat the other, that thou thoughtest he could not live. And thou hast al∣so caused the Clerks, that served the Great Czar, and would not consent to thy designs, to be put to painful deaths, commanding them to be hanged up by their Ribs. Besides, Thou Villain, after having killed in Astracan many good people, hast delivered ma∣ny Wives and their Daughters to be abused by your confederate miscreants; commanding al∣so the Priests that they should marry none at
the Metropolitan's Order, scoffing at the Church of God, and the Ordinances of the Holy Apo∣stles, and annulling the Sacrament of Marriage, and throwing such Priests as refused to comply with thee, into the water. Thou Villain hast also robbed the Treasure of the Great Czar in Astracan; and after an effusion of much blood, thou didst march out of that City to Tsarietza, and thence up the River to Tsaratof, whose Inhabitants surren∣dred themselves unto thee; and there thou didst rob the Corn-Moneys of his Majesty, and great store of Provision, putting to death the Way∣wode Koesmakotesin and many Noble men. From Saratof, Thou Villain, persisting in thy malitious designs, didst come to the Town Sa∣marof, which also was surrendred to thee, and whence thou didst carry away the Czar's Trea∣sure, putting to the sword the Governour Jwan Alsienofsky, and many Noble-men and Citizens, that would not take your part. From Samarof, thou Miscreant didst proceed to the Town Simbierske, to which thou laidst a Siege, and tookst it by storm, doing much mischief there. Thou didst also send to many other Towns some of thy villanous Compa∣nions,
by false Writings bearing them in hand, that the Eldest Son of our Great Czar, of Glo∣rious memory, our Czarawitz Alexis Alexewitz, Great Duke of the Greater, Lesser and the White Russia, was yet living, and that thou by Order of his Majesty, wast come to put to death as Traytors, all Bojars, Councellors, Noble men and Officers, being in his Majesties service: whereas, on the contrary, the said Son of our Great Czar, departed this mortal life, and pass'd into the everlasting Rest of Heaven; and that in his Pallace, in the presence of his Lord Fa∣ther, in the year 7178, alias 1670. the 17th of January; his Corps being buried in Mosco in the Cathedral of S. Michel, amongst his Progeni∣tors, the very next day after his death, likewise in the presence of his Lord Father the Great Czar, and of the Lords the Patriarch of Alex∣andria, Paysy, and the Patriarch of Mosco; Joseph, and of many Metropolitans, Arch-Bi∣shops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priests: which departure of our Lord Czarawitz of Glorious memory, is not only notorious here, but in other Kingdoms also. But Thou Traytor didst de∣vise this with a designe to discompose the people, and to occasion the shedding of innocent blood.
Thou hast also craftily given out, as if the Monk Nikow was with thee; whereby thou hast scandalized many; for this Nikow was, by the Order of the Great Czar, according to the condemnation of the Patriarch, deposed from his Office, and sent to Beelooser into the Cloyster Verapond, where he yet is. Moreover, thou didst also like a Villain, send thy Associats and Traytors into the Army of the Bojar Kneas Jurge Alexewitz Dolgoroeck, to intice them to joyn in Rebellion with thee: which designe yet, by the good providence of God, hath been frustrated. But, Thou Villain, lying about the Town Simbierske, was't not able with all thy storming and cheating to effect any thing; forasmuch as by the goodness of God Almighty, and the aid of our blessed Lady the Mother of God, the comfort of the Christians, and upon the inter∣cession of the Holy Father and Wonder-work∣er Sergius, and by the Military strength, and the prosperity of our Great Czar Alexis Mi∣chalowitz, Great Duke of all the Greater, Les∣ser, and the White Russia, as also of the High∣born Lord our Czarawitz and Great Duke Jwan Alexewitz; and likewise by the prudent
and careful Conduct, and the valour of the Sol∣diery of our Great Czar; Thou Villain and Tray∣tor, with thy Confederates and Abettors, hast been, neer the Town Simbierske, and in many other places, discomfited, and with a few of thy company didst then escape, and retreat down∣wards. In many other places have the Inhabitants, upon thy villanous sollicitations, rebelled, and kill'd their Governors, and thrown them into the water: And Thou Villain hast joyned thy self to the villany of thy Brother, and you to gether have fallen into divers Frontier-places, where you have shed much innocent blood, and done great mischief. In which your divellish practises, you perfi∣dious Villains, Stenka and Frolko, together with your Companions, did contemn and de∣ride the Church of God, not understanding the Grace of the most Holy Mother of God, the Hope of Christians, and of the Holy Wonder∣worker Sargius; designing the ruine of the Im∣perial City Mosed, and of the whole Moscovian Empire. You, with all your adherents, went so far in your wickedness, that you refused to obey the
Laws of our Great God, who is Glorious in Trinity, and slighted the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Hope of the Christians; putting all your confidence in your divellish practises: In which villainous design you have been engaged since the year 7175 (1667.) unto the year 7179 (1671.) April 4th; during which time you have shed store of innocent blood, without sparing that of poor harmless young Children. April 4th of the year 7179. (1671.) through the great mercy of the Almighty, and by the wise Conduct and the valour of the Army of the Great Czar, Alexis Michalowitz, Thou Villain wast taken prisoner, and hast been brought to his Majesty, and in the Examination and upon the Torture hast confessed thy Crimes: For which thy abominable Attempts and practises, com∣mitted agarnst God Almighty, and against our Great Czar, Alexis Michalowitz, Great Duke and Defender of all the Greater, Lesser, and the White Russia, for thy Rebellion and Treason, and for the Ruine and Desolation caused by thee to all Russia, the Great Czar hath commanded, and the Bojars have assented, that thou shouldst be condemned to be Quartered. FINIS.
