S2025 12006043 52327
The SCOTS DEMONSTRATION of their Abhorrence of POPERY, with all its Adherents In a Letter from Edenbrough to a Friend in London, contain∣ing the Manner of Burning the Pope there in Essigie, on Christ∣Mass Day. &C. Dear Sir, Our Christmass this morning very pleasantly began; For the Uni∣versity Boys during the Advent, took a Conceit, in Imitation, as is supposed, of your Famous City of London, to Burn the Pope in Essigie; but carried it not so privately, but that the Lord Chancellor got notice; upon which he Summoned the Magistracy to consult them about a Method to prevent it. The Masters of the University being present, 'twas agreed, the best expedient was, to offer the Boys a Bond in these terms, We the Students of the University of Edenbrough considering the Dangerous Consequencies might attend the burning of the Pope on Christmass-Day, do bind our selves not to do it upon that Day, or any Day hereafter: But very few or none of the Boys would Subscribe. Then the Magistrates Apprehended some of the most Active in this Contrivance, two of them English, one said to be the Son of Sir Philip Grey; They were seized in their Beds very early in the Morning, and the Town Guards surrounded the Colledge to hindered their Rendisvouzs. Notwithstanding which they Met betwixt 9 and 10 in a convenient Place, taking the advantage of the nighest Passage of the High-street, where they brought his Holiness with his Cavalcade, being attyred after his Antichristian Manner, with his Miter, Keys, &c. and settled in his Throne. One of the Boys read a short, but sharp Accusation against him: Then by common consent, proceeded to Sacrifice him by Fire to Sir Edmund Godfreys Ghost. At which time the Magistrates ordered the Publication of a Proclamation against tumultuous Assemblies, least they should be Petition'd for the tole∣rating of it by the Inhabitants, there being few Abhorrers to be seen at that time. But by design, the Earl of Lithcow coming to his Rescue, though the Boys were Resolute, yet by drawing of his Sword, and his Followers by his Example, relieved for some small season, the Old Gentlemen from his Sentence, and halled him into a by Place, and overturned him; but the Boys crying aloud, There was Heresy in his Belly; the Mermidons smel∣ling Gun-Powder, there left him to his incensed and enraged Adversarys, who dragged him again into the Great-Street, where the Fire coming to the Combustables in his Belly, blew off his Head, and miserably scattered the remaining Members of the Harlot. Immediately, General Dallyel marched with two Companies by the Cowgate-Part, supposing the Boys might have been at the ordinary Place of Execution. Before him marched the Kings Horse-Guards on a Gallop, with his Majesties Standard Royal, and Swords drawn, and at an other Port, entred two Companies more; but the Boys undaunted, drew the Insallible-Chear into the Streets, and then dispersed themselves, whil'st the Horse and Foot made a strong Parade, to secure what might further be attemped upon his Disciples. I shall not add further in this matter, be∣lieving you may have a better Account than can be possibly given you by Dear Sir, Your Friend and Servant.
