S2438 12186283 55794
Table-Talk: BEING THE DISCOURSES OF John Selden, Esq OR HIS SENSE of various MATTERS of Weight and high Consequence; Relating especially to Religion and State. Distingue Tempora. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head near the Inner-Temple Gate in Fleetstreet; and Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in Pater-Noster-Row, 1696.
To the Honourable Mr. Justice Hales, One of the JUDGES OF THE Common-Pleas; And to the much Honoured Edward Heywood, John Vaughan, AND Rowland Jewks Esquiers. Most worthy Gentlemen, WEre you not Executors to that Person, who (while he liv'd) was the Glory of the Nation; yet I am Confident any thing of his would find Acceptance with you, and truly the Sense and Notion here is wholly his, and most of the Words. I had the op∣portunity to hear his Discourse twenty Years together, and lest all those Excel∣lent
things that usually fell from him might be lost, some of them from time to time I faithfully committed to Writing, which here digested into this Method, I hum∣bly present to your Hands; you will quick∣ly perceive them to be his by the familiar Illustrations wherewith they are set off, and in which way you know he was so happy, that with a marvelous delight to those that heard him) he would present∣ly convey the highest Points of Religi∣on, and the most important Affairs of State to an ordinary apprehension. In reading be pleas'd to distinguish Times, and in your Fancy carry along with you, the When and the Why, many of these things were spoken; this will give them the more Life, and the smarter Relish. 'Tis possible the Entertainment you find in them, may render you the more inclinable to pardon the Presum∣ption of Your most Obliged and most Humble Servant RI. MILWARD.
THE TABLE. ABbies, Priories, page 1 Articles, 3 Baptism, 4 Bastard, 5 Bible, Scripture, 6 Bishops before the Parliament, 11 Bishops in the Parliament, 13 Bishops out of the Parliament, 19 Books, Authors, 25 Canon-Law, Ceremony, 27 Chancellour, 28 Changing Sides, 29 Chrismas, 30 Christians, 31 Church, 32 Church of Rome, 34 Churches, City, 35 Clergy, 36 High Commission, House of Commons, 38 Confession, 39 Competency, 40 Great Conjunction, Conscience. 41 Consecrated Places, 43 Contracts, 44 Council, 45 Convocation, Creed, 46
Damnation, 47 Devils, 48 Self-Denial, 51 Duel, 52 Epitaph, 53 Equity, 54 Evil Speaking, 55 Excommunication, 56 Faith and Works, 59 Fasting-Days, 60 Fathers and Sons, Fines, 61 Free-will, Fryers. 62 Friends, Genealogy of Christ, 63 Gentlemen, 64 Gold, Hall, 65 Hell, 66 Holy-Days, 67 Humility, 68 Idolatry, Jews, 69 Invincible Ignorance, Images, 70 Imperial Constitutions, Imprisonment, 72 Incendiaries, Independency, 73 Things Indifferent, Publick Interest, 75 Humane Invention, Judgments, 76 Judge, 77 Juggling, Jurisdiction, 78 Jus Divinum, King, 79 King of England, 81 The King, 84 Knights Service, 86 Land, Language, 87
Law, 88 Law of Nature, 90 Learning, 91 Lecturers, Libels, 93 Liturgy, Lords in the Parliament, 94 Lords before the Parliament. 95 Marriage, 97 Marriage of Cosin Germans, 98 Measure of things, 99 Difference of Men, Minister, Divine, 100 Money, 107 Moral Honesty, 108 Mortage, Number, 109 Oaths, 110 Oracles, 113 Opinion, 114 Parity, Parliament, 116 Parson, 119 Patience, Peace, 120 Penance, People, 121 Pleasure, 122 Philosophy, 124 Poetry, 125 Pope, 127 Popery, 130 Power, State, 131 Prayer, 134 Preaching, 137 Predestination, 144 Preferment, 145 Praemunire, Prerogative, 148
Presbytery, 149 Priest of Rome, 151 Prophecies, 152 Proverbs, Question, 153 Reason, 154 Retaliation, Reverence 155 Non Residency, 156 Religion, 157 Sabboth, 163 Sacrament, Salvation, 164 State, 165 Superstition, Subsidies, 166 Simony, Ship-Money, 167 Synod Assembly, 158 Thanksgiving, Tythes, 171 Trade, 174 Tradition, Transubstantiation, 175 Traitor, Trinity, 176 Truth, 177 Trial, 178 University, 179 Vows. 180 Usury, Pious Uses, 181 War, 182 Witches, Wife, 186 Wisdom, 187 Wit, 188 Women, 189 Year 190 Zelots. 192
THE DISCOURSES OF John Selden, Esq Abbies, Priories, &c. 1. THE unwillingness of the Monks to part with their Land, will fall out to be just nothing, because they were yielded up to the King by a Supream Hand, (viz.) a Parliament. If a King conquer another Country, the People are loath to lose their Lands, yet no Divine will deny, but the King may give them to whom he please. If a Parliament make a Law concerning Lea∣ther, or any other Commodity, you and
I for Example are Parliament-Men, per∣haps in respect to our own private In∣terest, we are against it, yet the major Part conclude it, we are then in volv'd, and the Law is good. 2. When the Founder of Abbies laid a Curse upon those that should take away those Lands, I would fain know what Power they had to curse me; 'Tis not the Curses that come from the Poor, or from any Body, that hurt me, because they come from them, but because I do something ill against them that deserves God should curse me for it. On the other side, 'tis not a Man's blessing me that makes me blessed, he only de∣clares me to be so, and if I do well I shall be blessed, whether any bless me or not. 3. At the time of Dissolution, they were tender in taking from the Abbots and Priors their Lands and their Hou∣ses, till they surrendred them (as most of them did) indeed the Prior of St. John's, Sir Richard Weston, being a stout Man, got into France, and stood out a whole Year, at last submitted, and the King took in that Priory also, to which the Temple belonged, and many other Houses in England, they did not then
cry no Abbots, no Priors, as we do now no Bishops, no Bishops. 4. Henry the Fifth put away the Friars, Aliens, and seized to himself 100000 l. a Year, and therefore they were not the Protestants only that took away Church Lands. 5. In Queen Elizabeths time, when all the Abbies were pulled down, all good Works defaced, then the Preachers must cry up Justification by Faith, not by good Works. Articles. 1. THE nine and thirty Articles are much another thing in Latin, (in which Tongue they were made) than they are translated into English; they were made at three several Convocations, and confirmed by Act of Parliament six or seven Times after. There is a Secret concerning them: Of late Ministers have subscribed to all of them, but by Act of Parliament that confirm'd them, they ought only to subscribe to those Arti∣cles which contain matter of Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, as ap∣pears by the first Subscriptions. But Bisho Bancroft (in the Convocation
held in King Jame's days) he began it, that Ministers should subscribe to three Things, to the King's Supremacy, to the Common-Prayer, and to the Thirty Nine Articles; many of them do not contain matter of Faith. Is it matter of Faith how the Church should be govern'd? Whether Infants should be baptized? Whether we have any Property in our Goods? &c. Baptism. 1. 'TWas a good way to persuade Men to be christned, to tell them that they had a Foulness about them, viz. Original Sin, that could not be washed away but by Baptism. 2. The Baptising of Children with us, does only prepare a Child against he comes to be a Man, to understand what Christianity means. In the Church of Rome, it has this Effect, it frees Children from Hell. They say they go into Lim∣bus Infantum. It succeeds Circumcision, and we are sure the Child understood nothing of that at eight Days old; why then may not we as reasonably baptise a Child at that Age? in England of late years I ever thought the Parson
baptiz'd his own Fingers rather than the Child. 3. In the Primitive Times they had God-fathers to see the Children brought up in the Christian Religion, because ma∣ny times, when the Father was a Chri∣stia the Mother was not, and some∣times, when the Mother was a Christian, the Father was not, and therefore they made choice of two or more that were Christians, to see their Children brought up in that Faith. Bastard. 1. 'TIS said the 23d. of Deuteron. 2. [A Bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even to the tenth Generation.] Non ingredietur in Ec∣clesiam Domini, he shall not enter into the Church. The meaning of the Phraise is, he shall not marry a Jewish Woman. But upon this grosly mistaken; a Bastard at this Day in the Church of Rome, with∣out a Dispensation, cannot take Orders; the thing haply well enough where 'tis so settled; but 'tis upon a Mistake, (the Place having no reference to the Church) appears plainly by what follows at the third Verse [An Ammonite or Moabite shall
not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even to the tenth Generation.] Now you know with the Jews an Ammonite or a Moabite could never be a Priest; because their Priests were born so, not made. Bible, Scripture. 1. 'TIS a great Question how we know Scripture to be Scripture, whe∣ther by the Church, or by Man's private Spirit: Let me ask you, how I know any thing? how I know this Carpet to be green? First, because some body told me it was green; that you call the Church in your Way. Then after I have been told it is green, when I see that Colour again, I know it to be green, my own Eyes tell me it is green, that you call the private Spirit. 2. The English Translation of the Bible is the best Translation in the World, and renders the Sense of the Original best, taking in for the English Translation, the Bishop's Bible as well as King James's. The Translation in King James's time took an excellent way. That Part of the Bible was given to him who was most excellent in such a Tongue (as the Apocry∣pha to Andrew Downs) and then they met
together, and one read the Translation, the rest holding in their Hands some Bi∣ble, either of the learned Tongues, or French, Spanish, Italian, &c. if they found any Fault, they spoke; if not he read on. 3. There is no Book so translated as the Bible for the purpose. If I tran∣slate a French Book into English, I turn it into English Phrase, not into French English [Il fait froid] I say 'tis cold, not, it makes cold; but the Bible is rather translated into English Words than into English Phrase. The Hebraisms are kept, and the Phrase of that Language is kept: As for Example, [He uncover'd her Shame] which is well enough, so long as Scholars have to do with it; but when it comes among the Common Peo∣ple, Lord, what Jeer do they make of it! 4. Scrutamini Scripturas. These two Words have undone the World; because Christ spake it to his Disciples; therefore we must all, Men, Women and Children, read and interpret the Scripture. 5. Henry the Eighth made a Law, that all Men might read the Scripture, except Servants; but no Woman, except Ladies and Gentlewomen, who had Lei∣sure and might ask somebody the Mean∣ning.
The Law was repeal'd in Edward the Sixth's Days. 6. Lay-men have best interpreted the hard Places in the Bible, such as Johannes Picus, Scaliger, Grotius, Salmansius, Heinsi∣us, &c. 7. If you ask which of Erasmus, Beza, or Grotius did best upon the New Te∣stament, 'tis an idle Question: For they all did well in their Way. Erasmus broke down the first Brick, Beza added many things, and Grotius added much to him, in whom we have either something new, or something heighten'd, that was said before, and so 'twas necessary to have them all three. 8. The Text serves only to guess by, we must satisfie our selves fully out of the Authors that liv'd about those times. 9. In interpreting the Scripture, many do as if a Man should see one have ten Pounds which he reckon'd by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. meaning four was but four Unites, and five sive Unites, &c. and that he had in all but ten Pounds; the other that sees him, takes not the Figures together as he doth, but picks here and there, and thereupon reports, that he hath five Pounds in one Bag, and six Pounds in another Bag, and
nine Pounds in another Bag, &c. when as in truth he hath but ten Pounds in all. So we pick out a Text here and there to make it serve our turn; where∣as if we take it altogether, and consi∣der'd what went before, and what fol∣lowed after, we should find it meant no such thing. 10. Make no more Alegories in Scrip∣ture than needs must, the Fathers were too frequent in them, they indeed before they fully understood the literal Sense, look'd out for an Alegory. The Folly whereof you may conceive thus: Here at the first sight appears to me in my Window a Glass and a Book; I take it for granted, 'tis a Glass and a Book, thereupon I go about to tell you what they signifie; afterwards upon nearer view, they prove no such thing; one is a Box made like a Book, the other is a Picture made like a Glass where's now my Alegory? 11. When Men meddle with the literal Text, the Question is, where they should stop: In this Case, a Man must venture his Discretion and do his best to satisfie himself and others in those Places where he doubts, for although we call the Scrip∣ture the Word of God (as it is) yet it
was writ by a Man, a mercenary Man, whose Copy, either might be false, or he might make it false: For Example, here were a thousand Bibles printed in England with the Text thus, [Thou shalt commit Adultery] the Word [not] left out; might not this Text be mended? 12. The Scripture may have more Senses besides the Literal; because God understands all things at once; but a Man's Writing has but one true Sense, which is that which the Author meant when he writ it. 13. When you meet with several Read∣ings of the Text, take heed you ad∣mit nothing against the Tenets of your Church; but do as if you were going over a Bridge, be sure you hold fast by the Rail, and then you may dance here and there as you please; be sure you keep to what is settled, and then you may flourish upon your various Lecti∣ons. 14. The Apocrypha is bound with the Bibles of all Churches that have been hitherto. Why should we leave it out? The Church of Rome has her Apocrypha (viz.) Susanna and Bell and the Dragon, which she does not esteem equally with the rest of those Books that we call Apo∣crypha.
Bishops before the Parliament. 1. A Bishop as a Bishop, had never any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: For as soon as he was Electus Confirmatus, that is, after the three Proclamations in Bow-Church, he might exercise Jurisdiction, before he was consecrated, not till then, he was no Bishop, neither could he give Orders. Besides, Suffragans were Bi∣shops, and they never claim'd any Ju∣risdiction. 2. Anciently the Noble-Men lay within the City for Safety and Security. The Bishops Houses were by the Water∣side, because they were held sacred Per∣sons which no body would hurt. 3. There was some Sense for Commen∣dams at first, when there was a Living void, and never a Clerk to serve it, the Bishops were to keep it till they found a fit Man, but now 'tis a Trick for the Bishop to keep it for himself. 4. For a Bishop to preach, 'tis to do other Folks Office, as if the Steward of the House should execute the Porter's or the Cook's Place: 'Tis his Business to see that they and all other about the House perform their Duties.
5. That which is thought to have done the Bishops hurt, is their going about to bring Men to a blind Obedience, im∣posing things upon them [though perhaps small and well enough] without prepar∣ing them, and insinuating into their Reasons and Fancies, every Man loves to know his Commander. I wear those Gloves; but perhaps if an Alderman should command me, I should think much to do it: What has he to do with me? Or if he has, peradventure I do not know it. This jumping upon things at first Dash will destroy all: To keep up Friend∣ship, there must be little Addresses and Applications, whereas Bluntness spoils it quickly: To keep up the Hierarchy, there must be little Applications made to Men, they must be brought on by little and little: So in the Primitive Times the Power was gain'd, and so it must be continued. Scaliger said of Erasmus; Si minor esse voluit, major fuisset. So we may say of the Bishops, Si minores esse volue∣rint, majores fuissent. 6. The Bishops were too hasty, else with a discreet Slowness they might have had what they aim'd at: The old Story of the Fellow, that told the Gentleman, he might get to such a Place, if he did
not ride too fast, would have fitted their turn. 7. For a Bishop to cite an old Canon to strengthen his new Articles, is, as if a Lawyer should plead an old Statute that has been repeal'd God knows how long. Bishops in the Parliament. 1. BIshops have the same Right to sit in Parliament as the best Earls and Barons, that is, those that were made by Writ: If you ask one of them [Arundel, Oxford, Northumberland] why they sit in the House? they can only say, their Fa∣thers sate there before them, and their Grandfather before him, &c. And so say the Bishops, he that was a Bishop of this Place before me, sate in the House, and he that was a Bishop before him, &c. Indeed your latter Earls and Barons have it express'd in their Patents, that they shall be called to the Parliament. Objection, but the Lords sit there by Blood, the Bishops not. Answer, 'Tis true, they sit not there both the same way, yet that takes not away the Bishops Right: If I am a Parson of a Parish, I have as much Right to my Gleab and Tithe, as you
have to your Land which your Ancestors have had in that Parish Eight Hundred Years. 2. The Bishops were not Barons, be∣cause they had Baronies annex'd to their Bishopricks (for few of them had so, unless the old ones, Canterbury, Winchester, Dur∣ham, &c. the new erected we are sure had none, as Glocester, Peterborough, &c. be∣sides few of the Temporal Lords had a∣ny Baronies.) But they are Barons, because they are called by Writ to the Parliament, and Bishops were in the Parliament ever since there was any mention, or sign of a Parliament in England. 3. Bishops may be judged by the Peers, tho' in time of Popery it never hapned, because they pretended they were not obnoxious to a secular Court; but their way was to cry Ego sum Frater Domini Pa∣pae, I am Brother to my Lord the Pope, and therefore take not my self to be judg∣ed by you; in this Case they impanell'd a Middlesex Jury, and dispatch'd the Busi∣ness. 4. Whether may Bishops be present in Cases of Blood? Answ. That they had a Right to give Votes, appears by this, al∣ways when they did go out, they left a Proxy, and in the time of the Abbots, one
Man had 10, 20 or 30 Voices. In Richard the Second's time, there was a Protestati∣on against the Canons, by which they were forbidden to be present in Case of Blood. The Statute of 25th. of Henry the Eighth may go a great way in this Busi∣ness. The Clergy were forbidden to use or cite any Canon &c. but in the latter End of the Statute, there was a Clause, that such Canons that were in usage in this Kingdom, should be in force till the thir∣ty two Commissioners appointed should make others, provided they were not con∣trary to the King's Supremacy. Now the Question will be, whether these Canons for Blood were in use in this Kingdom or no? the contrary whereof may appear by many Presidents in R. 3. and H. 7. and the beginning of H. 8. in which time there were more attainted than since, or scarce before: The Canons of Irregula∣rity of Blood were never receiv'd in Eng∣land, but upon pleasure. If a Lay-Lord was attainted, the Bishops assented to his Condemning, and were always pre∣sent at the passing of the Bill of Attainder. But if a Spiritual Lord, they went out, as if they car'd not whose Head was cut off, so none of their own. In those Days, the Bishops being of great Houses, were
often entangled with the Lords in Mat∣ters of Treason. But when d'ye hear of Bishop a Traytor now? 5. You would not have Bishops meddle with Temporal Affairs, think who you are that say it. If a Papist, they do in your Church; if an English Protestant, they do among you; if a Presbyterian, where you have no Bishops, you mean your Presbyterian Lay-Elders, should meddle with temporal Affairs as well as Spiritual. Besides all Jurisdicti∣on is Temporal, and in no Church, but they have some Jurisdiction or other. The Question then will be reduced to Magis and Minus; They meddle more in one Church than in another. 6. Objection. Bishops give not their Votes by Blood in Parliament, but by an Office annext to them, which being taken away they cease to vote, there∣fore there is not the same Reason for them as for Temporal Lords. Answ. We do not pretend they have that Pow∣er the same Way, but they have a Right: He that has an Office in Westminster-Hall for his Life, the Office is as much his, as his Land is his that hath Land by Inheritance.
7. Whether had the inferior Clergy ever any thing to do in the Parlia∣ment? Answ. No, no otherwise than thus, There were certain of the Clergy that used to assemble near the Parliament, with whom the Bishops, upon occasion might consult (but there were none of the Con∣vocation, as 'twas afterwards settled, (viz.) the Dean, the Arch-Deacon, one for the Chapter, and two for the Diocess) but it happened by continuance of time (to save Charges and Trouble) their Voices and the Consent of the whole Clergy were involved in the Bishops and at this Day the Bishops, Writs run, to bring all these to the Parliament, but the Bi∣shops themselves stand for all. 8. Bishops were formerly one of these two Conditions, either Men bred Ca∣nonists and Civilians, sent up and down Ambassadors to Rome and other Parts, and so by their Merit came to that Greatness, or else great Noble Men's Sons, Brothers, and Nephews, and so born to govern the State: Now they are of a low Condition, their Education no∣thing of that way; he gets a Living, and then a greater Living, and then a greater than that, and so comes to go∣vern.
9. Bishops are now unfit to Govern, be∣cause of their Learning, they are bred up in another Law, they run to the Text for something done amongst the Jews that nothing concerns England; 'tis just as if a Man would have a Kettle, and he would not go to our Brazier to have it made, as they make Kettles, but he would have it made as Hiram made his Brass-work, who wrought in Solo∣mon's Temple. 10. To take away Bishops Votes, is but the beginning to take them away; for then they can be no longer useful to the King or State. 'Tis but like the little Wimble, to let in the greater An∣ger. Objection. But they are but for their Life, and that makes them always go for the King as he will have them. Answer. This is against a Double Charity, for you must always suppose a bad King and bad Bishops. Then again, whether will a Man be sooner content, himself should be made a Slave, or his Son after him? [when we talk of our Children, we mean our selves,] besides, they that have Posterity are more obliged to the King, than they that are only for them∣selves, in all the Reason in the World.
11. How shall the Clergy be in the Parliament, if the Bishops are taken away? Answer. By the Laity, because the Bi∣shops, in whom the rest of the Clergy are included, are sent to the taking away their own Votes, by being involv'd in the major Part of the House. This fol∣lows naturally. 12. The Bishops being put out of the House, whom will they lay the Fault upon now? When the Dog is beat out of the Room, where will they lay the Stink? Bishops out of the Parliament. 1. IN the beginning Bishops and Pres∣byters were alike, like the Gentle∣men in the Country, whereof one is made Deputy Lieutenant, and another Justice of Peace, so one is made a Bi∣shop, another a Dean; and that kind of Government by Arch-bishops, and Bi∣shops no doubt came in, in imitation of the Temporal Government, not Ju∣re Divino. In time of the Roman Em∣pire, where they had a Legatus, there they placed an Arch-Bishop, where they had a Rector, there a Bishop, that eve∣ry one might be instructed in Christiani∣ty,
which now they had received into the Empire, 2. They that speak ingeniously of Bi∣shops and Presbyters, say, that a Bishop is a great Presbyter, and during the time of his being Bishop, above a Presbyter: as your President of the Colledge of Phy∣sicians, is above the rest, yet he himself is no more than a Doctor of Physick. 3. The Words [Bishop and Presbyter] are promiscuously used, that is confessed by all: and tho' the Word [Bishop] be in Timothy and Titus, yet that will not prove the Bishops ought to have a Juris∣diction over the Presbyter, tho' Timothy or Titus had by the Order that was gi∣ven them: some Body must take care of the rest, and that Jurisdiction was but to Excommunicate, and that was but to tell them they should come no more in∣to their Company. Or grant they did make Canons one for another, before they came to be in the State, does it follow they must do so when the State has re∣ceiv'd them into it? What if Timothy had power in Ephesus, and Titus in Creet over the Presbyters? Does it follow there∣fore the Bishops must have the same in England? Must we be govern'd like Ephesus and Creet?
4. However some of the Bishops pre∣tend to be Jure Divino, yet the Pra∣ctice of the Kingdom had ever been o∣therwise, for whatever Bishops do other∣wise than the Law permits, Westminster-Hall can controul, or send them to ab∣solve, &c. 5. He that goes about to prove Bi∣shops Jure Divino, does as a Man that having a Sword, shall strike it against an Anvil, if he strikes it a while there, he may peradventure loosen it, tho' it be never so well riveted, 'twill serve to strike another Sword (or cut Flesh) but not against an Anvel. 6. If you should say you hold your Land by Moses or God's Law, and would try it by that, you may perhaps lose, but by the Law of the Kingdom you are sure of it; so may the Bishops by this Plea of Jure Divino lose all. The Pope had as good a Title by the Law of En∣gland as could be had, had he not left that, and claim'd by Power from God. 7. There is no Government enjoyn'd by Example, but by Precept; it does not follow we must have Bishops still, be∣cause we have had them so long. They are equally mad who say Bishops are so Jure Divino that they must be continu∣ed,
and they who say they are so An∣tichristian, that they must be put away, all is as the State pleases. 8. To have no Ministers, but Presby∣ters, 'tis as in the Temporal State they should have no Officers but Constables. Bishops do best stand with Monarchy, that as amongst the Laity, you have Dukes, Lords, Lieutenants, Judges, &c. to send down the King's Pleasure to his Subjects; so you have Bishops to govern the inferi∣our Clergy: These upon occasion may address themselves to the King, otherwise every Person of the Parish must come, and run up to the Court. 9. The Protestants have no Bishops in France, because they live in a Catho∣lick Country, and they will not have Catholick Bishops; therefore they must govern themselves as well as they may. 10. What is that to the purpose, to what End were Bishops Lands given to them at first? you must look to the Law and Custom of the Place. What is that to any Temporal Lord's Estate, how Lands were first divided, or how in William the Conquerours Days? And if Men at first were juggled out of their Estates, yet they are rightly their Suc∣cessors. If my Father cheat a Man, and
he consent to it, the Inheritance is rightly mine. 11. If there be no Bishops, there must be something else, which has the Power of Bishops, though it be in many, and then had you not as good keep them? If you will have no half Crowns, but on∣ly single Pence, yet Thirty single Pence are half a Crown; and then had you not as good keep both? But the Bishops have done ill, 'twas the Men, not the Function; As if you should say, you would have no more Half-Crowns, be∣cause they were stolen, when the Truth is they were not stolen because they were Half Crowns, but because they were Mony, and light in a Thieves hand. 12. They that would pull down the Bishops and erect a new way of Govern∣ment, do as he that pulls down an old House, and builds another in another Fashion; there's a great deal of Do, and a great deal of Trouble: the old Rub∣bish must be carried away, and new Ma∣terials must be brought; Workmen must be provided, and perhaps the old one would have serv'd as well. 13. If the Parliament and Presbyterian Party should dispute, who should be Judge? Indeed in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth, there was such a Dif∣ference, between the Protestants and Pa∣pists, and Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Chan∣cellor, was appointed to be Judge, but the Conclusion was, the stronger Party carried it: For so Religion was brought into Kingdoms, so it has been continued, and so it may be cast out, when the State pleases. 14. 'Twill be great Discouragement to Scholars, that Bishops should be put down: For now the Father can say to his Son, and the Tutor to his Pupil, Study hard, and you shall have Vocem & Sedem in Parliamento; then it must be, Study hard, and you shall have a Hundred a Tear, if you please your Parish. Object. But they that enter into the Ministry for Prefer∣ment, are like Judas that look'd after the Bag. Answ. It may be so, if they turn Scholars at Judas's Age; but what Arguments will they use to persuade them to follow their Books while they are young.
Books, Authors. 1. THE giving a Bookseller his Price for his Books has this Advantage, he that will do so, shall have the Refusal of whatsoever comes to his Hand, and so by that means get many things, which o∣therwise he never should have seen. So 'tis in giving a Bawd her Price. 2. In buying Books or other Com∣modities, 'tis not always the best way to bid half so much as the Seller asks: witness the Country Fellow that went to buy two groat Shillings, they ask'd him three Shillings, and he bad them eighteen Pence. 3. They counted the Price of the Books (Acts 19. 19.) and found Fifty Thousand Pieces of Silver, that is so ma∣ny Sextertii, or so many Three-half-pence of our Money, about Three Hundred Pound Sterling. 4. Popish Books teach and inform, what we know, we know much out of them. The Fathers, Church Story, School∣men, all may pass for Popish Books, and if you take away them, what Learning will you leave? Besides who must be Judge? The Customer or the Writer?
If he disallows a Book, it must not be brought into the Kingdom, then Lord have Mercy upon all Scholars. These Puritan Preachers, if they have any things good, they have it out of Popish Books, tho' they will not acknowledge it, for fear of displeasing the People: he is a poor Divine that cannot severe the Good from the Bad. 5. 'Tis good to have Translations, be∣cause they serve as a Comment, so far as the Judgment of the Man goes. 6. In answering a Book, 'tis best to be short, otherwise he that I write against will suspect I intend to weary him, not to satisfie him. Besides in being long I shall give my Adversary a huge Advan∣tage, somewhere or other he will pick a Hole. 7. In quoting of Books, quote such Authors as are usually read, others you may read for your own Satisfaction, but not name them. 8. Quoting of Authors is most for matter of Fact, and then I write them as I would produce a Witness, sometimes for a free Expression, and then I give the Author his Due, and gain my self Praise by reading him.
9. To quote a Modern Dutch Man, where I may use a Clasic Author, is as if I were to justifie my Reputation, and I neglect all Persons of Note and Qua∣lity that know me, and bring the Testi∣monial of the Scullion in the Kitchen. Canon-Law. IF I would study the Canon-Law as it is used in England, I must study the Heads here in use, then go to the Practi∣sers in those Courts where that Law is practised, and know their Customs, so for all the Study in the World. Ceremony. 1. CEremony keeps up all things; 'Tis like a Penny-Glass to a rich Spi∣rit, or some excellent Water, without it the Water were spilt, the Spirit lost. 2. Of all People Ladies have no reason to cry down Ceremonies; for they take themselves slighted without it. And were they not used with Ceremony, with Complements and Addresses, with Legs and Kissing of Hands, they were the pi∣tifulest Creatures in the World; but yet
methinks to kiss their Hands after their Lips, as some do, is like little Boys, that after they eat the Apple, fall to the Paring, out of a Love they have to the Apple. Chancellour. 1. THE Bishop is not to sit with a Chancellor in his Court (as being a thing either beneath him or beside him) no more than the King is to sit in the King's-Bench when he has made a Lord-Chief-Justice. 2. The Chancellour govern'd in the Church, who was a Lay-man: And therefore 'tis false which they charge the Bishops with, that they challenge sole Jurisdiction: For the Bishop can no more put out the Chancellor than the Chan∣cellor the Bishop. They were many of them made Chancellors for their Lives, and he is the fittest Man to go∣vern, because Divinity so overwhelms the rest.
Changing Sides. 1. 'TIS the Tryal of a Man to see if he will change his side; and if he be so weak as to change once, he will change again. Your Country Fellows have a way to try if a Man be weak in the Hams, by coming behind him and giving him a Blow unawares, if he bend once, he will bend again. 2. The Lords that fall from the King after they have got Estates, by base Flattery at Court, and now pretend Con∣science, do as a Vintner, that when he first sets up, you may bring your Wench to his House, and do your things there; But when he grows Rich, he turns con∣scientious, and will sell no Wine upon the Sabbath-day. 3. Colonel Goring serving first the one side and then the other, did like a good Miller that knows how to grind which way soever the Wind sits. 4. After Luther had made a Combusti∣on in Germany about Religion, he was sent to by the Pope, to be taken off, and offer'd any Preferment in the Church, that he would make choice of: Luther an∣swered, if he had offer'd half as much
at first, he would have accepted it; but now he had gone so far, he could not come back: In Truth he had made him∣self a greater thing than they could make him; the German Princes courted him, he was become the Author of a Sect ever after to be call'd Lutherans. So have our Preachers done that are against the Bishops; they have made themselves greater with the People than they can be made the other way; and therefore there is the less Charity probably in bringing them off. Charity to Strangers is enjoyn'd in the Text; by Strangers is there under∣stood those that are not of our own Kin, Strangers to your Blood; not those you cannot tell whence they come, that is, to be charitable to your Neighbours whom you know to be honest poor People. Christmass. 1. CHristmass succeeds the Saturnalia, the same time, the same number of Holy-days, then the Master waited upon the Servant like the Lord of Mis∣rule. 2. Our Meats and our Sports (much of them) have Relation to Church-works. The Coffin of our Christmass-Pies in shape
long, is in Imitation of the Cratch; our chusing Kings and Queens on Twelfth-Night, hath reference to the three Kings. So likewise our eating of Fritters, whipping of Tops, roasting of Herrings, Jack of Lents, &c. they were all in Imitation of Church-works, Emblems of Martyr∣dom. Our Tansies at Easter have reference to the bitter Herbs; tho' at the same time 'twas always the Fashion for a Man to have a Gammon of Bacon, to shew him∣self to be no Jew. Christians. 1. IN the High-Church of Jerusalem, the Christians were but another Sect of Jews, that did believe the Messias was come. To be called, was nothing else, but to become a Christian, to have the Name of a Christian, it being their own Language: For among the Jews, when they made a Doctor of Law, 'twas said he was called. 2. The Turks tell their People of a Heaven where there is sensible Pleasure, but of a Hell where they shall suffer they don't know what. The Christians quite invert this Order, they tell us of a Hell where we shall feel sensible Pain, but of a
Heaven where we shall enjoy we can't tell what. 3. Why did the Heathens object to the Christians, that they worship an Asses Head? You must know, that to a Hea∣then, a Jew and a Christian were all one, that they regarded him not, so he was not one of them. Now that of the Asses Head might proceed from such a Mistake as this; by the Jews Law, all the Firstlings of Cattle were to be offered to God, except a young Ass, which was to be redeemed, a Heathen being present, and seeing young Calves and young Lambs kill'd at their Sacrifices, only young Asses redeem'd, might very well think they had that silly Beast in some high Estimation, and thence might imagine they worshipped it as a God. Church. 1. HEretofore the Kingdom let the Church alone, let them do what they would, because they had something else to think of, (viz.) Wars; but now in time of Peace, we begin to examine all things, will have nothing but what we like, grow dainty and wanton, just as in a Family the Heir uses to go a hunting,
he never considers how his Meal is drest, takes a bit, and away; but when he stays within, then he grows curious, he does not like this, nor he does not like that he will have his Meat drest his own way, or peradventure he will dress it himself. 2. It hath ever been the Gain of the Church when the King will let the Church have no Power to cry down the King and cry up the Church: But when the Church can make use of the King's Pow∣er, then to bring all under the King's Prerogative, the Catholicks of England go one way, and the Court-Clergy ano∣ther. 3. A glorious Church is like a magni∣ficent Feast, there is all the Variety that may be, but every one chuses out a Dish or two that he likes, and lets the rest alone: how glorious soever the Church is, every one chuses out of it his own Reli∣gion, by which he governs himself, and lets the rest alone. 4. The Laws of the Church are most favourable to the Church, because they were the Church's own making; as the Heralds are the best Gentlemen, because they make their own Pedigree. 5. There is a Question about that Ar∣ticle, concerning the Power of the Church,
whether these Words [of having Power in Controversies of Faith] were not stoln in, but 'tis most certain they were in the Book of Articles that was confirm'd, though in some Editions they have been left out: But the Article before tells you, who the Church is, not the Clergy, but Coetus sidelium. Church of Rome. 1. BEfore a Juglar's Tricks are disco∣ver'd we admire him, and give him Money, but afterwards we care not for them; so 'twas before the Discove∣ry of the Juggling of the Church of Rome. 2. Catholicks say, we out of our Charity believe they of the Church of Rome may be saved: But they do not believe so of us. Therefore their Church is better according to our selves: First, some of them no doubt believe as well of us, as we do of them, but they must not say so: Besides, is that an Ar∣gument their Church is better than ours because it has less Charity? 3. One of the Church of Rome will not come to our Prayers, does that agree he doth not like them? I would fain see
a Catholick leave his Dinner, because a No∣bleman's Chaplain says Grace, nor haply would he leave the Prayers of the Church, if going to Church were not made a Mark of Distinction between a Protestant and a Papist. Churches. 1. THE Way coming into our great Churches, was anciently at the West-Door, that Men might see the Altar and all the Church before them, the other Doors were but Posterns. City. 1. WHat makes a City? Whether a Bishoprick or any of that Na∣ture? Answer. 'Tis according to the first Char∣ter which made them a Corporation. If they are incorporated by Name of Civi∣tas, they are a City, if by the Name of Burgum, then they are a Burrough. 2. The Lord Mayor of London by their first Charter, was to be presented to the King, in his Absence, to the Lord Chief Justiciary of England, afterwards to the Lord Chancellor, now to the Barons of
the Exchequer; but still there was a Reservation, that for their Honour they should come once a Year to the King, as they do still. Clergy. 1. THough a Clergy-man have no Faults of his own, yet the Faults of the whole Tribe shall be laid upon him, so that he shall be sure not to lack. 2. The Clergy would have us believe them against our own Reason, as the Wo∣man would have had her Husband against his own Eyes: What! will you believe your own Eyes before your own sweet Wife. 3. The Condition of the Clergy to∣wards their Prince, and the Condition of the Physician is all one: The Physicians tell the Prince they have Agaric and Ru∣barb, good for him, and good for his Sub∣jects Bodies; upon this he gives them leave to use it; but if it prove naught, then away with it, they shall use it no more: So the Clergy tell the Prince they have Physick good for his Soul, and good for the Souls of his People; upon that he admits them: But when he finds by Ex∣perience they both trouble him and his
People, he will have no more to do with them, what is that to them, or any body else, if a King will not go to Heaven. 4. A Clergy-man goes not a Dram further than this, you ought to obey your Prince in general; [if he does he is lost] how to obey him, you must be inform'd by those whose Profession it is to tell you. The Parson of the Tower (a good discreet Man) told Dr. Mosely, (who was sent to me and the rest of the Gentlemen committed the 3d Caroli, to persuade us to submit to the King) that they found no such Words as [Parlia∣ment, Habeas Corpus, Return, Tower, &c.] Neither in the Fathers, nor the School∣men, nor in the Text; and therefore for his part he believed he understood no∣thing of the Business. A Satyr upon all those Clergy-men that meddle with Mat∣ters they do not understand. 5. All confess there never was a more learned Clergy, no Man taxes them with Ignorance. But to talk of that, is like the Fellow that was a great Wencher; he wish'd God would forgive him his Leachery, and lay Usury to his Charge. The Clergy have worse Faults. 6. The Clergy and Laity together are never like to do well, 'tis as if a Man were
to make an excellent Feast, and should have his Apothecary and his Physician come into the Kitchen: The Cooks if they were let alone would make excellent Meat, but then comes the Apothecary and he puts Rubarb into one Sauce and Agrick into another Sauce. Chain up the Clergy on both sides. High Commission. 1. MEN cry out upon the High Com∣mission, as if the Clergy-Men only had to do in it, when I believe there are more Lay-Men in Commission there, than Clergy-Men; if the Lay-Men will not come, whose Fault is that? So of the Star-Chamber, the People think the Bishops only censur'd Prin, Burton, and Bastwick, when there were but two there, and one spake not in his own Cause. House of Commons. 1. THere be but two Erroneous Opi∣nions in the House of Commons, That the Lords sit only for themselves, when the Truth is, they sit as well for the Common-wealth. The Knights and
Burgesses sit for themselves and others, some for more, some for fewer, and what is the Reason? because the Room will not hold all; the Lords being few, they all come, and imagine the Room able to hold all the Commons of Eng∣land, then the Lords and Burgesses would sit no otherwise than the Lords do. The second Error is, that the House of Com∣mons are to begin to give Subsidies, yet if the Lords dissent they can give no Money. 2. The House of Commons is called the Lower House, in twenty Acts of Par∣liament, but what are twenty Acts of Parliament amongst Friends? 3. The Form of a Charge runs thus, I Accuse in the Name of all the Commons of England, how then can any Man be as a Witness, when every Man is made the Accuser? Confession. 1. IN time of Parliament it used to be one of the first things the House did, to Petition the King that his Con∣fessor might be removed, as fearing ei∣ther his Power with the King, or else, lest he should reveal to the Pope what
the House was in doing, as no doubt he did when the Catholick Cause was concerned. 2. The Difference between us and the Papists is, we both allow Contrition, but the Papists make Confession a part of Contrition; they say a Man is not suffici∣ently contrite, till he confess his Sins to a Priest. 3. Why should I think a Priest will not reveal Confession, I am sure he will do any thing that is forbidden him, haply not so often as I, the utmost Pu∣nishment is Deprivation; and how can it be proved, that ever any Man revealed Confession, when there is no Witness? And no Man can be Witness in his own Cause. A meer Gullery. There was a time when 'twas publick in the Church, and that is much against their Auricular Confession. Competency. 1. THat which is a Competency for one Man, is not enough for ano∣ther, no more than that which will keep one Man warm, will keep another Man warm; one Man can go in Doublet and Hose, when another Man cannot be with∣out a Cloak, and yet have no more Cloaths than is necessary for him.
Great Conjunction. THE greatest Conjunction of Satan and Jupiter, happens but once in eight Hundred Years, and therefore Astro∣logers can make no Experiments of it, nor foretel what it means, (not but that the Stars may mean something, but we cannot tell what) because we cannot come at them. Suppose a Planet were a Simple, or an Herb, how could a Phy∣sician tell the Vertue of that Simple, un∣less he could come at it, to apply it? Conscience. 1. HE that hath a Scrupulous Consci∣ence, is like a Horse that is not well weigh'd, he starts at every Bird that flies out of the Hedge. 2. A knowing Man will do that, which a tender Conscience Man dares not do, by reason of his Ignorance, the other knows there is no hurt, as a Child is afraid to go into the dark, when a Man is not, because he knows there is no Danger. 3. If we once come to leave that out∣loose, as to pretend Conscience against Law, who knows what inconvenience
may follow? For thus, Suppose an Anabaptist comes and takes my Horse, I Sue him, he tells me he did according to his Conscience, his Conscience tells him all things are com∣mon amongst the Saints, what is mine is his; therefore you do ill to make such a Law, If any Man takes another's Horse he shall be hang'd. What can I say to this Man? He does according to his Con∣science. Why is not he as honest a Man as he that pretends a Ceremony establish'd by Law, is against his Conscience? Ge∣nerally to pretend Conscience against Law, is dangerous, in some Cases haply we may. 4. Some Men make it a Case of Con∣science, whether a Man may have a Pidgeon-House, because his Pidgeons eat other Folks Corn. But there is no such thing as Conscience in the Business, the Matter is, whether he be a Man of such Quality, that the State allows him to have a Dove-House, if so, there's an end of the Business, his Pidgeons have a right to eat where they please them∣selves.
Consecrated Places. 1. THE Jews had a peculiar way of consecrating things to God, which we have not. 2. Under the Law, God, who was Master of all, made choice of a Tem∣ple to worship in, where he was more especially present: Just as the Master of the House, who owns all the House, makes choice of one Chamber to lie in, which is called the Master's Chamber; but un∣der the Gospel there was no such thing, Temples and Churches are set apart for the conveniency of Men to Worship in; they cannot meet upon the Point of a Needle, but God himself makes no choice. 3. All things are Gods already, we can give him no right by consecrating any, that he had not before, only we set it apart to his Service. Just as a Gardiner brings his Lord and Master a Basket of Apri∣cocks, and presents them, his Lord thanks him, perhaps gives him something for his Pains, and yet the Apricocks were as much his Lord's before as now. 4. What is Consecrated, is given to some particular man, to do God Service, not given to God, but given to Man, to serve
God: And there's not any thing, Lands, or Goods, but some Men or other have it in their Power, to dispose of as they please. The saying things Consecrated cannot be taken away, makes men afraid of Consecration. 5. Yet Consecration has this Power, when a Man has Consecrated any thing to God, he cannot of himself take it a∣way. Contracts. 1. IF our Fathers have lost their Liberty, why may not we labour to regain it? Answ. We must look to the Contract, if that be rightly made we must stand to it; if we once grant we may recede from Contracts, upon any Inconvenien∣cy that may afterwards happen, we shall have no Bargain kept. If I sell you a Horse, and do not like my Bargain, I will have my Horse again. 2. Keep your Contracts, so far a Di∣vine goes, but how to make our Contracts is left to our selves; and as we agree upon the conveying of this House, or that Land, so it must be. If you offer me a Hundred Pounds for my Glove, I tell you what my Glove is, a plain Glove,
pretend no Virtue in it, the Glove is my own, I profess not to sell Gloves, and we agree for an hundred Pounds, I do not know why I may not with a safe Conscience take it. The want of that com∣mon Obvious Distinction of Jus praecepti∣vum, and Jus permissivum, does much trouble Men. 3. Lady Kent Articled with Sir Edward Herbert, that he should come to her when she sent for him, and stay with her as long as she would have him, to which he set his Hand; then he Articled with her, That he should go away when he pleas'd, and stay away as long as he pleas'd, to which she set her Hand. This is the Epitome of all the Contracts in the World, betwixt Man and Man, be∣twixt Prince and Subject, they keep them as long as they like them, and no longer. Council. 1. THey talk (but blasphemously e∣nough) that the Holy Ghost is Pre∣sident of their General Councils, when the Truth is, the odd Man is still the Holy Ghost.
Convocation. 1. WHen the King sends his Writ for a Parliament, he sends for two Knights for a Shire, and two Burgesses for a Corporation: But when he sends for two Arch-Bishops for a Convocation, he commands them to assemble the whole Clergy, but they out of Custom amongst themselves send to the Bishops of their Provinces to will them to bring two Clerks for a Diocess, the Dean, one for the Chap∣ter, and the Arch-Deacons; but to the King every Clergy-Man is there present. 2. We having nothing so nearly ex∣presses the Power of a Convocation, in respect of a Parliament, as a Court-Leet, where they have a Power to make By-Laws, as they call them; as that a Man shall put so many Cows, or Sheep in the Common, but they can make nothing that is contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom. Creed. 1. A Thanasius's Creed is the shortest, take away the Preface, and the Force, and the Conclusion, which are not
part of the Creed. In the Nicene Creed it is , I believe in the Church; but now, as our Common-prayer has it, I believe one Catholick and Apostolick Church: they like not Creeds, because they would have no Forms of Faith, as they have none of Prayer, though there be more Reason for the one, than for the other. Damnation. 1. IF the Physician sees you eat any thing that is not good for your Body, to keep you from it, he crys 'tis Poyson; if the Divine sees you do any thing that is hurtful for your Soul, to keep you from it, he crys you are damn'd. 2. To preach long, loud, and Damna∣tion, is the way to be cry'd up. We love a Man that damns us, and we run after him again to save us. If a Man had a sore Leg, and he should go to an Honost Ju∣dicious Chyrurgeon, and he should only bid him keep it warm, and anoint with such an Oyl (an Oyl well known) that would do the Cure, haply he would not much regard him, because he knows the Medicine beforehand an ordinary Medi∣cine. But if he should go to a Surgeon
that should tell him, your Leg will Gan∣green within three Days, and it must be cut off, and you will die, unless you do something that I could tell you, what listning there would be to this Man? Oh, for the Lord's Sake, tell me what this is, I will give you any content for your Pains. Devils. 1. WHY have we none possest with Devils in England? The old Answer is, the Protestants the Devil hath already, and the Papists are so Holy, he dares not meddle with them. Why, then beyond Seas where a Nun is possest, when a Hugonot comes into the Church, does not the Devil hunt them out? The Priest teaches him, you never saw the Devil throw up a Nun's Coats, mark that, the Priest will not suffer it, for then the Peo∣ple will spit at him. 2. Casting out Devils is meer Juggling; they never cast out any but what they first cast in. They do it where for Reve∣rence no Man shall dare to examine it, they do it in a Corner, in a Mortice-hole, not in the Market-place. They do nothing but what may be done by Art, they make the Devil fly out of the Window, in the
Likeness of a Bat or a Rat, why do they not hold him? Why in the Likeness of a Bat, or a Rat, or some Creature? That is, why not in some shape we paint him in, with Claws and Horns? By this trick they gain much, gain upon Mens Fancies, and so are reverenc'd: and certainly if the Priest deliver me from him that is my most deadly Enemy, I have all the reason in the World to reverence him. Objection. But if this be Juggling, why do they punish Impostures? Answer. For great reason, because they don't play their Part well, and for fear others should discover them; and so all of them ought to be of the same Trade. 3. A Person of Quality came to my Chamber in the Temple, and told me he had two Devils in his Head [I won∣der'd what he meant] and just at that time, one of them bid him kill me, [with that I begun to be afraid, and thought he was mad] he said he knew I could cure him; and therefore entreated me to give him something; for he was resol∣ved he would go to no body else. I perceiving what an Opinion he had of me, and that 'twas only Melancholly that troubl'd him, took him in hand, warranted him, if he would follow my
Directions, to cure him in a short time. I desired him to let me be alone about an Hour, and then to come again, which he was very willing to. In the mean time I got a Card, and lap'd it up handsome in a Piece of Taffata, and put Strings to the Taffata, and when he came, gave it him to hang about his Neck, withal charged him, that he should not disor∣der himself neither with Eating or Drinking, but eat very little of Supper, and say his Prayers duly when he went to Bed, and I made no Que∣stion but he would be well in three or four Days. Within that time I went to Dinner to his House, and ask'd him how he did? He said he was much bet∣ter, but not perfectly well, or in truth he had not dealt clearly with me. He had four Devils in his Head, and he per∣ceiv'd two of them were gone, with that which I had given him, but the other two troubled him still. Well, said I, I am glad two of them are gone, I make no doubt but to get away the other two like∣wise; so I gave him another thing to hang about his Neck. Three Days after he came to me to my Chamber and profest he was now as well as ever he was in his Life, and did extreamly thank me for the great
Care I had taken of him. I fearing lest he might relapse into the like Distemper, told him that there was none but my self, and one Physician more in the whole Town that could cure the Devils in the Head, and that was Dr. Harvey (whom I had pre∣par'd) and wish'd him if ever he found himself ill in my Absence, to go to him, for he could cure his Disease as well as my self. The Gentleman lived many Years and was never troubled after. Self Denyal. 1. 'TIS much the Doctrine of the times, that Men should not please them∣selves, but deny themselves every thing they take delight in; not look upon Beau∣ty, wear no good Cloaths, eat no good Meat, &c. which seems the greatest Ac∣cusation that can be upon the Maker of all good things. If they be not to be us'd, why did God make them? The truth is, they that preach against them, cannot make use of them their selves, and then again, they get Esteem by seeming to contemn them. But mark it while you live, if they do not please themselves as much as they can, and we live more by Example than Precept.
Duel. 1. A Duel may still be granted in some Cases by the Law of England, and only there. That the Church allow'd it Antiently, appears by this, in their pub∣lick Liturgies there were Prayers appoint∣ed for the Duelists to say, the Judg used to bid them go to such a Church and pray, &c. But whether is this Lawful? If you grant any War Lawful, I make no doubt but to convince it. War is Law∣ful, because God is the only Judge be∣tween two, that is Supream. Now if a Difference happen between two Subjects, and it cannot be decided by Humane Te∣stimony, why may they not put it to God to Judge between them by the Permission of the Prince? Nay, what if we should bring it down for Argument's sake, to the Sword-Men. One gives me the Lye, 'tis a great Disgrace to take it, the Law has made no Provision to give Remedy for the Injury (If you can suppose any thing an Injury for which the Law gives no Re∣medy) why am not I in this Case Supream, and may therefore right my self. 2. A Duke ought to fight with a Gen∣tleman; the Reason is this, the Gentleman
will say to the Duke 'tis True, you hold a higher Place in the State than I; there's a great distance between you and me, but your Dignity does not Priviledge you to do me an Injury; as soon as ever you do me an Injury, you make your self my Equal, and as you are my Equal I chal∣lenge you, and in sense the Duke is bound to Answer him. This will give you some Light to understand the Quarrel betwixt a Prince and his Subjects; tho' there be a vast Distance between him and them, and they are to obey him, according to their Contract, yet he hath no power to do them an Injury; then they think themselves as much bound to vindicate their Right, as they are to obey his Lawful Commands; nor is there any other Measure of Justice left upon Earth but Arms. Epitaph. AN Epitaph must be made fit for the Person for whom it is made; for a Man to say all the Excellent things that can be said upon one, and call that his Epitaph, is as if a Painter should make the handsomest Piece he can possibly make, and say 'twas my Picture. It holds in a Funeral Sermon.
Equity. 1. EQuity in Law, is the same that the Spirit is in Religion, what every one pleases to make it, sometimes they go according to Conscience, sometimes according to Law, sometimes according to the Rule of Court. 2. Equity is a Roguish Thing, for Law we have a Measure, know what to trust to, Equity is according to the Conscience of him that is Chancellor, and as that is larger or narrower, so is Equity. 'Tis all one as if they should make the Standard for the Measure, we call a Chancellor's Foot, what an uncertain Measure would this be? One Chancellor has a long Foot, another a short Foot, a Third an indifferent Foot: 'Tis the same thing in the Chancellor's Conscience. 3. That saying, Do as you would be done to, is often misunderstood, for 'tis not thus meant, that I a private Man should do to you a private Man, as I would have you to me, but do, as we have agreed to do one to another by publick Agree∣ment. If the Prisoner should ask the Judge, whether he would be content to be hang'd, were he in his Case, he would answer no. Then says the Prisoner, do
as you would be done to; neither of them must do as private Men, but the Judge must do by him as they have publickly agreed, that is both Judge and Prisoner have consented to a Law, that if either of them steal, they shall be hang'd. Evil Speaking. 1. HE that speaks ill of another com∣monly before he is aware, makes himself such a one as he speaks against; for if he had Civility or Breeding he would forbear such kind of Language. 2. A gallant Man is above ill Words: an Exemple we have in the old Lord of Salisbury (who was a great wise Man) Stone had call'd some Lord about Court, Fool, the Lord complains, and has Stone whipt; Stones cries, I might have called my Lord of Salisbury Fool often enough, before he would have had me whipt. 3. Speak not ill of a great Enemy, but rather give him good Words, that he may use you the better, if you chance to fall into his Hands: the Spaniard did this when he was dying; his Confessor told him (to work him to Repentance) how the Devil tormented the wicked that went to Hell: the Spaniard replying, called the Devil my Lord. I hope my Lord the Devil is
not so cruel, his Confessor reproved him. Excuse me said the Don, for calling him so, I know not into what Hands I may fall, and if I happen into his, I hope he will use me the better for giving him good words. Excommunication. 1. THat place they bring for Excom∣munication [put away from a∣mong your selves that wicked Person, 1 Cor. 5. Cha. 13. Verse.] is corrupted in the Greek for it should be, , put away that Evil from among you, not , that Evil Person, besides, , is the Devil in Scripture, and it may be so taken there; and there is a new Edition of Theodoret come out, that has it right , 'Tis true the Christians before the Civil State became Christian, did by Covenant and Agreement set down how they should live, and he that did not observe what they agreed upon, should come no more amongst them, that is, be Excommunicated. Such Men are spoken of by the Apostle [Romans 1. 31.] whom he calls , the Vulgar has it, Incomposit, & sine faedre, the last Word is pretty well, but the first
not at all; Origen in his Book against Celsus, speaks of the Christians, : the Translation renders it Conventus, as it signifies a Meeting, when it is plain it signifies a Covenant, and the English Bi∣ble turned the other Word well, Cove∣nant-breakers. Pliny tells us, the Chri∣stians took an Oath amongst themselves to live thus, and thus. 2. The other place [Dic Ecclesiae] tell the Church, is but a weak Ground to raise Excommunication upon, especially from the Sacrament, the lesser Excommu∣nication, since when that was spoken, the Sacrament was instituted. The Jews Ec∣clesia was their Sanhedrim; their Court: so that the meaning is, if after once or twice Admonition, this Brother will not be reclaim'd, bring him thither. 3. The first Excommunication was 180 Years after Christ, and that by Victor, Bi∣shop of Rome: But that was no more than this, that they should Communicate and receive the Sacrament amongst themselves, not with those of the other Opinion: The Controversie (as I take it) being about the Feast of Easter. Men do not care for Excommunication, because they are shut out of the Church, or delivered up to Satan, but because the Law of the King∣dom
takes hold of them, after so many Days a Man cannot Sue, no not for his Wife, if you take her from him; and there may be as much reason, to grant it for a small Fault, if there be contuma∣cy, as for a great one. In Wectminster-Hall you may Out-law a Man for forty Shillings, which is their Excommunicati∣on, and you can do no more for Forty Thousand Pound. 4. When Constantine became Christian, he so fell in love with the Clergy, that he let them be Judges of all things; but that continued not above three or four Years, by reason they were to be Judges of Matters they understood not, and then they were allowed to meddle with no∣thing but Religion; all Jurisdiction be∣longed to him, and he scanted them out as much as he pleas'd, and so things have since continued. They Excommunicate for three or four Things, Matters con∣cerning Adultery, Tythes, Wills, &c. which is the civil Punishment the State allows for such Faults. If a Bishop Ex∣communicate a Man for what he ought not, the Judge has Power to absolve and punish the Bishop: if they had that Juris∣diction from God, why does not the Church Excommunicate for Murder, for
Theft? If the Civil Power might take away all but three Things, why may they not take them away too? If this Excom∣munication were taken away, the Presby∣ters would be quiet; 'tis that they have a mind to, 'tis that they would fain be at. Like the Wench that was to be Married; she ask'd her Mother when 'twas done, if she should go to Bed presently: no, says her Mother, you must dine first, and then to Bed Mother? no you must dance after Dinner, and then to Bed Mother? no, you must go to Sup∣per, and then to Bed Mother, &c. Faith and Works. 1. TWas an unhappy Division that has been made between Faith and Works: tho' in my Intellect I may divide them, just as in the Candle, I know there is both Light and Heat. But yet put out the Candle, and they are both gone, one remains not without the other: So 'tis be∣twixt Faith and Works; nay, in a right Conception Fides est opus, if I believe a thing because I am commanded, that is Opus.
Fasting-Days. 1. WHat the Church debars us one Day, she gives us leave to take out in another. First we fast, and then we feast; first there is a Carnival, and then a Lent. 2. Whether do Humane Laws bind the Conscience? If they do, 'tis a way to en∣snare: If we say they do not, we open the Door to Disobedience. Answ. In this Case we must look to the Justice of the Law, and intention of the Law-giver: if there be no Justice in the Law, 'tis not to be obey'd: if the intention of the Law-giver be absolute, our Obedience must be so too. If the intention of the Law-giver enjoyn a Penalty as a Compensation for the Breach of the Law, I sin not if I submit to the Penalty: if it enjoyn a Pe∣nalty, as a future enforcement of Obedi∣ence to the Law, then ought I to observe it, which may be known by the often re∣petition of the Law. The way of fast∣ing is enjoyn'd unto them, who yet do not observe it: The Law enjoyns a Pe∣nalty as an enforcement to Obedience; which intention appears by the often call∣ing upon us, to keep that Law by the
King and the Dispensation of the Church to such as are not able to keep it, as young Children, old Folks, diseas'd Men, &c. Fathers and Sons. 1. IT hath ever been the way for Fa∣thers, to bind their Sons, to strengthen this by the Law of the Land: every one at Twelve Years of Age is to take the Oath of Allegiance in Court-Leets, whereby he swears Obedience to the King. Fines. 1. THe old Law was, that when a Man was Fin'd, he was to be Fin'd Salvo Con∣teneniento, so as his Countenance might be safe, taking Countenance in the same sense as your Country-Man does, when he says, if you will come unto my House, I will shew you the best Countenance I can, that is not the best Face, but the best Entertain∣ment. The meaning of the Law was, that so much should be taken from a Man, such a Cobbet sliced off, that yet not with∣standing he might live in the same Rank and Condition he lived in before; but now they fine Men ten times more than they are worth.
Free-will. 1. THe Puritans who will allow no Free-will at all, but God does all, yet will allow the Subject his Liberty to do, or not to do, notwithstanding the King, the God upon Earth. The Armenians, who hold we have Free-will, yet say, when we come to the King, there must be all Obedience, and no Liberty to be stood for. Fryers. 1. THE Fryers say they possess no∣thing, whose then are the Lands they hold? not their Superiour's, he hath vow'd Poverty as well as they, whose then? To answer this, 'twas decreed they should say they were the Popes. And why must the Fryers be more perfect than the Pope himself? 2. If there had been no Fryers, Chri∣stendom might have continued quiet, and things remain at a stay. If there had been no Lecturers (which succeed the Fryers in their way) the Church of England might have stood, and flourisht at this Day.
Friends. 1. OLD Friends are best. King James us'd to call for his old Shoos, they were easiest for his Feet. Genealogy of Christ. 1. TThey that say the Reason why Jo∣seph's Pedigree is set down, and not Mary's, is, because the Descent from the Mother is lost, and swallowed up, say something; but yet if a Jewish Wo∣man, marry'd with a Gentil, they only took Notice of the Mother, not of the Father; but they that say they were both of a Tribe, say nothing; for the Tribes might marry one with another, and the Law against it was only Temporary, in the time while Joshua was dividing the Land, lest the being so long about it, there might be a confusion. 2. That Christ was the Son of Joseph is most exactly true. For though he was the Son of God, yet with the Jews, if any Man kept a Child, and brought him up, and call'd him Son, he was taken for his Son; and his Land (if he had any) was to descend upon him; and there∣fore
the Genealogy of Joseph is justly set down. Gentlemen. 1. What a Gentleman is, 'tis hard with us to define; in other Countries he is known by his Priviledges; in West∣minster-Hall he is one that is reputed one; in the Court of Honour, he that hath Arms. The King cannot make a Gentle∣man of Blood [what have you said] nor God Almighty, but he can make a Gentle∣man by Creation. If you ask which is the better of these two, Civilly, the Gentleman of Blood, Morally, the Gen∣tleman by Creation may be the better; for the other may be a Debauch'd Man, this a Person of Worth. 2. Gentlemen have ever been more Temperate in their Religion, than the common People, as having more Reason, the others running in a hurry. In the beginning of Christianity, the Fathers writ Contra gentes, and Contra Gentiles, they were all one: But after all were Christi∣ans, the beter sort of People still retain'd the Name of Gentiles, throughout the four Provinces of the Roman Empire; as Gentil-hommel in French, Gentil homo, in Italian, Gentil-huombre in Spanish, and
Gentil-man in English: And they, no que∣stion, being Persons of Quality, kept up those Feasts which we borrow from the Gentils; as Christmas, Candlemas, May∣day, &c. continuing what was not direct∣ly against Christianity, which the com∣mon People would never have endured. Gold. 1. THere are two Reasons, why these Words (Jesus autem transiens per medium eorum ibat) were about our old Gold: the one is, because Riply, the Al∣chymist, when he made Gold in the Tower, the first time he found it he spoke these Words [per medium eorum] that is, per medium Ignis & Sulphuris. The other, because these Words were thought to be a Charm, and that they did bind whatsoever they were written upon, so that a Man could not take it away. To this Reason I rather incline. Hall. 1. THE Hall was the Place where the great Lord us'd to eat, (where∣fore else were the Halls made so big?) Where he saw all his Servants and Te∣nants about him. He eat not in private,
except in time of Sickness; when once he became a thing Coop'd up, all his greatness was spoil'd. Nay the King him∣self used to eat in the Hall, and his Lords sate with him, and then he understood Men. Hell. 1. THere are two Texts for Christ's de∣scending into Hell: The one Psal. 16. The other Acts the 2d. where the Bible, that was in use when the Thirty Nine Articles were made has it (Hell.) But the Bible that was in Queen Eliza∣beth's time, when the Articles were con∣firm'd, reads it (Grave,) and so it con∣tinued till the new Translation in King Jame's time, and then 'tis Hell again. But by this we may gather the Church of En∣gland declin'd as much as they could, the descent, otherwise they never would have alter'd the Bible. 2. [He descended into Hell] this may be the Interpretation of it. He may be dead and buried, then his Soul ascended in∣to Heaven. Afterwards he descended a∣gain into Hell, that is, into the Grave, to fetch his Body, and to rise again. The Ground of this Interpretation is taken
from the Platonick Learning, who held a Metampsychosis, and when a Soul did de∣scend from Heaven, to take another Bo∣dy, they call'd it , taking , for the lower World, the State of Mortality: Now the first Chri∣stians many of them were Platonick Phi∣losophers, and no question spake such Language as was then understood amongst them. To understand by Hell the Grave is no Tautology, because the Creed first tells what Christ suffered, He was Cruci∣fied, Dead, and Buried; then it tells us what he did, He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again, he ascended, &c. Holy-Days. 1. THey say the Church imposes Holy-Days, there's no such thing, tho' the Number of Holy-days is set down in some of our Common-Prayer Books. Yet that has relation to an Act of Parliament, which forbids the keeping of any Holy-Days in time of Popery; but those that are kept, are kept by the Custom of the Country, and I hope you will not say the Church imposes that.
Humility. 1. HUmility is a Vertue all preach, none practise, and yet every bo∣dy is content to hear. The Master thinks it good Doctrine for his Servant, the Laity for the Clergy, and the Clergy for the Laity. 2. There is Humilitas quaedam in Vitio. If a Man does not take notice of that Excellency and Perfection that is in him∣self, how can he be thankful to God, who is the Author of all Excellency and Perfection? Nay, if a Man hath too mean an Opinion of himself, 'twill render him unserviceable both to God and Man. 3. Pride may be allow'd to this or that degree, else a Man cannot keep up his Dignity. In Gluttony there must be Eat∣ing, in Drunkenness there must be drink∣ing; 'tis not the eating, nor 'tis not the drinking that is to be blam'd, but the Ex∣cess. So in Pride.
Idolatry. 1. IDolatry is in a Man's own Thought, not in the Opinion of another. Put Case I bow to the Altar, why am I guilty of Idolatry? because a stander by thinks so; I am sure I do not believe the Altar to be God, and the God I worship may be bow'd to in all Places, and at all times. Jews. 1. GOD at the first gave Laws to all Manking, but afterwards he gave peculiar Laws to the Jews, which they were only to observe. Just as we have the Common Law for all England, and yet you have some Corporations, that besides that have peculiar Laws and Pri∣viledges to themselves. 2. Talk what you will of the Jews, that they are cursed, they thrive where e'er they come, they are able to oblige the Prince of their Country, by lend∣ing him Money; none of them beg, they keep together, and for their being hated, my Life for yours Christians hate one ano∣ther as much.
Invincible Ignorance. 1. 'TIS all one to me if I am told of Christ, or some Mystery of Chri∣stianity, if I am not capable of under∣standing, as if I am not told at all, my Ignorance is as invincible, and therefore 'tis vain to call their Ignorance only in∣vincible, who never were told of Christ. The trick of it is to advance the Priest, whilst the Church of Rome says a Man must be told of Christ by one thus and thus ordain'd. Images. 1. THE Papists taking away the second Commandment, is not haply so hor∣rid a thing, nor so unreasonable amongst Christians as we make it: For the Jews could make no figure of God, but they must commit Idolatry, because he had ta∣ken no shape; but since the Assumption of our Flesh, we know what shape to picture God in. Nor do I know why we may not make his Image, provided we be sure what it is: as we say St. Luke took the picture of the Virgin Mary, and St. Ve∣ronica of our Saviour. Otherwise it would
be no honour to the King, to make a Picture, and call it the King's Picture, when 'tis nothing like him. 2. Though the learned Papists pray not to Images, yet 'tis to be fear'd the igno∣rant do; as appears by that Story of St. Nicholas in Spain. A Country-Man us'd to offer daily to St. Nicholas's Image, at length by mischance the Image was broken, and a new one made of his own Plum-Tree; after that the Man forbore, being complain'd of to his Ordinary, he answer'd, 'tis true, he us'd to offer to the old Image, but to the new he could not find in his heart, because he knew 'twas a piece of his own Plum-Tree. You see what Opinion this Man had of the Image, and to this tended the bowing of their Images, the twinkling of their Eyes, the Virgin's Milk, &c. Had they only meant Representations, a Picture would have done as well as these Tricks. It may be with us in England they do not worship Images, because living amongst Protestants they are either laugh'd out of it, or beaten out of it by shock of Argument. 3. 'Tis a discreet way concerning Pi∣ctures in Churches, to set up no new, nor to pull down no old.
Imperial Constitutions. 1. THey say Imperial Constitutions did only confirm the Canons of the Church; but that is not so, for they inflicted Punishment, when the Canons never did (viz.) If a Man converted a Christian to be a Jew, he was to forfeit his Estate, and lose his Life. In Valentines Novels, 'tis said, Constat Episcopus Fo∣rum Legibus non habere, & Judicant tan∣tum de Religione. Imprisonment. 1. SIR Kenelme Digby was several times taken and let go again, at last im∣prison'd in Winchester House. I can com∣pare him to nothing but a great Fish that we catch and let go again, but still he will come to the Bait; at last therefore we put him into some great Pond for Store.
Incendiaries. 1. FAncy to your self a Man sets the City on Fire at Cripplegate, and that Fire continues, by means of others, 'till it come to White-Fryers, and then he that began it would fain quench it, does not he deserve to be punish'd most that first set the City on Fire? So 'tis with the Incendiaries of the State. They that first set it on Fire, [by Monopolizing, Forrest Business, Imprisoning Parliament Men tertio Coroli, &c.] are now become re∣generate, and would fain quench the Fire; certainly they deserv'd most to be punish'd for being the first Cause of our Destractions. Independency. 1. INdependency is in use at Amster∣dam, where forty Churches or Con∣gregations have nothing to do one with another. And 'tis no question agreeable to the Primitive times, before the Em∣perour became Christian: For either we must say every Church govern'd it self, or else we must fall upon that old fool∣ish
Rock, that St. Peter and his Successours govern'd all; but when the Civil State became Christian, they appointed who should govern them, before they govern'd by agreement and consent: if you will not do this, you shall come no more a∣mongst us, but both the Independant Man, and the Presbyterian Man, do equally ex∣clude the Civil Power, tho' after a dif∣ferent manner. 2. The Independant may as well plead, they should not be subject to Tem∣poral Things, not come before a Con∣stable, or a Justice of Peace, as they plead they should not be subject in spiritual things, because St. Paul says, It is so, that there is not a wise Man amongst you? 3. The Pope challenges all Churches to be under him, the King and the two Arch-Bishops challenge all the Church of England to be under them. The Pres∣byterian Man divides the Kingdom into as many Churches as there be Pres∣byteries, and your Independant would have every Congregation a Church by it self.
Things Indifferent. 1. IN time of a Parliament, when things are under debate, they are indiffe∣rent, but in a Church or State settled, there's nothing left indifferent. Publick Interest. 1. ALL might go well in the Com∣mon-Wealth, if every one in the Parliament would lay down his own In∣terest, and aim at the general good. If a man were sick, and the whole Col∣ledge of Physicians should come to him, and administer severally, haply so long as they observ'd the Rules of Art he might recover, but if one of them had a great deal of Scamony by him, he must put off that, therefore he prescribes Sca∣mony. Another had a great deal of Rubarb, and he must put off that, and therefore he prescribes Rubarb, &c. then would certainly kill the Man. We de∣stroy the Common-Wealth, while we pre∣serve our own private Interests, and neg∣lect the publick.
Humane Invention. 1. YOU say there must be no Hu∣mane Invention in the Church, nothing but the pure Word. Answer. If I give any Exposition, but what is ex∣press'd in the Text, that is my Inventi∣on; if you give another Exposition, that is your invention, and both are Hu∣mane. For Example, suppose the Word [Egg] were in the Text, I say, 'tis meant an Hen-Egg, you say a Goose-Egg, nei∣ther of these are exprest, therefore they are Humane Inventions, and I am sure the newer the Invention the worse, old In∣ventions are best. 2. If we must admit nothing but what we read in the Bible, what will become of the Parliament? for we do not read of that there. Iudgments. 1. WE cannot tell what is a Judg∣ment of God, 'tis presumption to take upon us to know. In time of Plague we know we want Health, and therefore we pray to God to give us Health: in time of War we know we want Peace, and therefore we pray to
God to give us Peace. Commonly we say a Judgment falls upon a Man for something in him we cannot abide. An Example we have in King James, con∣cerning the Death of Henry the Fourth of France; one said he was kill'd for his Wenching, another said he was kill'd for turning his Religion. No, says King James (who could not abide fighting,) he was kill'd for permitting Duels in his Kingdom. Judge. 1. WE see the Pageants in Cheapside, the Lions, and the Elephants, but we do not see the Men that carry them; we see the Judges look big, look like Lions, but we do not see who moves them. 2. Little things do great works, when the great things will not. If I should take a Pin from the Ground, a little pair of Tongues will do it, when a great Pair will not. Go to a Judge to do a Busi∣ness for you, by no means he will not hear of it; but go to some small Servant about him, and he will dispatch it ac∣cording to your hearts desire.
3. There could be no Mischief in the Common-Wealth without a Judge. Tho' there be false Dice brought in at the Groom-Porters, and cheating offer'd, yet unless he allow the Cheating, and judge the Dice to be good, there may be hopes of fair Play. Juggling. 1. 'TIS not Juggling that is to be blam'd, but much Juggling, for the World cannot be Govern'd without it. All your Rhetorick, and all your Elench's in Logick come within the com∣pass of Juggling. Jurisdiction. 1. THere's no such Thing as Spiritual Jurisdiction, all is Civil, the Churche's is the same with the Lord Mayors. Suppose a Christian came into a Pagan Country, how can you fancy he shall have any Power there? he finds faults with the Gods of the Country; well, they will put him to Death for it: when he is a Martyr, what follows? Does that argue he has any spiritual Jurisdiction? If the Clergy say the Church ought to be
govern'd thus, and thus, by the Word of God, that is Doctrine all, that is not Discipline. 2. The Pope he challenges Jurisdicti∣on over all, the Bishops they pretend to it as well as he, the Presbyterians they would have it to themselves; but over whom is all this? the poor Laymen. Jus Divinum. 1. ALL things are held by Jus Divi∣num, either immediately or me∣diately. 2. Nothing has lost the Pope so much in his Supremacy, as not acknowledging what Princes gave him. 'Tis a scorn up∣on the Civil Power, and an unthankful∣ness in the Priest. But the Church runs to Jus divinum, lest if they should ac∣knowledge what they have by positive Law, it might be as well taken from them as given to them. King. 1. A King is a thing Men have made for their own Sakes, for quiet∣ness-sake. Just as in a Family one Man is appointed to buy the Meat; if eve∣ry
Man should buy what the other lik'd not, or what the other had bought before, so there would be a confusion. But that Charge being committed to one, he ac∣cording to his Discretion pleases all; if they have not what they would have one day, they shall have it the next, or some∣thing as good. 2. The word King directs our Eyes; suppose it had been Consul, or Dictator: to think all Kings alike is the same folly; as if a Consul of Aleppo or Smyrna should claim to himself the same Power that a Consul at Rome, What, am not I a Consul? or a Duke of England should think him∣self like the Duke of Florence; nor can it be imagin'd, that the word  did signifie the same in Greek as the He∣brew Word  did with the Jews. Be∣sides, let the Divines in their Pulpits say what they will, they in their practice de∣ny that all is the Kings: They sue him, and so does all the Nation, whereof they are a part. What matter is it then what they Preach or Teach in the Schools? 3. Kings are all individual, this or that King, there is no Species of Kings. 4. A King that claims Priviledges in his own Country, because they have them in another, is just as a Cook, that claims Fees
in one Lord's House, because they are al∣lowed in another. If the Master of the House will yield them, well and good. 5. The Text [Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's] makes as much against Kings, as for them, for it says plainly that some things are not Caesars. But Divines make choice of it, first in Flattery, and then because of the other part adjoyn'd to it [Render unto God the things that are Gods] where they bring in the Church. 6. A King outed of his Country, that takes as much upon him as he did at home, in his own Court, is as if a Man on high, and I being upon the Ground, us'd to lift up my voice to him, that he might hear me, at length should come down, and then expects I should speak as loud to him as I did before. King of England. 1. THE King can do no wrong, that is, no Process can be granted against him. What must be done then? Petition him, and the King writes upon the Petition soit droit fait, and sends it to the Chancery, and then the business is heard. His Confessor will not tell him, he can do no wrong.
2. There's a great deal of difference between Head of the Church, and Su∣pream Governour, as our Canons call the King. Conceive it thus, there is in the Kingdom of England a Colledge of Physicians, the King is Supream Gover∣nour of those, but not Head of them, nor President of the Colledge, nor the best Physician. 3. After the Dissolution of Abbies, they did not much advance the King's Su∣premacy, for they only car'd to exclude the Pope: hence have we had several Translations of the Bible upon us. But now we must look to it, otherwise the King may put upon us what Religion he pleases. 4. 'Twas the old way when the King of England had his House, there were Canons to sing Service in his Chappel; so at Westminster in St. Stephen's Chappel (where the House of Commons sits) from which Canons the Street call'd Canon-row has its Name, because they liv'd there, and he had also the Abbot and his Monks, and all these the King's House. 5. The three Estates are the Lord's Temporal, the Bishops are the Clergy, and the Commons as some would have it [take heed of that] for then if two agree the third
is involv'd, but he is King of the Three Estates. 6. The King hath a Seal in every Court, and tho the Great Seal be called Sigillum Angliae, the Great Seal of Eng∣land, yet 'tis not because 'tis the King∣dom's Seal, and not the Kings, but to di∣stinguish it from Sigillum Hiberniae, Sigil∣lum Scotiae. 7. The Court of England is much al∣ter'd. At a solemn Dancing, first you had the grave Measures, then the Corran∣toes and the Galliards, and this is kept up with Ceremony; at length to French-more, and the Cushion-Dance, and then all the Company dances Lord and Groom, Lady and Kitchen-Maid, no Distinction. So in our Court, in Queen Elizabeth's time, Gravity and State were kept up. In King Jame's time things were pretty well. But in King Charles's time, there has been no∣thing but French-more, and the Cushion-Dance, omnium gatherum, tolly, polly, hoite come toite.
The King. 1. 'TIS hard to make an Accomoda∣tion between the King and the Parliament. If you and I fell out about Money, you said I ow'd you Twenty Pounds, I said I ow'd you but Ten Pounds, it may be a third Party allowing me twen∣ty Marks, might make us Friends. But if I said I ow'd you twenty Pounds in Silver, and you said I ow'd you twenty Pounds in Diamonds, which is a Summ innumerable, 'tis impossible we should e∣ver agree. This is the Case. 2. The King using the House of Com∣mons, as he did in Mr. Pymm and his Company, that is, charging them with Treason, because they charg'd my Lord of Canterbury and Sir George Ratcliff; it was just with as much Logick as the Boy, that would have lain with his Grandmo∣ther, us'd to his Father, you lay with my Mother, why should not I lie with yours? 3. There is not the same Reason for the King's accusing Men of Treason, and carrying them away, as there is for the Houses themselves, because they accuse one of themselves. For every one that is accused, is either a Peer, or a Com∣moner,
and he that is accused hath his Consent going along with him; but if the King accuses, there is nothing of this in it. 4. The King is equally abus'd now as before; then they flatter'd him and made him do ill Things, now they would force him against his Conscience. If a Physi∣cian should tell me, every thing I had a mind to was good for me, tho' in truth 'twas Poison, he abus'd me; and he a∣buses me as much, that would force me to take something whether I will or no. 5. The King so long as he is our King, may do with his Officers what he pleases; as the Master of the House may turn a∣way all his Servants, and take whom he please. 6. The King's Oath is not security e∣nough for our Property, for he swears to Govern according to Law; now the Judges they interpret the Law, and what Judges can be made to do we know. 7. The King and the Parliament now falling out, are just as when there is foul Play offer'd amongst Gamesters, one snatches the others stake, they seize what they can of one anothers. 'Tis not to be ask'd whether it belongs not to the King to do this or that: before when there
was fair Play, it did. But now they will do what is most convenient for their own safety. If two fall to scuffling, one tears the others Band, the other tears his; when they were Friends they were quiet, and did no such thing, they let one anothers Bands alone. 8. The King calling his Friends from the Parliament, because he had use of them at Oxford, is as if a Man should have use of a little piece of Wood, and he runs down into the Cellar, and takes the Spiggot, in the mean time all the Beer runs about the House; when his Friends are absent, the King will be lost. Knights Service. 1. KNights Service in earnest means no∣thing, for the Lords are bound to wait upon the King when he goes to War with a Foreign Enemy, with it may be one Man and one Horse, and he that doth not, is to be rated so much as shall seem good to the next Parliament. And what will that be? So 'tis for a private Man, that holds of a Gentleman.
Land. 1. WHen Men did let their Land un∣derfoot, the Tenants would fight for their Landlords, so that way they had their Retribution: but now they will do nothing for them, may be the first, if but a Constable bid them, that shall lay the Landlord by the Heels, and there∣fore 'tis vanity and folly not to take the full value. 2. Allodium is a Law Word, contra∣ry to Feudum, and it signifies Land that holds of no body. We have no such Land in England. 'Tis a true Proposition; all the Land in England is held, either imme∣diately, or mediately of the King. Language. 1. TO a living Tongue new Words may be added, but not to a dead Tongue, as Latin, Greek, Hebrew, &c. 2. Latimer is the Corruption of Lati∣ner, it signifies he that interprets Latin, and though he interpreted French, Spanish, or Italian, he was call'd the King's Lati∣ner, that is, the King's Interpreter.
3. If you look upon the Language spoken in the Saxon Time, and the Lan∣guage spoken now, you will find the Diffe∣rence to be just, as if a Man had a Cloak that he wore plain in Queen Elizabeth's Days, and since, here has put in a piece of Red, and there a piece of Blue, and here a piece of Green, and there a piece of Orange-tawny. We borrow Words from the French, Italian, Latin, as every Pedantick Man pleases. 4. We have more Words than Noti∣ons, half a Dozen Words for the same thing. Sometimes we put a new signi∣fication to an old Word, as when we call a Piece a Gun. The Word Gun was in use in England for an Engine, to cast a thing from a Man, long before there was any Gun-powder found out. 5. Words must be fitted to a Man's Mouth; 'twas well said of the Fellow that was to make a Speech for my Lord Mayor, he desir'd to take measure of his Lordship's Mouth. Law. 1. A Man may plead not guilty, and yet tell no Lye; for by the Law, no Man is bound to accuse himself; so that when I say Not Guilty, the mean∣ing
is, as if I should say by way of Pa∣raphrase, I am not so Guilty as to tell you; if you will bring me to a Tryal, and have me punish'd for this you lay to my Charge, prove it against me. 2. Ignorance of the Law excuses no man; not that all Men know the Law, but because 'tis an excuse every Man will plead, and no Man can tell how to con∣fute him. 3. The King of Spain was outlaw'd in Westminster-Hall, I being of Council a∣gainst him. A Merchant had recover'd Costs against him in a Suit, which because he could not get, we advis'd to have him Out-law'd for not appearing, and so he was. As soon as Gondimer heard that, he presently sent the Money, by reason, if his Master had been Out-law'd, he could not have the Benefit of the Law, which would have been very prejudicial, there being then many Suits depending be∣twixt the King of Spain, and our English Merchants. 4. Every Law is a Contract between the King and the People, and therefore to be kept. A hundred Men may owe me an Hundred Pounds, as well as any one Man, and shall they not pay me be∣cause they are stronger than I? Object. Oh
but they lose all if they keep that Law. Answ. Let them look to the making of their Bargain. If I sell my Lands, and when I have done, one comes and tells me I have nothing else to keep me. I and my Wife and Children must starve, If I part with my Land; must I not therefore let them have my Land, that have bought it and paid for it? 5. The Parliament may declare Law, as well as any other inferiour Court may, (viz.) the King's Bench. In that or this particular Case, the King's Bench will de∣clare unto you what the Law is, but that binds no body whom the Case concerns: So the highest Court, the Parliament may doe, but not declare Law, that is, make Law that was never heard of before. Law of Nature. 1. I Cannot fancy to my self what the Law of Nature means, but the Law of God. How should I know I ought not to steal, I ought not to commit A∣dultery, unless some body had told me so? Surely 'tis because I have been told so? 'Tis not because I think I ought not to do them, nor because you think I ought not; if so, our minds might change,
whence then comes the Restraint? from a higher Power, nothing else can bind: I cannot bind my self, for I may untye my self again; nor an equal cannot bind me, for we may untie one another: It must be a superiour Power, even God Almighty. If two of us make a Bargain, why should either of us stand to it? What need you care what you say, or what need I care what I say? Certainly because there is something about me that tells me Fides est servanda, and if we after alter our Minds, and make a new Bargain, there's Fides servanda there too. Learning. 1. NO Man is the wiser for his Learn∣ing; it may administer Matter to work in, or Objects to work upon, but Wit and Wisdom are born with a Man. 2. Most Mens Learning is nothing but History duly taken up. If I quote Tho∣mas Aquinus for some Tenant, and be∣lieve it, because the School-Men say so, that is but History. Few Men make them∣selves Masters of things they write or speak. 3. The Jesuites and the Lawyers of France, and the Low-Country-Men, have engrossed all Learning. The rest of the World make nothing but Homilies.
4. 'Tis observable, that in Athens where the Arts flourisht, they were govern'd by a Democrasie; Learning made them think themselves as wise as any body, and they would govern as well as others; and they speak as it were by way of Con∣tempt, that in the East, and in the North they had Kings, and why? Because the most part of them followed their Busi∣ness, and if some one Man had made himself wiser than the rest, he govern'd them, and they willingly submitted them∣selves to him. Aristotle makes the Ob∣servation. And as in Athens the Philoso∣phers made the People knowing, and therefore they thought themselves wise enough to govern; so does preaching with us, and that makes us affect a Democra∣sie: For upon these two Grounds we all would be Governours, either be∣cause we think our selves as wise as the best, or because we think our selves the Elect, and have the Spirit, and the rest a Company of Reprobates that belong to the Devil.
Lecturers. 1. LEcturers do in a Parish Church what the Fryers did heretofore, get away not only the Affections, but the Bounty, that should be bestow'd up∣on the Minister. 2. Lecturers get a great deal of Mo∣ney, because they preach the People tame [as a Man watches a Hawk] and then they do what they list with them. 3. The Lectures in Black Fryers, per∣form'd by Officers of the Army, Trades∣men, and Ministers, is as if a great Lord should make a Feast, and he would have his Cook dress one Dish, and his Coach-Man another, his Porter a third, &c. Libels. 1. THough some make slight of Libels, yet you may see by them how the Wind sits: As take a Straw and throw it up into the Air, you shall see by that which way the Wind is, which you shall not do by casting up a Stone. More solid Things do not shew the Complexion of the times so well, as Ballads and Libels.
Liturgy. 1. THere is no Church without a Li∣turgy, nor indeed can there be conveniently, as there is no School with∣out a Grammar. One Scholar may be taught otherwise upon the Stock of his Acumen, but not a whole School. One or Two, that are piously dispos'd, may serve themselves their own Way, but hard∣ly a whole Nation. 2. To know what was generally be∣liev'd in all Ages, the way is to consult the Liturgies, not any private Man's writ∣ing. As if you would know how the Church of England serves God, go to the Common-Prayer-Book, consult not this nor that Man. Besides, Liturgies ne∣ver Complement, nor use high Expressi∣ons. The Fathers oft-times speak Ora∣toriously. Lords in the Parliament. 1. THE Lords giving Protections is a scorn upon them. A Protection means nothing actively, but passively; he that is a Servant to a Parliament-Man is thereby protected. What a Scorn is it
to a Person of Honour, to put his Hand to two Lyes at once, that such a Man is my Servant, and employ'd by me, when haply he never saw the Man in his Life, nor before never heard of him. 2. The Lords protesting is Foolish. To protest is properly to save to a Man's self some Right; but to protest as the Lords protest, when they their selves are in∣volv'd, 'tis no more than if I should go into Smithfield, and sell my Horse, and take the Money, and yet when I have your Money, and you my Horse, I should pro∣test this Horse is mine, because I love the Horse, or I do not know why I do protest, because my Opinion is contrary to the rest. Ridiculous, when they say the Bishops did antiently protest, it was only dissenting, and that in the Case of the Pope. Lords before the Parliament. 1. GReat Lords by reason of their Flat∣terers, are the first that know their own Vertues, and the last that know their own Vices: Some of them are a∣sham'd upwards, because their Ancestors were too great. Others are ashamed down∣wards, because they were too little.
2. The Prior of St. John of Jerusalem, is said to be Primus Baro Angliae, the first Baron of England, because being last of the Spiritual Barons, he chose to be first of the Temporal. He was a kind of an Otter, a Knight half Spiritual, and half Temporal. 3. Quest. Whether is every Baron a Ba∣ron of some Place? Answ. 'Tis according to his Patent; of late Years they have been made Baron of some Place, but antiently not, call'd only by their Sir-Name, or the Sir-Name of some Family, into which they have been married. 4. The making of new Lords lessens all the rest. 'Tis in the business of Lords, as it 'twas with St. Nicolas's Image: The Country-Man, you know, could not find in his Heart to adore the new Image, made of his own Plum-Tree, though he had formerly worship'd the old one. The Lords that are antient we honour, because we know not whence they come; but the new ones we slight, because we know their beginning. 5. For the Irish Lords to take upon them here in England, is as if the Cook in the Fair should come to my Lady Kent's Kitchen, and take upon him to
roast the Meat there, because he is a Cook in another place. Marriage. 1. OF all Actions of a Man's Life, his Marriage does least concern other people, yet of all Actions of our Life 'tis most medled with by other People. 2. Marriage is nothing but a civil Con∣tract; 'tis true, 'tis an Ordinance of God: so is every other Contract, God com∣mands me to keep it when I have made it. 3. Marriage is a desperate thing; the Frogs in Aesop were extream wise, they had a great mind to some Water, but they would not leap into the Well, be∣cause they could not get out again. 4. We single out particulars, and ap∣ply God's Providence to them, thus when two are marry'd and have undone one another, they cry it was God's Provi∣dence we should come together, when God's Providence does equally concur to every thing.
Marriage of Cosin-Germans. 1. SOme Men forbear to marry Cosin Germans out of this kind of scru∣ple of Conscience, because it was unlaw∣ful before the Reformation, and is still in the Church of Rome. And so by rea∣son their Grand-Father, or their great Grand-Father did not do it, upon that old Score they think they ought not to do it: as some Men forbear Flesh upon Friday, not reflecting upon the Statute, which with us makes it unlawful, but out of an old Score, because the Church of Rome forbids it, and their Fore-Fathers always forbore Flesh upon that Day. Others forbear it out of a Natural Con∣sideration, because it is observ'd (for Ex∣ample) in Beasts, if two couple of a near Kind, the Breed proves not so good. The same Observation they make in Plants and Trees, which degenerate being grafted upon the same Stock. And 'tis also fur∣ther observ'd, those Matches between Cosin-Germans seldom prove Fortunate. But for the lawfulness there is no Colour but Cosin-Germans in England may mar∣ry, both by the Law of God and Man: for with us we have reduc'd all the De∣grees
of Marriage to those in the Leviti∣cal-Law, and 'tis plain there's nothing a∣gainst it. As for that that is said Cosin-Germans once remov'd may not Marry, and therefore being a further degree may not, 'tis presum'd a nearer should not, no Man can tell what it means. Measure of Things. 1. WE measure from our selves, and as things are for our use and purpose, so we approve them. Bring a Pear to the Table that is rotten, we cry it down, 'tis naught; but bring a Medlar that is rotten, and 'tis a fine thing, and yet I'll warrant you the Pear thinks as well of it self as the Medlar does. 2. We measure the Excellency of o∣ther Men, by some Excellency we con∣ceive to be in our selves. Nash a Poet, poor enough (as Poets us'd to be) seeing an Alderman with his Gold Chain, upon his great Horse, by way of scorn, said to one of his Companions, do you see yon Fel∣low, how goodly, how big he looks; why that Fellow cannot make a blank Verse. 3. Nay we measure the goodness of God from our selves, we measure his Goodness, his Justice, his Wisdom, by something we call Just, Good, or Wise
in our selves; and in so doing, we judge proportionably to the Country Fellow in the Play, who said if he were a King, he would live like a Lord, and have Pease and Bacon every Day, and a Whip that cry'd Slash. Difference of Men. 1. THE Difference of Men is very great, you would scarce think them to be of the same Species, and yet it con∣sists more in the Affection than in the Intellect. For as in the Strength of Bo∣dy, two Men shall be of an equal Strength, yet one shall appear stronger than the o∣ther, because he exercises, and puts out his Strength, the other will not stir nor strain himself. So 'tis in the Strength of the Brain, the one endeavours, and strains, and labours, and studies, the other sits still, and is idle, and takes no pains, and there∣fore he appears so much the inferiour. Minister Divine. 1. THE imposition of Hands upon the Minister when all is done, will be nothing but a designation of a Person to this or that Office or Employ∣ment
in the Church. 'Tis a ridiculous Phrase that of the Canonists [Conferre Or∣dines] 'Tis Coaptare aliquem in Ordinem, to make a Man one of us, one of our Number, one of our Order. So Cicero would understand what I said, it being a Phrase borrowed from the Latines, and to be understood proportionably to what was amongst them. 2. Those Words you now use in ma∣king a Minister [receive the Holy Ghost] were us'd amongst the Jews in making of a Lawyer; from thence we have them, which is a villanous Key to something, as if you would have some other kind of Praefeture, than a Mayoralty, and yet keep the same Ceremony that was us'd in making the Mayor. 3. A Priest has no such thing as an in∣indelible Character: what difference do you find betwixt him and another Man after Ordination? only he is made a Priest, (as I said) by Designation; as a Lawyer is call'd to the Bar, then made a Serjeant: all Men that would get Pow∣er over others, make themselves as unlike them as they can, upon the same Ground the Priests made themselves un∣like the Laity.
4. A Minister when he is made, is Mate∣ria prima, apt for any form the State will put upon him, but of himself he can do nothing. Like a Doctor of Law in the University, he hath a great deal of Law in him, but cannot use it till he be made some bodie's Chancellour; or like a Phy∣sician, before he be receiv'd into a House, he can give no body Physick; indeed af∣ter the Master of the House hath given him charge of his Servants, then he may. Or like a Suffragan, that could do no∣thing but give Orders, and yet he was no Bishop. 5. A Minister should preach according to the Articles of Religion established in the Church where he is. To be a Civil Lawyer let a Man read Justinian, and the Body of the Law, to confirm his Brain to that way, but when he comes to pra∣ctise, he must make use of it so far as it concerns the Law received in his own Country. To be a Physician let a Man read Gallen and Hypocrates; but when he practises, he must apply his Medicines ac∣cording to the Temper of those Men's Bodies with whom he lives, and have re∣spect to the Heat and Cold of Climes, otherwise that which in Pergamus (where Gallen liv'd) was Physick, in our cold
Climate may be Poyson. So to be a Divine, let him read the whole Body of Divinity, the Fathers and the Schoolmen, but when he comes to practise, he must use it and apply it according to those Grounds and Articles of Religion that are established in the Church, and this with Sense. 6. There be four things a Minister should be at; the Conscionary Part, Eccle∣siactical Story, School Divinity, and the Casuists. 1. In the Conscionary Part, he must read all the chief Fathers, both Latine and Greek wholly. St. Austin, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostome, both the Gregories, &c. Tertul∣lian, Clemens, Alexandrinus, and Epipha∣nius; which last have more Learning in them than all the rest, and writ freely. 2. For Ecclesiastical Story let him read Baronius, with the Magdeburgenses, and be his own Judge, the one being extream∣ly for the Papists, the other extreamly a∣gainst them. 3. For School Divinity let him get Javel∣lus's Edition of Scotus or Mayco, where there be Quotations that direct you to every Schoolman, where such and such Questions are handled. Without School Divinity a Divine knows nothing Logi∣cally,
nor will be able to satisfie a ratio∣nal Man out of the Pulpit. 4. The Study of the Casuists must fol∣low the Study of the School-men, because the Division of their Cases, is according to their Divinity; otherwise he that be∣gins with them will know little. As he that begins with the study of the Reports and Cases in the Common Law, will thereby know little of the Law. Casuists may be of admirable use, if discreetly dealt with, though among them you shall have many Leaves together very impertinent. A Case well decided would stick by a Man, they will remember it whether they will or no, whereas a quaint Position di∣eth in the Birth. The main thing is to know where to search; for talk what they will of vast Memories, no Man will presume upon his own Memory for any thing he means to write or speak in publick. 7. [Go and teach all Nations.] This was said to all Christians that then were be∣fore the distinction of Clergy and Lai∣ty; there have been since, Men design'd to preach only by the State, as some Men are design'd to studdy the Law, o∣thers to studdy Physick. When the Lord's Supper was instituted, there were none
present but the Disciples, shall none then but Ministers receive? 8. There is all the reason you should believe your Minister, unless you have studied Divinity as well as he, or more than he. 9. 'Tis a foolish thing to say Ministers must not meddle with Secular Matters, because his own profession will take up the whole Man; may he not eat, or drink, or walk, or learn to sing? the meaning of that is, he must seriously attend his Calling. 10. Ministers with the Papists [that is their Priests] have much respect, with the Puritans they have much, and that upon the same ground, they pretend both of 'em to come immediately from Christ; but with the Protestants they have very little, the reason whereof is, in the be∣ginning of the Reformation they were glad to get such to take Livings as they could procure by any Invitations, things of pitiful Condition. The Nobility and Gentry, would not suffer their Sons or Kindred to meddle with the Church, and therefore at this day, when they see a Parson, they think him to be such a thing still, and there they will keep him, and use him accordingly; if he be a Gen∣tleman,
that is singled out, and he is us'd the more respectfully. 11. The Protestant Minister is least re∣garded, appears by the old Story of the Keeper of the Clink. He had Priests of several sorts sent unto him; as they came in, he ask'd them who they were; who are you to the first? I am a Priest of the Church of Rome; you are welcome quoth the Keeper, there are those will take Care of you, and who are you? A si∣lenc'd Minister. You are welcome too, I shall fare the better for you: And who are you? A Minister of the Church of England. O God help me (quoth the Keeper) I shall get nothing by you, I am sure you may lie and starve, and rot, before any body will look after you. 12. Methinks 'tis an ignorant thing for a Church-man, to call himself the Mi∣nister of Christ, because St. Paul, or the Apostles call'd themselves so. If one of them had a Voice from Heaven, as St. Paul had, I will grant he is a Mini∣ster of Christ, I will call him so too. Must they take upon them as the Apostles did? Can they do as the Apostles could? The Apostles had a Mark to be known by, spake Tongues, cur'd Diseases, trod upon Serpents, &c. Can they do this? If
a Gentleman tells me, he will send his Man to me, and I did not know his Man, but he gave me this mark to know him by, he should bring in his Hand a rich Jewel; if a Fellow came to me with a Pebble-Stone, had I any reason to believe he was the Gentleman's Man? Money. 1. MOney makes a Man laugh. A blind Fidler playing to a Company, and playing but Scurvily, the Company laught at him; his Boy that led him, perceiving it, cry'd, Father let us be gone, they do nothing but laugh at you. Hold thy Peace, Boy, said the Fidler, we shall have their money presently, and then we will laugh at them. 2. Euclid was beaten in Boccaline, for teaching his Scholars a mathematical Fi∣gure in his School, whereby he shew'd that all the Lives both of Princes and pri∣vate Men, tended to one Centre, Con Gen∣tilizza, handsomely to get Money out of other Mens Pockets, and it into their own. 3. The Pope us'd heretofore to send the Princes of Christendom to fight against the Turk, but Prince and Pope finely juggl'd to∣gether, the Moneys were rais'd, and some
Men went out to the Holy War; but com∣monly after they had got the Money, the, Turk was pretty quiet, and the Prince and the Pope shar'd it between them. 4. In all times the Princes in England have done something illegal to get Mo∣ney: But then came a Parliament and all was well, the People and the Prince kist and were Friends, and so things were quiet for a while. Afterwards there was another Trick found out to get Mo∣ney, and after they had got it, another Parliament was call'd to set all right, &c. But now they have so out-run the Constable— Moral Honesty. 1. THey that cry down moral Honesty, cry down that which is a great part of Religion, my Duty towards God, and my Duty towards Man. What care I to see a Man run after a Sermon, if he couzens and cheats as soon as he comes home. On the other side Morality must not be without Religion, for if so, it may change, as I see convenience. Religion must govern it. He that has not Religion to govern his Morality, is not a Dram better than my Mastiff-Dog; so long as you stroke him, and please him, and do
not pinch him, he will play with you as finely as may be, he is a very good mo∣ral-Mastiff; but if you hurt him, he will fly in your Face, and tear out your Throat. Mortgage. 1. IN case I receive a thousand Pounds, and mortgage as much Land as is worth two thousand to you; if I do not pay the Money at such a day, I fail, whether you may take my Land and keep it in point of Conscience? Answ. If you had my Lands as security only for your Money, then you are not to keep it, but if we bargain'd so, that if I did not repay your 1000 l. my Land should go for it, be it what it will, no doubt you may with a safe Conscience keep it; for in these things all the Obli∣gation is Servare Fidem. Number. 1. ALL those mysterious things they observe in Numbers, come to no∣thing upon this very ground, because Number in it self is nothing, has not to do with Nature, but is meerly of Hu∣mane Imposition, a meer Sound. For
Example, when I cry one a Clock, two a Clock, three a Clock, that is but Man's division of Time, the time it self goes on, and it had been all one in Nature, if those Hours had been call'd Nine, Ten, and Eleven. So when they say the Se∣venth Son is Fortunate, it means no∣thing; for if you count from the Se∣venth backward, then the First is the Se∣venth, why is not he likewise Fortunate? Oaths. 1. SWearing was another thing with the Jews than with us, because they might not pronounce the Name of the Lord Jehovah. 2. There is no Oath scarcely, but we swear to things we are ignorant of: For Example, the Oath of Supremacy; how many know how the King is King? what are his Right and Prerogative? So how many know what are the Privi∣ledges of the Parliament, and the Liber∣ty of the Subject, when they take the protestation? But the meaning is, they will defend them when they know them. As if I should swear I would take part with all that wear red Ribbons in their Hats, it may be I do not know which
Colour is Red; but when I do know, and see a red Ribbon in a Man's Hat, then will I take his Part. 3. I cannot conceive how an Oath is imposed, where there is a Parity (viz.) in the House of Commons, they are all pares inter se, onely one brings Paper, and shews it the rest, they look upon it, and in their own Sense take it: Now they are but pares to me, who am none of the House, for I do not acknow∣ledge my self their Subject; if I did, then no question, I was bound by an Oath of their imposing. 'Tis to me but read∣ing a Paper in their own Sense. 4. There is a great difference between an Assertory Oath, and a Promissary Oath. An Assertory Oath is made to a Man be∣fore God, and I must swear so, as Man may know what I mean: But a Promis∣sary Oath is made to God only, and I am sure he knows my meaning: so in the new Oath it runs [whereas I believe in my Conscience, &c. I will assist thus and thus] that [whereas] gives me an Outloofe, for if I do not believe so, for ought I know, I swear not at all. 5. In a Promissary Oath, the mind I am in is a good Interpretation; for if there be enough happen'd to change my
mind, I do not know why I should not. If I promise to go to Oxford to Morrow, and mean it when I say it, and afterwards it appears to me, that 'twill be my undo∣ing; will you say I have broke my Pro∣mise if I stay at Home? certainly I must not go. 6. The Jews had this way with them, concerning a Promissary Oath or Vow, if one of them had vow'd a Vow, which afterwards appear'd to him to be very prejudicial by reason of something he either did not foresee, or did not think of, when he made his Vow; if he made it known to three of his Country-men, they had Power to absolve him, though he could not absolve himself, and that they pick'd out of some Words in the Text: Perjury hath only to do with an Assertory Oath, and no Man was punisht for Perjury by Man's Law till Queen Eli∣zabeth's time 'twas left to God, as a sin against him; the Reason was, because 'twas so hard a thing to prove a Man perjur'd: I might misunderstand him, and he swears as he thought. 7. When Men ask me whether they may take an Oath in their own Sense, 'tis
to me, as if they should ask whether they may go to such a place upon their own Legs, I would fain know how they can go otherwise. 8. If the Ministers that are in seque∣stred Livings will not take the Engage∣ment, threaten to turn them out and put in the old ones, and then I'll war∣rant you they will quietly take it. A Gentleman having been rambling two or three Days, at length came home, and being in Bed with his Wife, would fain have been at some thing, that she was unwilling to, and instead of complying, fell to chiding him for his being abroad so long: Well says he, if you will not, call up Sue (his Wife's Chamber-maid) upon that she yielded presently. 9. Now Oaths are so frequent, they should be taken like Pills, swallowed whole; if you chew them you will find them bitter: if you think what you swear 'twill hardly go down. Oracles. 1. ORacles ceas'd presently after Christ, as soon as no body believ'd them. Just as we have no Fortune-Tellers, nor wise Men, when no body cares for
them. Sometime you have a Season for them, when People believe them, and neither of these, I conceive, wrought by the Devil. Opinion. 1. OPinion and Affection extreamly differ; I may affect a Woman best, but it does not follow I must think her the handsomest Woman in the World. I love Apples best of any Fruit, but it does not follow, I must think Apples to be the best Fruit. Opinion is some∣thing wherein I go about to give reason why all the World should think as I think. Affection is a thing wherein I look after the pleasing of my self. 2. 'Twas a good Fancy of an old Pla∣tonick: The Gods which are above Men, had something whereof Man did partake, [an intellect Knowledge] and the Gods kept on their Course quietly. The Beasts, which are below Man, had something whereof Man did partake, [Sense and Growth] and the Beasts lived quietly in their way. But Man had something in him, whereof neither Gods nor Beasts did partake, which gave him all the Trouble, and made all the Confusion in the World; and that is Opinion.
3. 'Tis a foolish thing for me to be brought off from an Opinion, in a thing neither of us know, but are led only by some Cobweb-stuff; as in such a Case as this, Utrum Angeli in vicem colloquantur? if I forsake my Side in such a Case, I shew my self wonderful light, or infinitely com∣plying, or flattering the other Party: But if I be in a business of Nature, and hold an Opinion one way, and some Man's Experience has found out the con∣trary, I may with a safe Reputation give up my side. 4. 'Tis a vain thing to talk of a He∣retick, for a Man for his heart can think no otherwise than he does think. In the Primitive Times there were many Opini∣ons, nothing scarce but some or other held: One of these Opinions being em∣brac'd by some Prince, and receiv'd in∣to his Kingdom, the rest were con∣demn'd as Heresies; and his Religion, which was but one of the several Opi∣nions, first is said to be Orthodox, and so have continued ever since the Apo∣stles.
Parity. 1. THis is the Juggling Trick of the Parity, they would have no body above them, but they do not tell you they would have no body under them. Parliament. 1. ALL are involv'd in a Parliament. There was a time when all Men had their Voice in choosing Knights. A∣bout Henry the Sixth's time they found the inconvenience, so one Parliament made a Law, that only he that had forty Shillings per annum should give his Voice, they under should be excluded. They made the Law who had the Voice of all, as well under forty Shillings; as above; and thus it continues at this Day. All consent civilly in a Parliament, Women are involv'd in the Men, Children in those of perfect Age; those that are under forty Shillings a Year, in those that have forty Shillings a year, those of forty Shillings in the Knights. 2. All things are brought to the Par∣liament, little to the Courts of Justice: just as in a Room where there is a Ban∣quet
presented, if there be Persons of Quality there, the People must ex∣pect, and stay till the great ones have done. 3. The Parliament flying upon seve∣ral Men, and then letting them alone, does as a Hawk that flyes a Covey of Partridges, and when she has flown them a great way, grows weary, and takes a Tree; then the Faulconer lures her down, and takes her to his Fist: on they go again, heirett, upsprings another Co∣vey, away goes the Hawk, and as she did before, takes another Tree, &c. 4. Dissenters in Parliament may at length come to a good end, though first there be a great deal of do, and a great deal of Noise, which mad, wild Folks make: just as in brewing of Wrest-Beer, there's a great deal of Business in grind∣ing the Mault, and that spoils any Man's Cloaths that comes near it: then it must be mash'd, then comes a Fellow in and drinks of the Wort, and he's drunk; then they keep a huge quarter when they car∣ry it into the Cellar, and a twelve Month after 'tis delicate fine Beer. 5. It must necessarily be that our Di∣stempers are worse than they were in the beginning of the Parliament. If a Physi∣cian
comes to a sick Man, he lets him Blood, it may be scarifyes him, cups him, puts him into a great disorder, before he makes him well; and if he be sent for to cure an Ague, and he finds his Patient hath many Diseases, a Dropsie, and a Pal∣sie, he applies Remedies to 'em all, which makes the cure the longer and the dearer: this is the Case. 6. The Parliament-men are as great Princes as any in the World, when what∣soever they please is priviledge of Parlia∣ment; no Man must know the num∣ber of their Priviledges, and whatsoever they dislike is breach of Priviledge. The Duke of Venice is no more than Speaker of the House of Commons; but the Se∣nate at Venice, are not so much as our Parliament-men, nor have they that Pow∣er over the People, who yet exercise the greatest Tyranny that is any where. In plain truth, breach of Priviledge is only the actual taking away of a Member of the House, the rest are Offences against the House. For Example, to take our Pro∣cess against a Parliament-man, or the like. 7. The Parliament Party, if the Law be for them, they call for the Law; if it be against them, they will go to a Par∣liamentary
Way; if no Law be for them, then for Law again: Like him that first call'd for Sack to heat him, then small Drink to cool his Sack, then Sack again to heat his small Drink, &c. 8. The Parliament Party doe not play fair Play, in sitting up till two of the Clock in the Morning, to vote something they have a mind to. 'Tis like a craf∣ty Gamester, that makes the Company drunk, then cheats them of their Money. Young Men, and infirm Men go away; besides, a Man is not there to persuade other Men to be of his mind, but to speak his own Heart, and if it be lik'd, so, if not, there's an end. Parson. 1. THough we write [Parson] different∣ly, yet 'tis but Person; that is, the individual Person set apart for the Service of such a Church, and 'tis in La∣tin Persona, and Personatus is a Personage. Indeed with the Canon-Lawyers, Perso∣natus is any Dignity or Perferment in the Church. 2. There never was a merry World since the Faries left Dancing, and the Parson left Conjuring. The Opinion of
the latter kept Thieves in aw, and did as much good in a Country as a Ju∣stice of Peace. Patience. 1. PAtience is the chiefest fruit of Stu∣dy, a Man that strives to make himself a different thing from other Men by much reading, gains this chiefest Good, that in all Fortunes, he hath something to entertain and comfort himself withal. Peace. 1. KIng James was pictur'd going easi∣ly down a Pair of Stairs, and up∣pon every Step there was written, Peace, Peace, Peace; the wisest way for men in these times is to say nothing. 2. When a Country-wench cannot get her Butter to come, she says, the Witch is in her Churn. We have been churn∣ing for Peace a great while, and 'twill not come, sure the Witch is in it. 3. Though we had Peace, yet 'twill be a great while e'er things be settled: Tho' the Wind lie, yet after a Storm the Sea will work a great while.
Penance. 1. PEnance is only the Punishment in∣flicted, not Penitence, which is the right word; a Man comes not to do Penance, because he repents him of his Sin, but because he is compell'd to it; he curses him, and could kill him that sends him thither. The old Canons wise∣ly enjoyn'd three years Penance, some∣times more, because in that time a Man got a habit of Vertue, and so commit∣ted that sin no more, for which he did Penance. People. 1. THere is not any thing in the World more abus'd than this Sentence, Salus populi suprema Lex esto, for we ap∣ply it, as if we ought to forsake the known Law, when it may be most for the advantage of the People, when it means no such thing. For first, 'tis not Salus populi suprema Lex est, but esto, it being one of the Laws of the Twelve Tables, and after divers Laws made, some for Punishment, some for Reward; then follows this, Salus populi suprema Lex
esto: That is, in all the Laws you make, have a special Eye to the Good of the People, and then what does this con∣cern the way they now go? 2. Objection. He that makes one is greater than he that is made; the Peo∣ple make the King, ergo, &c. Answer. This does not hold, for if I have 1000 l. per Annum, and give it you, and leave my self ne'er a Penny; I made you, but when you have my Land, you are greater than I. The Parish makes the Constable, and when the Constable is made, he governs the Parish. The An∣swer to all these Doubts is, Have you agreed so? if you have, then it must re∣main till you have alter'd it. Pleasure. 1. PLeasure is nothing else but the in∣termission of Pain, the enjoying of some thing I am in great trouble for 'till I have it. 2. 'Tis a wrong way to proportion other Mens Pleasures to our selves; 'tis like a Childs using a little Bird [O poor Bird, thou shalt sleep with me] so lays it in his Bosome, and stifles it with his hot reath; the Bird had rather be in the
cold Air: And yet too, 'tis the most pleasing Flattery, to like what other Men like. 3. 'Tis most undoubtedly true, that all Men are equally given to their Plea∣sure, only thus, one Mans Pleasure lies one way, and anothers another: Plea∣sures are all alike simply considered in themselves; he that hunts, or he that go∣verns the Common-Wealth, they both please themselves alike, only we com∣mend that, whereby we our selves re∣ceive some Benefit. As if a Man place his Delight in things that tend to the common Good; he that takes Pleasure to hear Sermons, enjoys himself as much as he that hears Plays; and could he that loves Plays endeavour to love Sermons, possibly he might bring himself to it as well as to any other Pleasure. As first it may seem harsh and tedious, but after∣wards 'twould be pleasing and delightful. So it falls out in that, which is the great Pleasure of some Men; Tobacco, at first they could not abide it, and now they cannot be without it. 4. Whilst you are upon Earth, enjoy the good Things that are here (to that end were they given) and be not me∣lancholly, and wish your self in Hea∣ven.
If a King should give you the keep∣ing of a Castle, with all things belong∣ing to it, Orchards, Gardens, &c. and bid you use them; withal promise you that after twenty Years to remove you to the Court, and to make you a Privy Coun∣cellor. If you should neglect your Ca∣stle, and refuse to eat of those Fruits, and sit down, and whine, and wish you were a Privy Councellor, do you think the King would be pleas'd with you? 5. Pleasures of Meat, Drink, Cloaths, &c. are forbidden those that know not how to use them; just as Nurses cry pah, when they see a Knife in a Child's Hand, they will never say any thing to a Man. Philosophy. 1. WHen Men comfort themselves with Philosophy, 'tis not be∣cause they have got two or three Sen∣tences, but because they have digested those Sentences and made them their own: So upon the Matter, Philosophy is nothing but Discretion.
Poetry 1. OVid was not only a fine Poet, but [as a Man may speak] a great Canon Lawyer, as appears in his Fasti, where we have more of the Festivals of the old Romans than any where else: 'tis pity the rest are lost. 2. There is no reason Plays should be in Verse, either in Blank or Rhime; only the Poet has to say for himself, that he makes something like that, which some∣body made before him. The old Poets had no other reason but this, their Verse was sung to Musick, otherwise it had been a senseless thing to have fet∣ter'd up themselves. 3. I never converted but two, the one was Mr. Crashaw, from writing against Plays, by telling him a way how to un∣derstand that Place [of putting on Wo∣mens Apparel] which has nothing to do in the Business [as neither has it, that the Fathers speak against Plays in their Time, with reason enough, for they had real Idolatries mix'd with their Plays, having three Altars perpetually upon the Stage.] The other was a Doctor of Divinity, from preaching against Painting, which
simply in it self is no more hurtful, than putting on my Cloaths, or doing any thing to make my self like other Folks, that I may not be odious nor offensive to the Company. Indeed if I do it with an ill Intention, it alters the Case; so, if I put on my Gloves with an inten∣tion to do a mischief, I am a Villain. 4. 'Tis a fine thing for Children to learn to make Verse, but when they come to be Men: they must speak like other Men, or else they will be laugh'd at. 'Tis ridiculous to speak, or write, or preach in Verse. As 'tis good to learn to dance, a Man may learn his Leg, learn to go handsomely; but 'tis ridiculous for him to dance, when he should go. 5. 'Tis ridiculous for a Lord to print Verses: 'tis well enough to make them to please himself, but to make them pub∣lick, is foolish. If a Man in a private Chamber twirls his Band-strings, or plays with a Rush to please himself, 'tis well enough; but if he should go into Fleet∣street, and sit upon a Stall, and twirl a Band-string, or play with a Rush, then all the Boys in the Street would laugh at him. 6. Verse proves nothing but the quanti∣ty of Syllables; they are not meant for Logick.
Pope. 1. A Pope's Bull and a Pope's Brief dif∣fer very much; as with us the Great Seal and Privy Seal. The Bull be∣ing the highest Authority the King can give, the Brief is of less: The Bull has a Leaden Seal upon Silk, hanging upon the Instrument; the Brief has sub Annu∣lo Piscatoris upon the side. 2. He was a wise Pope, that when one that used to be merry with him, before he was advanc'd to the Popedom, re∣frain'd afterwards to come at him, (pre∣suming he was busie in governing the Christian World) the Pope sends for him, bids him come again, and (says he) we will be merry as as we were before; for thou little thinkest what a little Foolery go∣verns the whole World. 3. The Pope in sending Relicks to Prin∣ces, does as Wenches do by their Wassels at New-years-tide, they present you with a Cup, and you must drink of a slab∣by stuff; but the meaning is, you must give them Moneys, ten times more than it is worth. 4. the Pope is Infallible, where he hath Power to command; that is, where he
must be obeyed, so is every Supream Power and Prince. They that stretch his Infallibility further, do they know not what. 5. When a Protestant and a Papish dis∣pute, they talk like two Mad-men, be∣cause they do not agree upon their Prin∣ciples; the one way is to destroy the Pope's Power, for if he hath Power to command me, 'tis not my alledging Rea∣sons to the contrary can keep me from obeying: For Example, if a Constable command me to wear a green Suit to Morrow, and has Power to make me; 'tis not my alledging a hundred Reasons of the Folly of it, can excuse me from doing it. 6. There was a Time when the Pope had Power here in England, and there was excellent Use made of it, for 'twas only to serve Turns, (as might be mani∣fested out of the Records of the King∣dom, which Divines know little of.) If the King did not like what the Pope would have, he would forbid the Pope's Legate to land upon his Ground. So that the Power was truly then in the King, though suffered in the Pope. But now the Temporal and the Spiritual Power (Spi∣ritual so call'd, because ordain'd to a Spi∣ritual
End) spring both from one Foun∣tain, they are like to twist that. 7. The Protestants in France bear Of∣fice in the State, because though their Religion be different, yet they acknow∣ledge no other King but the King of France. The Papists in England they must have a King of their own, a Pope, that must do something in our Kingdom, therefore there is no reason they should enjoy the same Priviledges. 8. Amsterdam admits of all Religions but Papists, and 'tis upon the same Ac∣count. The Papists where e'er they live, have another King at Rome; all other Religions are subject to the present State, and have no Prince else-where. 9. The Papists call our Religion a Par∣liamentary Religion; but there was once, I am sure, a Parliamentary Pope; Pope Urban was made Pope in England by Act of Parliament, against Pope Clement: The Act is not in the Book of Statutes, ei∣ther because he that compiled the Book would not have the Name of the Pope there, or else he would not let it appear that they medled with any such thing, but 'tis upon the Rolls. 10. When our Clergy preach against the Pope, and the Church of Rome, they
preach against themselves, and crying down their Pride, their Power and their Riches, have made themselves Poor and Contemptible enough; they dedicate first to please their Prince, not consider∣ing what would follow. Just as if a Man were to go a Journey, and seeing at his first setting out the Way clean and fair, ventures forth in his Slippers, not consi∣dering the Dirt and the Sloughs are a little further off, or how suddenly the Weather may change. Popery. 1. THE demanding a Noble, for a dead body passing through a a Town, came from hence in time of Popery, they carried the dead Body into the Church, where the Priest said Dir∣gies; and twenty Dirgies at four Pence a piece, comes to a Noble; but now it is forbidden by an Order from my Lord Marshal, the Heralds carry his Warrant about them. 2. We charge the Prelatical Clergy with Popery, to make them odious, tho' we know they are guilty of no such thing: Just as heretofore they call'd Ima∣ges Mammets, and the Adoration of Ima∣ges
Mammetry: that is, Mahomet and Ma∣hometry; odious Names, when all the World knows the Turks are forbidden I∣mages by their Religion. Power. State. 1. THere is no stretching of Power; 'tis a good Rule, Eat within your Stomach, Act within your Commission. 2. They that govern most make least Noise. You see when they row in a Barge, they that do drudgery-work, slash, and puff, and sweat; but he that governs, sits quietly at the Stern, and scarce is seen to stir. 3. Syllables govern the World. 4. [All Power is of God] means no more than Fides est servanda. When St. Paul said this, the People had made Nero Emperour. They agree, he to command, they to obey. Then Gods comes in, and casts a hook upon them, keep your Faith: then comes in, all Power is of God. Ne∣ver King dropt out of the Clouds. God did not make a new Emperour, as the King makes a Justice of Peace. 5. Christ himself was a great obser∣ver of the Civil Power, and did many things only justifiable, because the State
requir'd it, which were things meerly Temporary for the time that State stood. But Divines make use of them to gain Power to themselves, (as for Example) that of Die Ecclesiae, tell the Church; there was then a Sanhedrim, a Court to tell it to, and therefore they would have it so now. 6. Divines ought to do no more than what the State permits. Before the State became Christian, they made their own Laws, and those that did not observe them, they Excommunicated, [naughty men] they suffered them to come no more amongst them. But if they would come amongst them, how could they hinder them? By what Law? by what Power? they were still subject to the State, which was Heathen. Nothing better expresses the Condition of Christians in those times, than one of the meetings you have in London, of Men of the same Country, of Sussex-Men, or Bedfordshire-Men; they appoint their Meeting, and they agree, and make Laws amongst themselves [He that is not there shall pay double, &c.] and if any one mis-behave himself, they shut him out of their Company: But can they recover a Forfeiture made concerning their Meeting by any Law? Have they
any power to compel one to pay? but afterwards, when the State became Chri∣stian, all the Power was in them, and they gave the Church as much, or as lit∣tle as they pleas'd; and took away when they pleas'd, and added what they pleas'd. 7. The Church is not only subject to the Civil Power with us that are Prote∣stants, but also in Spain: if the Church does Excommunicate a Man for what it should not, the Civil Power will take him out of their Hands. So in France, the Bishop of Angiers alter'd something in the Breviary; they complain'd to the Par∣liament at Paris, that made him alter it again, with a [comme abuse.] 8. the Parliament of England has no Arbitrary Power in point of Judicature, but in point of making Law only. 9. If the Prince be servus natura, of a servile base Spirit, and the Subjects liberi, Free and Ingenuous, oft-times they de∣pose their Prince, and govern themselves. On the contrary, if the People be Ser∣vi Natura, and some one amongst them of a Free and Ingenuous Spirit, he makes himself King of the rest; and this is the Cause of all changes in State, Common-wealths into Monarchies, and Monarchies into Common-wealths.
10. In a troubled State we must do as in foul Weather upon the Thames, not think to cut directly through, so the Boat may be quickly full of Water, but rise and fall as the Waves do, give as much as conveniently we can. Prayer. 1. IF I were a Minister, I should think my self most in my Office, reading of Prayers, and dispensing the Sacraments; and 'tis ill done to put one to officiate in the Church, whose Person is contem∣ptible out of it. Should a great Lady, that was invited to be a Gossip, in her place send her Kitchen-Maid, 'twould be ill taken; yet she is a Woman as well as she; let her send her Woman at least. 2. [You shall pray] is the right way, because according as the Church is set∣tled, no Man may make a Prayer in pu∣blick of his own Head. 3. 'Tis not the Original Common∣prayer-book; why: shew me an original Bible, or an original Magna Charta. 4. Admit the Preacher prayes by the Spiris, yet that very Prayer is Common∣prayer to the People; they are ty'd as much to his Words, as in saying [Almigh∣ty
and most merciful Father:] Is it then un∣lawful in the Minister, but not unlawful in the People? 5. There were some Mathematicians, that could with one fetch of their Pen make an exact Circle, and with the next touch, point out the Centre; is it there∣fore reasonable to banish all use of the Compasses? Set Forms are a pair of Compasses. 6. [God hath given gifts unto Men.] General Texts prove nothing: let him shew me John, William, or Thomas in the Text, and then I will believe him. If a Man hath a voluble Tongue, we say, he hath the gift of prayer. His gift is to pray long, that I see; but does he pray better? 7. We take care what we speak to Men, but to God we may say any thing. 8. The people must not think a thought towards God, but as their Pastours will put it into their Mouths: they will make right Sheep of us. 9. The English Priests would do that in English, which the Romish do in Latin, keep the people in Ignorance; but some of the people out do them at their own Game.
10. Prayer should be short, without giving God Almighty Reasons why he should grant this, or that; he knows best what is Good for us. If your Boy should ask you a Suit of Cloaths, and give you Reasons (otherwise he cannot wait upon you; he cannot go abroad but he will discredit you) would you endure it? you know it better than he, let him ask a Suit of Cloaths. 11. If a Servant that has been fed with good Beef, goes into that part of Eng∣land where Salmon is plenty, at first he is pleas'd with his Salmon, and despises his Beef, but after he has been there a while, he grows weary of his Salmon, and wishes for his good Beef again. We have a while been much taken with this praying by the Spirit, but in time we may grow weary of it, and wish for our Common-Prayer. 12. 'Tis hop'd we may be cur'd of our extemporary Prayers, the same way the Grocer's Boy is cur'd of his eating Plums, when we have had our Belly full of them.
Preaching. 1. NOthing is more mistaken than that Speech [Preach the Gospel] for 'tis not to make long Harangues, as they do now a days, but to tell the News of Christ's coming into the World; and when that is done, or where 'tis known already, the Preacher's Work is done. 2. Preaching in the first sense of the word ceas'd as soon as ever the Gospel was written. 3. When the Preacher says, this is the Meaning of the Holy Ghost in such a place, in sense he can mean no more than this; that is, I by studying of the place, by comparing one place with a∣nother; by weighing what goes before, and what comes after, think this is the Meaning of the Holy Ghost; and for shortness of Expression I say, the Holy Ghost says thus, or this is the Meaning of the Spirit of God. So the Judge speaks of the King's Proclamation, this is the Intention of the King; not that the King had declared his Intention any other way to the Judge, but the Judge examin∣ing the Contents of the Proclamation, ga∣thers by the purport of the Words the
King's Intention; and then for shortness of expression says, this is the King's In∣tention. 4. Nothing is Text but what was spo∣ken in the Bible, and meant there for Per∣son and Place, the rest is Application, which a discreet Man may do well; but 'tis his Scripture, not the Holy Ghost. 5. Preaching by the Spirit (as they call it) is most esteemed by the Common-peo∣ple, because they cannot abide Art or Learning, which they have not been bred up in. Just as in the Business of Fen∣cing; if one Country Fellow amongst the rest, has been at the School, the rest will under-value his Skill, or tell him he wants Valour: You come with your School-Tricks: There's Dick Butcher has ten times more Mettle in him: So they say to the Preach∣ers, You come with your School-Learning: There's such a one has the Spirit. 6. The Tone in preaching does much in working upon the peoples Affections. If a Man should make Love in an ordina∣ry Tone, his Mistress would not regard him; and therefore he must whine. If a Man should cry Fire, or Murther in an ordinary Voice, no body would come out to help him.
7. Preachers will bring any thing into the Text. The young Masters of Arts preached against Non-Residency in the University; whereupon the Heads made an Order, that no Man should med∣dle with any thing but what was in the Text. The next Day one preach'd up∣on these Words, Abraham begot Isaac: when he had gone a good way, at last he observ'd, that Abraham was Resident; for if he had been Non-Resident, he could never have begot Isaac; and so fell foul upon the Non-Residents. 8. I could never tell what often preach∣ing meant after a Church is settled, and we know what is to be done; 'tis just as if a Husband-man should once tell his Servants what they are to do, when to sow, when to reap, and afterwards one should come and tell them twice or thrice a Day what they know already. You must sow your Wheat in October, you must reap your Wheat in August, &c. 9. The main Argument why they would have two Sermons a Day, is, because they have two Meals a Day; the Soul must be fed as well as the Body. But I may as well argue, I ought to have two No∣ses, because I have two Eyes, or two Mouths because I have two Ears. What
have Meals and Sermons to do one with another? 10. The Things between God and Man are but a few, and those, forsooth, we must be told often of; but things be∣tween Man and Man are many; those I hear of not above twice a Year, at the Assizes, or once a Quarter at the Sessi∣ones; but few come then: nor does the Minister exhort the People to go at these times to learn their Duty towards their Neighbours. Often preaching is sure to keep the Minister in Countenance, that he may have something to do. 11. In preaching they say more to raise Men to love Vertue than Men can possibly perform, to make them do their best; as if you would teach a Man to throw the Bar; to make him put out his Strength, you bid him throw further than it is possible for him, or any Man else: Throw over yonder House. 12. In preaching they do by Men as Writers of Romances do by their chief Knights, bring them into many Dangers, but still fetch them off: So they put Men in fear of Hell, but at last bring them to Heaven. 13. Preachers say, do as I say, not as I do. But if a Physician had the same
Disease upon him that I have, and he should bid me do one thing, and he do quite another, could I believe him? 14. Preaching the same Sermon to all sorts of People, is, as if a School-Master should read the same Lesson to his several Forms: If he reads Amo, amas, amavi, the highest Forms Laugh at him; the younger Boys admire him: So 'tis in preaching to a mix'd Auditory. Obj. But it cannot be otherwise; the Parish can∣not be divided into several Forms: What must the Preacher then do in Dis∣cretion? Answ. Why then let him use some expressions by which this or that condition of people may know such Do∣ctrine does more especially concern them, it being so delivered that the wisest may be contented to hear. For if he deli∣vers it altogether, and leaves it to them to single out what belongs to themselves (which is the usual way) 'tis as if a Man would bestow Gifts upon Children of several Ages: Two Years old, Four Years old, Ten Years old, &c. and there he brings Tops, Pins, Points, Ribbands, and casts them all in a Heap together upon a Table before them; though the Boy of Ten Years old knows how to chuse his Top, yet the Child of Two Years old,
that should have a Ribband, takes a Pin, and the Pin e'er he be aware pricks his Fingers, and then all's out of Order, &c. Preaching for the most part is the glory of the Preacher, to shew himself a fine Man. Catechising would do much bet∣ter. 15. Use the best Arguments to per∣swade, though but few understand; for the Ignorant will sooner believe the ju∣dicious of the Parish, than the Preacher himself; and they teach when they dis∣sipate what he has said, and believe it the sooner confirm'd by Men of their own side. For betwixt the Laity and the Clergy there is, as it were, a continual driving of a bargain; something the Clergy would still have us be at, and therefore many things are heard from the Preacher with suspicion. They are af∣fraid of some ends, which are easily as∣sented to, when they have it from some of themselves. 'Tis with a Sermon as 'tis with a Play; many come to see it, which do not understand it; and yet hearing it cry'd up by one, whose judg∣ment they cast themselves upon, and of power with them, they swear and will die in it, that 'tis a very good Play, which they would not have done if the Priest
himself had told them so. As in a great School, 'tis the Master that teaches all; the Monitor does a great deal of work, it may be the Boys are affraid to see the Master: so in a Parish 'tis not the Minister does all; the greater Neighbour teaches the lesser, the Master of the House teach∣es his Servant, &c. 16. First in your Sermons use your Logick, and then your Rhetorick. Rhe∣torick without Logick is like a Tree with Leaves and Blosoms, but no Root; yet I confess more are taken with Rhe∣torick than Logick, because they are catch∣ed with a free Expression, when they un∣derstand not Reason. Logick must be natural, or it is worth nothing at all: Your Rhetorick Figures may be learn'd: That Rhetorick is best which is most sea∣sonable and most catching. An instance we have in that old blunt Commander at Cadis, who shew'd himself a good O∣ratour, being to say something to his Soldiers (which he was not us'd to do;) he made them a Speech to this purpose; What a shame will it be, you English-men, that feed upon good Beef and Brewess, to let those Rascally Spaniards beat you that eat nothing but Oranges and Limons. And so put more Courage into his Men than he
could have done with a more learned Oration. Rhetorick is very good, or stark naught: There's no Medium in Rhe∣torick. If I am not fully perswaded I laugh at the Oratour. 17. 'Tis good to preach the same thing again, for that's the way to have it learn'd. You see a Bird by often whist∣ling to learn a Tune, and a Month af∣ter record it to her self. 18. 'Tis a hard Case a Minister should be turned out of his Living for some∣thing they inform he should say in his Pulpit. We can no more know what a Minister said in his Sermon by two or three words pickt out of it, than we can tell what Tune a Musician play'd last upon the Lute, by two or three sin∣gle Notes. Predestination. 1. THey that talk nothing but Pre∣destination, and will not pro∣ceed in the way of Heaven till they be satisfied in that point, do, as a Man that would not come to London, unless at his first step he might set his Foot upon the Top of Pauls.
2. For a young Divine to begin in his Pulpit with Predestination, is as if a Man were coming into London, and at his first Step would think to set his Foot, &c. 3. Predestination is a point inaccessible, out of our reach; we can make no notion of it, 'tis so full of Intricacy, so full of Con∣tradiction; 'tis in good earnest, as we state it, half a Dozen Bulls one upon another. 4. Doctor Prideaux, in his Lectures, several Days us'd Arguments to prove Predestination; at last tells his Auditory they are damn'd that do not believe it. Doing herein just like School-Boys, when one of them has got an Apple, or some∣thing the rest have a mind to, they use all the Arguments they can to get some of it from them: I gave you some t'other Day: You shall have some with me another time: When they cannot prevail, they tell him he's a Jackanapes, a Rogue and a Rascal, Preferment. 1. WHen you would have a Child go to such a place, and you find him unwilling, you tell him he shall ride a Cock-horse, and then he will go presently: So do those that govern the State, deal by Men, to work them to
their Ends; they tell them they shall be advanc'd to such or such a place, and they will do any thing they would have them. 2. A great Place strangely qualifies. John Read (was in the right) Groom of the Chamber to my Lord of Kent. At∣torney Noy being dead, some were say∣ing, how would the King do for a fit Man? Why, any Man (says John Read) may execute the Place. I warrant (says my Lord) thou thinkst thou understand'st enough to perform it. Yes, quoth John, Let the King make me Attorney, and I would fain see that Man, that durst tell me, there's any thing I understand not. 3. When the Pageants are a coming there's a great thrusting and a riding up∣on one another's Backs, to look out at the Window; stay a little and they will come just to you, you may see them quietly. So 'tis when a new States-man or Officer is chosen; there's great expe∣ctation and listning who it should be; stay a while, and you may know qui∣etly. 4. Missing Preferment makes the Pres∣byters fall foul upon the Bishops: Men that are in hopes and in the way of
rising, keep in the Channel, but they that have none, seek new ways: 'Tis so amongst the Lawyers; he that hath the Judges Ear, will be very observant of the way of the Court; but he that hath no regard will be flying out. 5. My Lord Digby having spoken some∣thing in the House of Commons, for which they would have question'd him, was presently called to the upper House. He did by the Parliament as an Ape when he hath done some waggery; his Master spies him, and he looks for his Whip, but before he can come at him, whip says he to the top of the House. 6. Some of the Parliament were discon∣tented, that they wanted places at Court, which others had got; but when they had them once, then they were quiet. Just as at a Christning some, that get no Sugar Plums, when the rest have, mutter and grumble; presently the Wench comes a∣gain with her Basket of Sugar-plums, and then they catch and scramble, and when they have got them, you hear no more of them.
Praemunire. 1. THere can be no Praemunire. A Praemunire (so call'd from the word Praemunire facias) was when a Man laid an Action in an Ecclesiastical Court, for which he could have no remedy in any of the King's Courts; that is, in the Courts of Common Law, by reason the Eccle∣siastical Courts before Henry the Eighth were subordinate to the Pope, and so it was contra coronam & dignitatem Regis; but now the Ecclesiastical Courts are equally subordinate to the King. There∣fore it cannot be contra coronam & dig∣nitatem Regis, and so no Praemunire. Prerogative. 1. PRerogative is something that can be told what it is, not something that has no Name. Just as you see the Archbishop has his Prerogative Court, but we know what is done in that Court. So the King's Prerogative is not his will, or what Divines make it a power, to do what he lists. 2. The King's Prerogative, that is, the King's Law. For example, if you ask whether a Patron may present to a Living after six Months by Law? I answer no.
If you ask whether the King may? I an∣swer he may by his Prerogative, that is by the Law that concerns him in that case. Presbytery. 1. THey that would bring in a new Government, would very fain perswade us, they meet it in Antiquity. thus they interpret Presbyters, when they meet the word in the Fathers: Other professions likewise pretend to Antiquity. The Alchymist will find his Art in Vir∣gil's Aureus ramus, and he that delights in Opticks will find them in Tacitus. When Caesar came into England they would per∣swade us, they had Perspective-Glasses, by which he could discover what they were doing upon the Land, because it is said, Positis Speculis: the meaning is, His Watch or his Sentinel discover'd this, and this, unto him. 2. Presbyters have the greatest power of any Clergy in the World, and gull the Laity most: For Example; admit there be twelve Laymen to six Presby∣ters, the six shall govern the rest as they please. First because they are constant, and the others come in like Church-War∣dens in their turns, which is an huge
Advantage, Men will give way to them who have been in place before them. Next the Laymen have other professions to follow: the Presbyters make it their sole Business; and besides too, they learn and study the Art of perswading; some of Geneva have confess'd as much. 3. The Presbyter with his Elders a∣bout him, is like a young Tree fenc'd a∣bout with two, or three, or four Stakes; the Stakes defend it, and hold it up; but the Tree only prospers and flourishes; it may be some Willow Stake may bear a Leaf or two, but it comes to nothing. Lay-Elders are Stakes, the Presbyter the Tree that flourshes. 4. When the Queries were sent to the Assembly concerning the Jus Divinum of Presbytery, their asking time to an∣swer them, was a Satyr upon themselves: For if it were to be seen in the Text, they might quickly turn to the place, and shew us it. Their delaying to answer makes us think there's no such thing there. They do just as you have seen a fellow do at a Tavern Reckoning, when he should come to pay his Reckoning, he puts his Hands into his Pockets, and keeps a grabling and a fumbling, and shaking, at last tells you he has left his Money at
home, when all the Company knew at first, he had no Money there; for every Man can quickly find his own Money. Priests of Rome. 1. THE Reason of the Statute against Priests, was this; In the begin∣ning of Queen Elizabeth there was a Statute made, that he that drew Men from their civil Obedience was a Traitor. It happen'd this was done in privacies and confessions, when there could be no proof; therefore they made another Act, that for a Priest to be in England was Treason, because they presum'd that was his busi∣ness to fetch Men off from their Obe∣dience. 2. When Queen Elizabeth dy'd, and King James came in, an Irish Priest does thus express it: Elizabetha in orcum de∣trusa, successit Jacobus alter Haereticus. You will ask why they did use such Language in their Church. Answ. Why does the Nurse tell the Child of raw Head and bloody Bones, to keep it in awe? 3. The Queen Mother and Count Ros∣set, are to the Priests and Jesuits like the Honey Pot to the Flies.
4. The Priests of Rome aim but at two Things, to get Power from the King, and Money from the Subject. 5. When the Priests come into a Fa∣mily, they do as a Man that would set fire on a House; he does not put fire to the Brick-Wall, but thrusts it into the Thatch. They work upon the Women, and let the Men alone. 6. For a Priest to turn a Man when he lies a dying, is just like one that hath a long time solicited a Woman, and can∣not obtain his end; at length makes her drunk, and so lies with her. Prophecies. 1. DReams and Prophecies do thus much good; they make a Man go on with boldness and courage, upon a Danger or a Mistress; if he obtains, he attributes much to them; if he miscar∣ries, he thinks no more of them, or is no more thought of himself.
Proverbs. 1. THE Proverbs of several Nations were much studied by Bishop An∣drews, and the Reason he gave, was, Be∣cause by them he knew the Minds of se∣veral Nations, which is a brave thing; as we count him a wise Man, that knows the minds and insides of Men, which is done by knowing what is habitual to them. Proverbs are habitual to a Nati∣on, being transmitted from Father to Son. Question. 1. WHen a doubt is propounded, you must learn to distinguish, and show wherein a thing holds, and wherein it doth not hold: Ay, or no, never answer'd any Question. The not distinguishing where things should be di∣stinguish'd, and the not confounding, where things should be confounded, is the cause of all the Mistakes in the World.
Reason. 1. IN giving Reasons, Men commonly do with us as the Woman does with her Child; when she goes to Mar∣ket about her Business, she tells it she goes to buy it a fine Thing, to buy it a Cake or some Plums. They give us such Reasons as they think we will be catched withal, but never let us know the Truth. 2. When the School-Men talk of Recta Ratio in Morals, either they understand Reason as it is govern'd by a Command from above; or else they say no more than a Woman, when she says a thing is so, because it is so; that is, her Reason per∣swades her 'tis so. The other Acception has Sense in it. As take a Law of the Land, I must not depopulate, my Rea∣son tells me so. Why? Because if I do, I incurr the detriment. 3. The Reason of a Thing is not to be enquired after, till you are sure the Thing it self be so. We commonly are at [What's the Reason of it?] before we are sure of the Thing. 'Twas an excellent Que∣stion of my Lady Cotten, when Sir Robert Cotten was magnifying of a Shooe, which
was Moses's or Noah's, and wondring at the strange Shape and Fashion of it: But Mr. Cotten, says she, are you sure it is a Shooe. Retaliation. 1. AN Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; That does not mean, that if I put out another Man's Eye, therefore I must lose one of my own, (for what is he the better for that?) tho' this be commonly received; but it means, I shall give him what Satisfaction an Eye shall be judged to be worth. Reverence. 1. TIS sometimes unreasonable to look after Respect and Reverence, ei∣ther from a Man's own Servant, or other Inferiours. A great Lord and a Gentle∣man talking together, there came a Boy by, leading a Calf with both his Hands; says the Lord to the Gentleman, You shall see me make the Boy let go his Calf; with that he came towards him, thinking the Boy would have put off his Hat, but the Boy took no Notice of him. The Lord seeing that, Sirrah, says
he, Do you not know me that you use no Reverence? Yes, says the Boy, if your Lordship will hold my Calf, I will put off my Hat. Non-Residency. 1. THE People thought they had a great Victory over the Clergy, when in Henry the Eighth's time they got their Bill passed, That a Clergy-Man should have but two Livings; before a Man might have Twenty or Thirty; 'twas but get∣ting a Dispensation from the Pope's Limi∣ter, or Gatherer of the Peter-Pence, which was as easily got, as now you may have a Licence to eat Flesh. 2. As soon as a Minister is made, he hath Power to preach all over the World, but the Civil-Power restrains him; he cannot preach in this Parish, or in that; there is one already appointed. Now if the State allows him Two Livings, then he hath Two Places where he may Ex∣ercise his Function, and so has the more Power to do his Office, which he might do every where if he were not restrain∣ed.
Religion. 1. KIng James said to the Fly, Have I Three Kingdoms, and thou must needs fly into my Eye? Is there not enough to meddle with upon the Stage, or in Love, or at the Table, but Reli∣gion? 2. Religion amongst Men appears to me like the Learning they got at School. Some Men forget all they learned, others spend upon the Stock, and some improve it. So some Men forget all the Religion that was taught them when they were Young, others spend upon that Stock, and some improve it. 3. Religion is like the Fashion, one Man wears his Doublet slash'd, another, lac'd, another plain; but every Man has a Doublet: So every Man has his Religi∣on. We differ about Trimming. 4. Men say they are of the same Reli∣on for Quietness sake; but if the Matter were well examin'd you would scarce find Three any where of the same Re∣ligion in all Points. 5. Every Religion is a getting Religi∣on; for though I my self get nothing, I am subordinate to those that do. So you
may find a Lawyer in the Temple that gets little for the present, but he is fitting himself to be in time one of those great Ones that do get. 6. Alteration of Religion is dangerous, because we know not where it will stay; 'tis like a Milstone that lies upon the top of a pair of Stairs; 'tis hard to remove it, but if once it be thrust off the first Stair, it never stays till it comes to the bottom. 7. Question. Whether is the Church or the Scripture Judge of Religion? Answ. In truth neither, but the State. I am trou∣bled with a Boil; I call a Company of Chirurgeons about me; one prescribes one thing, another another; I single out something I like, and ask you that stand by, and are no Chirurgeon, what you think of it. You like it too; you and I are Judges of the Plaster, and we bid them prepare it, and there's an end. Thus 'tis in Religion; the Protestants say they will be judged by the Scriptures; the Papists say so too; but that cannot speak. A Judge is no Judge, except he can both speak and command Execution; but the truth is they never intend to agree. No doubt the Pope where he is Supream, is to be Judg; if he say we in England ought to be subject to
him, then he must draw his Sword and make it good. 8. By the Law was the Manual received into the Church before the Reformation; not by the Civil Law, that had nothing to do in it; nor by the Canon Law, for that Manual that was here, was not in France, nor in Spain; but by Custom, which is the Common Law of England; and Custom is but the Elder Brother to a Parliament: and so it will fall out to be nothing that the Papists say: Ours is a Parliamentary Religion, by reason the Service-Book was Established by Act of Parliament, and never any Service-Book was so before. That will be nothing that the Pope sent the Manual; 'twas ours, because the State received it. The State still makes the Religion, and re∣ceives into it what will best agree with it. Why are the Venetians Roman Ca∣tholicks? because the State likes the Religion: All the World knows they care not Three-pence for the Pope. The Council of Trent is not at this day ad∣mitted in France. 9. Papist. Where was your Religion before Luther, an Hundred years ago? Protestant. Where was America an Hun∣dred or Sixscore Years ago? our Religi∣on
was where the rest of the Christian Church was Papist. Our Religion con∣tinued ever since the Apostles, and there∣fore 'tis better. Protestant. So did ours. That there was an Interruption of it, will fall out to be nothing, no more than if another Earl should tell me of the Earl of Kent; saying, He is a bet∣ter Earl than he, because there was one or two of the Family of Kent did not take the Title upon them; yet all that while they were really Earls; and afterwards a great Prince declar'd them to be Earls of Kent, as he that made the other Family an Earl. 10. Disputes in Religion will never be ended, because there wants a Measure by which the Business would be decided: The Puretan would be judged by the Word of God: If he would speak clear∣ly, he means himself, but he is asham'd to say so; and he would have me be∣lieve him before a whole Church, that has read the Word of God as well as he. One says one thing, and another a∣nother; and there is, I say, no Measure to end the Controversie. 'Tis just as if Two Men were at Bowls, and both judg'd by the Eye; One says 'tis his Cast, the o∣ther says 'tis my Cast and having no Mea∣sure,
the Difference is Eternal. Ben John∣son Satyrically express'd the vain Disputes of Divines, by Inigo Lanthorne, disputing with his Puppet in a Bartholomew Fair. It is so; It is not so: It is so; It is not so, crying thus one to another a quarter of an Hour together. 11. In Matters of Religion to be rul'd by one that writes against his Adversary, and throws all the Dirt he can in his Face, is, as if in point of good Manners a Man should be govern'd by one whom he sees at Cuffs with another, and there∣upon thinks himself bound to give the next Man he meets a Box on the Ear. 12. 'Tis to no purpose to labour to reconcile Religions, when the Interest of Princes will not suffer it. 'Tis well if they could be reconciled so far, that they should not cut one anothers Throats. 13. There's all the Reason in the World, Divines should not be suffer'd to go a Hair beyond their Bounds, for fear of breeding Confusion, since there now be so many Religions on Foot. The Matter was not so narrowly to be look'd after when there was but one Religion in Christendom; the rest would cry him down for an Heretick, and there was no Body to side with him.
14. We look after Religion as the Butcher did after his Knife, when he had it in his Mouth. 15. Religion is made a Juggler's Pa∣per; now 'tis a Horse, now 'tis a Lan∣thorn, now 'tis a Boar, now 'tis a Man. To serve Ends Religion is turn'd into all Shapes. 16. Pretending Religion and the Law of God, is to set all things loose. When a Man has no mind to do something he ought to do by his Contract with Man, then he gets a Text and interprets it as he pleases, and so thinks to get loose. 17. Some Mens pretending Religion, is like the roaring Boys way of chal∣lenges, [Their Reputation is dear, it does not stand with the Honour of a Gentle∣man,] when, God knows, they have neither Honour nor Reputation about them. 18. They talk much of settling Reli∣gion: Religion is well enough settled al∣ready, if we would let it alone: Me∣thinks we might look after, &c. 19. If Men would say they took Arms for any thing but Religion, they might be beaten out of it by Reason; out of that they never can, for they will not believe you what ever you say.
20. The very Arcanum of pretending Religion in all Wars, is, That something may be found out in which all Men may have Interest. In this the Groom has as much Interest as the Lord. Were it for Land, one has One Thousand Acres, and the other but one; he would not ven∣ture so far, as he that has a Thousand. But Religion is equal to both. Had all Men Land alike, by a Lex Agraria, then all Men would say they fought for Land. Sabboth. 1. WHY should I think all the fourth Commandment belongs to me, when all the fifth does not? What Land will the Lord give me for honouring my Father? It was spoken to the Jews with reference to the Land of Canaan; but the meaning is, If I honour my Parents, God will also bless me. We read the Commandments in the Church-Service, as we do David's Psalms; not that all there concerns us, but a great deal of them does.
Sacrament. 1. CHrist suffered Judas to take the Communion. Those Ministers that keep their Parishioners from it, because they will not do as they will have them, revenge, rather than reform. 2. No Man can tell whether I am fit to receive the Sacrament; for though I were fit the Day before, when he examin∣ed me; at least appear'd so to him; yet how can he tell, what Sin I have committed that Night, or the next Morning, or what Impious Atheistical Thoughts I may have about me, when I am approaching to the very Table? Salvation. 1. VVE can best understand the mean∣ing of , Salvation, from the Jews, to whom the Saviour was pro∣mised. They held that themselves should have the chief Place of Happiness in the other World; but the Gentiles that were good Men, should likewise have their Portion of Bliss there too. Now by Christ the Partition-Wall is
broken down, and the Gentiles that be∣lieve in him, are admitted to the same Place of Bliss with the Jews: and why then should not that Portion of Happi∣ness still remain to them, who do not be∣lieve in Christ, so they be morally Good? This is a charitable Opinion. State. 1. IN a troubled State save as much for your own as you can. A Dog had been at Market to buy a Shoulder of Mutton; coming home he met two Dogs by the way, that quarrell'd with him; he laid down his Shoulder of Mut∣ton, and fell to fighting with one of them; in the mean time the other Dog fell to eating his Mutton; he seeing that, left the Dog he was fighting with, and fell upon him that was eating; then the other Dog fell to eat; when he per∣ceiv'd there was no remedy, but which of them soever he fought withal, his Mut∣ten was in danger, he thought he would have as much of it as he could, and thereupon gave over fighting, and fell to eating himself.
Superstition. 1. THey that are against Superstition oftentimes run into it of the wrong side. If I will wear all colours but black, then am I superstitious in not wearing black. 2. They pretend not to abide the Cross, because 'tis superstitious; for my part I will believe them, when I see them throw their Money out of their Pockets, and not tell then. 3. If there be any Superstition truly and properly so called, 'tis their obser∣ving the Sabbòth after the Jewish Man∣ner. Subsidies. 1. HEretofore the Parliament was wa∣ry what Subsidies they gave to the King, because they had no account; but now they care not how much they give of the Subjects Money, because they give it with one hand, and receive it with the other; and so upon the matter give it themselves. In the mean time what a case the Subjects of England are in; if
the Men they have sent to the Parliament mis-behave themselves, they cannot help it, because the Parliament is Eternal. 2. A Subsidy was counted the fifth part of a Man's Estate, and so fifty Sub∣sidies is five and forty times more than a Man is Worth. Simony. 1. THE Name of Simony was begot in the Canon-Law; the first Statute against it was in Queen Elizabeth's time. Since the Reformation Simony has been frequent: One reason why it was not practised in time of Popery, was the Pope's provision; no Man was sure to bestow his own Benefice. Ship-Money. 1. MR. Noy brought in Ship-money first for Maritine Towns; but that was like putting in a little Augur, that afterwards you may put in a grea∣ter: He that pulls down the first Brick, does the main Work, afterwards 'tis easie to pull down the Wall.
2. They that at first would not pay Ship-money, till 'twas decided, did like brave Men, (though perhaps they did no good by the Trial) but they that stand out since, and suffer themselves to be distrained, never questioning those that do it, do pitifully, for so they only pay twice as much as they should. Synod Assembly. 1. WE have had no national Synod since the Kingdom hath been settled, as now it is, only Provincial; and there will be this inconveniency, to call so many Divines together; 'twill be to put Power in their Hands, who are too apt to usurp it, as if the Laity were bound by their Determination. No, let the Laity consult with Divines on all sides, hear what they say, and make them∣selves Masters of their Reasons; as they do by any other profession, when they have a Difference before them. For Ex∣ample, Gold-smiths, they enquire of them, if such a Jewel be of such a Value, and such a Stone of such a Value, hear them, and then being rational Men judge them∣selves.
2. Why should you have a Synod, when you have a Convocation already, which is a Synod? Would you have a superfetation of another Synod? The Clergy of England when they cast off the Pope, submitted themselves to the Ci∣vil Power, and so have continued; but these challenge to be Jure Divino, and so to be above the Civil Power; these chal∣lenge Power to call before their Presby∣teries all Persons for all Sins directly a∣gainst the Law of God, as proved to be Sins by necessary Consequence. If you would buy Gloves, send for a Glover or two, not Glovers-Hall; consult with some Divines, not send for a Body. 3. There must be some Laymen in the Synod, to over-look the Clergy, lest they spoil the civil Work: Just as when the good Woman puts a Cat into the Milk-House to kill a Mouse, she sends her Maid to look after the Cat, lest the Cat should eat up the Cream. 4. In the Ordinance for the Assembly, the Lords and Commons go under the Names of learned, godly, and judicious Divines; there is no Difference put be∣twixt them, and the Ministers in the Context.
5. 'Tis not unusual in the Assembly to revoke their Votes, by reason they make so much haste, but 'tis that will make them scorn'd. You never heard of a Coun∣cil revok'd an Act of its own making; they have been wary in that, to keep up their Infallibility; if they did any thing, they took away the whole Council, and yet we would be thought Infallible as any Body. 'Tis not enough to say, the House of Commons revoke their Votes, for theirs are but Civil Truths, which they by agreement create, and uncreate, as they please: But the Truths the Synod deals in are Divine; and when they have voted a thing, if it be then true, 'twas true before; not true because they voted it, nor does it cease to be true, because they voted otherwise. 6. Subscribing in a Synod, or to the Articles of a Synod, is no such terrible thing as they make it; because, If I am of a Synod, 'tis agreed, either tacitely or expresly. That which the major part determines, the rest are involv'd in; and therefore I subscribe, though my own private Opinion be otherwise; and up∣on the same Ground, I may without scru∣ple subscribe to what those have deter∣min'd,
whom I sent, though my private Opinion be otherwise, having respect to that which is the Ground of all assem∣blies, the Major part carries it. Thanksgiving. 1. AT first we gave Thanks for eve∣ry Victory as soon as ever 'twas obtained; but since we have had many, now we can stay a good while. We are just like a Child; give him a Plum, he makes his Leg; give him a second Plum, he makes another Leg: At last when his Belly is full, he forgets what he ought to do; then his Nurse, or some body else that stands by him, puts him in mind of his Duty, Where's your Leg? Tythes. 1. TYthes are more paid in kind in Eng∣land, than in all Italy and France. In France they have had Impropriations a long time; we had none in England till Henry the Eighth.
2. To make an Impropriation, there was to be the Consent of the Incumbent, the Patron, and the King; then 'twas confirm'd by the Pope: Without all this the Pope could make no Impro∣priation. 3. Or what if the Pope gave the Tythes to any Man, must they therefore be ta∣ken away? If the Pope gives me a Jewel, will you therefore take it away from me? 4. Abraham paid Tythes to Melchize∣deck, what then? 'Twas very well done of him: It does not follow therefore that I must pay Tythes, no more than I am bound to imitate any other Action of Abraham's. 5. 'Tis ridiculous to say the Tythes are God's Part, and therefore the Clergy must have them: Why, so they are if the Laymen has them. 'Tis as if one of my Lady Kent's Maids should be sweep∣ing this Room, and another of them should come and take away the Broom, and tell for a Reason, why she should part with it; 'Tis my Lady's Broom: As if it were not my Lady's Broom, which of them soever had it.
6. They consulted in Oxford where they might find the best Argument for their Tythes, setting aside the Jus Di∣vinum; they were advis'd to my Histo∣ry of Tythes; a Book so much cry'd down by them formerly; (in which, I dare boldly say, there are more Argu∣ments for them than are extant together any where:) Upon this, one writ me word, That my History of Tythes was now become like Pleus's Hasta, to wound and to heal. I told him in my Answer, I thought I could fit him with a better Instance. 'Twas possible it might under∣go the same Fate, that Aristotle, Avicen, and Averroes did in France, some five hundred Years ago; which were Excom∣municated by Stephen Bishop of Paris, [by that very Name, Excommunicated,] be∣cause that kind of Learning puzled and troubled their Divinity. But finding them∣selves at a Loss, some Forty Years after (which is much about the time since I writ my History) they were call'd in a∣gain, and so have continued ever since.
Trade. 1. THere is no Prince in Christendom but is directly a Tradesman, tho' in another way than an ordinary Trades∣man. For the purpose, I have a Man; I bid him lay out twenty Shillings in such Commodities; but I tell him for every Shilling he lays out I will have a Penny. I trade as well as he. This every Prince does in his Customs. 2. That which a Man is bred up in, he thinks no cheating; as your Trades∣man thinks not so of his Profession, but calls it a Mystery. Whereas if you would teach a Mercer to make his Silks heavi∣er, than what he has been used to, he would peradventure think that to be cheating. 3. Every Tradesman professes to cheat me, that asks for his Commodity twice as much as it is worth.
Tradition. 1. SAY what you will against Traditi∣on; we know the Signification of Words by nothing but Tradition. You will say the Scripture was written by the Holy Spirit, but do you understand that Language 'twas writ in? No. Then for Example, take these words, [In principio erat verbum.] How do you know those words signifie, [In the beginning was the word,] but by Tradition, because some Body has told you so? Transubstantiation. 1. THE Fathers using to speak Rhe∣torically, brought up Transub∣stantiation: As if because it is common∣ly said, Amicus est alter idem, one should go about to prove a Man and his Friend are all one. That Opinion is only Rhe∣torick turn'd into Logick. 2. There is no greater Argument (tho' not us'd) against Transubstantiation than the Apostles at their first Council, forbid∣ding Blood and Suffocation. Would they forbid Blood, and yet enjoin the eating of Blood too?
3. The best way for a pious Man, is, to address himself to the Sacrament with that Reverence and Devotion, as if Christ were really there present. Traitor. 1. TIS not seasonable to call a Man Traitor that has an Army at his Heels. One with an Army is a Gallant man. My Lady Cotten was in the right, when she laugh'd at the Dutchess of Rich∣mond for taking such State upon her, when she could Command no Forces. [She a Dutchess, there's in Flanders a Dutchess in∣deed; meaning the Arch-Dutchess. Trinity. 1. THE second Person is made of a piece of Bread by the Papists, the Third Person is made of his own Frenzy, Malice, Ignorance and Folly, by the Roundhead [to all these the Spirit is intituled,] One the Baker makes, the other the Cobler; and betwixt those Two, I think the First Person is sufficient∣ly abused.
Truth. 1. THE Aristotelians say, All Truth is contained in Aristotle in one place or another. Galilaeo makes Simpli∣cius say so, but shows the absurdity of that Speech, by answering, All Truth is contained in a lesser Compass; viz. In the Alphabet. Aristotle is not blam'd for mi∣staking sometimes; but Aristotelians for maintaining those Mistakes. They should acknowledge the good they have from him, and leave him when he is in the wrong. There never breath'd that Per∣son to whom Mankind was more be∣holden. 2. The way to find out the Truth is by others mistakings: For if I was to go to such a place, and one had gone be∣fore me on the Right-hand, and he was out; another had gone on the Left-hand, and he was out; this would direct me to keep the middle way, that peradven∣ture would bring me to the place I de∣sir'd to go. 3. In troubled Water you can scarce see your Face; or see it very little, till the Water be quiet and stand still. So in
troubled times you can see little Truth; when times are quiet and settled, then Truth appears; Trial. 1. TRials are by one of these three ways; by Confession, or by De∣murrer; that is, confessing the Fact, but denying it to be that, wherewith a Man is charged. For Example, denying it to be Treason, if a Man be charged with Treason; or by a Jury. 2. Ordalium was a Trial; and was ei∣ther by going over nine red hot Plough-Shares, (as in the Case of Queen Em∣ma, accus'd for lying with the Bishop of Winchester, over which she being led blindfold; and having pass'd all her Irons, ask'd when she should come to her Tri∣al;) or 'twas by taking a red-hot Coul∣ter in a Man's Hand, and carrying it so many Steps, and then casting it from him. As soon as this was done, the Hands or the Feet were to be bound up, and certain Charms to be said, and a Day or two after to be open'd; if the parts were whole, the Party was judg'd to be Innocent; and so on the contrary.
3. The Rack is us'd no where as in England: In other Countries 'tis used in Judicature, when there is a Semiplena pro∣batio, a half Proof against a Man; then to see if they can make it full, they rack him if he will not confess. But here in England they take a Man and rack him, I do not know why, nor when; not in time of Judicature, but when some Body bids. 4. Some Men before they come to their Trial, are cozen'd to Confess upon Exa∣mination: Upon this Trick, they are made to believe some Body has confes∣sed before them; and then they think it a piece of Honour to be clear and in∣genious, and that destroys them. University. 1. THE best Argument why Oxford should have precedence of Cam∣bridge, is the Act of Parliament, by which Oxford is made a Body; made what it is; and Cambridge is made what it is; and in the Act it takes place. Besides Oxford has the best Monuments to show.
2. 'Twas well said of one, hearing of a History Lecture to be founded in the University; Would to God, says he, they would direct a Lecture of Discretion there, this would do more Good there an hundred times. 3. He that comes from the Universi∣ty to govern the State, before he is ac∣quainted with the Men and Manners of the Place, does just as if he should come into the presence Chamber all Dirty, with his Boots on, his riding Coat, and his Head all daub'd: They may serve him well enough in the Way, but when he comes to Court, he must conform to the Place. Uows. 1. SUppose a Man find by his own In∣clination he has no mind to mar∣ry, may he not then vow Chastity? Answ. If he does, what a fine thing hath he done? 'tis as if a Man did not love Cheefe, and then he would vow to God Almighty never to eat Cheese. He that vows can mean no more in sense, than this; To do his utmost endeavour to keep his Vow.
Usury. 1. THE Jews were forbidden to take Use one of another, but they were not forbidden to take it of other Nations. That being so, I see no reason, why I may not as well take Use for my Money, as Rent for my House. 'Tis a vain thing to say, Money begets not Money; for that no doubt it does. 2. Would it not look odly to a Stran∣ger, that should come into this Land, and hear in our Pulpits Usury preach'd a∣gainst, and yet the Law allow it? Ma∣ny Men use it; pehaps some Church∣men themselves. No Bishop nor Eccle∣siastical Judge, that pretends Power to punish other Faults, dares punish, or at least does punish any Man for doing it. Pious Uses. 1. THE ground of the Ordinary's taking part of a Man's Estate (who dy'd without a Will) to Pious Uses, was this; to give it some body to pray, that his Soul might be deliver'd out of Purgatory; now the pious Uses come in∣to his own Pocket. 'Twas well exprest
by John O Powls in the Play, who acted the Priest; one that was to be hang'd, being brought to the Ladder, would fain have given something to the Poor; he feels for his Purse, (which John O Powls had pickt out of his Pocket before) mis∣sing it, crys out, He had lost his Purse; now he intended to have given some∣thing to the Poor; John O Powls bid him be pacified, for the Poor had it already. War. 1. DO not under-value an Enemy by whom you have been worsted. When our Country-men came home from fighting with the Saracens, and were beaten by them, they pictured them with huge, big, terrible Faces (as you still see the Sign of the Saracen's Head is) when in truth they were like other Men. But this they did to save their own Credits. 2. Martial-Law in general, means no∣thing but the Martial-Law of this, or that Place; with us to be us'd in Fervore Bel∣li, in the Face of the Enemy, not in time of Peace; there they can take a∣way neither Limb nor Life. The Com∣manders need not complain for want of it, because our Ancestors have done gal∣lant things without it.
3. Question. Whether may Subjects take up Arms against their Prince? Answer. Conceive it thus; Here lies a Shilling be∣twixt you and me; Ten Pence of the Shilling is yours, Two Pence is mine: By agreement, I am as much King of my Two Pence, as you of your Ten Pence: If you therefore go about to take away my Two Pence, I will defend it; for there you and I are equal, both Princes. 4. Or thus, two supream Powers meet; one says to the other, give me your Land; if you will not, I will take it from you: The other, because he thinks himself too weak to resist him, tells him, of nine Parts I will give you three, so I may quiet∣ly enjoy the rest, and I will become your Tributary. Afterwards the Prince comes to exact six Parts, and leaves but three; the Contract then is broken, and they are in Parity again. 5. To know what Obedience is due to the Prince, you must look into the Contract betwixt him and his People; as if you wou'd know what Rent is due from the Tenant to the Landlord, you must look into the Lease. When the Contract is broken, and there is no third Person to judge, then the Decision is by
Arms. And this is the Case between the Prince and the Subject. 6. Question. What Law is there to take up Arms against the Prince, in Case he break his Covenant? Answer. Though there be no written Law for it, yet there is Custom, which is the best Law of the Kingdom; for in England they have al∣ways done it. There is nothing exprest between the King of England and the King of France; that if either Invades the other's Territory, the other shall take up Arms against him, and yet they do it upon such an Occasion. 7. 'Tis all one to be plunder'd by a Troop of Horse, or to have a Man's Goods taken from him by an Order from the Council Table. To him that dies, 'tis all one whether it be by a Pen∣ny Halter, or a Silk Garter; yet I con∣fess the silk Garter pleases more; and like Trouts, we love to be tickled to Death. 8. The Soldiers say they fight for Ho∣nour; when the Truth is they have their Honour in their Pocket. And they mean the same thing that pretend to fight for Religion. Just as a Parson goes to Law with his Parishioners; he says, For the good of his Successors, that the Church
may not loose its Right; when the mean∣ing is to get the Tythes into his own Pocket. 9. We govern this War as an unskil∣ful Man does a Casting-Net; if he has not the right trick to cast the Net off his Shoulder, the Leads will pull him in∣to the River. I am afraid we shall pull our selves into Destruction. 10. We look after the particulars of a Battle, because we live in the very time of War. Whereas of Battles past we hear nothing but the Number slain. Just as for the the Death of a Man; when he is sick, we talk how he slept this Night, and that Night; what he eat, and what he drunk: But when he is dead, we only say, he died of a Fever, or name his Disease; and there's an end. 11. Boccaline has this passage of Soul∣diers, They came to Apollo to have their Profession made the Eighth Liberal Sci∣ence, which he granted. As soon as it was nois'd up and down, it came to the Butchers, and they desired their Professi∣on might be made the Ninth: For say they, the Soldiers have this Honour for the killing of Men; now we kill as well as they; but we kill Beasts for the pre∣serving of Men, and why should not we
have Honour likewise done to us? Apol∣lo could not Answer their Reasons, so he revers'd his Sentence, and made the Sol∣diers Trade a Mystery, as the Butchers is. Witches. 1. THE Law against Witches does not prove there be any; but it punishes the Malice of those People, that use such means, to take away Mens Lives. If one should profess that by turning his Hat thrice, and crying Buz, he could take away a Man's Life (though in truth he could do no such thing) yet this were a just Law made by the State, that who∣soever should turn his Hat thrice, and cry Buz, with an intention to take a∣way a Man's Life, shall be put to death. Wife. 1. HE that hath a handsome Wife, by other Men is thought happy; 'tis a Pleasure to look upon her, and be in her Company; but the Husband is cloy'd with her. We are never content with what we have. 2. You shall see a Monkey sometime, that has been playing up and down the
Garden, at length leap up to the top of the Wall, but his Clog hangs a great way below on this side; the Bishop's Wife is like that Monkey's Clog, himself is got up very high, takes place of the Tempo∣ral Barons, but his Wife comes a great way behind. 3. 'Tis reason a Man that will have a Wife should be at the Charge of her Trin∣kets, and pay all the Scores she sets on him. He that will keep a Monkey, 'tis fit he should pay for the Glasses he breaks. Wisdom. 1. A Wise Man should never resolve upon any thing, at least never let the World know his Resolution, for if he cannot arrive at that, he is asham'd. How many things did the King resolve in his Declaration concerning Scotland, ne∣ver to do, and yet did them all? A Man must do according to Accidents and E∣mergencies. 2. Never tell your Resolution before∣hand; but when the Cast is thrown, play it as well as you can to win the Game you are at. 'Tis but folly to study how to play Size-ace, when you know not whether you shall throw it or no.
3. Wise Men say nothing in dangerous times. The Lion you know call'd the Sheep, to ask her if his Breath smelt: she said, Ay; he bit off her Head for a Fool: He call'd the Woolf and ask'd him; he said no; he tore him in pieces for a Flat∣terer. At last he call'd the Fox and ask'd him; truly he had got a Cold and could not smell. King James was pictu∣red, &c. Wit. 1. WIT and Wisdom differ; Wit is upon the sudden turn, Wisdom is in bringing about ends. 2. Nature must be the ground-work of Wit and Art; otherwise whatever is done will prove but Jack-puddings work. 3. Wit must grow like Fingers; if it be taken from others, 'tis like Plums stuck upon black Thorns; there they are for a while, but they come to nothing. 4. He that will give himself to all man∣ner of ways to get Money may be rich; so he that lets fly all he knows or thinks, may by chance be Satyrically Witty. Ho∣nesty sometimes keeps a Man from grow∣ing Rich; and Civility from being Witty. 5. Women ought not to know their own Wit, because they will still be shew∣ing
it, and so spoil it; like a Child that will continually be shewing its fine new Coat, till at length it all bedawbs it with its pah Hands. 6. Fine Wits destroy themselves with their own Plots, in medling with great Affairs of State. They commonly do as the Ape that saw the Gunner put Bullets in the Cannon, and was pleas'd with it, and he would be doing so too: at last he puts himself into the Piece, and so both Ape, and Bullet were shot away together. Women. 1. LET the Women have power of their heads, because of the Angels. The reason of the words because of the Angels, is this; The Greek Church held an Opi∣nion that the Angels fell in Love with Women. This Fancy St. Paul discreetly catches, and uses it as an Argument to perswade them to modesty. 2. The Grant of a Place is not good by the Canon-Law, before a Man be dead; upon this ground some Mischief might be plotted against him in present possession, by poisoning or some other way. Upon the same reason a Contract made with a Woman, during her Husband's Life, was not valid.
3. Men are not troubled to hear a Man dispraised, because they know, tho' he be naught, there's worth in others. But Women are mightily troubled to hear a∣ny of them spoken against, as if the Sex it self were guilty of some Unworthiness. 4. Women and Princes must both trust some body; and they are Happy, or Un∣happy according to the desert of those under whose Hands they fall. If a Man knows how to manage the Favour of a Lady, her Honour is safe, and so is a Princes. 5. An Opinion grounded upon that, Genesis 6. The Sons of God saw the Daugh∣ters of Men that they were fair. Year. 1. 'TWas the Manner of the Jews (if the Year did not fall out right, but that it was dirty for the People to come up to Jerusalem, at the Feast of the Passover; or that their Corn was not ripe for their first Fruits) to intercalate a Month, and so to have, as it were, two Fe∣bruaries, thrusting up the Year still high∣er, March into April's Place, April into May's Place, &c. Whereupon it is impos∣sible for us to know when our Saviour was born, or when he dy'd.
2. The Year is either the Year of the Moon, or the Year of the Sun; there's not above eleven Days difference. Our moveable Feasts are according to the Year of the Moon; else they should be fixt. 3. Tho' they reckon ten Days sooner beyond Sea, yet it does not follow their Spring is sooner than ours; we keep the same time in natural things, and their ten Days sooner, and our ten Days later in those things mean the self same time: just as twelve Sous in French, are ten Pence in English. 4. The lengthening of Days is not sud∣denly perceiv'd till they are grown a pretty deal longer, because the Sun, though it be in a Circle, yet it seems for a while to go in a right Line. For take a Segment of a great Circle especially, and you shall doubt whether it be straight or no. But when that Sun is got past that Line, then you presently perceive the Days are lengthened. Thus it is in the Winter and Summer Solstice; which is in∣deed the true Reason of them. 5. The Eclipse of the Sun is, when it is new Moon; the Eclipse of the Moon when 'tis full. They say Dionysius was conver∣ted by the Eclipse that happened at our Sa∣viour's Death, because it was neither of these, and so could not be natural.
Zelots. 1. ONE would wonder Christ should whip the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and no body offer to resist him (considering what Opinion they had of him.) But the reason was, they had a Law, that whosoever did profane Sanctitatem Dei, aut Templi; the Holi∣ness of God, or the Temple, before ten Persons, 'twas lawful for any of them to kill him, or to do any thing this side kil∣ling him; as whipping him, or the like. And hence it was, that when one struck our Saviour before the Judge, where it was not lawful to strike (as it is not with us at this Day) he only replies; If I have spoken Evil, bear Witness of the Evil; but if Well, why smitest thou me? He says nothing against their smiting him, in case he had been guilty of speaking Evil, that is Blasphemy; and they could have prov'd it against him. They that put this Law in execution were called Zelots; but afterwards they committed many Villa∣nies.
FINIS.
