S2801 12740091 93114
SEVERALL PROPOSALS OR HUMBLE PROPOSITIONS Delivered in to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with THE ARMY. Resolved upon at a generall Councell of Warre of the Army under the command of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIR∣FAX, held at Reading, July 17. 1647. WITH A Letter to the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Common Councell concerning the disposall of the MILITIA of LONDON, By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX and his Councell of Warre. Signed by JOHN RUSHWORTH, Sec. OXFORD, Printed by J. H. and H. H. and published for the satisfaction of the Kingdome, 1647.
Severall PROPOSALS Delivered in to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army. THese severall ensuing Particulars being considered, debated, and resolved upon at a generall Councell of Warre, (his Ex∣cellency being present) wee the Commi∣ssioners of the Army were appointed in (the name and behalfe of them) to pre∣sent the same to your Lordships and the Commissioners, to be tendred with all speed to the Parliament; which we accordingly offer, and desire your speedy care therein, that so an Answer (according to the desire and expectation of the Army) may be speedily returned to these Particulars. 1. That there be an effectuall Declaration forthwith published to the whole Kingdome, against the inviting, & bringing in of any Forraign Forces, under any pretence whatsoever. 2. That the Army may be paid up equall with the disser∣tors thereof, according to the late Votes of Parliament; And that the Army may forthwith be put into a constant course of pay, that they may not be burthensome and op∣pressive to the Country: for the more speedy performance whereof, we desire, that the House of Peeres would be pleased to concurre with the desires of the House of Com∣mons (so often proposed to them) for the reviving of the Committee for the Army; that so the Assessments and
great Summes in arreares both in the City, and elsewhere, may be by their endeavour collected for the speedy and necessary supply of the Army: And also, that the Trea∣surers and the Committee at VVeavers Hall, may be speedily called to an account, in what manner, and by what warrant, the two hundred and thirty thousand pounds lately intrusted in their hands, have been in so short▪ time consumed. 3. That the Militia of the Citie of London, and the Committee for the same, may consist of such Persons, and speedily be returned into those hands who formerly du∣ring the worst of times have therein given large testimony of their fidelity to the Parliament and Kingdome; which besides the reall security it will be to the Parliament and Kingdome, in preventing of dangers, aud preparations toward another warre; would conduce so much to the re∣moving of iealousies, and give such a ground of confi∣dence to the Army, as that we might the better dispose it to larger Quarters in severall parts, for the ease of the Country. According to, and in pursuance of the Particulars mentio∣ned under the fifth Head of the Representation of the Army, wee do earnestly desire. 4. That all persons imprisoned in England, or Domi∣nion of Wales, (not for Delinquency in relation to the late warre, but for other pretended misdemeanours) whose imprisonment is not by the regulated course of Law, but by Order from either House of Parliament, or of Com∣mittees flowing from them; may be put into a speedy, re∣gular, and epuitable way of tryall: or (if the necessity of setling the generall affaires of the Kingdome admit not their present tryall,) that then they may have present li∣berty upon reasonable security for their appearance at a
certain day to answer what shall be charged against them in a legall way. And that when they shall be tryed, if they appeare wrongfully or unduely imprisoned; they may have reparation according to their sufferings. In particu∣lar we desire this may be done in behalfe of Lievetennant Colonell John Lilburne, M. Musgrave, M. Overton, and others in their condition imprisoned in and about Lon∣don. By the appointment of his Excel∣lency Sir THOMAS FAIR∣FAX. Reading July 19. 1647. John Rushworth, Se∣cretary.
A LETTER sent from his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the Councel of Warre; to the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Common-Councell of the City of London. My Lord, and Gentlemen, IN the carrying on of the great businesse of the Kingdome towards a generall and happy setle∣ment; it hath been a fixed principle with us to make it our first endeavour with the Parliament; that all things tending to the engagement of the Kingdome in a second Warre might be removed, before we could have a confidence to expect a good issue upon a Treaty with their Commissioners: which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of delay, yet by men, that are zealous of the Kingdomes good (we hope no endeavour will be iudged unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdome from the danger of a new embroyle∣ment. Wee are now come thus farre; that the most materiall particulars which we have in preparation to propose for the generall settlement of the affaires of the Kingdome, have been communicated to the Parliaments Commissio∣ners, and we hope they are satisfyed that they contain in them things tending to a generall good, and to lay an hopefull foundation for a common Right and freedome to the People of this Land in future, and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before we can securely intend, and without inter∣ruption apply our selves unto the proceeding and dispatch of the Treaty thereupon; wee have addressed some humble desires to the Parliament, which we have delivered into the hands of their Commissioners. The paper consists of three particulars, the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most imedi∣ately concerned, to the end you may see, we would aske nothing which relates to you, without giving you a iust
accompt thereof, and all possible fatisfaction therein, we have also given a Copy thereof to your Commissioners to be herewith sent unto you. We should not desire this or any thing else of that na∣ture, were we not perswaded that what we desire is seaso∣nable and necessary for yours and the Kingdomes good and quiet, and we should willingly have been silent (as to this) but considering the iust iealousies which lye against some persons now authorized in the exercise of that power amongst you, and those attempts which have been made by some who would have engaged your City to a warre, had not your Lordship and the court of Aldermen and Common Counsell by your wisedome prevented it, by getting those Votes which were passed by the Militia, made null; we cannot in a case of this importance but deale freely with you in desiring your concurrence with ours to the Parliaments, that the Militia may be changed into those hands out of which it was taken, of whose care and fidelity to the publique there hath been so long and large experience, as few ages have paralleld. And if the interest we have so long fought for be still the same. let it not seeme strange, that we desire both of the Parlia∣ment and City, that those may be in places of such a trust who have given the best proofe of their courage and con∣stancy in prosecution of the same. Having thus farre declared our selves withall freedome and clearenesse to you, as we doe not doubt of your good acceptance of our intentions therein, so we desire your forwardnesse in a worke, so much tending to mutuall confidence, and to prevent the designes of any who would be glad to put obstructions in the way to an happy con∣clusion, and envy nothing more then the continuance of a right understanding between you and us. Reading July 19. 1647. By the appointment of his Ex∣cellency Sir THOMAS FAIR∣FAX. and his Counsell of Warre. John Rushworth.
