S3397 9102217 42450
: OR The TIMES of RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS, WITH THEIR Neer Approach upon the RUINE OF THE BEAST. MANIFEST By two Tracts on Rev. 20.5. & Rev. 21.5. Containing the main Scope of all Revelation Pro∣phesie: Upon both which our former whole work is, now by Divine Disposal, become a very Useful Commentary. 1. For Explication. 2. Confirmation. 3. Illustration and Application. As will after more appear. Which said two last Tracts may fitly be Entituled An Alarm to this present World, Bidding adiew to all wicked Grandure, and all sinful enjoyments thereof: Not of 120 years as Noahs, but now of about 20 years in a fit latitude, upon many weighty Scriptural Con∣siderations, following. Therefore, First, I. Lay not up for your selves Treasure upon Earth, Mat. 6.19. II. Kiss the Son least he be angry and ye perish from the way, Psal. 2. III. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting Habitations, Luke 16.9. And that ye may not hear Christ say to you, Go ye cursed, for I was hungry and ye fed me not, &c. Mat. 25. IV. Seek first, chiefly, constantly, the Kingdome of God, and his Righ∣teousness, Mat. 6.33. By William Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel. London, Printed in the Year 1675.
Clauis abstrustoris SS.ti Euangelij partis opera et vigilijs Guilielmi Sherwin ejus∣dem ministri et assidui, quibusdam abhinc annis, ind agatoris excusa, tandem{que} propitio  et hominum adjuuamine hucus{que} Ecclesice vsui prolata, jam{que} dicata. Cujus effigies em praefigitur Anno: Dom: 1672o. Anno{que} Aetatis 65o.Ex dono Guilielmi Sherwin filij ejus natu maximi adhuc superstitis, ac Insculptoris Regio Diplomate, insianiti et auctorati.
The Contents of the ensuing Treatise. 1. THe Parallels of the Text, Rev. 21.5. with Acts 3.19, 20, 21. in four respects. 2. Is shewed how the first Bodily Resurrection of the Saints is their inlet into that happy state of the 1000 years Reign, &c. 3. Some Questions Answered, shewing 1. That all Saints deceased until then shall arise, and not Martyrs only: of which seven Reasons are given. 2. Who are the rest of the dead that rise not till the said 1000 years be fi∣nished, and that they are many ways distinguished from the former. 3. Such Texts of Scripture answered, as seem to speak of one Resurrecti∣on, and one Judgment, and that at once not so distant; whence it may appear that it is a Divine Rule from Christs Revelation, ch. 20. that those last things, viz. concerning Resurrection and Judgment, are from thence to be surely resolved, in what was not so resolved before in other Scrip∣tures, for sundry reasons. 4. Some Answers to other Questions, to remove some difficulties upon for∣mer mistakes, and to make way for the clearer handling of that Text of Gods Renovation of all things; and reasons why the last Judgment, ch. 20.11. to the end, is set before the said Renovation, and the New Heavens and New Earth, which are proved to be in time 1000 years before: with the conside∣ration of the dependency which the three last ch have upon ch. 19. wherein the general heads of them are briefly hinted; with divers pertinent observa∣tions in the explication thereof: and that ch. 20. is especially to be consider∣dered as the Table of the good times, as ch. 11. to v. 15. was of the bad times: with many other matters affording much light to many things in those four last ch. preparatory to the Text. 5. The Consideration of Gods declared Renovation in the Text, with its Illustrations and Confirmations. 6. The Explication thereof, shewing what it is, and wherein the said Re∣novation consists three wayes. 1. Negatively, That it is not Gods making a new material frame of the World, &c. 2. Positively, What it is: and that two ways. 1. By Gods removal of the evils brought into the world by Sin, Satan, and wicked men: as the Curse, Corruption, Bondage, Enmity, &c. 2. Positively, By making Prophetical New Hea∣vens
and New-Earth, viz. in what is to be renewed or restored by and for Christ, with his said Saints the Lambs Wife at that great solemnity, &c. ac∣cording to former Predictions, Promises or Covenants agreeing with Divine Revelations, concerning the same in sundry particulars, &c. 7. Many Scriptural Explications setting forth what the said times of Renovation are, vpon several accounts decyphering the same in many parts and portions thereof, and what Scriptures chiefly manifest the neer approach of the said times, and how they do it, in sundry computations in Old and New Testament. 8. The Ʋse and Improvement of all to several purposes. 1. To discover the manifold errours and mistakes concerning this Text and Context. 2. To set footh, 1. The Excellency. 2. The Ʋsefulness: And conse∣quently the great and weighty Reasons for the studying of this sacred Book: and especially, in regard we have in a fit latitude from thence the ends of two great Mysteries: first of Mystery Babylon, and her great Mystery of Iniquity: and secondly, the finishing of the great Mystery of God, &c. The former many ways pointed out, and especially by her ending term of 666. as by the wisdome of the holy Scripture [for divers reasons it appears to be not from Christs Birth but by a necessary addition of the whole number of one thousand [for other reasons] to begin from his Ascention, as we published twice, An. 1665. as follows &c. 3. And after some reference to other former improvements in former par∣cels: A Ʋse of Admonition to all sorts, to beware of insnaring themselves in the too eager persuit of worldly affairs and projects: 2. To sit loose from them: 3. To do good with them whilst they are theirs; viz. only for a short time. 4. To exhort all that bear the name of Christ upon them from the consider∣ation of the neer approach of the said times, as Esa. 1. to be very watchful and diligent: 1. To cease from evil: 2. To learn to do well: which that they may perform, they must be very industriovs in the use of all good means to be madegooad, that they may be able acceptably to do good, and that they may be ca∣pable of all kind of promised good here, in the world to come, at the said times of Renovation of all things, and thence-forward unto all Eternity.
An Addition to our former Comprisal and Systeme of Promised Mercies, &c. WHereas our former whole Work of this Nature (as we said) is now by Divine disposal become a very Useful Commentary to Explain, Confirm, and Il∣lustrate, &c. what of these Divine Mysteries is con∣tained or briefly couched in our two last Tracts on Rev. 20.5. of the Saints bodily Resurrection, whereby they will be made capable of the happiness of Christs Davidical Kingdome, and also in this Tract upon Rev. 21.5. which sets forth the particularities making up the happiness thereof: It being the main scope of all Revelation Prophesie (after the suffering times of the Church are over) to point out in their due order the fulfillings of the most antient Promises and Covenants made to and with the faithful Fore-fathers, for themselves and their Spiri∣tual Seed, &c. then to take place; being (as we observed formerly) that excellent use of our Saviours said Divine Key in the four last Chapters of this Book: Wherefore we prefixed to the former Tract, our Comprisal and System, to illustrate these matters, with the Picture of the said Divine Key, p. 63, & 64. of the same, which are also as much to be looked to in this, because they both stand upon the same Foun∣dations (as we hope sound and judicious Christians will be much by this Tract helped farther to discern) for Divine Gospel Truths of this nature are not slightly to be passed over, but seriously pondered by all such, as containing now in these times more Mercy & Divine Grace in them than the world is aware of; because they have been formerly less discovered, and their times more remote, but are now neer approach∣ing (as we hope to many such may hereby be made manifest) &c. Now that our former said whole work may be really found thereunto more subservient, we shall here add unto the said Comprisal of the same work, somewhat more particularly to point out what therein serves chiefly, 1. For Explication. 2. For Confirmation. 3. For Illustration and Application.
1. For Explication chiefly serve, our Key by many Distinctions, and short Assertions referring to many parts thereof, with the Account next following, and all Summaries of these Dectrines, as the Letter of Nov. 3.63. in the Prodr. with 16 Divine Theses in the Iren and the Addition there, to which belongs the Treatise on Gen. 3.15. also the two Folded Leaves at the end thereof, and all other Letters and Papers in the Prodr. which with the Scheme thereof and Parallels, give much light to the Book of Revelation, and also what in the Irenicon is said up∣on the 4, & 5, ch. which considered with the Book of Parallels of Da∣niel and the Revelation do jointly give the greatest light to regulate mens minds in these Mysteries, and from whence (amongst many o∣thers) the strongest Confirmations may be drawn, (as in part was shewed in our Account) and the want of some competent light therein makes some persons strangly averse from such Truths, which other∣wise (I believe) would not be so, &c. And also for Explication much serve the 31. Useful Observations after the Tract on Rev. 22.20. whereby may be observed how the Spirit of God hath Divinely couch∣ed matters of this nature in holy Scripture, &c. with other things fol∣lowing: Also the Paper of the Jews and Israelites great Restauration, Printed May 1.74. and much also for Explication serve the three for∣mer Practicals upon 1. Rev. 22.20. the ground whereof, See Assert. 6. of our Key, and of Gen. 3.15. in the 17th Assert. and upon Jer. 3.17. the ground of which is from the 14th Assertion. 2. For Confirmation chiefly serve first the seven Foundations in the Contents of the Ireni, and in the two first leaves of the Abridgment of the same, also that happy and glorious state of Christs said Kingdome is confirmed by the 12 Foundations of the Faith thereof from the begin∣ning of the Holy Scriptures to the end: which is also farther again con∣firmed in many particularities thereof in the 8 Convincing Arguments in the Word written, occasionally drawn up. 1. Because the Holy Scripture sets down many things to be at the beginning, and in the time, and after the end of the said thousand years Reign of Christ with his Saints: of which, 36. Particulars are specified, Arg. 1. 2. Because many such things in the Old Testament respecting the same time and state are by Christ and his Apostles so explained in the New Testament. 3. Because those times and things belonging to them are so stamp∣ed and marked out by the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, which have also their Explications and Confirmations in the New Testament, respecting the same times and things.
4. Because concerning them both the Apostle Peter divinely teacheth us, Acts 3.20, 21. [That God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began] which is largely proved ch. 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. of the Irenicon, which Testimonies are again quoted in the Treatise on Gen. 3.15. 5. Because they are especially confirmed by the double Testimonie of Daniel, and the Revelation, as is abundantly manifest by the Paral∣lels of both Books. 6. Not here to mention any more: Because Christ hath encouraged all his Overcomers in all the suffering times [until the said happy peace∣ful times shall come] with many special Promises of things to be enjoy∣ed by them in the said state, as by the 7th Argument is manifest. All which Grounds and Arguments may be abundantly sufficient to all such unto whom God shall give Faith to believe them: but in the mean time, those that do not, or will not, cannot be able to over-throw the strength of them: But I hope serious and judicious Christians will upon due and impartial consideration of them, judge them too weigh∣ty to be neglected or disregarded. 3. For Illustration and Application of these Doctrines all the 5 said Practicals on several Subjects and Texts, as Gen. 3.15. Rev. 22.20. Jer. 3.17. with these two last also on Rev. 20.5. & Rev. 21.5. may sufficiently and aptly serve, &c. and do not only much illustrate the Doctrines of the said state and times, but point out many excellent Uses of them. It may here (haply) be advantagious to some to hint at least in what way God hath been graciously pleased to lead us to these last great Discoveries in these two last Treatises, as first by two Principles laid by a Reverend and truly Religious Person, Mr. H. P. then my Tutor, when I was about 20 years of age, who was much owned and honored in his time, &c. viz. First, That many great Promises, such as Es. 60. & others like, were neither yet fulfilled, nor were to be interpreted only in a spiritual sence, but would be litterally fulfilled in their time. Secondly, By informing me of what Mr. Mede had then lately written, on Rev. 20. to be in the 1000 years which was owned in the Primitive times, which occasioned me to look into things of that nature divers years following; but about 30 years after, when I had left the University, I was so taken up in the work of my Ministry, and especially in the latter part thereof, in Preaching, Expounding, Catechising, publick Fasts, &c. so that all that time I had little freedome for such an intense busi∣ness, when by a double necessity, I being very much then spent, was
then laid aside: But in that my Retirement I began again to reassume my former notions, and persue them, about Anno Dom. 1662. 1. By that Essay in my Irenicon, to prove that such a Kingdom of Christ would be, from the seven Foundations therein, in that method set down ch. 1. which was after altered by the discovering that Christs Reign being in the great day of Judgment would be personal, &c. For in searching such Mysteries it was hard to keep any set Method then and all parts after were occasional, not first intended: to which I first added those occasional Letters and Papers in the Prodromus, to give light to the order of Revelation Prophesie; to supply the want of which and of the Abridgment of the Rev. on ch. 5. in the Irenic. we framed the Scheme of the whole Rev. and Summary of Dan. in one sheet, of very great use, when many hundred of both, Prod. and Irenic. were burnt, An. Dom. 1666. and of the Parallels, from which, with the A∣bridgment of Daniel, was the Book of Parallels framed, suiting to the 5th ch. of the Irenicon, which I found to be of exceeding great use both to ground and regulate all such studies ever since: After these I was divers years stopped in my proceeding by the loss of two Coppies of the two first Practicals on Gen. 3.15. & Rev. 22.20. until I was forced by an unexpected Law-sute to continue some time in London, about An. Dom. 70. I then again (as I had formerly) found so much encouragement and engagement, both from God, and many Honorable, Learned, Religious and Worthy Persons of several Ranks and Conditions, to proceed in these Studies, that thereupon I drew up the 12 said foundati∣ons of Faith, and published the same, with the said 8 Convincing Ar∣gument, containing the substance of the chief Argumentative parts of all the former: Unto which, the Tract on Jer. 3.17. was added, to ex∣plain the Distinction from Scripture of the two New Jerusalems, or the two fold state of New Jerusalem then for the raised, and then converted Saints of one happy Communion, on Rev. 21. gloriously described the Great, Holy, and Beloved Jerusalem, which, as the Apostle saith, Heb. 11. God is the Maker and Builder of, which hath Foundations, upon its Inhabitants coming down from God out of Heaven, which will by the immediate hand of God be made for the Fore-fathers then which Abraham expected, and for all that die in the Faith till Christs second coming without sin to Salvation, v. 10, 16, 39, 40. Secondly, The other, that Jerusalem to be built by men, whose Walls Strangers and their Kings, saith the Prophet Esay, shall build, (probably) that described in the 9 last ch. of Ezekiel, for the then Converted and Reduced Jews,
Israelites and Gentiles coming in, in the natural life, which Rev. 21. are called the Nations of them that are saved, walking in the light of the other said great, holy, and beloved new Jerusalem: wherein are those fifteen well-approved Reasons, why it will be then in the world suited wonderfully to the condition of the then raised Saints. And lastly, from those gradual Discoveries in all the other parts and parcels by the superaboundant Grace of God to so weak and unwor∣thy an Instrument, we more lately obtained that great Discovery of the main Scope of all Revelation-Prophesie, in the 4 last Chapters of the Revelation, as the Divine Key left by Jesus Christ for his Church, opening that state of the 1000 years, to be the fulfilling of the most antient Promises, Mercies, and Covenants made to the faithful Fathers and their spiritual Seed, then in both their said con∣ditions, &c. which we have here, according to Grace received, en∣deavoured further to open and explain in this last Treatise also: com∣mending the same with all the former in our Prayers to his blessing for the benefit of all true Believers, who only have interest in all Gospel-consolations, whether laid down in Holy Scriptures more e∣vidently or more mysteriously, whose Servant I more especially pro∣fess my self to be in this their so great concernment, and of the Great Lord and Master of us all, the Lord Jesus Christ. William Sherwin. Revel. 21.5. And he that sate upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things new: And he said unto me, write, for these words are true and faithful. WE now being to consider in our present proceeding, that great, gracious, and glorious work of God's renovation of all things in reference to the said Kingdom of Christ to fill up those times reserved for those mercies belonging to that state and world. We shall still therefore refer the Reader to the serious per∣usal of our said Comprisal and System in reference to this also, as be∣ing a Subject standing upon the same foundations (as was said,)
The Declaration whereof is so gloriously illustrated by him that is said to sit upon the Throne, as in the Text. As our blessed Saviour did first in his life-time doctrinally teach many things concerning that state and world, which the children of the Resurrection should then be counted worthy of (as we shewed from Luke 20.35, 36.) and afterwards very punctually explained his said Doctrine in many particulars in the Revelation, respecting the same in the order of accomplishment. 1. Even so the Spirit of God guided the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. to teach divers things concerning the times of restitution of all things, which our Saviour here hath as punctually in this Re∣velation of the renovation of all things also explained, concerning that time in the order of accomplishment; when God (as in this Text) will make all things new; for all the links in the Chain of Re∣velation-Prophesies have their unalterable measures of their propor∣tioned times, many ways through Divine wisdom and goodness ac∣commodated to the benesit & happiness of the Church of Christ in the world, until all promised mercies be fully performed in the issue: Wherefore so much reference is made to the Prophets to the end of that Divine Book, as is very observable. 2. As the Apostle Peter particularly teacheth, that the Hea∣vens must receive Christ until those times of restitution of all things. So Christ in the Revelation order placeth those times upon his own coming from the right hand of his Father to destroy the Beast and false Prophet, and of the Resurrection of the said Saints to reign with him, Chap. 19. & 20. 3. As the same Apostle informs us further, that God hath spoken of these times, not things (as Beza well notes on that Text) by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began: So here the Prophets are not only referred unto, and often mentioned upon these accounts, but the particulars are therefore many times asserted to be true and faithful, as being before foretold or promised in the Writings of the Prophets. 4. As the said Apostle useth that expression of them , the times of the restitution of all things; and using that De∣compound word, that fitly denotes a placing things in order out of a discomposed state of them: so pointing out the particularities to be renewed in those times, wherein both the antient Prophesies & the said Revelation-key do both concur & agree, the last giving both clearness and evidence to the former: only in this said Key of Christ's,
we have the last promised mercy of Christ's Kingdom as the Son of David. First, set down, as being the chief thing, which all the rest serve to make to make up, into the possession whereof the Resurre∣ction of all his Saints which he brings with him as his Spouse or new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.9. is the Inlet (as we noted) to bring them into a capacity to partake of in such restitution of all things; so speaking first of that restoring the King∣dom to Israel, as Acts 1.6. or raising up Davids Tabernacle, Acts 15. and then speaking of the said new Jerusalem. Chap. 21. which con∣tains the Marriage of the Lamb, spoken of Chap. 19.7. wherein will also be that Paradise of God in that state, and the pure River and Tree of Life, Chap. 22. and all these in the times of the new Heavens and new Earth, when God will, as in this Text, make all things new. Quest. But here a Question may arise, which it may be requisite to resolve at present, viz. If the said Resurrection be such an Inlet to the said Saints to enjoy the happiness of that state, why are only the Mar∣tyrs that suffered death for Christ here said to live and reign with him the 1000 years, as some have conceived? Ans. It is true, that Ch. 20.4. speaks only of two sorts of Revelati∣on-Martyrs, as was answered to the cry of those Souls under the Altar, Rev. 6.10. to whom it was said, that they should rest till their fellow-servants and brethren should be killed: the Souls are there said to be , of such as were before beheaded under the red Dragon in the Pagan Persecutions of the Sts. but those that were called , the fellow-servants & Brethren after to be killed, were such as suffer'd since under the Beast, as Ch. 20.4. describes them; of which, though very many suffered death, yet not all: neither are they only Martyrs of Christ that suffer death actually, but all such as have had a willingness and resolution of mind to suffer for Christ, if called to it, are reckoned by him for Martyrs; and though others have suffer∣ed in a less degree than death, yet are also to be counted such. We know Ishmael's mocking of Isaac, is called Persecution by the Apo∣stle; and all the Saints have suffered one way or other for God and Christ; for which cause they are all to be esteemed Martyr, as they have been sufferers under the Beast, or under any other Persecutors in any times before, & that all suffering Sts. deceased before the time of the Beast shall also rise at the first said Resurrect. of the just, when both the Martyrs blood will be avenged, as Deut. 33.42, 43. and they all rewarded, as may from these following considerations be made to appear.
1. Because when Christ comes he will come with all such his said Saints, whether they have actually suffered death for him, or other∣therwise, as the Apostle speaks expresly 1 Thes. 3.13. with Zech. 14.5. He comes with all his Saints. And again, saith he, All that then sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Thes. 4.14. namely, to raise their bodies from the dead: the Scripture then is clear for the resurrection of all then. Secondly, That parallel Text, Rev. 11.18. that respects the time and occasion of judging the Saints, viz. with a Judgment of reward or recompence at Christs appearance, makes a full enumeration of all sorts to be then rewarded, of Old Testament Saints or sufferers, as well as of the New; yea, of all Saints in that capacity, as suffer∣ers; and Prophets, as well as Apostles, and even all that fear Gods Name, both sinall and great, shall then have their peculiar reward, though in the natural life then (which I conceive is meant of the last sort of all such as are said to fear Gods Name:) So saith Christ then, Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every one according to his works. But all deceased Saints are then made capable of their proper reward in that state they rise into, by the first bodily Resurrection, viz. to reign with Christ the 1000 years in his Davidical Kingdom. Thirdly, In Chapter 21.2. When the new Jerusalem comes down from God out of Heaven; which v. 9. is called the Lambs wife, as con∣taining all the Spirits of just men made perfect upon that Resurrection to be united to their own bodies to inhabite that City which God himself then makes for them, when that great Voice saith, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, &c. Now that Jerusalem will contain all those raised Saints which had died be∣fore, and it will be the general priviledg of them all which God had given to Christ that they shall behold his glory which his Father hath gi∣ven him in his said Kingdom, John 17.24. Fourthly, All Saints that have lived in suffering times, as all times, have been and will be from Abels death to the Saints said Resurre∣ction; who as they have suffered with or for Christ from the world and Devil; so all such sufferers, saith the Apostle, shall then reign with him, 2 Tim. 2.12. and they must all first rise bodily, before they can be capable of reigning with him in that state, or of enjoy∣ing the promised mercies belonging thereunto. Fifthly, All the 24 Elders, and the four living Wights which re∣present the whole Church of Christ, Rulers and People, exult a∣forehand,
Revel. 5.10. that in the issue of Revelation-prophesie, they shall reign upon earth, who acknowledge themselves to be such as Christ hath redeemed by his blood out of every kindred, tongue and people, and Nation, who shall have their part with Christ in the sure mercies of David, according to the promise Esa. 55.3. which they must be made capable of by the said first Resurrection. Sixthly, All Christs overcomers since the Revelation-prophesie began to take place in all that is said there shortly to be done, that is in the due order of times to be accomplished: they are all encou∣raged by something belonging, to the Jerusalem state, which only by the said Resurrection they attain to their shares; as is particular∣ly manifest in our seventh convincing Argument in the Word writ∣ten: now all faithful Christians are Overcomers, though they suf∣fer not death, as those said Martyrs, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. but only by les∣ser tryals. Seventhly, Christ who is appointed by the Father then to be heir of all things, promiseth in special to each Overcomer without exception, that he shall also inherit all things with him, v. 7. which priviledg belongs to all Saints, as the Spouse of Christ, or Lambs wife; and therefore belongs to them as Saints, to which purpose saith St. Paul, If chil∣dren, then heirs, and joynt-heirs wich Christ, which without the Resur∣rection they cannot enjoy, no more than the separate Spirits of good men enjoy them now. Quest. If Christ to the said purpose bring all the Saints with him, to raise their dead bodies that they may reign with him the 1000 years, how are the rest of the dead said not to live again till the 1000 years are ended, ver. 5. are not some of those called the rest of the dead Saints, at least, I say, some of them? Answ. All Saints that died in the suffering times before Christs coming, he then brings with him, to raise them to reign with him; but such Saints as live or die afterwards, seem not to be in that rank or capacity; but at last when Christ descends with a shout, and the voice of an Archangel, will in a moment be rapt to meet him, and be changed with all other Saints raised before, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. it is twice there asserted by the Apostle, and we shall all be changed; and the wicked then to be raised after them at the last Trump, seem to be some of those called before the rest of the dead that lived not a∣gain till the 1000 years are finished: and the former raised suffering Saints are many ways distinguished in Scriptures from the other Saints. First, they are expresly termed all such as slept in Jesus be∣fore
that his coming, when the new Jerusalem comes down from God out of Heaven, &c. 1 Thes 4.14. Secondly, they are distinguished by their sufferings for Christ in the former suffering times, upon which account they must reign with him (as was said.) Thirdly, the Scripture de∣scribes them by the meek that have a promise to inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace, Psal. 37. which yet is not fulfilled, but our Saviour saith, shall be, Matth. 5.5. Meek Mo∣ses, Abraham, Jacob, David, yea, Christ himself, and all his Martyrs so killed, as was said, Rev. 6.10, 11. as meek Lambs were led to the slaughter, &c. who neither inherited the earth, but were pil∣grims and strangers in it; nor much less delighted themselves in the abundance of peace therein, &c. But as for all other Saints that shall live in the following peaceable happy times, and all that die before the last Trump, and that live then, shall enjoy the benefit of that promise, who were not numbered with the former sufferers in the suffering times; but yet as the Seed of Shem and Japhet, or of Abra∣hams or Davids spiritual Seed at least, if not of their natural race also (as many of the converted Jews and Israelites will then be) shall all enjoy their proper portion by promise and Covenant: whence the Apostle seems to call redemption of the Saints bodies (especially Gentiles) the receiving of the Adoption, even the redemption of their bodies, viz. by the first said Resurrection, Rom. 8.23. and such as these that shall die in those future happy peaceable times, the same Apo∣stle seems to intend by those dead in Christ, that shall rise first, 1 Thes. 4. though in a general sense it is true likewise of those that rise at the said first Resurrection: but I conceive the particular intent of that Text respects the later sort of the Saints last raised at the gene∣ral rapture and change at the last Trump. Object. But are not the Resurrections of good and bad joyned together both in Old and New Testament, and both are said to arise to Judgment, as that noted Text Dan. 12.2, 3. where some are said to awake to life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt; and our Saviour also joyns them both, John 5.29. They that have done good shall come forth of the Grave to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of Damnation. Answ. As for Dan. 12. that seems particularly to respect the re∣stauration of Israel, as appears by the end of the former Chapter, concerning Gogs the Turks destruction, spoken of also Ezek 38, & 39. who then shall come to his end, & none shall help him, when Daniels peo∣ple shall be delivered, Chap. 12.1. and ver. 2. it is only said many shall
then awake, viz. out of the dust of their dispersion and bondage, like the dry bones, Ezek. 37. but not said all, which should have been said, if all, good and bad were to be raised as at a general Resur∣rection (as some use to speak) and whereas that Text speaks of turning many to righteousness, which will not be done at any general Resurrection, but is to be done at such Civil Resurrection of Jews and Israelites to own a Righteousness of Justification by faith in Christ which they did not before: and the wise that are there said to do it, are in the Original said to be Teachers, which cannot be sup∣posed to do any such thing for any upon such general Resurrection, when all time of Grace will be past, from the death of all that were not converted before; for, as the tree falls so it will lie, &c. But if it were granted that this Text, and that of John 5. and many other∣like Texts did comprise both first and second Resurrection, to the first and second acts of both said Judgments of the great day (as Jude was directed by the Spirit of God to style it) and our Saviour in a general sense speaks there of both; for ver. 27. he saith, the Father had given him Authority to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of man: and as the Father gave him the Son to have life in himself to raise the dead in sin spiritually, ver. 26. so he had power also hereafter to raise both good and bad out of the graves bodily to Judgment. For answer whereunto and many like passages in Scripture, we are to consider that many such Texts deliver only some general truths of the whole Doctrine delivered in this Book by our Saviour more fully and par∣ticularly concerning both the said Resurrections and Judgments with what is to be known of matters to intervene betwixt both, which are always to be referred to such future explications of them, as the holy Spirit hath from time to time given forth to any of Christs servants to make further known; for the Doctrines of these last things have been made known but by degrees. Of the first Resurrection, Esai. 26. spake darkly, shewing the Heathen Tyrants that oppressed the Jews were dead, they should not live, they were deceased, they should not rise; ver. 14. but Gods Saints should live, and with his dead body they should arise, ver. 19. which (with other Texts in our Treatise on Rev. 20.5.) could not be understood without Christs Revelation of the first bodily Resurrection of the Sts. there decypher∣ed in many particulars, at what time, to what ends, how long before the rest of the dead, as was shewed: and so for Judgment, after God had at the fall declared, the Seed of the woman [so to be true man, and only of the woman, and not of the man, and so was to
be necessarily the Son of God;] that is, God to be manifest in the flesh; which is the first part of that great Mystery, which was 4000 years in carrying on, to lay the sure foundation of breaking the Serpents head at his first coming: that by the Judgment of the great Day, he might break it 1. eminently at the first, and 2. totally and finally at the last Judgment: the next antient Prophesie for remo∣ving the power of Satan, &c. was given to Enoch in the old World, recorded by Jude, ver. 13, 14. concerning Christs coming to Judg∣ment, which hath direct reference to Daniels Vision of the first Ses∣sion of Judgment at the destruction of the Beast, Dan. 7. which our Saviour confirms and explains in part, Rev. 11.18. and Rev. 19. but Daniel speaks not there of the last general Judgment, that is left for Christ to do, Rev. 20.11. to the end 1000 years and more af∣ter the former: and hence as Daniel of the said first act had said, The Judgment was set, and 2dly the books were opened: and the Apostle Paul who had much of these mysteries revealed to him, tells us, 3. Christ would judge the quick, viz. temporal destruction; and 4. the dead Saints with reward (as was shewed) & so saith the Apostle, Christ will judg the quick & dead at his appearance & Kingdom, in 2 Tim. 4.1. and all these four marks of that part of Judgment are the proper Characters of the Judgments of the said great Day, which belong also to the last Judgment above 1000 years after Daniels, as Rev. 20.11. to the end, after the last Gog and Magog shall be destroy∣ed: and here we finde not any of these marks of that Judgment at any other time when the Old World or Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, though these are both in some respects made patterns of the other by our Saviour, Luke 17. Sodom and Gomorrah probably of the first when many terrible Judgments will finde out many sorts of wicked men, &c. and the other a pattern of the general destruction of the world by fire, as the other was by a Deluge of Water. Jeru∣salems first and second destructions are also patterns, and the Pagan-Idolators and Persecutors destruction, which is set forth like a day of Judgment, Rev. 6.12. to the end; and so in that large descrip∣tion of the desolation of the Churches enemies, Esai. 34. throughout the whole Chapter: but in none of these or any other do we finde these four Characters peculiar to the Judgments of the said great Day; but only in Dan. 7. and Rev. 20. we read of many excellent points Christ informed such as lived in the visible Church, or such as have to do with his Servants there; as by him that had not the Wedding garment, Matth. 22.11. shewing that nothing will serve
Professors, but being by faith invested with his righteousness; and by three Parables together, Matth. 25. First, that the foolish Virgins were shut out for want of true faith and grace, though they were formal Professors; and his own Servants (whether Ministers, Ma∣gistrates, or other Christians in the Church) to whom the Talents were delivered to improve when he went into a far Country, viz. to Heaven as he expounds it, Luke 19. when one failed he was con∣demned; and in that 3d which is more general but yet restrained to the visible Church likewise, or such as had to do with his Servants, whom in their afflictions or persecutions they should have fed, clo∣thed, visited, which he looks as done to himself; but for the want of this all such will be condemned: And alas! alas! how few consi∣der any such proceeding of Christ in Judgment, that are deeply in such case concerned; men are in these days far short of the love, com∣passion and zeal of the Primitive Christians, who sold their pos∣sessions, Acts 4.37. But to omit many passages to like purposes, as some to be condemned by the Law, some without the Law by their own Conscience, some by the Gospel, &c. but above all, Christ hath in the said Revelation made many great points known, not known before of the said Judgment of the Great day; as that there is a second act or general Judgment to be celebrated by Christ, as well as that Daniel had the Vision of, and he had before confirm∣ed; and shews what distance of time shall be betwixt them, viz. above 1000 years, and what things are to intervene betwixt them in the 1000 years, and how the last shall be brought on by Gods raining fire from Heaven upon the last attempt of the last Gog and Magog, and at his sitting on the Throne, Heaven and Earth should be dissolved, and the Earth, the Sea, and the Grave shall give up their dead, that they shall be judged by their several distinct books, the elect out of the Book of life, and the Devil first be cast into the lake of fire, where the Beast and false Prophet were cast before 1000 years, and more, and so should death and hell afterward; which in such respects seems to shew their utter end in the world, as in Chap. 17.11. but more to them that are capable of more: these by Christ are Divinely delivered of the said Judgment, no where in Scrip∣ture so made known before; and so of both Resurrections, after E∣say, and David, then Daniel had much mystically shewed him in Vi∣sion; that they sat on Thrones set for them, and Judgment or pow∣er of judging was given then to the Saints; but that the suffering Saints should come at that time with Christ, coming in the Clouds of
Heaven, and be raised by Christ to reign with him 1000 years be∣fore the raising of the rest of the dead good or bad, and that all the promised mercies should then be fulfilled to them, none could re∣veal these but Christ, who had this Book with seven Seals given to him by the Father in such a glorious manner, when none else in Hea∣ven or earth was found worthy to open it, or look into it, or much less to fulfil the contents of it, but only the Lamb, that had, as it were been slain, and lived again, but will then appear to be the Li∣on of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, as well as the Branch: the Father only reserved these things to be made known by his Son, the Wisdom of the Father, the Eternal Word, in the bosom of the Father; and therefore these his Divine Oracles concerning all such last things are chiefly to be attended to as Gods and Christs utmost infallible resolution of all such things as were not so fully and par∣ticularly explained concerning Resurrections or Judgment of all sorts before; or what is to be fulfilled upon the foundations of the Pro∣phets in the interim of the 1000 years betwixt both: the Apostle Paul who was rapt into the third Heaven, reveals many things of the Re∣surrection, & shews some Mysteries of that & the Judgment, 1 Cor. 15 1 Thes. 4. and elsewhere, but much thereof cannot from thence be rightly expounded without Christs said Revel. ch. 20. which there∣fore seems in these respects much more clearly and distinctly delive∣red than any of that Book before or after, as we hope to shew: and therefore these Revelations of all such last things are not to be ex∣plained by other Scriptures that speak not of such things, but all o∣thers that either speak in general of them, or not explicitly of ma∣ny of the said particulars, are in those respects to be explained by our Saviours Revelation, whose wisdom is infallible, his truth unerring, being the saithful and true witness, and all such his Revelations are ut∣most resolutions in the case, and sure foundations therein to rest up∣on: and the rather, because of the Divine charge to the contrary, with the terrible penalty annexed unto these Doctrines, which is ve∣ry evident doth respect the same especially, Chap. 22.18.19. con∣cerning willing at least, or much more willful, adding to or taking away any thing from the Prophesie of this Book, which ought not slightly to be overlooked, besides, many other considerations which might be added: that of 1 Cor. 15. ver. 23. as the Revelation ex∣plains it, Christ was the first fruits of the Saints Resurrection above 1600 years before his coming at Antichrists destruction, when the suffering Sts. shall rise which he brings with him [ita deinde, as saith
the Apostle] then cometh the end: as in Rev. 20.1000 years after and more; and a reason is added, all Christs enemies must first be put un∣der his feet; viz. first, Ezekiels Gog & Magog, Turk & Pope, as we shew∣ed, and all taken then out of Christs Kingdom that offend, and 1000 years after, when the last Gog and Magog, Rev 20. shall be destroy∣ed, and the Devil that seduced them cast into the lake of fire, then will the last enemy death also be destroyed; but in the interim all the said thousand years, saith the Apostle, he must reign, till that last enemy death be also destroyed; after which he will deliver up his Davidical Kingdom to the Father, as was said ver. 24. but at ver. 51, 52. he declares certain mysteries not known before con∣cerning the general sudden rapture and change at the last Trump, and last Resurrection, which suit with Revelation order also (though those mysteries and Christs last descending with a shout at the same time, 1 Thes. 4. seem to be only revealed to the Apostle Paul) yet the distinction of Christs bringing his said Saints with him at his next coming, 1 Thes. 3.13. and 4.14. and his sudden rapping them up above 1000 years after, to meet him in the Air when he descends with the said Trump of God, v. 16. at the coming of the Lord (as it is also called, ver. 15.) from which time they shall ever be with the Lord, which was not true from the former, as by Revel. 20. is manifest; which is also another evident ground of distinguishing the same, and by the Revelation-order, so to be explained; which is not to be understood according to any mens apprehensions of other Scriptures: but other Scriptures to be explained by that in all such matters as God hath given unto Christ in that most Divine Book to resolve his Church of in such particulars therein held out: and as for that of Peter. 2.3. upon which some mistaken apprehensions of some seem to have put some difficulties, by the help of the Revel. may ea∣sily be resolved, if we consider he speaks both of the Scoffers of the last times, and to faithful Christians likewise, and suits considera∣tions useful for both: to the Scoffers he offers the consideration of the day of the Lord; that is the great day of Judgment wherein is the morning Judgment contained; when Christ is said to come as a thief, at the end of the 6th Vial, Rev. 16.15. about the Armageddon battle, as here he is said, also to come as a thief in the night, then will be the consuming of the body of the Beast by fire, Dan. 7. and ver. 10. a fiery stream issued from the Ancient of days at that Judg∣ment: but this seems by our Saviour (besides other considerations) to be a partial destruction, chiefly falling upon wicked men, com∣pared
Luk. 17. to Sodoms and Gomorrahs destruction, that will find out such where they are. But then the deluge of fire, and the passing away of the Heavens, as Rev. 20.11. both which by Revelation-Prophesie are manifest to be above 1000 years after the Armaged∣don-battle: (when the Beast and salse Prophet were taken, and said to be cast into the lake of fire burning with Brimstone, Rev. 19.20.) but both these burnings, the first partial, the second general and ul∣timate are contained in the day of the Lord, or the Judgment of the Great Day, as Christs Revelation also teacheth, without which this Text, with many others could not be soundly resolved: & for his bringing in the exception of the New Heavens and New Earth, v. 13. that is, on the Saints part to comfort them against the Scoffers in these bad times, not that they will be after the last destruction of the World, but that there was such an happy state coming on wherein they were interessed (though both at the beginning and ending of the day of the Lord such fiery Vengeance was in store for such wicked Scoffers, hardned by Gods long sufferance in these last Days which the Apostle prophetically spake of) and this Exposition from the warrant of this Divine Book given particularly for many such pur∣poses, and therefore stiled the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him to shew unto his Servants, &c. is more satisfying to my Conscience than all the differing apprehensions of men whatso∣ever concerning the same. Quest. And whereas it may be questioned by some, whether these In∣terpretations being mysterious be according to the intent of the Writers of those, or the like. said portions of Scriptures. Answ. That is not so much to be respected, as that they be ac∣cording to the minds of the Inditer of them, who taught all his Mes∣sengers and Amanuenses to write and deliver what was Divine and sacred truth whether he gave them full Interpretations of them at the same time or not, sometimes it is evident he did not, as when Daniel was denied the knowledge of the times of the end; there∣fore he said, I heard, but I understood not, Dan. 12. and the Disci∣ples could not understand the fulfilling of the Prophesie of Hosea, Ch. 1. of the calling of the Gentiles then, till by Vision to Peter, and and gifts of the Spirit, and the like he had resolved them; and it seems probable, that neither Moses in his Song for Posterity, Deut. 32. or threatnings in order, Lev. 26. or in penning Jacobs Prophe∣fie, or Balaams Parable, as they all respected the last times did so understand them: so whether the Apostle Paul or Peter in those
things, being guided by the Spirit of Christ to write concerning mat∣ters directly respecting the last times did know the particular mean∣ing of them in those respects as they are explained since by the Book of Revelation: I must ingeniously acknowledge that in things which were so by the same Spirit of Christ, further in due time to be revealed, I believe they did not: for first, it is probable they would then, with the said things, have given the Interpretation of them if they had then known them: And secondly, the Holy Spirit of Christ would not have given particular Revelations to open and explain the particular meanings if they had not been necessary so to have been revealed in respect of the hidden parts of them, and especially that God the Father in a glorious wonderful manner, Rev. 5. should so give that most Divine Book to his beloved Son the Lamb so to reveal them (as he hath done) without which the Church had been in the dark, in regard of many excelent points of Heavenly Doctrines now only knowable by the help and use of the said Book (especially in what concerns the main Scope of all Revelation-Pro∣phesie) which is therefore highly to be esteemed and diligently to be studied by all wise and good Christians for the right understand∣ing of the darkest portions of Scripture which are not rightly dis∣covered by any other means but by these Divine Oracles of Jesus Christ; and let it henceforth stand as an irrefragable Rule amongst all sound Christians, that all those Texts of holy Scriptures concer∣ning those last things, viz. Resurrections and Judgment are to be ex∣plained by Christs Revelation and not the Revelation by them. From the former said sure Rule, and the many foundations for∣merly laid down in the whole work, these Divine Conclusions or Christian Doctrines will evidently follow: First, That Christs Davidical Kingdom on earth will begin with the first act or session of the Judgment of the Great Day, above 1000 years before the Last Judgment, Esa. 9. Luke 1.32. with Dan. 7. Rev. 11. and 19.6, 9, 11, to the end. 2. That at the first said Session the quick, namely the Beast & fals Prophet with other great and small enemies then living will be judg∣ed by temporal destruction from the earth, Dan. 7. Ezek 38.39. Dan. 11.45. Matth. 13.41. And the deceased Saints will then also be judged with a Judgment of reward or recompense at their holy
and blessed bodily Resurrection, when they shall rise to reign with Christ, who will then so Judge both quick and dead at his appear∣ing and Kingdom, Dan. 7. Rev. 11.18. 2 Tim. 4.1. Thirdly, Christ will reign with his said raised Saints on earth in his said Kingdom all that same 1000 years, wherein (as he hath both strongly and emphatically taught us) that Satan shall be bound from deceiving the Nations any more until the said 1000 years shall be sulfilled. See Treatise on Rev. 21.5. page 37, 38. and page 8. of this. Fourthly, The said 1000 years space to be so fulfilled beginning from the first said Session, or Matutinum Judicium (as Mr. Mede speaks, or a greater than he, Psal. 49.14. and a greater than them both, Luke 19.18, 19. Rev. 2.26.) before the little space of Satans loosing again, is that interim before the last Judgment wherein shall be the performance of Gods most antient promised Mercies and Covenants to the faithful Forefathers, and to their spiritual Seed [viz. the then raised Saints and others then converted] through their Divine promised Seed Christ, by whom they shall all then have their sure Mercies of David, Esa. 55.3. and as the Lambs wife, then inherit all things with him, Rev. 21.7. Fifthly, The New Jerusalem state, the Marriage of the Lamb, the Paradise of God with the pure River and Tree of Life therein and the Nations of them that are then saved walking in the light of the said great holy and beloved New Jerusalem, wherein consists the New Heavens and new earth, when God will make all things new, as in this Text, are the contemporaries of the said happy times and state in the said 1000 years, and will make up that happiness in the said Davidical Kingdom of Christ, both to the said Saints then rai∣sed, and to the then converted Jews and Gentiles in the natural life, when also the two second great calls of them both will be accom∣plished, Deut. 32.43. Rom. 15.10. that Jews and Gentiles will rejoyce together. Sixthly, Satans last most wicked attempt with his last Gog & Ma∣gog against the said holy City and the Camp of the Saints after the said 1000 years are ended, will occasion fire from Heaven to con∣sume them, and probably the earth and the works upon it, &c. and thereupon also the destruction of the last enemy death, when all the Saints both raised before, and then living or lying in the grave (to free them (as is probable) from the destruction with wicked men then) shall be rapt up together, and all be changed in a moment or
twinkling of an eye to meet Christ in the Air, &c. when also all the wicked shall be raised at the last Trump to the last general Judg∣ment and final sentence, &c. upon whose sitting upon the great white Throne will be the utter dissolution of the whole created world, as Rev. 20.11, &c. And these (I believe) are upon the many said accounts from ho∣ly Scripture, the Divine truths of Jesus Christ, not contradicting a∣ny thing taught in Gods Word before, but only explaining many things formerly darkly, yet Divinely couched therein, and especially things respecting the said first and second bodily Resurrections, and the proceedings of the Judgment of the great day of the Lord at above a 1000 years distance, with the performance of the promised mercies in the interim (as was said.) And thus have I given an account of my faith as respecting these things for which I bless and magnifie the glorious Name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, three Persons, and one true and ever∣living God, and I do believe that all Saints will do the same here or hereafter. Amen. And thus for the Questions concerning the first Resurrection, as be∣ing the Inlet to the Sts. that Christ brings with him when he comes into the happy said approaching state 1000 years before the said rest of the dead shall live again; and that answers to sundry portions of Scripture that are by some otherwise expounded, but are only to be understood by the help of the most Divine Book of the Revela∣tion of Jesus Christ, as we have shewed. And now before we proceed to speak particularly of the words or matters of this Text of the Renovation of all things, which are to make up the happiness of Christs said Reign with his Saints upon the said first Resurrection: we shall consider the preceding and fol∣lowing context thereof with its dependencie, to remove some other seeming difficulties, which for the greater evidence we shall endea∣vour to do by Answering some other Questions, and resolving some doubts upon weighty reasons concerning the same. Quest. 1. Are not the New Heavens and the New earth the renovation of all things the New Jerusalem and Paradise of God, &c. Ch. 21.22. to be after the last Judgment, wch is set down before them in Ch. 20.11. Answ. Although the last Judgment is there placed in the end of the foregoing Chapter, it doth not follow that it will be in time before those great things spoken of in the two following Chapters, but it will appear to be there placed upon other special reasons. One
Reason is from the reference of divers things spoken of Chap. 19. which are further explained in their order in the three following Chapters, and consequently of their dependance thereupon. A second Reason is from the special consideration of Chap. 20. to ver. 11. as the Table of the good times of Gods Church, as Chap. 11. to ver. 15. was the Table of the bad times, as after we hope to make manifest in the Divine contrivance of this sacred Book to the good advantage of right enquirers. But first, for the Reason of such things Chap. 19. as refer to the three following Chapters: The first is from ver. 6. after many great Hallelujahs for the the Whores destruction, ver. 1, 2. redoubled again, ver. 3. and a∣gain, they said Hallelujah. Thirdly, of the representative 24 El∣ders and four Beasts, or four living Wights worshipping God, and adding their Amen, to their Allelujah (for such will be the high prai∣ses of God in the hearts and mouths of Gods people then for his destroying of Babylon, called here his judging of the great Whore for her great provocations) [mark that expression, for then will be∣gin Christs great day of Judgment] v. 2. & v. 5. there is a Divine ge∣neral enforcement to the like praise to all Gods Servants not only for this said ruine of Babylon, but for the ensuing reign of Christ thereup∣on, set forth in wonderful expressions, ver. 6. saying Allelujah for the Lord, God Omnipotent reigneth; which is the first general referring to the future Chapters, and this is further explained Ch. 20. of Christs reign with his Saints 1000 years, and the same 1000 wherein Satan was to be bound, which for its certainty is six times said to be so three times absolutely, and three times relatively. The second general, Chap. 19. ver. 7. is the coming of the Marri∣age of the Lamb, which is explained Chapter 21.2, 9, 10. in the New Jerusalem state, unto which matter of joy and thanksgiving there is a third addition in general, that the Lambs wife hath made her self ready in the same verse, which seems specially to respect the calling of the Jews, then to be betrohed for ever, when the Tabernacle of God is also said to be with men, c. 21.3, 4. at that his coming which the many Hallelujahs in the Hebrew tongue then to be sung seem to point out to us, and not only Jews and Israelites will then be brought into Christs sheepfold; but all the Nations of them that are saved and shall all walk together in the light of the Jerusalem that came from God out of Heaven (being all to be then of one Communion of Sts.
though in several capacities celebrating accordingly the Marriage of the Lamb the said 1000 years, v. 2.9, 10, 22, 24, 26. and as from the Throne of God and the Lamb, then and there proceeds that pure River of the water of Life, viz. all Divine Grace, John 7.37, 38. so in the middest of the street of the City then will be the Tree of Life in that blessed state of that Paradise of God, chap. 22.1, 2. as chap. 2.7. is also explained, which will be more gloriously resto∣red then by and for Christ the second Adam than the state of that was which the first Adam lost in many respects, when God, as in the Text, makes all things new. Now concerning such a neer Union of all Gods Saints and Ser∣vants at the said Marriage of the Lamb according to their several capacities, we have much in the Prophets observable; we shall on∣ly name a few texts, as Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, in Righteousness, in Judgment, in Loving Kindness, and in Mercies: the whole 45th Psalm, and much in Esa. 60, & 62, & 65, & 66. all respecting the same time and state, and is in part applyed, Rev. 21. And thus much of the reference of these three last chap. to the said general heads mentioned chap. 19. of Christs said Reign, the Marriage of the Lamb, and his Wives making her self ready, which is usually in Scripture, and especially in this book, to mention Generals, and after particularly to explain them: and beside these ob∣serve that there is no distinction of order or times in the three follow-Chapters by first second or third, or after this I saw, as chap. 18.1. at the Whores destruction, or after these things I heard, chap. 19.1. but from thence to the end of the book all the Visions are of the same time, as we may after shew. But because the opening of this Rereference in chap. 19. is of great use to the understanding of all the rest of this book to the end, we shall endeavour according to what by Divine Grace we have received, to resolve these Questi∣ons following. 1. Why these great things should here be inserted, chap. 19.5, 6, 7. after Babylons destruction? 2. Why the destruction of the Beast and false Prophet from ver. 11. to the end of the Chapter is decyphered before them? 3. What is meant by that in v. 9 where it's said, Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, which is set forth with so much Divine Illustration? Much after the manner that Gods Re∣novation is set forth in this text. The first is to teach us, that Baby∣lons ruine is the beginning of Christs Reign, chap. 11.17. he then
takes to himself his great power and reigns, as here, ver. 6. which seems to be the that beginning of Revenges, Deut. 32.40, &c.) and when God begins then he will also make an end) for by this God prepares for a greater and more general revenge upon the Enemies, by provoking them to gather to the Armageddon Battel, as chap. 16. ver. 13, 14, 15. by sending the three unclean Spirits, or Spirits of Devils afterwards to the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to it, which is here gloriously decyphered, ver. 11. to the end. 2. To manifest to the Churches Consolation, that as the Beast had scattered the power of the holy people, Dan. 12.7. for his time, times, and half a time; so then his power should be so scattered, that there remains no more but to prepare for the greatest Vengeance at his last destruction: he shall never more hurt or molest them. 3. To instruct us how the Morning Judgment of the great day, de∣scribed by Daniel, chap. 7. will be brought on: First by judging the Whore. 2dly, the Beast and false Prophet, with their Followers, as is written, Deut. 32. Psal. 149. Rev. 19. the last: for Christ, saith the Apostle, shall destroy the man of Sin at the appearance of his coming: so when Christ comes from the right hand of his Father, he makes his soes his footstool, Psal. 110.1. whom the Heavens receive till the times of Restitution of all things, saith the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. [for they all contemporate.] 4. To assure us of the beginning then also of that said happy state of Christs Church, chap. 11.18, 19, & 19.6, 7. for when Christ comes in the Clouds he brings all his Saints with him; who probably may have that honour to execute that wrath in part upon those Ene∣mies, who shall then also in that Judgment receive their reward, Dan. 7.13, 14. ver. 22. Rev. 11.18. to teach all Gods people then to lift up their heads, as our Saviour directs, Luke 21.28.31. be∣cause their Redemption is neer; and that Kingdome of God also: and though there will be then great shakings of the Enemies, out of the world, as Numb. 25. Es. 2.17, 18, 19. yet God will send his Angels then to gather his Elect from the four corners of the Earth, Mat. 24.3. and two shall be then in the field, the one shall be taken the other left v. 40, &c. To the third Question we Answer, That these generals of Christs Kingdome are explained in the following Chapters after Antichrists ruine, to shew the first eminent act of power Christ will manifest when he begins to reign, will be to remove that great offender out of
the way, who hath so long obstructed the happy communion of God and Christ, with all the Saints, which they shall enjoy upon his removal, when the said Marriage of the Lamb takes place, and Gods antient people are turned to him, (as was said.) 2. Because that is the eminent breaking of the Serpents head by the first Judgment revealed to Enoch, seen in Vision by Daniel, Dan. 7. explained and confirmed, and to be fulfilled by Christ, Rev. 11.18. & chap. 19. as may farther after appear, &c. which first Judgment of the wicked quick, is that removens prhibens, re∣moving the hinderance, and therefore seems first necessary to be done, to make way for that said happy ensuing state, as Mat 13.41, 42. and is an eminent breaking of the Serpents head, as the destroying the last Enemy Death will be the total and final break∣ing thereof. The next Question is, What is meant ver. 9. by that they are said to be blessed that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb? 2. Why the Apostle John is commanded to write it? 3. Why the Angel adds as he testifiedth, These are the true say∣ings of God? 4. Why the Angel resisting his attempt to worship him, enjoyns him to worship God, as in chap. 22.9.? 5. Why he tells him he is his fellow Servant, and of his Brethren, [the Prophets, chap. 22.] and here adds, That have the Testimony of Jesus: and then adds, Worship God: giving this reason; For the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophesie? To resolve the first Question, these three things are to be consider∣ed; First, What is meant by the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. 2. What is their Calling to it. 3. How they are said to be blessed that are called to it: and these we desire a little to explain, though but in our passage, because they have been misapplyed formerly. 1. The Marriage Supper of the Lamb is the ensuing destruction of the Beast, and the like wicked Enemies shortly after the Whore chap. 18. for which the many said Halelujahs were sung, when in such a terrible, powerful and glorious manner Christ comes to de∣stroy them with his heavenly Armies, and his Garments dipt in blood, and takes the Beast and false Prophet, and casts them into the fiery lake for ever; and that is denoted by the great Voice of the Angel standing in the Sun to call all the Fowls to the same Supper, ver. 18. who also were filled with their flesh, ver. last., who were
slain with the Sword of Christs mouth, that is, according to his Word: who is therefore said in Righteousness to Judge, and make War, ver. 11. and then to judge, because it will be the first act of his Judgment, as chap. 11.18. 2. This sense may farther appear from other like expressions in Scripture, of a Sacrifice God will make of his Enemies, or a Sup∣per or Feast, as here; so Esa. 346. a great part of that c. and v. 4. is applyed to the destruction of those Pagan Persecutors, Rev. 6. the like also Jer. 46.10. Gods day of Vengeance is called a Sacrifice: But most pertinent is that of Gogs the Turks destruction, at or about the same time, Ezek. 39.17, 18, 19, &c. yea and of Magog like∣wife, [the Pope] v. 6. briefly there mentioned, because it was to be farther explained in the New Testament, as the Jews Enemy [the Turk] is largly in the Old [see our 4th Obser.] of both which those hints of Reasons seem considerable, besides many others both in Ezek. Dan. and the Book of Revelation. 1. Because the Turk is stiled Gog in the Land of Magog, ver. 1. that is, in the Roman Empire, a great part whereof he should sub∣due unto himself. 2. This is farther manifest in that he is designed by God to be the great Ruiner of that Empire, to revenge upon it the blood of the Saints shed before under the Red Dragon, being acknowledged by many to be the 2d Woe, or 6th Trumpet, falling chiefly on the Eastern Empire. 3. He is a greater Ruiner of it than the Saracens before him who did but push at it, and got scarce half so much as he hath since over-flowed in it by his multitudes, Dan. 11.40, 41, 42, &c. 4. Magog, v. 6. is described to be in the Isles, as the Jews reckon∣ed all remote from their own continent to live in the Isles. 5. God saith there he will send fire on Magog, which will also be the means of the Beasts destruction, Dan. 7.9, 10. when his bo∣dy will be given to the burning flame. 6. As was hinted what was spoken largly of Gog the Jews enemy, that holds their Land also from them in the Old Testament; is left for Christ largly to explain of the ruine of Magog, the Pope, the great Enemy of Christians in the New Testament, who hath all his 42 months trampled the holy City under foot till then. 7. Both are said to be in the latter or postremity of dayes, Ezek. 38.8, 16. with the Revelation, and both to be ruined about the Jews Conversion to be as we shewed in the latter dayes, Jer. 23.20.
and Jer. 30.24. for at Christs appearance the Jews will be delivered Dan. 12.1. and the man of Sin will be destroyed at the appearance of Christs coming, 2 Thes. 2.8. 2. They are called to it, namely, to that Marriage Supper, who have the word of God for their sure ground of coming to it; for Christ will then slay such with the sword of his mouth, which is the Judgment written, when all predictions of the Beasts destruction shall take effect: 2. When by his providence he remarkably points out that work to be done by them, the Angel is said then to stand in the Sun to call all the Fowls to that Supper, which seems to note the clearness of their call, as well as the generality; hence when that Lord of Lords, and King of Kings so conquers his Enemies: those that are with him are said to be called, and chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14. called as having Christs Commission for it; chosen as being Saints; and faithful to do his said work against all discourage∣ment or opposition. 3. They are blessed as being first come out of Babylon, for that they partaked not of her Sins before, nor her Plagues then, Rev. 18.4. 2. They are also blessed in doing Gods work then, and executing his just Judgments written of before, Psal. 149. ult. upon his and his Churches great enemies: So was Jael blessed, Jud. 5. so they shall be blessed that dash that Babels little ones, viz. her doubly spu∣rious off-spring against the stones, Psal. 137. for so will Christs Church not only be freed from that Tyranny, but much happiness will ensue thereupon to all Saints in Christs Kingdom, and the Mar∣riage of the Lamb, with the happy Restitution of all things, &c. Now for the other annexed Questions respecting the illustrations in of the Angels revealing that matter, we answer briefly first the Apo. Joh. must write what concerns the said Marriage Supper, as a thing most sure from Gods predictions, Gen. 3.15. from Enochs Prophesie, Daniels Vision, chap. 7. and 2dly, a suitable reason is given by the Angel: These are the true sayings of God, not said faithful as of the pro∣mised Mercies twice afterwards, which is heedfully to be observed: for this only respects the predictions (as we said) of the Ene∣mies removal, here for the expressions of the Holy Spirit are very curious concerning both. 3dly, he engages him to worship God now and afterwards, chap. 22. by reason varieties of salse Worship would come up in the world by Heathens and Antichristians, till those times he spake of should come.
4. He saith, he was of his Brethren, viz. the Prophets, chap. 22. and that he had also the testimony of Jesus; for all that we are to believe of Jesus is testified by the Prophets, as were all these myste∣ries here made thus known to him by the Angel: whereupon 5. he adds this reason of all these Revelations, That the Testimo∣nie of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophesie, so surely resolving both here and in the following chapters, that we must look to the Prophets for the foundations of all these things concerning Christs Reign and Kingdome, and the preparations to it, and all that belongs unto it, and to all such as shall have part with him therein: of all which the Angel Christ (probably) in Vision had generally taught, chap. 10.7. when the Mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared (saith he) by his Servants the Prophets, so that all these Revelati∣ons must be understood concerning Christ, according to that Spirit of Prophesie, Nothing to be added, nothing to be taken therefrom, chap. 22.18, 19. and also manifesting they must all be fulfilled be∣fore the end of the world, when all Prophesie will be accomplished: But I only touch upon these things to prepare for the better unfold∣ing of the Text, being very needful to that purpose, and also give much light being rightly understood, not only to that text, but in a good part to much that concerns that whole state of Christs said Reign with his Saints the 1000 years. The Second Reason of such placing them is from the special Use which is here to be observed, namely in regard the 20th chap. to ver. 11. is first placed as the table of the good times of Gods Church to come, in reference whereunto the great things that follow are after considered; and the last Judgment from ver. 11. is there ad∣ded as the boundary of the same table, according to the excellent Divine contrivance of this book, even as that former Table of the bad times, chap. 11. which contained about 1700 years under the Dra∣gon, and others to the end of the Beasts 42 months, to the end of those suffering times of the Saints, which table hath also for its bounda∣ry from ver. 14. the happy times and state following in some gene∣rals to the end of the chap. but not as included in the same Table: and as the chief measure of those times after the Red Dragons per∣secutions is the two Witnesses 1260 dayes of years their Prophesy∣ing in Sackcloth, whom God calls, my two Witnesses, and to whom I will give power against the gret a Beast though Prophesying in Sack∣cloth; so the chief measure of these good times is the Reign of Christ with his raised Saints in the 1000 years, whom he calls, my King upon
my holy Hill of Sion, Psalm 2. when the world hath done its worst, yet, saith he, &c. I will set my King, &c. by which also all those things that follow, chap. 21, & 22. are to be measured for their con∣tinuance, which is another reason of such placing that Table before the last Judgment, which is the boundary following the times there∣of, and so in both the said Tables, Primum in utroque genere est men∣sura reliquorum: and so both these Tables have their distinct conside∣rations, as containing in them both, all the times of Revelation Prophesie, viz. about 2700 years, besides the little space of Satans loosing, chap. 20. all to precede the last Judgment. The first Table links together the double Scheme; first of the Civil Roman state un∣der the seven Seals, in the times of some of which the Heathen stare persecuted and killed the Saints, chap. 6. whereupon out of the 7th Seal proceed the seven Trumpets, bringing on the ruine of that wicked Roman state; First by the four first Trumpets that felt mostly upon the Western Roman Empire, and deadly wounded it by the incursion of the Barbarous Nations, as Almands, Goths, Van∣dals, Huns, Alanes, Burgundians, Frankes, and the rest; breaking the Empire, ruining the Government, of Emperour, City and Se∣nate, in chap. 8. for about 200 years, and by the two following Woe Trumpets of Saracens and Turks, first half the Eastern Roman Em∣pire was harased and lost, chap. 9. to ver. 11. and after wholely over∣flowed by the Turks: First by the Saracens till about the 1300 year of Christ, when the Turks day, and hour, and month, and year be∣gan, when the Ottaman Family obtained the power, for 396 years by that computation: both which are contained in chap. 9. but the 7th Trumpet, which will dispatch them both, is added after this first Table, chap. 11.15. whereby is linked with this the Scheme of the Ecclesiastical state, running again through all the said times, respect∣ing that also, as contained in the little open book, chap. 10. begin∣ning chap. 12. with the primitive state of the Church in her purity, but soon set upon by the Dragon and his Angels, fighting against Mi∣chael and his Angels, till God by that famous Emperour Constantine the great cast down the Dragon, but after, upon the Dragons flood, the Woman entered into her Wilderness condition, for her time, times & half a time, contemporating therein with the twofold Beasts 42 months, chap. 13 raised out of the Sea and Earth in those fluctua∣ting times of the said Barbarous Nations, as also with the Witnes∣ses 1260 dayes  ears, till the seven Angels have poured out their Vials to destroy the Beast; likewise chap. 15, 16. concerning which
matters there is an explication, chap. 17. executed chap 18, 19. when the last head is ruined of that Ecclesiastick state also: unto both which Schemes of both Civil and Ecclesiastick state the same Table of the bad times hath reference, and links them so together as Con∣temporaries. But besides the said Series or order of the first said Ta∣ble, in the Divine contrivance thereof referring to the said double Scheme of the times thereof, beginning with the Regular state of the Church that was as was said chap. 11.1. these things are farther to be observed from chap. 1.19. first concerning the things the beloved Apostle John had then seen, viz. how Christ in all those times walk∣eth in the midst of the Candlesticks the Churches and holds the stars the true Ministers thereof in his right hand, chap. 1. and 2dly the things that then were concerning the then present seven Churches of Asia, chap. 2.3. which are also conceived to adumbrate or shad∣dow out seven Intervals contained in the said first Table of the suffer∣ing times: and 3dly, the things to be hereafter, which are Epittomi∣ed in some sort before the 24 Elders, and 4 living Wites, in chap. 4, and 5. first in chap 4. is set the Prologlue and Chorus of all that Tragy-Comody (as Mr. Mede speaks) and in the 5th is represent∣zed the glorions manner of the Father's delivering this Book to his Son the Lamb, that had been as it were slain and lived again, to re∣veal and fulfil the contents thereof, with a glimps of the ishue of the times of the said first Table of Revelation Prophesie, when the Representative (say they) shall Reign upon Earth, ver. 10. where∣upon Angels, Saints, and all Creatures in their kindes shall adore and magnifie the Lamb, as worthy to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdome and Strength, ver. 8. to the end; and in chap. 7. we have the Sealing of the 144000 spiritually in the East, under the Ty∣ranny of the Saracens and Turks, as chap. 9.4 in the times of the two first Woe Trumpets, from about Anno Dom. 600. to about 1700 [for we must conjecture in a Latitude perhaps of about a decad under or over the said times, by reason of some defects in Chrono∣logie] and in ch. 14. wherein with the same times of the Beasts said 42 months; the true Church had her 144000 Spiritually Sealed also, and preserved in the West: All which, with the Angels warnings there following, Christ hath now almost accomplished in this so ex∣cellent a contrivance of this Divine Book in all these respects: And therefore Faithful Christians need not much trouble themselves as to the remaining Prophesies of this Book in respect of the suffering times, save only they must watch, and keep the Garments of Justi∣fication
and holy conversation, as Christ warnes, ch. 16.15. when the Whore, or Babylons end draws neer, as chap. 18. and chap. 14. on∣ly after is to be expected the gathering to the Armageddon Battel, chap. 19. before which, some good time (I conceive) will be the falling of the tenth part of the City, wherein the 7000 names of men as in the Original are foretold to be slain to the strange affright∣ment (probably by some Divine appearance of that remnant that are thereupon said to give glory to the God of Heaven, chap. 11. v. 13. by acknowledging his hand therein: to such I would commend St. Peters counsel, Acts 17.18, 19, &c. Brethren, I wot that through ig∣norance ye did it, as did also your Rulers, &c. [who were the Leaders and Guiders of the rest, as hath been usual, at least by the Engi∣neers of such evil contrivance, who are skilful to draw into them more innocent persons, &c.] Repent ye therefore, &c. and the rather, be∣cause the remnant when affrighted, v. 13. hopefully shall so do: for the thing is to be done upon a great Earthquake [or Commotion of Nations] when the last finishing Witnesses, decyphered from ver. 6. to ver. 13. did begin to ascend upon their hearing of the great Voice, viz. of a person eminent in publick Authority, saying come up hither in the Plateia, or street of the City [where they were before civilly killed in the second war of the Beast (of which Mr. Mede conceived there was only one) resembled to Jerusalem in Judea many ways] where our Lord was Crucified, rose again, and ascended, &c. being then a tenth Province or tenth part of the Dition of that great City, &c. of which many things may appear considerably evident, if the said Plateia prove to be the said tenth part of the City, which in its final falling off from Rome, shall utter∣ly cast out of it all Romish Idolatry, Superstitions, and Errours, &c. which for many Reasons may seem more probably (and whereof an account may (probably) be after given) And not the fall∣ing of the City Rome it self, (as some have conjectured) because it is but a tenth part now of what it was in the Heathen Emperours time, (as Mr. Mede from Lipsius declares) which latter (more probable) by some computations may seem to be about a dozen years after this falling, or more, upon which the gathering to the Armageddon Battel may be expected; for Romes ruine is like highly to provoke the Beast and false Prophet to that Battel, though to their own ruine. Rev. 19.20. although they will not believe it, which is the means to bring it on them. But upon the falling of the tenth part here the said 2d Woe or sixth Trumpet is said to be ended, ver. 14. under which Mr. Mede most probably placeth
most of the Vials, during the Turks 396 years, who is usually reck∣oned the 2d Woe, and if this falling of the tenth part of the City was meant by the 5th Vial upon the Throne of the Beast (as some have conceived) whereby seems more probably to be pointed out that antient Apocryphal Episcopacie, as the Mystical Throne of the Beast, [upon which he hath sitten to kill Christs Witnesses from first to last] viz. in respect of the old pretended Jus Divinum thereof, as being more suitable to the mysteriousness of the Vials, and to experience] (as the 4th was upon his Universality) whereby all Popish Prelacie, with many Errours depending thereon have been pretendedly supported all along) which seemed much to be shaken by that 5th Vial, and neer to falling, &c. upon advantage whereof, the Pope afterwards as Bishop of Rome, it being the chief City, hath since most falsely pretended to be Peters Successor, who yet from Scripture is manifest never to have been Bishop there; and Christs Vicar general on Earth [though Christ promised he would never be non-resident from his Church there, but present with them to the end of the World, Mat. last, and last.] So that as he needs no such, so he ordained no such Officer, as shortly he will be taught to know (and all the deluded part of the world that follow him) to their cost. But if that had been this tenth part of the City, I conceive it would have been past before this time.) But it seems there will be some good and peaceable times in that Plateia at the fall of this tenth part of the City in the West, though, though the 2d. Woe continue longer in the East; because at the end thereof, before the 7th Angel begin to sound, it is said, the 3d Woe cometh quickly (no remarkable occurrents then and there said to intervene) for the word  quickly or swiftly is in this book to be understood in the due order of accomplishment whereby Christ hath inseparably linked together the first and last things of neer 1700 years distance, hence he saith in the beginning, Rev. 1.1. that they are things which must  shortly or swiftly come to pass, viz. in the said-determined order, (which due order [N. B.] is in this Book Doctrinal (being the Divine purpose of setting it so down, &c.) and likewise it is again said, Behold I come quickly, or swiftly, (the same word  being used) about the end of 1700 years after in the end of the last ch. the most of which said 1700 years from Christs birth is contained in the 19 first chap. of this most Divine Book before the 1000 years being chap. 20.] but is not said to come presently or immediately and the ending of the great Earthquake before the fall of the said tenth part of the City with the 100 slain in the West, and that glory then to be rendred unto God by that said remnant
there [all which imply the compleating of the said ascention of the finishing Witnesses] and therewith some respite from former suffer∣ings before the 7th Trumpet, [called by some the Woe joy Trum∣pet] shall actually begin to sound, (besides the time of that coming quickly not presently may be considerable there) for when that sound∣ed, ver. 15. great Voices of Joy were heard in Heaven, saying, the King∣doms of the world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and at the beginning thereof (as we shewed from chap. 19.9, 11; &c.) Christ will destroy the Beast and false Prophet, the interim before which, & after the said fall of the tenth part of the City, when the second Woe ended, v. 14. seems (I say) to import some intermission of the Churches trouble in the West; before that time oppressed by the Beast there, though some of those Sealed ones in the East, chap. 7. may continue that interim under the pressures of the Turk, during the second Woe there, &c. Which brings in also the good times of the 2d Table which we spake of in chap. 20. wherein is contained Satans binding, Christs and his Saints Reign, so exactly, strongly, and clearly asserted by Christ to be 1000 years, with its Contemporaries; first, before it, chap. 19. viz. the coming of the Marriage of the Lamb, and his wifes making her self ready, ver. 7. and after it also, chap. 21. & 22. when will be the New Hea∣vens and the New Earth, the New Jerusalem, with the Nations saved walking in the light thereof; also the pure River, and Tree of Life in the middest of the street of the City, all to continue that said 1000 years in the world, until Satans loosing: which are after expound∣ed c. 21, 22. as depending on c. 19.7 & it is agreeable as was said to that Antient Prophesie, Deut. 32.41, 42. of the beginning of Revenges up∣on the Whore and Beast, before Jews and Gentiles then rejoice together, &c. when many Halelujahs will be Sung upon those ac∣counts in the beginning of chap. 19. to ver. 7. when the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. So then these two excellent Tables have their distinct considerati∣ons in the said Divine contrivance for divers excellent purposes, and the said boundaries of the times of each are not to be taken into them as set in their proper order and place, so as what follows must needs therefore be after them in time: It was not so in the experience of the former Table, and it will not be so in the latter, which being well understood, with what we have here said upon that occasion, may accordingly be as we desire, and endea∣vour whilst time and opportunity serveth to give light to this part of
this most Divine Book, and the rather, being of late very sensible of the Infirmities of old Age, now fast incroaching upon us; and this more especially because the very Cream and Marrow of all faithful Christians Interest included in these mystical parts of the Gospel of Christ may hereby be made more conspicuous, and comfortable unto them: which also, we hope, by resolving other following Questions may farther appear: and hereunto Mr. Medes judicious Synchro∣nisms are very subservient, as in our Scheme of the whole Revelation may be observed: but the main business is there set down in this last table, viz. the reign of Christ with his raised Saints, for which Reign their said bodily Resurrection makes way (as was shewed) being the chief thing in reference whereunto all that are after explain∣ed, chap. 21, & 22. to belong to that state, as to their time are de∣termined by Christ, to be to continue 1000 years; and from thence he sets down Satans loosing, with the last Gogs & Magogs destruction, leading in the last judgment, which seemed necessary to be so explain∣ed according to our Saviours Divine Wisdom, as the most full Reve∣lation of what should be useful to be known by his Church for the most full explication of Enochs Prophesie or Vision of the great day of Judgment, as Jude speaks of which Daniel, chap. 7. seems only to explain the first act or matutinum judicium, at the destruction of the Beast above 1000 years before; but by this Divine Table we are directly brought in this order of Prophesie, to the last act or Vesperti∣num judiium, of all sorts good and bad, much more clearly than was revealed before in sundry particulars, &c. but he then returns back to the predictions of the Prophe concerning the said 1000 years reign of Christ with his said Saints, or times of Gods making all things New, (as the Context before and after manifest.) And this will ap∣pear in that which concerns the first particular, viz. of the New Heavens and New Earth, Esa. 65. from ver. 20, 21, 22. where many things are nam'd respecting those in the natural life (as is observable) for antient Prophesies are the Foundatiocs of them all, &c. But 2dly, if it were supposed they were after the general Judg∣ment, it might then be enquired what use in reason they could be conceived to serve for, since Scripture gives no ground for any such matter; but contrarily resolves us the world will then be dissolved, chap. 20.11. all Creatures destroyed or removed, the Saints rapt in a moment to meet Christ before, and all be changed, and thence∣forth ever to be with him, the Lord; the Devil cast into the Lake of Fire, and wicked men sent into Hell, &c. What use can be then of the New Heavens and New Earth after the great day of Judgment?
But these Heavens will not be the making a new frame of the ma∣terial Heavens, when the old are passed away (as after may be shewed) but will be Prophetical Heavens, grounded upon Gods Word, both for the Nature, Times, and Use of them: when, as follows, there will be no Sea, viz. such an unsteady state of things as the seven headed and ten horned Beast rose out of, when the Barbarous Nations had broken the Western Empire in pieces to make way for the ten Crowned Horns: or such Waters as the Whore sate on ever since unsteady rolling Wayes: No such Mystical Sea will have room then in that Kingdom of Christ and his Saints, that cannot be moved or shaken, Heb. 12.9. as the frustrating of Satans attempt with his last Gog and Magog will certainly manifest: But the New Heavens will be those Heavenly Creatures coming with Christ, when he removes his Court from Heaven into this World for the time of his great day of Judgment, which were for∣merly the Inhabitants thereof; in which sence our Saviour, upon the Whoren destruction, calls upon the Heaven of Saints to rejoyce, Rev. 18.20. Rejoyce over her thou Heaven: then to manifest what Heaven he meant, he adds, and ye Apostles and Prophets which shall be Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem, chap. 21. v. 2. So also the Heaven of Angels that comes thn with Christ to attend on him in his Da∣vidical Kingdome, when the Tabernacle of God will be with men: (And where Christ will then be, there Heaven must needs be) And there will also then be such a Prophetical New Earth too, wherein will dwell Righteousness, as the Apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3. for a King shall then Rule in Righteousness, as the Prophet speaks, and Princes in Judgment, Esa. 30.1. among the Nations of them that shall then be saved, their Rulers shall be Peace, and their Exactors Righteousness, Esa. 60.17. which will be the stability of Christs Throne then; and such Heavens and Earth appear to be the Object of this Holy Apostles Vision, ver. 1. and the 2d verse confirmes the same; I John saw the Holy City descending, &c. (as we may have occasion afterwards more fully to shew) and the Tabernacle of God is then said to be with men, and he to dwell with them, viz. for that said 1000 years reign in his personal presence in that body which God gave him, Heb. 10.5. which was typified by the Tabernacle of old, wherein the then acceptable services of God were perform∣ed, and that body whereby at Christs death all acceptable Sacrifice for sin was wholly fulfilled to which purpose is that expression of this holy Evangelist, John 1.14 of Christs living, but , a little
while here lower than the Angels, as Heb. 2. that he Tabernacled a∣mongst us, as the words  do properly signifie: Now that Tabernacle of his body in the Type and Antitype being perfect∣ed in glory at the Fathers right hand in this said state and time, perso∣nally comes in the Clouds of Heaven in his own glory, and of the Fathers, and of all his holy Angels; and that is the blessed Taber∣nacle there said to be with men, &c. as we have many wayes pro∣ved; namely, that that coming will be personal: his appearance to the Jews personal: his feet standing on Mount Olivet personally: his bringing his Saints with him, his personal act: his command to slay his Enemies before him personally: his raising the said Saints, his peculiar personal act: his sitting on Davids Throne as the Son of David personally; and the many great things wherein he will be ad∣mired of his Saints then in all his said great day of Judgment, will be all personal, 2 Thes. 1.10. Se farther, Assert. 7. of our Key, for his Personal Appearance and Reign. A second Question may be, Why the Reign of Christ in his Davidi∣cal Kingdome with his raised Saints being the last promised to the Posteri∣ty of Shem, Abraham and David, is here the first spoken of, as perform∣ed in the 1000 years? Answ. It is the chief thing promised to Christ as the Son of David; And the Promise of Canaan made to Abraham and his spiritual Seed before (wherein the Holy City Jerusalem is said to be prepared for the Fore-fathers was also contained therein, as Heb. 11.16.) and hence the state of his people in Canaan did by degrees grow up into a Kingdome (as the Scripture manifests) as the main thing inten∣ded: for after the Promise to Abraham, both he, Isaac and Jacob were Pilgrims and Strangers in the world a long time, and their na∣tural race long after in bondage in Aegypt, 400 years in their Wil∣derness condition; and when they possessed Canaan, they were un∣der many oppressors above 400 years, in the times of the Judges: but at last they grew up into a Kingdome in Davids and Solomons time, &c. but when their Posterity had forfeited both Land and City, &c. they have since remained in bondage all the times of the Gentiles Monarchies, almost 2300 years, and so must (probably) do till Da∣vids Tabernacle (as the Apostle James speaks, from Amos 9.11.) shall be raised up again: for Christ with his raised Sts. at the times of Restitut. of all things; that therefore being the last & chief thing promised, and the rest seem to make up the glory & happiness thereof, it is therefore here first spoken of again in the table of the good times: So that where
God left off before in fulfilling Antient Promises to the Fathers for the sins of their natural Race in that chief Mercy of the Kingdome there likewise, he here in revealing his Restauration for the comfort of their spiritual Race begins with again in that said glorious King∣dome of Christ to come: in both which respects it being the chief thing promised, and also shortly now to be performed for Christ and his Saints, it may appear very meet and congruous that it should here be set in the Table of these good times in the first place, as the measure of all the rest that follow, which do all but make up the happiness of that Kingdome; as Christ reckoned his Sufferers and two Witnesses chief in the bad times, Rev. 11. which times also are chiefly measured by the 1260 dayes of years, during their Prophe∣sying in Sackcloth: So in the Renovation God seems to begin chap. 20. where in their natural Race by reason of their sins, he had left, and in chap. 21, and 22. proceeds backward to speak of the rest, and lastly, of the Paradise of God, the first lost, and last to be restored by Christ the second Adam, in that state in the world. 2. And for the bringing on of this Kingdome of Christ the Son of David with his raised Saints, God hath ever since the fall of that Ta∣bernacle, overturned all the Gentiles States and Kingdoms succes∣sively in their orders, (as in Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2. and Daniels Visions of the four Beasts destroying each other, Dan. 7. was signified) and will still do so till the God of Heaven set up this Kingdom as the top of these Mercies, that should never be destroy∣ed; but as the Kingdome of the Stone should destroy all others in the world, till it became a Mountain filling the whole Earth, (which Christ hath now almost fulfilled) and which will be that state there∣of in the 1000 years of the reign of Christ with his Raised Saints, for which the said Restitution of all things will be accomplished, which was spiritually and powerfully begun at Christs first coming, upon his Resurrection and Asoention, when he led: Captivity Cap∣tive, tryumphing gloriously over all the powers of Darkness, Col. 3.15. and though ever since the Prince of the power of the Aire, that ruleth effectually in the Children of Disobedience hath prevail∣ed in all the suffering times under the Dragon and Beast, now almost for 1700 years to bring on Persecutions and Sufferings of the Saints, who notwithstanding by Christs Divine and Powerful Grace have been carryed on to suffer with him or for him; yet in that state ap∣proaching, he will not only free them from all such Miseries, and E∣vils now in the world through Sin, but bring them into that happy
state of Reigning in the world with himself as his Spouse, that with him shall then in her it all things, with their sure Mercies of David. in this Univer salo and perpetual Kingdome in the world: in reserence unto which, the Renovation of all things will then be made by God himself, as in the Text. The third Question: But how doth it appear that such a coming and Kingdome of Christ shall be above 1000 years in the world, before the last general Judgment, when he will descend with a shout, &c. 1 Thes. 4.16. Answ. It will most manifestly appear, not only from our Saviours Table of the good times, which we spake of but now, and from the litteral sense of the 1000 years, which we spake sufficiently of, pag. 38. of the Saints bodily Resurrection, which is constantly granted by all sound Expositors, to be litterally so understood: neither is it other vise taken in the Beasts 42 months: nor are the Prophetical dayes of the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. [or Sons of Oyl, Zech. 4. standing before the Lord of the whole Earth, ver. 14. to which that Prophesie seems chiefly to have reference, &c.] understood other∣wise than for 1260 dayes of years: and there is much less reason to pervert Christs words of his own, and his said Saints Reign from their litteral sense, when he most plainly saith they are 1000 years: and where are any numbers of years in Scripture to be found, but for that individual number they are set for: the lives of all Antients, Patriarks and Fathers, the times of Judges, Reigns of Kings, con∣tinuance of States are set down by their peculiar number of years, without which nothing could be resolved of: and in ch. 20. (as Mr. Mede observed) that Christ set down things more plainly there, than in all that book before: & because men have been averse to think so of these last parts, there have come up many mistaken conceits of anticipating Satans binding in the primative times of Persecution, & the Saints reigning under their greatest sufferings, but not in the sence here intended, which will also be performed: and the taking the New Jerusulem state for the Kingdom of Heaven, and the New Heavens and New Earth to be after the last Judgment, and the like: which being resolved by the Scripture Foundations to which this part of the Revel. hath particular referonce, they will upon due considera∣tion appear very evidently to belong to this set time of the 1000 years us by our 15 Reasons why they shall be in the world may also be ma∣nifest, and by our first Convincing Arg. of 36 Particulars to be accor∣ding to Scripture, before, in, & after the said 1000 years; and by our
many distinctions of Christs appearance or coming at Antichrists de∣struction, and of his descending above 1000 years after with a shout, and the voice of an Arch-angel, and the Trump of God at the Saints General Rapture, and Resurrection of the wicked: per∣use them seriously, they have Scripture warrant, &c. And as Mr. Mede observed it, to be the usual Errour of the Jews to confound the first and second coming of Christ; overlooking the Humility of the first, which was not often before clearly distinguished, except by Daniel, and in some few places: so Christians do much in these times over look the Mercy of the Jews at Christs second coming lit∣tle regarding Christs irrefragable resolutions of many things of the last times, which were given to him alone by the Father to instruct his Church in, yea though they be founded upon many other parts of Scripture, and refer unseasonably to what concerns both Jews and all promised Mercies to the raised Saints to the times of the last General Judgment, above 1000 years most evidently, after their set times. Object. But many Learned men have conceived that gloriouss City de∣cyphered, Rev. 21. and the Paradise of God to be the Kingdome of Glo∣ry in the highest Heavens. Answ. Besides our former said approved Reasons that it will be in the World, the Apostle Paul, Gal. 4. calls that the Jerusalem that is now above, the Mother of all Saints, being the peculiar Mansion at present of all the Spirits of Just men made perfect, where they re∣main in happy Security, Peace and Blessedness in their present state, expecting the time of the said first Resurrection of their bodies, which when Christ comes and brings them with him to raise and u∣nite their Spiritual Bodies with them, will be the Jerusalem here said then to come down from God out of Heaven, which glorious place and City is prepared by God for the Fathers then, and all such; as the Apostle teacheth, Heb. 11.16, 40. that without us shall not be made perfect, or perfect in one, as our Saviour prayed, John 17. which are called the Lambs Wife; of the solemnity of whose Mar∣riage the Kingly Prophet David foretold, Psal. 45. when that Bride, instead of Fathers, shall then have Children whom she may make Princes in all Lands: and as Solomon in his most excellent Song in the book of Canticles divinely illustrateth it, of the return of the Shula∣mite, and the like; which will be the fulfilling of the Covenant to Abraham and his Spiritual Seed, by that one Divine Seed Christ in that state and time: and for the Paradise of God annexed to that
state which Christ will then restore instead of that lost before in the world by the first Adam; it will be part of the Restitution which God will then effect, as we hope in due place farther to manifest from this Text. But for the clearer discovery of what hath been said, let us a little look back again to the beginning of this Chapter, where it is said this Holy Man had the Visions of the New Heavens and the New Earth, which as to their time was not after the last Judgment, as was said; neither is there placed before it that usual expression in this Book, when things which follow are spoken of: [After this I saw] as chap. 18.1. & chap. 19.1. but are 1000 years before it, as is very evident: neither is it any New making of the Material frame of them; but they will be Prophetical Heavens and Earth, (as was said) suitable to that Kingdome wherein Christ will reign with his raised Saints (as the wood witnesseth) of which Kingdom these are to be considered as the integral parts: for never came such a King into the world before, that must not only have all Nations to do him service, and the Heathen to be given to him for his Inheri∣tance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his possession: but when he comes, all the Elohim, Angels or Gods must Worship him; yea, all knees in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, must then bow and be subject to him, owning him to be Lord: but he must also then have those New Heavens and New Earth then made for him and his Spouse: As Satan had his Mystical Heavens before, when the Pagans worshipped Sun, Moon and Stars: Their Mercury, Jupi∣ter, Mars, Apollo, with the multitudes of their Heathenish false Deities. And hence it was under Christs spiritual Kingdome of the Stone, that there was in the primitive times a great Battel in Hea∣ven betwixt Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, Rev. 12. but the issue thereof was, that the Dragon was cast down from his Heaven to the Earth: And as God very remarkably by the Ministry of the Prophet Jeromiah, caused it to be proclaimed before the Captivity of Babylon, chap. 10.11. and that verse is only writ∣ten (as Mr. Mede well observes) in the Caldean Language: whither that People was shortly after to be led Captives: [The Gods, said he, that made not the Heavens nor the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens:] and accordingly, chap. 25. God sent by him a Cup of Wrath to be drunk by those many Nations that owned such Gods: And afterwards, neither Bell nor Merodach of the Caldeans could save themselves or their Wor∣shippers
from their Enemies; nor the Graecian Monsters, and mul∣titudes of feigned Gods and Goddesses could deliver themselves, or those that served them: and when Pagan Rome had ingrossed the Idol Gods of all Nations which they subdued, they were at Christs first coming struck dumb, and ceased to deliver their Oracles, as for∣merly; and after by Constantine the Dragon was cast out of his Hea∣ven to the Earth; and likewise that Beast that rose out of the Earth afterwards, with all his Paganized Christianity of Popish Idolatry will shortly also find Jeremiahs Proclamation true, That such Idol Gods shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens: for not only all such, supposed Heathen Gods, but all Pagano-Christian Idols also will be then totally and finally casheired for ever out of the World, Psal. 97.7. Esa. 2. And such like Heavens were ascri∣bed in Scripture to Kingdoms and States, according to many Ori∣ental Notions, (as Mr. Mede observed) who reckoned what was Superiour in their States were their Heavens; as Monarchs, and Go∣vernours, and what was Inferiour their Earth: But these New Hea∣vens and New Earth being of an Heavenly Excellency; not only , according to the Opinions or Customs of the vain World, but , according to Truth, are to be taken for what God hath promised then, and as his Word sets them forth: the Heaven of Angels will come with Christ then to wait upon him and to wor∣ship him: and Christ coming personally with them then will make it an Heaven indeed: and then also he brings all his Saints that sleep in Jesus with him: so that there will also be then an Heaven of Saints al∣so, as he speaketh at the Whores Destruction, chap. 18.20. Rejoyce thou Heaven, ye Apostles and Prophets, and even that Mystical Heaven, the New Jerusalem shall then come from God out of Hea∣ven, as is explained v. 2. which is called the Bride, the Lambs Wife, ver. 9. and for her also with the Lamb be made then also the New Earth, wherein will dwell Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. when not only the Tabernacle of God will be with men, as ver. 3. but her Of∣ficers shall be Peace, and her Exactors Righteousness, Esa. 60.17. and all that happiness in that time of refreshment from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. and as follows, ver. 4. that God will not on∣ly wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death nor crying, nor pain, but Christ will personally dwell with them in that Tabernacle wherein he was before [] only for a little while made lower than the Angels (as we said) but then he will be exalted far above all Principalities and Powers, and every
Name, &c. and continue to dwell with them, and be their God, and they shall be his people: and for the assured making of these Integral parts of Chtists said Kingdome, viz. the New Heavens and the New Earth is Gods great glorious and gracious undertaking at that time set forth in this text: and he that sate upon the Throne, said, Behold, I make all things new, &c. Now having thus prepared the way by removing these former dif∣ficulties, and opening the context, we shall by Gods assistance pro∣ceed to consider the Text it self, both in respect of the words and sence thereof; which is a farther step and degree of that most excel∣lent Vision given to this beloved Apostle, and (saith he) he that sat upon the Throne said, behold, I make all things New. In which words we have a most excellent declaration of the compleating of Christs outward visible work of Redemption in the world, with its Illustration and Confirmation: the Declaration is of the happy Re∣novation of all things in that very determined point of time, and occurrence of affairs, which the Series and order of this Vision leads to. [I make] that is, I now make [when the great Enemies are destroyed, and Christs Davidical Kingdom is to take place, and the Saints raised, even in that state of things, I make all things New: for Christs unalterable order of these things is a doctrinal Foundation as was said] and this most Divine Declaration is first Illustrated from the person that spake the words, and undertakes the work, whole speaking then will be doing, as at first, so said the Psalmist, He spake the word and they were made, he commanded and they were crea∣ted: so when the period of this present State shall come, God will as by speaking a word of Command make all things new. 2. Again in respect of the excellency of his person he is here said to be he that sate upon the Throne, who is Hieroglyphically and glori∣ously described in chap. 4. as God made known in his Church, as on a Throne; for in Judah is God known, and his Name is great in Is∣rael: at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion, Psal. 78.1. and he is known to them in the face of Jesus Christ in all his glorious Attributes, Nature and Persons, as revealed in the Word, 2 Cor. 4.4, 6. as here compassed with the Rain-bow, the Token of the Covenant, made with Noah through Christ for all Creatures, to the end of the world, &c. and also hath 7 Lamps bur∣ning before the Throne, which are the 7 Spirits of God, or the Ho∣ly Ghost, chap. 1.4. and about the Throne 24. Seats for the 24 El∣ders, and within the Throne 4 living Wights, full of eyes within,
continually saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: So that there God is set forth as very gloriously made known in his Church to be three in Persons, one in Essence to be ever so worshipped and glorified by them before and since, for his great and good work of Creation, ver. 11. For as at first he Created the world by Jesus Christ, Eph. 3.9. the Holy Spirit moving upon the face of the Waters, Gen. 1.2. so he hath, and doth, and will redeem and fully work his Renovation of the world by the Lamb that was slain, and hath since lived again, and the book with 7 Seals is deli∣vered to him, to open and execute the Contents thereof, as in chap. 5. by the power and effectual working of the Holy Ghost, one God with the Father and the Son, and proceeding from the Father and the Son: So the 24 Elders, and the 4. Beasts or living Wights wor∣shipped him at the Whores Destruction, as sitting on the Throne, chap. 19.4, &c. and in the end of chap. 4. & 5. though this last was upon assurance of the fulfilling of all Revelation Prophesie: But in the Text he that sits upon the Throne with a Rainbow about it, and seven Lamps burning before it, saith, Behold, I make all things new, &c. Thus then Almighty God, Three in Persons, and One in Essence, so manifest in his Church, that so Created the World, and also by his Son and Holy Spirit carrieth on his work of Redemption, and full Renovation of the World, who maketh known this Divine Declaration thereof by his Servant John for the use of his Church, in these latter times to be fulfilled most certainly (as will after appear) in the neer approaching times of the Restitution of all things, the next Illustration of it is that usual note of Attention and Observation, Behold: but here to be more highly considered as a notation of Ad∣miration & Adoration; Behold, Admire the wonderful Mercy herein contained, adore him in the Divine excellency thereof: the like is done in many like Notations set forth by God respecting his wonder∣ful work begun, and by degrees carried on, and to be perfected by his Son Jesus Christ, as first especially in laying his great Foundation in Sion, Esa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner Stone, Elect and Precious, as saith the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.6. which the said Pro∣phet sets forth with a great deal of Illustration in the Heberew, &c.  and aptly rendred by Arias Montanus, Ecce ego fundo in Sion Lapidem, Lapidem munitionis an∣guli preciosi fundamenti fundati, &c. Behold I found in Sion a Stone, a Stone of defence, of a precious corner of a foundation, founded
and to be adored and admired likewise therein. The like of the Womans Seed promised without Man, Behold a Virgin shall bear a Son, Esa. 7.14. and yet a Virgin when she hath a Son; but such a Son as should be God as well as Man, who should be called Imma∣nuel, God with us: here was likewise matter of Admiration, and Adoration, that he that was the Eternal Father, as well as the Prince of Peace; of the increase of whose Kingdome upon the Throne of David there shall be no end, should yet in such a time be born of a Virgin, &c. Esa. 9. The like by the Angel is used to the Shepheards at the birth of that said Virgins Son, Luke 2.10, 11. Be∣hold I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, &c. So when God will make the New World for his said Son, Behold I make, &c. and the season of this work is the Alpha and Omega of this book of Revelation, to be observed, and admired, and desired too by the Saints, chap. 1.7. Behold he cometh with Clouds at the Jews Conversion, who are there said to have pierced him: which I conceive will not only be in mercy to the Jews, as Zech. 12.10. but all Kin∣dreds also of the Earth shall wail because of him penitently also, when he then comes the second time without sin to Salvation, be∣cause the Heathen shall be given then to him for an Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his possession, and they shall also then serve him, Dan. 7.27. and as the Prophet saith in those times, ten men shall take hold of the skirt of a Jew, Zech. 8.32. to joyn themselves to them in the service of the God of Israel; and the great shakings and dessolations in the world when the glorious Majesty of Christ shall then appear, as Esa. 2.17, 19. so shaking terribly the Earth (probably) may much prepare all the Kindreds of the Earth that remain then so to wail with Contrition that they have not known Christ before, and then so wailingly mourn after him; there∣fore is added by the Holy Spirit, Even so Amen to both, Rev. 1.7. [N. B.] to teach us ever after to pray for the fulfilling of these so strongly promised Mercies then, which is therefore the chief drift of that Petition, Thy Kingdome come; that also then Gods Will may be done in Earth as it is now in Heaven; for which in that state there is great ground to believe: and so his Name will be hallowed then as now in Heaven, which is the great end of all Prayer. And then he cometh also with reward for his Saints, as chap. 22.12. & 11.18. The way to love Christs appearance, as the Apostle Paul perswades all sound Christians, is to know the happy advantages that all such shall have thereby at that time, when God will make all things New that per∣tain
to Christs Davidical Kingdome, as here, &c. The next thing considerable respecting this comfortable Declaration of God, is the Confirmation of it. 1. by commanding the Holy man to record it for the comfort of his Church, Write, saith he. 2. He gives a two∣fold ground of such Confirmation or Record of it, first in regard that the words were true as antiently delivered by the God of Truth, that cannot lye, or deceive, or be deceived: but secondly, they are likewise faithful, grounded upon many gracious promises and Cove∣nants, as we hope farther to manifest. Come we now to consider the main thing declared that God at such a time or state of things occurring in the world, makes all things new, being Emphatically called by the Apostle Peter, The times of Restitution of all things: which Renovation of all things is three wayes considerable: first, Negatively, what it is not. Secondly, Privatively, in respect of what God will then remove or take away. Thirdly, Positively, in respect of what God will do in the performance of that great and gracious work. 1. Negatively, in respect of what he will not do; it doth not imply that God will then bring a total destruction upon the Created World, by destroying it and the Creatures in it, with wicked men then to be destroyed out of it, and other Creatures to be placed in a New world, which we have no Scripture grounds for; but for the contrary: for that is to be done at Christs sitting upon the great white Throne at the dissolution of all things, Rev. 20.11. above 1000 years after; neither in reason can it be conceived; for what use Creatures should serve when good and bad men were removed before out of it, &c. 2. Privatively, by Gods removing and taking away many evil things out of the world, which have been brought into it (since he first in 7 days Created finished his great and good work of Creation) by Satan, Sin, and wicked men; such as the Curse, Corruption, Bon∣dage, and Enmity of the Creatures since abiding in it, in an emi∣nent degree with the causes thereof, by destroying many wicked men out of the Earth, Rev. 11.18. and binding Satan for the 1000 years in the bottomless pit, that he deceive not the Nations any more till that 1000 years shall be finished: therefore (I say) with the cau∣ses thereof; for sublata causa tollitur effectus: and contrarily; to bring the world into a capacity to be made better, and to be put in∣to a New and better frame than when they prevailed in it, he will then also eminently remove and take away those many evils caused and
brought into the world by them: first, the curse brought in by them will then be taken away: for saith Christ, there shall then be no more curse, Rev. 21.3. the earth which was cursed by these means upon the Fall, shall be eminently restored unto its native fruitfulness, peculiar to that time and state, Ezek. 34.26, 27. There shall then be showers of blessing upon it, and the trees of the field shall yield her fruit, and the Earth shall yield her increase: and with that fruitfulness they shall then have safety and peace, for they shall be safe in their Land, and shall know that I am the Lord, being delivered from their Ene∣mies, as there follows, &c. So also Ezek. 36.8. Ye Mountain of Is∣rael, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel: and ver. 11. I will multiply upon you man and beast, and they shall increase and bring fruit: and ver. 29, I will call for the Corne and increase it, and lay no famine upon you, &c. yea their Land shall become for fruitfulness like the Garden of Eden, ver. 35. and Joel 3.18. The Mountains shall drop down with New Wine, and the Hills shall flow with Milk: which are high expressions of the fruitfulness of those times: also Hos. 2.21. In that day will I hear, saith the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and the they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn and the Wine and the Oyle, and they shall hear Jezreel. A∣gain, the Enmity of men and other creatures will then be also remo∣ved, which have prevailed in the world from the fall: first among men there hath been (since the fall, Murther, & Slaughter, & Blood shed prevailing and so will still untill those times) amongst them: but then Nation shall no more rise against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more; yea they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning hooks, Esa. 2.4. and Hos. 2.18. I will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battel out of the Earth, and will make them to lie down in safety: and for the peaceableness of o∣ther Creatures which not only Allegorically (as some understand the Promises to that purpose, but they will litterally be performed) when that Savage Cruelty in their corrupt natures since the fall, will then be taken away, that the Wolfe shall dwell with the Lamb, as the Prophet Esa. speaks, chap. 11.6. and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, &c. and they shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy Mountain: and Esa. 65.25. The Wolfe and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lyon shall eat straw like the Bullock, &c. So the hurtful influence of the Heavens, and the distempers of the 4 Elements, and the noxious qualities of the Creatures will be then wonderfully refined: that the Heavens, as God promiseth, may hear
the earth, and they hear the Corn and Wine and Oyl, &c. And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall not then say, I am sick, when the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity, Esai. 33.24. The Creatures which since the Fall have been held under the bon∣dage of corruption, under which the whole Creation still groaneth, shall, as the Apostle teacheth, Rom. 8.21. in that state be delivered from it, and that also into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. The bodies of all Saints (saving some few, as Enoch, Moses, E∣lias) have lien rotting in the Grave, and so will till then, but they shall all in that time and state receive the Adoption, Rom. 8.21. the [faithful Gentiles then receiving that with all benefits belonging to them as the spiritual Seed of Abraham, Gal. 3.29. as well as to his faithful natural Seed both Jews and Israelites] which he explains in the next words, even the redemption of our bodies [N.B.] which (as was shewed before) will be the inlet to all those Saints into the hap∣piness of that time and state, &c. And thus briefly of Gods remo∣ving the said evils or the like, with the causes thereof. When Christ the Universal King of Kings, and Prince of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 19. and Rev. 1.5. will not only rescue the great and excellent building of the World out of the power of the Prince of the Air, but repair the ruines and desolations he and his retinue of wicked men and Devils have wrought in it, and reduce it for himself and his Spouse the Saints into a far better condition than ever it was in before, which will be by Gods said removal of the said evils, then when he makes all things new. Thirdly, this renovation is to be considered Positively in respect of Gods conferring good upon them at those times of restitution of all things, Acts 3. viz. upon Christ the Lamb and his Bride then, which I conceive is taken for both sorts of Saints both then raised, and in the natural life (though then in their proper different states) yet by gracious dispensation will pro∣bably be both of one Communion, which we are taught to believe according to Gods Word, sutable to that of Christ and his Disciples forty days after he rose from the dead. Secondly, The Positive part is included in the same declaration, Gen. 13.15. after explained by many gradual Promises and Cove∣nants. We shall begin with the last at first in this Divine Key of our Saviours, viz. the Kingdom promised to David and his Seed for ever, which is the main thing here spoken of, that Christ with his
Saints should enjoy in that state, comprehending all the rest, which all the other tend unto and are to be conferred with it, before the en∣joyment of which the raised Saints have their spiritual bodies then, whereby they are put into a capacity to enjoy all the happiness of that time and state, and the Jews, Israelites, and Gentiles shall be converted and united into one sheepfold &c. This Kingdom was foretold by Jacob, Gen. 49. and by Balaam, Numb. 24. and often prophesied of by David, confirmed in Nathan's Message, seen in Vi∣sion by Daniel, at what time Christ should receive it over all Nations under the whole Heavens, Dan. 7.27. with many other confirmati∣ons by the Prophets, and declared by Christ that it was his Fathers pleasure to give it to his little little flock, Luke 12.32. that they suf∣fering with Christ should reign with him: which in the 1000 years they are said to do, Rev. 20.4. of which more is said in our twelve foundations of the faith thereof, and in the Word written, and else∣where from Scripture-Authority. For this great King are the New Heavens and earth to be made, without such a mystical moveable Sea out of which the Beast arose in the times of the Barbarous Nati∣ons Cmmotions, & the Whore hath sitten upon those many troubled waters ever since: but this Kingdom that Christ with his Saints shall receive, is such, as cannot be shaken or moved, Heb. 12.28. this said Kingdom is the first and main thing here spoken of by Christ (though the last promised to David and his Divine spiritual Seed) which the Apostles expected should be restored, Acts 1.6. and will be at that time of the raising up of Davids Tabernacle, which had been fallen in his natural Race 2300 years (probably) before, Acts 15.16. Amos 9.11. The next thing belonging to this Kingdom for which the integral parts thereof the New Heavens and the New Earth are then to be be made, as Rev. 21.1. is that which is contained in the Covenant to Abraham and his Seed respecting the promised Land, as the Mo∣ther City thereof typified by that Jerusalem of old which is now in bondage with her Children, Gal. 4. And is now above till the time of the descending of it from God out of Heaven, when Christ comes in the Clouds of Heaven, and brings all his Saints with him, till the Marriage of the Lamb spoken of Rev. 19. and 21. which is cal∣led the great, and holy, and beloved Jerusalem, that City with foun∣dations that Abraham expected, and is said to be prepared for the forefathers, and all the faithful since, Heb. 11.16.40. whose Ma∣ker and Builder is God: which appears to be in great part the New
Heavens, as Rev. 18.20. as we in part shewed before, with the Hea∣ven of the glorious Angels coming to attend on Christ when his Ta∣bernacle of his bodily presence will be with men, not for a little time, as Heb. 2. at his first coming, but he will dwell with them the space of the 1000 years. Then will also be according to many Promises to the Saints in the natural life of all the Nations that shall then be saved, the New Earth wherein will dwell righteousness, when Christ that great King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment, Esa. 32.1. whose Officers shall be peace, and whose Exactors shall be righteousness, Esa. 60.17. when Christ sits upon the Throne of Da∣vid, to order it, and to establish it with Judgment and with Justice, from thencforth and for ever, viz. unto the end of the world, Esa. 9.7. the Prophesies and Promises which respect that state of Gods peoples mercies, benefits and Priviledges therein are exceeding great and manifold, that would require a large Volume to explain them, respecting Saints then in the natural life; both in being greatly freed from the evils we now spoke of, with the manifold enjoyments of good; but especially in regard of their large measure of Grace then promised as in the New Covenant, first made in their Book of Deuteronomy, after the first Tables had been brok on, remarkably set down Deut. 30. to ver. 11. for circumcising the heart of that people and their Seed after all their great dispersions; who shall be setled in their own Land then, and remove no more, as 2 Sam. 7. and Gods Sanctuary shall be with them for evermore, Ezek. 37.28. when God will pour his Spirit on them generally, Joel 3. as he did upon his Disciples and some few at his first coming, and those expressions of the New Covenant, Jer. 31.33, 34. and 32.39, 40. and Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27, &c. do chiefly belong to that people, and such as are u∣nited to them in the natural life in those times that shall then walk in the light of the said beloved Jerusalem, Rev. 21. (though we Gen∣tiles have now our share in them) through faith in some degree, but they then in the times of Restitution much more by far, and this will then be that special great foundation of all other temporal enjoy∣ments, as the strong entail that Christ will make them of all promised good. And to all Saints in those times it is probable will arise that great enlargement of Joy for the inlarging Christs Kingdom with praise to God in Christ for it, by the powerful operation of the Holy Spi∣rit in that, together with the inheriting of all promised mercies to
themselves, they will see and know then the great confluence of sa∣ved Souls then abundantly coming in upon the like foundations from the Word of God, when all Nations shall see the salvation of the God of Israel, and the Heathen shall be given to Christ [Gods King then set upon his holy hill of Sion] for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession Psalm. 2. for if the Angels in Heaven rejoyce at one sinners conversion now: how will both Angels and Saints then rejoyce, when so many thousands and millions which will then be saved in the prolonging of Christs days, when he shall see his numerous seed (as promised to the Fa∣thers) and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Esa. 53. and his City prepared will be large enough to contain all raised Saints being as it is described a perfect Cube of 1500 miles in length, breadth, and heighh, fitted for the motion and benefit of their spiritual bodies, yet said then to have foundations, because then they will have their bodies, who needed no foundations when they were Jerusalem above, only the spirits of just men made perfect, Gal. 4.2. and for the other in the natural life they shall lengthen their cords, & strengthen their stakes, Esa. 54.2. God hath prepared fit places for both, who fully knows the number of them all: Now many things in Scripture are said to be prepared by God or Christ that will not have their peculiar existence at present till the times come: So our Saviour went to prepare the beloved great Jerusalem for his Disci∣ples, John 14.1, 2, 3. where they shall behold this his glory which his Father hath given him, John 17.24. and this is the City prepared for the Forefathers, Heb. 11.16. and for us, v. 40. so saith Christ, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, Matth. 25.34. and the eternal happiness which eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, & which God hath prepared, 1 Cor. 2.9. and on the contrary, Hell torment is prepared for the wicked, Matth. 25.41. and Tophet is prepared of old for the King, Esa. 30.33. probably meant of the great Assyrian which will at that time be destroyed, viz. the [Turk] called the As∣syrian, Mich. 5.5. when the Assyrian shall come into our Land, that is, possessing the Assyrians Kingdom then: now all these so said to be [prepared] shall have their existence certainly in their times; and it seemeth probable that this last Tophet with the River of Brimstone, Esa. 30. will be out of the matter of the earth dissolved at last, &c. which will yet make for the happiness of the Saints, that they have not only escaped all such sufferings, but shall inherit such wonderful, manifold, and everlasting happiness.
And now we come Fourthly to the last great Priviledge of the said New Jerusalem state, and the said Kingdom of Christ with his Saints, namely the Paradise of God then likewise to be restored in∣stead of that which was first lost by the fall of the first Adam: last mentioned in this Divine Key, or bunch of Keys of our Saviour, of which (though from the fall intended) yet we hear nothing particu∣larly of it until our Saviour by his death had purchased it, and then promised it to the penitent Thief upon the Cross with him. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise; whither Christs Soul then went to take possession of it for all his Saints: before he said, the Angels are said to carry Lazarus into Abrahams bosome: but the Apostle Paul explains it afterwards to be the third Heaven, and Paradise where then it was, but after when the New Jerusalem comes down with Christ from God out of Heaven, that Paradise of God is described to belong to that Holy City, where is the Tree of Life, which yield∣eth fruits every Month, and whose Leaves are for the healing of the Nations, with the pure River flowing from the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22. which are Divine expressions of the happi∣ness of the Saints then spoken in resemblance unto the first Paradise, and to the living waters spoken of by Christ, John 7.37, 38. which all the Saints shall in that state enjoy. And so we have given a touch of these several parts of Gods Renovation of all things at that time of the restitution of all things spoken of by the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.21. But one thing more the Scripture speaks of to belong to the same renovation, and that is the Dominion over the Creatures to be restored then also when God shall put all things in subjection under Christs feet, Psa. 8.4. and Heb. 2.8. together with the Creatures freedom from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, of which much in Scripture, when the emnity shall be taken away from amongst them, as was said, when Christs rest shall be glorious, ver. 10. Now all these great Priviledges are found∣ed upon the antient Promises and Covenants of God to the faithful Fathers, and thus Divinely unlocked by this said Key of our blessed Saviour so graciously left for his Churches consolation in these latter days, when the evil suffering times are almost at an end, and that happy state of things for the Saints is near approaching, as we hope many ways to manifest in considering what those times of renovai∣on or restitution are which is next to be considered: And how should the evidence of these things stir up all Christians to believe and act as to secure their own interest in them, and to cast off every weight
that presseth down, that might hinder them in running their Chri∣stian race to obtain the Crown with all such precious Jewels wherewith it is so richly adorned: for these Scriptures for this hap∣py state cannot be broken. We proceed to the third Head, namely, to consider what are the the times, or in what state or occurrence of affairs in the world God will work this renovation or restitution of all things. Obj. But here an Objection must first be answered: Doth not the Apostle Paul tell us the times of renovation are past, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is become a new Creature, old things are past away, saith he, Behold, all things are become new: in the very words of this Text. Answ. The Holy Apostle speaks there of the great spiritual reno∣vation of the Souls of the faithful, the foundation whereof was laid at Christs first coming: and which will be the real ground to all Saints of obtaining their shares in the great renovation which God will work for them in that state to come we speak of, wherein all such shall have their part; for if Christ had not by his Death, Re∣surrection and Ascension then laid the happy foundation by leading captivity captive, triumphing gloriously over the powers of dark∣ness, there could have been no obtaining of this other, but since he hath, this will necessarily in its order and time follow thereupon, in that perfecting of the work of Redemption in the world. Again, old things were then by that means passed away, and all things be∣come new then comparatively in respect of what they were un∣der the Old Testament before he actually came in our nature, before Gospel Grace was dark and more rare, less efficacious, un∣der many types, shadows, and Ceremonial observances and Old Testament dispensations: under the New Testament is a new and better Covenant, new and better Promises, new and better Ordi∣nances, new and better Dispensations, as might largely be set forth: So then by his first coming was the chief foundation laid of all following renovation of the world to come, then was indeed the inchoation and powerful beginning of all happy renovation and the foundation laid of all the other, the hopes whereof will be but build∣ing upon the sand without that founding upon the Rock Christ by faith wrought in believers Souls by the powerful operation of the Holy Ghost: but these times of restitution of all things we speak of are quite another thing to be fulfilled for Christ and his Saints at his second coming, which the first made way for when the outward
visible total and final Redemption will be fulfilled as well as the in∣ward; for Satan remains still the God of the world, and Prince of the Power of the Air, and works effectually in the Children of dis∣obedience () which will not believe, and he & they both bring much suffering and persecutions upon the Saints, but in the following renovation they will both be taken off, so that the Servants of Christ shall then serve him in righteousness and true holiness before him without fear of their enemies all the days of their lives, which is the mercy promised to the Fathers, as Zacharias sweetly sings out, Luke 1, 72, 74, 75. for then the inward and spiritual work of Redemp∣tion will be much more perfected in the Saints, as well as the out∣ward and visible for the Saints: And thus much for answer to that Objection. Now to proceed to consider what these times are, how set forth in Holy Scripture, and how it doth appear that they are now near ap∣proaching: for the resolution whereof we must chiefly make use of this most Divine Book of Revelation with some of Daniels Visions respecting the same times, as they are by Christ more fully explain∣ed in their due series and order, which is a matter of very great use in all the sufferings times of the Church, to Chap. 19. but after of much advantage and benefit for the Church of God in those good and happy times, to which our Saviours Divine Key of these things hath special reference, and is graciously given by him to open the Mysteries of them, for the great use and consolation of his people in these later days, to which purpose we shall consider those princi∣pal Texts of Scripture that have their reference unto those latter days. The first is that great declaration of God upon the Fall of man, Gen. 3.15. which is the most comprehensive of all others both containing removal of evil, & conferring of good in the Restitution of all things, upon which accounts Christ hath ever since proceeded in the execution of all his three great Offices, of the great Prophet, Priest, and King for his Universal true Church, as the work his Father gave him to do, until he make his great enemies his footstool, eminent∣ly by destroying of wicked men that destroyed the earth, and binding of Satan, so to still the enemy and the avenger: and finally at his casting him into the Lake of fire, as was shewed from Holy Scrip∣ture, when he will be utterly stilled, for by reason of prevailing sin he brought the old world to suffer the Vengeance of the Deluge by Waters, and Sodom and Gomorrah to be consumed with fire and brimstone from Heaven, and even Gods people to be led captive by
the Assyrians and Caldeans with all other miseries befalling for sin be∣fore and since Christ stilled him in good measure at his first coming, when he was struck dumb and his Oracles put to silence, and more stilled him under the sixth Seal when he was cast down from his Re∣gencie of Heathenish Idolatry in his Heavens under the Pagan-Ru∣lers unto the earth, whereupon in his great wrath he betook him to his last designe of setting up the twofold Beast to continue till the said great stilling of him in the 1000 years; also that great Oracle of God, Psal. 110.1. much spoken of in the New Testament hath also direct relation unto the said times when Christ shall cease to sit at his Fathers right hand in Heaven, and his enemies, as was said, be made his footstool: till which times saith the Apostle Peter also, Acts 3.31. the Heavens must receive Christ, viz. till these times of restitution of all things deciphered in the Text by him that sits upon the Throne, when his Church will be refreshed with Christs presence and the Tabernacle of God then be with men, and he dwell with them that space of the 1000 years, &c. in the third verse of this Chapter, till which times the Apostle saith, Heb. 10.13. Christ sits there expecting till his foes be made his footstool, when Turk and Pope who stand in the way to hinder Christs said Kingdom, shall be destroyed. Unto these times also relates that great promise made by God unto Abraham upon that great act of his faith and obedience, in sacrificing his Son Isaac, Gen. 22. that his seed should possess the Gates of his Enemies (though it was partially and typically per∣formed in subduing such as would have stopped their passage, or hindred their possession of the promised Land above 400 years af∣ter, when the iniquities of the Amorites were arrived to their fulness, but the great possessiou will be given to the Divine Seed, Christ at his second coming, and by him to all the spiritual seed, and that so as never to be cast out again, as 2 Sam. 7. when they shall remove no more from it: as also many other Scriptures manifest. Then also shall be performed from the beginning of revenges upon the Whore of Babylon, and the great vengeance upon the enemy [Antichrist] fore prophesied by Moses in that excellent Song for Po∣sterity, Deut. 32.41.42. when God will whet his glittering sword, and make his arrows drunk in blood, that Jews and Gentiles may rejoyce together, as Rom. 15. [then also will be fulfilled that great Promise Esa. 51.20, 21, 22, &c. respecting those times also, made upon occasion of the destruction of old Babylon, the Type of
this and much of Jeremies Prophesie there is by the Spirit of God ap∣plied in the Revelations to mystical Babylons destruction; but we read not of Gods peoples being then Gods Battle-Axe and Weapons of War then, &c. for they came home then by Gods working power∣fully upon the Spirit of Cyrus, and they were ever low upon that reduction; but when they shall be again restored, all that great pre∣valencie over all enemies will take place fully; for they, as saith the Prophet Malachy, shall then be as ashes under the soles of their feet, Chap. 4.3. and all Nations that will not then be subject to the belo∣ved great and holy Jerusalem shall be destroyed, Esa. 60.12. And when the same Prophet Esay, chap. 26.19. shews that Gods Saints shall rise at the first bodily Resurrection, explained by our Sa∣viour Luke 20.35, 36. and Rev. 20.5. Esay declares the contrary of such as tyrannized over Gods Church before, ver. 14. they, saith he, are dead, they shall not live then, they are deceased, they shall not rise then, &c. for the enemies shall be so taken away for ever from the Land of the living, that they shall ever after be uncapable of good with the Saints in the world, and to all eternity: when those Children of the Resurrection, as our Saviour stiles them, that shall then be counted worthy of that world, , like the Angels of God, & be manifest to be the Children of God, and shall not only be freed from all the evil formerly brought upon them by men shall be made or Devils, but also shall by that blessed Resurrection be made capable of all promised good belonging to that state. It is very observable how the Spirit of God guided the Apostle Peter to set forth many Di∣vine Doctrines concerning those times, in that excellent portion of Scripture, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. first, in that apt title he gives them, , that they are the times of the restitution of all things; when God himself saith he will make all things new, in this Text, by putting them into their due order and frame. Secondly, they will be times of refreshing. Thirdly, that their sins will then be blotted out, that is one great refreshing. But fourthly, a greater will be from the presence of the Lord, when the Tabernacle of God will be with men, and he shall dwell with them. Fifthly, that God hath spoken of these times by his holy Prophets. And sixthly, by all his holy Prophets since the world began, as we have shewed largely concerning the Kingdom of Christ, in the said 12 foundations of the faith thereof, and in the Iren, and much may be done respecting the Jews and all Gods peoples Priviledges and Mercies belonging to those times, which we have or shall farther speak of: so that wherever we may find the holy Prophets have spo∣ken
any thing tending to break the Serpents head by the promised Seed of the woman, his head of Policie or his head of Power, which shall in the issue chiefly and fully be performed by him in his execu∣tion of the Judgment of the Great Day, which was preached to the Old World by Enoch, & hath been since the great Tradition, through alltimes till the Apostle Jude recorded it in his Epistle, stiling it (as the Spirit of God then taught him) the Judgment of the Great Day; which since by our Saviour in this most excellent Divine Book is ex∣plained to have a first Act or the Matutinum Judicium according to what was long before revealed to Daniel, Chap. 7. confirmed also by himself, Revel. 11.18. and Rev. 19. later end, at the ruine of the Beast and false Prophet. But the other Act of the Great Day hath fince been by the Father only left to be made known by Christ him∣self to explain and confirm most fully, for the use of his Church, concerning the last finishing Act of the said Great Day of Judgment or the Vespertinum Judicium thereof, without which his Church had been much in the dark in respect of such great Points of the Doctrine thereof delivered by himself in this most excellent Book, which he hath so strongly, clearly, and exactly done beyond all Parallel, in that Divine Table, respecting the 1000 years, of which and the little space following, his Doctrines of the last Act, are the boundary (as we shewed before) and was needful to be explained, as being in∣cluded in Enoch's said Vision or Prophesie thereof: which said 1000 years include all those promised Mercies most antiently laid down in the Word of God respecting the Saints in those times, ei∣ther privitively, in respect of the evils to be removed; or positively, in respect of good things to be obtained by them in the particulars beforesaid, so unlocked by our Saviours said Divine Key, or rather Bunch of Keys (as they may be called) unlocking the several Cabinets wherein the said Mercies are contained. And on the other hand whatsoever of these Mercies for good we find the Prophets have spoken of as to be obtained by Gods people in those times upon any such notion respecting them, they are by the Apostle Peter's rule so to be understood with respect thereunto, and the words of my Text are a sure Key to open the meaning of them. Now since from the fall of the first Adam, the Dominion lost by him hath been usurped by the Prince of the Power of the Air that hath all along ever since effectually worked in the Children of dis∣obedience, and will not according to the word be fully taken away from him, and his Vassels the evil Powers in the world, till those two
said Acts of Judgment be finished by the said promised Seed the Son of God; and since likewise the Word of God gives so manifold evi∣dence of the said promised Seed the Son of God, his so taking to himself his great Power and Reigning, which Kingdom of David was the highest mercy promised formerly to the Fathers as a Type, and from whom Christs Title hath ever since been strongly confirm∣ed, and that for the sins of Davids Posterity and people his Taberna∣cle fell at the Babylonian Captivity, so as not to be raised till the time of the Anti-type of Davids said Kingdom come, when the Ta∣bernacle of David is said again to be raised, as Amos 9.11. so ex∣pounded by the Apostle James, Acts 15.16. let us from the fall there∣of consider what discoveries of the seasons of the raising thereof, we can find from the Word of God, which are these said times of the restitution of all things, spoken of by the Apostle Peter, and the re∣novation of all things spoken of in the Text by God himself. Now from the falling of Davids seid Kingdom in the Type, to the raising of Christs Davidical Kingdom in the Anti-type, we have (as Mr. Mede observes) a two-fold Calendar in Daniel leading thereunto, the great Calendar passeth through all the times of the four Gentile Monarchies set forth by four Mettle Kingdoms, Chap. 2. in Nebu∣chadnezzars Image which he saw, and the same again revealed to Daniel by four Beasts destroying each other, Chap. 7. so that by these two testimonies both to Jews & Gentiles, it might be in due time manifest what was there fore-shewed shall in due time ensue, both for Christs Kingdom of the Stone, or Kingdom of Patience, from Christs ascension, being that which God set up then, Dan. 2.44. to his coming again, in which time it should Divinely and pow∣erfully destroy all other Kingdoms, at which said second coming it should become the Kingdom of the Mountain, or Kingdom of Pow∣er, filling the whole earth upon Christs taking possession of it, Dan. 7.13, 14. and there seems to be an exact Table of the times of this great Calendar, Chap. 8. of 2300 years, and that upon that account ver. 17, 19. as almost is now by experience explained, with the se∣ries of Revelation-Prophesie in the 1700 years therein contained; the reasons thereof we have set down in our summary of Daniels Vi∣sions: and for the lesser Calender of the 70 Weeks of years, Dan. 9 viz. 490 years, the Key of the Times, whereof appears to be the 1335 years, after the full taking away of Sacrifice, Chap. 12. and the setting up of the abomination of desolation most remarkably done by Julian the Apostate Emperor; the Epoca whereof was about
365. or as Learned Bishop Ʋsher conceives 363. to which the said 1335. being added (probably) makes up the times of the great re∣stauration of Jews and Israelites at Christs appearance, when the Turk is destroyed, Dan. 11.45. and Chap. 12.1, 2. which is further explained by the 1700 years of Revelation-prophesie, until that time, viz. about 320 years, under the six first Seals, until Constan∣tine the Great cast Satan from his Heaven to the earth, by abandoning his Heathenish Idolatries of his Sun, Moon, and Stars, worshipping his Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, &c. with the Pagan Worshippers and Promoters thereof, unto which sueceeded the other Christian Empe∣rors for their short space spoken of, Rev. 17.10. viz. about 80, or 90 years, till the Dragons flood, about the Womans, the true Churches entring into her wilderness condition, and from thence under the four first Trumpets proceeding out of the seventh Seal, when began the sealed Judgments of the Trumpets, which carry on the ruine of the Roman Civil state for their Persecution of the Saints in the Pri∣mitive times, which four first are conceived to take up about 200 years more, wherein the barbarous Nations by degrees broke in many pieces the Western Roman Empire, giving opportunity for the Crowning of the ten Horns, turning the Provinces thereof into so many Kingdoms, whose Power hath since been given to the Beast: But for the 2 first woe Trumpets, of the Locust Mahumetans, first under the Saracens in the East, from their beginning about An. Dom. 600. to the beginning of the Turkish Mahomitans in the Ottoman. family about 1300, which was 700 more, and the Turks day, and hour, and month, and year, since prevailing over the Easterm Em∣pire, which by computation are 396 years more, altogether will make up the whole account of about 1700 years, till the seventh Trumpet begin to sound, when the Kingdoms of the world will be∣come the Kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. And the same 1700 years of Revelation Prophesie may also be computed by the Table of the suffering times under the Dragon and the Beast, as they were pointed out before from Rev. 11. to ver. 13. viz. the regular Primitive times, Chap. 11.1. contained about 320. when was the Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon and their Angels, Chap. 12. whereupon the Dragons flood was poured out, but dried up by the earth, at the womans entrance into her Wilderness-condi∣tion about 90 years, when with her time, times, and half a time be∣gins the Beast to trample under foot the holy City for his 42 months, and also during the two witnesses time of 1260 days of years for all
these 3 are contemporaries, and end with the second Woe, ver. 14. when it is said, the third Woe cometh quickly, at the end of the last Gentile Monarchy; the first of which Monarchies, viz. the Caldean, by Scripture is reckoned to continue 70 years: the Mede or Persian, computed in Chronologie about 230 years: the Grecian, about 280. until about 48 years before Christs birth (saith Helvicus) or ac∣cording to our former Computations of them in our Parallel of the ruine of the Roman Empire: in the Caldean 70: about 70 or 80 more: in the Persian Monarchies to Daniels weeks, which are 490 years more, in all, 640. to the end of the last week, An. Dom. 5.38 years after Christs birth; which last 38 years are to be deducted on our usual account: in which Parallel consider well that conjecture of 1666. to the ruine of Antichrist from Christs ascension; though as Bishop Ʋsher conceives we have lost therein four years, &c. See there also our four mystical numbers, leading to the Jews deliverance, Dan. 12.1. and the great Enemies ruine at the end of the 4 Monar∣chie, all which have their periods about Ann. Dom. 1700. But as there were different conjectures, 1. about eleven years or more, as before said, of the Jews deliverance from Babylon, so should some like latitude be allowed to probable conjectures now. Thus having set down a scantling of these times, by which it may appear upon these and many other accounts that the times of the re∣stitution of all things cannot be far off, which should make all men be careful to prepare for them, & thereupon to be engaged the more to fight against their spiritual enemies, the flesh, the wold, and the Devil; and as Christ upon that account exhorts to exercise Christian watch∣fulness, that their hearts be not overcharged with surfetting and drun∣kenness, and cares of this life, lest these times come upon them un∣awares, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. and the rather, because, as he tells us, they will come as a snare upon them that are in the whole earth. See to this purpose the 9 Uses after the Tract on Rev. 22.20. Now as God created the world at first, as the Apostle speaks, by Jesus Christ, the Spirit moving upon the face of the Waters, Gen. 1.2. And as God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.12. and also upon Christs Resurrection from the dead, whereby he was declared to be the Son of God with Power, accor∣ding to the Spirit of holiness, Rom. 1.4. hath committed all power to Jesus Christ, and accordingly afterwards gave him the Book with seven Seals, Rev. 5. to open and execute the contents thereof to the end of the world and last Judgment.
So at the times of this New State God creates this New World for, and gives it to his Son as a boon, or , for doing all his Wills (as was said of David) and to his spiritual Seed with him, as joynt-heirs thereof, which will also be their sure Mercies of David, Esai. 55.3 and therefore it is said, at his coming in the Clouds, Dan. 7.13, 14. there was given to him, viz. by the Father, Dominion and Glo∣ry, and a Kingdom, that all Nations, People, and Languages should serve him; and therefore he also saith, John 17.24. that the Glory he hath therein his Father hath given him; and upon this great ac∣count also, he bids his little flock not fear, for it is his Fathers plea∣sure to give them the Kingdom; and in reference unto both, will all things then be made new; for as God hath appointed him heir of all things; so then he shall actually possess them: as also ver. 7. he promiseth to his overcomers, that they shall inherit all things; and the Apostle teacheth, 2 Tim. 2.12. that those that suffer with him, shall reign with him: So that New State and Kingdom then is first and chiefly given to Christ which comprehends all the rest, and is then prepared for Christ, and those he then brings with him as his Spouse or Bride the Lambs Wife, as her dowry at that great so∣lemnity of the 1000 years. And this the Fathers New Creation, as it is deciphered Esai. 65. will be a greater work than the first (as the making of the spiritual New Creature is, 2 Cor. 5.17.) because here is a great incapacity in the world, much resistance, much depra∣vation, much disorder, opposition in men and Devils, in all the Crea∣tures in it, saving that God hath given Christ Power and Authority by degrees aforehand to take it away; for which end our Saviour in this excellent Book (besides other Scriptures) hath much therein set forth the usefulness of Preaching the Crown as well as the Cross (though that in the first place) but this as a motive to take up the Cross, which was formerly of great prevalencie, as is storied of the Primitive sufferers, that desired Martyrdom that they might reign with Christ in that his Kingdom on earth; surely they had much greater faith of these things than is usually found in our days, when that world is neer approaching: and in this whole Book something is propounded to all the Sufferers in their several times respecting the Jerusalem-state, as to the Asian Churches to the Sealed ones, Chap. 7. &c. for their encouragements, as we have shewed in our seventh Convincing Argum. pag. 28, 29. But we proceed to some other remarkable portions of Scripture that one way or other point out these times unto us. To which pur∣pose
we may in a special manner observe that peculiar mark in the the curious Divine contrivance of Revelation-prophesie twice set down therein at the pouring out of the last Vial, Chap. 16, 17. upon the Air of the Beast, probably taking away or binding the Prince of the Power of the Air. Then came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, saying, it is done; which appears also to be at the time of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet; when the Kingdoms of the world become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. (which shews their coincidence) about the same time; and likewise that this great work of Gods renovation concurs in truth with both; for the binding of Satan and the Reign of Christ with his raised Saints are fully contemporaries. So it is added in the words next following this Text: as being here again spo∣ken by him that sat upon the Throne. And he said unto me, It is done: which declares the same time that Satan is bound, and Christ reigns this great work will be effected: and therefore is another e∣vidence that all things contained in Chap. 21. and 22. belong to the time and state of the said 1000 years of Christs Reign with his rai∣sed Saints in his said Davidical Kingdom upon earth. But the Question here may be moved, What is that that then will be done? Ans. In General, many great enemies and workers of iniquity shall be destroyed, but more especially it seems to have respect un∣to that great Divine Oracle fore-named, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool, Psal. 110.1. at which time likewise Christ receives his Kingdom (for his enemies ruine is the beginning of Christs Reign) so that in respect of both, God himself saith, It is done: viz. what he himself had promised unto David's Lord before: and this time and day seems to be set forth very emphatically upon occasion of the destruction of Gog (the Turk) then likewise, and there also the Holy Ghost seems to use the same Watch-word, for the time thereof, as here was at the Beasts ruine, and that with a great deal of Divine illustration: Be∣hold it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord God: this is the day where∣of I have spoken, Ezek. 39.8. the said Text appears to be of great weight. N. B. Quest. But how doth it appear that the Turk shall then also be destroy∣ed? Answ. By Daniels last great Vision, Chap. 10.11.12. in Chap. 11. having spoken something briefly of the Persian, and more of the Greek Monarchy, he comes to the Roman, ver. 36. and of the Ro∣man
Antichrist, ver. 37, 38, 39. and then he proceeds to speak of the two Ruiners of the Roman Monarchy, viz. the two Woe-trumpets, Rev. 9. that is, the Saracens and Turkish Mahumitans: the first sti∣led the King of the South, the last the King of the North, whose History is set down, as almost accomplished, ver. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. as Mr. Mede judiciously applied it, except the last, his setting his Tabernacle of his Palace in the Holy Land, when he comes to his end, and none shall help him: and then immediately follows [then stood up Michael the Prince of Daniels people] and in that troublous time delivers them at his appearance (probably) when his feet shall stand upon Mount Olivet, Zec. 14. and that mourning be, Zec. 12.10. and ruine of both the first Gog and Magog, as well as the last is pro∣phesied very neer together, &c. And this mark of destruction of both, It is done, &c. seems the more to be observed, besides divers others, both in Ezech. 38. and 39. and in the Revel. because as the Apostle shews, Heb. 10.13. Christ had sitten to that time above 1600 years, expecting till such his foes should be made his footstool. Therefore how fitly is it by God himself so punctually declared both to the Jews and Gentiles, that he is not unmindful of his pro∣mise to his Son Jesus Christ, but as he promised so at that set time: It is done: as if he should say, my Beloved Son hath many hundred years sitten at my right hand expecting this particular season for my fulfilling such my promise to him; and now that time is come, and it is done, this is the day whereof I have spoken. Hence also the Ho∣ly Spirit directed the Apostle Peter to assert the same thing for time: The Heavens must receive him (saith he) till the times of the restitution of things, Acts 3.21. as we shewed formerly more fully and remark∣ably. And since Christ hath left the Book of the Revelation to open Daniels before, shut up and sealed Mysteries, until the times of the end; whilst the Roman Monarchy should continue after God had set up the Kingdom of the Stone from Christs first coming, in the 19 first Chapters of that Divine Book, unto his second coming, Chap. 20. and hath also given the remainder of that Book as a Divine Key, or Bunch of Keys to open also the Mysteries of the most anci∣ent promised Mercies and Covenants to the Fathers, as we have shewed, which are to have their completing from his said second coming in that state of the 1000 years, and those times of the resti∣tution of all things, in my Text. What pity is it that such matters of so great concernment to all Saints now near approaching, are no more considered or understood, or duly prized or improved: and now
indeed is the proper and seasonable time to publish them, and make them known: when Gods wonderful Grace and Goodness therein wth his Truth & Faithfulness in the performance of them, shall shortly be beheld with admiration and adoration, as in the Text, Behold, I, &c. Another remarkable deciphering of these times is the finishing of the Mystery of God, when the seventh Angel begins to sound, Rev. 10.7. as he hath declared to his Servants the Prophets; so that the Prophets are here alledged as the foundation of what ever should be fulfilled from the sounding of the last mystical Trumpet; and therefore I conceive this finishing of the Mystery is not only appli∣caple to the Jews conversion, though to that in special, yet to all o∣thers then to be fulfilled in their their time; I rather conceive it in∣cludes the completing of all the parts of the great Mystery of God∣liness, which the Apostle Paul sets forth so particularly in order con∣cerning Christ, 1 Tim. 3.16. And without controversie great is the My∣stery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, &c. he concludes with his receiving up into Glory, as signifying, that when that state of Christs session at his Fathers right hand was ended, all such Scrip∣ture. Mysteries would end, & be finished, &c. the times of Revelation of all things would follow thereupon, as well as the times of the re∣stitution of all things, when the Temple of God will be open in Hea∣ven, and there shall be seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament, Rev. 11.9. and saith that same Apostle, We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. and it seems upon Christs sitting there, he had the Book of Revela∣tion, in due time to be made known by his Servant John to the Churches, containing the order and temper of all the times ever since to his second coming, when this Mystery of God will be finished: which the same Apostle there briefly recounteth in order, which we shall a little touch upon particularly. First, God was ma∣nifest in the flesh at his first coming, which was 4000 years in fulfil∣ling, saith Bishop Ʋsher, from the first promise made to Adam and Eve at the fall, and carried on all along that time by many confir∣mations and explications thereof, by many Types, Prophesies, Pro∣mises, Services, and Sacraments, till that great accomplishment of them all at his said first coming, whereof that late many ways e∣minent and Reverend person Bishop Brownrig speaketh acurately upon that Text, as follows: All the Prophets (saith he) from Samuel, and those that followed after, as many as have spoken, have foretold his coming, Acts 3.24. Of this Salvation all the Prophets have enquired
and searched diligently. He is Abrahams promised Seed, Moses his Great Prophet, Jacobs Shilo, Esays Immanuel, Jeremie's Man compassed by a woman, Ezechiels Shepherd, Daniels Holy One, Zechariah's Branch, Solomons Lilly, David's Lord, Malachy's Angel; all that prophesied looked at him: he is the end, and body, and substance of all their Rites and Ceremonies: He was Abels Sacrifice, Abraham's first Fruits, Isaac's Ram, Jacobs Ladder, Moses his Passeover, Aarons Rod, The Israelites Rock, The Patriarchs Manna, Davids Tabernacle, So∣lomons Temple, all Types and Representations of his Incarnation: all their Kings were Figures of this Great King: all their Deliverers and Judges Types of this great Saviour: all their Priests were Ush∣ers to bring in this High Priest of our Profession: all the Mysteries in Scripture serviceable to this Mystery. So the time of his coming, the place of his birth, the Tribe, the Progenitors, the Person of whom he was born, with all things that mainly concerned the excel∣lencie of his Person, or the greatness of his humiliation were foretold by the Prophets; yea, and his exaltation too; though the grea∣test part remains to be fulfilled in his 1000 years reign, & afterwards. Again, 2ly. Justified (saith the Apostle) in the Spirit, he was powerfully with him from his birth, continued with him in his life, in his increasing in wisdom and favour with God and men, which was observably by his disputing with the Doctors in the Temple at 12 years of age, and in the Spirits descending upon him in the shape of a Dove and sitting upon him at his Baptism. In his Tentations in the wilderness 40 days, in his holy and gracious conversation in his whole life-time: in his Divine Doctrine which he taught, in his ma∣ny wonderful Miracles that he wrought in both powerfully de∣claring him to be the Son of God, in fulfilling the whole Law, and Prophesies of himself, in satisfying fully by his sufferings for mans sin: in powerfully raising him from the dead: in instructing his Di∣sciples in the forty days after, in the things pertaining to the King∣dom of God, &c. 3ly, Seen of Angels, proclaimed by them to be the Saviour of all people at his birth: attended on by them all his life: honoured by them at his Resurrection: testifying his coming again at his Ascen∣tion, Acts 1. And shall also be worshipped by all those Elohim at at his second coming again, Heb. 1.6. Psal. 97.7. Fourthly, Preached unto the Gentiles at their first calling upon the rejection of the Jews: when as said the Apostle, the sound there∣of went into all parts of the world, &c. which hath been continued
for almost 1700 years, and will till they that pierced him shall peni∣tently behold him as is hopeful, Rev. 1.7. Zech. 12.10. Fifthly, Believed on in that world by all Nations, none excluded, ac∣cording to his Command to his Apostles to preach the Gospel to e∣very Creature capable of the Grace of God by him therein to be so offered unto all, Mark 16.15. And lastly, received up into Glory, wherein Gods said great Mistery was to be perfected at his coming again, viz. when those Mysteries in the Revel. will be accomplished that are to precede it, and all the other said revealed Mercies then to be fulfilled in their seasons, as the Prophets have foretold respecting those times (as we said) which the Angel [Christ] there declares should then be finished, when the seventh Angel begins to sound, &c. Chap. 10.7. accordingly the raising up the Tabernacle of David, also points out those times pro∣phesied of Amos 9.11. and applied Acts 15.16. remarkably to these very times, pointing out Christs Davidical Kingdom in due time to come, whereby the great fulness of the Gentiles will come in at the Jews second call, when Jews & Gentiles will both rejoyce together. Upon which we may observe how the Spirit of God inspired the holy Apostle to deliver that greatly useful Divine truths, known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world, as if especi∣ally he would teach that glorious Kingdom of Christ which was to be set up in the end of the world, was Gods designe from the be∣ginning, for then the Serpents head will be eminently broken, and that till then God fills up all times with all his foreknown works, because to every purpose there is time and judgment, &c. as Eccles. 8.6, 7. whence we should labour to have our thoughts, words, and actings regular; for he hath shewed us what is good, Mic. 6.8. then & we may be sure the issues of Providence will be good to us; which will be a good improvement of that Divine truth, and of that occasion of delivering it. The threefold consideration of Noah in our late Systeme pre∣ceding the Saints Resurrection: 1. respecting Noah as a Type of Christs saving his, as their true Ark, at the overflowing de uge of the wicked worlds destruction, at the beginning and end of the 1000 years. Secondly, in respect of that Covenant made with Noah, for the worlds and Creatures preservation, till those last times, when the Scriptures also testifie the greatest fruitfulness also will be. And third∣ly, in respect of his Prophesie, Gen. 9. that the Posterity both of Shem the Jews, and of Japhet the Gentiles (as now we hinted) should both in those times at both their second calls, spoken of in
Scripture, Deut. 32.43. rejoyce together, applied also, Rom. 15. to those times with other Scriptures respecting the same, &c. The same times were pointed out by our four Computations of the Jews deliverance, and the great enemies destruction out of Daniel and Revelation, formerly explained in our Parallels. The like may be observed from what we said before of the Taber∣nacle of God, at the same time, being with men, and his dwelling with them, &c. ver. 3, 4. wherefore also the name of the City then seems to be called Jehovah Shamma, the Lord is there, Ezek. 48 last. And at the same time the Sun is ashamed, and the Moon confounded, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Antients gloriously, Esa. 24.23. which all spect the same times. The New Covenant upon the New giving of the Law after the first Tables were broken, Deut. 30. to 11. especially respects Gods People the Jews in those times, which seems to be the antient foun∣dation in Moses writings, of which divers like in the following Pro∣phets are the confirmations and explications, as Jer. 31.33 Ezek 36. more especially belonging to that people after their reduction from their great dispersions: though applicable to all Abrahams spiritual Seed in the times of the Gentiles also, Heb. 8.9, 10, 11. These times are also pointed out by the great solemnity of the Marriage of the Lamb with his Bride the 1000 years, at the New Je∣rusalems coming down from God out of Heaven; which great so∣lemnity was prophesied of by the holy Kingly Prophet David, Psal. 45. when she shall have Sons whom she may make Princes in all Lands: To which purpose is that excellent Song of Songs by Solo∣mon, as respecting the return of the Shulamite in the Book of the Canticles (probably) about the time the Bride is said to make her self ready, Rev. 19.7. And Solomons peaceable Kingdom of old was but a Type of that peaceful and glorious Kingdom and state which Christ with his Saints at the said times of restitution of all things shall enjoy the 1000 years. The Scepter and Dominion prophesied of by Balaam, Numb. 24. and according to Jocobs Prophesie placed in the Tribe of Judah, said by him to be a Lyons whelp, and the Ensigne thereof was also the Lyon: accordingly Rev. 5. Christ is stiled the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, and in Ch. 22. stiles himself so, when in those times he shall be as a strong Lyon to destroy his enemies, Ps. 110. who also is both
the Root and Offspring of David, Rev. 5. as will wonderfully  manifest in the same times, &c. The first Adams casting out of Paradise compared with Christs Key for the restoring all the spiritual Seed to a Paradise in that State, manifests it to be Gods designe from the beginning, by that Goel or Deliverer promised to be at his second coming a more perfect Resto∣rer of all things (then) than the Serpent Satan was or could be a cor∣rupter or destroyer: before it was called Abrahams bosom, whe∣ther (Christ said) the Angels carried Lazarus his Soul: but after by our Saviour was called Paradise at his death, when he had purcha∣sed it, and promised the Penitent Thief, as we noted, that he should be with him there that day: and so the Apostle Paul said, he was rapt up into the third Heaven or Paradise, 2 Cor. 12. called after the Paradise of God in the world the 1000 years of Christs Reign with his Saints; and so is coincident in the same times of the Restitution with the other. The same times are also set forth by the world to come, Heb. 2.5. and 1.6. as the general Deluge ended the Old World, and began the New, so the ruine of that last wicked Roman Monarchy, in respect of each of those long God-provoking States therein, viz. both Civil and Ecclesiastical, with all the broken parts of the three former Mo∣narchies, Dan. 2. will end this world in the present state of things; and Christs said 1000 years Reign in those times will begin that World to come: and the Apostle Paul, Ephes. 1.21. uses the same distinction which by our Saviour had been laid down before, when he taught, that the sin against the Holy Ghost should neither be for∣given in this world nor in the world to come, Matth. 12.32. which will begin , when the Father brings the Son again into the world, viz. the second time (as both Ancients and even Papists understand it) when all the Elohim (Angels) shall worship him, as Psal. 97. Likewise the 42 Stages in the Childrens of Israel their passing through the Wilderness to possess the Land of Canaan was a Type of the womans the Christ ans's Church passing in her wilderness condition in the times of the Beasts 42 Moneths to attain in the issue to the New Jerusalem state, in the said times of the restitution of all things, or that redemption of the purchased possession, as it seems, Ephes. 1.14. The restoring the Dominion over the Creatures lost by the fall of the first Adam was foretold by David to be obtained by Christ the
second Adam, Psal. 8.4, 5, 6. &c. as is explained and so applied by the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 2.6, 7, 8. which is another part of the Restitution of all things in the said times (as we shewed) And the said Creatures freedom from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Rom. 8.21. will be another in∣gredient to make up that blessed state, and although the same holy man, Heb. 2.7. did acknowledge that they did not then see all things in subjection unto him; yet he declares in due time, Phil. 2.9, 10. That every knee of things in Heaven and Earth, and under the earth shall bow, and be subject unto that great King of the whole world. And can it be conceived by rational men, that these Divine truths are written in vain? and that Christ when he takes to himself his great power, shall not reign in these respects also unto the end of the world, and have that honour reserved for him by Angels men, and all Creatures in the world then? It appears also to be the end and drift of all Revelation Prophesie, by that general Doxolog Ch. 5.10. to the end; by Angels, men, and all Creatures upon the fulfilling of the contents of the Book given unto the Lamb. We might be  in ma∣ny particular Promises to this purpose respecting the  in that time, with many excellenties respecting tha , as we have spe∣cially shewed, how concerning Christs Dividid a Kingdom and peo∣ple, then, God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began, as is manifest by the third of our 8 Con∣ving Arguments in the Word written. And the great designe of the All knowing and All working God in giving such Prophesies to his Church from the beginning, concerning such great things to be ful∣filled at the end of the world in that said Great Day of Judgment, appears to be made manifest by such Divine Chronology, first set down by Moses and other Penmen thereof before the Captivities of Israel and Judah; but after that are in their discoveries chiefly carri∣ed on by those Mystical Prophesies of those two beloved Servants of God and Christ, the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle John, but chiefly by the last, to whom these hidden secrets of God respecting those times, wore particularly (as we shewed) commisted, to open Danichs sealed Mysteries, to Ch. 19. and from thence to the end the most anti∣ent Predictions and Promises, &c. when God would raise unto David that righteous Branch, that King that shall reign and prosper, and exe∣cute Judgment and Justice in the earth, in whose days Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely, Jer. 23.5, 6. when they shall have the Mercies promised to their Forefathers performed to them, as Ze∣chary
is taught Divinely to sing out, and in such a manner he would grant unto them, that being delivered from the hand of their ene∣mies they might serve God without fear of them in righteousness and true holiness all the days of then lives, Luke 1.7, &c. which will be the stability of all the happiness of that state, when that New Kingdom of Israel will be restored, the Tabernacle of David that was fullen new raised up again, for that said righteous Branch, which God then said he would then raise unto David; for whom with his Bride God will then make New Heavens and a new earth in that new world to come, wherein shall be that New great, holy, and beloved Jerusalem, that City that hath foundations whose Ma∣ker and Builder is God: for those new Inhabitants that came from God out of Heaven, and came with Christ to receive their spiritual bodies at the first blessed Resurrection of the Saints, where also will be the New Paradise of God: Also the converted Jews and Israe∣lites shall then enjoy their New Jerusalem also, built upon its own heaps, when strangers shall build her Walls, as the Prophet fore∣tels; upon the return of the Shulamite, who instead of Fathers shall have Children whom she may make Princes in all the earth; being the Seed then which the Lord hath blessed, Esai. 61.9. then shall be her new guides and watchmen upon her Walls (probably the new raised Saints) that shall not hold their peace day nor night: new dispensations, new peace, plenty, security, new priviledges, new pleasures & delights in heavenly visions, comunion, discoveries in the revelation of such things as are appointed then to be known, & in the restitution of all things promised then to be done, as in the forenamed particulars we before set down, and the times of these things are chiefly made known in their fit latitudes by Revelation-prophesie: for when we read of the coming of Christ; at his appearance and Kingdom, the times thereof are so set forth (as was shewed) by Re∣velation-prophesie. We read of the Saints first bodily Resurrecti∣on, but the time thereof is only deciphered by Revelation Pro∣phesie; we heard of raising Davids Tabernacle which was fallen, but the time is only pointed out by Revelation prophesie, and that the Saints shall receive their sure mercies of David, Esa 55.3. but when, can only be resolved by Revelation prophesie: we read of Gods setting up the Kingdom of the Stone that should destroy all others, and it self become a Mountain filling the whole earth, but the times and order of his carrying on these great works by Jesus Christ, is in the fittest proportion made known to the Church by Re∣velation-prophesie.
The Lord said to Davids Lord, Sit at my right hand until I make thy foes thy footstool, which he hath long expected, Heb. 10.13. and the Heavens must receive him till the times of the Restitution of all things: but the best resolution of both is to be had from Revelation-prophesie: Glorious things are spoken (saith the Psalmist) of the City of God, of the new, the holy, the great, the beloved Jerusalem; but what, and when, and where, and for whom we are chiefly informed from Revelation-prophesie. We read of the ruine of Gog and Magog the Churches greatest enemies before that City Jehovah Shammah shall be set up, but when it shall be, we chiefly learn from Daniel and Revelation-prophesie. Object. But did not Christ reprehend his Disciples, Acts 1.6. for in∣quiring the time of his Kingdom, &c. Ans. Though this and such like hath been sufficiently answered; yet know it is only whilst God keeps such things in his own power:and in the next Verse he said, But ye shall be indued with power, which was done about ten days after at the Feast of Pentecost, and all that wrote after speak something thereof, but chiefly the beloved John. And though Christ as man, then said, he knew not the day and hour of his coming; which none now pretend to, yet in a fit lati∣tude Christ hath revealed the near approach thereof, with many things to be done before, very useful for the Church to know, and wherein all Saints are greatly concerned; which are great mercies in many respects to be known and believed in these later days, for which there is great cause of thanksgiving, but no reason of cavil∣ling with our mercies or the goodness of the Author of them. Thus for the Doctrinal part of this Text, wherein we have consi∣dered this most gracious Divine Declaration of the set time of such its performance, with the glorious illustrations and confirmations thereof, and shewed from Scripture wherein it doth consist, and the many decipherings of the times of the renovation of all things, with Scripture evidences accordingly referring thereunto, both manifest∣ing the thing, and shewing in a latitude the near approach there∣of: We shall now by Gods gracious assistance endeavour to make some pertinent improvement thereof. 1. We may hence be informed of the many mistakes that have been both of this Text and the Context thereof, as respecting the matter, time and place thereof; the matter, not the making new these visible
Heavens and earth, but the Prophetical Heavens and earth, as we have shewed. For the time, not after the last Resurrection and Judgment, but in the interim, betwixt the first and last, wherein the anciently de∣clared and promised mercies are to be performed to the faithful Fa∣thers and their spiritual Seed, through the Promised Seed of the Wo∣man alone without man, the Mighty One to save, which God hath laid help on for that purpose, Psal. 89.19. Thirdly, for the Place, not in the highest Heavens, for that time (during the Judgment of the Great Day) but in the world until Christs Kingly Office and Business fore-prophesied of in the Word be there sulfilled, in destroying or removing the causes of evil in the world, viz. wicked men and Devils out of it, with their evil effects by sin; namely, the curse, bodage, corruption, emnity brought upon the Creatures therein, under which both men and other Creatures have long  do groan; and accomplished all that promised good appoved for that time and state in the parts of that great restaura∣tion and renovation, respecting both the raised Saints and those in the ural life, according to Predictions and promised Mercies be∣longing to both sorts then, &c. which are all most surely confirmed Doctrines to be true and faithful by him that is said to sit upon the Throne in this Text, and all as belonging to the Davidical Kingdom of Christ; into the possession whereof the raised Saints are brought by the first blessed bodily Resurrection as their Inlet thereinto. Secondly, This may inform Christians, first, of the Divine excel∣lencie of this Book. 2. Of the incomparable usefulness thereof, in those many great respects of the Saints great concernments in that time and state, leading them into and securing also unto them their eternal happiness in the highest Heavens, upon the compleating thereof: and thirdly, thereupon of the great Reasons they have to stir them up to the frequent reading, diligent study, and profitable improvement of the matters set before them by God and Christ therein. First, the excellencie thereof appears from the Author of it, and the manner of delivering it for the benefit and information of the Christian Church; God the Father gives it to the Son, and he to the beloved Apostle John, when he was in the Spirit on the Lords Day in time of his banishment for the word of God and the Testimony of Jesus to be sent unto the Churches, being also for that end sent and signified by his Angel, Chap. 1.1.
Secondly, It was given with wonderful great solemnity in respect of things then to come, to the end of the world, Chap. 4. and 5. God the Father as sitting upon his Throne, the Church represented by the 24 Elders, and four living Wights about him, representing all faith∣ful Christians and Church-guides, with whom is the Lamb and the seven Spirits ever present: and when none could be found in Hea∣ven or earth worthy to look into that Book, or open the Seals thereof, it was given to the Lamb to open and fulfil, who by his infinite wisdom and perfect power hath, and doth, and in due time will both perfectly open and fulfil the same, in the set order for the accomplishment thereof, which will bring unexpressible rejoycing and praise by Angels, Saints, and all Creatures in their capacities thereupon, &c. Chap. 5.10. to the end. Thirdly, The matter is profound and contains highly profitable Mysteries: the form is very excellent, in a wonderful Divine contri∣vance, as in some small measure we have pointed out, as we have in Mercy received, &c. Secondly, for the usefulness; it gives encouragement in the worst times of sufferings, from many memorandums of Christs Kingdom for the suffering Saints, and of the New Jerusalem-state observable in all these times, as in our 7th Argum. of the Word written is shewed. Secondly, Useful in opening the hidden Mystical part of the Gospel, and the great Subjects of the last things respecting the first and second said Resurrection of the bodies of just and unjust in their orders, and of the first and second Acts of the Judgment of the great Day, contained in general in Enochs Vision or Prophesie, and in many things explained by Christ and his Apostles, but in ma∣ny other could not be understood without this Book, therefore cal∣led the Book of Revelation with an Emphasis, as the whole holy Scriptures, called the Bible, and the name of Christ is added to it, being the Revelation that only could be made by Jesus Christ the Son of God, the eternal word, but as manifest in the flesh: there∣fore much is to be looked for from it, not to be attained by any other Writings, nor many things in the Holy Bible understood aright without the explications of this most Divine Book, &c. And therefore in the third place, hence may all serious and found Christians see what great Reasons there are for them to use all careful endeavours to understand the weighty matters held out and revealed therein, they are not secret things, forbidden, as some in the Old times, when men might not look into the Ark of Gods Testament, nor things shut up and sealed, as many of Daniels Mysteries that were
reserved for Christ thus to open in the times of the end, or Gos∣pel-times, but they are of things whereunto a blessing is annexed to the due reading and search into them; and therefore the belo∣ved Apostle is commanded contrarily not to seal them, Chap. 22.10. This Book with Daniels Prophetical Visions (the hidden part whereof this in good measure is a Divine explication, viz. du∣ring the Revelation said suffering-times, to the 19th Chapter, and they are both together given to regulate all Chronologie in the world for 2300 years and more, to the end of this sacred Book: without which little truth in all times since in that respect could have been found or discerned by all humane Authors; so that all Prophetical Chronologie by the Revelation of God the Spirit is given in them both for so long a time, viz. from the Captivity of Babylon to the end of the world; even as Moses had likewise received his Divinely re∣vealed Chronelogy of all times past to and in his own time for the space about 2490 years, when there was nothing but Tradition to have supplied that want, which was after in the Books of Joshua, Judges, Kings, and Chronicles contiued upon record until the said Prophetical Chronology of Daniel and Revelation took place, which have been since Divinely carried on, and so will be (as was said) un∣to the end of the world, and because Moses and many of those that followed had likewise (as the Apostle Peter teaches) distinct Prophesies of those last times in the Book of Revelation, therefore God in won∣derful wisdom, faithfulness and goodness hath in that last Table of of the happy times of Christs Church in the world, revealed unto us those sure foundations of such unspeakable goodness, then to be per∣formed and accomplished, not otherwise to be known or believed in many respects, which are the peculiar excellencies belonging to and benesits accrewing to the Christian Church, by this so Divine Book; and are not these great engagements to the study of the same? In this Divine Book we have the revelation in a latitude of the end of two special great Mysteries, viz. the end of the great Myste∣ry Babylon, and of the great Mystery of her iniquity, and the fi∣nishing the great Mystery of God, bringing in the Revelation of all things, as we shewed, as well as the Restitution of all things spoken of in the Text; which because they are both matters of great and uni∣versal concernment of the Saints, are earnestly to be enquired into; and for the difficulties that may appear in such endeavour, serious and judicious Christians may by such conscientious endeavours in the use of good means find them much removed, especially by the help
of Christs Divine Key in our late Tract on Rev. 20.5. and in this on Chap. 21.5. and as for the bad times to Chap. 20. though things respecting them were at first much more darkly delivered, yet by the long continued endeavours of many Ages past, and by the experi∣mental accomplishments already of most things therein contained, much light is now given to them: But now Christians ordinarily need not trouble themselves much in respect of those bad times of the man of sin, because upon all accounts they are now almost expired, whether we respect the Seal, Prophesie, holding out the ruine of the Roman Civil State, or the Book Prophesie, pointing out the like of the Ecclesiastical State, or the Table of suffering times, Rev. 11. re∣lating to them both, containing about 1700 years (as was before shewed) and fitly in a latitude concur with the two former Mystical Numbers in Daniel, leading in the same until Israels great Restaura∣tion, viz. first that of Dan. 8. ver. 17, 19, 26. of 2300 years, from the Captivity of Babylon to Christs appearance, leading to the end of 1700 years since Christs birth: the second of the Jews and Gentiles blessed times, Dan. 12.12. to be 1335 years after the last taking a∣way of Sacrifice (very probably in Julian the Apostate Emperors time, about Ann. Dom. 365.) unto which if we add 1335 it makes up the full number of 1700 years ending at the same period, only we must remember some error (as was said) is found in our ordinary account from Christs Nativity: yet in a latitude they all concur and agree: whence the ending number of the Beasts 666 years, to which the whole number of 1000 being added, (as is usually understood by many Nations:) so making up 1666 years from Christs Ascen∣tion, not from his Birth, to about the end of the said 1700 by vulgar account, when (probably) as the Apostle saith, he will destroy the man of Sin with the appearance of his coming, 2 Thes. 2.8. and that Epoca of his Ascention which we also twice published Ann. Dom. 1665. first in our Parallels, pag. 37. Secondly in the large Note on Rev. 22.20. page 10. seems also more congruous than of Christs Nativity, that as he had at his ascending powerful and glorious Victory and Triumphs over the spiritual powers of darkness, as Col. 3.15. so at the end of that date upon his descending again, he should have a Visible and glorious Conquest over all his visible soes, by making them his foot∣stool: (when that man of Sin especially is to be destroyed) when he will take to himself his great power and reign in the world, Rev. 19. Now by such computation of the said suffering times of the Church, to Chap. 20. an apt way is offered to apply the Table of
them to both Schemes of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Roman-state, & of the true Churches condition under the 2 last Heads of Govern∣ment therein, namely, under Emperors and the Papacie. Now for the manifesting that the chief intent of that number of the Beast 666. Ch. 13. is to decipher in a Divine mystical way the ending term of his date we shall further by Gods assistance add some other weighty conside∣rations [yet withal acknowledging the divers usefulness of other con∣jectures upon several distinct accounts] as by  of old, where∣in the said number was found, may fitly be pointed out the Country of the Beast, whose Language, and Laws, and Liturgy, and even whole Religion are Latin, formerly also called the Latin Church, and his Country Latium, &c. which fitly agrees to him in that respect. Also 666, for so many Popish Errors (as Mr. Durham intimates) may point out to us the grosness of his Mystery of Iniquity, being a long continued source of multiplied heresies, seducements, and er∣rors through the course of many hundreds of years, against which Christs two sackcloth witnesses have all along born their Testimony, even till his measure is almost full. And for Dr. Potters late Arithmetical observation, setting forth the opposition of the Root of 666, which is 25. and much observable in the Beasts concerns, to the root of 144000 of Christs sealed ones, being after to be the New Jerusalem-inhabitants both in the East, Chap. 7. and in the West, Chap. 14. whereof the root is 12. by which their concerns are deciphered also, &c. And so by many other Notations of the name or number of the Beast in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, many observable things answe∣rable to the diversity of mens enquiries have been found out; as Romagnosh, denoting the place of his Seat, at Rome; , noting the glory of his state, like the Sun above the Stars, &c. as his flat∣terers would have it; and even near blasphemy spake one of them, Paulo Quinto Vice Deo, setting him in Gods stead; but to pass by many others like mentioned by Mr. Bernard in his Key of Know∣ledge, and by others; let us now offer our considerations, whereup∣it may appear that the chief intent of the said number 666, is to set forth the end of the said Beasts date. Though in respect of some of the other, the wisdom, power and providence of God may appear in setting forth and fulfilling, upon such considerable accounts what concerns such a manifold Monster in iniquity as he is described Dan. 7.24, 25. thereby not only prevailing against three Kings or Kingdoms, but also in daring to speak great words against the most
High, by his strange Heresies and Blasphemies (as may be seen in in our Abridgment of Daniel on that Verse) and think to change times and Laws, and persecute the Saints of the most High, for his time, times, and dividing of a time, till Christs appearance, Dan. 12.1, 7. when he shall be destroyed, 2 Thes. 2.8. But (I say) that the chief intent of the said number of the Beast 666. is to set forth the said time of his end, these further reasons induce me to believe, besides what we said before. First, we have the like in Dan. 5.26. at the end of the Caldean Monarchy at Belshazzers death, God hath numbred thy Kingdom and finished it, viz. for 70 years, foretold, Jer. 25, &c. Even as Dan. 12.7. the Beasts date was explained to be a time, times, and a dividing of a time. 2. The Epocha or beginning of his 1335 years, Chap 12.12. re∣ferring to the times of the end, when such as were faithful should be blessed, were to take their beginning from the third and last most ef∣fectual taking away of Sacrifice (most probably in Julian the Apo∣state Emperors time, by a remarkable hand of God, about 365 years after Christs birth) unto which 1335 years being added, makes up 1700, viz. all the times of Revelation prophesie, to Ch 20. (which the former 2300, Dan. 8. also wholly contain) but what dark∣ness there hath been from Julians said time and before is hard to resolve by reason of like confusions before and since, and what er∣rors may be in our vulgar account may not easily be found; four years Bishop Ʋsher observes to be lost in it, happily more, since it was (as is acknowledged) 500 years after Christs birth, before it came in common use. Thirdly, The Turks said day, and hour, and month, and year, Rev. 9. or his 396 years are not so exact as that we can certainly re∣solve whether the Ottoman family obtained the full power some few years before, or some few years after 1300, who having the latest E∣pocha of all the rest by much, should therefore seem more easie to be resolved, but for the like reasons still some darkness remains therein; but counting his 396 years back (as was before said) may so bring us nearest (probably) to his truest Epocha. The said Beasts rising at one hour with the said ten crowned Horns, Rev. 17.9, 12. being as we said, in times of great confusions, likewise when the Empire in the West was so broken by the Barbarous Nations, that the Writers of such affairs then or after must needs speak of them more uncertainly, a latitude therefore of conjecture must needs in
reason be allowed, (especially besides former considerations, that that one hour Rev. 12. may be an opportune season (as was said) and not a Prophetical hour when the stories of such are differently penned for such times and things as often they are, &c.) but Divine wisdom from the Scripture, such as in Daniels said Numbers with  Pauls Doctrine seem to be for that purpose the Divine directions, as the Holy Spirit informs us is needful as such true wisdom to direct us in an especial manner in these above all the rest, viz. to discover both the Beasts beginning and ending; which we may only expect to find in a convenient latitude, but not to be exact therein, which God is pleased to keep only in his own power, as Acts 1.6. yet it is Christians duty to inquire after them, and much light and benefit comes to themselves and others by so doing, &c. and if by his said date of his ending number about 1700, we count his 42 months backward upon the former ground and considerations, our conje∣cture may be so made (most fitly as we conceive) of his Epocha, and the said Womans, &c. to be about 430, but the exact time we can∣not thereby know; and so the Period of both (haply) may be about 20 years hence, in a fit latitude from An. Dom. 1675. upon all former said considerations whereunto succeed the happy times of renovati∣on there spoken of in this Text: yet Chapt. 18. and 19. declare the burning of the Whore to be some small time before the last ruine of the Beast, which in Chapt. 16. is for his preparation (probably up∣on this account) to the Armageddon battle by his three unclean spi∣rits like frogs (as we shewed) croaking in the Courts of Kings. Ʋse of Exhortation. We shall not here be large in the improve∣ment of this Subject, because of what we have formerly done up∣on Doctrines of this nature in our former Treatises, only we shall add some brief admonition and exhortation to all such as the Name of Christ is called upon; that upon this weighty account that the great changes of the world, are so many ways manifest to be near ap∣proaching; first, that as the Prophet Esai, Chapt. 1. exhorted sinful men in his time, that they would cease to do evil, and learn to do well. And therefore 2ly, to labour to be good, that they may be fit both to do good accepably & receive good infallibly. Let all prophane wicked, carnal, worldly, and unregendrate men be hence admonish∣ed to forsake their evil, licentious, and ungodly practises, let them from the ruionous state of this wicked world be think themselves what precipices of destruction they walk upon, from whence they
are every moment in danger to fall into an irrecoverable ruine; and if they should not otherwise be cut off, yet who knows how sudden∣ly the great Changes of the world may come upon them; let them well weigh for times past, what good they have gotten in the ways of sin, whereby they have long (happly) provoked God already, and for which much guilt lies upon their Souls and Consci∣ences, and for which they are liable to the heavy wrath and Judg∣ments of God continually to seize upon them; besides (as we said) all wickedness will shortly have an end, and what good can the sin∣ful profits, pleasures, or honours of the world do them, if they had the longest continuance that this world can afford them (I say) sinful profits, pleasures, or honour, if either sinfully obtained, or not right∣ly used, or wickedly abused to evil purposes, as for the most part they are by such persons. But secondly, it is not enough for such to cease to do evil, which yet will be hard for them to do; for so long as they are evil Trees, they will bring forth evil fruits, and must needs be nigh to cursing whose end is to be burned, as Gods word plainly  also learn to do well, and that speedily too, lest the evil  come upon them unawares, which cannot be far  Chan∣ges in the world, although they be not  be∣fore, from which they can have no security,  their sinful ways, have rather much reason continually to expect; for in∣dignation and wrath (saith the Apostle) tribulation and anguish shall be upon every Soul of man that doth evil, Rom. 2.8, 9. And therefore in the third place that they may rightly learn these two Lessons, to cease to do evil, and learn to do well, they must add the third, viz. labour earnestly to be good, that they may do good, and consequently be made capable to receive good; they must be made good Trees that they may bring forth good fruit, they must get Faith and Grace and become new Creatures, else all will come to no effect: men may out of some fear of wrath be sometime in a pang, and so be restrained from some evil practises, and be also forced to do some good works, materially good; but they will neither conti∣nue in well-doing, nor can they do any such good works as are ac∣ceptable unto God, if they be not converted unto him from their sins, and be reconciled to him by faith in Jesus Christ. Object. But Faith and Grace are Gods gifts, it will be said, and they cannot of themselves obtain teem.
It is true they are so, but such should now, especially now, even now in these last and worst times know if they have them nor; and be con∣vinced of the necessity of them; they should seriously consider that they are therefore by this exhortation specially called the more ear∣nestly to labour to obtain them whilst God is pleased to afford them a little time and opportunity for that purpose, such should consider now God and Christ call them to Faith and Grace, therefore to day, whilst it is called to day let them hear his voice, and take need they be not longer hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, nor follow any longer their own ways, or the evil example of the wicked world, but wait upon Gods call, use his means to obtain his Grace, hear, read, meditate, pray, inquire the way to Sion, and walk there∣in; let such give ear to no discouragements that might divert them, and flight not any Scripture-encouragement that God doth or may afford them. Wisdom cryes, and utters her voice in the streets, under∣stand ye simple, &c. This Wisdom is Christ Jesus, that came to save sinners; and it is life eternal to believe in him whom the Father hath sent: Go unto him, O sinner, as the true and able Physitian of thy Soul, to cure thee: he never sends away Souls rightly sensible of their misery without help and cure if they continue to wait upon him in the use of due means, such he will by no means cast out, as he himself as∣sures with a double asseveration, John 6.37. this time how short soe∣ver it be, is yet a time of Grace; improve it therefore well whilst thou hast it, for it cannot be recalled nor any way purchased when it is past; what would lost Souls give (if they had where withal to do it) to obtain thy present opportunity, &c. But if thy lusts are more prevalent with thee that thou art like the deaf Adder to these Calls of God, and thou rather hearkenest to the Calls of Sin and Sinners, of Satan and the wicked world; if thou dost with the scoffers of these last times deride all good admonitions and exhortations) as many now do, which is the special Character the Scripture gives of these last times) then take notice there is fiery in∣dignation coming out from God against all such shortly; and such as have drunk deep of the Cup of the Whore of Babylon, are chiefly intoxicated with this fronzie, by despising all true Reli∣gion and such as profess it, and casting reproaches and slanders, with bitter scoffs and mockings upon it and them, and even on Christ Jesus himself in so doing, whose peculiarly they both are; and since the Beast hath put such a real scoff and mockage upon all at once, by burning by his wicked Instruments of late, our Chief City upon a
falsly supposed 666.) though our warpings backward in places of Publique Worship in bestial Superstitions there may mind us (haply) of Gods Justice in permitting such a thing then & there so to be done by them) yet let the Beast and his followers know, that for that very reason that they have made such a mock of Christs real & most certain Prediction of the Beasts ruine at the end of his number 666. (so mistaken at that time by some from his Nativity) yet he & they shal most surely feel the force of that Prediction of the said Beasts ruine at Christ true 666. infallibly determined, and now shortly approach∣ing; as also the Scarlet Whore of Babylon will in her visition most cer∣tainly find before him, Rev. 18.6. for so runs Christs Commission to his Officers then, Reward her as she hath rewarded you, double her dou∣ble according to her works, in the Cup which she hath filled, fill to her don∣ble, for can it be conceived that Christ Jesus the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the Prince of all the Kings of the earth will suffer such an horrible affront to his Divine Majesty to pass unrevenged, or such a blasphemous scoff against his Divine Oracle to go scot-free; most certainly he will not, but Londons burnings will make Romes names more fierce and devouring when her day is fully come; and such actings may fitly for warn men that the burning of the Scarlet-Whore draws nigh, who may then look (as was shewed) that her Cup which she filled for others will then be doubly doubled unto her self, and that by Gods own Command, who hath aforehand ingaged his All mighty power in that work, and to shew himself strong in judging that Whore, Rev. 18.8. for he will in an especial manner put forth his Almighty power in execution of his Sentence upon her: Read Gods Commentary of her Ruine in that whole 18th Chapter; therefore they must carefully avoid her sins of spiritual and corporal fornication, cruelty, lying, slandering, reproaching, and scoffing at the ways of God, with all other her abominations and seducements, and even blaspheming Gods Name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, Ch. 13. that would escape her plagues; the great Judg that will give also the body of the Beast to the burning flame, hath his Throne fiery, and Wheels as burning fire, and a fiery stream issued and came from before him, to that purpose Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. and when the Lord will give his people rest, 2 Thes. 1.7. is it not chiefly against the Man of Sin that Christ will then be revealed from Hea∣ven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire taking, vengeance on such as obey not the Gospel; and who is especially, particularly, and ex∣actly deciphered Chap. 214. to sit in the Temple of God as God, &c.
and the time of such his destruction also is set down. ver. 8. to be at the appearance of Christs coming, which upon many Scripture grounds we have made manifest now to be near approaching, when God will arise in his Glory to shake terribly the earth, Esa. 2.17, 19. & what joy will be to all Saints at that day, we shewed from Chap. 19. O what an excellent designe would it now be for Princes and People and all sorts of Persons in the Church to promote the Whores bur∣ning and Beasts ruine. The Pulpit and Press here have long been improved by many zealous and faithful Servants of Jesus Christ for many Ages past by preaching, praying, and printing, to detect such wicked enemies, to search out and foretel their ruine; and now that it is so near approaching, it may encourage all faithful Christians prayers for the hastening thereof, not but that Gods set time will stand, but when such a spirit of Prayer is stirred up in them from such encouragement that this time draws near, it is not only a good signe of such approach of her ruine, but will prove like the battering Rams of old, or the Constantinopolitan Cannons of great force to batter Babylons Walls, &c. and let such as look upon the filthiness of that Mother of Abominations prepare aforehand their Songs of Triumph over her at her desolation: Christ will have such Songs sung in the New Heavens, Rev. 20.18. and let the old Mystical Heavens prepare aforehand to bear their part in those Divine Halelujahs like∣wise. And it may not be unseasonable even for Poets and Painters, Pi∣cture-drawers and Printers upon such apprehensions with a Christian sobriety and seriousness to prepare materials for the solemnity of that approaching funerals of the infamous Harlot, great My∣stery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the whole earth, Rev. 17.5. next to take place before the Beasts final destruction come upon him. Let them therefore that would be free from sharing in their hastening destruction hasten speedily to flee from sharing in their enormous sins and great provocations. FINIS.
ERRATA. IN the Contents, add, 2ly, privatively, 3ly, positively, r. pursuite, read, all. Page 7. line 25. r. their. p. 9. l. 11. r. shares in. p. 10. l. 21. add, the. p. 12. l. 15. add, with temporal. p. 14. l. last, , not, ita. p. 15. l. 10. r. at that coming. p. 19. l. 22. r. and the answers. p. 18. line 8. read, pag. 20. at. l. 24. & p. 31. l. 19. to. l. 26. but chiefly. p. 38. l. 11. to l. 27 p. 27 l. 17. r. Al∣mans. p. 28. l. 24. r. representatives say. p. 29. l. 2. r. of not or. p 30. l. last, r. 7000. p. 34. l. 29. r. 40. years. p. 41. l. 30. add, will be made. p. 45. l. 30. r. in 6 days finished. p. 63. l. 20. r. truth. p. 55. l. 20. add shall be made . l. 22. dle, shall be made. p. 75. l. 28. . Reader: THe other Parts serving, First, for Explication: Second∣ly, for Confirmation: Thirdly, for Illustration, &c. of these two last Tracts, which (with our Key contain the Scope and Sum of all, &c.) may be had at the Crane in St. Pauls Churchyard, or from the Author, for about 250. now only remaining perfect.
