S531 12069035 53475
A TESTIMONY Unto the TRUTH, AND A Warning unto the World IN GENERAL, But more particularly to the Inhabitants of Enoder parish in Cornwall. By one whom God hath called out to bear witness of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, called by the Name of RICHARD SAMBLE. Printed in the Year, 1676.
TO THE READER READER, THou art desired to be considerate when thou read∣est this following Book, and to be very ponderous in thy Mind, as touching the things therein contained, that thy Understanding may be opened by the invisible God, who giveth unto us Life, Breath and Being; and also, that thou wouldst lay to Heart this ve∣ry Thing, How that Almighty God hath risen in ma∣ny Ages of the World, in his Judgments and Fury, to stain the Glory of all Flesh, and to set up Righte∣ousness in the Earth, and hath caused his Truth to spring and flourish amongst his People, under every Dispensation, until they departed from the Lord, and served other Gods, and followed their own Inventi∣ons, and then Darkness came over them, and so their Hearts were hardened from his Fear, Prov. 1.29, 30. And this thou art also to consider, That Sin hath been the very Cause of Man's Destruction from Ge∣neration to Generation, and therefore if thou dye in thy Sins, thou art like to have no part amongst the Living in the Kingdom of Christ; but the same will be thy Portion that hath been the portion of the
Wicked in all Ages, which is perpetual Sorrow, Di∣stress and Anguish for evermore. And this consider also, That whatever thou dost profess, or what Shew of Religion soever thou mayest make, whilst thy sins remain, I am to tell thee, and that in the Name of Christ Jesus, Thou art not accepted of God, but all thy Prayers are an Abomination to the Lord, Ezek. 8.17, 18. Isa. 1.15. because thou art in the Transgres∣sion in that which the pure God of Glory hateth, and upon which he will pour out his Fury and Indignati∣on for evermore; and if thou art one that lives in Pleasure, & thy daily Satisfaction is in following these Evil Devices, that are very common amongst men in this Generation, to wit, Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, or other Prophane Practices, and that which is called Pastime, or sporting thy self amongst such as count it Pleasure to Riot in the day time, Jam. 5.5, 6. know this, that all these things will be a Hindrance to thy eternal Well-fare; for such as do such things, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And also thou art to consider, That there hath been a Night of gross Darkness over the Hearts of the Chil∣dren of men, since the Apostles dayes; and that Sa∣ving Grace, which was common in that Generation, people have lost in the Night, and are become dry and barren, as a Desert or Wilderness, as relating to Matters of Spiritual Concerns, wherein consists the Stability of their Souls Peace with God. And this also I am to tell thee, That God, who is unchangeable, and immortal, hath revealed his blessed Truth again, and the Gospel of his blessed Kingdom is now prea∣ched
to the Nations; and if ever thou comest to God's Kingdom, thou must come to know him that is the Everlasting Teacher (to wit) Christ Jesus, and him to know in thy own Particular, who is the Man of God's Right Hand, a quickening Spirit the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.45. and so thou wilt come out of thy lost Condition, wherein thou art in the Fall, in the first Man Adam, into the Life of Holiness and Righteousness, into the Restoration by Christ Jesus, the second Adam, the Heavenly Man. And this know also, That thou canst not come to him by any other way, but as thou comest into Self denyal, and belie∣vest in thy Heart the Record that God hath given of his Son, which is the true Light, that shines within thee, and lets thee see thy Sins. And farther, That as sin hath been the very Cause of Man's Separation from the Lord; yet when thou shalt return again, and come to know a Godly Sorrow in the Secret of thy Heart, and when thou shalt feel in thy self a Tender∣ness, and a Broken-heartedness before the invisible God, who sees in secret, Mat. 6.6. he will grant thee Repentance unto Life; and he will return unto thee in his Everlasting Mercies, and blot out thy sins out of his Remembrance. And this also I am to tell thee, in the Fear of God, and in his Name, That as the Lord hath appeared in dayes past, and in Generations that are gone, in his Indignation, and hath smitten many Nations and Peoples in his Wrath, sometimes overturning the World by Water, and sometimes de∣stroying Cities and Peoples by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, Luke 17.29. Gen. 19.24, 25. and again by
Plagues & Pestilence, and at certain Seasons the Lord God (because of the Abominations of the Children of Men) hath visited them in his Wrath and hot Dis∣pleasure, and greatly afflicted them; and the End of the Lord hath been, that such as remain upon the Earth might fear before him, and dread his great Name, who is Mighty, and none can escape him: And people in these last dayes and times have greatly grieved the Lord, and therefore except they Repent, his Fury will he pour forth upon them, until that which is in his Heart be accomplished, and they shall not escape his heavy Hand. And so Reader, whoever thou art, that reads these fol∣lowing Lines, the Desire of my Soul is, that thou mayest be impartial concerning me, and conclude in thy Mind, that its written in tender Love to thy Soul, and so thou wilt see my honest Intent, who am a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, desiring thy Eternal Well-fare when this Time and Day of thine is at an End. I rest Thy Friend and Well-Wisher, RICHARD SAMBLE.
A TESTIMONY UNTO THE TRUTH, &c. IN the deep Consideration of the States and Conditions of the Sons and Daughters of men in the Fall, and see∣ing how the World lies in the Extremity of Wickedness, being overcome by the Old Serpent, called the Devil and Sa∣tan, who hath tyed and bound them with his Chains of Sin (who is the Author of all Sin) I am drawn in Spirit to warn them to Repentance, and to declare to the World the Way that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth hath ordained, which is Christ Jesus, who is Everlasting, and was with the Father before the World began, John 17.5. who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. by whom my Soul hath been redeemed, and who raised me up out of Sin; and therefore, having ob∣tained Mercy through the Love of God in Christ Jesus, whom he hath sent a Light into the World, and I having known in measure the Judgments of the Lord, and the Terrors of the Almighty because of my Transgressions, therefore cannot but perswade men to turn from Ungodliness, even all people that lie in Wickedness, knowing assuredly, that all People shall be called to an Account before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, there to give an Account for the Deeds done in the Body, 2 Cor. 5.10. and such as have done well, shall receive a Crown of Life and Peace with God forever; and they that have done Evil, shall go into Everlasting Punishment, Mat. 25.46. And therefore, as you have been Transgressors against God, and Strangers to the
Life of Holiness, it is upon my Spirit from the Lord God to warn you speedily, to turn every one from the Evil of your Wayes, that out of Darkness you all may come, and out of Ignorance and Blindness, unto Christ Jesus, the true Way, that you may have Life, who said, I am come that you may have Life, and that you may have it more abundantly, John 10.10. And therefore turn unto him in your Hearts, whose Spiritual Appearance is inwardly, whom God hath sent a Light into the World, John 1.9. Now that all may come unto him, and believe in your Hearts the Lord Jesus, and be saved; for people have been in a great Mistake concerning the Faith that saves and overcomes the World; for the true Faith is the Gift of God, Ephes. 2.8. arising from the Word of Faith nigh in the Heart, Rom. 10.8. which Faith Christ is the Author of, and the Finisher also, Heb. 12.2. and without this Faith you can∣not please God, Hebr. 11.6. And so all People. read your States and Condition in the Light of Christ within you, which shews unto you what you are, and declares unto you your Thoughts, this is the Record which God hath given of his Son in the Earth, which is Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son, John 5.11. this reproves you in secret for sin; this is the Holy Spirit of Promise that was to come, whom the Prophets pro∣phesied of in the dayes of old, whom God hath given for a Lea∣der and a Commander of the People, Isa. 55.4. the Gentiles Light and Israel's Glory, Luke 2.32. and unto him you must turn, who stands at the Door of your Hearts and knocks, Revel. 3.20. who is come to destroy Sin in the Flesh; whose living Power was felt in the Hearts of many Thousands in dayes past, after his Resurrection, in the dayes of the Apostles, when he returned to his Glory that he had with the Father before the World was; who descended first into the lowest parts of the Earth, and ascended up far above all Heavens (Ephes. 4.9, 10.) that he might fill all things, whose Glory fills Heaven and Earth; neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all things are naked and open to the Eye of him with whom we have to do, Hebr. 4.13. who dyed for our Sins, and rose again for our Redemption and Justification, Rom. 4.25.
who appeared first to Mary Magdalen, and made her a Preacher of his Resurrection, Mat. 28.10. Mark 16.9. and then to his Disciples, before he ascended into Heavenly Glory: And when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive, und gave Gifts unto Men, Ephes. 4.8. And though he ap∣peared to his Disciples as they sate at Meat, yet he bad them wait for the Gift of the Spirit, when he asecended unto the Father, Luke 4.49. And so they were made Witnesses of his Resur∣rection, that he rose out of the Grave, and not only so, but that he was in Heavenly Glory, who came again, as he had foretold his Disciples, who said, Ye have heard how I said, I go away, and come again unto you, &c. John 14.28. And as the Apostle said, he was offered up once for all, and to every one that looks for him, will he appear the second time without Sin unto Salvation; and by his spiritual Appearance were many Thou∣sands gathered, and many were made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. And this Spirit of Grace taught them to deny all Ungod∣liness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly and righteously in this present World, Tit. 2.12. And this Grace of God that bringeth Salvation, hath appeared unto all men, Tit. 2.11. even to Jew and Gentile; the Grace of God, the pure Spirit of Christ, the Light of the Gentiles, unto which Light the Apostles were sent to turn the Heathen, that had no wrt∣ten Law in those Days; and from the Power of Satan unto God, Acts 28.8. Thus the Lord stretched forth his Everla∣sting Arm of Strength and Power in those Days, that People might be gathered unto him, and raised up by Christ Jesus, out of Death and spiritual Bondage; and those Preachers of the Glorious Gospel of God's Kingdom, travailed chearfully in the Lord's Work, and preached freely, as they had recei∣ved freely, Mat. 10.8. declaring both to Jew and Gentile that God hath raised his Son from the dead. Acts 2.24, 25. and that the Day of Joy and Glad tidings was come, wherein Deliverance from the wicked one was to be known, and Re∣demption from dead Works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. who waited for the Son from Heaven (mark that) you
that are Preachers in this Nation. The Apostles did not come to People with Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but directed them to the Light that was revealed from Heaven (to wit) the Son of God the Light of the World, Thes. 1.10. 1 Cor. 2.4. John 1.9. and if you turn not People to the Son of God the Light of the World, to wait for him inwardly, then ye are blinded and are in Darkness and preach another Gospel then Christ jesus, whom the Apostles did preach, Gal. 1.8. for Christ Jesussaid, Seek not the Kingdom in Observations; for behold, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, Luke 17.21. And Paul to the Romans saith, That which may be known of God, is manifest∣ed in them; for God hath shewed it unto them, Rom. 1.19. And the true Gospel is the Power of God, wherein the Righ∣teousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Rom. 1.16, 17. and the Light of this Glorious Gospel shines within, and if this glorious Gospel be hid, it is to them that are lost, in whom the God of this World hath blinded the Minds of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. And you that have not this Gospel take heed how you preach, lest you be found false Witnesses, runnning before the true Guide Christ Jesus, and professing God and Christ, and yet dead in Sin, all such Preach∣ers and Hearers that are not come to the Gospel within, to the Word of Eternal Life in their Hearts, 1 John 5.12. are out of the Truth, in the Fall, and so abiding in Death; for he that hath not the Son (who is the Truth) hath not Life; for this living Word within, was the Foundation of the Holy Prophets and Apostles, by which they were made alive; and this did divide between the good & bad, which Word is quick and powerful, and searcheth the Heart, and trieth the Reins, Heb. 4.12. Rev. 2.23. And it is the same to this Day as ever it was, yea, it lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. And the Primitive Cristians who were true Believers, their Faith did arise from this living Word, which came down from Heaven; And Wo be to such as turn away from him that speaks from Hea∣ven, Heb. 12.25. which is sent forth from God (to destroy the Works of the Devil) 1 John 3.8. Christ Jesus the Seed Immortal and Incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.23. that bruiseth the Head
of the Serpent, and by this Seed they were redeemed (in the Days of the Apostles) and brought forth and born of it, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible; and this Seed must be witnessed within, as in the Days of Old, to raise up Man∣kind out of the Fall inwardly, and to quicken to God by his Spirit that dwelleth in you, said the Apostle, Rom. 8.11. And this is the true Shepherd that laid down his Life for the Sheep, John 10.11. that gathers his Sheep from the Barren Moun∣tains, where they have been scattered in the cloudy dark Day, Ezek. 34.12. and brings out of the Wilderness and Solitary Ways, into a sure Dwelling, and a quiet Resting Place, Isa. 32.18. And this true Bishop of the Soul was known savingly in the primitive times, by all those that did return unto him, as the Apostle said, Ye were as Sheep going astray, but are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. And so by the Operation of his Spirit inwardly, People came to the Knowledge of God and Christ Jesus, whom God sent forth to save the World; and this is Life Eternal, as our Lord said in the Days of his Flesh, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent, John 17 3. And there is not another Way to Salvation, but as People come to know Christ revealed in them, as the Apostle said, Examine your selves, prove you own selves, what, know you not how that Christ Jesus is in you except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13 5. but in those Days this pure Way of Life was hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed to Babes and Sucklings (mark) such as were born again, regenerated and walked in the Way of Regeneration, those only knew the Mysteries of God's Kingdom; for it was revealed unto them by the Spirit, Rom. 2.10. But the wise Men who were outside Professors (yet Rebellious and Stiff necked, and a Gainsaying People) unto whom God stretched forth his Hand all the Day long, but they would not obey him, nor hearken to his Voice, Rom. 10.21. Acts 7.51. These knew not Christ in the Mystery, but cru∣cified him, though they were I rofessors and had a Zeal for the Traditions of their Fore-Fathers, yet I say the Workings of God's Spirit was a strange Thing unto them, for said the Apo∣stle,
We preach Christ in a Mystery, which none of the Princes of this World knew; for if they had known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of Life 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. And those holy Apostles and Servants of Christ, who preacht by the Spirit, even by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. they were hated, and persecuted, and set at nought, and esteemed as a Foolish and Ignorant People, as the off-scouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. And said the Apostle, God hath made foolish the Wisdom of this World. When the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 20.21. So those that were Enemies to God, and to the Appearance of his Son; they cast him (that is the true Heir) out of the Vin yard, and slew him, that the Inheri∣tance might be theirs, Mat. 21.38, 39. So read this ye pro∣fessing Christians, who are in the Rebellion against Christ's Appearance, who is now appeared in Spirit in these last Days, Glory to the Name of the Lord forever. And is not this it that you rebel against, even his Appearance in your Hearts, that breaks your Peace in the Transgression, and brings forth your Deeds which you have wickedly wrought in secret, to your Remembrance? And do you not love Darkness rather then Light because your Deeds are evil, John 3.19. And are you not in the same Transgression with those Jews who hated his Appearance in the Flesh? and are turned from Jesus Christ in your Hearts, and consulting together against him (who is the Light & Life of Men) how you may betray and overcome this true Principle of Eternal Life in your selves & others, that you may set up your selves, and live in your Pride and Lostiness, and all manner of Wickedness; and so in much Wantonness you pass and spend away your precious time, in Rioting and Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness which is for∣bidden, and will be eternally punished, James 5.5, 6. And so you live above the Cross of Christ Jesus, the Power of God in your own Hearts, which Cross said the Apostle, Crucisies the World unto me, and me unto the World: And so you are found Enemies to God, resisting the holy Ghost, as they that cast him out in Days past, and would not believe that it
was he: And said Christ Jesus, If ye believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your Sins, John 8.24. Acts 7.51. Ye shall seek me, but shall not find me; and whither I go, thither ye cannot come. So all People, believe that it is he that re∣proves you in secret, and obey him in your Hearts, lest you dye in your Sins, &c. for it is surely the same true Witness that in old time testified of the World, that the Works thereof are Evil, John 7.7. which is a sure Witness, that doth not alter, but is Unchangeable, with whom there is no Variableness, James 1.17. but if you rebel against him, who is the great Power of God, Christ Jesus, WO will be unto you for ever∣more. Therefore I warn you in God's holy Fear, and in the Autho∣rity of his Spirit, That you rebel no longer against God; for if ye continue in the Rebellion against him, Time will not bring End to your Misery, but you will go into Everlasting Punish∣ment, and so take heed to your wayes, lest ye be found with Ju∣das, betraying his Master; for Judas was a Professor of Christ, and yet apostatized: So ye professing Christians, take heed lest ye be found in the Treachery, dealing deceitfully against the Light of Christ Jesus in your Hearts, professing him with your Mouthes, and denying him in your Hearts, who is the Spirit of Truth, that reproves the World of Sin, Righteousness and of Judgment, Joh. 16.8. And therefore examine your selves, and try whether ye be in the true Faith; for there is but One Lord, One Faith and One Baptism, Ephes. 4.5. which is the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, the pure Spirit of Life, which baptizeth into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. (And so all other Faiths and Baptisms will come to an End) and this brings into true Love and Unity one with another: And this true Faith works by Love, Gal. 5.6. But in this dark Night of Apostacy, the World, that hath retained a Form of Godliness in the out∣side Profession of Christ hath been setting up Faiths and Forms of Worship, from the true Faith, and true Wor∣ship of God, which is in the Spirit, John 4.23. and out of the Power and Life (in the dark) out of the Light, where∣in
the Fellowship of the Saints stood in the dayes of old, 1 Joh. 1.7. And this Faith, that's of man's making and setting forth works not by Love, neither brings people into Unity and a holy Fellowship one with another; but people are brought under by Constraint, and by outward Force; and such as are in their Way zealous for their Worship, run into Per∣secution, and so the Ground is not good, the Heart is not changed, but the old Man of Sin remains; and this is far from the true Faith, that works by Love: and many times people, whose Hearts God hath touched, are compelled to go to such Worships against that which hath in some measure given them to see the Insufficiency of those Worships and Faiths that stand not in God's Power. And so people, you that are in any measure made tender in your Consciences, and are breathing inwardly for Delive∣rance (that you may witness Redemption to your Souls) and know not the true Way, and are many times afflicted inward∣ly, and accept not Faith to believe in yout Hearts on the Lord Jesus, Wait you in the Sense of that which begets the Brea∣things, and pens your Hearts for the Desire to spring forth, that desires after the Lord, and that will let you see the Way more and more, yea, the invisible Way of God, Christ Je∣sus, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. and then you will have Faith to believe that God will bring you forth out of the False Wayes of this World, into Peace with himself, and into Covenant with him, and so your Hearts will be changed, and you will come to witness inwardly the Law of the Spirit of Life written in your Hearts, and so then you will have no need to wander abroad, to seek Christ Jesus in the dark wayes of this World; but you will all know the VVay of his Appearance in your selves, and so you will be his People, and he will be your God, Hebr. 8.10. And this is the same Truth that was in the dayes of the Apostles, Christ, the true Foundation, that upheld all the true Christians in the former dayes, who were the true Church, in Covenant with God, joyn∣ed unto the Lord, and so were Heirs of God's Kingdom, yea,
joynt Heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17. Ephes. 2.20. and this was a true Church, that was in God, and in Christ Jesus, 1 Thes. 1.1. not an outside Profession only, but an inward Possession, a people that were risen with Christ, seeking the things that are above, where Christ sitteth at the Right Hand of God, Colloss. 3.1. So they had Heavenly Riches and Treasure, laid up in Heaven, that faileth not: And this true Church was the House of God, not an Outward House, builded with men's Hands, but a Spiritual House, a People made alive to God, by Christ Jesus, and so they were the Workmanship of God, Ephes. 2.10. 1 Pet. 2.5. But since the Apostacy came in, and people having gone a whoring from the Lord, they have not known this Mystery; but have been building High Places, and calling them Churches, and God's House, contrary to the Scriptures; and so People have lost the true Sense and saving Knowledge of Christ Jesus, though they have the Letter of the criptures, which tells us plainly, that the Bodies of the true Christians are God's Temples and his House, 1 Cor. 6.15, 19. And his Church is of his building, and of his raising up, who is the sure VVorkman, even Jesus Christ, that makes alive, and brings up Mankind unto God, out of the Fall; and of this Church he was and is the Head, who is worthy of more Honour then the House, which is his Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth, 1 Tim. 3.15. So Christ Jesus was in his House, in his Church, over which he ruled and was the Head; and he is in his Church to this day, and is the true Head, the true Guide and Leader of his People, that are quickned by him, and brought forth to Praise him, with one ongue and one Morth even as one Body And so all people, come to know Christ in you, as they that we read of in the Scriptures, Coll 26.27. for this is a Time wherein he is to be sound, if you seek to him berimes, and not sleight the Day of your Visitation; for the Visitation of the Almighty is come, and he hath caused the Day pring from on Pigh to visit us, Luke 1.78, 79. in which the Lord will bring to pass that which hath been of old in his Determination (viz) to set up Righteousness in the Earth; and this Day shall never have an End; it the
lasting Dispensation, that shall never more be vailed, Prov. 14.6. and blessed are all that come to the Knowledge of it; and in the first Breakings forth of it in the dayes of the Apostles, many Thousands were gathered to God; and that which was the Cause of its being vailed from man's Understanding was, because of the Unfaithfulness of such as did profess the Truth, whose Candlestick at last was removed out of its place, Rev. 2.5. and Darkness came over them, who retained a Form of Godliness, and lost the Power thereof, and these were the first that rebelled against the Spirit of Christ in the dayes of the Apostles, Acts 7.51. and so the Devil got the Posses∣sion of their Hearts, and sate in the Temple of God, shew∣ing himself that he is God, 2 Thess 2.4. Therefore, oh ye professing Christians! search your selves, let not the Devil rule in your Hearts, for all Unrighteousness is begotten in the Heart by the Devil, who is the Author of all Sin in the Heart, before it be committed; but turn to the Light of Christ with∣in, that convinceth your Consciences, and shews you the Be∣gettings of that false spirit, and so you will know Deliverance from the subtil Serpent, the Enemy of all Mankind: for it is high time to look about you, and consider whose Ser∣vants you are, and to whom you yield your selves Servants to obey, and whose Work you are doing, whether ye are obey∣ing Christ Jesus in the Spirit of Truth, that leads out of the World's Wayes, Fashions and Customs, into all Truth (John 14, 16, 17, 20,) and Righteousnes, that ye may know ye are his Sheep; for, My Sheep, saith he, hear my Voice, (John 10.11, 14.) and I lead them out, and they follow me, and ill give unto them Eternal Life, John 10.28. Or whether you are obeying the Devil, which is the Spirit of Error, which leads your Minds into the Wickedness which is in the World, out from God and Christ Jesus the true Light, into Darkness and Death, and so you are under the Bondage of Corruption, polluted with all manner of Uncleanness, and so in the Way to Everlasting Destruction, and as the Ground that bringeth forth Bryers and Thorns, which is nigh unto Cursing, whose End is to be burned; for his Servants you are to whom you yield
your selves to obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness, Rom. 6.16. for its not sufficient to say with your Mouthes and your Lips, We believe in God and Christ Jesus, while ye abide in the Transgression, and your Hearts far from him; and that he dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, and ye still live in the Nature of the Wicked One; this is the same as they in old time, who retained a Form of Godliness, and denyed the Power thereof, 2 Tim. 3.5. who were False Apostles, Deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and its no Marvel, said the Apostle, for Satan himself is transformed into an Argel of Light, and it's no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, whose End shall be according to their Works, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. And this was the great Deceit that entered into the Church, and began in the Days of the Apostles, when that false Spirit of Antichrist seduced those that were called Christians, I say such as were deceitful Professors of Christ Jesus in that Day, who turned aside after filthy Lucre into Balaam's VVay, and so loved this present VVorld, 2 Pet. 2.15. and these denyed the Immediate working of the Spirit of Christ, and so became Enemies to God, and unto the Cross of Christ, whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their Shame, who mind earthly things, said the Apostle, Phil. 3.19. and said Jude, Beloved you have heard before of the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, how that there should Mockers come in the last time, walking after their own ungodly Lusts, these be they said he, who separate themselves, Jude 18, 19. sensual not having the Spirit; and these were they that denyed the only Lord God, and our Lord jesus Christ savingly, under the Dispensation of the Gospel, who rebelled against the Spirit and Power of God in their Hearts; and these were corrupted & deceitful treacherous, Heady, High∣minded, Lovers of Pleasure more then Lovers of God 2 Tim. 3.3, 4. And thus the Devil (by his Insinnuations) brought in the Apostacy, and led People into the Rebellion against the Light and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so People have been bewildred, and greatly desolated since the Days of the Holy Apostles, Rev. 12.6. and VVanderers from Hill to Moun∣tain,
even from one dry Profession to another, in the Dark∣ness of Transgression, and so Ignorance hath abounded in the Kingdoms of men, and the general Doctrine hath Been denying the work of the Spirit of Christ within, and the Light not to be the Way, and so People are binded from time to time, and following the Spirit & Power of Darkness, who leads from God and Christ Jesus who is Light and Life (to the Souls that obey him) into Death and Sorrow, under the We and Indignation of Almighty God. Now consider ye that are denying the Working of the Spirit of God within you, and say, Revelati∣on is ceast. Oh that you would diligently weigh this thing in the just Ballance in your own Hearts! Is not this the denying of Christ? for God looks to the Heart, 1 Sam. 16.17. and not to the outward Appearance; and all that deny the Spirit of Christ within, they have broken Covenant with God, and are in Danger of Eternal Death, and so go a whoring after other Gods, and other Lovers, as the old apostate Jews, who turn∣ed aside into by Paths, and crooked Ways from the Way of Life, whose Services, Sacrifices and offerings, New moons and Sabbaths were all an Abomination to the Lord, Isa. 1.13. And so you that deny the work of the Spirit in your Hearts, your Service, Worships and Ordinances are not acceptable to the Lord, because Sin remains, the Sting of Death yet un∣taken away, you remaining in the Guilt dead in Trespasses and Sins, and so the Spirit of the VVicked One keeps the House, & hath the Possession in the Heart, who hath no right to reign in the Hearts of the Children of Men, therefore as the wicked Spirit hath reigned, which hath led you into Darkness, and possessed you with a Perswasion that Revelation is ceast, now examine and try your selves that he may be cast out, and your Hearts cleansed, and your Souls redeemed, that Christ may reign whose right it is, and so you will come to know the VVorking of God's Holy Spirit, the true Power, Christ Jesus, who is come to destroy Sin in the Flesh, Rom. 8.3. to the 11th. and as you yield your selves unto him inwardly, so the Change of the Mind you will come to witness, and your Affections, Desires and Inclinations will be redeemed out of the Earthly
corruptible things, and Vanities of the VVorld, into a Hea∣venly-mindedness; and so you will have Treasure in Heaven with the Lord, being delivered from the Power of Death and Darkness, which rules in the Hearts of the Children of Diso∣bedience, and so you will be true VVitnesses for God that he hath raised up his Son from the dead, who is become a quick∣ning Spirit, who works in the Hearts of all that obey him, and these are the true Christians this Day, who are redeemed by Christ Jesus to God, out of the Fall, out of the Death, that came by Sin, into the Life, that came by Christ Jesus who sin∣ned not, and so you will know in your selves the Truth and the VVay which is Holy, and no Defilement at all in it, which is the Light and Life of Men, Christ Jesus, John 1.4. for as∣suredly the Day, is dawned wherein God hath opened the VVay of Truth, which is not another, but the same as in old time, which is the VVay of Holiness, Isa. 2.3. & 35.8. And though this seems to be a strange thing to preach Christ Jesus in Spirit (this Day) who is the Light of the VVorld, as God hath sent him forth to enlighten every man that com∣eth into the VVorld, John 1.4, 9. yet we know to our Souls Comfort and Satisfaction, that he is come, whose Power and Dominion shall sway and bear Rule in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, until he hath utterly wasted that wick∣ed Nature in Man that rebels against him, and will not that he should reign, Luke 19.27. And though People have rebelled against him in this Night of Darkness, and the Clouds there∣of have shaddowed, vailed and darkned the Understandings of the Sons of Men, yet that shall not make void the Ancient Promise of God, who said, that the Knowledge of his Glory should fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14. neither shall it frustrate the Intention of the Lord, whole Determination hath been and is, to make an End of Sin, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. though the Enemy of the Souls of Men hath brought in a great and deep Mystery of iniquity under a Pretence of Religion in these latter Ages and Generations of the World, yet it's not that which must stand in the Earth, being polluted and defiled, nei∣ther
are such polluted Worshippers (who are bound with the Chain of Sin) accepted of God, who are placed in the Habi∣tations of Cruelty: And so the wicked One hath been posses∣sing the Minds, and Hearts of those who wander from God in their Imaginations, that Revelation is ceased; but though this Doctrine be preached, as though God would work no more in the Children of Men, I say it is not consistent with Truth, but is of the false Part in man that wanders from God, and therefore shall not hinder the Lord from breaking forth in this his Day, to redeem a People to himself for his own Glory, neither doth it hinder, or stop the Blessings of God unto his People, and redeemed ones, who wait to be sustained by him with the Bread of Life, but the Lord is at work in this his bles∣sed Day, wherein he hath sent forth a Saviour, even jesus who is revealed from Heaven; and your preaching against the Work of the Spirit of Christ within, will not be sufficient in the great Day of Account, to stop (but rather to hasten) the Eternal Judgment from being executed upon you, who are in the Deceivableness of Unrigteousness with them that perish, 2 Thes. 2.10. Oh that you would lay to Heart these things, & repent and live, while your Day lasteth, that you may come forth from all your Abominations, and believe the true Wit∣ness in your Consciences that records your Deeds, for which if ye repent not, you will suffer in time to come, and such as deny the Work of the Spirit within, are one with them that went out from the Apostles Fellowship, that stood in a rege∣nerated State, 1 John 1.7. who walkt in the Light, and had Fellowship with God, 1 John 1.3. And since the first turning from God, out of the Heavenly Light, how hath the Devil deceitfully wrought in the Kingdoms of this World? but bles∣sed for ever be the Name of our God, the true Light is come, that lets us see through the gross Darkness of this Night of Apostacy, wherein the Stars that have fallen from Heaven have been wandering in the Night of Darkness, having lost their Habitations, for whom the Blackness of Darkness is re∣served forever, Jude 13. And therefore you that have lost the Truth, and are yet in the Death, that came by Adams Trans∣gression,
you that have gotten the Name Christian, and lost the Power and Life of Christianity, unto you this opens in my Heart to write; if ever you be saved, you must come to that which was in the Beginning before the Apostacy entered, and before they denyed the work of the Spirit, even to the Word that God hath given of his only Son, which is the living Wit∣ness in you, testifying against your Evil Deeds; and so your Eyes will be opened to see the Death that hath reigned over Mankind since the Working of the Spirit of Christ hath been denyed; and also you will see the Work that God hath begun, and is doing in this his Day, who hath shewed forth his Strength in the Redemption of a little Remnant, who are true Worshipers, who worship the Father in the Spirit & in the Truth, John 4.23, 24. but if you hold to the Traditions of your Fathers, who deny Revelation, and so have set up your Reso∣lutions, not expecting the Spirit to be revealed in you, then I say, you cannot be saved; for without the Spirit man is dead to God, and Righteousness, and Holiness; and so without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. and this is the Gross Darkness that is over many this Day, who are set∣led upon their Lees, as Moab of old, not being emptied from Vessel to Vessel, Jer. 48.11. not knowing the Lord's Power in them to change their Hearts, and such have set themselves against the Spirit of Truth within, and cry out to People that Revelation is ceast, in such a Day as this wherein the Iniquity of many is even come to the full, and wherein God hath affor∣ded to Mankind a Day of Visitation that they may be saved. So in a general Sense, the Wise and Learned amongst men in the Apostacy, in their several Professions, are resting in some∣thing besides the Spirit, and so esteem the Profession without the Spirit, that first in the days of old the true Christins recei∣ved and obeyed, by which they were brought to profess Christ Jesus; and so their Profession and Worship was not only in a Form, but in the Power and Spirit of God, until the Deceiver entred, and then they retained the Form, and lost the Power, 2 Tim. 3 5. and now through the Disobedience of Mankind, and rebelling against the Power, they have undertook to gain∣say
and resist the Holy Ghost, even the Holy Spirit which i the true Leader to God's Kingdom, as did their Fore-Fathers, Acts 7.51, 52. Oh that you would return to God! Ye pro∣fessing People while you have a Day; for now is a time where∣in you may find the Lord, if you seek him early; for he hath said, They that seek him early shall find him, Isa. 55.6, 7. And now all such as deny the Revelation of Jesus Christ, they are seen to be in the Deceit, and in the old corruptible Way, as in the Days of old, in the broad Way that leads to Destructi∣on, Mat. 7.13. where no true Peace is, but men out of God's Counsel, running not being sent of God, and so profit not the People at all, Jer. 23.32. And now as one whom God hath raised up to proclaim his ancient Truth against all the Deceit that hath entered into the World in the Night of Dark∣ness, for the Sakes of such as have Desires after the Lord, this is written; for there are many, I do believe, that are amongst you, whose Hearts the invisible God hath touched by his word which is Eternal, and from the Beginning, that is nigh in your Hearts, Deut. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. & Rom. 10.6, 7, 8. at certain Seasons, being quick and powerful, sharper then a two-edged Sword, Heb. 4.12. which doth open the Secrets of your Hearts, and declares unto you your Thoughts, so that you need not go far away to seck a Saviour, but wait for him from Heaven to be revealed within you, as the Apostle direct∣ed, 1 Thes. 1.10. and then you will find him, who is the true Beloved; for if ever you come to the true Enjoyment of him, you must wait for him in his own Way, who is Heavenly, and comes from his Holy Habitation: and you must turn from the blind Watch-men, who are in the Night, who have loft the Way of his Appearance, and are turned against him, even fighting against his Appearance with their filthy Weapons, pleading for sin, for which Cause the Earth mourns, and the Inhabitants thereof (who are redeemed) take up a Lamentati∣on in the Consideration of these things. And all you that are thus touched inwardly, and tendred in any measure, in the Bowed-dowaness of your Souls, seeking the Lord that you may be saved, oh! go not forth after your Imaginations to
seek him in the Desert, nor after such as say, Lo here, or Le there, Go ye not after them, nor follow them, Mat. 24.23. but wait, ha∣ving your Minds retired in the Manifestation of his heavenly Light within you, and then ye will come to a true and certain Knowledge of him; and so you will see how the Wise have Er∣red, & how they are gone back into the old By-Pathes that they were in that could not speak a Word in Season to the Soul that is weary, but shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and hindred such as were entring, Mat. 23.13. therefore WO was cryed against them, which WO stands over the Heads of all that are in the Rebellion against the Spirit of God to this day: And is it not even so? Do not our Wise Men and Pro∣fessors shut the Kingdom against men? Do not they preach a∣gainst the Entrance into Life Eternal, saying, Revelation is ceased; and this sad Doctrine hath filled the Land with Uncer∣tainties, and many Thousands are like to perish and dye in their Sins through Unbelief, John 8.21, 24. Now all you that are out of the Light of Life, in the World of Death and Darkness, and are perswaded, though you dye in your (Sins and) Ʋncleanness yet you shall be saved, not being freed by Christ Jesus from the Act of Sin here in this Life: Troly this is a false Faith and Hope, that will come to an End; for Sin ever was and is the Cause of man's Separation from God, Isa. 51.1, 2. and God sent his Son to destroy Sin in the Flesh, and to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. And though People have forsaken the Lord God of Power and Life, yet he hath again visited with his Ancient Mercies, the Sons of men, to the End they might not perish, and his Ancient Arm is revealed, that gathers to himself; and though the Night hath been long and tedious, wherein the E∣nemy of the Soul hath possessed the Place and Seat in the Tem∣ple, 2 Thes. 2.4. yet now the Lord calls for Repentance, and for all to come unto him out of their Sins, and from under Satan's Power; and whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wayes cast out, John 6.37. but in this Day, who refuseth to hearken to his Heavenly Voice, and come not unto him, they will unavoidably perish for evermore, and their Blood shall be
upon their own Heads; for there is no way to God's King∣dom, but as Redemption is witnessed by Christ Jesus out of the lost State, and so being restored to God by Christ Jesus, you come into the Way of Life, where Peace with God is known; and this hath been the Happiness of People in all A∣ges and Generations, as they have come up into Obedience, out of the Transgression, and so have had Fellowship together in the Light of Righteousness, and so Truth and Righteousness was their Way, and Christ the Rock was their Foundation, which Foundation God hath laid, 1 Cor. 3.11. and so they found Favour with the Lord, and ended their Days in Peace; but on the other Hand, this hath been the sad unhappy State of Mankind, when they turned from God and Righteousness, and Holiness into Disobedience, and so became wicked work∣ers, filthy and corrupted with Sin and Uncleanness, and so the Devil through Deceit hath undone many to their Utter Ruin, and their Eternal Sorrow, and sometimes perswading the Creature one Way, and sometimes another, sometimes in profession of Religion without the Life of Holiness, which is an Abomination to the Lord; for unto the Wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou shouldst take my Covenant in thy Mouth? Psal. 50.16. And so let all repent and turn to the Lord, that you may be saved; for the Truth is revealed that hath a long time been hid with the Lord even the same unchangeable immortal Seed, CHRIST, that bruiseth the Serpent's Head; and though many are so vail∣led with Darkness, as to deny his working Inwardly; and li∣mit the holy one, yet he is come contrary to their Expectati∣ons and therefore they receive him not: So the Way of God is not to be known in man's Way, nor yet in man's Time, nor in man's Will, but as man obeyes God and is subject to him, so he comes to know his Way. And so all People consider these things whilest you have time, and be warned to come out of Ignorance, and become sensible that you may understand; for God never forsakes any People without a just Cause, there∣fore lay it to Heart, and ponder this in your secret Meditations, and as your wise men tell you Revelation is ceast, let them
tell you, when? where? to whom? and for what cause? did God ever cast off any People, when they were obedient to him? Nay, he never forsakes People till they forsake him, therefore the Cause is in man, and God is clear: So the Lord in his Mercy in these latter Days hath opened his Truth, and hath brought us into the Way of Life, wherein we see how the Apostacy came in, and in all Ages, and under every Dispen∣sation, the Cause was in men, because they rebelled, and turn∣ed from God; but now there are many so bewildred in their Minds, having lost the good old Way, are perswaded the Cause is in God, and that he will not work by his Spirit now, as he did in Days past, and so being deceived do not truly en∣deavour to come out of Sin all their Life time, but imagine that God will accept of them in their Sins, and yet are per∣swaded that they shall inherit Heaven, when this Life shall be at an End, Ephes. 5.5. whereas the Apostle said, The Heaven and the Earth that now is, are kept in store reserved unto Fire against this Day of Judgment and Perdition of ƲNGODLY MEN, 2 Pet. 3.7. so you may read your Portion here, if you turn not to God that you may be cleanled, where all your false Joyes and Pleasures will come to an End, Amos 8.10. and everlasting Sorrow will overtake you. And farther, as you deny the Working of the Spirit, and rebel against it, you are one with the old Backsliders, even from the Begin∣ning; for that was the chief Cause that God brought Destru∣ction upon the old World, because they rebelled against his holy Spirit; for, after they departed from the Lord, yet his good Spirit did strive with them, till at length the Lord was grieved, and said, My Spirit shall not alwayes strive with Man, &c. Gen. 6.3. so the Day of their Visitation passed away, and they were overthrown with the Flood, Gen. 7.23. so you may read and apply this to your selves; for you dare not say, but the Lord by his Spirit hath & doth strive with you (as in the dayes of Noah) who is reproving you in your hearts for your Prophaneness and Idolatry; therefore, while you have Time put into your Hands, Repent, and obey the Good Spirit of the Lord God, lest God cease striving with you, and so you be over∣thrown
by his Almighty Power, who is a terrible God against all Unrighteousness: but all the holy People of God, before the Flood, were guided by his holy Spirit, which was a true Guide, and a sure Leader from the Beginning; and the Spi∣rit of Truth was the Guide of all the chosen People of God after the Flood, even Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and that sustained them in all their Travails, and was with them, as you may read at large in Gen. 12, & 48. And this was the Foundation of all the Holy Men in all Ages and Generations. And when Israel at any time rebelled against the Spirit of God, which he gave them to instruct them, (read Neh. 9. through∣out) then the Lord turned against them, and afflicted them, and caused them to be carryed away out of their own Land. Therefore the Spirit was and is the true Guide, and the true Fountain of Life, of Living Refreshment and Heavenly Vir∣tue, which gives true Wisdom and a heavenly Mind, which when people forsook, and rebelled against it, then Ignorance abounded: And so you that rebel against God, who is a Spi∣rit, are you not one with Israel in the Apostacy, notwithstan∣ding your Profession, against whom the Prophet testified, say∣ing, My People have committed two horrible Evils; the one, they have forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of Living Waters; and have hewen out to themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold no Water, Jer. 2.13. And is not this your State and Condi∣tion this day? Are you not digging Wells of your own, and hewing out to your selves Cisterns, and when all is done, it retains nothing pure, nothing holy, nothing clean, no living Water, nothing from Heaven, but all is corruptible, all filthy, all sinful? Oh that your Eyes were opened to see these things! how ye are erred from the Life and Power, from the Living Fountain, with the old backsliding Jews and dark bewildered Christians, who in old time lost the Light of the Sun of Righ∣teousness: but these things have happened through gross Mi∣stakes; as for instance, The general Belief hath been and is amongst the outside Professors of Jesus Christ, confessing only and believing, that Christ dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, though it is true; and so in a general sense saying, We believe
in God and in Christ Jesus, and so come no farther to any in∣ward Belief and Knowledge of him, as did the true Christians, Rom. 8. from Vers. 1. to 17. now here lies the Mistake, and here many comfort themselves, because they confess to his Ap∣pearance in the World sixteen hundred Years since, but this a man or woman may do and yet they may perish; for to pro∣fess Christ and live in the Lust of Uncleanness, is but to aug∣ment their Sorrow. because there is a living Witness in them which they rebel against, and pierce, and so cause his Wounds to bleed afresh, and put him to an open Shame, Heb. 6.6. Rev. 11.8. And notwithstanding they may use Meats and Drinks, and have respect to Days and Times, Moneths and Years, yet all will pass away, and perish with the using, and the ground of the Separation from God may remain, and so you may eat and drink Damnation to your selves at unawares; for he that eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27. therefore be warned whilest you have time, and consider these things whilest your Day lasteth, that you may come to God (out of Sin and Death) by Christ Jesus, who is come to destroy Sin in the Flesh (mark that, in the Flesh) this is a nearer Knowledge of him, then to confess him only as he dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, who is glorified with the Glory he had with the Father before the World was, and fills Heaven and Earth; neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all things are naked and open to the Eye of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. Therefore take beed to your Way, and mind that pure Eye, even the hea∣venly Light within you, which is a sure Word of Prophecy, to which ye do well if ye take heed, as unto a Light shining in a dark Place, till the Day dawn and the Day Star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. And this is the true saving Faith, and sa∣ving Knowledge. to believe in your Hearts the Lord Jesus, Acts 16.30, 31. Rom. 10.8. And whatsoever Way or Wor∣ship there is, or may be this Day, or whatsoever Profession or Confession, otherwise then that which the ancient Apostles declared of, who were Eye-Witnesses of his Majesty, is contra∣ny to Truth, and will not make the comers thereunto Perfect,
who preacht from a certain Divine, yet Intelligible Principle revealed within them, which was the Seed Immortal, Incorrupti∣ble, promised of God to destroy Sin & bruise the Head of the Ser∣pent, and this Seed or Spirit of Life you must all come to know within you, to destroy Sin in Flesh in your Mortal Bodies, and to quicken you from dead Works to serve the Living God, Rom. 8.11. And this is the plain Truth unto you from the Spirit of the Lord, witnessed by the Scriptures, as John well said, when the spirit of Antichrist began to work, and some were seduced by the Wicked One, said he, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God; every spirit that confesseth that Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God [mark] every spirit that confesseth Christ come in the Flesh, Rom. 8.3. who came to save his People from their Sin, and to destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 4.2. for the Devil had wrought in the Flesh of Mankind the Works of Darkness, Corruption, Uncleanness, and all manner of Fil∣thiness, in which he rules and Reigns over the Children of Dis∣obedience, in that State and Nature which he hath begotten them into, and such were those sometimes that the Scrip∣ture mentions, who were by Nature Children of Wrath, even as others, but God, who is rich in Mercy, and abundant in Loving-kindness, caused his Love to break forth in Christ Je∣sus, the Brightness of his Glory (Hebr. 1.1, 2, 3) and visited those that were dead in Sins and Trespasses, and quickened them by the Spirit of his Son; and so they were made Witnes∣ses of the Life of Jesus, who begat them again, and Redeem∣ed them from the Bonds of Death by his Blood. So here is the Way of Life, and Path of Eternal Rest, Christ Jesus, the Power of God, which destroyes the Devil and his Works, 1 John 3.8. Hebr. 2.14. and this is the true Spirit this day, we know it to our Souls Satisfaction, that confess Christ come in the Flesh; and this was the Advice of the Apostle John to such as did retain Christ, the Power & Wisdom of God, which taught them all things, and instructed them in the things of God, and in the weighty Matters pertaining to Eternal Life; Little Chil∣dren (saith he) I write these things concerning those that seduce
you; but the Anointing that you have received of him, abideth in you; and you have no need that any man teach you, 1 John 2.27. and this was at that time when the Devil went about to deceive the Churches; for said Peter, Your Adversary the Devil goes about like a Roaring Lyon, seeking whom be may de∣vour. And again, saith John, It is the Last Time, in which you have heard, that Antichrist should come; for even now there are many Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. and Every spirit that con∣fesseth not that Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God, but is a Deceiver; and this is that spirit of Antichrist which ye have heard of should come, and even now is already come into the World. 1 John 4.3. And this hath been and is to this day the loss of many, in that they profess Christ Jesus only outwardly come, and not try the spirits, that they may know Christ also inwardly, by his Spirit, Power and Wisdom, crucifying the fleshly Desires, Affections and Lusts, that he alone may reign and rule: And this is the true Guide, Leader and Teacher of all the Children of the Lord in every Age and Generation, who is given for a Leader, even Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, Isa. 55.4. and such as are not taught of him, they are not the Children of the Lord, but Children of him that hath stoln their Hearts from God, and leads them into For∣getfulness concerning the weighty things, wherein consists their eternal Peace; and so multitudes are deceived, and are Wan∣derers in the Darkness of the palpable Night, wherein the Thief hath robbed, stoln and deprived Thousands of their. Right; for Man was not created for Destruction, but to inhe∣rit Life Eternal; and our God creates none to be destroyed, but that all should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of his Truth, 1 Tim. 2.4. And therefore, if any perish, its be∣cause they yield themselves to the Wicked One to work Un∣righteousness, which is the Cause of Man's Misery: And I certainly know, That no Man or Woman can have Peace with God, but as they come to witness in themselves Reconciliation by Christ Jesus, which can never be until they obey him; for this I find by good Experience, That Tribulation and Anguish is upon every Soul of man that doth Evil, to the Jew first, and also
to the Gentile, Rom. 2.9. both Professors and Prophane, and notwithstanding the Height of Profession, where Christ Jesus is not become the Head, or where that which is contrary to his blessed will is not yet put under his Feet in every particular, there is Condemnation and Terror within, & secret Fears and Doubtfulness, which many Times causeth Torment, 1 John 4 18. And so in the Bowels of tender Love to all the Sons and Daughters of Men, is my Heart opened to declare the Truth, as it is in Jesus, who is the true Foundation and Rock of Ages, 1 Cor. 10.4. And for lack of the true and saving Knowledge of him, many have wandered in great Fear, and many to this Day wander from the Knowledge of him, and some whole Hearts (by the Nearness of God unto them) are tendered in Secret, and mourn in Secret, and are broken in Heart, in the Consideration of their Conditions, whose Sins are laid before them by the Lord, Psal. 50 8. and know no Way to escape the Indignaion of Almighty God, but lye down in Fear and rise up in Sorrow, those are they whose secret Cry is to the un∣known God, whom yet they are not come to know; but here is a Travail inwardly to enjoy the Redeemer, and here the in∣visible, immortal God hath reached forth his spiritual Power, and some have come to a Desire after the Lord, from a real Sense of an inward Breathing after him, and yet have come short of the thing they desired in the Day of the Tenderness of their Hearts; for the Desire begotten inwardly, it must in∣wardly be satisfied, and all outward things, as Ordinances and outward Observations cannot satisfie the Soul, and herein ma∣ny in this Day have come to a loss, and have stumbled at the Foundation that God hath laid, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. and so have over-run themselves, and the tender Breathings of their Souls come to be stopt, and so comes up Hardness of Heart again, though the Pretence be never so fair, and here many stand in their Imaginations, fighting against the Appearance of God, and so many that might have been serviceable for God's Cause in their Day and time, and Witnesses (in the Life of Jesus) a∣gainst the Works of Darkness, are now become Enemies to the Lord that first begot them into Tenderness, in Days that
are gone and past; and this is the very Way, in which many Thousands in this Nation have lost themselves, but a Rem∣nant there are that have obeyed the Heavenly Voice of the Be∣loved, that first touched their Hearts, and opened their Un∣derstandings, whose Souls have continually mourned after him Day and Night, when Sorrow overtook us, and Lamen∣tation was heard within our Dwellings, till we were sensible of the Way that leads to God's Kingdom, and then it was the true Desire of our Souls to obey him, and follow him in the Way of his Judgement, Prov. 8.20, 21. Isa. 1.27. & 4.4. and now he is become our Leader, who is the true Satisfier of the Soul, even Jesus Christ (unto whom every one must give an Account) who is the first and the last, Rev. 21.6. & 22.13. the Beginning of the Creation of God, who hath all Pow∣er in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18. and is near to all, who is that Grace of God, that bringeth Salvation unto man∣kind, Tit. 2.11, 13. and these that obey him and hear him, who is the Beloved of the Father, according to his Command∣ment Mat. 17.5. they are the true Church, the true Body, Christ Jesus being Head, ruling by his blessed Power and Spi∣rit in every Member, and this Spirit and Power redeems the Church, and raises it up from the Grave, and such come to know the Resurrection of the Body, and the Passage from Death to Life, who obey Christ and know his Power in their Hearts to quicken and make alive; and so tis mortal puts on Immortality, and this corruptible puts on Incorruption, and so Death is swallowed up in Victory, Isaah 25.8. And this is a holy Church redeemed to God, whole Light is God's Glory, Rev. 21.23. Isa. 60.19. and those that are come to this Spirit and Power that overcomes the Devil, are true Witnesses for the Lord, in this Age and Day, who are re∣deemed from Death and Darkness, into Life and Light; and this is the Lamb's Wife which is espoused unto him, betrothed in Loving Kindness, and confesseth him, and is not ashamed of his Name before Men, Mat. 10.32. and such as have the Spirit they are the Children of God, but if any man have not the pirit of Christ he is none of is, Rom. 8.9. and these that
are obedient to the Spirit of Christ within them, they are a Living People, and are spiritually minded, waiting for the Promise of God to be sealed up in Covenant with the Lord, Ephes. 2.22. And so they come to be a Habitation for God through the Spirit, that first cleanseth and prepareth the Heart for God, and so it comes to be sanctified through the Spirit by believing in the Truth, 2 Thes. 2.13. And all other People that are gathered outwardly, without the Spirit, and Life and Power of God, that destroyes the Devill and his Works, are dead to God, and are yet in the Grave of Transgression, and are in danger of falling into the deep pit of Misery, where their Worm dieth not, neither is their Fire quenched, Isa. 66.24. and such are Hypocrites deceiving themselves and others, and painted with an outside, having the Sheeps clothing, but In∣wardly are ravening Wolves: And such as have not the Spi∣rit for their Guide, run when God sends them not, and pro∣phesie when the Lord speaks not to them, Jer. 29.8, 9. as they in old Time that rebelled against the Spirit, and cast the Word of God behind their Backs, Isa. 5.24. and such are blind Watchmen, who are in the dark Profession, over whom the Sun is gone down, Mic. 3.6. and Darkness is to them who have not a Vision, Michah 3.5, 6, 7. but de∣ny any such Thing as Vision and Revelation, and so are Night-Workers, not knowing whether their Work will stand in God's Day, or not; and such were the blind Watchmen in the Dayes of old, when God did arise, and by his Word and Power in the Hearts of a People, moved the Inner man, and raised De∣sires after himself, but the Watchmen of the Night (said the Church they found me and wounded me, Cant. 5.7. and here is the Time of trying the false Prophets; then sayes the travailing Soul, I am troubled inwardly, and cannot be satisfied with all, my outside Profession, nothing will satisfie me till I come to enjoy the Beloved of my Soul, who is heavenly, and was sent to save me from my Sins; Watchman canst thou tell me where I may find him? But saith the blind Watchman, Revelation is ceast, no inward immediate Working of the Spirit now. And here many have been (and are) wounded to this Day; and this is a cer∣tain
Testimony whereby you may know the true Prophet from the false; for the true Prophet comes in the Name of the Lord, standing in God's Counsel, turning People to God, say∣ing, Turn from Transgression, and obey Christ Jesus the true Light, that you may be made free, and saith the true Messenger, wait for the Son from Heaven, 1 Thes. 1.9, 10. And so many have obeyed this Glorious Gospel, the Light whereof shines inwardly, and the Beloved is found that we sought for amongst the blind Watchmen, where we found him not; but it was but a little whil, I was gone from the Night Watchmen, and I found him whom my Soul loveth, Cant. 3.4. This also con∣sider, the false Prophet he comes with a Lye, preaching no Freedom from Sin, no Revelation, the Light within not the Way, not directing to the Heavenly Witness, which is able to save Eternally from Death and Misery, but daubs up with untempered Morter: Ezek. 13.10, 11. and sows Pillows under the Arm holes of People crying, Peace, Peace, when there is none, healing the wound deceitfully, Jer. 6.14. And so are Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of God's Pa∣sture, Jer. 23.1. but God will require his Flock at their Hands, Ezek. 34.10. and We will be unto them forever, who are found in the Way of the old rebellious amongst the Jews, and profest Christians, who transgress against the God of Jacob, whose Portion was with the Unbelievers and Hypo∣crites where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. And in the Rise of the false Church, who went a whoring from Jesus Christ, it was signified by the Spirit concerning her Punish∣ment, I will cast her into a Bed of Torment, and they that com∣mit Adultery with her, into great Tribulation, Rev. 2.22. And so all People consider these Things, and come to the Re∣velation of the Son of God, which gives Life and Dominion over Hell and Death, Isa. 25.8. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56 which is the Good Old Way, the Path of the Righteous, and Obe∣dient Children of the Light of Jesus Christ; and so all will know the Lord and be saved; for without this, Man is beneath the Beast of the Field; for when he was made Ruler over the Creation, he knew Dominion, and Power, and Wisdom from
on high, and was in the Image of God over the Creation of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes and the Earth, Gen. 1.26. but when he transgrest against God, he lost his Righteous Life, and In∣nocent Dominion, and fell under the Creation; and so the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but Israel knows not his God, Isa. 1.3. Jer. 8.7. now until this lost Estate be restored to man again, and the Cause removed, which is Sin, Man remains in the Loss, without God in the World, and there is no Way to come to that State again, but by Christ Jesus, who is the Door the true Entrance, who saith, No Man knoweth the Son, but the Father, neither know∣eth any Man the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. and this is the standing Rule, which is unchangeable, and is from Everlasting to Eve lasting, though it's vilified and lightly esteemed of amongst many, yet unto us he is the chiefest of Ten Thousands, Cant. 5.10. who hath redeemed us unto God out of our Sins, and washed us from our Filthiness in his own Blood, to him be Glory for∣evermore, Rev. 1.5. And this is the sure Rock, upon which God is building his Spiritual House his Church, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail, Mat. 16.18. And all that think of an Inheritance in Heaven, though they dye in their Sins, are in a great Mistake; for no unclean thing shall enter, Ephes. 5.3, 4 5, 6. And if any think of being cleansed af∣ter this Life, and so made fit hereafter, this also will fail and come to an End; for after Death there is no Redemption, mor∣tifie therefore your members whilest you are upon the Earth Col. 3.5. for consider the Rich Man who dyed, and lift up his Eyes in Hell, Luke 16.23. and cryed for Help from poor Lazarus, ver. 24. but all was in vain, there was no Remedy, nor Re∣demption for him who had spent his Days in Pleasure, and Vanty upon the Earth, not so much as a little Water to cool his Tongue, when he was tormented in the Flame: And also you may read concerning his five Brethren, that he had left behind in his Father's House, who were in the same Danger to be tormented with him, and therefore desired they might be warned by poor Lazarus, lest, said he, they also come to this
Place of Torment, Luke 16.28. So all you that are lofty and wanton upon the Earth, consider your latter End, who spend your precions Time to the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness, and nourish your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter, James 5.5. O remember the Day wherein the Holy Pure God will plead with you for all your Abominations, and for your Secret Sins, that you have committed against the God of Heaven, and how you make merry over the VVitness, that brings Con∣demnation upon you because of your Sins, and even torments the VVorker of Iniquity in secret, this is the Faithful and True VVitness, even Jesus the True Messenger, who brings Gad∣tidings to the imprisoned Soul, that's like to perish in Iniquity, and this is he that was crucified in the Flesh, but quickned a∣gain in the Spirit, by which Spirit he preached to the Spirits in prison 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. And it may be thus men may re∣bel agaist him, and not turn at his Reproofs, but spiritually may crucifie him to themselves, as some did in Days past, Heb. 6.6. Rev. 11.8. but it would have been much better that they had never had a Being; for when God shall call them to an Account for the Deeds done in the Body, then shall they cry to the Mountains, fall upon us, and to the Hills, cover or hide us from the Face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. for the Hour of his Judgment is come; and who shall be able to stand? There∣fore return unto him betimes before it be too late, that you may be reconciled to the Father, and so the Lord will return unto you; in his Love, and in his Tender Mercy will he visit you, as you yield unto him in your Hearts; for such as obey him this Day, do certainly injoy his Peace, and in his Name is their Safety, which is his Power, by which their Souls are kept from the spiritual Enemy, and therefore, O Land of my Nativity! hear the Word of the Lord God of Heaven, which VVord is near unto all the Inhabitants thereof, from one End unto another, that the Land may be cleansed, and enjoy hr Sabbaths, lest Afflictions and great orrow come in like a flood upon the inhabitants, from the Great God, whose Righteous
Soul is grieved because of the Abominations that are within thy Borders, who by his searching, living Power that is Eternal, over all (Death and Hell) is searching from one End to the other to bring Mankind into his Light and Life, to worship him in his Spirit and Truth, who is the blessed Creator of all, the Begin∣ning and the End, to whom be Glory forever, Amen. THE Righteous God, whose Power is great, and who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in working, Isaiah 28.29. hath in these last Days appeared invisibly in the in∣ward Parts of Mankind, to place his Name and his pure Fear in the Hearts of his People, according to his ancient Promise, Heb. 10.16. Jer. 31.33. and to write his Law in the Hearts of his Children, who are truly turned unto him; and amongst the many Witnesses, the Lord who is rich in his Love unto Mankind, not willing that any should perish, he visited me, who was a Wanderer in Desolation from Year to Year, seek∣ing the Way of the Redeemed of the Lord, and a Cry in secret was begotten in my Heart after God, who in his own time did hear, and Answer my Earnest Desire; and I well remember the Days of my tender Years, when I was very young, there was an Innocent Breathing within me after the Thing that is Good, and I saw Sin in its Conception, but knew not that which gave me the Knowledge of it; and Swearing I saw to be a great Evil in them that were addicted thereunto, and un∣to the Nineth and Tenth Year of my Age, I was in a good Measure restrained from Evil, according to the Knowledge I then had, but afterwards when Years did encrease, I well re∣member my great Loss; for evil Desires did spring up within me, and by the subtil one I was betrayed, and led into divers Pleasures, and Vanities of this Wicked World, and into many Evils which did displease the Lord, and so the Tender Desires which were after Righteousness were slain, and then great Darkness and Sorrow did overtake me, and so into a spiritual Captivity from the Light that did shine within me in my ten∣der
Years, and so for many Years walkt in the Crooked By∣paths of Darkness and Ignorance, in Disobedience, with∣out the Knowledge of the true God, in which time I was a Ser∣vant to the Wicked One, and so are all that obey him, be they high or low, rich or poor; and after some Years I began to consider my Condition, and something within me bringing to Remembrance what I had done, and laying before me the Danger that attends the wicked, and in this time a Travail was begotten within me to seek the Lord, and repent of my Sins, and from Day to Day under the Indignation of the Lord which was revealed against me because of Sin; and here was a Travail through much Fear and Doubtfulness what would be∣come of my Soul if God should cut off my Life, and indeed I could read Adam's Condition, when he was afraid of the Lord and hid himself, because he was naked; and in the first Adam I then was, and so lost in the Fall, and as God behold me in that woful State, Heb. 2.15. subject to Bondage for Fear of Death, at last he opened unto my Soul the way of Life, howbeit Sorrow overtook me, and much Bowed∣downness did compass me about, and then the Enemy of my Soul wod have taken away my Life, but the secret invisible Arm of God's Power did uphold me, though I knew it not; so I say, God is the Saviour of all men, especially of them that believe 1 Tim. 1.10. And as Tenderness was begotten in my Heart, so my Sins became a Burden too heavy for me to bear And this Testi∣mony I give in the Name of the Lord, that whosoever feels the Weight of their Sins, it's by the working of God's Heavenly Power, begetting Tenderness in their Hearts though they know it not: And so none can come to God but by this Way, as our Lord said, None can come unto me, except the Father that has sent me draw him, John 6.44. And so my Heart was bowed before the Lord, and an Inward Desire begotten, that none could satisfie but him alone: And I saw the Ways of Man in his corrupt Nature, were not those which lead to God's Kingdom, and from Professor to Prophane, all were gone astray, then my Cry was the more earnest to the unknown God, and none amongst my Worldly Relations, and Neighbours could tell me the
Way of my Soul's Beloved, till at last the Power of the Lord o∣pened my Understanding, and as I retired my mind inwardly in the Heavenly Light, I was made more and more sensible of the Operation of his blessed Spirit, which gave me Dominion over one Sin, and here was the Beginning of the Work of God in my Soul, and then I had a little Hope, of overcoming, and a little Faith to believe I should be saved. So this is the Seed of God's Kingdom, which is immortal, compared to a little Leaven d in three Measures of Meal, until the whole be lea∣vened, which Seed is the Foundation which God hath laid, 1 Cor. 3.11. for Man and Woman to build upon. And when all my Hope was lost of getting out of that fallen State, and when I could not believe that I should be saved, if I died in Sin, so that this Cry was within me, My Bones are dryed, my Hope is lost, I am cut off for my Part, Ezek. 37.11. then did the Lord remember me, and manifested a Saviour in an accepta∣ble Time, and as my Mind was inclined towards the invisible Power that opened my Understanding. Ephes. 5.13, 14. so the Sins of Youth I overcame, and this is the Light of the Glory of God, that shined in my dark Heart, before I knew what it was; and so it is certain the Light shineth in Darkness, but the Darkness comprehendeth it not, John 1.5. and then I came to know God's Salvation near me, according to his Promise, Isa 51.5. and so I saw the Days I had spent in Vanity, and began to redeem the Time, Ephes. 5.15, 16. and also how youthful Lusts and Pleasures came over me in the Begin∣ning, and how I was betrayed from my Innocent State, in the Days of my Childhood; so now I know this is the Spirit of Promise, that brings all Things to my Remembrance, Joh. 14.26. and so my Soul by the Spirit of Jesus Christ was redeemed from dead Works, and out of the dark Ways of sin and Igno∣rance, into the Light of Righteousness, to serve the living and true God; and this I affirm is the Spirit of Truth, that first con∣vinceth the Conscience of sin, and then as it is obeyed, it lead out of sin, and roots out the Worker of Iniquity, and sets up Righteousness and Holiness in the Heart, and this is the true Teacher, that comes to do the works that none other can do,
and such as declare that which he hath done for their Souls, they are the true Messengers, as it is written, How beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of them that bring Glad-tidings, and publish Peace, bringing Glad-ridings of good Things, Rom. 10.15. and such as are come unto this true Teacher (and abide with him) are happy forever; and as my Soul lamented in Days past for a Saviour, and languished for lack of Spiritual Comfort, now I am satisfied fully, in that I feel a VVitness in my self, 1 John 5.10. which bears witness that my Soul is redeemed; and this was before me for some Years, to give a Testimony of these Things which God hath done for me, in restoring me to my Habitation, Everlasting Praises be given to his Name forevermore. And as Man that is lost in the first Adam, as he obeys the Heavenly and Spiritual Adam, Christ Jesus, who never fell, so he comes to God again, and is re∣stored into Life and a holy Liberty, vvith the Sons of God. And novv my Soul is made a VVitness for Jesus Christ, that God hah raised him from the Dead, vvho hath quickned me that was dead in Sins and Trespasses, 1 Cor 15.45. And this is the Mystery of Godliness, hid from the wise and prudent, and re∣vealed unto Babes and Sucklings, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21. And this Everlasting Power that is now revealed, is that which will overcome, even unto the End, Rev. 3.21. and his Go∣vernment is everlasting, and shall root out and destroy the Go∣vernment of the Wicked One; for he shall reign whose Right it a, Rev. 11.15. And now all you that have Desires after the Lord, and are not come to the Knowledge of him, consider these Things, and singly read these Line, that the saving Know∣ledge of God you may come unto, and then the Burden of Sin, an the heavy Weight will be taken away from your Souls, and then Life and Immortal Glory will be your Portion forever; for great, yea, unspeakable is God's Love to his People, who are saved by him, and Infinite are his Mercies to he Souls of his Children; and though there be many miserable Comfor∣ters that say, Revelation is ceast, so much as to say, The Way of God's Heavenly Mercies to the Souls of Men; is shu up, but blessed be the Lord, there are many Witnesses this Day, unto
whose mourning Souls God hath opened the Way of his Ten∣der Mercies, and they are come to the Faithful and True VVitness, even Jesus the Mediator, and he openeth and none can shut, and shuts and none can open: And my Soul is made willing to invite all to come; for the Spirit saith come, and the Bride saith come, and let him that is a thirst come and drink of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. that all may be saved from the VVrath to come, which will be heavy upon those of this Generation, who sleight the Day of their Visitation; and therefore you that are come to seel your Sins to be your Burden, look not out for a Saviour, but wait for the Appear∣ance of Christ within, and you will find him to your great Sa∣tisfaction, and Everlasting Comfort, and in your Age and Generation you will come to be VVitnesses for God, and his Presence you will come to know, in which is Life, and at his Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore. And this is the Joy of my Soul, now God hath made me sensible of his VVay, e∣ven to do his VVill; and I know that such as do not his VVill will be found on the left Hand amongst the Hypocrites, and such as are without God, unto whom it will be said, depart ye cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 7.23. Mat. 24.41. And then I well remem∣ber, when this VVay of Life, first I came to knovv, and when I was separated from my former Acquaintances, & could not go with them into the same kind of Riot as before, they then turned against me, and I became a By wod unto my Neighbours, and as the Apostle said, They think it strange be∣cause you go not with them to the same kind of Riot, speaking e∣vil of you, 1 pet. 4.4. and so our Lord foretold of thee things, who said, They shall cast you out of their Company, and your Names shall be cast out, as evil, for the Kingdom of God Sake; and when men shall persecute you, and speak all manner of Evil fasly for my Name Sake, rejoyce in that Day; for great is your Reward, list up your Heads, and be glad; for your Redemption draweth night, Luke 21.28. And this was that which did up∣hold me in that Day, even my Redeemer drawing nigh. And, now I have written concerning my Coming forth out of my
Sins, and from the Wayes and Worships of the VVorld, who are not in the Spirit and in the Truth, and therefore will come to an End, and the true VVorship which is in the Spirit, and in the Truth, will be established; for God who is strong in Judgment, will raise up his own Tabernacle, Amos 9.11. Acts 15.16. and the Time is come wherein the Lord will work, and wo unto such as endeavour to hinder his VVork, which is a righteous VVork, and will stand, when the Plea∣sure of Sin shall end with Everlasting Punishment; for it is Righteousness. that will remain when God shall judge the VVorld, and search out every secret VVork that hath been wrought in Darkness, yea, when Inquisition shall be made for the Thoughts of the Ʋngodly. And so all that read understand, and turn unto the Lord; for he is certainly risen in great Power, yea he hath taken unto him his great Power, and is come to reign, 1 Cor. 15.25. for he hath seen the great Backslidings of the Sons of Men and the Dark∣ness that hath vailed the Creation, and the Death that hath reigned over Mankind; and he is come to take away the Vail that the Enemy of Mankind hath spread over the Nations, and to destroy the Face of the Covering cast over all People, that Death may be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55 And the Holy, Pure God, whole Dominion is an Ancient Dominion, and his Heavenly Glorious Kingdom is from Everlasting to Everlasting, before the Devil and Death's Kingdom, Rule and Government was, he hath beheld the Sad Estate of the Sons of Men & hath sent forth a Saviour, who is mighty, the same that in Dayes past was mighty in word and Deed, before God and all the People, Luke 24.19. and the same Saviour, even Jesus, which is Christ the Lord, hath redeemed and saved a People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. who is able to bring forth all the distressed amongst the People, whose inward Cry is to the unknown God, as mine was, who hath delivered my Soul from Death, who is my Shepherd, Bishop and Teacher, in whom dwelleth all Fullness, who laid down his Life for his Sheep, whose precious Blood hath re∣deemed us, whom my Soul hath Cause to extol and praise
Night and Day, who is my Strength and Defence against all the Assaults of my Soul's Enemy, to whom saith my Soul, be Glory Everlasting, and Praises for ever rendered, who is over all Blessed forever, Amen. After this Work was begun in my Soul and my Understan∣ding opened to see the sad and woful State of Mankind, being fallen into the State of the first Adam, in the Separation from God, and Christ Jesus, my Heart was filled with Sorrow, and a Zeal for the Name of the Lord God did livingly spring in my Heart, and a Necessity was laid upon me to warn my Neigh∣bours to turn unto the Lord; and the Lord shewed me the sad and woful State of many whose Iniquities are even come to the full, and I warned them in the Name of the Lord in their publick Assemblis to turn from the Evil of their wayes, and now it lives in my Heart afresh, to warn them by writing also, in the Holy Fear and Awe of the God of Heaven and Earth, in the deep Consideration of their sad Estate. And now my Neighbours, this is unto you in Bowels of tender Love, whose, ol desireth your Everlasting Good, that you may consider your Wayes, and turn unto the Lord; for he is merciful, slow to anger, and of great Kindness, that In∣wardly you may be sensible of the Power of Jesus Christ whose Heavenly Light shews you your Sins; for great are your Abominations which grieves the Lord God, and the a∣bounding thereof from Day to Day. How doth Drunkenness abound amongst you, and Pride, and Vain Glory, and Swear∣ing, and Lying from Day to Day abound, within the Borders of the Place of my Nativity? for whose Sakes my Heart hath often been bowed down before the Lord, that the Dayes of Sin and Iniquity may come to an End. Now Friends and Neighbours, there is no Way for you to escape the Indigrati∣on of the Lord, but by Repentance, and therefore repent speedily, and forsake your Sins in this Day wherein the Lord hath visited you with his Day Spring from on high, and that is the true Light that sheweth unto you your Thoughts, and re∣proves you in Secret for Lying, Swearing and Drunkenness,
and all manner of Uncleanness; and that is the Day Spring from on high, revealed from God to lead out of Sin, and to save from Transgression, and this is the Grace of God which the Apostle spake of which hath appeared unto all men, which is the true Teacher, and Leader out of Sin, Tit. 2.11. into Ho∣lines; and this will search your Hearts, as you wait for it; for how have you been saying from Time to Time? At what Time soever a Sinner doth repent him from the Bottom of his Heart; God will blot out all his Transgressions out of his Remem∣brance, and do not many take Liberty to sin because of this, but as the Promise of Forgiveness upon Repentance, Ezek. 18.21, 22. commends the Mercy of God, that none might despair, yet the Lord will surely plead with all, that are pre∣sumptuous and Continuers in Sin, read (your Portion) Ezek. 18.20. therefore all both old and young, remember Repen∣tance from the Bottom of the Heart; for that you must all come to witness, if you be made clean, so that God may receive you. And indeed that is a Thing of great Con∣cernment; but that is the Thing most wanting amongst men; for there are Professions enough, but I see but few that are come to the Cleansing of the inside, or inward Washing, but as the Pharisees, who made clean the outside of the Cup or Platter, but the inside was unclean, Luke 11.39 So there are many outside Professors of God and Christ, that r confes∣sing their Sins, and Repentance, as they say, from the Bottom of the Heart, but the Cause remains, the Bottom is still cor∣rupt, and therefore that you may come to the Bottom that is the Desire of my Soul, and the End of writing unto you; for you can never come to the Bottom, till you come to the Spi∣rit of Truth, the Heavenly Light that lets you see the Bottom of your Hearts, and searcheth out the most hidden Things; for the Heart of Man is deceitful, and none can search it but the Lord, Jer. 17.10. and the Lord knows it, and tries the Heart, ad searcheth the innermost Parts. And this is the Substance that is come, that searcheth the Heart and declares unto man his Thoughts, Ames 4.13. and as you obey him who is near you, even the Spirit of Truth, o
you will come to witness the Work you are a talking of, a Death to Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness; for Christ Jesus is manifest to take away Sin, renew Man and Woman again to God: And such as come to witness Re∣pentance from the Bottom of the Heart, are the only People of God, who are come to the Foundation and Rock which is laid in the Bottom of the Heart that is cleansed; for such as are cleansed to build upon. So this is the Truth, and is no Lye, and is a sure Teacher, which is in Heaven, and not only so, but in the Earth also, by his Spirit and Power redeeming, and bringing up out of Captivity his Heritage, that mourned unto him, Jer. 12.11. being in Desolation, and all false Co∣verings that serve for a Cloak for your Sins, as a bare Confes∣sion, and yet remain the same as before, will be too narrow to hide you from the Wrath of God, which is like to break forth upon you, except you repent. And therefore my Country∣men and Neighbours, I cannot but deal plainly with you to declare in Plainness the Thing that is upon me from the Lord; for I truly desire your Everlasting Good. And now you that are young, and think you have much Time to spnd, take heed to your selves, and remember the Lord before whom you must appear, that it may be well with you; for the Lord visited me amongst you in the Dayes of my Youth, not that I was better then others, but God who is rich in Mercy, heard the inward Cry of my Soul, and granted me Re∣pentance unto Life, Rom. 10.12. and that which I was saved by that declare I unto you, to be the only and alone Saviour, and there is not another, that can save from Sin but Jesus Christ, John 4.29, 42. neither is there any Way to come to God but by him, John. 14.6 and there is no way to come to him but as you turn to his Light in your Consciences, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, John 1.9. So all repent and live; for Wo will overtake all the wicked, and great Di∣stress will come upon them from the Lord; for the Day is dawned wherein he hath begun his Work, which he will car∣ry on by his mighty Power; and it is in vain for any to gain∣say the Lord; and all false Professions the Lord will bring
down, and set up his Ancient standing Rule over all, yea, the Standard of his Power, over the Devil, and all God's Enemies; for the Year of his Redeemed is come, and the Day of Venge∣ance is in his Heart, Isa. 63.4. who hath suffered, and hath been slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. by the Wicked amongst Men, and in many Ages and Generations he appeared spiritually, and by his mighty Power began to reform the Nations, but People dealt deceitfully with him, and cast his Word behind their back, Neh. 9.26. and in this dark Night of Apostacy he hath greatly suffered with his Heri∣tage, which hath been in the Wildernss, and in the Streets of that great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt where the Witnesses have prophesied in Sack cloth and Ashes, Rev. 11.3. but now the appointed Time is come, wherein the Lord hath prevailed over him that hath darkned, and de∣solated the People, and hath taken to him his great Power and is conquering, Psal. 146.10. and in this his Day, he will cut his Work short in Righteousness; for a short Work will the Lord make in the Earth, Rom. 9.28. and all Foundations of every Profession are clearly seen in the Light of the Lamb. & all whose Vine, is the Vine of Sodom, and Grapes, Grapes of Gomorrah, will be shaken as a Fig Tree that casteth her un∣timely Figs when she is shaken with a mighty Wind, Rev. 6.13. yea the Harvest of the Earth will be reaped, and cast into the Wine press of the Wrath of God, Rev. 14.19. And he that People sin against, whose Way you err and stray from, and whom you pierce by Reason of your wicked Works; I say, The Lamb that was slain, who liveth, and was dead, who hath all Power given unto him in Heaven and in Earth, Rev. 1.18. he treadeth the Wine press of the Wrath and Fierceness of the Almighty God, whom all Rebellious Christians have forsaken, therefore will he bring Judgment into Victory, that Righte∣ousness may run down as a mighty Stream; and happy, and blessed will all such be that return unto him in their Hearts, who is come near to execute true. Justice and Judgment in the Earth, who is the Covenant of the People, the Gentiles Light, and Israel's Glory. I say, such will see his Goodness, and
they only will be received into the Father's Kingdom being freed from the great Punishment due because of Sin. And so my Country men, Repentance unto Life, yea, a Forsaking of your Sins, that will cause the Lord to turn from his Fierce Anger that s like to break forth like Fire against you, and no∣thing else will make up the Breach, and therefore, O my Na∣tive Place, I cannot but lament thee, because I see the great A∣bominations that are committed within thee, and not in thee only, but in the Places adjacent, but chiefly I am concerned for you who are my Acquaintances, that if by any means I might provoke you to fear the Lord, and consider your latter End; for in the Way you are in which is sinful, you will never find peace with the Lord; for the End is Sorrow, and the Re∣ward is Death, Rom. 6.23. but if you forsake the Evil, and love Righteousness, you will come into Life, and live for∣ever with the Lord; and that is the Travail Ifel within me concerning you, that you may walk in the Light, and come to a Holy Righteous Conversation, that you may have Fellow∣ship with us. 1 John 1.3. and have Right to call God your Father, that you may be begotten of him, and so love one an∣other with a true Love in Righteousness, and so come to know the Spirit of adoption, which is the Spirit of his Son, who breaks down the middle Wall, Ephes. 2.14. and blots out the Hand-writing of Ordinances that is contrary to us, and takes it out of the Way, nailling it to his Cross, Col. 2.14. and so you will come into Covenant with God, in the Light of Jesus, which Light leads to God's Kingdom, and conducts out of all the barren Wildernesses, & Desolations of the first A∣dam, into a sure Way, and Place of Defence in the second A∣dam, where is Safety, and a Place of Rest, as he said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden: and you shall find Rest to your Souls, Mat. 11.26. and so you will know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free, John 8.32. and you will come to the general Assembly, and Church of the first born written in Heaven, Heb. 12.32. and to have Right to the precious Promises of God, and to the Tree of Life; but while you continue in Rebellion against God, you have no
Part nor Lot, or Inheritance amongst the Living; for Sin is the Hindrance of the Promises and Blessings of God unto the Soul, whatever you may promise your selves, and think to inherit if you dye in Sin, nay; for man comes short of all spiritual Blessings, notwithstanding all his Wisdom, Parts and Abilities; for God hath placed Cherubims, and a Flaming-Sword, which turns every Way to keep the Way of the Tree of Life, Gen. 3.24. and here man is defeated, notwithstanding all his fair out∣ward Shew or Pretence of Religion; for without Obedience to Christ, he is undone and lost, though he may retain the Name Christian, and as some in Dayes past, who had a Name to live, and were dead, Rev. 3.1. and stood as though they were Rich, and had need of nothing, but knew not that they were Poor, Blind, Wretched, Naked and Miserable, and so were without the City, New Jerusalem, without a Part or Inheri∣tance in the Kingdom of God; though they had a Name, yet were dead to God, in the Profession only without the Life, and so were threatned, as said the Spirit, I will kill her Children with Death, and all the Churches shall know that I am the Lord, that searcheth the Heart, and trieth the Reins, and give to e∣very one according as his Work shall be, Rev. 2.23. & 3.17. And so dear People, come into the Light of Christ that is within you, before your Glass be run, that you may find a Place of Repentance, lest the Dayes come over you when Repentance shall be hid from your Eyes, Hosea 13.14. and so with Esau seek the Blessing when it is too late, and a Place of Repentance with Tears, and could not find it, therefore while it is called to day, if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, Heb. 3.7, 8. but draw near unto the Lord, and he will draw nigh unto you, and gather you unto himself, and you shall no more wander without the Knowledge of him, but the gathering Arm of God's Power will keep you from the Ene∣my of your Immortal Souls, who is a Thief, and a Lyar from the Beginning, and a Murderer, who abode not in the Truth, John 8.44. and so you will be with the Redeemed of the Lord, whose Hearts are in Covenant with him, who are come to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things then
that of Abel, Heb. 12.24. and so you will know a sure Teacher, even Jesus Christ, who is a Priest forever, after the Order of Melchizedek, whose Ministration is Life, who hath the Words of Eternal Life, John 6.48. And this Teacher cannot be removed into a Corner, Isa. 30.20. who is the ten∣der gathering Shepherd, and careful over-seeing Bishop, 1 Pet. 2.25. which leads by the Springs of Living Water, and guides to the Fountain of Life, Rev. 7.17. and here you will find Power and Wisdom, Strength and all things needful; for God hath laid Help on one that is mighty, which is the mighty Re∣deemer and Reconciler of Man to God; and this is that secret Joy that springeth up in my Soul from day to day, feeling the holy Power of the Lamb of God, that taketh away the Sins of the World, who hath delivered my Soul, and now he doth minister Joy and Comfort to my inner Man, in the Sense whereof my Soul saith, Come all ye scattered ones, who are yet wandring as Sheep having no Shephed, come to the Fold of Rest; Oh! let your Hearts be bowed down and tendred before the Lord, who is risen in this the Day of his Power, and hath made a little Remnant willing to follow him, whose Eye is render, and seeth, every secret thing, and beholdeth the Breathings of the Souls of the Children of Men, who have Desires after him; and all you that mourn in secret, cleave unto him who hath toucht your hearts, and go not forth, but be retired in your Minds, and he will make way for you through all, and so Fear not them that can kill the Body, but fear him that hath Power to cast both Body and Soul into Hell (Luke 12.5.) and so such as will obtain Life, let them take up the Cross, and despise the Shame (Hebr. 12.2.) and turn your Backs upon all the World's Pleasures & Delights, and follow Christ in the Regeneration, and be of Moses's Mind, who esteemed it greater Riches to suffer Persecution with the People of God, then to injoy the Pleasure of Sin for a season, Hebr. 11.24, 25. for the Wo reacheth forever to Man and Woman in the Trans∣gression, if they Repent not; and that State is attended with the Wrath of God, and the Lord's Displeasure, which is a sufficient Discouragement. And so read these Lines in Coolness of spirit, and in a ponde∣rous
weighty sense of your present Conditions, & then you will receive Benefit thereby, and the End will be answered for which this is written; so being clear in my Conscience, in that I have done as I was drawn in Spirit by the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, to declare unto the World in general and to some more particularly, that which was opened to my Understanding, to warn People concerned herein to turn unto the Lord, I shall leave the Issue of all unto him who knoweth all Hearts, and re∣turn into my Rest in that Measure of Grace given me of God, where with my Brethren and Sisters, who are redeemed out of the Sins of the World, I shall give Glory to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore, Rev. 5.13. which was, and is, and is to come, who is our God, our King and Law-giver, before whom all must appear, who is God over all blessed forever, Amen. Richard Samble.
POSTSCRIPT. GOD, who is Everlasting in his Being, and Mighty over all in his Power, rewarding such as obey him with Life e∣ternal, Joy, Peace and everlasting Comfort; and also reward∣ing the Wicked with Punishment and Sorrow for evermore. When first he created Man and Woman, he created them in his own I∣mage, in Righteousness and true Holiness; but soon after the Creation, the Devil prevailed over them, and corrupted their Hearts, and so they lost the pure Presence of the Lord; and then, as the World came to be peopled, so did Wickedness abound in the Earth, although the Lord did strive with them by his Spi∣rit, that they might return and live, but they continued in the Rebellion against the Lord, and then the Lord said, My Spirit shall not alwayes strive with man &c. Gen. 6.3.—and so God brought the Flood upon them, and their Blood was upon their own Heads: And after the Flood, though great was the Deliverance of Noah and his Family, in that great Deluge wherein many Thousands were overthrown, yet one of the Sons of Noah became a Wicked Man, and the Curse came over him, Gen. 9.25. and as the World became peopled again, so did Wickedness encrease, and people grew up in Ignorance, without the Knowledge of the true God, in Rebellion against the Lord; and then God appear∣ed unto Abraham, and commanded him to forsake his Father's House, and his Kindred, Gen. 12.1. and Abraham believed and obeyed God, and was faithful in all things before him, with whom the Lord made a Covenant, and the Promise of Life was unto his Seed, wherein all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; and the Promise of God unto Abraham was, That his Seed should inherit the Land wherein he was a Stranger; so God blessed Abraham, and multiplied his Seed as the Stars of Hea∣ven; and they encreased unto a multitude in the Land of Egypt, and the Egyptians intreated them evilly, and afflicted them Fo Hundred Years, Gen. 15.13. and afterwards God remembred
his Covenant made with Abraham, and raised up a Prophet, to wit, Moses, who was faithful in all God's House, and by mighty Signs and Yokens of his Judgments upon Egypt, God brought them forth by a mighty Hand and an out stretched Arm, and preserved them by the Way from the Expectation of their Ene∣mies, and kept them in the Red Sea from being overtaken with the Egyptians; and God did this for them, to the end they might be unto him a Chosen People, to set forth his Praises to the Ends of the Earth: But soon after this great Deliverance, when they came into the Wilderness, the Devil by his Subtilty turned their Hearts from the Lord, and so Iniquity was found within their Camp, and Murmurings amongst the People, and so God was displeased, and cut down their chosen men who lusted by the way, and raised up another Generation amongst them, and they enter'd the Land, and God gave them his Law and his Statutes, that they might be a People known to the Lord, in obeying him forever; but soon after they came into that Inheritance, the Devil wrought a∣gain to turn their Hearts from the Lord, and they followed the Wayes of the Heathen whom God cast out before them, and then the Lord was grieved with them, and gave them into the Hands of their Enemies, who ruled over them, until they should remem∣ber the Lord, against whom they had sinned; and when they re∣membred the Lord, he sent Deliverance unto them, which brought them again to their Land: And so all may read who have Ʋnder∣standing, what the Cause is this day, why people do not injoy the Blessings of God unto their Souls, its certainly because they are in the Transgression: But God will remember such, though they may be in spiritual Captivity, that desire after him, and forsake their Sins, which is the Cause of their Souls Captivity; for when the Heart shall return unto the Lord, he will take away the Vails, and give an Ʋnderstanding of the thing that's Heavenly: So Israel dealt treachtrously with the Lord from time to time; but the Lord often times, when they cryed unto him, raised up faith∣ful Messengers, which declared unto them the Way of the Lord; and David, whom God chose, with whom he confirmed his Pre∣mise before made unto Abraham, and said, David shall not want a Man to sit upon his Throne forever; but this People, to
Israel, were Corrupters, and followed their own Inventions, and rebelled against the Spirit of God, and slew the Prophets of the Lord, which he sent unto them: And so the Time came when God according to his Promise, sent his Son, the Seed, wherein the Blessing consists, in which all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed, which is to gather into one all things in Christ, whe∣ther in Heaven or in Earth, Ephes. 1.10. But the Jews, though they were the Seed of Abraham outwardly, yet did not know this spiritual Seed, Christ, but rose against him, and put him to Death, h beit God raised him from the Dead by his Glorious Power, and received him again into his ancient Glory, that he had with him before the World began; but God turned his Hand a∣gainst these professing Persecutors, and the Time came over them that Distress and Sorrow compassed them in, and Affliction and Tribulations from day to day attended them, because of that bloody Action, in Consenting to the Death of Jesus; and so God's Fury was poured forth upon them from time to time, until they were disinherited and driven out of their Possession, which if they had received him, and believed that it was he, Eternal Life and Glory would have been their Reward for evermore: And a∣bout this time, God, who is rich in Grace, after Christ Jesus, the Son of his Love, was raised up from the Dead, began to appear in him, and to work by him inwardly in many, and raised up ma∣ny to bear witness of God, that he had raised up his Son from the Dead, whom he furnished with the Gift of Life, Power and Wisdom, to declare unto the Sons of Men, That Jesus was the Christ; and this was the Gospel which before was preached unto Abraham, unto whose Seed the Promise was forever, which Seed is Christ; and many Thousands by this glorious Gospel were ga∣thered to God, and a glorious Way they were brought into, and also into the injoyment of the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. never to be forsaken, nor yet to want a Man to execute Judg∣ment (in their Behalf) in Truth and Righteousness: But here comes the Misery again, the Devil, who was ever an Enemy to God's Heritage under every Dispensation, he begins to work a∣gain, and to seduce the Minds of such as profess Christ Jesus, and then Wickedness again began to spring, and as Wickedness aboun∣ded,
so people were darkened in their Ʋnderstanding; and as the Wicked One prevailed, so people were corrupted; and this was the beginning of falling away again from God, after the Appearance of Jesus Christ: And now, as the Jews and all Apostates in days past have rebelled against God, so have these called Christians rebelled against Christ, and so Darkness and Ignorance came over those called Christians also, and the Devil hath ruled, and hath had Dominion, and then God, who first appeared to them in his Son Christ Jesus, when they thus rebelled and grieved him, he with drew his Presence from them, and so they have been a wan∣dring People from Generation to Generation; but God, who is E∣verlasting, though Man hath changed in his Mind, yet God is the same, and changeth not; and that Blessed Truth and Everlasting Gospel, which is not another, in these last dayes hath God revealed again, and its now profest, injoyed and preacht by the despised Peo∣ple called Quakers, whom God hath gathered by the Right Hand of his Righteousness, to bear forth a Testimony for his Name, in this Generation, whom God will support, uphold and strengthen a∣gainst all Oppositions, that his ancient Truth may be proclaimed to the Ends of the Earth, that so such as are afar off may be brought nigh to God, & the Devil shall be defeated, whose Power of darkness hath reigned, and Christ Jesus shall reign, whose Right it is, and he shall bring us into the Possession of the spiritual Canaan, that Land of Eternal Rest which remains for the People of God; and he will chain the Devil that has deceived the Nations, & cast him into the Bottomless Pit, and his holy People shall possess and inherit forever the blessed Kingdom; and the Wicked and Abominable, and Murderers and Adulterers, and all Lyars, shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the se∣cond Death, Rev, 21.8. R. S. THE END.
