S557 13623329 100856
MODERN POLICIES, Taken from Machiavel, Bor∣gia, and other choice Au∣thors, by an eye-witnesse. Hom. Salust. Fragm.Libidinem dominandi, causam belli habent, & maximam gloriam in maximo imperio putant. Plautus in Capti∣vis.Nam doli, non doli sunt, ni si Astu colas,Sed malum maximum, si id palam pervenit. Trinum∣mus.Ambitio jam more sancta'st, Libera'st a Legibus,Petere honorem pro flagitio, mo∣re sit:Mores, Leges perduxerunt jam in potestatem suam. The fourth Edition. LONDON, Printed for Tho: Dring, at the signe of the George in Fleet-street neer Cliffords Inne. 1653.
To my very good Lord My Lord R. B. E. My Lord, I Was never so proud, as to think I could write any thing that might abide the test of your judicious eye; what I now send, appeales to your Can∣dor, intreating you to lay aside the per∣son
of a Iudge, for that of a Friend. It is at best but a Pamph∣let, whether you con∣sider its bulke, or worth. The result of a few pensive houres spent in recollecting what the memory had registred from publike observance, or private reading, in a Theme so sadly co∣pious as this is. If it be not impertinent to tell you what hin∣ted to this trifle, it
was this; Having had opportunity to looke abroad into the world, I tooke some notice of the Contra∣stos of the Italian Princes; I remark'd the Spaniards griping Portugal; his grounds for the challenge of that Kingdome, & his way of manag∣ing those grounds; I lookt upon his me∣thod of propagating Christianity in the West: (where one
saies the Indian is bound to be religi∣ous and poore upon pain of death.) More∣over, I observed with what Artifice the Pope moderated in the European quar∣rels, and with what devices he twisted the Gopsll, and the Advantage of the Chaire togehir; and in all the struglings and disputes, that have of late years be∣falne this corner of
the: World, I found hat although the pletence was, fiue and spirituall, yet the ultimate end, and sedpe, was gold, and greatnesse, and se∣cular glory. But (my Lord) to come nearer, when I saw Kingdomes tot∣tering, one Nation beeding against ano∣ther, yea, one piece of a Nation justling the other, and split into so many parties, and
petty enmities: and each of these quoting Bible to palliate his mad, and exorbitant opinions; I sigh'd, and it grieved mee to see popular easinesse, and well-meaning abus'd by Ambiti∣ous self-seeking men; for there is a Genera∣tion that is born to bee the plague, and disquiet, and scourge of the Age it lives in; that gladly sacrifice the publike peace to
private interest; and when they see all fi∣red, with joy warme their hands at those unhappy flames, which themselves kindle, tuning their merry Harps; when others are weeping over a kingdomes fu∣nerall. But above all, it pierced my heart to see the Clergy in such an high degree accessory to the civill distempers, and con∣tentions
that have every where shak'd the Foundations of Church and State; so that (as a Catholike noted) there hath been no floud of mi∣sery, but did spring from, or at least was much swel'd by their Holy-water. I search∣ed Evangelicall Re∣cords, and there was nothing but milde and soft Do∣ctrines, I inquired in∣to the breathings of
the Spirit, and they were pacificatory; I wondered from what Precedents and Scrip∣ture incouragements these men deduc'd their practises; and at last was forced to conclude, that they were only pretended Chaplaines to the Prince of Peace; Those Torches that should have been for saving Light, were degenerated into fire∣brands; Those Trum∣pets
that should have sounded retreats to popular furies, knew no other musicke but Martiall All-armes. I have endeavoured in the sequell to re∣present to you the Arts of Ambition by giving you the pi∣cture of a person o∣ver covetous of glo∣ry, the peice is course, but yet like; drawne onely in water co∣lours, which some of greater Leisure and
Abilities may possi∣bly hereafter lay in oyle. You know that the desires of man are vast as his thoughts, boundless as the Ocean, , A bored tub is not more insatiate. Tis pity that great∣nesse should at any time be out of the Rode of goodnesse; and I would some∣times, if I durst, with
Socrates, curse him that first separated pro∣fitable and honest▪ It does to me a lit∣tle relish of Paradox, that where ever I come, Machiavell is verbally curs'd and damn'd, and yet pra∣ctically imbraced and asserted; for there is no Kingdome but hath a Race of men that are ingenious at the perill of the pub∣like; so that as one said of Galba in re∣spect
of his crooked body: Ingenium Galbae malè habitat; so may I say of these in re∣gard of their crooked use; That wit could not have chosen a worse mansion, then where it is viriated, and made a Pander to wickednesse. If you aske mee what I mean to trou∣ble the world, that is already under such a glut of Books? You may easily perceive
that I consulted not at all with advanta∣ging my name, or wooing publike e∣steeme by what I now write; I knew there was much of naked truth in it, and though it might pos∣sibly be of some cau∣tion to prevent the insinuation of pious frauds, and Religious fallacies into my na∣tive Country: If any plaine-hearted, ho∣nest man shall cast a∣way
an houre in per∣using it, he may per∣haps finde something in it resembling his owne thoughts, and not altogether strange to his owne experience. It is not the least of our mis∣fortunes, that sins and vices are cost times endear'd to us by false Titles and Comple∣ments: being cou∣zened with a speci∣ous name, though much incoherent to
the thing we ascribe it: or ele, omiing the vice which is the maine, it intimates onely the eie which is the By  As for example, we call an ambitious man , a person of notable aime and high enterprize whereas in truth, signifies, an indirect affectour of Gran∣deur: And I finde that by incautelous inter∣tainment of these
Phrases, our judg∣ments are often brib'd to misapprehensions, & we seduced to bad actions. I have endea∣voured in the ensu∣ing discourse to wipe off the paint and fu∣cu: that so things may appeare in their true complexo, un∣adulterated with the slights and subtilties of Deluders. My Lord, That your Lordship may be one of those which
the darke Poet calls , that the youth of your Ho∣nours may be renew∣ed to you, that your happines may be ac∣quainted with no o∣ther season but a spring, is the earnest vote Of your bounden SERVANT.
THe name of Prince, which I often use, must be understood, as con∣vertible with any person, or persons, whom God hath in∣trusted with a just supre∣macy; all the dialects of Government being con∣cerned in the Abuse; I have made the cheife, and most familar, to represent the rest. I am not ignorant that the Quotations may justly seeme more numerous than method, and the Rule of Art will conveniently al∣low; I have this to say, to vindicate me from affect¦tednesse; that I have been
little studious of Elegance, and curiosity in the compo∣sure; esteeming nakednesse to be the best dress of truth: and if I mistake not, those attendants I have here pro∣cured for her, may afford some material, though litle ornamentall advantage.
A Praemonition. It is farre from the de∣signe of this Treatise, to derogate from the ho∣nour of the calling, or worth of the person of any sober Statesman; 'Tis a know∣ledge that no man observes with more due respects then my selfe; Because, I know it is no meane degree essen∣tiall to the peace, and flou∣rishing condition of a King∣dome or Common-wealth. 'Tis a jewell to be lock'd up in some few rare Cabinets,
and not to be made cheape, and expos'd to irreverence, by being bared, and prosti∣tuted to every vulgar eye. The Pseudo-Policy here mention'd is contradistinct to that science, which is e∣ver built upon piety and prudence; for upon these solid Bases, your wise Ar∣chitect delights to raises he glorious superstructure of government in a Prince, and subjection in a people: so knitting the Interest of both with reciprocall mix∣ture, that the welfare of the one may be involv'd in the good of the other: the Majesty may be preserv'd in its just splendor, and ye
the Liberty of the Subject remaine inviolate: Hee is the Atlas of the falling State, cures it when sicke, sets it when dis-joynted, meets it in its severall pres∣sures with sutable reliefs. Such was Philip de Com∣mines, of whom one said, it was a measuring cast, whether Lewis were the wiser King, or Philip the wiser Counsellour: such was Burleigh to our late Queen Elizabeth, whose advise had very eminent influence into the prosperitie of her Reign, which was such, as I beleive few ages can paral∣lel, and future times will read her happy Annals, as
written like Xenophon's Cyrus, Non ad historiae fidem, sed ad exemplum justi imperij; So that if we love Peace, or Plenty, or Liberty, we are bound in way of acknowledgment to owne that in Plutarch,Cato Ma∣ior. pav. But as the corruption of the best things makes them worst, so this noble know∣ledge has been abused to loose and ambitious ends,Ophyo∣genes, & Pfylli. by some men who seem to have suck'd the venome out of all politicks, misapplying what was good, and creating new according to the urgency of
their own occasions, like the Lawes that were made in Causinus his Babel, to be∣ru'd by manners,Furialibus commenta∣riis illu∣straut. and not manners by Lawes. They vex true Policy by misin∣terpreting, and false glos∣sing; framing in their hearts Diana's of hypocrisy and subtilty, and worship∣ing them in their actions. The Rules following there are few so silly as to beleive, though too many so wicked as to practise; and not only so, but by a bold imposture to perswade that such actions as are de∣duc'd from these principles, are justifiable, and if for∣tunate,
commendable. That all may see these Rocks, and shun them, and detest knavery though never so specious, and nauseate sinne, though robed in suc∣cesses and triumphs, is my daily prayer.
First Principle. The Polititian must have the shadow of Religion, but the substance hurts. THere is no superstition in Politicks more odi∣ous, then to stand too much uponni∣ceties and scruples: and therefore Machiavel cut the haire, when he ad∣vis'd, not absolutely to disavow conscience, but to manage it with such a
prudent neglect, as is scarce discernable from a tendernesse: not per∣mitting it to be techy and relucting, nor yet prostituting it, unlesse upon solemne and insu∣perable occasion: Hee notes it from Papirius in Livy, who slighted the Pullarii handsomly, and was rewarded; whereas Appius Pulcher did it grosly, and was puni∣shed. But because the Poli∣titian is best able to tell his own documents, you may please to conceive you found these broken discourses in his study:
to each of which I shall adde an Antidote. Externall holinesse in∣vites awfull regards; There is no mask that becomes Rebellion and Innovation so well as Religion; Nothing that so much conceals defor∣mity, & pretends beauty. 'Tis an excellent thing so to dissimulate piety, that when we act strong∣ly against it, in that very article of wickednes the people Saint us: Herod would faine worship, when he means to wor∣ry. —Ipso sceleris Molimine Tereus Creditur esse pius:
This is that which leades the World in a string, that hallowes the most hellish enterprises: for the common people (which are the ) never see behind the cur∣tain, a handson e glosse is with them as good as the Text: I believe the great Naturalist was in the right, when h call'd a Deity a jolly invenion, Irridendum,Plin. l. 2.6.7. agere curam rerum humanarum quicquid est summum, sed credi ex usu vitae est, Let me en∣joy the temporall advan∣tages of Religion, and let others take the eternall; Let me use it for a cloak
or a Crutch, and let o∣thers expect from it a Crowne. The River in Athenaeus is my emblem,43 Fons in Mileto, cu∣ius proflu∣es aqua dulcissima, guae vero in imo fal∣sa. whose up∣per waters were sweet and gratefull, but to∣wards the bottome brac∣kish. Let me be a superfi∣ciall, let others be funda∣mentall Christians: I like the humour of the Samseans in Epiphanius, that were neither Iewer, nor Gentils, nor Christians, but preserving a commo∣dious Correspondence with all▪ whatsoever I act in reference to Hea∣ven is meerely theatri∣call; and done in subor∣dination
to some other interest. Lycurgus could never have ingratiated his Lawes so effectually, if he had not pretended a Dialogue wth his God∣desse. 'Tis to me indif∣ferent, whether the Reli∣gion I personate be true or false, so it be but po∣pular: and if the people I meane to juggle with err fundamentally, I can by no means court them more, then by imbra∣cing their delusion; It buckles them very close to me in morall obser∣vance, to assist them in their spiritual soundnes, and mix with their di∣stemper;
and therefore I commonly lead the Van in the Faction, and call it Iure Divino, though I never found it but in Hells blacke Canons. How comfortably the Pope and Cardinall con∣fer'd notes,— Quan∣tum nobis lucri peperit illa fabula de Christo! O the rich income and glo∣rious result of hypocri∣sie! This, this must be diligently studyed and practis'd. — Da justum sanctumque videri, Noctem peccatis, & fraudi∣bus objice nubem.
Privacy for a sinne, and cleanly conveyance for a cheat, make it to common eyes seeme as white as innocency it self: the strictness of that Thiefe was very notable, who alwayes before hee went about the Worke of his Calling (for so he call'd stealing) went to prayers that God would blesse and prosper him: So I say grace to the De∣sign, be it never so wick∣ed, and give thankes for the successe, bee it never so bloody. But further in subser∣viency to a loose interest, there must bee no such
puling thing as consci∣ence; Hell, and Heaven, and Scripture, and what else the Christian e∣steems most sacred, must all truckle under the plot, but not be observ'd when they come to op∣pose it: Had Alexan∣der boggled at inva∣ding other mens King∣domes, hee had never wept for the scarcity of Worlds. There is noe greater obstacle to gene∣rous Actions, then a coy and squemish consci∣ence; Tis pretty that some tel us that it strikes Surdo verbere, and then how can it bee heard in
the noise and bustle of a clamorous World? Had your mighty Con∣querours, and your vali∣ant Captaines, and your thriving Popes, listned to this inward Charmer, their names had never swell'd, and look'd bigg in the Rolls of Fame.
Colasterion. BUt let all sober Chri∣stians know, that this shell of Religion, though it may be of ex∣ternal conducement, yet there is nothing that Gods pure and undelu∣ded eye looks on with more abhorrency: We may possibly deceive men, but tis in vaine to put Ironies upon God. A counterfeit Religion shall find a reall Hel, and tis pitty that such a Sa∣cred thing should be vi∣olenced, & made to obste∣tricate to rebellious ir∣regular designes.
As for such who have conspir'd with the wrath of God in the stupefacti∣on of their consciences, though they may for a time struggle with those inward checks, yet there will bee a day (if not in this life) when that wit∣ness, that Judge, that Ju∣ry will not bee bribed. God hath fixed it in the soul as an eternall Regi∣ster,Origen. as an impartiall Di∣ary as the Censor of the af∣fections, and Paedagogue of the passions. It does not only illustrate divine justice in an Autocatcri∣sy, but was meant by God for a bridle and restricti∣on:
And he that hath by an inveterate wickedness conquer'd the opposition which God seated in his heart to sin, may possibly consult well with his present advantage and greatnesse, but not at all with his future comfort; for besides the losse of that intimate pleasure which writes upon inno∣cency;Vinum i pectore. Hee eels some∣times those bosome quarrells that verberate and wound his Soule, — for .
Principle II. Thè Politician must by all means make the most in∣sinuating applications to the people that hee can; and lock up his owne de∣signe, in pretence for Re∣ligion, Liberty, Restitu∣tion of Laws, Reforma∣tion of Gabels, &c. THE prosperity of Innovation de∣pends in a high measure upon the right knack of kindling and fomenting jealousies and dislikes in the people; and then weilding those grudges
to the favour & advan∣tage of private ends; for the people are to the Polititian like tools to the Mechanick, he can performe nothing with∣out them, they are his wings, his wheels, his Im¦plements, the properties that he acts with. That this may be done effectually, there must be an excellency in these following slights. First, To assign such a cause of grievances, and such a course for redress, as may open a way to the alteration he ayms at: as if he means to alter the Government', or to in∣gross
the Supremacy, he must artificially con∣vince of a necessity to arme, 1. Defensively, and if that succeeds, 2. Offensivly; This hee may do by false Alarmes of danger, inventing hor∣rid News, and plying the people with such fictiti∣ous perils, as may make them beleive, Religion and Liberty, and All is at stake, and that they are the Geese that must save the Capitoll. Secondly, when hee sees opportunity to re∣veale his own designe, he must doe it gradually, and by peece-meale; for
that which at one view would bee a Mormo to fright them, give it them in small parts, and they will digest it well e∣nough. Thirdly, Hee must compose his very garbe and gesture: 'tis a great matter to tell a lye with a grace; as, if Religion be the Mode, he must in his tales knock his breast, attest God, and invoke imprecations upon him∣selfe, if hee does not doe that, which hee never in∣tends. Fourthly, Hee gives them good words, and bad Actions, like those
the Historian brands with a Crudelitatem dam∣natis, crudelitatem in∣itis, ravishes them with apprehensions of Liber∣ty, under the highest strain of oppression: for it is most certaine if, you please them with the name, they will imbrace it for name and thing. Something like this had beene imposed upon Rome, when the Orator writ to his Friend At∣ticus,Ingeniosi muse pula∣tores. — Nominu re∣rum perdidimus, & licen∣tia. militaris libertas vo∣catur, that they were cheated in names, for military Licence was
miscal'd Liberty; This is wel describ'd by Plau∣tus in Truculentu. In melle sunt lingu sitae vestrae, at∣que orationes, Lacteque: corda felle sunt sita, at∣que acerbo aceto. Elinguis dicta dulcia datis, at cor∣de amare facitis. Fifthly,. He observes that they receive proba∣bilities wisely propoun∣ded, more greedily then naked truths: and there∣fore he is very studious to glase and polish his Impostures,. that so they may to a loose eye dis∣semble truth, according to that of Pindar, —  —
, : Or that of Menander: . Sixthly, when hee hath by the assistance of the people got the sword into his owne hands, he awes them with it, and frights them into future complyance. Hee tha courted them before with all the adulator termes, that ambition could invent, or they re∣ceive; as if he had bee
vow'd their Martyr, and ready to sacrifice his dea∣rest enjoyments upon the Altar of publick li∣berty and freedome; as if his veines knew no o∣ther blood, but such as he would be proud to spend in their service, having now served him∣selfe of them, he forgets the bosome that warm'd him, they hear from him now in a Palinode, he curles up his smooth complements into short Laconicks, and exchan∣ges his Court-ship for command.
Colasterion. FIrst, We may be as∣sured that there is no greater Index of ambiti∣on, then an affectation of popularity: which ap∣peares in meek addres∣ses to the people, wooing and familiar condescen∣tions, bemoaning thei sufferings, commending a more vigorous sense o them; that of the Comit is no bad rule, Non temerarium est ubi dives ble de appellat pauperem, Aitera manu fert Lapicadem, pa ostentat altera: Nemini crede, qui longe blandu'st  ves pauperi.
Or that which Livy notes of a Crandee, Cre∣debant hand gratuitam in tanta superbid comita∣tem fore, the extreame kindnesse or fawning of great persons, is alwaies suspicious, because of∣ten fraudulent: remem∣ber the Sileni, that use to kill with huggs, and em∣braces. Secondly, Know it's very usuall for men to personate goodnesse, till they have accomplished their ends; 'tis observed of Appius, when he had his wish, Finem fecit ge∣rendae alienae personae; tis an old note,
Maxima pars morem hunc homines habent, quod fibi votunt, Dumid imperiant▪ honi sunt, se ubi iam penes sese habent, Ex bonis pessimi, & fraudulentiss sunt. Athons tells a pret∣ty story, of one Atheni born obscurely, who  long as hee was priva and poor, excelled in  soft and tractable dispo∣sition, but when by jug∣ling he had obtained th Athenian Governmen there was none more ∣dious for a cruel, cove∣ous, & barbarick tyrany: as it is reported  Caligula, there was nev
a better Servant, and a worse Master. Thirdly, We know that a good aime, much ess a good pretence can∣not justifie a bad action, and therefore we ought to be as Solicitous about the lawfulnesse of the meanes, as about the goodnesse of the end. It s a Maxim in Morality, that bonum oritur ex inte∣s, and in Christianity, hat wee must not doe vil that good may come f it; & we may possibly escue our selves from uture cousenage, if we xamine the lawfulnesse f every circumstance
leading to the end pro∣pounded, before we are tickled and transported with the beauty of the pretence.
Principle. III. If the Supremacy be inva∣ded, the Lapses of the former Magistrate must be inculcated with the greatest advantage, and what is wanting in rea∣lity, must be supplyed in Calumny. IT cannot easily be imagined of what sin∣gular importance the aspersing and blotting of a Prince is, to boyl up popular discontent to that height which is re∣quisite for a rebellion; and here it must diligent¦ly
be enquired if there have not beeene indeed such lapses, as have gal'd the people; and though they be old sores and skin'd, yet they must be searcht and refreshed, and exasperated with all the urging circumstan∣ces, that come within the invention of scandal; It must be remembred, if any persons of publick note have suffer'd under the Sword of Justice, whose crimes can by Art or eloquence be extenu∣ated, whose hard mea∣sure must be mentioned with teares, that so old Traytors may be pro∣pounded
for new Martyrs. This hath been the ordi∣nary Method of Ambiti∣on, as you may find it no∣ted by a great Scholar in these words,Barclay contra Monarch▪ 30. — Fuit haec omnibus saeculis, & adhuc est ad occupandum tyranni∣dem expeditissima via, dum summo se amore; ac pietate in patriam esse si∣mulant, principum vitia, & populi miseriam, apud suos primum, deinde palam queribunda voce lamentan∣tur, non quo plebem, cuius solius commodis inservire ideri volunt, ab illo ser∣vitutis jugo asserant in li∣bertatem; sed quo populari aura subnixi, aditum ibi
& januā ad eam ipsā dig∣nitatem, nequiora aliquan∣do ausuri patefaciant. And therefore if the Prince be severe, he gives him Nero's brand, a man knea∣ded up of dirt and blood: if he be of parts and con∣trivance, he calls it per∣nicious ingenuity: If he be mild and favourable to tender consciences, he declaims against his to∣leration: If he urge uni∣formity, and decency in Divine service, he railes at his Superstition. And because there is no such aequilibrious vertue, but has some flexure to one of the extreams he is ve∣ry
carefull to publish the extream alone, and to silence the vertue. But if the Prince hath by carriage of extraor∣dinary innocence,Candida vita. vindi∣cated himself from oblo∣quy (wich shall scarce be, if small faults be rightly improved) then Machiavels advice must be follow'd, to calumni∣ate stoutly, till the peo∣ple have entertained something to his preju∣dice: 'Tis a Figure in Politicks to make every infirmity a fault, and every faull a crime: and if the people be disposed to alteration, these must
be first urged against a Monarch to depose him, or if need be to murther him; which is commen∣dable, if you can dresse him up like a Tyrant, as you may find it justified by an honest Scot,Buchanan. who complaines that there are not some glorious re∣wards appointed for Ty∣rannicides: and by the best of Orators,Pro Mil∣ne. — Grae∣cos Deorum honores tri∣buisse iis, qui Tyrannos ne∣caverunt: and by the Tra∣gedian, Hercules furens. Victima baud ulla amplion potest.
Magisve optma mactari Iovi, Quam Rex iniquus. And secondly, these personall faults must be artificially devolved up∣on Monarchy it self. There remaines to disperse the commen∣dations of that Govern∣ment which is intended for a Successor: if Ar∣stocracy, the long-liv'd prosperity of Sparta and Venice, is a very plausible evidence of its goodnes: If Democracy, the happi∣nes of the Romanes under their Tribunes is very memorable; to which
may be added this out of Machlavel:pon Li∣vi p. 22. that they are the most sutable guardi∣ans of any thing, who are least desirous to usurp it: and without doubt con∣sidering the designes of the Nobility and the people, we must confesse, that the first are very ambitious of rule, the last desire onely not to be opprest.
Colasterion. I Presume that person is very rare, that can boast of such an absolute Saint-ship whilst he is a∣mongst mortals, but that there will now and then some actions fall from him, which confesse hu∣manity, and require Can∣dor: some leaves in the volume of the fairest life, that are Legenda cuno venia: If this be a com∣mon frailty, why do we six such rigid censures upon the miscarriages of Princes or why do we deny them the same
mildness which we use, when wee commiserate the infirmities of other Men? 'Tis yet much more disingenious to re∣vive and pore upon a few bad actions, which it may be have been long ago expiated with many good: Take this from no mean Statist. — Iniqua in omni re accusanda, prae∣termissis bonis, malarum enumeratio, vitiorumque se∣lectio; namne ullus quidem isto modo magistratus vi∣tuperabilis noerit. As greatnesse gives a glosse to the vertues of a Prince, so it mitigates his vices; for if we look up∣on
him as circled with honour, and all outward enjoyment; we see with∣al that variety of tempta∣tions he hath to struggle with above others, ha∣ving no other Guard, no other weapon then his meer vertue; sometimes we are defended from a sin by our very impoten∣cy, it may be above our sphere, or out of our reach; we do not, because we cannot; how often are our wils offenders, when our hands are innocent? wee are checked from without, he commonly from within, having no∣thing to dispute with his
immoderate desires but himselfe. This is that which inhances the goodnes of a Prince, as that excellent Poet leads his Temperate Knight through al the delicacies and charms of pleasure,Spencer. and delivers him a Con∣querour. But suppose a Magi∣strate really tyrannical; it is no contemptible question, Whether the evils of the redresse may not be equivalent to the mischiefe. I remember Livie's, Nec morbum ferre possumus, nec remedum: and Plutarchs,
: and Tacitus, Ferendae Regum ingenia, neque usui esse crebras mu∣tationes: vitia erunt, do∣nec homines, sed neque haec continua, & meli∣orum interventu pensan∣tur; and Seneca, Infae∣liciter aegrotat, cui plus periculi a medico quam à morbo. Poise the mise∣ries of a civil War with the grievances of an un∣just Magistrate, and the Polititian must take ma∣ny granes of allowance from fallacy to make the scales even. For though the fury of incen∣sed tyranny may fal hea∣vy
upon many particu∣lars,, Arist. Pol. 7. yet the bloody con∣sequences of an intestine Sword, are more epide∣micall, and more perma∣nent. As to the charging the faults of a Governour upon the Government its self,Isocrates. I see nothing in it but delusion, nor can there be a more grosse abuse, then . For King-killing, be∣cause I know it a techy subject, I shall wholly omit all discouse of it; only I finde it damn'd by
an able English Divine Jesuiticall;Io. Good∣win, in his Anticava∣lerism. and Tacitus commends to subjects rather scutum then gladi∣um, the shield of patience and toleration, rather then the Sword.
Principle IV. The Polititian must nou∣rish some mercenary Ie∣suits, or other Divines, to cry up his aymes in their Churches, that so the poyson may insinu∣ate more generally into all the parts. HE that peruses Hi∣story, will finde that there hath beene no Innovation so grosse, no Rebellion so hide∣ous, but hath had some Ecclesiasticall Fomen∣tors: for such as want
worth enough of their owne to reach prefer∣ment in a regular way, are most apt to envy the just honours of better men; and despairing to obtain their end by lear∣ning and piety, they as∣pire to it by the crooked meanes of faction and schisme; nor are these despicable instruments to the Polititian; for the sharpest sword in his Ar∣my cannot vye services with a subtle quill: You may see his businesse in the Comick,Aristoph. . The Jesuite reckons
it in the number of his merits,Concutiunt populos, vexant regna, soli∣citant bel∣la, diruunt Ecclesias. if he may by any sinister wayes ruffle and disorder Heretical king∣domes (so he cals them) encourage weak and un∣stable mindes to slight Magistracy', irritate di∣visions, tumults, rebelli∣ons, absolve from oaths, and al sacred ties; so that it is hard to find any tra∣gicall Scene, or bloody Theatre, into which the Iesuite hath not intruded, and been as busie as Da∣vus in the Comedy, con∣tributing in a very high measure to every fana∣tick insolence, Justify∣ing the old Lemma of
Loiola's Picture, Cavete vobis Principes: These are the firebrands of Europe, the forge and Bellows of sedition, Infernall Emis∣saries, the Pests of the Age, men that live as if huge sinnes would merit Heaven by an Antiperi∣stasis. 2. Nor is any Nation without some turbulent spirits of its own, the dis∣honour of the Gown and Pulpit, the shame,Classica ca∣nere. and sometimes the ruine of their Countrey; you would thinke they had their Text from a Ga∣zet, because you heare so much of a Curranto in
the Application: That these may be fit imple∣ments for the Polititian, there are thse requisite qualifications. 1. There must be a principall gift of wrest∣ing the Scripture, vexing & urging the holy Text, constraining it to patro∣nize the design; the great Apostle expresses this in three very emphaticall termes; 1. Cogging the Dye, making the Word speake what they list; 2. Crafty applications, and expositions of it; 3. All the Methods and Arts of consenage,
,. gilding and varnish∣ing rotten doctrines, and this must be done. 1. In publick, vomit∣ing out flames and Sul∣phur from that Sacred Pegma, where he should deliver none but milde and soft, that is, Evange∣licall Embassages. 2. In private,. at Par∣lour Sermons,Evange∣lioptho. ri. and meet∣ing houses, where he is listened to as an Oracle, and here commonly he is more Euthsiuast then Scripturist, and his Au∣ditors beleive his dreams to be as Canonical as the
Revelation; like those Melancthon speakes of, Quicquid somniant, volunt esse spiritum sanctum, or those that the Father chides, when he tels them that every whimsey is not Prophesie . 3. Hee ought to be of some abilities in dispu∣ting, and what he wants in Logick, he must sup∣ply in Garrulity: for whatsoever hee affirmes, the interest he hath in his seduc'd hearers improves into a Syllogisme;Populi.  if you ask after his Topicks;l. St. Herom Ex officina carnificum argu∣menta
petit: if after his weapons, Armat se ad la∣trocinium per Christi no∣men,Strada. and the woun hee makes is Faction; those consciences which will not surrender to his parly, his Master takes by storme: And thus hee abuses Christ, by pretending his Fa∣vour to unwarrantable Actions; hee abuses his Prince, by alienating the affection and allegiance of his subjects; he abuses the Church, by shattring it into rents and schisms; wounding it with a fea∣ther from its own wing, snatching a Coale from
the Altar,Ecclesiae nomine ar∣mamini & contra Ec∣clesiam di∣micatis. Aug. to fire both Church and State; and lastly he abuses himselfe, for when the Polititian hath made his best use of his seditious spirit, hee leaves him to his owne wilde distempers, having directed his owne thoughts to another Goale.
Colasterion. ALthough we have caution enough a∣gainst these in sad and frequent experien∣ces, these latter Ages groaning under the ef∣fects of an exorbitant Clergy; yet such is the easinesse and credulity of the Vulgar, such the subtlety and dissembled sanctity of the Impostor, that hee meets with as great a pronenesse in the people to be coused, as he brings willingnesse to delude; for it is a true Observation, that these
Clancular Sermocina∣tors beare as great sway in popular mindes, and make as deep impression upon their consciences, as the Loyolists doe, when they impose upon their blinde Laity. I dare onely subjoyne these few advises. First, I should suspect  Clericall Statu, I meane such a one as in the dispensation of Sa∣cred Oracles, tampers with secular affaires, un∣lesse it be in case of high concernment to his Au∣ditors soules. Secondly, I should be∣leive him a Jugler, that
sprinkles his Sermons with murmurs against the lawfull Magistrate, Ecclesiasticall, or Civill, unlesse he hath some bet∣ter ground for his dis∣like, then a th warting his humour, in things Con∣troversiall and Adiapho∣rous. Thirdly, I should more then doubt his knavery, that should suborn Scripture, to at∣test, or incite to Illegall Actions, as a kin to that, which Salvian calls Reli∣giosum scelus. 4ly. All newes in Religi∣on, whether in Doctrine or Discipline, is
common skreene of pri∣vate design; Let  tell it,Apud. Di∣on. Cass.  Which is noted by the great Causabon in his Epi∣stle before his Baronian exercitations, thus; Cu∣piditas novandi haec secum mala semper trahit, Christ inconsutilem tunicam lace∣rat, sectas novas parit, & statim multiplicat, Eccle∣siam & populum concutit &c. Tis sad to see Vrati divine Vrania inroll'd i blood, the Stars and Lu∣minaries
of the Church, to shed such blacke and malignant influences; in lieu of pious documents, to heare none but furious incentives; Ite aacres, tantaeque precor confidite Causae;Papirius. The Cause they serve, is the doctrine and the use, the egg, the ap∣ple, the head and foot of all their discourses; if you like to confer notes, you may finde a peice of their Sermon in Barclay to this effect,Con. Mo∣narc. p. 32. Se Evange∣lij libertatem praedicare, illm Christianis animis vim inferre, suam cuique conscientiam liberam re∣linquere, verbo ducere, non
vi quemquam adigere; ea esse Evangelij doctrinam, u omnes conscientiae fruantu libertate: sibique ut id li∣ceat, votis omnibus postu∣lare.
Principle. V. If successe waites upon his Enterprises, he urges it to authenticate his Cause. THere is no Argu∣ment more popular then succes, because the bulke of men is not able to distinguish the permission of God, from his approbation: And although it be in its selfe fallacious and feeble, yet the misery of the con∣quer'd denies them the opportunity to dispute it; for the opposition of the Sword will never be
confuted by the bare fist of Logick. Nor doth the Victor commonly per∣mit any ventilation of his dictates; for when the body is a slave, why should the reason be free? ,In Pom∣peio. ; as the souldiers in Plutarch wondred any would be so importunate to preach Laws, and Mo∣rall reasons to men with Swords by their sides; : And if Armes knew not how to descend to rationall inquiries, but were enough justified by
an odd kinde of necessity of their owne creating; like those in Livy, In ar∣mis jus ferre, & omnia for∣tium virorum esse. I have often considered with my selfe, what should move Tyrants to Print Justifications of themselves, and asserti∣ons of their proceedings, which I suppose never made an understanding man a Convert, nor met with a cordiall reception in any; unlesse the abuse of a few, poore, shallow Beleivers, be thought a tryumph worth their paines. I have sometimes thought they do by these
papers please themselves in their abilities to de∣lude, and so gratifie their tyranny over the noblest part of mn, by denying the Liberty of the thought, and subduing the powers of the Soule to an implicit coherence with their owne magiste∣riall opinions. But our Polititian, by quoting the successe of his undertakings, besides the plausibleness▪ and in∣sinuating nature of the Proposition its self, hath the advantage of power to make us beleive him. Nor▪ is this bait con∣temptible, many of parts
and prudence, yea and of Religion, have been stag∣ger'd by it; some questi∣on whether Diagoras de∣serv'd the brand of A∣theisme, considering the wilde conceits they then had of their Gods; or differ'd from the com∣mon Creed, crying out, O how the Gods favour sacriledge! when he had a merry gale, after a sacri∣legious atempt. The best of the Roman Historians calls the Victory, the just Arbitresse of the Cause, eventus belli velut aequus Iudex, unde jus stat, ei vi∣ctoriam dabit: So hard it is to perswade meer rea∣son,
that vertue may b unfortunate, and vi happy. He was no small Po that argued himselfe o of his Gods, by seei wickednesse honoured,  worth slighted: whi he expresses thus; Memtor to Lius tu mulo iacti at Cato parv, Pompeiusnullo, guis putet esse De In English. Licinus does in Marble sleep, A common Urne does Cato keep Pompeys ashes may catch cold, That there are Gods, let Dou Hipp.There may be so use made of that in Se∣ca,
Honesta quaedam scelera successus facit, prosperous mischiefes are Cardinall vertues in the Worlds Ethicks; & therefore the Tragedian repeates it, Prosperum ac faelix scelus,Her. Eur. virtus vocatur. The un∣warrantablenesse is hid and concealed in the glo∣ry of the successe: wee often praise the Macedo∣nian Conquest, but sel∣dome mention their boundlesse and unjust ambition. On the contrary, if an undertaking really good miscarry, we censure it: so that according to the vogue of the World, 'tis
the event that gives th colour to the action, and denominates it good o bad.Old. To .
Colasterion. THere is some of this Leaven in the judgments of most, notwitstand∣ing those brighter dis∣coveries, in the Noone of Christianity we live un∣der. A Bible throughly observ'd, would expound to us much of the riddle, and dark passages of pro∣vidence: we are so short∣sighted, that we cannot see beyond time, we va∣ue things, and men, by their temporall prospe∣rities, and transient glo∣ries; whereas if we put
Eternity into the othe seale, it would much out∣poise that worldly Lus∣stre, that so much abuses our eye, and cousens our understandings. I finde not in holy writ that God hath in separa∣bly annex'd goodness and greatness, justice and vi∣ctory: Hee hath secur'd his servants of the felici∣ties of a better life, but not of this. Chists Kingdome was not, our happinesse is not of this World. Nor doth my Bible shew me any warrant for appeal to heaven for th decision of this, or that
ntricacy, by bestowing successe upon this party, or that cause, according to its righteousnesse, and due merit. There is a vast difference betwixt  and , e∣ven in Scripture constru∣ction. The great Turke may justly exult, and prune himselfe in discourses of this nature, if they bee once admitted, & own'd by Christians: And I shall forbeare any longer to think Mahomet an Im∣postor, and must receive the Alcoran for Gospel; f I shall bee convinc'd that temporall happiness
and triumph, are a true Index of divine Favour▪ Our Religion hath some∣thing more to invite our closure with it; it pro∣poses a conveniency on Earth, but the Crowne and Garlands are reserv'd for Heaven. The Mony-God in A∣ristophanes pretends a command from Iupiter to distribute as great a Lar∣gesse to the wicked,. as to the good; because if ver∣tue should once impro∣priate riches, that faire Goddesse would be more wooed for her Dowry▪ than for her native beau∣ty: So if Religion were
attended with those out∣ward Allurements that most take the senses; we should be apt to follow Christ for the loaves, and over-look the spirituall charmes, and more noble ends of Christianity. The Heathen could say, Foelix praedo mundo exemplum inutile, Happy Pyracy is a thing of un∣happy presidency; For∣tunate sinnes may prove dangerous temptations; But to say that God doth signally at test the actions of such a person, or the justice of such a cause, by permitting it to prosper, and taper up in the
world, is such a deceit, as deserves our serious abhorrency—I leave it with Ovids wish, —Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu facta not anda putant.
Principle VI. The Polititian must change with the times. THAT Alterations & Revolutions in Kingdomes are the rods with which God scour∣ges miscarrying Princes,Comin. 170 is resolved by my Lord of Argenton: to which may be added out of Aristotle in the fift of his Politicks — Per fraudem & dolum reg∣na evertuntur, That the ruines of a Kingdom are often derived from fraud
and subtleties: I shall omit inquiry into other Causes, as forrein to my present purpose. The Polititian knows best how to improve these popular Gusts, be∣cause hee caused them▪ such a storme is his seed time. 'Tis the boast of a Dutch man, that he can saile with all winds; the aspiring man observes the quarter whence the fairest gales of prefer∣ment blow, and spreads the sailes of his Ambiti∣on to entertaine them; nor can the compasse breath more varieties, then his dextrous soul has
changes and garbs, and suitable compliances. What the Orator cals his top and perfection, to make happy application to the severall humours and genius of all sorts of men, qualifying his ad∣dresse with what he knowes will most charm the person he treats; that the Polititian does not only with his lip, but life you may finde all those Figures and Tropes di∣gested into his actions, and made practicall, that are in the other only vo∣call. He remembers that of an English Marquesse
awlet of Winchester) who having succesfully served four Princes, and still in the same room of favour,Nantons Reg alia. unshaken with the vicissitudes he had run through, being ask'd by one, by what meanes he preserv'd his fortune, he replies, that he was made, ex salice, non ex quercu, of the pliant wil∣low, not stubborn Oak, alwaies of the prevailing Religion, and a zealous professor. This easmesse and bending is of abso∣lute necessity; for, if the same temper, which insi∣nuated in violent times, were retained in a com∣posed
and setled govern∣ment, it would be alto∣gether distastfull; and so on the contrary. Therefore if Religion be fashionable, you can scarce distinguish him from a Saint: He does not only reverence the holy Ministers, but if need be, he can preach himselfe: If cunctation prevailes, he acts Fabius: If the buckler must be chang'd for a sword, he personates Marcellus: If mildenesse be usefull, Soderini of Ve∣nice was not more a lamb then he: If severities are requisite, Nero's butche∣ries are sanctities, com∣pared
with his: As Alci∣biades in Plutarch, shifted disposition as he alter'd place (being voluptuous and jovial in Ionia, frugal & retir'd in Lacedaemon) so he proportions him∣selfe to time, place, per∣son, Religion, with such aplausiblenesse, as if he had been born only to serve that opinion, which hee harbour'd but as a guest whilst it continued in sway: having a room in his heart, if occasion be, to lodge the contra∣ry, and to cry it up with as much ardour; as hee once us'd to extoll the former. And thus like a
subtle Proteus, he assumes that shape that is most in grace, and of most profi∣table conducement to his ends, In eo stant confilia, quod sibi conducere putat. He abounds in that which Varo cals, vera∣tile ingenium, a voluble wit, like the changling derided by Plautus, as more turning then a Potters wheele.Rota figu∣lari versa∣tilior. He hath this advan∣tage of the Camelion, that he can assume white ness; for I finde him of∣ten wearing the vest of innocency, to conceale the uglinesse and black∣nesse of his attempts.
Finally, he is the Heli∣otrope to the Sun of Ho∣nour, and hath long since abjur'd his God, Religi∣on, Conscience, and all that shall interpose, and skreen him from those beams, that may ripen his wishes and aymes in∣to enjoyments.
Colasterion. BUt the true States∣man is inviolably constant to his Prin∣ciples of vertue, and reli∣gious prudence; his ends are noble, and the means he uses, innocent: he hath a singl eye on the publick good; and if the ship of the State miscarry, he had rather perish in the wrack, than preserve himselfe upon the plank of an in-glorious subter∣fuge. His worth hath led him to the Helme, the Rudder he uses, is an ho∣nest and vigorous wis∣dome
the Star he looks to for direction is in Heaven; and the port he aymes at, is the joynt welfare of Prince and people. This constancy is that solid Rock upon which the wise Venetian hath built its long-liv'd Re∣publick: So that it is not improbable the Maiden∣Queene borrowed her Motto of Semper eadem, from this Maiden Com∣mon wealth. 'Tis true, something is to be conceded to the place, and time, and per∣son; & I grant that there are many innocent com∣pliances;
Virgils Obliqua∣re sinus is observable, there may be a bending without a crookednesse: We may circumire, and yet not aberrare; Paul be∣came a Jew, that hee might gaine the Jewes, but he did not become a sinner, that he might gain sinners; He was made all things to all men, but he was not made sin to any: that is, his condescensi∣ons were such, as did we consist with his Christi∣an integrity. Greatnesse, and Ho∣nours, and Riches, and Scepters, those glorious temptations, that so
much inamour the do∣ting world, are too poor shrines for such a sacrifice as conscience, which the Polititian hath so much abus'd by an inveterate neglect, that it is be∣come menstruous, and Ephemerall.
Principle VII. If the Polititian find reason to impose oathes, Let them be of such ambi∣guity as may furnish with a sense obliging to the design, and yet so soft as the people may not feel the snare. IT appeares by sad ex∣perience, that in pro∣pounding of oaths, requi∣ring promises, and other solemn Tyes; there have been multitudes induced to bind themselves upon some secret Loose, and men tall reservation; wch
they have framed to themselves as a salvo in case of breach: so apt we are in affaires of greatest importance, to advise more with corrupt▪ wit than sound conscience. In the Catalogue of self-delusions, you may possibly finde these; 1. We are ready to in∣terpret the words too kindly, especially if they be ambiguous; and 'tis hard to find terms so po∣sitive, but that they may be eluded indeed, or seem to us to be so, if we be disposed. 2. Some are invited to illicite promises qu
illicit, because they know them to be invalid. 3. Some are frighted into these bonds by threats, and losses, and temporal concernments, and then they please themselves that they sweare by Duress, and so are disingaged. 4. Some are oath∣proofe; I mean there are such sear-soul'd men, as will swear Pro and Con. 5. Some have learn'd from the Civilians,Grot. de iur. belli, 245. that though wee sweare to a thing not materially un∣lawfull, yet if it impedes a greater morall good, it becomes void.
Some take Liberty to sweare, because they judge the person to whom they sweare inca∣pable of an oath: as Cic∣ro defends the breach of oath to a Theife, from perjury, and Brutus to a Tyrant: as it is in Appian, . The first sort of thes fals most properly under the notice, and practise of our Polititian; though he may also use the last, but at different times. It is not difficult for him to cast his desire into such soft glib expression as will down with most▪
Yea, with many that would absolutely dis∣avow the same thing in rough Language. If he be unskil'd in this black art, I commend him to the Paedagogy of the Del∣phick Devill. Now it is most cer∣taine, there is no other tye of such security, and establishment, to a per∣son that hath ravished greatness, and acquired it by violence. Usurpation hath only these two pil∣lars, its owne Armes, and Militia, and publick oath and acknowledgement; and it is scarce worth Quaerie, whether, when
the Grosse of a Nation is thus bound, the Oath be not as valid, and the con∣science as much concer∣ned, as if it had beene sworn to a lawful Prince. It is reasonable that a usurping power cannot upon any prudent per∣swasion have the same confidence in the love of the people that a Just hath: Nor is the follow∣ing government inticing, as Tacitu notes, Nec qus∣quam imperium malis arti∣bus quaesitum benè admini∣stravit. The same with Guazz,De civil converse. l. 2. p. 132. where one obje∣cting the vices of Prin∣ces, receives this answer,
Perchè non erano Prencip per natura, ma per violen∣za, & erano più temuti che amati: And therefore if the Polititian can by the blessed meanes fore∣mentioned gaine a supe∣riority, there is no trust∣ing to those ingenuous Guards, his own good∣nesse, and the love of o∣thers: His best defence is awe, and feare, and Scaffold, and Gibbet, and the like. For he that hath noe voluntary roome in the hearts of his people, must use all meanes to gaine a coercive. For his own promises he puts them into the
same bottomlesse bag, which the Poets say Iu∣piter made for lovers as∣severations: His word is as good as his oath, for they are both trifles, as it is in Plautus. — Pactum non pactum est,Aulular. un pactum pactum est, cum illis Lubet. 'Twas he that first in∣vented that useful distin∣ction of a Lip-oath, and a heart-Oath; you may find him in Euripides. Iurata lingua est, mente iuravi nihil He makes good use of that in Plutarch,Apoph.  that children are
to be cousn'd with rattls, and men with oathes. 'Tis an huge advantage that man hath in a credu∣lous world, that can easi∣ly say and sweare to any thing; and yet withall so palliate his falsifications and perjuries, as to hide them from the conusance of most. The Polititian mast be furnished with handsome refuges, that may seemingly heal mis∣carriages this way. Hee need not spend much time in inquiry after such helps; these declin∣ing ages wil abundantly furnish his invention.
Colasterion. AN Oath is in its self a religious affirma∣tion, a promise with Gods seale; And there∣fore it concernes Christi∣ans to be cautelous be∣fore swearing, to sweare Liquidly, and to observe conscionably. 'Tis pity such slender Evasions should satisfie us, as have bin scorn'd by heathens. We are bound (sayes one of them) to the sense of the imposer, or else we do , we are bound to the performance of what wee have thus
sworn, or else we do : Tis much, that a morall conscience should more check them, than a clearer light can awe us: As if they more honour'd the Genius of a Caesar, than we revere the presence of a God: or else wee should never ingage in new protestations, that do interfere, yea, and som∣times positively quarrell with old. They had their , their perjury revenging Gods; to whose vindictive powers they referr'd their offenders: they punished such as swore falsely by their
Prince with fustigation; But such as abus'd their Gods, were left to the dispose of their injur'd Deities, as if they were at a loss how to finde a pu∣nishment equall to the sinne. Hear how soberly Plato mentions it (out of the noble Commentator upon Philostratus) En tou∣tes manieres sà este un fort belle ordinance & instituti∣tion, de n' user point du nom des Dieux Legerement, de peur de Les contaminer; ca la Majeste des Dieux ne se doit imployer, qu' en un saincte & venerabile pure∣tè. See what reall honour they gave to their coun∣terfeit
Gods: Let us have a care that we ascribe not counterfeit honour to the true God. Our God hates every false Oath:Causabon exercitat. 202. It appears in his severity to Zedekiah, for breaking Covenant with the Babylonian Mo∣narch, though a Tyrant of the first magnitude. Were all Subjects du∣ly solicitous about the weight of this bound, we should be lesse prone to take, and more studious  observe it; I remember the Scholiast upon Ari∣stoyhaes,p. 848. derives
, It hed∣ges in and shuts up a man, and tyes his hands behind him; I know not how some Conquerours may cutt this knot with the Sword; or how some Sampsons may shake off these cords; or what gaps the Licentious may make in this hedge; But such as value God, or hea∣ven, or Prince, or Peace, can discover it no way better than in a sincere use of so divine an Ordi∣nance. There can be no cer∣tain rule given, when to
beleeve, and when not, what such as are, or would be great, please to inculcate to us: I finde more wracks upon the rock of credulity: and tis no heresie to affirme, that many have beene sa∣ved by their infidelity; I commend that of Epichar∣
Principle VIII. Necessity of Stte, is a very competent Apology for the worst of Actions. IT has been observ'd, that in all Innovations and Rebellions (which ordinarily have their rif from pretences of Reli∣gion, or Reformation, or both) the breach and neg∣lect of Laws hath been authorised by that great Patroness of Illegal Acti∣ons— Necessity. eva ne∣essitas Now the Polititian is never without such an Advocate as this; For he
cares not to distinguish whether the necessity be of his own creating, or no, as for the most part it is▪ being indeed an Ap∣pendix to the wrong he undertakes: and signifies no more, then that he is compelled to cover wrong with wrong, as if the commission of a se∣cond in were enough to justifie the first. He changes that old charitable advise—Be∣nefact a benefactis aljs per∣egito nè perpluant; into vitia vitijs alijs pertegito nè perpluant: that so hea∣pig one crime upon another, the later may
defend the former from the stroke of Justice. Hee adores that Max∣ime in Livy, Iustum t bellum quibus necessarium, & pia arma quibus in ar∣mis spes est: It were very incongruous to desire that man to leave his crutch, that cannot walk without; 'tis no lesse un∣naturall to invite him to quit his sword, whose life and fortune leans intirely upon it. If he can insinuate the scope of the Warr to be Legall, a little dawbing will serve to Legalize the circumstances: that of the Civilians must be
remember — Licere in bello quae ad finem sunt necessaria,Victor. de Iure Belli, nu. 18.39. the Oracles of the Gown are too tender for Sword-men; and it may bee he had wit in his anger, who affirmed, that martiall Law was as great a Solecisme, as Martiall peace. If the people be once possest that his aime and intention is faire, they wil never expect that the Media for attainment of his end should be re∣trench'd by the strict Boundaries of Law: Hee manages that Rule very practically, Rem alienam, ex quâ certum mihi peri∣ulum
eminet, citra culpae alienae considerationem in∣vadere possum; Now he can very plausibly make this periculum, certum, or incertum, as shall best sute with his affairs. De iure Belli, l. 424.'Tis a broad Liberty that Grotius concedes, Quare si vitam aliter fer∣vare non possum, licet mihi vi qualicunque arcere eum qui eam impetit, licet pec∣cato vacet; & hoc ex jure quod mihi pro me natura concedit.Mach. on Livy, 627 When Life, and Liberty, and safety come in question, there ought no confideration to be had of just or unjust, pit∣tifull or cruell, honou∣rable
or dishonourable: Now when the people have according to his de∣sire got over the great ob∣stacle, and digested the plot for pious; it is easie to set all future proceed∣ings upon the score of Liberty, Safety, Religi∣on: And if he be con∣strained to use means grosly unlawfull, 'tis but to make them seem holy in the application, and all's well; For it is the humour and genius of the vulgar, when they have once rush'd into a party implicitly, to pro∣secute it as desperately, as if they were under de∣monstrative
convictions of its Justice. Finally, He must make a vertue of Necessity, be∣cause there is no other vertue will so easily be induc'd to serve his pro∣ceedings as this; she may well smile upon Licen∣tiousnesse, who hath her selfe no Law.
Colasterion. LEt that great Rule be received, that no man can be necessitated to sinne: Our Divines generally damne an offi∣cious Lye; and the equi∣ty bindes from any offici∣ous sinne. It would soon cut the nerves of the eighth Commandement, If Ne∣cessities and Urgencies, though reall, were pro∣nounced a sufficient ex∣cuse for stealing. But that which our Polititian calls Necessity, is no more than necessity of conve∣nience,
nor so much, ex∣cept we interpret that convenience, which may favour his own ends, and so is convenient for his design. He uses Neces∣sity, as the old Philoso∣phers did an occult qua∣lity, though to a different purpose; that was their refuge for ignorance, this is his sanctuary for sin. ess. l. 11, 12. ub. 12.  70.Those Civilians that are most charitable to Necessity, make it no plea at all except it be absolute and insuperable; as by the Platonick Laws onely those persons are allowed to drink at their Neighbours Well, that
had in vaine sought a Spring, by digging fifty cubits deep in their owne ground. We allow the disburdening of a Shipp in imminent perill of wrack; But this will not excuse those, who upon a fond or feigned prevision of a State-tempest, shall immediately cast Lawe and conscience over∣board; Discard, and quit Hudder and steerage, and so assist the danger, they pretend to fear. Pausanias tells of a Chappell in Acrocorinth,Caelius Rhodig. 1025. dedicated to Necessity and violence; those Twin∣Goddesses may be fit ob∣jects
for the worship of Heathens; but 'tis pitty they should be so much adored by Christians. If I mistake not, the fundamentall deceit lyes in a greedy entertaining those first pretences, and seemingly candid Propo∣sitions are made to us, before they have passed those scrutinies, and se∣vere inquiries, they de∣serve; or been examined by the test of Gods word, and Nationall Lawes: All the rest are but ugly consequences of that absurdity we first gran∣ted, according to the an∣cient Philosophick Max∣ime,
.
Principle IX. The Polititian must wave all Relations, both Sacred and Civill, and swim to his design, though in a Sea of bloud. SUch as study to be great by any means, must by all means for∣get to be good; and they that will usurp Domi∣nion over others, must first become slaves to the worst of Tyrants, a lust after greatnesse. Crescit interea Roma Albae ruinis, begins one of the Decads, that the wals
of Rome were cemented with bloud,Upon Li∣vy l. 2. c. 3 Thebe ma∣ritum, T∣moleon fratrem, Cassius fili∣um hoe jure inter∣fecore. is known and commended by Machia∣vel; Although the super∣structure was brave, yet if we search the founda∣tion, we shall finde it laid in the rod ruines of her wasted neighbours; That the first Founder became a fratricide upon reason of State, to guard his new Conquest, by freedom from a Competitor; is not onely vindicated from cruelty, but asserted to be a piece of meritorious policy. Nor did this hap∣pen to the City in its structure alone, but after in its reparation; when
the Sons of Brutus were sacrific'd to the design of their Father: So that Rome was not only nurs'd with bloud, but after grouth and ripenesse, she sustained her selfe; Iived and thrived upon Magna & sanguinolenta latrocinia; so that our Polititian can scarce want examples in the ap∣plauded actions of this City, to patronize the most crimson and skar∣let sin, that ambition can prompt. He admires the ge∣nerosity of Neroe's Mo∣ther, who is reported to have said of her sonne,
A , Let my Son be my murderer, so he may be a Monarch; Accor∣ding to the advice of an high-spirited fury, Pro Regno velim patriam, pena∣tes, conjugem flammis dare, Imperia pretio quolibet con∣stant bene; An Empire cannot be purchased too dear, though it cost the blood of Millions. He is much taken with the Gallantry of the Mammalukes, who abu∣sed the easinesse of the E∣gyptian Sultan, and wore the Supremacy three hundred years, upon the
length and keennesse of an usurping Sword. And rather than want a bongrace, he commends the Ottoman wisdom; for the great Turk rivets himself to the Imperiall Chair, with the bones of his murdered Brethren. Aspiring desires are not only insatiate, but admit of any sin; that will pro∣mote their ends: See Bas∣sanus murthering his Brother Geta in his Mo∣thers armes; Andronicus strangling his Cousin Alexius, lest he should have a part in the Em∣pire that had right to all: See Caesar slighting the
Oathes by which he had obliged his obedience to the Roman Senate. Finally, Ambition knows no confinement, nothing so sacred but it violates. The Gods must bow and yeeld to it,In Apo∣loger. as Tertullian, Id negotium si∣ne Deorum injuriâ non est, eadem strages manium & Templorum, tot sacrilegia Romanorum, quot trophaea; tot de Diis quot de Gentibus Triumphi.
Colasterion. THe Italian Polititian seems to intimate a scruple, when he saies, —Si jus violandum est, regnandi causâ violandum est, His (If) dictates an uncertainty; and if we appeale to the bar of Na∣ture, or Divinity (though possibly the entire asser∣tion may have something of truth) yet we shall find that wicked (f) absolute∣ly banished. 'Tis true, we may more justly pity him, that swallows a bait fair and glistring, than a per∣son
that tempts tempta∣tions to deceive him; or catches at Flies, and tri∣fling allurements because in the first case a greater reluctancy is requisite, and the dart may possibly be so sharp, as to pierce through the Armour of a sober Resolution; But all this will little succour im, who knows it to be a bait, and hath before∣hand designed its beauty, and fairenesse, to apolo∣gize for the foulnesse of the sin: for here the great∣nesse of the Temptation will not at all extenuate e grossenesse of the rime: No more than he
mitigates his Robbery, who shall plead, that hee stole nothing but Gold and Jewels. The World is much mistaken in the value of a Scepter or Crown; we gaze upon its brightnesse, and forget its brittleness, we looke upon its glory, and forget its frailty; we respect its colour, and take no notice of its weight. But if all those gay things which wee fondly fancy to our selves were really to be found in Greatnesse, yet still he payes too deare, that pawn his Heaven for it he that thus buys a shor
blisse, gives not twenty, or an hundred years pur∣chase, but (if mercy pre∣vent not) Eternity. It will be little advan∣tage here, to introduce the example of a Roman, or Turk, or Christian, if unlawfull; such presi∣dents may perchance baf∣fle the Vulgar (in whose Creede you may insert what you please) but wil be very cold answers, when we appeare before a severe Tribunall: It concernes us rather to observe how ambition claimes kindred with e∣very other vice, stoops, and takes up every sinne
lies in its way; and, if up∣on enquiry we finde it to bee indeed such a com∣plicated mischiefe, it will become us studiously to shun it our selves, and se∣riously to detest it in o∣thers.
Principle X. A generall Innovation con∣tributes much to the growth and security of Vsurpation. WEE may receive this as a Traditi∣on, handed to us from the great Patriarchs of Po∣licy, attested by the pra∣ctice of the subtilest times; I presume it may be grounded upon these, or the like Perswasions. 1. Because such an In∣novation raises the dust, and begets a cloud for the main design; for when the waters are troubled, tis
hard to see the bait. 2. Because the Paren∣thesis betwixt an old and new government, flatters the hopes of all parties, soothing those desirs that are for a relapse into the old, and yet incouraging those that wish for the establishment of a new. 3. Because when all things are reduced into a Chaos and rude heape, when all the lines and Li∣neaments of the former Government are blotted out, that which is new written will be more le∣gible, and the old sooner forgotten: for suppose a Kingdom made a Lump,
without shape and void, and it is like materia prima, prone to imbrace any form; when an In∣strument is distun'd, you may set it to what key you please; and he that cannot sometimes losn the strings, will never make good Musick upon Synesius his Harp. 4. Because by nw moulding of Jurisdicti∣ons, and offices of State, there may be a fair oppor∣tunity offered, of gra∣tifying those that have serv'd us; and for others its very familiar to see some stubborn and rigid opiniators, who have
continued long unshaken either by threat or argu∣ment, at length to surren∣der their Principles, and bow the knee before the Dagon of Honou and Riches; such is the flex∣animous power of golden Eloquence, as it is in the Adage, Besides, we can find no better way to breed an absolute dependance, and make others adhere to our fortunes, then by winding the concern∣ments of other men up∣on the same bottom with
our Interest; we may ob∣serve this from the pra∣ctice of great Favourites, who alwayes delight in these Props, and are care∣full to set their whole Tribes in the sunshine of favour. 5. Because such a ge∣neral Deordination gives a taste and Rellish to the succeeding Government, though in its selfe not so delectable;3 Po, for Aristotle notes, that Democracy is better than Anarchy. There are many other advantages to be made by a due improvement of these turbid intervals; as the occasion of subdivi∣ding,
and parcelling out your great end; for by this meanes they which refused to close with it in grosse, will receive it in retaile: and having en∣tertained some portions of it, the grudge they bore to the whole will be by degrees quieted and appeas'd. Besides, when all things are ruffled and confused, it is then the Devils Ho∣ly-day, and therefore our work-day: The noise is so loud, that it drowns the voice of the Lawe; and there may be some truth in his waggery, who sayd, That such as
mean to commit a Rape upon the Body politick, must put out the Lawes; as others upon a like oc∣casion use to put out the Lights. Finally, If wee ever hope to sin with Impuni∣ty, to usurp prosperously or to govern Arbitrarily; wee must take out that Lesson in Plantus: Idem facere, quod plurimi alij, quibus Res timida aut Turbida est; Pergunt turba∣re usque, ut ne quid possit conquiscere.
Colasterion. TIs most certain, that sinister ends are promoted by Innova∣tions; but it lyes in our bosomes to promote or quench the Innovations themselves, which we can no way better do, than by a strict adherence to the Laws; for as long as we maintain them, they will maintain us: If we ob∣serve these, it will rescue us from the hands of State-Novellists; for we are not fit for their turns, till we are cross-byassed with faction.
As a caution against changes in Government, give me leave to repeate, what was long since told us by an ingenious Lord, — That all great mutati∣ons are dangerous;Faulkla even where what is introduc'd by that mutation, is such as would have been very profitable upon a prima∣ry foundation: and it is none of the least dangers of change, that all the pe∣rils and inconveniencies which it brings, cannot be foreseene; and therefore such as make title to wis∣dome, will not undergo great dangers, but for great necessities.
But further, let me ap∣peale to generall experi∣ence, yea, let me ask thee (Reader) if thou hast ne∣ver before heard, or read of a Nation, that was once the gaze and envy of its Neighbours; and yet being insensible of its happiness, or possest with fond hopes of bettering its condition, has closed with pretended friends, and reall enemies, and gladly contributed to its owne ruine. So apt men are to catch at the shadow, though they hazard the substance: we may guesse at the Morall of the Frogs
in the Fable, who could finde no satisfaction in a still Prince, and were af∣ter forced to abide the severities of a Tyrant they prayed for. But if there be such distempers in a State, as shall necessarily require amendment; Let it be done with the Pruning∣hook of the Law, and not with the Sword of vio∣lence: For I never read, that Illegall, or Tumultu∣ous, or Rebellious, were fit Epithets for Refor∣mation. And 'tis fit Christians should forbear the use of such surly Physick, till they have
levied a Fine in the Court of Heaven, and cut off the Intail of the seventh Bea∣titude. This may suffice to re∣veale in some measure, Arcanum Ambitionis, . I could add much more, but that I judge it a fitter task for our Nephews, when Pens shall be in∣franchised. And now (Reader) let us mix our prayers, that God would for ever ba∣nish this cursed Policy out of Europe, and the whole Christian World; and damne it downe to Hell, from whence origi∣nally
it came, and let such as delight to abuse o∣thers, thinke of that self∣cousenage, with which in the interim they abuse themselves; God permit∣ting the Devill to re∣venge the Imposture. And whilst we are busie with politick stratagems, and tortious Armes to invade the rights of o∣thers; Let us all consider that this is not the vio∣lence which takes Hea∣ven. Let it be a piece of our daily Oraisons, that God would guard our Pulpits from such Boutefeus, as like Atna and Vesuvius,
belched out nothing but flames, and fiery discour∣ses; using the Scripture as preposterously and impertinently, as some Pontificians, who trans∣ported with the vehe∣mence of Hildebrandian zeal, think the temporall Monarchy of Popes suffi∣ciently Scripturall, from the saying of Christ to Peter — Pasce oves. Farr be it from us to intitle the Spirit of God to ex∣orbitant doctrines, it is easie to distinguish the Vulture from the Dove. The miscarriages of the Clergy have a deeper stain from the sacredness
of their function, as pro∣bably he that invenomed the Eucharist has the more to answer for his Triple Crown. It is manifest, that wee are fallen into the dregs of Time; we live in the rust of the Iron Age, and must accordingly expect to feel, V'tima seescentis mundi deliria, the dota∣ges of a decrepit World: What is become of truth, sincerity, charity, humility, those Antiqui mores, whither are they gone? Did they attend Astraea into Heaven? And have left such degenerous successors, as cruelty,
pride, fraud, envy, oppres∣sion, &c. Such qualities as abundantly justifie the worst of Heathens, and dishonour the name of Christians: I thinke it may safely be affirmed, That if a new Europae spe∣culum were sincerely writ∣ten, it might be contract∣ed into this short Sum∣mary; Novi ego hc seculum quibus moribus sit; Malus bonum, malum esse vult, ut sit sui similis; turbant, mis∣cent,Trinum∣mus. mores mali; Rapax, Avarus, Invidus, sacrum prophanum, publicum pri∣vatum habebit; Hiulca Gens, &c.
THat eternall Maje∣sty, which raised so brave a Fabrick, out of such indisposed materi∣als; that weilds the world with his finger, ever since it was made; that con∣troules the wave, and checks the tumult of the people: that sits above, and laughs at the malig∣nant counsels, and devices of wicked men: Let his mercy be implored for the speedy succour of his distressed Church; That the Rod of Aaron may blossome; That the Ta∣bernacle of David may be raised; That the subtle
may be caught in their own snares; And that the Result of all afflictions, may be the greatning his glory, and exalting of his Scepter. FINIS.
