t2341b 11952316 51456
A True ACCOUNT OF THE ADVANCES of His MAjESTY'S Royal ARMY Towards the Taking of Limerick: Together with His Majesty's Most Gracious PROCLAMATION. In a Letter from an Officer the Camp before Limerick, Dated August 19th, 1690. SIR, MY last acquainted you of our Progress in the Siege till five last Night, and that Lieutenant-General Douglass was to take charge of the French, but could not then inform you, what other General-Officers were to joyn him in that Charge, now have learnt, that my Lord Sidney, and Brigadier Stew∣art, were the Persons who about ten last Night, with seven Battalions of Foot relieved the Prince of Wirtem∣burgh, it being exceeding dark; and the main Design being to gain the Fort, the Enemy have on this side the Town, covering the Counterscarp, (it had not the success expected) for the Officers being unacquainted with the Defile, or ways to move in order, and coming late, cannot much be blamed with the mistake that hap∣pened, as follows: It was agreed to fall on about Twelve, and the several Parties of ours chancing to mistake their way, met one another, and apprehending each other for Enemies, fired cruelly on both sides; but God be praised, without much mischief, which being followed with a great Shout, disco∣vered the mistake, and with much a∣do the enraged Souldiers were parted, hardly being perswaded with the truth by their Officers, and they had hardly got into order, when the Enemy made a furious Sally with the greatest strength they had in the Garrison, but were stoutly repulsed, and our Men would have pursued the Enemy, but were hindered for fear of Ambushes; after which the Men were eager to storm the Fort; but General Douglass, for some Reasons I know not, would not suffer it; from twelve till two of the Clock was incessant string; many Officers here saying, for the time, they never heard the like; and all this, as I am certainly informed, with the loss on our side, of less than twenty Men, not one Officer falling: and one of the Chirurgeons of the Hospital af∣firmed to me, this Evening, that there came but three wounded Men into them, since the Action happened.
This Morning our Guns fired bris∣ly to amuse the Enemy, and every three or four hours gave them four or five Rounds from a Battery of eight Guns, four of twelve Pounders, and four of six (and as by this mis∣chance last Night was lost.) This Morning it was ordered the Tren∣ches should be relieved at four in the Afternoon: Which was accordingly done. Count Solms commands in chief, Count Nassau, and Brigadier Hanmore assisting, the Officers being commanded to take particular No∣tice of every thing that may direct them to the Fort, as also when out of their way; so doubt not by the next, to give you a good account of this Action. I never saw Men march more freely into their Winter-Quar∣ters, than ours did to the Trenches; whether a great Number of Faggets are carried this Night, as also a great many Packs made up for to shelter the Men from the Enemy's Shot; a Battery within Carbine-shot of the Town, was this Night finished, for twelve Guns, six of which were those Sarsfield thought he had spoiled, of eighteen l. Ball, and six that came from Carrick of 24 l. all which I hope to hear play to morrow, when our Great Mortars will be up with us, at farthest. This Morning two Guns, and a good Party of Horse, went out on a Design, I know not yet: Our Men are couragious and healthy, and I doubt not of a Victory; which GOD grant. A PROCLAMATION, By the KING and QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesties. WILLIAM R. WHereas We are informed, That divers Persons, either through Disaffection to the Clergy of the Church of Ireland as by Law Established, or from a Design to take Advantage of the present Disturbances in this Kingdom, do delay or refuse, to pay their Tythes and other Ecclesiastical Duties, to the aforesaid Clergy, as by Law they ought to do. We having a Gracious Regard to the distressed Condition of the Church and Clergy, and being stedfast in Our Resolution, To preserve the Benefit of the Law to all Our Subjects, in the Due Execution thereof; Do hereby strictly Command and Require, all Our Loving Subjects, of what Rank or Con∣dition soever, That they yield, set forth, and pay unto the Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Rectors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and all others that have Ecclesiastical Dig∣nities or Cure of Souls; the Tithes and other Ecclesiastical Duties, that are or shall become due or payable to them respectively, according to the Laws and Customs of this our Realm of Ire∣land, Given at Our Royal Camp before Limerick, this Fifteenth Day of Au∣gust, 1690. In the Second Year of Our Reign. GOD Save the KING and QƲEEN. Londn: Printed for Richard Bldwin, near the Black Bll in the Old-Baily, 1690.
