T2588 99830852 35306
The True and Wonderful Relation OF THE DREADFUL FIGHTING And Groans that were Heard and Seen IN THE AYR, On the Fifteenth of this Instant January, in Carmarthen, in South-Wales, BY Mr. Henry Lewys, And his whole Family; And by many hundreds more the Night following. The Truth of this Relation will be Attested by Me, William Sanders, Lodging at one Mr. Jones his House, in Princes-Street, near Clare-Market; And o∣ther credible Witnesses, if need require. Printed for W.T. and J.C. in Duck-Lane, 1681.
A True and VVonderful Relation of the Dreadful Fighting that was seen in the Ayr, &c. THe strangeness of my story might indeed chal∣lenge an Apology to introduce the Reader to a belief, especially in such a time as this, when 'tis free for every Hackney Writer, to croud into the Press, and therefore I cannot expect to be Credited till it comes from better hands then mine. On the 20th. of this Month, I had a Letter from an intimate Friend of mine in Wales, (a Person of such Repute and Reputation, that nothing yet ever came from him, which cou'd by the most censorious be thought less than becomeing a Gentleman,) which Letter brought me this astonIshing News, as followeth.
THat on the 15th. Day of January, about Five at Night, Mr. Lewys a Gentleman living near Carmarthen in South-Wales, comming home heard an unusual noise, sometimes of Drumms, then Guns, intermixt with doleful crys as of Men put upon the Rack, or used with some such severe torment: You may imagine this kind of surprize dis∣compos'd him extreamly, and put him out of his way, and his reason directed him but little; but he examining round about with his eyes, where he thought there was a probability of finding it out, cou'd not at all satisfie himself with the reason of the thing, or where it was, so fear kindling a zeal in the Gen∣tleman, he fell on his knees to Prayers, and turning up his Eyes to Heaven, saw most dreadful Apparitions in the
Ayr, thus pausing a little he made shift to get home (which was not far off) and signified to his Family, what 'twas that discompos'd him so; they all then saw the Visions, as they have testifi'd since; Armies fighting, Groans and Cryes heard, among which they took notice of this, Oh my Son is kill'd, kill'd, kill'd! another, I am glad I have took my Brother Captive; so hot the Battel seem'd to be, that the whole Ayr looked thick as it were with a bloody smoak; after this the Drums and Trumpets sounded and put an Interval to their so hot service; then the Ayr cleared up extreamly, not but that the Armies were plainly seen still, one retir'd toward the North, and the other Southward, but withal Guns were discerned to be Discharged from each side.
Thus after about the space of half an hour, the Heaven seem'd to open, and immediately follow'd such a Clap. of Thunder, as if it had struck at the disso∣lution of Natures frame, the Armies then rallied up again, and the Pike men were plainly discern'd from them that had Muskets; they fell to't hotter ('twas judg'd) then before, and greater destru∣ction was made, such were the sparkles that came from their clattering Swords, that you would have thought Heaven had a new supply of Stars. In the interim of this came up 2 armys of Horsemen, powd'ring, and they met with as great destruction as the former, then the noise of Men and Horses were heard anew, sometimes the Rider & his Horse came tumbling down, another's Arm dropt off, which so frighted the spectators, that they often shrunck their
heads for fear of the fall: In this sort the War lasted till Nine, and then a kind of Fog rose from the earth, and put an end to't, as 'twas supposed. Here Mr. Lewys and his Family went into his house ill satisfied with their spe∣ctacle; the next Day Carmarthen Rung with this unexpected News, surveying the Heaven with careful eyes, but about 5 a clock the whole Town observ'd this Mr. Lewys's spectacle, and more too, for there appear'd 2 Fleets of Ships, one from the North, and 'tother from the South, which sail'd up with such speed as if they had had the benefit of 2 winds to drive them; they soon met, and their salutation was in Cannon language: immediately the Main-mast fell there, the Sails rent here, another Ship sunk, another split, now several Men were seen thrown o∣verboard, and by and by half the ships
on fire; then the Heaven was seen to o∣pen again, and a Thunderclap follow'd, so the Ayr clear'd, and the South Ships hastened back, but the North pursued them, and were seen to bring back some of them (as 'twas judg'd) for Captives; so the North Fleet retired, and shouts were heard signifying triumph, and gi∣ving glory to God; then another shout was heard above all the rest, Babylon is fallen, and lies in Dust; then followed a consort of sweet Musick, and the Visi∣ons Vanisht away. The Verity of this I do not at all doubt, (tho' the Reader may) because I had it from such persons as I dare not suspect, and the chief reason why I appeared in Print, is this, because I had a mind it should be known to the maturer Judgements of the Nations, that they may discuss upon it, and if any ill is signified to us, we may all to prayers that God may avert is; but if good, we may return thanks to Providence for it. FINIS.
