T2864 12896062 95190
The true Protestant Religion set forth, BY WAY OF DIALOGUE Discovering the Idolatries and abominations PROFESSED and taught in the Church OF ROME By a PRESBYTER of the Church of ENGLAND. LONDON Printed for Langly Curtiss, &c. 1683
THE PREFACE. To all Protestant Parents, and Masters of Families. I Need not tell you how deeply you stand ingaged to provide for the Spiritual, as well as Temporal good of your Children and Families. The Command of God by Moses is plain, These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart: And thou shalt teach them diligently to thy Children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up, Deut. 6.6, 7. The Apostle likewise is as plain, Eph. 6.4. And you Fathers, provoke not your Chil∣dren to wrath, but bring them up in the nur∣ture and admonition of the Lord. If ever you intend to perform this Duty, be careful of it now. The Priests and Jesu∣its
of Rome swarm amongst us. They com∣pass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes, and endeavour by all the wayes and Arts ima∣ginable, to root out the true Christian Pro∣testant Religion, which hath so long flourish∣ed amongst us. It concerns therefore, now most especially, all that fear the Lord, to consider one another, to teach and exhort one another, to edifie and build up one an∣other, in our most holy Faith and Duties of the Gospel. Now, to the end you may know the true Christian Faith, and the Differences between us and Rome; I have composed this little Book, which, when your Children have learned the Church Catechism, and in some measure begin to understand it, I con∣ceive will be very useful for them. Accept it as candidly, as 'tis charitably offered to you, by one, whose onely aim and Design is, to do good in his Generation, that he may make his Accounts with comfort, at the coming of Jesus Christ.
A PROTESTANT CATECHISM. Child. SIR, By the Grace of God, and your help and care, I have learned the Church Catechism, and have been able to answer the Minister in the Publick Congregation, to such Questions as he thought fit to propose to me. I have heard him likewise expound the Catechism, and shew the usefulness of it, from that of Solomon, Prov. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it: And yet for all this, I must confess, I understand but little of Religion; I hear some∣times a great deal of Discourse about it, but I see little Practice of it. I pray therefore, as you have been careful to provide for my Outward man, so make some provision for my Inward man also, that I may not be always as a Child, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lye in wait to deceive, as the Apostle speaks, Eph. 4.14. Father. My good Child, I am very glad to see such signs and symp∣tomes of Grace in you, to hear you inquire after God and the Gospel of Christ. God forbid that I should sin against God, in ceasing to in∣struct you, and to bring you up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord: I will, to the utmost of my Power, teach you the good and the right way. Child. I heartily thank you for your Love to my poor Soul, and I praise the Name of the Lord, who hath given me so good a Father, and I hope he will give me Grace to honour and obey you, and to remem∣ber your words all the dayes of my life. And first, I pray you, tell me what Religion I must profess? Father. You must profess, Child, the Christian Religion; for we read, the Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch, Acts 11.26. Child. But, Sir, I meet with some men that call themselves Catholicks; are not they Christians?
Father. Yes, They are Christians, but the worst Christians in the World; for they are Idolatrous Christians, and have almost destroyed the Christian Religion by their Inventions. Child. I pray, Sir, what do you call these men? Father. The Law calls them Popish Recusants, but we usually call them Papists, because they believe the Pope of Rome to be the Head of the Church, and obey his Commands, though contrary to the Com∣mands of God. Child. And what do these men call us? Father. When they may speak their mind freely, they call us Here∣ticks. And this we confess with St. Paul, Acts 24.14. that after the way which they call Heresie, so worship we the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. Child. But do they not sometimes call us by the Name of Protestants? Father. Yes, and we do not disown the Name: for we do protest against the Errours of the Church of Rome. Child. Do they call us by any other Names? Father. Yes, They call us Lutherans and Calvinists, and what else they please, though it be a known truth, that the Church of England loves no Nisms. We pin not our Faith upon any man's sleeve. We ho∣nour Luther and Calvin, and many others whom God raised up in the darkest times to preach the Gospel, and to discover the Errours and Abominations of Rome: but we profess no Lutheranism nor Calvinism, nor indeed any thing of Mens invention, but what we find in the Word of God: Neither dare we turn the Faith of our Lord in respect of Per∣sons, or cry up one man in opposition to another. For, while one saith I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.4. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? were you baptized in the name of Paul? chap. 1.13. Child. But, Sir, I have heard some Papists say, that the Protestant Reli∣gion is a new Religion, and therefore not true: is it so indeed? Father, No. The Religion we profess was taught by Jesus Christ, and preached by the Apostles to all the World. Go teach all Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Matth. 28.19.20. Whatsoever Jesus Christ and his Apostles taught, we believe; if they taught the true Christian Religion, we believe and profess it. Child. But I have heard some Papists put this Question to some Prote∣stants, Where was your Religion to be found before Luther? what Answer may be given to that Question?
Father. Our Religion was, and is now to be found, where theirs ne∣ver was, nor will be found; in the Word of God. Child. Is the Scripture then the Rule of Faith and Obedience? Father. Yes. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly fur∣nished unto all good Works, 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. Child. But besides the Scriptures, have we not a Profession of Faith? Father. Yes. We have the Nicene Creed, made by the Fathers of the Nicene Councel, the Creed of Athanasius, and that which is commonly call'd the Apostles Creed, which ought throughly to be believed; for they may be proved by most certain Warrants of holy Scripture, as our Church declares, Art. 8. Child. But do these Creeds contain the true Christian Catholick Faith? Father. Yes. They contain all necessary points in Religion, to be believ'd, and have therefore been call'd the Key and Rule of Faith, and the Church never knew any other Creed or confession of Faith, for ma∣ny hundred years. Child. Is this the Faith which I must profess, and seal with my Blood, if I be called to it? Father. Yes. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. 1.13. Hence Athanasius thus concludes, This is the Catholick Faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. Child. But do not the Papists own these three Creeds as well as we? Father. They do own them as part of the Christian Faith, though they little regard them; but not as the whole Christian Faith. Child. Have they any other Creed or Profession of the Faith? Father. Yes. The decrees of their Popes, and the Canons of their late Popish Councels, they hold to be Articles of Faith: but especially, they own and maintain the new Creed, made by the Councel of Trent, and confirmed by Pope Pius the fourth, in the year 1564. Child. Is it lawful, Sir, to make a new Creed? Father. No, in no wise. Though we (saith St. Paul) or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Gal. 1.8. Child. I perceive by what you have spoken, that notwithstanding the Pa∣pists talk of the old Religion, they have made a new Creed, and brought in a new Religion; and that we are call'd Protestants, because we protest against it.
Father. You conclude very well: and that you may be confirmed and strengthened in the true Faith, I will shew you the Trent Creed, and give you some short Observations upon it. First, I most firmly receive and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and all other Customs and Constitutions of the same Church. Child. What be those Traditions and Customs of the Church? Father. Truly Child I know not, neither do they themselves, neither will they tell us what they be; but when they can make no proof for a Doctrine out of the Word of God, they say 'tis a Tradition; and yet, this Christ condemns in the Jews, Mark 7.7, 9. In vain do they wor∣ship me, teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of men: full well ye reject the Commandments of God, that you may keep your own Traditions. Child. If this be the first Article of their new Creed, they begin well: for, as far as I can understand, the real Sense and Import thereof, is, I believe in the Pope, for whatsoever he says is a Tradition, must be believ'd. I pray Sir, what is the second? Father. The second Article is, I admit the holy Scripture in that sense which the holy Mother-Church hath held and holdeth, to whom it belongs to judge of the true Sense and Interpretation of the holy Scrip∣tures; nor will I ever receive or interpret them, but according to the unanimous Consent of the Fathers. Child. Here is a form of receiving the Scriptures, but I perceive it must be in such Tenor and Sense, as the Fathers admit; that is, I suppose, the Pope and his Council. But do they suffer the People to read the Scrip∣tures? Father. No Child, they dare not do it, they know that would de∣stroy Popery Root and Branch; and yet Christ says, Search the Scrip∣tures, for in them you think you have eternal Life, and they are they which testifie of me, John 5.39. And the Bereans are commended, and said to be nobler than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all Readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, Acts 17.11, 12. Child. But since they keep the power of Interpretation, methinks they might suffer People to read the Scriptures, with their Glosses upon it. Father. No Child, they dare not, for they would quickly find their Glosses to be false, the Scripture is so plain, teaching us, that no Pro∣phecy of the Scripture, is of any private Interpretation: for the Prophe∣cy came not in old time by the Will of Man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20.
Child. But are all things necessary to Salvation, plainly to be found in Scripture? Father. Yes. The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the Simple. Psal. 19.8, 9. Thy word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Path. Psal. 119.108. From a child thou hast known the ho∣ly Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation. 2 Tim. 3.15. Child. You have said enough to this, I pray God set it home to my Heart. I pray Sir proceed to the third Article. Father. The third Article is, I profess also, that there are 7 true and proper Sacraments of the new Law, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord for the Salvation of Mankind, although all are not necessary to each one; to wit, Order, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Pennance, extream Unction, Matrimony, and those all give Grace, and of these, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order cannot be reiterated without Sacri∣ledge. Child. Did Jesus Christ appoint these Seven Sacraments? Father. No, some of them had their being before, and some after Christ's time; only Baptism and the Eucharist, or Lords Supper, were instituted immediately by Christ, received their Forms from him, and flowed out of his wounded side; whence it cometh, that Water is the matter of Baptism, and Bread and Wine of the Lords Supper. Child. I observe that they make Matrimony a Sacrament, and say it gives Grace, and yet I have heard that they will not suffer their Priests to marry. Is that true? Father. Yes. 'Tis true they do so, but 'tis contrary to the word of God: for we read, 1 Tim. 3.2. A Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, having his Children in Subjection. Child. I pray Sir what is the fourth Article? Father. I also receive and admit all received and approved Rights of the Catholick Church, in the solemn Administrations of all the above∣said Sacraments. Child. I pray Sir what are those approved Rights? Father. The vain Superstitions, and idolatrous Rites of the Church of Rome, in the Administration of the Sacraments, are so many, that they cannot easily be numbred. However, some of the Principal that are in my mind, I shall discover to you. In Baptism, they conjure the Devil out of the Child, they use many Crossings, and besides Water, they use Chrisme or Cream, Salt, and the Priests Spittle. In the Eu∣charist, after the words of Consecration, they elevate the Hoast, as they
call it, that is, the consecrated Wafer, and they ring a Bell to give the People notice of it, that they may adore it. If any of the People receive, which is very seldome, they must not touch it with their hands, but the Priest must put it into their mouths, and there it must dissolve. These and ma∣ny other such like Ceremonies, are made Articles of Faith. Child. But did Christ ordain none of those Rites? Father. No. John came baptizing with Water, John. 1.31. The Eu∣nuch said to Philip, here is water, what doth hinder me to be baptized? Acts 8.36. For I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered to you, saith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.25. That the Lord Jesus, the same night that he was betray'd, took Bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body, which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. They do neither break the Bread, nor suffer the People to take, or eat it. Child. I have heard enough of this, I pray, Sir, proceed to the fifth. Father. I also embrace and receive all and several the things which have been defined and declared in the Sacred and holy Synod of Trent, concerning Original Sin and Justification. Child. What Doctrines do they hold concerning Original Sin and Justi∣fication? Father. The things declared, and defined by the Councel of Trent, concerning Original Sin and Justification, are too many to be here re∣cited. They teach, that Concupiscence is no sin after Regeneration, that 'tis washed away by Baptism. That the first motions thereof is no sin. Concerning Justification, they declare, that we are Justified by Works, that good Works are meritorious; nay, that there be Works of supererogation, whereby the Saints do merit not onely for them∣selves but for others; and out of the superabundant Merits of Christ and the Saints, the Treasure of the Church is made up; which the Pope hath power to dispence to vvhom he please, vvhich brings him in great Treasure. Child. But what doth the Scripture say to these things? Father. David confesseth his Original Sin, as the Root and Fountain of all Sin, Psal. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. And St. Paul complains of it, Rom. 7.18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing, for to vvill is present vvith me, but hovv to perform that vvhich is good, I knovv not. Child. But are we not justified by our Works?
Father. No Child. We are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Rom. 3.24. & v. 27.28. Where is boasting then? it is excluded: by what Law? of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law. Child. If we are not justified by Works, then certainly we cannot merit by them. Father. You say well: and the same Christ teaches us in the Gospel, Luke 17.10. When you shall have done all those things that are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants; we have done that which was our duty to do. Child. What is the sixth Article? Father. I also profess, that in the Mass there is offered to God, a true, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead; and that in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, is contained tru∣ly, really, and substantially, the Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ, and there is made a perfect Change of the whole substance of the Bread, into his Body: and of the whole Substance of the Wine into his Blood, which change the Catho∣lick Church calleth Transubstantiation. Child. In this Article are many things that I would be glad to under∣stand. 1. What I pray Sir is meant by the Mass? Father. 'Tis an old word that few understand, the word Missa some say, did signifie to dismiss some out of the Assembly, even all that did not communicate, which if it should do so still, would leave the Priest alone: for now he usually communicates by himself, and the People look on. But I rather think 'tis call'd the Mass, because 'tis a mess, or mass of Corruption. Child. But why is is call'd a Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead? I thought Sacrifice had ceased. Father. True Child, so the Apostle, Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offer'd to bear the Sins of many. and Chap. 10.12. But this man after he had of∣fer'd one Sacrifice for Sins for ever, sate down on the right hand of God. and verse 14. By one Offering he hath perfected for ever, them that are sanctified. It may be call'd a Sacrifice, because it is a Representation and Memori∣al of the true Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, and because it makes us Partakers of the same, but no otherwise as I know of. Child. But is is the Bread and Wine changed into the Body and Blood of Christ?
Father. No Child, certainly if it were, we should see it with our Eyes, and handle it with our hands, and smell it, and tast it so to be; but we see it, and handle it, and smell it, and tast it, Bread and Wine, and there∣fore no doubt so it is. After this manner St. John writes, That which was from the Beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have han∣dled of the word of Life, 1 Joh. 1.1. and ver. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you may have Fellowship with Child. But what doth the Scripture call it? Father. The Scripture after Consecration, calls it Bread three times together, 1 Cor. 11.26.27.28. For as often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do shew the Lords Death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Child. But is it plain Bread and Wine, and no more? Father. O no! God by these Signs of Bread and Wine signifieth, sealeth, and exhibiteth to every faithful Receiver, the Body and Blood of Christ, and all the merits of his Death and Passion: So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, is it not the Communi∣on of the Body of Christ? Child. But what is this they call Transubstantiation? Father. The word signifies the Change of one Substance into another, and thereby they express their Doctrine of the corporal Presence, but neither the word nor thing is to be found in Scripture, nor in the Wri∣tings of the primitive Fathers: neither was it pretended to be an Arti∣cle of Faith, till the Lateran Counsel, 1200 years after Christ; and therefore we protest against it, and say, that what the Church of Rome teaches of Transubstantiation, is absolutely impossible, and implies Contradictions very many; to the Belief of which, no Faith can oblige, us, and which no reason can endure. Child. I pray Sir what do they teach concerning the Cup? Father. That you shall see in the Article which runs thus, I confess also, that whole and entire Christ, and the true Sacrament is received under one only Species of Bread. Child. By this Article I am apt to think they do not give the Cup to the People, and indeed so I have heard, but do they dare to do so? Father. Yes. Notwithstanding we read in the Gospel, Matth. 26.26.27. That Jesus took the Bread and blessed it, and break it, and gave it to his Disciples. And he took the Cup, and gave it to them, saying, drink ye all of it.
Child. I wonder at this very much, I pray Sir what do the Christians of the Church of England say to this? Father. We say 'tis Sacriledge, and tell them plainly, that they do dismember the Institution of Christ, and prevaricate his express Law and Creed from the practice of the Apostles. Child. What do the Papists say to this? Father. They take Liberty to say and do what they please: for tho they confess it was the Institution of Christ, and the Practice of the Primitive Church, yet they lay it aside, and curse all them that say they do amiss in it; that is, they curse them that follow Christ and his Apostles, and his Church, while themselves deny to follow them. Child. The Lord deliver me from Communion with such a Church. Have they any more such Articles of Faith? Father. Yes. The eighth Article is, I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory, and that Souls there detained, are holpen by the Suffrages of the faithful. Child. I have heard indeed, that the Papists talk much of Purgatory, but is there any such place? Father. As I said of Transubstantiation, so I say of Purgatory; nei∣ther name nor thing is to be found in Scripture, nor the primitive Fathers of the Church, for above a thousand years; nay the Scripture is express against it. He that heareth my word and believeth on him that sent me, hath eternal Life, and cometh not into Judgment, but passeth from Death unto Life. John 5.24. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth, even so saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labours. Rev. 14.13. If the dead in Christ be at Rest, then the doctrine of the horrible pains of Purgatory, is as false as 'tis uncomfortable. Child. One would wonder why the Church of Rome should invent and defend such an idle thing as Purgatory is. Father. You are, Child, much deceived in this, 'tis no such idle thing as you imagine: the Fire of Purgatory maintains the Fire in the Pope's Kitchin; for though it be said that the Souls in Purgatory are holpen by the Suffrages of the faithful, yet certain it is, the Pope lays claim to a greater Power in that infernal Territory, and boasteth to possess the Keys thereof, and to open and shut at his Pleasure, especially to such as are rich and liberal, and the Priests for saying Masses and Dirges, get more money than you can imagine. Child. Nay, if it be so gainful, 'tis no wonder; for I have heard 'tis a Proverb with them, No Penny, no Pater noster. But I pray proceed, what is the ninth Article?
Father. Likewise, that the Saints reigning with Christ, are to be wor∣shipped and invocated, and that they offer Prayers for us to God, and that their Relicks are to be worshipped. Child. Do the Papists worship the Saints. Father. Yes. They worship the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints; though Christ says plainly, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve, Mat. 4.10. They worship likewise the Angels, and particularly, their Guardian Angel, though the Angels abhor it. I fell down to worship before the Feet of the Angel, which shewed me these things. Then said he unto me, see thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow-Servant, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the Sayings of this Book, worship God, Revel. 22.8, 9. Child. What Worship do they give to the Saints? Father. They pray to them, they worship and invocate them more than God; like the Heathen, who changed the Truth of God into a Lye, and worshipped and served the Creature, more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. Rom. 1.25. Child. Have they any guide for this? Father. No, They have neither Precept, nor Promise, nor Example for it, in the Word of God. Child. But are they sure the Saints hear them? Father. No, neither. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, Isa. 63.16. so David, Psal. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire, besides thee. Child. But do they worship not only the Saints themselves but their Re∣licks also? Father. Yes. They put them in Glasses and Gauderies above the Al∣tar, and that to have them adored. They have this day, the Milk of the Virgin, which they say is as precious as the Blood of Christ; and her Slippers, and her Work-basket, and Joseph's Breeches, and the Navel-string of Christ, and a thousand other things, which they keep and shew to be worshipped. And yet St. Paul says, Act. 14.15. Sirs, Why do you these things? We also are men of like Passions with you, and preach unto you, that you should turn from these Vanities, unto the Living God. Child. Is there any thing else that they worship? Father. Yes. The tenth Article is, I most firmly assert, that the Ima∣ges of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and of the other Saints, are to be had and kept, and duty of Honour and worship to be given them.
Child. Is not this point-blanck contrary to the Word of God? Father. Yes. The Commandment is plain, Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the Likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. Exod. 20.4.5. Notwithstanding, they make Images of God the Father, in the likeness of an old man, of God the Son hanging on the Cross; and of God the Holy Ghost, in the likeness of a Dove: They make also the Image of the Virgin Mary, and cloth her like a Lady, and call her Queen of Heaven; and also of the Apostles and other Saints, and they put off their Hats, they kneel, and fall down, and pray before them. Child. If this be not Idolatry I know not what is. I pray Sir what is the next Article? Father. The eleventh Article is, I also affirm, that the Power of In∣dulgences was left in the Church by Christ, and that the use of them is most conducive to Salvation of the Christian people. Child. Do they give Indulgence or Pardon for Sin? Father. Yes. The Pope giveth Indulgence or Pardon for Sin, some∣times for ten, twenty, or thirty thousand years, which brings him in a great Revenue: and yet St. Peter says, Forasmuch as you know, that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the pretious Blood of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.18. Child. Have they any more Articles of Faith? Father. Yes Child. The twelfth Article runs thus; The Holy Catho∣lick and Apostolick Church of Rome I acknowledge to be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and I vow, swear, and promise Obedi∣ence to the Bishop of Rome, as Successor of B. Peter, Prince of the Apo∣stles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. Child. This seems to me, to be the worst I have heard yet, for it makes all Churches subject to Rome, and the Pope Lord and Master of all the World: Doth the Scripture call the Church of Rome, the Mother and Mi∣stress of all Churches? Father. No Child, Rome is not the Mother-church, for the Gospel came from Jerusalem: Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, &c. And that Repentance and Remission of Sins, should be preached in his name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Luc. 24.46.47. Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. Neither is it the Mistress of all Churches. It seemeth good unto the Holy Ghost, and to us, saith the Apostles and Elders, and the whole Church assembled at Jerusalem, Act. 15.22, 23, 28, 29. to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things.
Child. But the Pope, it seems, requires obedience from all Christians, doth the Scripture command any such thing? Father. The Scripture commands obedience to our Pastors, but not to the Pope. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, Heb. 13.7. Child. Is the Popedom an Office in the Ministry? Father. No. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ, Eph. 4.11, 12. Child. Was St. Peter Prince of the Apostles? Father. No. Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Do∣minion over them, and they that are great exercise Authority upon them: But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Servant, Matth. 20.25, 26. Child. Is the Pope St. Peter's Successor? Father. Truly Child, I know not: 'tis probable he never was at Rome. St. Paul makes no mention of him, neither in his Epistle to the Romans, nor in any of his Epistles from Rome; and St. Peter himself writes not to the Romans, but to the Jews scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 1 Pet. 1.1. and subscribes his E∣pistle from Babylon, chap. 5.13. so that unless Rome be Babylon, 'tis not likely St. Peter was there. Child. But is there not one Visible Head of the Church? Father. No. We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone, Eph. 2.20. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as you are called, in one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, Eph. 4.4, 5, 6. Child. But was not St. Peter the great Apostle of the Gentiles? Father. No. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the Circum∣cision was unto Peter, (for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in me towards the Gentiles) And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars, perceived the Grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of Fellowship, that we should go to the Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9.
Child. By all this I perceive, that neither the Pope nor St. Peter himself, hath, or had any Dominion or Authority over the Church of Christ, and yet I have heard, that the Pope claims Authority to depose Kings; Is that lawful? Father. No. St. Paul sayes, Put them in mind to be subject to Prin∣cipalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. And St. Peter is more plain, and gives the Supremacy to Kings. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil Doers, and for the praise of them that do well, for so is the Will of God, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Child. Doth not the Pope also absolve from Oaths of Allegiance? Father. Yes. And yet Solomon sayes, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandement, and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccl. 8.2. Child. Doth he claim any other Power? Father. Yes. He can make right, wrong, and Justice Injustice, say the Jesuits, and they are bound to believe he commands well, what∣soever the thing be; and that all things enjoyned are just and good, so good, that nothing better could be done; so that they speak mo∣destly of his Power, that say he can dispence with the Commande∣ments of God: And yet Christ sayes, Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandements, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matth. 5.19. Child. Can such a man as this be a Christian Bishop, or be termed his Holiness? Father. No. The Scripture calls him the Man of Sin, the Son of Per∣dition, who opposeth, and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sitteth in the Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God, 2 Thes. 2.3, 4. Child. Doth the Scripture describe him by any other marks? Father. Yes. v. 9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Sathan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders. Child. Indeed, I have heard the Priests and Jesuits of Rome pretend to cast out Devils, and work Miracles, Do they so in England? Father. Yes, Ever and anon some Popish Person or other is pos∣sessed, and then a Priest comes and exorcises him, and casts out the Devil, but their juggling tricks are usually discovered. Such an one was the Boy of Bilson in Staffordshire, whose tricks were all laid open before the Judge and Grand Jury at Stafford Assizes by the Bishop of the Diocese.
Child. Doth not St. John also describe him? Father. Yes. Revel. 7.3, 4, 5, 6. I saw a woman sit upon a Scarlet-colour'd Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten Horns. And the Woman was array'd in Purple and Scarlet colour, and decked with Gold, and pretious Stones and Pearls, having a golden Cup in her hand full of Abominations, and Filthines's of her Fornication. And upon her Head was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. And I saw the Woman drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her I wondred with great Admiration. Child. Doth this concern the Pope and Church of Rome? Father. Yes. So the Angel interprets, v. 9.18. The seven Heads are se∣ven Mountains, on which the Woman sitteth, and the Woman which thou sawest, is that great City which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth. Child. If this be the Pope and Church of Rome, the Lord give me Grace to avoid Communion with them, Father. You say well, for we have a command to that purpose, Rev. 18.4, 5. I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues, for her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembred her Iniquities. Child. Is this the last Article of the Trent Creed? Father. No, they have two more: The thirteenth Article is, also all and whatsoever other thing delivered by way of Tradition, defined and declared by the holy Canons, and the general Councils; and chiefly, by the sacred and holy Synod of Trent, I undoubtedly receive, and profess, and together all contrary things, and whatsoever Heresies, damned, rejected, and accursed, I also damn, reject, and accurse. Child. You have spoken something already of Tradition, is there any thing more to be known? Father. Yes. They make their unwritten Traditions and the Canons of their Councels, equal to the word of God, and necessary to Salva∣tion: Nay, they make the Councel of Trent the only measure and rule of Faith in the Church of Rome. Whereas, on the contrary, St. Paul instructs the Churches of Galathia, Gal. 1.8. To measure their Faith by that Gospel only, which from the Beginning they had receiv'd, and was by himself preached unto them. Child. I pray Sir what is the last Article? Father. This true Catholick Faith, without which, no man can be saved, which at this present, I freely profess, and truly hold; I do
promise, vow, and swear, most constantly, God assisting, to retain and confess entire and inviolate, to the very last gaspe of Life, and to pro∣cure as much as shall lie in me, that the same be held, taught, and preached by all my Inferiours, and by those that are committed to my care and charge; So God help me, and those holy Gospels of God. Child. By this I perceive what is the Catholick Faith of the Church of Rome, in the new Trent Creed or Gospel, made 1500 years and more after the Death of Christ, and imposed by the Pope upon his Subjects, to be professed, vowed, sworn and maintained under Pain of eternal Damna∣tion. But can no man be saved without believing in this Creed? Father. So says the Pope: he curses all that will not receive it. But St. Paul declares him accursed, Gal. 1.8. who preaches any other Gospel, than that which he had preach'd unto them. The Curse therefore will fall upon the Pope and his Priests, except they can find a Priviledge greater than given to Apostles or Angels, to make new Creeds, and to preach new Gospels at Pleasure. Child. Do they baptize into this Creed? Father. No. All the Christian World have ever been baptized in∣to the Faith of the old Creed; never any that I heard of into the Faith of this new Creed. If this were as needful to Salvation as the old, they do men Wrong in Baptizing them, but into one half of the Christian Faith; therefore we are resolved to adhere to that Faith, which hath been professed always, every where, and by all persons; and particularly, both by them and us at our Baptisms, without Ad∣dition or Diminution: This was their Faith formerly, and is ours still. The Result of all is this, As the Sum of the Primitive Creed and Gospel is to believe in God, so the sum of the Romish Creed is to believe in the Pope; and as the rule of the Primitive Faith is the Word of God, the holy Scriptures, so the Rule of the Romish Faith is the word of man, papal Definitions; and as the end of the Primi∣tive Faith is the charity of GOd, to keep his commandments, so the end of the Romish Faith is Slavery to man, to uphold his Tyranny, and maintain his Supremacy. Remember therefore, what the Lord Christ says to his Disciples, Matt. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly, they are rave∣ning Wolves; ye shall know them by their Fruits, Math. 7.15. And that of the Apostle, I know this, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw
away Disciples after them. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one Night and Day with Tears. Act. 20.29, 30, 31. Child. The Lord write your Words in my Heart, and give me Grace to avoid these ravening Wolves, that lie lurking in every Corner. But, I pray Sir, having so well stablished, strengthned, and settled me in the Faith, be pleased also to open to me the Rule of Life; viz. the moral Law, that I may not be insnared by the corrupt Glosses which I hear the Papists have put upon the holy Law of God. And first, I pray, Sir, what do they teach of the Law in general? Father. The Law, as it is expounded by Christ, Mat. 5. they say, is a new Law, far more perfect than the Law of Moses: they say also, that Christ delivereth new Divine Counsel to his Disciples, which was not given in the Law, or in the Prophets; though Christ says, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fullfil, Mat. 5.17. and Mat. 7.12. There∣fore, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Child. What else do they teach concerning the Law? Father. They teach that 'tis possible for a man to keep the whole Law of God; and yet Solomon says, Who can say I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? Prov. 20.9. They have also a distinction of Venial and Mortal Sins: some Sins, they say, are veni∣al in their own Nature, which if they were all together, could not equal one mortal Sin, nor destroy Charity. And yet Jesus Christ says, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment, Mat. 12.36. Child. I pray Sir, what Sins do they call Venial Sins? Father. Lying, ordinary swearing, by St. Mary, or by the Mass, and simple Fornication and such like; and yet St. John says, speaking of Heaven, There shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defi∣leth, neither whatsoever worketh Abomination, or maketh a Lie, Revel. 21.27. Child. I have heard indeed, that they are very loose in their Mo∣rals, and I perceive this distinction of venial and mortal Sins, was invented for this Purpose: But I pray Sir, what do we Protestants hold concerning the Law? Father. We hold that the moral Law commands the perfection of Godliness and Righteousness, and directs us in our duties to God and Man. Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God
hath commanded you: you shall not turn aside, to the right hand or to the left, Deut. 5.32. Child. I pray Sir, proceed now to the Commandments in particular, as they were delivered by Moses, and shew me first, what we Protestants teach, and then what the Church of Rome teaches concerning them. Father. I shall do it readily. The first Commandment is, Thou shalt have no other Gods before me: and our Protestant Doctors teach, that this Jehovah, one in Substance, and three in Persons, the Creator, and Governour of all things, and the Redeemer of his Peo∣ple, is to be entertained for the only true God, in all the powers of the Soul; and so Christ opens it, Matt. 22.37. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. Child. Doth not the Church of Rome expound it so? Father. No. The Church of Rome teaches to make more Gods than one: they pray to the Saints, whereby they make them Gods in giving this Divine Property unto them, to know the Heart. They call the Virgin Mary, Queen of Heaven, and say she is a Goddess, and pray to her to command her Son to help them. Nay, they make the Pope a God, they call him, Our Lord God the Pope, and they are more careful to obey his commands, than the commands of God. Child. What is the meaning of the second Command? Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any Likeness of things in Hea∣ven, &c. Father. The meaning of this Commandment is, to bind all men to that solemn Form of religious Worship, which God himself in his Word prescribeth, that we serve him not according to our Fancies, but according to his Will. What thing soever I command you, ob∣serve to do it, thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deut. 12.32. Child. How do the Papists expound this Command? Father. They leave it quite out of their Catechisms, because 'tis so plain against their Image-worship, and they divide the tenth into two, to make up the number. Child. What Worship do they give to Images? Father. The same Worship they give to those whose Image it is; as they worship the holy Trinity and Christ, so they worship the Images of the Trinity, and of Christ.
Child. Did not the Heathens thus worship their Images? Father. Yes. The Papists say they worship their Images with a relative Worship, and so did the Heathens; and indeed, an Image cannot be worshipped with any other Worship. Nor does the com∣mandment forbid any other Worship, for it is a contradiction to say, this is the Image of God, and yet this is God; and therefore it must be also a contradiction, to worship an Image with any other Worship, for then it must be, that the Image of a thing is that thing whose Image it is. But they go yet a little farther, the Image of the Cross they worship with divine Honour, and though this divine Worship is but relative, yet the Cross it self is worshipped termina∣tively with divine Adoration: now if this be not Idolatry, I can ne∣ver be told what is the notion of the word. If there can be Idolatry in the Worship of an Image, it is certain, that a relative divine Wor∣ship is this Idolatry; for no man that worships an Image can make the Image the last Object: either therefore the Heathens were not Idolaters in the worshiping of an Image, or else these men are. Child. What is the sum of the third Command? Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord, &c. Father. The Sum of this Command is, That we impeach not, but by all means, advance the glorious name of God in all things, whereby he maketh himself known to men: Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, worship the Lord in the beauty of Holi∣ness, Psal. 29.2. Child. How do the Papists keep this Command? Father. They teach, that 'tis lawful to swear by the Saints, and in their common talk they cry out, O Lord, O Jesu! They use the Word Jesu thirty times together, and this they take for a peice of Devotion. And the Pope dispenseth with all Oaths at his pleasure, and teaches, that Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. Child. What is the meaning of the fourth Command, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day? Father. It challengeth at the hand of every man one day of seven in every Week, and requireth all Persons to separate themselves from their ordinary Labour, and all other Exercises, that they may attend to the worship of God only. Child. How do the Papists expound this Command? Father. They make the Popes Holy dayes equal with the Lords Sabbath, and they are more zealous for the Observation of them, for
they will be sure to keep them, but the Sabbath they usually spend in playing at Cards, Dice, and Tables. Child. What is the meaning of the fifth Command? Honour thy Fa∣ther and thy Mother, &c. Father. That the Quality of mens Persons and Places, in what E∣state soever, Natural, Civil, or Ecclesiastical, be truly acknowledged and respected; for it requires the Performance of all such Duties as one man oweth unto another. Render to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom, to whom Custom; Fear, to whom Fear; Honour, to whom honour, Rom. 13.7. Child. How do the Papists keep this Commandment? Father. They disannul it, in giving freedom and immunity to to their Clergy from subjection to Civil Authority, and in dispen∣sing with Subjects for their Loyalty and Allegiance to their Lawful Princes, and with Children and Servants from yielding due help, service, and obedience to their Parents and Masters. Child. What is the summe and meaning of the sixth Commandment; Thou shalt not murder? Father. That the Life and Person of man be by man not impeach∣ed but preserved. Surely, the Bloud of your Lives will I require. At the hand of every mans Brother will I require the Life of man, Gen. 9.5. Child. How do the Papists keep this Commandment? Father. They have Houses of Refuge, which they call Sanctua∣ries, wherein Murderers live in Safety. They hold it meritorious to poyson or stab any man for the advancement of the Catholick Cause, and 'tis a Position with them, though a damnable one, That Prin∣ces, excommunicate by the Pope, may be murdered by their Sub∣jects. Child. What is the meaning of the seventh Commandment, Thou shalt not commit Adultery? Father. That all Uncleanness and Impurity be avoided, and Cha∣stity by all means preserved. Having these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holi∣ness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Child. How do the Papists keep this Command? Father. They give Divorces for Marriages in the fourth degree, and Dispensations to marry in the second. Nay, which is most abo∣minable, the tolerate Stewes, publick Whore-houses, even in Rome
it self, where every Whore pays a Julian penny to his Holiness week∣ly, which amounts to, yearly, as some think, 50000 l. Child. What doth the eighth Commandment contain, Thou shalt not steal? Father. It contains a charge of our own and our Neighbours Goods, that we shew Love and faithfulness therein, and not only not impeach or hinder, but by all means preserve and further the the same. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him la∣bour, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give him that needeth, Eph. 4.28. Child. How do the Papists keep this Command? Father. The Pope makes sale of all things, of Heaven, Hell, and the Earth, of Pardons for Sin, and delivering men from Purgatory; which is flat Robbery, and most gross Deceit and Cozenage. By the fulness of his Power, the Pope can dispense in all things, where there is cause, and in many things, where there is no cause, under a greater price: so saith the Tax of the Datary, or the Book of Rates, where the price of the Dispensations are set down to a farthing, for the basest and vilest Sins that can be imagined. Child. What is the scope and end of the ninth Command, Thou shalt not bear false Witness, &c? Father. The main scope and end at which God aimeth, is the con∣servation of Truth amongst men, and of our own and our Neigh∣bours Fame and good Name. Put away lying, speak every man Truth with his Neighbour, for we are Members one of another, Eph. 4.25. Child. How do the Papists keep this Command? Father. They allow Equivocation, and mental Evasions, and teach that 'tis lawful to lye, or deceive the Question of the Magistrate, to conceal their Names, and to tell a false one, and to elude all Exami∣nations. Nay, they hold it not onely lawful, but meritorious, to dye with Lyes in their Mouths, if it be for the good of the Pope's Cause. Child. What is the summ and drift of the tenth Commandment, Thou shalt not covet, &c? Father. Gods People must not harbour in their hearts any thoughts or motions against their Neighbours, though the Will consent not: but content themselves with that Estate that God allots them: So St. Paul expounds it, I had not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shalt not covet, Rom. 7.7.
Child. How do the Papists expound this Command? Father. They hold Concupiscence before consent to be no sin. If it be any, they say 'tis less than any venial sin, which deserveth not damnation. Whereupon they have forged a Limbus for such In∣fants as dye in Original Sin. Thus they expound and keep the Com∣mandments. Child. If this be their way of keeping the Commandments of God, the Lord deliver me from them and their wayes, and incline my heart to keep his Commandments according to the Exposition of the Protestant Doctors. But are there no more Commandments but these? Father. No, Child. He declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even ten Commandments, and he wrote them upon two Tables of stone, Deut. 4.13. Child. Have the Papists any more Commandments? Father. Yes, Child. They have six Commands more, which they call the six Commandments of the Church, which are, 1. To keep all Sundays, and such Holy-days as are appointed, by hearing Mass, and forbearing to work. 2. To keep Abstinence and Fasting-days appointed; that is, to fast Lent, such Vigils as are commanded, Em∣ber-days, Fridays, and Saturdays. 3. To confess our Sins once a Year to a Priest. 4. To communicate once a year, and that about the time of Easter. 5. To pay Tiths. 6. Not to solemnize Marriage at forbidden times: and to these they say as well as unto Gods, is promised the Reward of eternal Life. Child. Sir you have shewed me the true Doctrine of Faith, which I must profess, and in some measure opened and expounded the ten Com∣mandements, the Rule of Life: I pray Sir proceed, and instruct me how to perform the Duty of Prayer: And first, pray tell me, Have we any Rule for Prayer? Father. Yes. The Lord Christ hath given us a full one. When you pray, say, Our Father, &c. Luc. 11.2. Wherein there is a Preface, or Entrance into Prayer, in the first words, Our Father which art in Hea∣ven. A Body of Petitions, containing the Matter of Prayer, in the words following. A Conclusion for confirmation and close of Pray∣er, in the last words, For thine is the Kingdom, &c. Child. What doth the Preface put us in mind of? Father. Of him to whom we pray, teaching us, that God, and God onely, is to be prayed unto. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, Psal. 50.15.
Child. How many Petitions be there in the Lord's Prayer? Father. Six, equally divided as it were into two Tables; where∣of, three do concern God, as doth the first Table of the Law; three do concern our selves and our Neighbours, as doth the second Table: for in the three first we make Requests for those things that concern God's Majesty, whose Glory and Service we are to prefer before our own Good: In the three latter, for those things that concern the Necessity of man and our own Welfare, which we must must refer to the former. Child. What is the Conclusion of this Prayer? Father. For thine is the Kingdom, &c. The sum whereof is, that we ground our Assurance of obtaining our Prayers in God, from whom all things we ask do come, and to whom therefore, all Glory must return. Child. You have shewed me the Protestant Doctrine of Prayer, do not the Papists teach the same? Father. No, Child. They teach that Prayers themselves ex opere operato, or by the natural Work it self, do prevail; for it is not, say they, essential to Prayer, for a man to think particularly of what he says: nay, 'tis not necessary to the Essence of Prayer, that he who prays should think of the speaking it self; so that Prayers in the mouth of a Papist, are like the words of a Charmer, they prevail, even when they are not understood; so that with them, Attention to, or Devotion in Prayer is not necessary. If the outward work be done, the Church in satisfied, and yet this the Lord Christ sharply reproves in the Jews; This People draweth nigh unto me with their Mouths, and honoureth me with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, &c. Mat. 15.8.9. So that between the Protestants and the Papists, the difference herein is this, They pray with their Lips, we with the Heart; we pray with the Understanding, they with the Voice; we pray, and they say Pray∣ers. Child. Do they teach any other Doctrines concerning Prayers? Father. Yes. They teach the People to pray with Beads, and they have Books to direct them; the Psalter of our Lady is 150 Ave-ma∣ries; and at the end of every tenth, they drop in the Lord's Prayer; and this with the Creed at the end of the fifty, makes a perfect Ro∣sary. They have also, the Psalter of Jesus, in which are fifteen short Ejaculations; as, Have Mercy on me, strengthen me, help me, com∣fort
me, &c. And with every one of these, the name of Jesus is to be said thirty times, that is in all four hundred and fifty times. Now this we think the Lord Christ plainly forbids, Math. 5.7, 8. When you pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathens do; for they think that they shall be heard by their much speaking, be not ye therefore like unto them. The Heathens thought to be heard for their much speaking, and if the people of the Roman Church do not think so, there is no reason why they should do so. Child. Is there any thing else they teach concerning Prayers? Father. Yes. They teach the People to pray in Latin, though they understand it not, and tell them, 'tis sufficient that God understands it: and all their publick Prayers are in Latine, of which the People understand not one word; contrary to Scripture, and the practice of the Primitive Church. If I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spi∣rit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful: What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with Understanding also: else, when thou shalt bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of Thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest, 1 Cor. 14, 15, 16. Child. But what do they do at Mass, if they do not understand the Prayers? Father. Truly Child, I know not, I was never there to see: but I have been told, that some talk one with another, others look about them; but they that would seem to be devout, kneel down, and say their Ave-maries according to their Beads. And this is agreeable to their Doctrine, for the Precept of hearing Mass is not to intend the words, but to be present at the Sacrifice, though the words be not so much as heard: and their Doctors say, 'tis enough if their Bodies be pre∣sent at their greatest Solemnities, though they hear nothing that is spoken, and understand as little. Child. This is wonderful strange to me, that Christians should be taught to pray, as Parots are to speak, such Prayers certainly are not for God who searches the Heart: To whom do they usually pray, and direct such dead Prayers? Father. They pray to dead Men and Women, who are, or whom they suppose to be beatified; and those they invocate as Preservers, Helpers, Guardians, Deliverers in their Necessity, and they expressly call them their Refuge, their Guard and Defence, their Life and
Health; which is so formidable a Devotion, that we for them, and for our selves too, if we should imitate them, are to dread the words of the Prophet, Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departeth from the Lord. Child. But to whom do they chiefly pray? Father. To the Virgin Mary, to their Angel-guardian, and to the Saints, upon several Occasions; and yet the Lord Christ says, when you pray, say our Father, Luc. 11.2. Child. How do they pray to the Virgin Mary? Father. They have many Prayers and Littanies to the Virgin Mary, and there is a Psalter of our Lady, of great account in the Church of Rome; which is nothing but the Psalms of David, in which the name of Lord is left out, and that of Lady put in; so that whatever David said of God and Christ, the same Prayers and the same Praises they say of the Virgin Mary: and whether all that can be said without intollerable Blasphemy, I suppose needs little Dispu∣tation. Child. But I pray Sir what Prayers do they present to the Virgin Mary? Father. They have many Prayers to the Virgin, such as these; O generous Mary, beautious above all, obtain Pardon for us, apply Grace unto us, prepare Glory for us: Hail thou Rose, thou Virgin Mary, &c. grant to us to use true Wisdom, and with the Elect to enjoy Grace, that we may with Melody praise thee, and do thou drive our Sins away: O Virgin Mary, give us Joys. These and di∣vers others like these, are in the Anthem of our Lady; but the or∣dinary Prayer is this, Hail Mary full of Grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou above all Women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us Sinners now, and at the hour of our Death, Amen. Child. What Reasons do they alledge for this? Father. The Reasons they give are more absurd than the Prayers themselves. They say that Christ is not our Advocate alone, but a Judge; and since the Just are scarce secure, how shall a Sinner go to him as to an Advocate? Therefore God hath provided us of an Advocatess, who is gentle and sweet, in whom nothing that is sharp is to be found. And to those words of St. Paul, Come boldly to the Throne of Grace, they say, that Mary is the Throne of Grace;
in whom he rested: to her, therefore let us come with Boldness, that we may obtain Mercy, and find grace in time of need. They say al∣so, that Mary is call'd, full of Grace, because she is the Means and Cause of Grace, by transfusing Grace to Mankind: nay, they go higher yet, Pope Leo the Tenth calls her a Goddess, and the Jesuits say, that she is the Companion or Partner of the divine Majesty and Power; to her God long since gave the Principallity of all heavenly and mortal things, so far as the Guardianship of men requires; she rules at her Will the Earth and Seas, Heaven and Nature; and she consenting, he gives divine Treasures and coelestial Gifts. Nay in some of their Mass-books they call the Virgin Mary the way to Life, the Governess of all the World, the Reconciler of Sinners with God, the Fountain of Remission of Sins, Light of Light, and at last salute her with an Ave universae Trinitatis Mater, Hail thou Mo∣ther of the whole Trinity. Child. I beseech you no more of these Blasphemies, I think no Chri∣stian Ear can hear them with Patience; I am sure the Lord Christ gives no such Titles to the Virgin, but rather reproves her, Woman what have I to do with thee, mine Hour is not come, John. 2.4. And calls his Disciples his Mother and his Brethren. Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? And he stretched forth his hand towards his Dis∣ciples, and said, Behold my Mother and my Brethren; for whosoever shall do the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother, Matt. 12.49, 50. But I pray proceed, do they pray to the Angels also. Father. Yes. To their Angel-guardian they use this Prayer, Blessed Angel! To whose Care and Custody, our loving Creator hath com∣mitted me, defend me this day, I beseech you, from all Dangers, and direct me in the way I ought to walk. Child. Do they pray also to the Saints? Father. Yes. They have a patron Saint, whose name they bear, to whom they pray thus; Glorious St. N. whom the divine Provi∣dence hath allotted for my Pattern upon Earth, and my Patron in Heaven; obtain I beseech you, for me your poor Pupil, so to imi∣tate here your Virtues, that I may hereafter be made Partaker of your Glory. Nay, they have a Saint to pray to for every Infirmi∣ty and Disease; to St. Sebastian, and St. Roch, to cure the Plague; to St. Petronilla for the Fever; to St. Bennet to cure all Poyson; to St. Apollonia for the Tooth-ach; to St. Otilia for sore Eyes; to
St. Apollinaris for the French-Pox; to St. Liberius for the Stone; and to St. Felicitas for Barrenness in Women: they pray also to St. Gall for the Health and Fecundity of their Geese; to St. Wendeline for their Sheep; to St. Anthony for their Hogs, to St. Pelogius for their Oxen. They have also their peculiar Saints for every Trade, the Physitians are patronized by Cosmus and Damian; the Painters by St. Luke; the Potters by Goarus, the Shoo-makers by Crispin; the Hunts men by Eustachius; the Harlots, for that also is a Trade at Rome, by St. Afra and Mary Magdalen. They are so given up to these Delusions, that every Nation hath a peculiar Guardian-Saint, and every City, every Family, and almost every House, and every devouter person chooses his own patron-Saint, whose Altars they more devoutly frequent, whose Image they more religiously worship, to whose Relicks they more readily go in Pilgrimage, and whose Festival they more solemnly observe. Of such as these the Pro∣phet complains, Jer. 2.13. My People have committed two Evils, they have forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water. Child. This seems to me to be more like Heathenism than Christiani∣ty; and certainly, people cannot be good Christians in those Devotions: but, I pray Sir, Do they not use the Lords Prayer? Father. Yes, after their way. They say ten Ave Maries for one Pater noster, and leave out the Conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, &c. though it be expresly mentioned by St. Matthew, 6.13. Child. What do the Protestants say to this? Father. We say of this, as we do of their robbing the People of the Cup in the Sacrament, that 'tis Sacrilege. They steal away this Thanksgiving from Prayer, as if it were no part of it. So that it is no marvel, that in Popery, all the whole Body of their Doctrine is of the Salvation of men, and that at a strange rate too, God's Glory being buried in a deep silence. Child. You have shewed me the Christian Faith, and the Roman Faith, the Popish way of keeping the Commandements, and the Protestant way; and after what manner the Church of Rome teaches her Disci∣ples to pray, and how we Protestants pray: I should now intreat you to proceed to the Sacraments, but you have spoken so much of them already in the Trent Creed, that I know not what to ask you about them: Is there any thing more fit for me to know?
Father. Yes. You may remember, that 'tis one Article of the Trent Creed, that there are seven Sacraments: Now we Protestants own but two; and I will shew you what Reasons we have for it. First, When the number of Sacraments were most necessary, as un∣der the Law, they had but two, which were types of ours, there∣fore we need require no more. Brethren, I would not that you should be ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same Spiritual meat, and did all drink the same Spiritual drink; for they drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly, Having meat, drink, and Cloaths, we ought therewith to be content. Now, by the Sa∣crament of our Enterance, our Spiritual cloathing is sealed unto us. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. And by that of our growth, is sealed our Feeding. The Cup of the Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Bloud of Christ? the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16. Thirdly, These two Seals assure us of all Gods Graces; as of our Regeneration, Entrance and In∣grafting into Christ, so of our growth and continuance in him: and therefore we need no more. For by one Spirit we are all bap∣tized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. There be as many Sacraments, as there be things that need to be betokened to us, about our Justification: Therefore those five other Sacraments, of Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Orders, and Extream Unction, added by the Papists, are superflu∣ous, because some of them have no Warrant at all out of the Word of God, and God hath not promised a Blessing upon the using of them. Others of them, though they are agreeable to the Word, yet are without the nature and number of Sacraments. Child. Since the Church of Rome takes liberty to make new Creeds, new Commandments, and new Sacraments: hath she invented nothing else? Father. Yes. She hath invented little pretty things, like Sacra∣ments, of her own, without a Divine Warrant; and to these Sa∣cramentals, as she calls them, she imputes Spiritual Effects; and promises not only Temporal Blessings, Immunities, and Benedicti∣ons, but the collation or increase of Spiritual Graces, and Remission
of Venial Sins, and mitigation of pains due to Mortal sins, to them who shall use them. Child. I pray Sir, what be those? Father. Of this nature are Holy Water, the Paschal Wax, Oyle, Palm boughs, holy Bread, holy Hats, Agnus Dei's, in English, Lambs of God, holy Medals, holy Beads, Swords and Daggers sanctified on the Altar, Holy Bells and Roses hallowed upon the Sunday, cal∣led Laetare Jerusalem, such as Pope Pius the second sent to James the King of Scotland. Child. I pray what is their Doctrine concerning these things? Father. Their Doctrine is, that the Bloud of Christ is by these applied unto us; that they do not only signifie, but produce Spi∣ritual Effects; that they blot out Venial Sins, that they drive away Devils, that they cure Diseases; and that though these things do not operate infallibly, as do the Sacraments, and that God hath made no express Covenant concerning them; yet by the Devotion of them that use them, and the Prayers of the Church, they do prevail. Child. I pray Sir what ground have they for those things? Father. The Priests and Jesuits abuse the People with Romantick Stories out of their Legends, making them believe, that one cured a mans broken Thigh with holy Water, that another cured a mad∣man with the same Medicine; that some have cured sick persons with holy Bread and Oyl, which indeed is the most likely of them all, as being good Food, and good Medicine. And although not so much as a Chicken is now a days cured of the Pip, by holy Water, yet upon all Occasions they use it, and the common people throw it upon Childrens Cradles, and sick Cows horns, and upon them that they think bewitched or blasted, and if they recover by any means, it is imputed to the Holy-water; and so the Simplicity of Christian Religion, the glory of our Dependance upon God, and the Holiness and mystery of Sacraments are disordered and dishonour'd. Thus the Israelites did when they fell to Idolatry, they joyned themselves to Baal Peor, and eat the Sacrifices of the dead; thus they provoked him to anger with their Inventions, Psal. 106.28, 29. and v. 39. Thus were they defiled with their own Works, and went a whoring with their own Inventions. Child. Is there any thing else that they teach of the Sacraments, to be observed? Father. Yes. There is yet one great Instance more of their Irreligion, they are taught to rely upon the Sacraments with so little of moral
and vertuous Dispositions, that the Efficacy of one is made to lessen the Necessity of the other, and the Sacraments are taught to be so effectual by an inherent Vertue, that they are not so much made the Instruments of Vertue, as the Supplement; not so much to encrease, as to make amends for the want of Grace, contrary to that of the A∣postle, Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28. Child. By this I suppose they do not think Repentance is needful, to fit and pre∣pare us for the Lords-table. I pray Sir what do they teach concerning that Duty? Father. They are so loose in the Doctrine of Repentance, that you cannot imagine it. I shall therefore shew you, what we and they teach concerning that Duty, and conclude this Discourse. Child. I pray Sir, first shew me then what we teach concerning Repentance? Father. Our Protestant Doctors teach, that Repentance is an inward and true sorrow for Sin, especially, that we have offended so gracious a God, and so loving a Father, together with a settled purpose of Heart, and a careful endeavour to leave all our Sins, and to live a Christian Life accor∣ding to all God's Commandments; The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spi∣rit, a broken and a contrite Heart, O God thou wilt not despise, Ps. 51.17. Child. How is this Grace wrought in us? Father. 'Tis wrought in us partly by the threatning of the Law, and the fear of God's Judgments; but especially, increased by feeling the Fruit of Christ's Death, whereby we have power to hate Sin, and to leave it. Child. Wherein doth Repentance properly consist? Father. In a through changing of our purpose and desires from the Evil which God's word rebuketh in us, to the good which it requireth of us. Child. Can men repent of themselves, or when they list? Father. No, for it is the gift of God, given to them that are born again. Child. When is this Repentance to be practised? Father. The practice of Repentance ought to be a continual abhorring of Evil, and cleaving unto that which is good, for as much time as remains in the Flesh after our Confusion, yet at some times there ought to be a more special practice and renewing thereof, as after grievous Falls, as we see in David, Psal. 51. and in fear of eminent Judgments, which the Pro∣phet calls for, Amos 4.12. Because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Or when we should fit our selves to receive special mercies, as when we come to the Lord's Table, &c. Child. You have shewed me the Protestant Doctrine of Repentance, I pray
God give me Grace to practise it all the dayes of my life. But, I pray Sir, Do not the Papists teach the same? Father. No. They teach, 1. That a Sinner is not bound to repent of his Sin presently, if it be done at any time 'tis sufficient. Some say, he is bound by the Precept of the Church to repent upon the great Holidays: others say, once a year, at Easter; but 'tis the general opinion, that by the Law of God they are not tied to so much, but only to repent in the dan∣ger or Article of Death; from whence some conclude, that to refuse to repent, is but a venial sin: but others say, 'tis none at all. Child. This seems to me to be intolerable, Have they any more such Doctrines? Father. Alas, Child, this is but the beginning of sorrows. The next thing therefore that I shall mention, is their Doctrines concerning Contrition; which, when it is true and cordial, for having sinn'd against God, the the Church of Rome does not allow it to be of any value, unless it be joyn'd with a desire to confess their Sins unto a Priest; and this is decreed by the Councel of Trent, contrary to all Scripture; to the Doctrine of the Prophets, Ezek. 18.30. Repent, and turn your selves from all your Transgres∣sions, so Iniquity shall not be your ruine: to the Doctrine of the Apostles, Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. But this is not all; for as Contrition without Confession will not reconcile us to God, so Attrition, as they call it, proceeding from fear of damna∣tion, together with their Sacrament, will do as well. There is no neces∣sity of Contrition at all. If a man live a wicked life 60 or 80 years to∣gether, yet, if in the Article of his Death he be but a little sorrowful for his Sins; and though this Sorrow hath in it no love of God, but only a fear of Hell, if the Priest absolves him, he passes him instantly into a state of Salvation. The Priest with two fingers and a thumb, can do his work for him in a moment. Child. Ʋpon these terms, it is a wonder, that all wicked men in the World are not Papists, where they may live so merrily, and dye so securely; but is not Confession a troublesome thing to them? Father. Not at all. They have an easie formal way of it. I confess un∣to Almighty God, to the Blessed V. Mary, to blessed Michael the Archangel, to blessed Jo. Baptist, to the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, to all the Saints, and to you, my Ghostly Father, that I have very much sinned in thought, word, and deed, through my fault, through my fault, through my exceed∣ing great fault: Therefore, I beseech thee, B. Virgin Mary, blessed Michael the Archangel, blessed John Baptist, the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, all the Saints, and you, my Ghostly Father, to pray unto our Lord God for me. And when they see Princes and Prelates, Women and Boyes do the
same every day, it troubles them not: and they look upon it as a certain Cure: therefore, in their Carnavals, they give themselves all liberty and licence to do the vilest things, because they are to be so soon eased of their Crimes by Confession, and the never-failing hand of the Priest. Child. But I have heard some say, that they are enjoyn'd Penance, Is not that troublesome to them? Father. Alas, Child! their Penances and Satisfactions, as they are hand∣led, are nothing but words, and ineffective sounds: for if some Confes∣sors happen to be severe, they may go to a gentler, or they may have them commuted to Money; or they may get some body else to do them for them, or they may get all supplied by an Indulgence; of which, there are such store in the Lateran at Rome, that, as P. Boniface said, no man is able to number them. In the Church of Sancta Maria de populo, there are, for every day in the year 2800 years of Pardon. In the Church of St. Vitus and Modestus, there are for every day in the year 7000 years of Pardon, and a third part of all our sins besides, and the price of all this is, but praying before an Altar in that Church. In a Book of theirs, called, The Hours of the most Blessed Virgin Mary, accor∣ding to the use of Sarum, for the saying three short Prayers, are promi∣sed 90000 years of Pardon of deadly sin. If this should be neglect∣ed, a little Alms to a Priest, a Pilgrimage to the Image or Relicks of a Saint, wearing St. Francis cord, saying over the Beads with an hal∣lowed Appendant, praying at a priviledged Altar, leaving a Legacy for a Soul Mass, and twenty other Devices, will secure the Sinner from suffering Punishment here or hereafter. And if a man fail in all these things, 'tis but going to the Tax of the Apostolick Chamber, where there is a price set down for his Absolution that hath kill'd his Fa∣ther or his Mother, Brother, Sister, or Wife, or that hath lain with his Sister or Mother, or committed such sins as are not fit to be named. These Observations I hope, Child, are sufficient, to keep you, and eve∣ry well-meaning Christian, from running into, or abiding in such temptations. Child. I beartily thank you for the Advice you have given me, hoping in the Lord that I shall be stedfast, and immoveable, alwayes abounding in the Work of the Lord. I shall detain you no longer, but only intreat you to give me the sum of what you have said, in few words, that I may the better remember it. Father. I shall readily comply with your Desires. The Religion of a Christian consists in Faith and Hope, Repentance and Charity, Divine Worship, and celebration of the Sacraments; and finally, in keeping the
Commandments of God. Now in all these, both in Doctrines and Pra∣ctices, the Church of Rome does dangerously err, and teach men so to do. They do Injury to Faith, by creating new Articles, and enjoyning them as of Necessity to Salvation; they spoil their Hope, by placing it upon Creatures, and devices of their own; they greatly sin against Charity by damning all that are not of their Opinions in things false or uncer∣tain, right or wrong; they break in pieces the salutary doctrine of Repentance, making it to be consistent with a wicked Life, and little or no Amendment: They worship they know not what, and pray to them that hear them not; they not only eat what they worship, but adore those things with divine Worship, which are not God. And as for the Commandments, they leave one of them out of their Catechisms, and add six new ones of their own, and while they contend for the possibility of keeping them all, they do not insist upon the necessity of keeping any, till the danger or Article of their Death. And concerning the Sacraments, they take one half of the principal away from the Laity, and they institute little Sacraments of their own, and annex spiritual Graces to them without a Divine warrant or In∣stitution: if these things can consist with the Duty of Christians, cer∣tainly we have lost the true measures of Christianity. Let all therefore that desire to be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, give no heed to their seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, teaching Lies in Hypo∣crisie, having their Conscience seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath crea∣ted to be received with Thansgivings, 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. And let them give God Praise, that they were born, and bred up in the Church of England, where the word of God is constantly read and preached in the Vulgar Tongue, and the Sacraments duely and fully administred, ac∣cording to Christ's Institution; where Repentance is preached accord∣ing to the Measures of the Gospel, Faith in Christ propounded accord∣ing to the Rule of the Apostles, the Commandments expounded with just Severity, Holiness of Life urged upon all men, as indespensibly ne∣cessary to Salvation, and every thing practised therein, which is useful to the saving of our Souls. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things, 2 Tim. 2.7. FINIS.
