T892 R38197 17203880 106227
THE ART OF Chymistry: As it is now Practised. Written in French, By P. THIBAƲT, Chymist to the French King. And now Translated into English, BY A Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON: Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter near Temple-Bar in Fleetstreet. 1675.
Licensed, Roger L'Estrange.
The Author's PREFACE. I Have, Courteous Reader, but two things to say to thee; the first is, To de∣liver my Opinion con∣cerning Chymistry; and the other is, To set down my Way and Method of proceeding in Operations. Chymistry, as I take it, is a Libe∣ral Art, which, though it have the same Object, and the same End, as Vulgar Pharmacy, does nevertheless compose it by Nobler, and more In∣genious
Means, and more to the ad∣vantage of Physick. In ancient times, even long before Hippocrates, Physitians neither knew, nor made use of any more than four ways of preparing their Remedies; for, ei∣ther they pressed the Juice out of their Ingredients, or beat them to powder, or they boiled them, or else they infused them in Water, or some other Liquor, and so gave them to their Patients. Some Ages after, and particularly since Mesue, and those other famous Arabians, till the time of Paracelsus, Physitians con∣tinually invented so many new Pre∣parations, and put so many Disgui∣ses upon their Remedies, that they were fain to give over doing of it themselves, and to assign that care to those whom we now call Apotheca∣ries. But, if we give a Judicious
Curiosity leave to pry into these ma∣nifold Disguises, we shall soon be convinced, that they are indeed no∣thing but the four first Simple Pre∣parations, with the addition of Su∣gar or Honey, and some differences of Colour and Consistency; for the most part heaping great quantities of Simples one upon another, to the end their Patients might swallow them with less distaste. Paracelsus and his Followers having particular∣ly wrought upon Minerals, found out some excellent Remedies; and being encouraged by their rich Dis∣coveries, they continued them with such eagerness, that in a short time with Inventions equally ingenious and laborious, they did almost sub∣due the three Kingdoms of Vegeta∣bles, Animals and Minerals, and came to the possession of most rich,
and hitherto unknown Secrets, inso∣much, as one may say, that even from the beginning of the World, to their times, the Vertues of those ex∣cellent Remedies lay buried in their own Bodies, as in a Grave. This may be clearly seen in Crude Anti∣mony, of which a pound, either in powder, or in Infusion, or Decocti∣on, works no other effect in the Bo∣dy, than if we had swallowed as much Saw-dust. But, if you know how to open its Body by the Keys of Chymistry, then for interiour Reme∣dies, you shall have an Emetick, a Purgative, a Sudorifick, a Diapho∣retick, a Diuretick, and a Cordial, which you need only give in a diffe∣rent proportion of so many Grains. And for exteriour Applications, you may, out of the same Antimony, have a Desiccative, a Mundificative, a Con∣sumptive,
or Escarotick, with other rare Remedies, as we shall hereafter set down at large. If we consider Mercury, they that work in the Mines in Spain, teach us by their Theft, that more than a pound of it may be ta∣ken inwards without harm; for, a little before they give over working, they swallow a good quantity of it, which, when they are at liberty, they ease themselves of by Stool, and so keep it to sell in secret. And this the Overseers having discovered, do now force every Workman to stay there a considerable time, after his giving over working, that these Mer∣curial Thieves may be so forced to leave their theft behind them. But, if by the vertue of Chymical Dissol∣vants you open the body of Quick∣silver, it will produce in very small Doses, such various and wonderful
effects, that out of it alone may be had Remedies to answer all the Indi∣cations of Physick. Is there any thing more contemptible than Niter, in the hands of the Vulgar Pharma∣cy? But, is there any thing more admirable than the self-same Niter handled by Chymistry? for with it, we make now a pleasant and cooling Acid, now a hot and burning Corro∣sive; sometimes it revives the Eme∣tick and Purgative vertue of Anti∣mony, sometimes it kills the Emetick, and revives only the Purgative, and sometimes it destroys both Emetick and Purgative, and quickens either the Diuretick or Diaphoretick; and in a word, it produces so many won∣derful effects upon all the other Mi∣nerals, that we may justly call it the Ʋniversal Agent of Chymistry. Who would think that a quantity of Sil∣ver,
no bigger than a Pea, Chymi∣cally prepared, were able to heal, by once touching, any Ulcers of the Mouth? and by two or three touch∣ings, soften and heal the hardest, and most inveterate Ulcers, and even the Gangrene it self in any part of the Body, and that incomparably better than any Remedy of the Old Phar∣macy. Would any body believe, that out of Common Salt, which is generally reputed so prejudicial to those that are subject to the Stone or Gravel, Chymists should extract a pleasant Spirit, which drives out all Gravel, breaks the Stone in the Kid∣neys and Bladder, and dissolves en∣tirely in the palm of the hand a Stone cut out of a humane Bladder? I should be tedious in setting out all the other VVonders of this Art, only this I'll say to prove its excel∣lency,
That whereas in its birth, and even in its growth, when it was either not known at all, or ill known by Physitians, almost every body had an aversion, and a prejudice against it; now quite contrary, being high∣ly esteemed, and throughly known by the Learned and Experienced Professors of this Art, it has gained the Reputation of being the best In∣strument of the excellent Cures they perform. But, if in requital of the kind Reception it now meets withal in the world, Chymistry hath any acknow∣ledgments to pay, it is particularly to Monsieur Vallot, who having been long the Physitian of the greatest Practice in Paris, is now the Physi∣tian of his Most Christian Majesty; in which place, by his profound Learning, and the excellent choice
of Remedies, borrowed, for the most part, from Chymistry, he still per∣forms wonderful, and most singular Cures. So famous an Example makes me apt to believe, that if there be any persons obstinate in their old errour against Chymistry, they will by little and little forsake it; as those have been forced to do, who for a long time stubbornly opposed the new Discovery of the Vessels that carry the Chyle from the Stomach to the Heart, without coming at the Liver, only because they had not seen, or at least not well observed this new con∣veyance. Now for my Method, it all runs upon two principles; First, To find out, and set down solid and pertinent Reasons of all the Circumstances which accompany our Operations. The Second, to discover the best, ea∣siest,
and shortest way of performing the said Operations. These were no easie things to be found out; for, the first Chymists happened upon abun∣dance of excellent Secrets, but being ignorant of the true Reasons of their Discovery; that they might give credit to their new Science, they made use of the Cabalistique Cloak, of covering all things with a Myste∣ry. The Modern Professors indeed have given a better Foundation to their Art, and so good an one, as hath shaken that of the old Philoso∣phy, but withal, either for want of skill, or maliciously they have en∣cumbred their processes with so ma∣ny, and such impertinent Circum∣stances, lengthening both them and the expences, that very few, and in∣deed none, but very sharp-sighted Physitians have been able to see
through the Cloud, and both receive and communicate the benefit of the light there hidden. This conside∣ration has moved me in this my VVork, to keep within the limits of Chymistry, neglecting any Speculati∣ons beside my purpose; and withal, to endeavour to free my processes from all those Obscurities, Difficul∣ties and Protractions, which Expe∣rience and Reason have convinced me to be either superfluous, or pre∣judicial to them. If I have not ex∣ecuted my design to thy mind, I must confess, Courteous Reader, that it is much a harder thing to per∣form well, than to project.
A TABLE OF The Matters contained in this BOOK. A ACids serve to precipitate the dissolution of Minerals Page 55 Advice to the Artist 99 Alembick open its parts and composition 20 Blind Alembick 21 Alembick twins, their description ibid. Amber distilled with Spirit of Wine 153 Essence of Ambergreece 183 Antimony Mineral preferrable to all others for the Philosophers Stone 101 Is the most malignant of all for the use of Physick ibid.
Antimony diaphoretick 98 What Antimony is best for its preparation ibid. The way of forming it into Trochisks 100 Observations on the matter of this Remedy ibid. How to hinder it from being vomitive 101 What it is properly 102 Its Ʋse and Vertues ibid. Antimony revived 263 Antimony, its differences 85 Red Acid Oyl of Antimony 276 Its Ʋse ibid. Aqua fortis dissolves Silver in equal quantity 127 What effects, if your Silver be mingled with Cop∣per ibid. Aqua fortis, how made 41 Aqua Regalis, how made 42 Aqua fortis, with purified Niter, and Alom 233 Arcanum Corallinum, what it is 84 Its Ʋse and Vertues ibid. Gravelled Ashes what 132 B BAlsom of Brimstone 182 Its Vertues 183 Balsam of St. Johns-wort 178 Its matter and preparation ibid. Its Vertues ibid. Balneum Maris, what 27 A Glass Bell, what kind of vessel 24
Benjamin, its preparation into flowers 213 Its qualities 215 The vertue of the Flowers ibid. The Virginal Milk of Benjamin and Storax 231 The use of this Milk 232 Bezoard Mineral 110, 276 Its matter and preparation 111 What it is 112 Its vertues ibid. Bismuth a kind of Marcassit 133 Ought not to be dissolved in Aqua fortis 136 Its preparation 133, 134 The Magistery of Bismuth, what 137 Is a good Fucus ibid. The Precipitate of Bismuth 277 Its use ibid. Bricks use in Chymistry, their Figure 4 The manner of making and drying them 5 Box is the Guaiac of Europe 142 Yields much Spirit, and little Oyl 143 Vertues of its Spirit and Oyl 143, 144 Butter of Antimony 105 Its different names ibid. Its matter and preparation 106 The Dosis 110 Its vertues ibid. Butter of Saturn 265 Its vertues 266
C CAlcination of Lead 202 The use of Calcin'd Lead 263 Calcination of Venice Talc 210 The use of calcin'd Talc 211 Calx of Egg-shells 207 Its Ʋse and Vertues 209 Calx of Lead 113 Its preparation and vertues 113, 114 Calx of Mercury 75 Grows yellow by pouring warm water upon it ibid. Calx of Oyster-shells 305 Calx of Silver, how reduced to a Metallic Nature 126 Camphire melts into Oyl in its dissolution 156 Cauteries, how made, and of what 130, 274 How moulded 131 Their use 133 Cinnaber of Antimony 107 Colcothar of Vitriol. Its vertues 40, 274 Coals serving to the Chymical fire, their conditions 26 Colophone, what 50 Conserve liquid of Roses 171 Conserve of all sorts of flowers and leaves 169, 170 Coral, its Salt and Magistery 175, 176, 177 Cream of Saturn, Vid. Butter. Cream of Tartar 225 Its vertues 229 Cream of Steeled Tartar ibid.
Crocus Martis astringent 245 Crocus Martis opening 272 Chrystal, what it is 213 The matter it is made of ibid. Crystal, how prepared to endure a violent fire 235 Crystals of Mars 243 Their preparation 244 Their colour and vertues 245 Crystal Mineral 255 Its Dosis and Vertues 256 Sweet Crystals of Saturn 115 Their preparation 115, 116 Crystal of Tartar 225 Crystals of Venus 49 Crystals of Venus 239 Their preparation and vertues 243 Crystal Mineral 55 Remarks 57 Its vertues 60 Purging Cup of Antimony 92 D DIstillation per discensum 28 Flying Dragon, what 33, 139
E WHite Eagle, what it is 68 Essence against the Tooth-ach 164 Extracts of Berries, Leaves, Flowers, &c. how made 193 Extract of Guaiac 141 Its vertues 142 Extract of Hellebore 163 Its vertues 164 Extract of Juniper 192 Its vertues ibid. F CHymical Fire, what to be considered in it 26 Its degrees 29 Circulary Fire 28 Fire of half Suppression and whole Suppression 28 Sand-Fire ibid. Flowers of Antimony 216 Their vertues 218 Flowers of Brimstone 44 Their preparation 219 Their vertues 221 Chymical Furnaces 6 Their Figure, Division, and Sub-division ibid. Furnace of Balneum Maris 7 Furnace with a Sand-Fire 9
Furnace with a naked circulary Fire 10 Furnace with a naked fire and small Reverberatory 12 Furnace with a naked fire and great Reverberatory 13 Furnace with a little circulatory Fire 15 Furnace with a great circulatory Fire ibid. Furnace with a circulary Fire of Suppression with∣out chink 15 Furnace with a Fire of Suppression and chink 16 Furnace with a melting Fire, or a mind Furnace 17 G GƲaiac yields much Oyl and Spirit 142 Cup or Goblet of Antimony that purges 92 Gold is not to be calcin'd alone 237 Its dissolvant 236 Is not potable, but in its dissolvant 238 Glass Tunnel, its description 24 H HOny, its Spirit and Tinctures 160 I INstruments of Chymistry, their number 2, 3 Infernal Stone 125 Its vertues 129 Dyes the Beard black ibid.
L CHymical Laboratory, its definition, it condi∣tions 1, 2 Lamp for Chymical Operations 27 Laudanum its matter and preparation 193 Its Ʋse and Vertues 196 Lead calcin'd by Brimstone 113 Lime contains two Salts 131 Liver of Antimony 85 Its vertues and dose 87 Lute Chymical, its composition and use 3, 4 Observations how to Lute well 5 M MAgistery of Bismuth 133 Its vertues 137 Magistery of Crabs-eyes, Bezoard, Mother of Pearl, how made 176 Magistery of Coral 174 Its vertues 177 Magistery of Egg-shells 207 Its vertues 209 Magistery of Jalap, Vid. Rosin. Magistery of Pearls 201 Is a great Cordial 204 And also a Fucus Magistery of Saturn 115 How used against sore eyes 121 Magistery of Silver 233 Its use 234
Mars uncalcin'd, its qualities 123 Matras, its description 22 Milk of Brimstone 198 Its vertues 201 Virginal Milk 121 Milk of Benjamin and Storax 231 Minium, what 118 Mould of Lattin for the Infernal Stone 128 Moors-head part of the Brass Vesica 19 N NIter breaks a hot pot 57 Being well purified, is Crystal Mineral 60 Niter crystallized preserves distilled Waters 168 Niter sulphurated 60 How this Salt is moulded 63 It is a most powerful cooler 65 Cures the Running of the Reins ibid. Nutritum of Saturn. Vid. Butter. O OPeration in a Sea-Bath 27 In a Sand-heat ibid. Acid Oyl of Antimony 103 Its colour 104 What it is, and its vertues 105 Oyl of Ash 143 Oyl of Box ibid. Its vertues ibid.
Oyl of Bricks 148 Its vertues 150 Oyl of Camphire is made in a partioular manner 156 Its use and vertues 157 Oyl of Cloves stinking 144 Its vertues 145 Oyl of Yolks of Eggs 151 Its vertues 152 Oyl of Guaiac 138 Its vertues 142 Black Oyl of Juniper 191 Aromatick Oyl of Juniper 187 Its use and vertues 190 Oyl of Jet 145 Oyl of Myrrha and other Gums 147, 275 Its vertues 147 Oyl of Karabe 153 Oyl of Sulphur 43, 44 Oyl of Tartar 53 Its vertues 55 Oyl of Turpentine 50 Its vertues 52 Oyl of Vitriol 37, 38 Its vertues 40 Oyl of yellow Wax 156 Its vertues 157 P PEarls dissolved in Spirit of Salt 201 Pills of Turpentine 165 Their use and vertues 166
Pills everlasting 91 Phlegm of Turpentine 50 Plaster of Saturn 163 Emetick Powder its preparation 109 Red Precipitate of Mercury 80 Its vertues 82 White Precipitate of Mercury 76 Its vertues 79 Precipitate of Jalap. Vid. Rosin. Precipitate of Bismuth. Vid. Magistery. Precipitate of Brimstone. Vid. Milk. Precipitate of Silver. Vid. Magistery. Lapis Prunellae 57 R REeceiver of Stone, how it differs from the ear∣then ones 23 Receiver of Glass 22 Refrigeratory 19 Regule of Antimony 88 Its preparation 89 Its excellency ibid. Its vertues 91 Regule of Mars 93 Its preparation ibid. Its vertues 94 Retorts how luted 5, 6 Rosin of Jalap 221 Its vertues 224 Rosin of Scammony ibid. Its vertues 225
S OPening Saffron of Mars 124, 273 Other opening Saffron of Mars 125 Both their vertues ibid. Binding Saffron of Mars 245 Salt of Crystal 211 Its Vertues 213 Salt decrepitated what 31 Salt of Mars 245 Salt of precious Stones, how made 213 Salt of the Sugar-canes 120 Salt of Saturn its use 116 Salt of Tartar its preparation 53 The use of it 54 Salt of Venus 239 Its Vertues 243 Sal Antifebrile, or the Salt against Feavers 279 Its use ibid Spirit of Box 143 Spirit of Guaiac 138, 139 Its vertues 142 Burning Spirit of Honey 160 Its preparation and vertues 160, 161 Aromatick Spirit of Juniper 187 Remarks 188 Spirit of Niter 33 Its vertues 35 Spirit of Niter which has dissolved Mercury, being distilled, is useful in many Diseases 74 Spirit of Salt how made 30 Its use and vertues 32
How distinguished from the Spirits of Niter, and Vi∣triol, and Sulphur 32 Spirit of Sulphur 43, 273 Its vertues 46 Spirit of Tartar 185 Its preparation and vertues 186 Spirit of Turpentine 50 Spirit and Oyl of Turpentine 277 The Separation from its Oyl 51 Its use and vertues ibid. Spirit of Vitriol, how made 36, 37, 274 Its vertues 40 Spirit of Wine, how made 46 Its vertues 48 Spirit of Wine Amber'd 153 Its vertues 155 Spirit of Wine Campheriz'd 157 Aromatick Spirit of all sorts of Woods, Barks, Seeds, Leaves, Rinds, &c. how drawn 190 Spirit of all sorts of Woods that are not Aromatick how drawn 143 Sponges in the Vesica, their use 19 Sulphur purifies Niter 60 Sulphur of Antimony is red 104 Golden Diaphoretick Sulphur 94 Its matter and preparation 94, 95 The effects of the Acid poured upon its Lixivium 95 Its vertues and dose 97 Corrosive Sublimate 179 Comes from Venice 180 Its vertues 181 Is a poison without Antidote ibid.
Sublimate dulcified 65 Its preparation 60 Drugs necessary for its preparation 66 How to know whether it be falsified 69 Its vertues 71 T TArtar its Tincture 184 Its Spirit and foetid Oyl 185 The use of the Tincture ibid. The vertues of the Spirit and Oyl 186 Aromatick Tincture of Cloves 158 The use of the Tincture ibid. Tincture of Roses 197 Their use and vertues ibid. Treacle of the Germans 193 Turbith Mineral 72 Its vertues and dose 76 Turpentine, the Spirit and Oyl of it 277 V VErdigreece 239, 241 Brass Vesica, what 10, 11 Vessels how luted 6 Double Vessel 23 Distilled Vinegar 261 Vinegar of Saturn 161 Vitriol is a Vomitive 35 Vitriol of Mars. Vid. Salt.
W VVAter of Cinnamon 159 Its vertues ibid. Ʋse of the first and second Water 160 Water distilled from Plants 166, 167 How to know when the distillation is done 167 Lime Water 172 Its vertues 173 How to make the Phagedenick Water 173, 174 Water against the Itch 110 Sea-Water how made 79 Water of Pearls 204 Pontick Water 110 Its vertues ibid. Rose Water 169
Chymical Books lately Printed for John Starkey. BAsilica Chymica & Praxis Chimiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chymistry; augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To which is added, his Treatise of Signatures of Internal Things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and lesser World. As also, the Practice of Chy∣mistry of John Hartman, M. D. Augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions. All faithfully Englished, by a Lover of Chymistry. Price bound 10 s. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles of the Art of Phy∣sick, with the insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing Medicines, and the excellency of such as are made by Chymical Operation. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Lond. in octavo, price bound 1 s. Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of prepa∣ring Animals, Vegetables and Minerals for a Phy∣sical use; by which preparations they are made most efficacious, safe and pleasant Medicines for the preservation of the life of man. By Edward Bolnest Med. Reg. Ord. in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d.
THE ART OF CHYMISTRY, As it is now Practised. Of the Chymical Laboratory. THE Chymical Laboratory is a place fit to perform the Operations of Chymistry, which cannot be done without great preparations, expe∣rience, industry and skill. The Chymical Laboratory, re∣quires of it self three Conditions: First, there must be a Chimney in it for those Processes, where some unpleasant and noisom smoaks are to be avoided: Secondly, The Room ought to be clear and light, that one may see distinctly, even to the bottom of the Vessels, the divers changes
that do happen, and which sometimes, in some choice and important Operations, ought to be observed with a great deal of care, that one may either augment or diminish the heat, as necessity shall require. Thirdly, The place ought to be so capacious, as that in one part may be the Furna∣ces, in another the Vessels and Utensils, and in another your Auditors or Spectators; and yet in the middle there may be room enough left for the Artist to mind his Operations, and bestir him∣self. Of the Chymical Instruments. THe Chymical Instruments, with which a La∣boratory ought to be furnished, are of two sorts: for some are Principal, the others less-Principal. The Principal Instruments without which no Operation can be done, are, the Lute, the Fur∣naces, the Vessels, and the Fire. The less-Principal are those that serve some∣times for one Process, sometimes for another, towards the facilitating of them; and are in great number. But I propose only Thirty of the most useful: viz. an Iron Ladle, a little Iron Bar, an Iron Spatula, a great Stick, a Brass Mortar and Pestle, a Marble Mortar, with a Woodden-pestle; a Plate-dish of White-ware, with a Glass-pestle, two pair of Scales and Weights; a Marble or Porphyry-stone to grind
upon; some Pack-thread, white and brown Paper, Starch or Glue, a fine Sieve; some old Linen∣rags cut out into long slices, some Ashes, some Sand, some Tiles, some water, a Tin-Mould in form of a Pipe, an Iron-Mould for Pistol-Bullets, a Copper-Mould for a Goblet, a little Trevet, a Woodden Spoon, a Tin-Tunnel, Rolls stuft with Straw or Chaff, or made of Paste-board, a Mould for Bricks, a Fire-Shovel, a pair of Tongs, and a pair of Bellows. Of these we shall not treat here particularly, but as occasion shall serve in the O∣perations where they shall be imployed. Of the Chymical Lute. TO make a good Lute for all the purposes of Chymistry, take of Potters-Earth, of white or yellow Sand, and of Horse-dung, an equal quantity, not an equal weight; mingle them, and moisten them by little and little with water, first working them together with your feet upon the ground, then piece by piece kneading of them exactly with your hands upon a Table, till you have so incorporated your Ingredients, that they are not distinguishable from one another; then make them up in form of Bricks, that so you may use them more neatly; keeping them from Fire and Sun, lest they should be over-dry and hard. The Potters Earth is made use of because of its unctuosity, which makes the Lute less brittle; the Sand is employed to bind the Potters
Earth from cracking, and flying, and burning to dust. (And some do use powder'd Glass for the same end.) The Horse-dung is added, because being full of little Straws well grownd by the Horses Teeth, they do serve for the firmer knit∣ting of the matter together. (And so some use Calves Hair for that purpose.) Finally, the Wa∣ter incorporates these three things together; In the place of which, some use the Whites of Eggs, which by their sliminess make a stronger conglu∣tination of all the Ingredients. This Lute serves for six uses: 1. To make Bricks. 2. To lute and cement the Bricks of your Furnaces. 3. To fill up the cracks and slits of your Furnaces. 4. To frame little Rounds like Salt-sellers to set the Retorts on. 5. To lute all Vessels both of Earth and Glass. 6. To repair the cracks of your Vessels. Now because there is a peculiar industry in well forming the Bricks and Salt-sellers, or Rounds, and in luting the Vessels; I shall here set it down at length. Our Bricks are all of a bigness and proportion, that so our Furnaces may be the more even and firm, and the easilier built, even without ce∣ment: Moreover, they are almost in the shape of a half Moon, that they may make the Furnace round; that figure being the fittest to gather and concentrate the heat. Therefore we form our Bricks in a Woodden-mould either of Box or Guaiac, or some such hard wood. The piece of wood is a foot long, half a foot broad, and three inches thick. In its middle there must be a hol∣low or overture drawn from a Round made with
a Compass; which Overture ought to be eight inches outwards, six inches inwards; three in∣ches large, and three inches thick. Now to make your Bricks, fill your mould with lute, and with a woodden knife even the superficies, and so knock out your Brick; and when your mould grows dirty, rub the sides of it with sand; dry your Bricks in the shade, so they will last longer; for being thus half-dried, they will bake leasurely in the using of them, and not be apt to crumble and break, neither will they be so soon calcin'd, as if you had dried them by the fire or Sun, or in a Potters Oven. Our Rounds or Salt-sellers derive their name from their figure, because they are somewhat like the old-fashioned Salt-sellers. To form them, take of our Lute a quantity as big as your fist, and rowling it between both hands, reduce it to the form of a Cylinder two inches high; flat the lower end of it upon a Table, and then with your fingers sink in the upper part, till it be somewhat like a Salt-seller that is hollow, and of the breadth of an inch in diameter. For the luting of your Vessels, the Lute that is employed ought to be softer than either for Bricks or Rounds, and therefore you'll do well to wet it with some Water. It must not be laid on thicker than the thickness of a Half-Crown-piece; for if it be, the fire will scarce be able to heat the Water contained in your Vessels. Observe that sometimes the Matrasses are luted up to the neck, sometimes half way. Retorts are luted in the same way too; only there
ought to be a little space left near the neck, that one may see thorow it into the Vessel in the time of the Operation: Your Vessel being luted, must be dried at leisure in the Sun or shade, or near a gentle fire; taking care to turn them equally, so that they be not dried more in one place than in another. Of the Chymical Furnaces. OUr Furnaces are round and little: They are round, that they may unite and concen∣trate the heat of the fire; they are little, that our Laboratory may not be incumber'd to no pur∣pose, and also that we may give our Vessels a quicker and more equal fire, and that with less toil and less expence. We have two sorts of Furnaces: the first are fixt, which are made of different lays of crook∣ed Bricks, cemented strongly together with our Lute; the others are moveable, and consist of crooked Bricks laid one upon another without any lute or cement, and in which you lay the fire, not under your Vessels as in the first sort of Furnaces, but circularly round about them. The fixt and cemented Furnaces are five in number; to wit, the Furnace with a heat of Bulneum maris, or of the vaporous Bath; the Furnace with the heat of ashes or sand; the Fur∣nace with a naked fire and circular heat; the Fur∣nace
with a naked fire and small Reverberation; and the Furnace with the fire of great Reverbe∣ration. The moveable and not cemented Fur∣naces are likewise five in number; viz. the Fur∣nace with a small circulatory fire; the Furnace with a great circulatory fire; the Furnace with a fire of circulation and suppression without a gape; the Furnace with a fire of circulation and sup∣pression with a gape; and the Furnace with a moulting fire, or the wind furnace: All these five Furnaces are with a naked fire. The Furnace with the heat of Balneum maris, or the vaporous Bath, is necessary for the gentle distilling of all sorts of aery or sulphureous li∣quors in glass-bodies, placed in a Cauldron full of water; and withal, it serves to evaporate and dry, by its gentle heating vapour, all extracts, and salts, in little earthen glaz'd dishes, which are set upon the Overtures made in the cover of the said Kettle or Cauldron; so that the remedies thus dryed have no odour not taste of Empy∣reume or burning. For the building of this Furnace, do thus: lay one Round of our Bricks of such a compass as may be proportionate to the greatness of the Kettle you intend for your Balneum, leaving an empty place before, four or five inches broad for the ashes-hole; then lay another entire Round of Bricks, upon which place your Grate; then upon this lay two Rounds more, leaving before an empty space for your fire-door, as you did for your ash-hole; and then add four entire Rounds for your Laboratory, leaving in the upper most of
them three little jams or gaps, each an inch wide to let in the air; viz. one before, above the fire-door; another behind, over against to this first; and a third on the side, which shall be opposite to that where the Receiver is placed, lest if there were one on that side, the flame might sometimes break the Nose of the Limbeck. Now for your Kettle or Cauldron, it must have a brim of an inch broad, whereby it may be scituated and equally suspended upon the brims of your Furnace, leaving betwixt it and the Furnace-sides an orbicular space of an inch, to give the fire play round about it, that so it may heat equally the matter contained with∣in it. In the Fabrick of this Furnace, as likewise in the structure of the four following, observe: 1. That you must not forget to put a suffici∣ent quantity of Lute under, above, and betwixt your Bricks, that they may be strongly cemented together. 2. That you must not place your Bricks just one upon another; if so, your Furnace will not be firm and stable, but by the operation of the fire will soon cleave asunder. Do therefore as expert Brick-layers, and interlace your Bricks one with another. The Furnace with the fire, or heat, or sand, or ashes, is useful for the distillation, and rectifica∣tion of all sorts of liquors drawn from Vegetals, Animals, or Minerals, in glass or earthen bo∣dies, glazed with their glass heads, and also for all infusions, extinctions, tinctures, evapo∣rations, &c. made in Cucurbits, Matrasses,
dishes, pans of glass, or glazed earthen ware. This is the hardest to be well built of all our Furnaces, and, for the building of it, do thus; first make a sufficient quantity of Mortar, consisting of our Lute, Water, and Plaster of Pa∣ris in powder; then with little Tiles make upon a floor, an Oval of one foot in length, and of eight inches in breadth; cement your Tiles well together with this Mortar, which because of the Plaster will render your Furnace more firm and durable; raise this first Oval Lay of Tiles to the heighth of two inches, leaving a space for your ash-hole; then add one Lay of our Bricks, not fil∣ling up the space left for the ash-hole, because it must be almost as high as the space to be left for the fire-room; upon this lay of Bricks, place your Iron-bars for a Grate in the same distance, as they are set in chafing-dishes, placing one little bar upon the ash-hole door, not forgetting to bestow good store of Mortar both above, under, and betwixt your Bricks and Bars: then upon so much of this Furnace as is already built, place small Tiles, cementing of them together in such an order, as may make this Furnace acquire a square figure outwardly, which will make it more solid and firm; and by adding to it a conside∣rable thickness, fit it for the conserving of an equal heat with a few Coals. Upon this first lay of Bricks, (which have in the inside an oval figure though the Tiles hanging over on the outside form a square one) place another Lay of Bricks, leaving a convenient space for the fire-room, which must be something higher than it is broad: but ob∣serve
that in this Oval lay must be employed more Bricks than in the other, because your Furnace by little and little must acquire a greater circum∣ference towards the top; then build up with lit∣tle Tiles and Mortar, your square outside to the heighth of your Bricks, so continuing as you build up your Furnace: upon the top of the fire-room lay a little Iron bar, then add another entire round of Bricks without any overture, only a lit∣tle chinck in the backside of your Furnace over against the fire-room, of two fingers breadth to give the fire air; and this Circle must be in cir∣cumference wider by two inches than the last; smoothing with mortar the inside of this round; that the fire may be carried more evenly up∣wards: this done, place on this last Round a square Iron plate all of a piece; (or of two pieces if you will, sawdering them well one upon ano∣ther) the place must not be thicker than a shil∣ling, that so the fire may the easilier penetrate and give a moderate heat to the sand; then with our Mortar raise on the inside a Square of an inch thick, to all the four sides of the Furnace, to make a place to put your sand in, or ashes if you will: ashes give not so great a heat as sand: whensoever you desire to moderate the heat of either, you may wet them with a little wa∣ter. The Furnace with a naked fire and circular heat, serves to distil Aqua vitae, spirit of Wine, Aromatick and Balsamick ossences, and also the waters of all Plants: in the Brass-vessel, called Vesica, with its Helm or Moors head, borded
with a refrigeratory of the same metal, making use also of a long pipe of the same matter which passes through one or two great Hogs-heads full of water near the Furnace; and which are in stead of a second and more powerful refrigeratory. For the building of this Furnace, do thus. First, take your Brass Vesica, set it upon the ground where you intend to erect your Furnace, then lay a Round of Bricks well cemented with our Lute, so that there be half a fingers breadth left betwixt your Vesica and the Bricks, and an Overture for the ash-hole; then taking out your Vesica, add another Round of Bricks, leaving still room for the ash-hole; which will be about half a foot high: upon these two lays place a Grate of divers little Iron-Bars; then add an entire Round of Bricks, to which add two more but not entire, leaving a space empty for the fire-room perpendicularly over the ash-hole; then add one circle of Bricks entire, without any Overture, upon which place two little Iron-Bars to uphold the bottom of your Vesica. And in this place is terminated the heighth of your fire-room, which is once again as high as your ash-hole. After this raise by Rounds your Furnace, till you have brought it as high as the neck of the Vesica; which that you may the better do, place your Ve∣sica upon its two Bars, and so it will serve for a measure, to the elevation your Furnace ought to have. Observe, that this Furnace is not to have any chink on any side whatsoever; but every where, and particularly in the Laboratory, there ought
to be circularly half a fingers breadth left empty, that so the air compassing the Vessel, may draw the heat upwards in all the circumference of the Vesica. And this environing heat carries the Spi∣rits from the bottom of the Vessel to its neck, from whence they are raised all together to the top of the cover or Moors head; and if above you stop this empty circumference, your fire will be apt to go out, if it be not excessive great, which also would be inconvenient, because it would consume in vain great quantity of fewel. The Furnace with a naked fire and small rever∣beratory serves to distil the Phlegm, the Spirit, and the foetide Oyl of Berries, Woods, Barks, and Roots, in an earthen, or glass Retort well luted, lest it should break in the fire. For the building of this Furnace, you must first consider of the bigness of the Retorts, you ordinarily intend to make use of; and make the circuit of your Fur∣nace so wide, as there may be a fingers breadth left betwixt it and your Retort. Lay then four or five Rounds of Bricks in the said proportion, leaving an empty space for your ash-hole and fire-room; they being not to be separated in this Fur∣nace by a Grate, because else the air coming in at the ash-hole, and meeting with the fire upon a Grate, would kindle it too violently, and so great a fire is not requisite for these substances to be di∣stilled. Then add an entire Round of Bricks, upon which place two Iron bars, upon which you must put the cover of a Pipkin turned with its hollow part upwards, which must be filled with sand to receive the bottom of the Retort:
then with divers Rounds of Brick raise your Fur∣nace to the heighth of the Retort, or higher; ta∣king care to leave an overture, or open space, to pass the neck of the Retort; which chink you must afterwards with our Lute repair under the neck of your Retort, to hinder the flame from passing that way, and endangering the breaking of the Vessels. Having fitted a Recipient to it, you must lute both their necks together, very close, to the end that nothing of the spirits exhale and scape that way in the distillation. Last of all, you must have an earthen Pan of the capacity of your Furnace, which may cover the top of it, and re∣verberate the rising flame upon the Retort; and this Pan must be of glazed earth, else it would fly in pieces in the heat: besides, it must have a hole in the middle of its bottom, of the bigness of an Egg, and this to give the fire air, which else would be stifled, and go out. The Furnace with a naked fire, and great Re∣verberatory, serves to distil the acid and corrosive spirits; the acid, black and corrosive Oyls in a glass, or earthen luted Retort, or in an iron one. To build this Furnace, you must consider of the bigness of the Retorts you mean to employ, and do as above in the little Reverberatory-Furnace: then make an ash-hole covered with a Grate, and a fire-room covered with its two Iron bars; and at last, a Laboratory of the elevation of the belly of your Retort, as has been said already; only you must on the top of the Laboratory leave a chink on one side of the ash-hole, and fire-room, of two Bricks in heighth, to pass the neck of the Retort.
Before you place your Retort upon the Iron-Bars, you must provide a little earthen cover with ashes, as has been said in the first Furnace of this kind. Then place your Retort, and fit to it a large Recipient, which must be also setled with great care upon a little Joint-stool, and un∣der it must be either Paper, or Linen, or some soft thing, that it may rest gently and surely up∣on. Then with our Lute, fill up the space you left for the neck of the Retort, for the reason al∣ledged in the precedent Furnace, luting also the conjunction of the Retort and its Receiver toge∣ther: this being done, there remains to make a Reverberatory, which may reflect, and beat back the rising heat, upon the Retort: and to this ef∣fect, lay five Rounds of moveable Bricks, that is, without Mortar, or Lute; only one upon another, in such a manner as your Rounds go always in di∣minishing; so that in the first you employ half a Brick less than in the last cemented Round; and in the second, a whole Brick less than in the first moveable Round; and in the third you must employ two Bricks less than in the second, lea∣ving a hole in this last Round, which you shall fill up with pieces of Iron, of such a bigness as shall not slip betwixt the space that is left be∣tween the Retort, and the Wall of the Furnace: The reason why I put Iron, rather than Bricks or Stone, or any other solid thing, is, because at the end of the Operation you'll find an excellent Crocus astringens of Mars, red as Scarlet, and which will stick to the superficies of all your pie∣ces of Iron.
The Furnace, with a little circulatory fire, or Ignis rotae parvus, serves to evaporate the dissolu∣tions of Minerals, as also of Animals and Vege∣tals, by a gentle ready heat in a Matrass, either luted, or not luted. This Furnace is made of one only Round of our Bricks, close set together without any Lute or Mortar: you must place a Round or Salt-seller of Lute in the middle of this Furnace; and upon this Salt-seller, filled with sand or ashes, place your Matrass straight, lea∣ving a circumference of two inches between your Matrass, and the Furnace sides; then put your Coal, ready kindled, into this space, approach∣ing your fire nearer to the Furnace than to the Matrass. The Furnace, with a great circulatory fire, serves to sublime all salts drawn from Metals and Minerals in a luted glass Matrass. This Furnace is made of two equal Rounds of our Bricks, so set together without Lute, that there is a little di∣stance betwixt them, to the end that the Air, en∣tering at these small Overtures, may serve to keep the fire alive: place your Salt-seller, and upon it your Matrass, then your Coals, as we have said in the precedent Furnace. The Furnace, with a circulary fire, and of suppression without any chink; is useful to cal∣cine, and melt down all sorts of Minerals, as also those Animals and Vegetables that require Calcination, either in a Crucible, or a Pot of Earth unglazed: To build this Furnace, lay first upon the ground either a large Salt-seller of our Lute, or two Bricks, and upon them your
Crucible or Pot; then raise divers Rounds of our Bricks without Lute, till they come two or three fingers above your Pot, leaving in the first rank an interval of a fingers breadth betwixt the Bricks, but in the last row they must be joined very close together: leave also betwixt your Crucible, and the Furnace-sides, a space of two inches broad, which must be filled with Coals up to the top of the Furnace: and from thence this fire is called a fire of Suppression, because the Coals are not only under, but circularly above, and on the sides of the Vessel; and besides, very often we cover the whole Pot with Coals. The Furnace, with a fire of Suppression, with a chink, is for the distillation of Oyls, and Spirits, and Phlegms of all sorts of resinous Gums, and Wax, in a Glass Retort well luted; it is made as the precedent, only there ought to be in the two last Rounds of Bricks, a chink, gap, or overture for the neck of your Retort to pass through, which must be set, and compassed with Coals, as has been said. Observe, That in placing your Retort, either in this Furnace, or any of the small or great Re∣verberatories, there are three things to be taken notice of. 1. That the body of the Retort touch the Bricks of the side, that the Chink is in such a manner as the whole neck may hang out at the Chink, lest otherwise the fire should break it. 2. That the neck of your Retort hang down∣wards, that the liquor may the easilier run into the Recipient. 3. That the end of the neck of your Retort enter into the middle of your Re∣cipient,
for fear the vapours received should find some passage, even through their luted conjun∣ction. The Furnace, with a melting-fire, or the Wind-Furnace, to melt the hardest bodies; as Gold, Glass, Stones, in a Crucible, or unglazed Earthen pot: and it is thus made. Take two Loggs of Wood, or two great Stones, half a foot high; a Barrel knock'd out at the lower end, and having in the other a hole as big as a mans head, then set this Barrel upon the Stones or Loggs, and having laid a Grate up∣on the uppermost hole, cover all this top with our Lute, and Plaster together; and upon this erect a moveable Furnace, with the fire of suppression, with our Bricks, as it has been said before. The air coming in, with violence under the Barrel, does so blow and light the Coals, that it pro∣duces a heat incomparably greater than any other. Of the Chymical Vessels. THe Kettle, or Cauldron, serving for the Balneum Maris, or Vaporous Bath. This Ket∣tle is of the same matter and form as ordinary Kettles are, that is, Brass: it must have no Bail, but round about it a brim of an inch broad, by which it is to be suspended, upon the brim of the Furnace; this Kettles cover must exactly fit it, and have five round holes; whereof the middle∣most
must be the biggest, and capable of the bot∣tom of a Glass-Cucurbit, or Body, with its head: the four other are less, and for little dishes of Earth, or Glass, in which Extracts, and Salts are to be dried. The Vesica, or Copper-body, cover'd with its Moors-head, and bordered with its Refrige∣ratory, serving to distil Aqua vitae, Aromatick and Balsamick Essences, Waters, and Spirits of Plants. This Vesica ought to be of Copper; not tinn'd within, and somewhat round bottom'd: it ought not to be thicker than a shilling, of one foot and a half high, and one foot broad in diameter: in its top it must be a little Convex, not in form of a Pear, as they ordinarily make them; and this, that it may repercute the phlegm of Aqua vitae, and the Essences. From the middle of this top, rises a neck four inches high, and three in diameter below, but four inches above; whose use is, to make the Cover of the Vesica enter ea∣sily, and stick faster, and so you see that this Vessel is not unlike a Hogs-bladder; on one side of the top, rises a little pipe two inches high, and half a finger wide, by which, with a Tin-tunnel you put in again the first Spirits of Wine that come a little muddy, because they have carried along with them the smoot adhering to the con∣ducts of the Alembick: its Cover is of Brass, and consists of a neck half a foot deep, three inches large at the top and bottom, but four inches in the middle, because within it must be five or six Spunges, so fastned with cross-sticks under and
over them, as to be kept from falling down into the Vesica, and from rising up into the head: their use is, to draw to themselves the aetherial Spirit of the Aqua vitae, or Brandy, and to hinder the phlegm (which in the middle of the Operation rises with the Spirits) from passing any farther: for, the Spirit being thin and aery, easily makes way, where the gross phlegm cannot; which there∣fore falls down again into the Vesica: This neck is terminated in a round Ball, not unlike a hu∣mane skull, and is therefore called the Moors-head, from whose middle is derived a Pipe a foot long, and in diameter an inch wide, which goes through a Cauldron or Kettle, sawder'd round about the Moors-head, and which must be of such a proportion, as to contain a pale of water, which is poured in the Operation, cold, to the end that the Vapours that are in the Moors-head may be soon condensed, and dissolved into liquor. This Cauldron is therefore called a Refrigerato∣ry: on one side of the brim there is a little cock, wherewith to empty the water if it grow too hot, and when the Operation is ended. The lit∣tle moveable neck, by which the Pipe coming from the Moors-head, must be join'd with the long Pipe that goeth through the Hogs-heads, ought to be half a foot long: the long Pipe which passes through the Hogs-heads, must be of Brass, and six foot long, one inch wide in diameter; by little and little diminishing, as it comes nearer the end: This Pipe goes through two Hogs-heads, situated close by one another, by four holes, so made, that the Pipe entring almost at the top of
the nearest, runneth down a-slope, to come out at the last hoop of the furthermost; afterwards the circumference of these holes must be strongly luted; then fill with water your Hogs-heads, which will be another strong Refrigeratory, and by condensing the Spirits and Vapours in their way, make a copious distillation in a small time. The open Limbick is made of two different pieces, viz. of a Body or Cucurbit, and its Head. The Body may be of Glass, Stone, or Earthen glaz'd ware, or of Brass: it is always higher than it is broad; broader in its middle than in its bot∣tom, and broader at the bottom than at the top, and round in all its breadth, by which descripti∣on you see that it is not unlike a Gourd. The head may be of the same matter as the body, and sometimes of Lead; the top of it rises in form of a point, the bottom is broad and proportioned to the body. In its lower part, it hath a brim in∣wards, on which the Vapours that rise in it fall, and gently distil to the Nose of the Pipe, which is of half a foot long, and conveys the liquors into the Receiver. These two Vessels, fitted one to another, serve to distil, and rectifie in a sand-fire, per assensum, the waters of Plants, Aqua vitae, Spirit of Wine, the phlegm Oyl, and Spirit of Vegetables and Animals, and to rectifie the Phlegm and Spirit of Minerals. Before you put your Cucurbit into the sand, you must lute two or three slices of white Paper upon the neck of your body, that so you may even it, and make it fit for the head, which must fit close: upon these slices of Paper round
about the Glass-body, tye a pack-thread with a loose knot; then with more Paper lute together the head, and its body over this pack-thread: the use of which, will be to undo easily these Vessels, one from another, by drawing the pack-thread, and so breaking the Papers, when the Operation shall be ended. If you expect not a considerable quantity of li∣quor from your matter, then make use of a small Receiver, which you may hang to the Nose of the Limbick, by a pack-thread fastned to the little but∣ton that is on the top of its head; but, if it be big, and you hope for much liquor, then place it care∣fully upon a little Stool, or upon Bricks laid one upon another. Blind Limbicks are made of a Cucurbit, and its head, sealed hermetically to it, of the bigness of ones fist: in the top of the head there is a little hole, fit to receive the small end of a Tunnel, by which the Liquors are poured into this Vessel, and in the lower part of the head, there is a nose by which the Liquors distil. Its use is, to rectifie the acid Spirits of Minerals, Vegetables and Animals, so that nothing be lost, nor exhale from them; and therefore you must carefully stop the hole, by which you put in your matter, with a Glass or Cork-stopple. Twins or Pelicans are two blind Limbicks, whose noses are reciprocally inserted into the Bo∣dies of one another: they must both have a hole in the top, for the use mentioned in the other: they serve to fix and circulate the Oyls, and Spirits, with their Salts, of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals.
The Retort is a glass made up of a great belly, or ball, and a long bending neck, which near the belly is six or eight inches wide, but diminishing, still grows less, till its end be but wide enough to put your finger in; it serves to distil by the side of the Furnace, and ordinarily in a naked circu∣latory fire, the black Oyls, and Spirits of Minerals and Metals, and the stinking Oyls of Vegetables and Animals. The Iron or Earthen Retort, is like the Glass-one; only the neck is three inches diameter, near the belly, and two inches in its extremity; to the end, that gross and heavy ingredients may the easilier be put in: it serves to distil the Spirit, and stinking Oyls of Woods, Barks, Roots and Berries. The Matrass or Bolt-head is always of Glass, and may be of different sizes: it consists of a round bowl, convex in its bottom, with a neck half a foot long, or thereabouts, according to the big∣ness of the body; the neck is every where an inch wide: it serves to sublime Mercury, and divers Salts. The Recipient is a Matrass of any bigness, whose neck must be broken off four fingers breadth, near the belly; to the end that the ex∣tremity of the neck of the Retort may enter in∣to the middle of the body of the Receiver: it serves to receive Waters, Essences, Oyls and Spirits of Animals, Vegetables, Minerals and Me∣tals. The way to make a Recipient of a Matrass, is this: Heat the neck in that part where you in∣tend
to cut it off, and when it is very hot, wet it, and so knock it with a hammer, and it will break there where it has been wet; if it be not very even, you may with a key even it by little and little. The Stone, or Earthen Receiver, is of the same figure with the Glass one, only it has a wider neck to receive the Nose of the Earthen Retort; you may use an Earthen Pitcher, if you cannot get a fit Receiver, so the neck of the Pitcher be straight, and the belly big and wide, taking care to lute it close with the Retort: but these Earthen Recei∣vers are seldom used, except it be to receive the Spirits, and stinking Oyls of Wood, Rinds, Roots, Barks and Berries. The double Vessel in form of a Matrass, is a Matrass with a long neck, into which is inserted the neck of another Matrass of the same bulk; in the ball, though its neck be a little less, and may, if you will, also be shorter, and go but half way into the first Matrass; you must lute with three or four slices of Paper the Junction of these two Vessels, that nothing may exhale: it serves to extract by Infusion in a Sand-heat, all sorts of Tinctures. The double Vessel, in form of a Cucurbit or Body, is a Cucurbite of Glass, or Earth, upon whose mouth you place a Cup like your Cup∣ping-Glasses, with the mouth downwards; it having a little brim, by which it is suspended upon the top of the Cucurbite: these two Vessels must be close luted together. The best Lute will be of Flower, or Starch, in form of a hasty Pudding.
This Vessel serves to extract by infusion the tin∣cture of Aromatick Flowers, that so nothing may be lost of their Spirit, and is fitter than the Pit∣cher ordinarily used to this purpose. The Bell is a great Glass-Vessel, like the Bell Gardiners use to cover Melons withal. The use of this is, to draw the Spirit and Oyl of Sulphur, of Salt Armoniack, of Antimony, and Mars, or Iron, by covering with it an Earthen Pan; and if you turn it with the mouth upwards, it serves for precipitations, and washings or lo∣tions. The Glass-Tunnel, though it be open at both ends, yet we reckon it among the Vessels; as well, because sometimes by stopping the little end, it is really one, and contains Liquors, as because there is something worth observation in its Fabrick or making; it must have a straight long neck: be∣cause being used in the blind Alimbeck, it must reach as far as within the Body, and not spill upon the inward brim of it; it must not have so large a belly as the Tin-Tunnels, lest when you separate your distilled Oyl from their Phlegm and Spirit, much of the Oyls be lost by sticking to the large sides of your Tunnel. It serves to se∣parate the Oyl from the acid Phlegm distilled with it, which is done by letting these two Liquors settle in the Tunnel, and then taking away your finger which stopped it, and giving leave to that Liquor which is lowermost to run out; which done, stop again the neck of your Tunnel, and let the remainder of your Liquor run into ano∣ther Vial. It may be lined with a cornet
of brown Paper, through which are filtrated Lixiviums, Washings, and divers other things, and may also stand you in stead of a Tin-Tun∣nel. The Crucible is a pot; of which there are of different sizes. It is made of the same earth as white ware; it is round without a handle very narrow at the bottom, and wider and wider to∣wards the top: it has a little Sinus or Cavity, by which the thing melted is poured out: it serves to calcine and melt Minerals and Metals, especi∣ally in a small quantity. The Camion, is a Pot like an ordinary Cham∣ber-pot with a handle to it. It is made of Pot∣ters Earth, and Sand; and therefore it holds out strongly in the fire, which your Pots made of or∣dinary Earth do not, but fly. There are two sorts of these Pots, some are glazed, or leaded, and these serve to evaporate and dry; some are unglazed, and they serve to melt and calcine Mi∣nerals, and Metals, and every thing that needs such preparation, especially if you have a great quantity to prepare, these Camions being bigger than Crucibles. A Pan is an Earthen Vessel straight-bottom'd, and flat and wide-mouth'd. There are two sorts: Glazed, that serves to evaporate in a naked fire Extracts, Syrups, Pills, Plasters, &c. and Un∣glazed ones, which serve to evaporate in a Bath, or Sand heat, Salts, Crystals, &c. and to wash salt Remedies. In some of our Operations, we make use of Utensils of the Kitching; as Frying-Pans, to make
the Oyl of Eggs; Kettles, and Brass Basins, to congeal the Crystal Mineral, and make our Cau∣teriums. Of the Chymical Fire. IN the governing of the Chymical fire, there are four things to be considered; viz. 1. The materials of your fire; 2. The interposition of your fire; 3. The disposition of your fire; and, 4. The ordering, governing, or regimen of your degrees of fire. The Materials are of five sorts; whereof two are common, and the other three extraordina∣ry, viz. Coal, Wood, a Lamp, the Beams of the Sun, helped by a Burning-glass, and Horse-dung. Your Coals must have two conditions to be good; they must be of good Wood, and of any Wood rather than of Oak, because all Oak-Coals flyes, and may break your Glasses. 2. They must be very dry, that they may make a quick live-fire, and spare you the labour of blowing; the best Coal is that which is of a middle size, round, and of a Beech-Tree: the Wood must have the same qualities, for the same reasons. The Lamp is a Tin-Box full of Oyl, in which swim three or four wicks, or links: this is set in the Lamp-Furnace; which serves to digest or distil, with a long and moderate heat, without any obligation of being present at the operation.
Because a Lamp-fire is very seldom used, we have not in the description of Furnaces made any men∣tion of a Lamp-Furnace, neither will we here say any more of its figure, and proportions, nor of the Oyl that is to be used; being resolved to set down all these things more particularly in some of our Operations. The Sun-Beams serve to extract Tinctures; to make long digestions, to Calcine some Mine∣rals, especially when the said Beams are ga∣thered by a Burning-glass: which way we shall also describe at length in some of our Operati∣ons. The Horse-dung is used by putting into it Vessels sealed up hermetically, or close stopped, there to ferment and circulate. We shall al∣so describe this way in some of our Operati∣ons. The Interposition of the Chymical fire, is of four sorts. 1. When between the Vessel and the Fire, there is nothing but two Iron-Bars, or a little Round to set the Vessel on, and this is called working by a naked fire. 2. When between the fire and the Vessel, there is an Iron-plate, or Brass Kettle, or an Earthen Pan, full of ashes or sand, into which the Vessel is sunk more or less; and this is called, Working with a Sand-fire, or of Ashes. 3. When between the fire and the Vessel, there is a Kettle full of Water, into which your Vessel is set up to the neck; and this is called, working by a Balneum Maris, or Mariae, that is, a Sea-Bath, or Maries Bath. 4. Is when between the fire and the Vessel, there is a Kettle full of
Water, which Kettle is covered, and its Cover has five holes in it, upon which are placed as many Vessels to receive the Vapour of the Bath; and this is called Working by a Vaporous Bath. The disposition of the Chymical fire is of four sorts: 1. Where the fire is placed only under the Vessels, as is done in the five Furnaces following, viz. of the great and small Reverberatory of the circulary fire, of the sand fire, of the Balneum Maris, and Vaporous Bath; and observe, that though in the two first Furnaces the heat is by Re∣verberation as strong above as below the Vessels, yet the fire is only under them. 2. Where the Coals are laid only round about the Vessel upon the ground; and this is called Ignis rotae, or a cir∣culary fire. 3. Where the Coals are not only laid round about the Vessel, but are heaped up to the top of it, and that is called a fire of half-sup∣pression; but, if you cover even the top of your Vessel with Coals, then 'tis a fire of whole-sup∣pression. 4. Where the fire is altogether above the Vessel, which is also a fire of suppression; and is used in distillations per descensum, for which Operation we make use of a great Earthen glazed Tunnel, of a little Iron Plate full of holes, and of a Kettle full of fire: which way of operating, we will teach more distinctly in some of our Pro∣cesses. The Regimen or Degree of the Chymical fire, is also of four sorts: 1. When you give and con∣tinue a small fire, all along the Operation, as is practised in the first sublimation of dulcified Mer∣cury. 2. When you give a moderate heat either
at first, for fear of breaking your glasses, or by little and little, when there is the like danger; and then maintain this heat in such an equality as to augment and diminish it when it passes the limits of moderation, as it is practised in the di∣stillation of the Spirit of Wine; and in a sand-fire, where you stop your ash-hole door, and al∣most all your fire-room door; as also the hind∣most Register, that so you may keep your Coals in that heat that they are in. 3. When you aug∣ment the heat by degrees, till you come to the last and greatest you can procure, and that soon after, that your operation ceases as it is practised in the distillation of the Oyl of Bricks. And observe here, that all the activity of the fire is divided in∣to four degrees; a little fire is the first degree; a moderate is the second degree; a great fire is the third; and a very great and intense one is the fourth. 4. When you have augmented the fire by degrees, and are come to the last, which you maintain the space of some hours, as it is done in the distillation of the black Oyl of Vitriol, or Col∣cothar.
The Spirit of Salt. TAke a quantity of Potters-Earth, cut it in∣to slices of the length, breadth and thick∣ness of a finger, and set them in order upon a Grid-iron; which you shall set upon red Coals in a hot Oven after the bread is drawn: when they are dry on one side, turn them on the other; then take them out, and powder them in a Mor∣tar: and keep this Earth, thus dried and pow∣dered, as well for this Operation, as for divers others. Mingle five parts of this Earth, thus prepared, with one part of common Salt, beaten to pow∣der, but not decrepitated; with this matter fill a Glass-Retort, of an ordinary size, which must be luted up to half the neck; set it in a close Re∣verberatory, and fit it to a large and capacious Glass-Receiver. Give your fire by degrees, com∣ing as soon as you can to the last degree, which continue twenty four hours, or till your Recipient seem cold, though the Retort be violently hot; from whence you may infer, that your matter hath sent out all its Spirits: out of one pound of Salt by this method, you'll draw nine or ten oun∣ces of Spirits. Observe, 1. This Earth is given to the Salt as an intermedium to hinder its fusion: for Salt melts in a great fire, and being once melted, be∣comes so fix, as there is no raising of its Spirits to distil them.
Observe, 2. That we rather make use of a Glass, than of an Earthen Retort; because, the Spirits of Salt being very acid, and something corrosive, might so penetrate the Earth of the Retort, as to lose something of their virtue, and dull their activity; therefore you must also keep your Spirit of Salt in Glass, not in Earthen Ves∣sels. Observe, 3. That the Salt must not be decre∣pitated, that is, separated from its Phlegm, nor the Clay absolutely dried, or heat red in the fire: for it is necessary, that there should remain some watrish humidity in both: to the end, that this phlegm coming, first in distillation, may help the acid Spirits, and be as a Vehicle to them; other∣wise, were your fire never so violent, if there were no Phlegm, you would never obtain any acid Spirits. Observe, 4. That your Retort must be filled up to the neck, because the Spirits, in their first rising and separating themselves from their gros∣ser parts, would, if there were any Vacuum, pre∣sently re-impregnate themselves, and be so fix'd, as that no power of fire would be able to raise them again, and make them Volatil: whereas the Vapours raised, meeting with no empty room in the Retort, are not able to condense there, but by the fire are forced into the Recipient; into which they enter in form of a white Vapour, which by little and little cools, and condenses, and at last dissolves into a Liquor white and clear as water. Observe, 5. That that Phlegm which first
comes is little in quantity; and if you will have your Spirit strong and pure, you may deflegmate and rectifie it in a sand-heat. Its vertue and use is, It resists all corruption taken interiourly, and outwardly applied; and for this reason in venomous and malign Feavers, we mingle three or four drops of it with a Cor∣dial Julip: and for a preservation against the Plague, we put a spoonful of it into a quart of Oxycrate, and so rub the body all over before a good fire: It whitens the Teeth admirably, be∣ing mingled with a little Water, or some syrup; it's a powerful diuretick against suppressions of Urine, caused by the oppilation of the conducts thorow which it should pass: it drives the Gra∣vel out of the Kidneys and Bladder; and so is specifick to break the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder; that if you put a Stone cut out of a humane Bladder, into a quantity of Spirit of Salt, it will dissolve immediately without fire, or any addition of any thing, though it were never so hard; it is used to dissolve Gold, and make it Potable: if you do whet its Vertue, by putting to it a little Salt decrepitated before you put your Gold in it; alone it dissolves Pearls and Coral. The marks whereby you may know and di∣stinguish this Spirit from others, are these; 1. That it is clear and white, drawing to a citrine, transparent colour. 2. Being newly made, it is Vaporous, and seizes the nose pre∣sently, but without stink; and being old, it has no odour at all. 3. That upon your tongue it is of an acid biting faltish taste. 4. It nei∣ther
corrodes, nor tinges of any colour its cork-stopple. Spirit of Niter. MIngle one part of fine and well purified Niter, with four or five parts of Potters Earth prepared, as in the Chapter of Spirit of Salt; fill with this, a Glass-Retort well luted up to its neck; place it in a close Reverberatory Fur∣nace, fitting to it a large and capacious Recipi∣ent; give your fire by degrees, till you come to the highest, which continue twenty four hours. The Phlegm will come first, and in small quanti∣ty, and also with a little Spirit, which will appear in the Recipient in form of a White Vapour; a little after the pure Spirit will come, appearing in form of red Vapours, which will make your Recipient bright, and red as a Ruby. Out of one pound of Niter thus distilled, you may have four ounces of Spirit. Obs. 1. That you must be very exact in luting your Retort close with your Recipient; lest many of your Vapours should exhale: and however, the Artist must have a care of com∣ing too near at that time; lest the Sulphure∣ous, and Malign Vapours of the Niter (which our Authors call the flying Dragon) should offend his Brain, and Nerves, and make him Paralytick, by the fusion and resolution of the humours of the Brain, which at that time
borrowing from the subtle Nitrous Vapours an extraordinary thinness and penetration, would easily insinuate themselves into the nerves, and by their abundance, cause a total Obstruction. Obs. 2. That we give the Potters Earth to Ni∣ter, as we do to Salt, to hinder its fusion: now Niter is very easily melted, because it is the Body which helps other Bodies to be so too; by reason of its great thinness, the abundance of its Sulphu∣reous substance, and its penetration; but when once it has been melted, it becomes so fix, that, having lost all its Sulphur, it can neither evapo∣rate, nor be inflamed, though you put it into the fire: Then therefore it is called Salt of Niter, be∣ing fix as Salts; whereas before its fusion, it was so strangely Volatil, that when you did but put a Coal into it, it presently was in such a flame, that it was almost quite consumed. Obs. 3. That for this Operation we make use of very fine purified Niter; because the purer it is, the less it hath of fixed Salt in it, and therefore yields more Spirits; you may learn in the Chap∣ter of Crystal-Mineral, how Niter is purified, and that in its purifying, it is devested of its fixt Salt. Obs. 4. and 5. That the Retort must be of Glass, and filled up to the neck, for the reasons alledged in the precedent Operation. Obs. 6. That the Phlegm which comes first in the distillation, is in a very small quantity, and cannot be separated from the Spirit by rectifica∣tion; because this Spirit is so Volatil, that it comes of a sudden conjointly with the Phlegm, and so
the rectification would be unnecessary; the Phlegm being in so small a proportion to the Spirit, as not to be able to make the last lose any thing of its activity and energy. Its Vertues and use: This Spirit is Corrosive, not only applyed to Warts, rotten Flesh, and the Gangreen, but it corrodes and dissolves Mer∣cury, and the other Metals; it is often to be pre∣ferr'd to Aqua fortis, for these two uses; or it is not so burning in its action upon the flesh, as A∣qua fortis; and it is much fitter for the dissoluti∣ons which are made by it of Mercury, and other Metals and Minerals, in order to the preparing of some remedy to be taken inwardly, as well be∣cause pure Niter is an acid aperitive, and pure Vitriol is an acid vometive; as because Niter, be∣ing a Sulphureous Salt, drawn from temperate A∣nimals, and Vitriol, a terrestrious Salt drawn from Minerals, by their union in the composition of A∣qua fortis, is produced a malignous quality. Nay, it is fitter than Aqua fortis, for the dissolution of Minerals in order to make Fucuses for the face, because the Spirit of Niter, applyed to the skin, leaves but a little yellow spot, which may be ea∣sily taken away; whereas Aqua fortis leaves a deep orange-spot, so sticking, and adhering, that it can never be taken out, but with the loss of the skin; from whence we may infer, that a Fucus prepared with Aqua fortis, should rather black than whiten the skin. The marks to distinguish this Spirit, are these: 1. That it is of the same colour and transparency as the Spirit of Salt. 2. That it is very vaporous
and stinking, coming near the stinking smell of Aqua fortis. 3. It is too corrosive and biting, to be tasted upon the Tongue; but, to try its goodness, pour out some drops upon a Brass half-peny, and, if it be right, it will presently boil, and makes the half-peny stir, it produces a blew colour in the said half-peny. 4. It cor∣rodes, and makes its Linen-stopple look yellow, as Aqua fortis uses to do; sometimes the Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur are sophisticated by put∣ting a little Spirit of Niter, or a little Aqua fortis into common Water, till there result an acid taste, which is not caustick: but you shall perceive this cheat, if having rubbed a Paper with the Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur in one place, and the Spirit of Niter and common Water in another place, you present the said Paper to the fire; for then the place rubb'd with the Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur, will grow black and break; and the place rubb'd with Spirit of Niter in common Water, will only grow yellow, and not break. The Spirit and black Oyl of Vitriol. TAke an Earthen-pot unglazed, of the Earth they make Crucibles of, fill it up to the brim with good green Vitriol; set this pot up∣on a Salt-seller in a great Circulatory fire: in two hours time, or there abouts, your Vitriol having first dissolved into a Liquor, will be dryed, defleg∣mated,
and at last coagulated into a grayish lump; then take out your pot, let it cool, and, when cold, put your matter into a Brass or Iron Mor∣tar, and powder it. Take a Glass Retort, well luted up to half the neck; fill it with the said Vitriol, and place it ac∣cording to Art, in a great Reverberatory fire, fit∣ting to it a great Receiver. Give your fire by degrees, coming as soon as you can to the last, which continue till you perceive, in the top and sides of your Receiver, a kind of black Veins that trickle down to the bottom; these are the black Oyl which begins to distil. Then unlute your Receiver from its Retort, and separate by incli∣nation, the acid Spirit of Vitriol, which hi∣therto has been distilled, and which is of a white and transparent colour like Water, and which entered your Receiver in the form of a white Va∣pour. By this time your Vitriol will be calcin'd in∣to a red colour, and brought to be a Colcothar, which yet retains its black Oyl. Which to ex∣tract, you must again fit the Receiver to its Re∣tort without lute; for else, the neck of the Retort being exceeding hot, would presently break by the approach of the cold, and moist Lute; continue then your fire, and give it in the highest degree, for the space of six, or eight hours, till your Receiver be cold, though the fire be vehement under the Retort, by that you'll perceive that the contain'd matter has yielded all its black and thick Oyl. Let your fire go out: then take out your Retort, which by the
long violence of the fire will seem somewhat sunk and straitned, and in it will remain a Colcothar, devested of its phlegm, its Spirit, and its black Oyl; but yet containing the fixed Salt of Vitriol, and therefore is not so sharp and acrimonious as the first Colcothar. 'Tis out of this second Col∣cothar, that you may extract the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, by making a Lexivium of the said Col∣cothar, to extract its fixed Salt. Out of one pound of green Vitriol, you'll have nine or ten ounces of Spirit, with its Phlegm, and half an ounce of black Oyl. The acid Spirit of Vitriol contains much Phlegm, which came first with it; therefore if you desire to have a purified Spi∣rit, you must evaporate the Phlegm by putting this Spirit Inflegmated into a Matrass not luted, which set upon a Salt-seller in a small Circula∣tory fire, till the whole substance be half dimi∣nished, and begin to look a little yellowish; if you continue this Evaporation any longer, your Spirit will become blackish, drawing near the colour and acidity of your Oyl of Colco∣thar. If reciprocally with the said black Oyl of Col∣cothar, you desire to make a white acid Spirit, do but mingle in a Matrass one dragm of the said Oyl with an ounce of common water; then you shall see that the said Oyl will presently go to the bottom; and will so heat the neck of the Ma∣trass, that you will scarce be able to hold it in your hand. Mingle them well by agitation, till the water grow blackish, then through Paper fil∣trate the said liquor, and there will come a clear
acid Spirit, as yellow as Gold, which will have the same force and virtue as the common Spirit of Vitriol; the Paper retaining the black and thick faeces. From whence we may conclude, that this clear Liquor, which we call Spirit of Vitriol, is nothing but a small portion of the true Spirit mingled with a great deal of Phlegm, and that this black Liquor which we call Oyl, is indeed a pure Spirit of Vitriol, entirely dephlegmated, but because of its Sulphureous blackness and thick∣ness, it is improperly called Oyl, being somewhat unctuous to the feeling, though it be not at all inflameable, as all true Oyls are. Obs. 1. That you must dephlegmate the Vi∣triol, and powder it well before you put it into your Retort; else you would not draw off the Spirit, but the Phlegm alone: for, the matter would coagulate in the bottom of the Vessel in∣to a lump, which sticking close to the sides of the Retort, would so retain all the Spirits, that a strong fire of forty hours lasting, would scarce be able to reduce this mass to powder: there∣fore it is better to dephlegmate and reduce to powder your Vitriol, before it be put into the Retort. Obs. 2. That we give no Intermedium to Vi∣triol, as we do to Salt and Niter; because, be∣ing a terrestrious Salt, it cannot be melted, and by consequent, cannot fix and retain its Spirits within its self: so that, provided it be dephleg∣mated, the Spirits are easily raised, and distilled by the violence of the fire.
Obs. 3. That you need not fill your Retort up to the neck with your matter, because the Spirit of Vitriol, having not so much tenuity as the Spi∣rits of Salt and Niter, is not in danger of re∣impregnating and fixing its self in its own masse. Obs. 4. That the Retort must be of Glass, for the reason alledged in the Spirit of Salt. Obs. 5. That you chuse good Vitriol, not too dry; for it will yield more Spirit and Oyl: there∣fore that which comes from Germany and the Low Countries, is better than the Roman Vitriol for this effect. Its virtue and effects: Both the white Spirit, and the black Oyls, are Acids, which pleasantly and excellently do cool, desopilate, and resist all corruption: and therefore they are frequently, and with good success, made use of for the Li∣ver and Kidneys, in burning and Pestilentious Feavers. The dose is five or six drops of the Spirit, two or three of the Oyl, either in Wa∣ter, Broth, or White Wine: It serves for the dissolution of Metals; and in Surgery it is used, either pure, or mingled with a little water or Mel rosatum, to touch the ulcers of the mouth. The first and second Colcothar are both an ex∣cellent Astringent, given in violent Diarrhoea's, Dysenteries, and Hepatick Fluxes: or, mingled with some unguents, it stops bleeding Wounds. The Marks to distinguish the Oyl of Vitriol from other, are these: 1. It is very black: 2. It is not only acid, but caustick: 3. It is very
heavy: 4. It seizes the nose, with a strong Va∣pour, when new made; and in all these four conditions, it is like the Oyl of Sulphur. As for the Spirit, it is known by its pleasant acidity, by its yellowish colour: and because, be∣ing old, it yields no smell, no more than Spirit of Sulphur, neither doth it corrode, or make its stopple yellow; the Spirits of Niter and Aqua fortis, are distinguished from it by their smell; and because they corrode, and change the colour of their stopples: Spirit of Salt is known from it, because it has a brackish taste, and smells strong when new, being much more intolerable and un∣pleasant than Spirit of Vitriol. Aqua Fortis. TAke a Glass-Retort luted up to half its neck, put in it equal parts of common Niter, and green Vitriol, not dephlegmated, but they must be beaten to powder in an Iron Mortar before: fill but two thirds of your Retort, leaving a third empty, for else the Vitriol being melted by the Niter, would, it may be, rise, and run in sub∣stance into the Recipient, before the distillation of the Aqua fortis could be begun. Set your Retort in a little Reverberatory, or in a little Circulatory fire, (a great Reverberatory being not so necessary here, because the Niter is of it self so volatil; and having melted the Vi∣triol, it makes it likewise capable of yielding its Spirits
without a very violent degree of heat.) Give your fire by degrees; continuing the first degree, till the phlegm, which will appear in a white va∣pour in the Recipient, be distilled; otherwise, if at first you did give a great heat, the Niter and Vitriol together would boil over your Vessel, and in their own substance run into the Recipient: When your Recipient begins to fill with red Va∣pours, (which is the sign of the Spirit's coming forth) augment your fire, and cover your Re∣tort with Coals; if it be in a Circulatory fire, continue this heat till your Recipient begin to lose something of the brightness of its red co∣lour, and till it become cold, though the fire be vehement under the Retort: then the mat∣ter has sent forth all its Spirits, and you shall find these red Vapours dissolved all into a white clear Liquor, as water: Out of one pound of com∣mon Niter, and as much of green Vitriol unde∣phlegmated, you may have sixteen ounces of Aqua fortis. Obs. 1. That though the Spirit of Vitriol can∣not be drawn from Vitriol undephlegmated, yet Aqua fortis may; because being in company with the Niter, it cannot, after the distillation of its Phlegm, coagulate in a lump, which might fix and retain its Spirits; the Niter, by its opening Sulphur, keeping the Vitriol porous and vapo∣rous. Obs. 2. That Aqua fortis may be very well made with dephlegmated Vitriol, and fine Niter; and then it is so strong and corrosive, that it is Aqua regalis, and can dissolve Gold and Silver: but
because we do not ordinarily need in Chymistry so strong a dissolvent, for the frequent dissoluti∣ons we make of Mercury, of Tin, of Bismuth, and of Silver; we are content with Aqua fortis prepared as has been taught. Its virtue and use: This is a very caustick burning water; some do touch Warts and Corns with it: but it is dangerous so to do, and our Chymistry will afford us gentler and fitter reme∣dies, which I shall set down hereafter. It serves to dissolve your Metals and Minerals: the Dyers use it, to give a strength and penetration to their Colours. The Marks to distinguish it, are, 1. It is yel∣lowish. 2. Stinks very much. 3. It yellows and corrodes its stopple, and the bladder and pack-thread that are employed about the stopping of it. 4. If you pour a drop or two of it up∣on a Brass-half-peny, it makes it stir, and look green. The Spirit and black Oyl of Sulphur. TAke a great Stone, or unglazed Earthen Pan, put it into a pound of common wa∣ter; in the middle of this Pan, set a little Stone-pot, and upon this Pot, place a little flat Earthen Cup full of sand: in the mean time, reduce into powder four pound of Brimstone, and of this
put one spoonful into the middle of the sand, then take a great Coach-wheel Nail, and heat it red hot, and with a pair of Tongs put the head of it into this Brimstone which is in the sand, presently the Brimstone will be in a flame: there∣fore have ready a Glass-Bell well proportioned to the bigness of your Pan, and with it cover your Pan, as soon as the Brimstone begins to take fire; and that you may lose nothing of the Vapour, stop with Linen the junction of the Bell and Pan; from this inflamed Sulphur will rise an abundance of white Vapours, which will be converted, part of them into acid Spirits, which being received in the Pan, impregnate the Water; and part of them into yellow Flowers of Sulphur, which will be found sticking to the sides of the Bell and Pan, and will form a little skin upon the super∣flicies of the Water. After a quarter of an hour, the Vapours being ceased, and condensed into Spirits and Flowers; break that skin, that the Water may be at liberty to re-impregnate it self with new Spirits, at a second flagration; then put another spoonful of Sulphur, inflame it, co∣ver it, and in a word, do as before, continuing this till all your Brimstone be spent. When you have done, there remains a muddy acid Water, into which put all those Flowers of Brimstone, which you find sticking to the sides of your Pan, or Bell, as likewise those that swim upon the Water; put them all together into a Matrass of an ordinary size not luted, which set upon a Salt-seller in the little Circulatory fire; the Phlegm will be evaporated, the Flowers
will dissolve into the Spirit, and the Spirit will wax black; then with a wet clout take out your Retort, and pour out your Liquor thus hot, in∣to a white Earthen Bason. The Spirit being cool, you'll find in the bottom the Flowers con∣gealed into a bright yellow lump. By this me∣thod in one day, out of four pound of Sulphur you may draw half an ounce of black Oyl; and if you put an ounce of Water upon one dram of this Oyl, mingling them well in a Matrass, and then filtring them through a course Paper, you may have that which is called the Spirit, or A∣cid of Brimstone, of a yellow bright transparent colour like Gold. Or, by another way, do but evaporate the two thirds of your pound of Wa∣ter, impregnated with the Spirit of Brimstone, and there will remain four ounces of a yellow in∣flegmated Spirit. Obs. 1. That we put sand into the little Ear∣then Cup, lest the Brimstone, inflamed, should break it; which it would do, were it empty. Obs. 2. That, Water is put into the Pan, that the Spirits may be the better gathered, without which they would be apt to be consumed to no purpose, in the superficies and substance of the said Earthen Pan. Obs. 3. That the Matrass in which the Evapo∣ration is performed, must be short-neck'd, that the phlegm may the easilier evaporate; therefore let it be two inches high. Obs. 4. That we pour the said Spirit hot into a white Basin, and not into a glazed one, lest it should corrode the Lead of the Vernish, and so be
weakned, and loaden with a blackness, which no filtration would be able to take away: and the reason why we pour out the Liquor hot, is, be∣cause if we did let it cool, the Brimstone would congeal into such a lump, as could never be come by, without breaking the Matrass. Obs. 5. That, if by this method there is but little Spirit drawn from such a quantity of Sul∣phur, yet by all the other processes you meet with in Authors, you shall draw less. Its virtue and use: It cools and purifies the Blood, resists Corruption, appeases the Burning Feavers. 'Tis a very good preservative against the Plague, taking three or four drops of it in a glass of water ever morning. It is most excel∣lent to touch Venereal Ulcers and Warts; it dis∣solves Pearls and Corral: It fixes Mercury; but cannot dissolve him, no more than the other Metals. The Marks by which it is distinguished, are the same by which Spirit of Vitriol is known from other Spirits; but all the difficulty is to distinguish Spirit of Vitriol from Spirit of Sul∣phur. Spirit of Wine. TAke as much good Aqua vitae, as will fill your Vesica or Copper body half full: set it in a naked Circulatory fire; fit to it its cover or Moors-head, bordered with its Refrigeratory,
having before hand put into the Vesica's long neck five or six sponges, held up by two sticks set a-cross, and kept from falling down or rising up: Then to the Moors-head Nose fit the moveable Pipe, which shall join it with the long Brass Pipe that goes through the two Hogs-heads of water; then starch on long slices of Paper upon all the conjunctions of the Pipes; and over the Paper, put cloth-ones, which bind fast with pack-thread: fit your Receiver of glass to the lower end of the long Brass Pipe that goes through the Hogs-heads; set your Coals on fire, and add some wood to them, to make at first a great fire, which may raise and distil your Spirit quickly. In a very little time, it will come not by drops, but in a small stream like a Fountain. In all the course of this Operation, there must be singular care taken that the distillation be equal and mo∣derate, so that as soon as you perceive white va∣pours in the Recipient, diminish your fire; ei∣ther by throwing ashes on it, or taking a good deal of it away. For these white Vapours are the Spirits which come in such an abundance, that they have not had time to condense, neither in the Moors-head, nor in the long Pipe, and therefore will easily scape out of your Receiver, and so the best of your Spirit will be lost to no purpose: besides, whensoever the Distillation is performed in too big a stream, though there be no Vapours, yet diminish your fire. But if it should come drop by drop, then augment the heat; you may take notice that the first quart that comes, though excellent and pure, yet it is not clear,
but muddy, having contracted a foulness from the sides of the Vessel; therefore throw it in again with a Tunnel by the little Pipe, which on purpose is in the top of the Vesica, and presently stop the said Pipe close with its Woodden stopper; the Spirit that shall from henceforth be distilled, will be clear and transparent. By this method, out of thirty quarts of good Aqua vitae, you may draw eighteen quarts of good Spirit of Wine in a day, and in one only Vesica. You must observe often, all along your Operation, whether your Spirit be well deflegmated; which try thus: Put as much Gunpowder as you can take up with your two fore-fingers and your thumb, into a little spoon, which fill with Spirit of Wine; then fire it with a Match, or lighted Paper: for if this Spirit take fire and burn blew, till it be consu∣med, and then fire the Gunpowder, and that at last there be no mark of any moistness left in the spoon, you may be sure your Spirit is very pure, and very good. The last Spirit that comes, is not good, as well because it brings phlegm with it, as because it smells of the Empyreuma, or burning; and having been long in the Vesica, is somewhat impregnated with the substance and qualities of the Copper. Therefore set it aside to be used exteriourly, or in Mechanicks; or else rectifie it again with new Brandy. Whensoever your perceive that there comes some muddy whitish drops, which make the clear Spirit which was in the Receiver change its colour, then know that it is time to make an end of the Operation: for these drops are
the flegm which produces this effect upon the pure Spirit: for if you put two or three drops of Water into good Spirit of Wine, it will do the same thing. There will remain in the Vesica twelve quarts of flegm muddy and greenish from the Copper; this tincture is to be thrown away. This Spirit of Wine does also contain in it self something of the Copper: nevertheless it may be taken safely by the mouth, because that Copper extracted by this Spirit, is not so dange∣rous as Verdigreece extracted out of Copper by Vinegar. Nay, the Copper does contribute much to the preservation of this Spirit in its force. But, if in a Glass Alembick you will take the pains to rectifie it, and reduce your eighteen quarts to fifteen, then you may without scruple use it in all manners; and in the bottom of your Cucurbit, there will remain a green tincture, which is a flegm impregnated, with the Salt and Sulphur of Venus, or Copper. Which tincture evaporated, congeals into blew Crystals; then powdred and dissolved in common Water, filtred, and then evaporated a second time, will again in a cold Cellar congeal into blew transparent Crystals of Venus. Its virtue and use: Spirit of Wine is a pow∣erful Dissolver for all sorts of Gums and Rosins, as well for the use of Physick, as to make China-Vernish: it is good for Burnings, Contusions, Gangreens, Palsie, cold Fluxions; particularly, if it be circulated with Salt of Tartar, it serves to extract perfectly the tincture of all Barks, Rinds,
Woods, Berries, Aromatick, Balsamick, and Resi∣nous, as also of Opium; to make of them Magi∣steries, Extracts, Essences and Syrops. The Phlegm, Spirit, and Oyl of Tur∣pentine. FIll half the fourth part of a Brass Vesica with clear Venice Turpentine; pour upon it com∣mon Water, till the Vessel be but half full, lest if it were fuller, the Turpentine should boil up, and run in its own substance into the Receiver. Fit to the Vesica the Moors-head, bordered with its Refrigeratory, omitting the sponges in the neck, because the Liquor here is not spiri∣tous enough to pass through them. Give your fire, and govern your Operation altogether as has been taught in the Chapter of Spirit of Wine. The Flegm, Spirit and Oyl, will come alto∣gether; but the Flegm will sink to the bottom of your Receiver, whereas the Spirit and Oyl will swim above. There will remain in the Ve∣sica a thick substance called Colophon. Separate your Flegm by a Glass-Tunnel, and keep the Spi∣rit and Oyl incorporated together. This Oyly Spirit is sold by Druggists in Paris, under the name of Spirit of Turpentine: they have it from Provence, and afford it us at a much cheaper rate, than we could make it at Paris.
How to separate entirely the Spirit from the Oyl. Fill a Glass-Retort half full, (your Retort must be luted, only there must be upon the neck a long empty space left to see into it, that so you may perceive towards the end of the Operation, of what colour your Oyl is:) set your Retort up∣on a Round, in the little Circulatory fire, and di∣stil your matter, till you have three parts of Spi∣rit out of it, and that in the bottom of your Re∣tort you see a thick red Oyl, almost of the colour of a Pomgranate. Take then your Retort off from the fire, and pour out this hot Oyl into an Earthen Pan of white ware. As for the Spirit which you have in the Receiver, rectifie it again in the same Retort, and by the same sort of fire, so as to distil three quarters and an half in Spirit, and the rest remain in form of a thick red Oyl: which done, pour out the said Oyl to that which you have already. Then rectifie your Spirit a∣gain, doing thus, as long as you can extract any Oyl out of it: then your Spirit will be right and pure, devested of its Oyl, and without smell; but it will still have its force and acrimony. The Use and Virtues of the Spirit. 'Tis a powerful Diuretick, and makes the Gonorrhaea's flow abundantly, by melting and inciding those tough and clammy humours, which stop the pas∣sages of Sperm and Urine: It dissolves the soft Stones which are not yet strongly petrified: It dissolves all Gums better than Spirit of Wine, and that without any additional heat, either of Fire or Sun; Therefore it is used in making the best Vernish: it dissolves with a small heat Brim∣stone,
and makes a better Balsam of it than that which is made with the oyly Spirit of Turpen∣tine, bought at the Druggists. The Provencals, who are great Drawers of Essences, use it in all their Operations, either upon Flowers or Woods, Barks, Leaves or Berries, both Aromatick and Balsamick, because this Spirit being naturally un∣ctuous, is easily impregnated with the oyly Es∣sence of these Druggs; and because it has no smell of its own, it easily takes the Aromatick or Balsa∣mick Odour of any of those that are infused in it, and then distil it in the Vesica, as we do Spirit of Wine. For do not think that their Essences are pure, and drawn from their Druggs alone: no, they are nothing but Spirit of Turpentine, im∣pregnated with the Essence of them. So that this Spirit has a double use; for it extracts the Essence, and multiplies it considerably. The Virtues and Use of the red Oyl: It is a So∣vereign Anodynum for the wounds of nervous parts, because it has lost all its Acrimony, which consisted in its Spirits.
The Salt of Tartar, of which is made the Oyl of Tartar by solution of the Salt. TAke equal parts of pure Nitar and good Tar∣tar, either white or red; powder them a∣part very fine: then mingle them in a glazed ear∣then Pan; then, with a red hot Iron, stir all this masse, until the Niter be entirely consumed and evaporated, which you shall know by the ceasing of flagration or burning. Thus your Tartar, be∣ing perfectly calcin'd, will afford you a Salt as white as Snow, and the same in weight with that which you mingled with the Niter at first; whence you may conclude, that Tartar is all Salt. The Oyl of Tartar is made thus: Set this Salt in a very wet air, such as the air of a Celler, there it will melt, and dissolve into a white viscous Li∣quor, which we call Oyl of Tartar by solution, to distinguish it from the black stinking Oyl, which is drawn by distillation in a Retort and open fire: nevertheless, to speak properly, the name of Oyl is not due to either of them, because they are neither Sulphurous nor inflamable sub∣stances. If after you have made the Salt of Tar∣tar, you are in haste to have the Oyl, you may presently compass your end by throwing eight ounces of common Water upon four ounces of this Salt of Tartar; for then it will all dissolve into Liquor. Obs. 1. That you chuse good Tartar; for that
is all Salt: whereas the grosser sort of Tartar has much of faeces, and terrestreity in it, which would spoil this Operation, in which we pretend to dis∣solve all the Salt into Water. Obs. 2. That your Niter be well devested of all its fixt Salt, because we desire here a pure Salt of Tartar, without the mixtion of any other: there∣fore your Niter must be entirely volatil, and ex∣hale all in the flagration. Obs. 3. That they both be well powder'd, and mingled together, that so the Niter penetrating the Tartar, do throughly calcine it; and it is for this reason that we use an equal quantity of Niter: By this method the Tartar is far better and easilier calcin'd than by the naked fire, without any In∣termedium. Obs. 4. That we make use here of an earthen glazed Pan, without any fear that the Niter should corrode the Lead of the Vernish; because its flame is not retained, but is at liberty to ex∣hale. An unglazed or stone-Pan would be unfit for the Operation, because it would presently break by the Inflammation of the Niter. The Virtues and Use of the Salt: 'Tis a great Aperitive, Deopilative, and Diuretick; the dose is from one to two dragms, in some Broth, or any other appropriated Liquor. The Tartar Vi∣triolated, because of the grateful acidity which it borroweth from the Vitriol, is much more plea∣sant to take than this Salt. This Salt, in the quan∣tity of half a scruple, will extract in a quarter of an hour the virtue and tincture of half an ounce of Senna, in a glass of cold water, and at the same
time proves a good Corrective to the noisom smell and taste of the Senna, giving it also the virtue of penetrating into all the Veins. The Oyl of Tartar is very scouring and drying; and is therefore excellent to rub all Scabs, Itch, and Tetters; as also to take away Spots, and Sun∣burns upon the Hands and Face. It is useful to precipitate the dissolutions of Metals, and Half-metals, or Marcasites. And pray, by the By, take notice, That all Acids, as Sea-water, di∣stilled Vinegar, Oyl of Tartar, Spirit, and black Oyl of Sulphur; and Vitriol, Spirit of Niter, and Aqua fortis, serve to precipitate the dissolu∣tions of Minerals: but that ordinary common Water, serves to precipitate the Distillations and Calcinations of Minerals; as also the Dissolutions of Vegetables made in Spirit of Wine, for the Rea∣sons which hereafter we shall alledge. Crystal Mineral, or Lapis Prunellae. TAke a Pot of the same Earth that Crucibles are made of, of the bigness of a Chamber-pot, and like it in Figure, with a handle; set it upon two Bricks in a great Circulatory Fire of Suppression: before the Pot be heated, throw in∣to it as much pure Salt-peter in powder, as will fill it up to the brim; the Salt-peter will melt; and as soon as it is melted, throw into it a spoon∣full
of Brimstone in powder, which immediately will take fire, and be consumed: when the flame ceases, throw in as much more, and so do three or four times. This Brimstone does not commu∣nicate any virtue to the Niter, only serves to pu∣rifie it, by precipitating its Faeces to the bottom of the Pot, till it become so transparent, that af∣ter these Projections and Flagrations, you may see the bottom of the Pot through the melted Niter. This done, pour a little of this melted Niter into a Brass-tinn'd-Kettle, and presently set your Pot upon the fire again, having taken away a good part of the Coals round about it; then stir your Kettle so, as to make the Niter spread it self all over the bottom of your Vessel; which done, set it in a bigger Vessel full of cold Water, that so you may hinder the Niter from burning, and adhering too strongly to the bot∣tom of your Kettle: separate then at last this white Crust, which is as thin and as brittle as Glass, and as white as Alabaster, and is by some called Crystal Mineral. After this, take more melted Niter out of your Pot, pour it into your Kettle, and do all things as before, continuing till there be nothing left in the Pot but the Faeces of the Niter, which you may throw away. Then gather all these thin Crystals together, and put them into a Kettle of Water upon the Fire, there to dissolve by a gentle ebullition; and if all dissolve not, it is a sign there is not Water enough. When all is dissolved, take off your Kettle, and filter this Liquor pre∣sently, while it is warm, through a brown Paper,
over an earthen unglaz'd Cucurbite. Then set the said Cucurbite in a Sand-heat, there to eva∣porate, till there appear upon the Superficies a thin skin; then take it off, let it cool; the Niter will crystallize into Needles of a sexangulary Fi∣gure, white, clear, and transparent, as any Rock-Crystal; but as brittle as Glass, and of a pleasant and grateful acidity. And then it is properly cal∣led Crystal Mineral, because of its resemblance with Crystal. Some call it Lapis Prunellae; and that is, because it is sharp and sowre, like your wild Prunes or Plums. Obs. 1. That we make use of a Pot of the same Earth that the Crucibles are made of, and not of an ordinary earthen-glaz'd Pot, because the Niter being once melted, would also dissolve the ledding of the Pot; and being incorporated with it, would lose much of its whiteness. Obs. 2. That we fill the Pot full up to the brim, that we may make at once a great quantity of Crystal Mineral; and because the Niter mel∣ted will take up but half the room it did be∣fore, being no ways subject to rise and run over. Obs. 3. That you must beat to powder your Niter; for so, a greater quantity will be contained in the Pot, and also be easilier melted. Obs. 4. That you must not stay till your Pot be warm, before you put in your Niter; because the Pot being very hot, and the flegm of the Niter coming to be dissolved first, would be broke infal∣libly. Therefore put in your Niter at first; and so by degrees, as your Pot warms, your Niter will
be deflegmated: and yet observe, That if you throw a spoonful of Niter into a pot red-hot, it will not break, because there is too little flegm for so much heat. Obs. 5. That the Niter being hot enough, melts and is deflegmated; it melts by the means of its flegm; for it is the flegm that puts all Salts into fusion. And whensoever Salts are entirely calci∣ned or deflegmated, they cannot be melted, ex∣cept they be wet anew by some washings, and then they grow whiter. Obs. 6. That if while the Niter is deflegmati∣zing, there chance to fall into it any small live Coal, then it will all be in a flame, till the Coal be consumed; and, to extinguish this flame, there is no way but to take out the said Coal, and to cover the pot. Obs. 7. That if after the melting of your Ni∣ter, and the purifying of it by the different in∣jections of Brimstone, you do not take off your pot, or take away some Coals, and the two first rounds of Bricks of your Furnace, that then your Niter will break the pot, though it were of Iron; and then the fire will inflame your Niter: which inflamed, will all exhale, and vanish away. The reason why the pot will be broken, is, because that then the Spirits of the Niter, being strongly heated, fly out of their body, and so corrode and break the pot. Obs. 8. That the Niter does not take fire in the pot; because, that though a spoonful of Niter cast into a pot red-hot, will presently be in a flame, and vanish all away in smoak; yet a great
quantity of Niter, even after its deflegmations, cannot be set a-fire, but by a red-hot Coal, unless you use a fire of Suppression, and so penetrate the pot, as to make it fire the Niter. And that cannot be done, because in such an Operation, an Earthen or Iron Pot or Crucible would break, and a Glass one would melt down. Obs. 9. That the Niter, being melted, is not afterwards coagulated into a lump upon the fire, as Vitriol and Alum use to do; because they are gross terrestrious Salts, which Niter is not. Obs. 10. That you must take well purified Ni∣ter, that so there be less of fix'd Salt in it: for, the fix'd Salt is easily dissolved into Water; and therefore your Niter being clear of it, will make your Crystals whiter and drier; if you use ordi∣nary unrefin'd Niter, your Crystals will be apt to dissolve into Water. Obs. 11. That the Brimstone takes fire in the melted Niter, and yet inflames not the Niter; because the oyly substance of the Brimstone is dryer than the Niter, and because that the Niter can scarce ever be well deflegmated: for its Spi∣rits, by reason of their great thinness, are subject to evaporate, and be gone with the flegm; as also, because no Vessel can long contain melted Niter, without breaking or melting. Obs. 12. That the Brimstone purifies the Ni∣ter, because that the grosser part of the Brim∣stone, which has not been a-fire, mingling its self with the melted Niter, hurries along with it to the bottom all the Faeces of the Niter. Obs. 13. That Crystal Mineral is nothing but a
well-purified Niter, that is well devested, 1. Of its Flegm: 2. Of its fix'd Salt: 3. Of its black Faeces, which it had contracted in those Vessels in which Niter is grosly prepared at first; and so you see, unless you filtrate it, and then crystallize it, it is not sufficiently purified. When once it has been crystallized, then you may dissolve it a∣gain, and reduce it into a white Crust, which is called Lapis Prunellae. Now the Crystal Mineral loses its flegm, by the melting of the Niter it is devested of; its Smoot by the flagrations of the Brimstone, and by the filtration; and it loses its fix'd Salt by the crystallization. The Ʋse and Virtues: It cools very much, re∣sists Corruption, and is Diuretick: It may be ta∣ken inwards, from half a scruple to a drachm; and in a Clyster, from two drachms to half an ounce. The Niter sulphurated, or the nitrous Salt of Sulphur. TAke four ounces of Flowers of Brimstone, and eight ounces of very fine purified Niter, re∣duce them into a very fine Powder separately, and then mingle them together. Then pour into a great stone-Pan, a pint of Spirit of Urine, (drawn from fresh Urine, in a Glass-Alimbeck, and Sand-fire;) in the middle of this Pan set a little stone-Pot, upon which set also a little Cup of the same Earth.
Then begin to make the flagrations of the said Brimstone and Niter together; and for this effect, put a spoonful of these two powders mingled to∣gether into the little Cup, then put into them a red-hot Iron, your matter will be immediately in a flame; therefore cover your Pan with a Glass-Bell, whereby you may receive the red Vapours of the flaming matter. These Vapours will dis∣solve into three different Substances, viz. into Spirits of Niter, and Spirits of Sulphur, which fall together, and are incorporated with the Spirit of Urine in the bottom of the Pan; and into nitrous flowers of Brimstone, which will be found stick∣ing, partly to the sides of the Bell, and partly to the sides of the Pan, and part of them will be spread in form of a Pellicula, or little skin, upon the superficies of the Spirit of Urine. Take notice, That in this first flagration your Cup breaks infallibly, because it is not lined or fenced with any thing that can hinder the Niter from exrcising its activity upon it. In a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, the Vapours will be passed, and dissolved into the three Substances I have spoken of; which done, break that little reddish skin upon the superficies of the Spirit of Urine; to the end, that in the following flagra∣tions, the Spirit of Urine may be impregnated with the acid Spirits of the Sulphur and Niter, which could not be, if that skin remained entire: then take away your broken Cup, in which you will find a whitish Crust left. After the first fla∣gration, powder this, and put it into a new stone Cup, and it will keep it from breaking, as the
first did. Then put another spoonful of water into this Cup, fire it, and in a word, observe all the circumstances of the Operation already de∣scribed, continuing it till all your Sulphur and Niter be consumed. This done, take the calcined Faeces of Niter and Brimstone, which remain in the bottom of your Cup, and reduce them into a fine powder, in an Iron Mortar: then mingle them, with all that is contained in your Earthen Pan, taking care to scrape off from the sides, into the Pan, all those Flowers that stick either to the Bell or Pan: Let this stand, and infuse the space of twelve hours; to the end, that the acid of the Niter and Sulphur, may entirely dissolve all the said Faeces and Flowers: filtrate this Dissolution through a brown Paper, over a glass Pan or Dish, and there will remain in the Paper some grey Fae∣ces of the Flowers of Sulphur, which you may throw away. Then begin your second Operation, that is, the deflegmation or evaporation of your Dissolution; To this purpose, put your Dissolution into a Ma∣trass, which must not be luted; because towards the end of the Operation, you are to see what passes in the Vessel: Your Matrass must be short∣necked, to the end the evaporation may be quick∣er; and it must not be above three quarters full, lest the matter should boil and run over, by break∣ing the Glass. Set your Matrass upon a Round, in a small Circulatory Fire, hindring all sorts of Coals, either kindled or not, from coming near your Glass, for fear of breaking it. Continue a
good equal Fire, till you perceive, after a long boiling, a kind of white scum upon your matter; then lessen the Fire, and let your matter evaporate gently, till it be of a clear milky colour, and cease to boil, and make a noise. Then augment the heat, that so in a small time you may evaporate the nitrous red Spirits still re∣maining: then, if with this augmentation of heat your matter does not boil, take it off from the fire, and pour it very hot into a stone-Pan, stirring and turning your Pan so as to make your liquor congeal, and spread it self all over equally, in the form of a Crust, as white as Alabaster, but as brit∣tle as Glass. This second Operation, thus performed, you must begin a third, which is to mould this Salt into the Figure of Glass-Vials. This third Ope∣ration does indeed add nothing to the virtue of the remedy, but is only an ingenious beautifying of it, which is thus performed. Fill little Glass-Vials half full with these white Crusts, place a Vial upon the ground, and sur∣round it with live Coals, the Salt will presently melt: when it is melted, take away your Vial, and shake it, that the Salt may stick to the sides of it, and so take the shape of the Glass; then wet your Vial with cold Water, and it will break into a thousand pieces, which will nevertheless cleave to the Salt. These you must loosen with the point of a knife, and when you have taken away all the bits of Glass, there will remain a Vial of Salt, as white as Alabaster, and which may be so preserved till you need it.
Obs. 1. That to make the Salt of Brimstone, you must calcine the Brimstone, and that nothing can calcine it so well as Niter, which, by firing the Brimstone, raises its volatile part, or Spirits, and leaves in the Cup the Calx of Brimstone, containing but few Faeces, and a great deal of fix∣ed Salt: and the Niter being pure, burns all away, and remains not in the said Calx; but, because here Niter is the Agent, therefore we use here as much again of it as of Sulphur, which is the Pati∣ent. The reddish Flowers of Brimstone are also calcined by the said Niter. Obs. 2. That we use here Spirit of Urine, as well because that if there were no Liquor, the acid Spirits of Niter and Brimstone would be lost in the pores of the earthen Pan, as because that the said Spirit of Urine is a powerful Diuretick, and does therefore augment the virtue of our Re∣medy. Obs. 3. That the hardest thing in this Opera∣tion, is to deflegmate the dissolution of Brimstone in the Spirit of Sulphur, and there is a great deal of danger that the Matrass will break towards the end of your Operation, when the matter rises, and boils high; therefore be diligent, mo∣derate your heat, Experience makes a good Ar∣tist. Obs. 4. That after you have happily evaporated your Dissolution, that you may conclude your process, and chuse whether you will mould your Salt into the Figure of Glass-Vials, or no: but pour out your Dissolution into an earthen Dish, and so keep it.
Obs. 5. That this nitrous Salt of Brimstone, is nothing but the Flowers of Brimstone, calcined by the Salt of Niter, then impregnated with the Spi∣rits of Brimstone and Niter, and at last coagu∣lated into a white Salt. If after the evaporation of the Spirit of Niter, which was incorporated with this Salt, you take of it, and Sal Armoniac, equal parts, and sublime them together, you will have a lovely sublim'd Salt, white, and so strong, that it will melt in Paper, and break a Box, if you put it into it. Its Ʋse and Vertues: 'Tis a powerful cooler, and Diuretick, it purifies the Blood, resists Cor∣ruption, is most excellent in Feavers, both con∣tinual, and intermittent; it drives the Gravel of the Kidneys, and cures the Running of the Reins; the Dose is, from ten to thirty Grains, in Wine, Broth, Syrop, Ptisane, Distilled Wa∣ter, or Decoction, answerable to the Indica∣tion, and sometimes in a Purgative Powder, or Bolus. Dulcified Sublimate. TAke of good Corrosive Sublimate of Ve∣nice, as much as you please, eight ounces if you will; powder it to a fine Powder, in a white earthen Dish, pretty deep, and very even, with a glass or earthen Pestle, and be care∣ful to stop your Nose with a Handkerchief, tyed behind your Head, for fear the vapours of the
Sublimate, should make your Head ake, or cause some worse effect. Then put to it the same weight of Quicksilver, and by trituration, or beat∣ing, incorporate them together: when they are half incorporated, add to them a spoonful of distilled Vinegar, or rather just as much as is ne∣cessary to reduce your Mass into a wet powder, and not into a paste; if you put too much Vine∣gar, you will have the trouble afterwards of eva∣porating it by the fire side, and then all the pur∣gative vertue of the Mercury will go near to fly away, with the superfluous humidity of the di∣stilled Vinegar. Put this powder into a small Matrass, long and straight-necked, and unluted, that you may see to the bottom; let a good part of the Matrass be empty, that there may be room for the sublimation, and that it may be perfor∣med in a shorter time with a small heat; pose your Matrass upon a Round, in the small circu∣lary Fire, and presently you will perceive some humid vapours, which rise from the Vinegar: and when they cease, then 'tis a sign that all the Vinegar is evaporated: then stop your Matrass with a Paper-stopple, the better to keep in the Spirits of the Mercury, and the Salts of the Sub∣limate Corrosive: continue your Fire equally, till all the matter be raised, and sublimed from the bottom of the Vessel; then your first Sub∣limation is perfected: therefore take off your Matrass, let it cool, and then break it below the Sublimate; take out the said Sublimate, which will be all in a lump, like a Mushrome, and of a Pearl-colour; separating the Quicksilver,
if any, which you shall find swimming on the top, and which has not been well incorporated with the rest; if there be any spot of blackness about it, you must also scrape it with a Knife gently; and above all, you must take out by in∣clination, that is, by pouring the Quicksilver that will be got, as high as the orifice of the Ma∣trass; as also, scrape away a kind of greyish pow∣der, which will be in good quantity in the neck of your Matrass: set aside this scraping, and this powder, to use it in those Unguents, in which Mercury is required: because, this black scraping would in a second Sublimation, stain the white∣ness of your Sublimate; and the greyish powder, would communicate a venomous quality to the remedy, because in it are enclosed the sulphureous Volatil, yellow Salts, as well of the Mercury, as of the Corrosive Sublimate; and it is in these Volatil Salts, that consists all the malignity of the Sublimate. This done, reduce your Pearl-colour Sublimate into powder, in a stone or marble Morter, and put it into a great Matrass, luted from the bottom to half the belly; so that there be five parts left empty, for the Sublimate to stick to; set it in the same Furnace, encreasing the heat by little and little, and taking care to keep off from the Matrass all flaming Coals, lest they should break the Glass: continue this heat, till, when you take off your glass, and shake it, you perceive that little or nothing falls to the bottom. And take notice, That it is better that there should remain something, than that all should be sub∣lim'd;
else your Sublimate being over-heated, would contract a yellowness. Thus your second Operation is ended, take off your Matrass, let it cool, and then break it below the Sublimate (which now is call'd the White Eagle) it appears in form of a Crown, towards the middle of the Matrass. Take out your Sublimate, and separate it carefully from all its Faeces, which are a red Earth, proceeding from the Vitriol, and which sticks to the bottom of the Sublimate, and also a grey powder, coming from the volatil, and venomous Salts of the Mercury, and the Subli∣mate Corrosive: it sticks to the orifice and neck of the Matrass. Use them both in Unguents, as it has been said if you chuse not rather to revive all the Mercury that is in them, and make it quick again, for this same, or some other Opera∣tion. Keep this Sublimate in a glass Vial of a large orifice, and put it in, in pretty big morsels; stop it well with a Cork, and a piece of oyl'd Blad∣der over it, for fear it lose at last its purgative Vertue, by the evaporation of its best volatil, white mercurial Salt. It is not good to sublime it a third time, lest it lose all its purgative Vertue; nay, the more you would sublime it now, the blacker it would grow: so that, after five or six sublimations, it would turn in the bottom of the Glass into a black lump, without possibility of being sublimed any more. Obs. 1. That the Corrosive Sublimate ought to be made with Quicksilver, Common Salt, Vi∣triol, and Saltpeter: they make it rarely well at
Venice, from whence it is brought to us, and sold three times cheaper than we can afford to make it. The Hollanders send good quantities of it hither, but it is ordinarily sophisticated, by the mixtion of white Arsenick, which is very heavy, and but ten pence a pound; whereas Mercury is worth four or five shillings a pound; besides, that Arsenick being incorporated with the Sublimate, is a strong poyson. But you will easily perceive this Cheat, if you pour a little Oyl of Tartar, made per deliquium, upon your Corrosive Sublimate: if it be good, and without mixtion of Arsenick, it will become as yellow as Gold; if there be Arsenick, it will grow as black as Ink. Besides, the best Sublimate of Ve∣nice, is made into little Grains, as big as Hemp∣seed: but the Sublimate of Holland, is in great Splinters, as Mineral, Antimony, or Bismuth; and this is, because the Arsenick cannot be so well incorporated with the said Mercury, as common Salt, Niter, and Vitriol. Obs. 2. That we take of Sublimate and Quick∣silver equal parts; because, if there were less Corrosive Sublimate, it could not corrode, and calcine the Mercury: and if there were more, it would be hard to dulcifie the Mercury: 'Tis expe∣rience has taught us this proportion. Obs. 3. That we make use of a Glass, or white Dish, or Pan, with a glass or marble Pestle, to powder the Corrosive Sublimate: for it would whiten and spoil a brass or iron Mortar: and be∣cause in an earthen-glaz'd dish it would be black'd by the Lead of the Dish, and in an un-glaz'd one,
there would much of it be lost in the little pores of the Earth: but all these inconveniences are pre∣vented by making use of a Marble Glass, or White∣ware Dish, which indeed is but the dreggs of Glass, refined and crystallized. Obs. 4. That we use distilled Vinegar to incor∣porate the Quicksilver, with the Corrosive Subli∣mate; because, the Vinegar, having a Salt, helps the corrosion of the Mercury; and therefore fur∣thers more their intimate mixtion, than a Liquor which had not such a Salt would do; but undistil∣led Vinegar, and particularly of Red-wine, is not good, because it would alter the whiteness of this Remedy. The Spirit of Vitriol is worse, for it would make it black: spittle would do well enough, but it is dangerous to spit upon the Subli∣mate, lest in spitting, some of it should get into the mouth. Obs. 5. That in the first Sublimation, we give but a gentle circulary Fire, and do thereby ele∣vate the Sublimate, but a little above the bottom of the Matrass; because, we do not pretend at this time to any thing, but only to calcine, and incorpo∣rate the Mercury with the Sublimate. But in the second Sublimation we give a greater Fire, and raise the Sublimate to the middle of the Matrass; because then we desire to purifie exactly our Subli∣mate from its Faeces, and by evaporating the ma∣lignant venomous volatil Salts, have a fair crystal∣lized Sublimate. Obs. 6. That if in the second Sublimation, when all your powder is sublim'd, you do not take your Matrass off from the Fire, it will grow
yellow, and blackish; nay, the more you sublime it, the blacker it will grow; because the Mercury being devested of the purest part of its Salt, who have left behind a sulphureous smoot, begins to burn, change colour, and at last grow black. Obs. 7. That the dulcified Sublimate is but crude Mercury; incorporated with, and calcined by Corrosive Sublimate, then devested of its own, and all the venomous Salts of the Corrosive Sub∣limate; but yet furnished with the mildest, and sweetest parts of them, and by them. The Vertue Purgative of this Remedy, is, as it were, whited, and sharpened. Now while the Mercu∣ry is a calcining, and purifying by these Salts, it rises more or less, according to the heat, by its own nature, which is Volatil, and by the means of the Niter, which is joyned with it. And this we call subliming; for the common Salt, and Vi∣triol, are hurried away, and carried up by the Mercury and Niter, and by their Nature, which is not Volatil: they keep the Mercury and Niter from rising so high, as to run out of the Matrass. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It purges gently, from one scruple to a dram; and if you take it four days together, augmenting your Doze, by little and little, from a scruple to a dram, it fluxes. Its particular Use is, to dissolve all scirrous, and scorbutick Tumours, both interiour and ex∣teriour.
Turbith Mineral. TAke two ounces of Quick-silver, well purifi∣ed, and three ounces of Spirit of Niter; put them into a Glass Retort luted to half the neck, leaving a gap to look through at; place it upon a Round, in a small circulary Furnace, keeping the neck of your Retort streight, and not lean∣ing on one side, till your Mercury be dissolved in the Spirit of Niter, which you will easily perceive through the gap you left, when you luted your Glass. When your Mercury is quite dissolved, then, to go the shorter way to work, evaporate the Spirit of Niter, your Retort being in the same posture still: but if you mean to draw off the said Spirit of Niter, then set your Retort in a distilling posture, and fit to it a Recipient, con∣tinuing your fire in the same degree as before. When the exsiccation, or drying of your Mercu∣ry shall be thus performed, take off your Vessel, and let it cool; then pour into it an ounce of Oyl of Sulphur, upon the white matter which remains in the bottom, and then set it again up∣on the same fire, till all the Oyl of Sulphur be likewise evaporated; reiterate three or four times this cohobation, or rectification, with the same proportion of Oyl of Sulphur: to the end, that at last it may fire the Mercury. This done, break your vessel, and in the bottom you will find a white lump, which reduce to pow∣der, and upon this powder pour warm water,
which incontinent will become yellow: reiterate this dulcoration or sweetning, till at last your water come away as insipid as it was poured on; then separate by inclination the water, which will not be tinged as the other was, and after dry your matter gently in a sand heat, and there will remain at last a powder as yellow as Gold: upon this, pour some spponfuls of Spirit of Wine, and set it on fire, doing thus three or four times to sweeten your Mercury the more. It will be as yellow and as bright as Gold, and of no taste, and so fix, that being put into a Crucible, and melted in a Wine Furnace, it will still keep the consistence of a yellow powder, without losing but very little of its weight, which is a sign that it is well fixt. Obs. 1. That your Mercury for this Operation, must be well purified, because the intention is to fix it, which could scarce be done, if it were im∣pure, and mingled with Lead, besides that be∣ing designed for a purgative in a very small Dose, it would scarce answer your intention: you will be able to judge if it be well purified or no, by putting some of it into a Stone-cup: for, if when you put a finger into it, it does not hang, and make a long thred, as a syrup would do, but is short, then it is good. If it be impure, you may purifie it by straining it through the Leather called Chamy; for, the Lead, if there be any, will remain in the leather; or else distill your Mer∣cury in a Glass Retort luted, in a fire of suppres∣sion, and the Mercury will remain in the bottom of the Retort.
Obs. 2. That we use Spirit of Niter, and not Aqua fortis, to dissolve the Mercury, because the said Spirit being less harmful, and corrosive than Aqua fortis, ought to be imployed in all prepara∣tions of Remedies that are to be taken inwardly: besides that, if we had employed Aqua fortis, then the Mercury must necessarily after its dissolution have become red, as it shall be taught in the Chap∣ter of the Red Precipitate hereafter: and no other Spirit would be corrosive enough to dissolve the Mercury but Spirit of Niter. Obs. 3. That we use a greater quantity of Spirit of Niter, than of Mercury, because ex∣perience teaches us, that the dissolvant must be in greater quantity to dissolve such a dose of Mercury. Obs. 4. That the said dissolution requires no other than a small circulary fire: for, if the heat were greater, the Spirit would evaporate, and be gone, in stead of doing its work; and for the same reason, we keep the Retort with its neck upwards, that so, if the Spirit be raised, yet it may fall down again, and dissolve the Mercury. Obs. 5. That if you draw off by distillation that said Spirit of Niter, it may be useful to you in frictions, for the Itch, the Scab, and such like disea∣ses, having lost its force, which would have con∣sum'd proud flesh, excrescences, &c. Obs. 6. That the Mercury, being dissolved, and calcin'd Philosophically by the Spirit of Niter, after the exsiccation and evaporation of the said Spirit, the Calx of the Mercury is
white, because the Niter being also white by na∣ture, cannot with a small fire colour any body that is dissolved in it, but the Aqua fortis, makes the bodies grow red, because of the Vitriol which is in it. Obs. 7. That upon the Calx of Mercury, we pour Spirit of Sulphur divers times, that so we may intirely fix the said Mercury, because the spirit of Sulphur is of it self fix, and farr from evaporating, when it is put in a Matrass upon the fire, it fixes part of it into a very pricking sharp Salt: and therefore, this Spirit has power to fix all Metals. The black Spirit of Vitriol, is not proper to fix, because it is of its nature volatil, and would evaporate all away, as for its salt at least; and there would remain nothing but a Caput mortuum: and observe, by the by, that Mercury passes here through two the noblest Ope∣rations of Chymistry; for first, it is dissolved by the Spirit of Niter, and then coagulated by the Spirit of Sulphur. Obs. 8. That by pouring warm water upon this calx, it presently grows yellow, because the Oyl of Sulphur has communicated to it the Sulphureous yellow colour; and the water being actually warm, dissolves and extracts the Salts who were incorpo∣rated in the said Calx. Obs. 9. That by burning Spirit of Wine over the said Mercury, you dulcifie and sweeten it, and make its purgative vertue gentler; because, the burning Spirit of Wine, penetrating the said Mer∣cury, carries away with it, in the burning, all the Venemous volatil Salt that could be left.
Obs. 10. That Turbith Mineral is nothing but Mercury dissolved, and calcin'd by the Spirit of Niter, then fixt by the Spirit of Sulphur, then devested of the salts of its dissolvants by re∣iterated lotions, and freed from its malig∣nous Sulphur by the flagrations of the Spirit of Wine. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It purges strongly, and often provokes Vomit, from three to six grains; it cures the Pox without fluxing, because being fixt, it cannot rise to the mouth, as all other pre∣parations of Mercury that have not been fixt do. It is nevertheless very violent, because it is not so fixt, but there yet remains a little un-fixt mer∣curial Salt, and Sulphur, who are sharpened by the Spirits of Niter and Brimstone: and indeed, if all of it were fixt, then nothing of it could be dissolved in the stomach, and so would produce no other effect, than as much Gold in powder; also, being not altogether Volatil, its Vertue is less harmful. The White Precipitate. TAke of pure Mercury eight ounces, and of Aqua fortis sixteen, put them into an un∣luted long necked Matrass, and of such a size, as it be not half full, lest when the Mercury and Aqua fortis are in dissolution, there should be so great an ebullition, as to cause the matter to run
over: stir a little your Matrass with your hands, to heat the Aqua fortis, then set your vessel on warm ashes, to help a little more your Aqua fortis in its action upon the Mercury: but have a care you give not a greater heat than is necessa∣ry for a gentle ebullition; for, if your Aqua fortis be over-heated, and opened, it will tinge (by the means of its Vitriol) your Mercury in a yel∣low colour: as soon as your Mercury is entire∣ly dissolved, which may be done in half an hour, pour your dissolution into an earthen Stone Pan, or glass Bell (the glazed earth being unfit, because the Aqua fortis would dissolve the Ver∣nish) then pour upon your matter cold sea-wa∣ter, well filtrated, and impregnated with com∣mon Salt undecrepitated; you may use about a quart of this Water, till your dissolved Mercury be all precipitated to the bottom of your Vessel, in a white powder. And take notice, that if you had used common water, you would not have precipi∣tated your Mercury, but turned your dissolution into a white Liquor, which would have dis∣charged it self of a white sharp powder: because that common water, having no salt, cannot fight with the salts of the Aqua fortis; but if it be im∣pregnated with a contrary salt, there arises a conflict, during which the Mercury scrapes, and falls to the bottom, leaving behind him a good part of his salts. This done, separate by Inclina∣tion your sea-water, and pour a great quantity of common water upon your matter, to take away the Acrimony, which the Aqua fortis by its Niter and Vitriol has communicated to the Mercury,
and continue this, till your water come off insipid. Then, having pour'd off your last water, filtrate the remainder in a brown, or rather white Paper, to preserve the colour; and dry your Precipitate in the shade: for, if you do it in the Sun, or by the Fire, it will lose much of its whiteness; when it is very dry, keep it in a close Vial, well stopped, and covered with an oyl'd Bladder. Obs. 1. That though this Remedy be taken in∣wards, yet we use Aqua fortis, and not Spirit of Niter; because, Aqua fortis costs less, and is sooner made than Spirit of Niter; which undoubtedly, without this reason of sparing, would be much fitter for this Operation: yet, we think that the great Lotions that are made, do dulcifie it, as if it had been prepared with Spirit of Niter. Obs. 2. That we take as much again of Aqua fortis as of Niter; as well, because the dissolvant must be stronger than the thing dissolv'd, as be∣cause that Experience teaches, that such a Dose of Aqua fortis is necessary to dissolve the Mercury entirely. Obs. 3. That the Matrass must be long necked, that the Aqua fortis rais'd by the heat, to the mid∣dle of the neck, may cool, be condensed, and fall down again; for, in this Operation, we pretend to nothing, but to dissolve and calcine Philosophically, and lightly, the Mercury, without penetrating its Body, and opening it by the Salts of the Aqua fortis, as we mean to do in the Red Precipitate: and thence it comes, that this Mercury, after its preci∣pitation, retains its white colour, and the nature of Quicksilver.
Obs. 4. That if you pour hot Sea-water on your Dissolutions, then you will not be able to precipi∣tate entirely your Mercury; because, that the salt Sea-water, being sharpened by an actual heat, would penetrate and dissolve a part of the said Mercury, in stead of precipitating it. Obs. 5. That to make Sea-water, you must not take decrepitated Salt; because, it would be to no end to take away the flegm, since you are to put it into Water; and as for purifying it, filtration will do that. Obs. 6. That the White Precipitate, is nothing but Mercury opened, and calcined by the Aqua fortis, and retaining but very little of the Salts of the said Aqua fortis, the rest being carried away by the dulcorations. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It is the gentlest of all the Purgatives drawn from Mercury, though it be dissolved by Aqua fortis; because it has been sweetned by Lotions: It purges nevertheless more violently than the sweet Sublimate, and its Dose is less: For, to Children it is from three to six Grains, and for Aged persons, it is from six to fifteen: It cures the Pox taken interiourly; and being dissolved with Oyl, it may be exteriourly used by Frictions, to cure the Itch, &c. This Remedy fluxes as easily as the sweet Sublimate; because, the Mercury being unfix'd in these Preparations, has his wings left him, wherewith he presently flies upwards, in stead of purging by Stools.
The Red Precipitate of Mercury. PUt four ounces of good Quicksilver, and six ounces of Aqua fortis into a Matrass, lu∣ted from its bottom to half the belly: set your Matrass on a Round, in a small circulary Fire; give a gentle heat at first, lest you should cause too great an ebullition; then encrease it, by little and little, till your Aqua fortis be evaporated; and you will know if your Aqua fortis be evaporated, by laying upon the mouth of your Matrass a piece of Brass, or any other Metal: for, if it be not wet, then it is a sign that all the humidity, pro∣ceeding from the Aqua fortis, is evaporated: then encrease the Fire, putting live Coals round about the Glass, as high as the Lute goes, and continue the Fire, till your Mercury rise upon the brim of the Matrass, in form of a yellow Soot, and that a piece of yellow Metal set over this vapour, do grow white by rubbing of it; and that is a sign that the Operation is ended: there∣fore take off your Glass with all speed, else your Mercury would all vanish away in this smoak. Your Matrass being cold, must be broken a little above the matter, and you shall find in the bottom an Orange-colour lump, the same in weight as the crude Mercury you used at first: and this is it, which we call a Red Precipitate. Obs. 1. That if perchance the middle of this lump were of a whitish colour, then that is a sign that the Operation is not perfect; and therefore, you
must reduce it to powder in an Iron Mortar, and reverberate it in a Crucible, with a Fire of Suppression, till it become right Orange-colour. Obs. 2. That you must not give the Fire so long, till your lump be red; because, than your Mercu∣ry would lose all its corrosive Salts, and therefore would be disabled from consuming proud flesh, which is its principal Vertue. Obs. 3. That we use here Aqua fortis to calcine Mercury, because the Remedy which we intend is a Topick exteriour one, to corrode, and con∣sume all superfluous fleshly Excrescences; and it is necessary, that it should be in greater quantity, than the Mercury, to dissolve it entirely. More∣over, calcin'd Mercury does not retain its natu∣ral whiteness; because, the Vitriol of the Aqua fortis communicates this tincture, and because that the Fire here, is much more violent, than that which is us'd in the preparation of the Re∣medy, call'd Turbith Mineral. The dissolvant being also much more over-heated, and penetrating by the help of the Fire, communicates a sulphureous colour. Obs. 4. That the Precipitate is found to be equal in weight to the Mercury, that was dissol∣ved; because, though in this Operation it have lost something of its volatil part, yet it hath impregnated it self with some of the Salts of the Aqua fortis, as much as to make up the weight: and these Salts it will keep, till it be reviv'd, and made Cuicksilver again. Obs. 5. That the Red Precipitate of Mercury
is a Mercury dissolv'd, and calcin'd by Aqua fortis, and then charg'd with the sharpest part of the Salts of the said Aqua fortis. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It is lightly caustick, and escarotick, or consumptive; and therefore eats away all proud flesh, and excrescences: and to mollifie it a little, it is mingled with some Un∣guent; as the Basilicum, &c. It is good to cleanse Ulcers; it is useful likewise in the preparation of the Arcanum Corallinum. Arcanum Corallinum. PUt as much Red Precipitate as you please into a glass Bell, pour upon it a good quantity of warm Water, not too hot, for fear of breaking your Vessel; and do this often, till at last your Water come away sweet and insipid; then having poured off your last Water, put your Precipitate into a little glass Cucurbite, and twice as much Spirit of Salt in weight, as there is Precipitate; set your Cucurbite in a Sand-fire, with its Head and glass Receiver fitted to it, to draw off by distillation the flegm of the Spirit of Salt: in the mean time, the volatil Salt of the common Salt, which composes the Spirit of Salt, will remain in the bottom, and be incorporated with the Pre∣cipitate of Mercury, and so fix it, as to make it able to endure a reverberatory Fire, without eva∣poration; on the top of this Mercury there is a white Crust, which is the grossest part of the
Spirit of Salt that is corporified. Pour upon all this, some cold Water (as soon as your vessel is cool) to the end you may dissolve this grosser Salt, and draw it off from the Mercury; reite∣rating thus your Lotions, till your Water come off insipid: then put your Mercury (which is of a dark yellow) into a Crucible, and reverberate it in a small reverberatory Furnace, till it become as red as Corral: and in this reverberation, the Salts of the common Salt, which were incorpora∣ted in the Mercury, do evaporate, and leave the Mercury in the same weight it had before its first Lotion: and nevertheless, the Mercury is fix'd by that little of these Salts which it enjoys. This done, put the said Mercury into a Dish of Earth glazed, and pour upon it good Spirit of Wine, two or three Fingers deep, which set on fire, till it be consumed, and so reiterate once more the said Fla∣gration, to the end that the purgative, and vomi∣tive Vertues of the Mercury, be milder by the evaporation of the volatil, and venomous part of the said Mercury, and its Salts. Obs. 1. That we wash the Red Precipitate with luke-warm Water, to the end, that all the sharp Salts that are in the said Precipitate, be dissolv'd the better; and by these reiterated Lotions, it becomes at last as sweet, as if it had been prepar'd with Spirit of Niter, in stead of Aqua fortis. Obs. 2. That the Spirit of Salt, as well as the Spirit of Sulphur, has the vertue of fixing Mer∣cury; because, the Mercury it self too is naturally fix'd; being therefore opened, and intimately pene∣trated
by the Spirit of Salt, the said Spirit com∣municates to it its fixative vertue, and is it self fixed in the Mercury. And observe, that the Spi∣rit of Salt has un-dyed the Red Precipitate, and made it of a dark yellow; because the common Salt, being by its nature all white, and coming to mingle with the Orange-colour, must needs clear it, and give it this yellow. Obs. 3. That the Arcanum Corallinum, is no∣thing but Mercury calcin'd and dissolv'd Philoso∣phically by Aqua fortis, then fix'd by Spirit of Salt, and devested by washings, from the most malignous part of its Salts, and of the volatilest part of its substance, by reiterated flagrations of Spirit of Wine. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It purges, and sometimes procures a Vomit, gently opening, and unstop∣ping at the same time the passages, and dissolving all the hardnesses of the schirrous parts: alone it cures the Pox, without fluxing, because it is fix'd: The Dose is, from three to six grains. The Crocus Metallorum, or Liver of Antimony. TAke of Female Antimony one pound, and half a pound of common impure Niter; powder them, and mingle them together; in the mean time heat red-hot upon two Bricks, in a great Fire of Suppression, a large and capacious Crucible, or Camion: throw into this, with a
great Iron Ladle, a quantity of your matter, and cover presently your Crucible, keeping it cover∣ed, till all the smoak cease: continue this Proje∣ction, and Flagration, till all your matter be con∣sumed. This done, encrease the Fire, and stir with a stick your matter continually, till it be all melted: then take it off from the Fire, and pour it into a Brass or Iron Mortar, hindring as much as you can the Faeces, which swim upon the top, from going into the Mortar; this liquor will con∣geal into a lump, which, when it is cold, you may break into many pieces, as glistring, and shining as Steel, or as burn'd Liver: then, if you powder them, they will change into a Saffron-colour'd powder, not unlike a diseas'd bilious Liver: and thence it is call'd the Saffron of Metals. As for the Faeces, remaining in the Crucible, you must throw them away as useless. Obs. 1. That you must take Female Antimony, as being the worst, and you may know it, by its long bright white Needles; as also, because it is much more brittle, than either the Male or Mine∣ral Antimony. The Male is better than the Fe∣male, and is known by its little blue, yellow, green Needles, diversified in colours like a Rain∣bow. The Mineral Antimony is worst of all, because, not having been melted, it has not lost any of its volatil substance, in which consists all its malignity. It is distinguished easily; for, it is full of the Rock out of which it is drawn. When you melt Mineral Antimony, the Male goes to the bottom. In this Operation of the Crocus Me∣tallorum, Female Antimony is good enough; be∣cause,
the Remedy resulting from it is none of the best of Chymistry; you may use the Male if you will, but have a care you do not use the Mineral; because, being loaded with Earth and Rock, it would not melt with so small a quantity of Niter. Obs. 2. That you must take common Niter, not purified, but such as comes from the first washing; because, it is good enough to put the Antimony in fusion; and because, its Faeces be∣ing to be mingled with the Faeces of the said Anti∣mony in the melting, it would have been super∣fluous to have purified the Niter before-hand; yet, if you will be at the charge, purified Niter will do no harm, it will rather be better. Obs. 3. That you must powder your Antimony, and Niter, and mingle them well together; that so, they may the easilier take fire. Obs. 4. That you must not use a glaz'd Pot, or Crucible, lest the enflamed matter should cor∣rode, and melt the Lead of the Pot. Obs. 5. That you must not throw your matter into your Crucible, till it be red-hot, else your Niter would not take fire, and so would not be able to put your Antimony in fusion. Obs. 6. That you must not throw all your mat∣ter at a time into the Crucible; for then, the fusion of your Antimony would not be well performed; because, the Niter by so great a flagration, would exhale, and be gone, before it had melted the Antimony. Obs. 7. That after every Projection, you must cover your Crucible very close, to the end you
may keep in the enflamed vapours of the Niter, who by their circulations, do the better contri∣bute to the melting of the Antimony. Obs. 8. That after all your matter is consu∣med, yet you must encrease the fire, because the Antimony is but half melted by the said flagra∣tions: but, being already opened by the Niter, it soon melts, if the fire be encreased: and in the mean time, you stir it well, that so the Antimo∣nial Liquor may go to the bottom, and be free from its Faeces; and therefore, we use a stick, and not any thing of Iron, because the said Liquor would corrode the Iron, as we may perceive in the Regulus of Mars; where the Antimony dis∣solves, and eats the filings of Iron, that are added to it. Besides, you may freely put the said stick to the bottom of your Crucible, because you do not mean to hinder the Faeces of the Antimony from going to the bottom; and therefore, both melt∣ing together, descend likewise together, and on∣ly the Faeces of the Niter swim on the top of the melted Antimony. Obs. 9. That the Liver of Antimony, or Cro∣cus Metallorum, is nothing but Antimony opened, and melted by Niter, and not devested of its terrestreity, but full of its malignant purgative, and vomitive Sulphur: therefore, we have used but half the quantity of Niter, to a double pro∣portion of Antimony, and we have let it stand no longer upon the Fire, than was necessary to melt it, with the fixt Salt of the Niter remaining in the Crucible. Its Ʋse and Vertues: We seldom or never use
the Liver of Antimony, till we have made it Cro∣cus metallorum, by pulverisation. It is a Mode∣rate vomitive, betwixt violent and gentle, and purges too, at the same time. This powder serves ordinarily to make the Vinum emeticum, or emetick Wine, by putting one ounce of it to in∣fuse in a quart of white Wine, Sack, Beer, Ci∣der, &c. the Dosis of this drink, will be from one to two ounces, to take at the mouth; and from four to six ounces, in an emollient decoction, in a Clyster, without dissolving in it any thing else. The Regule of Antimony. TAke three pound of male Antimony, one pound and a half of common Niter, one pound and a half of Tartar, and four oun∣ces of Wood Coals; in the mean time, heat red hot a great Crucible, in a great circulary fire of suppression, then throw in your matter by parcels, with an Iron or wooden-ladle, and co∣ver your Pot, or Crucible, at every time, till the smoak be past; then, when your Crucible is almost full, encrease your fire, and with a stick, stir your matter from time to time, that so the purest part of the Antimony, may go to the bottom; but, do not put your stick to the bottom of the pot, lest the Regule, which is in the bottom, should be mingled with
its Faeces that swim on the top; continue doing thus, till all your matter be melted, which will be in half an hour or thereabouts. Then, if you have any of your first matter left, for which there was not room in the Crucible, you may make an end of it, and put it to this, ob∣serving the same circumstances: when all is mel∣ted, give a violent fire for a quarter of an hour; to the end, that the most harmful part of the Antimony may exhale. After this, take off your Crucible, set it upon a hot brick, for a cold one would go near to break it, because of its hu∣midity: your Crucible being cold, break it, with a hammer, and in the bottom you will find your Regulus congealed in a lump, of the proportion of the bottom of the pot, as white as silver, very smooth underneath, and sometimes starred above in its superficies: on the top of this Silvery lump are the grayish Faeces, dry and spongious, and in good quantity, and marked also with the Star: but when the Star fails, the Regulus is as good, as if it had not fail'd; for the Star is produced, but by a long fusion, which straightning it, does also diminish something of its purgative, and eme∣tick vertues, by the too great evaporation of the flowers, and volatil Salt of the said Anti∣mony. Obs. 1. That you must preserve the Faeces of your Regulus; for out of it you must draw the Golden Diaphoretick Sulphur, as shall be said hereafter. Obs. 2. That we use here the Male Anti∣mony
as best, because here we aim at a more excellent remedy, than the Crocus Metallorum. Obs. 3. That we use here common Niter un∣purified, for the reason alleadged in the Chapter of the Liver of Antimony. Obs. 4. That we here make use of Niter to o∣pen and set in fusion the body of Antimony, though we do also imploy the Tartar to hinder a too great ebullition of the said Antimony, be∣cause, the Niter being somewhat busie in cal∣cining the Tartar, cannot employ all its force up∣on the Antimony; besides, the Tartar being not inflameable by its nature, hinders the Niter from causing this ebullition; and being withall a gentle Salt, it purifies, cleanses, and whitens the Antimony. Then we use Wood-Coals in powder for the same end, and because also the Coals being spongious, are apt to draw to them∣selves, and retain the Faeces of the Antimony. Now it is very necessary in this Operation, to prevent the ebullition, lest the Antimony should run over the pot, and be lost, we use also but one proportion of Niter to two of Antimony, for fear the flagration should be too quick, and we keep all the matter longer upon the fire than we do the Crocus metallorum, to give the Regulus time to separate from its Faeces. Obs. 5. That you must powder, and mingle together the said matters; that you must not make use of a glazed pot; that you must not put in your matter, till your pot be red hot: that you must not put it in all at a time, but by little and little; and that presently after every pro∣jection,
you must cover the Pot with its cover: That you must stir your matter with a stick, for the reasons alledged in our observations upon the Liver of Antimony. Obs. 6. That the Regulus of Antimony is no∣thing but an Antimony opened, and melted by the Niter, somewhat more intimately, than the Liver of Antimony; because of the addition that is made here of the Tartar and Charcoal; and also, by reason of the continuation of the fire, which devests it of its terrestreity, and of a good part of its venomous Sulphur, and flowers: but yet it is endowed with a great emetick, and purgative vertue. Therefore we have not used here much Niter; and though the fire has been more violent than in the Liver of Antimony, yet it has not been strong enough to banish all the vomitive and purgative vertue, as shall be done in the Diaphore∣tick Antimony. The Vertues and Ʋse: It is a milder vomative, and a gentler purgative, than the Crocus metallo∣rum: and it is used in three different ways. 1. It may be powder'd and infus'd, and so make a Vinum emeticum, as has been said in the Crocus metallorum. 2. We make of it eternal Pills. 3. We make Cups of it, in which Wine infus'd, becomes purgative, and emetick. 4. It serves also to make the Diaphoretick, by calcining it with Niter, either in a fire of suppression, or in the Sun-beams by a burning-glass. To make the everlasting Pills, you must have a Mould for leaden Bullets, of the bigness of an ordinary pill: lute, with our Lute, the lower
parts, and all the sides of your Mould, to the end that your melted liquor being thereby kept in, may be fitly and handsomly shaped into the form of Pills; then take as much as you please of your Regulus, and put it into an iron melting spoon, with a long handle: which set, upon a great fire of suppression, or in a wind Furnace: cover the said spoon with a dry Tyle, not a wet one, lest it should fly, then pour coals upon your spoon, thus covered, and give a melting fire, till your matter be red hot, and perfectly melted, and as shining and bright as quicksilver; then pour gently your matter into your mould, and when it is cold, take out your Pills, which stick all one to another; se∣parate them; and with a knife even them so, as they may have no unequal parts, which might hurt the throat, esophage the Maw, the Guts, or the Fundament. One of these Pills may serve you for ever, tak∣ing it out of the close-stool; and then making it clean for another time: for one Pill of dragm has the same effect, as the ordinary dose of Vinum emeticum, and works as well, as if you took three or four of these Pills at a time. As for the mould of the Cup, it must be of sand and can serve you but once: your Cup must be as thick as a Crown piece: you must make your addresses to those that cast Bells, to make you a mould: you may make one of Brass, but it will cost you too much, and yet will not do so well as one of sand.
The Regulus of Mars. TAke two pound of Male Antimony, one pound of Tartar, and as much of Common Niter, two ounces of Charcoal, and six ounces of filings of steel, or iron, powder all these, and mingle them well together, and operate in the same man∣ner, as you did in making the Regulus of Antimo∣ny. The Operation done, will produce you thir∣teen ounces of Regulus, proceeding from Seven ounces of Antimony, and six of filings; whereby you may perceive, that the Antimony loses much of its smooty Sulphur, and its sulphureous malig∣nant flowers. Obs. 1. That we add here the filings, to the end we may fix the vomative quality of Antimony, but you must not put above three ounces to each pound of Antimony, lest it should be so fixt, as to lose its purgative vertue, and contract the na∣ture of a metal. Obs. 2. That we employ, not so much Char∣coal in this Regulus of Mars, as in the prece∣dent Regulus of Antimony, in recompense where∣of we put the filings, which produce the same effect. Obs. 3. That out of the Faeces of this Regulus, is also made the golden Diaphoretick Sulphur. Obs. 4. That the Regulus of Mars, is nothing but Antimony perfectly opened by Niter, and devested of its venemous qualities by a long fu∣sion, though not long enough, to evaporate,
all its purgative Sulphur. Its Emetick vertue is fixt, by the Addition of Mars. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It purges gently by stool without provoking to vomit; if it be infused in white Wine, or if you make of it everlasting Pills, or Cups, in the same dosis and methods we have described in the Regulus of Antimony. Nay more, if you powder one pound of it, and tye it up loosely in a coorse linnen, and then let it infuse in a quart of the decoction of sudorifick Woods, and Roots, you may cure the Pox with∣out fluxing by Mercurial remedies. There is also made with the Regulus of Antimony, and Niter calcin'd together, an excellent Diaphoretick Antimony; but observe, that that which is made, either with crude Antimony, or with the Regulus of Antimony, provokes vomiting, except it be very well washed; whereas that which is made with the Regulus of Mars, never incites to vomit. The golden Diaphoretick Sulphur. TAke of the Faeces of Regulus Antimony, or of the Regulus of Mars, and boil them a quarter of an hour in common water, in a Brass kettle, to make thereof a dark yellow Lexivium, which filtrate through a brown Paper. Gather together all your filtrations, and put them into a glass, or stone vessel, but not into a glazed ear∣then
then one; lest the Salts of your matter, should corrode the Lead, or Vernish, and so black your powder; then pour upon them two or three spoonfuls of Vinegar, or Spirit of Niter, Vitriol, or Sulphur, or some other acid; the stronger it is, the higher will be the colour of your Precipitate; for, these acid Spirits do much more vivifie colours, than Vinegar does. You will see presently, that your Faeces will curdle, become yellowish, and stink; your Curd being setled, pour away the Liquor, which you may keep to wash your Bedsteds withal, to keep them clean from Punaises: then upon your Curds, throw common Water; and you shall see them precipitate into a powder of a Saffron-colour. Pour away this first Water, and pour on some more, in great quantity, that you may at once sweeten your powder, and take away from it its ill smell, and its emetick vertue; then having poured away this last Water, filtrate the residue through a brown Paper, in which let it dry at leisure in the shade. Obs. 1. That the Faeces of both these Reguluses, do contain a Sulphureous smoot of Antimony, and a fix'd Salt of Niter and Tartar: therefore common Water is easily impregnated therewith by ebullition. Obs. 2. That the Acid, which you pour upon the said Lexivium filtrated, produces three diffe∣rent effects; of which the first is, To separate the sulphureous and saltish Smoot, from the com∣mon Water, and so it appears in Curds. The second is, To give a gross yellow colour to the
Curds and Water. The third is, To make the said Curds and Water stink abominably. It pro∣duces the first effect; because, that the Antimo∣nial Sulphur, dissolved by a saltish and lexivial dissolvant, remains incorporated with him, till you pour in a little of a salinous Precipitant; which being of a different nature to the dissol∣vant, it happens that these two Salts, thus min∣gled, begin to whet one another, and by their action, and re-action, cause an ebullition, evapo∣ration, and dissipation of the sharpest part of the dissolvant. So that growing weak, he is forced to let go his hold, and suffer the body he had seized upon, to fall away to the bottom of the Vessel. The Acid produces the second effect; because all Acids do enliven, and enlighten co∣lours; now the colour of Sulphur is yellow, from whence it comes, that this Antimonial Sulphur, which in its dissolution was of a dark yellow, in its precipitation, becomes now of a fine light yellow. Now all salinous Spirits, do vivifie co∣lours, because, they are of a detergent nature, and do cleanse, and take away all the greasie, ob∣scure smoot, which did darken the lustre of the natural colour, as linnen grows white and clean by bucking. The Acid produces the third effect; because Sulphur, when it is heated, is naturally stinking; now it is heated by the action of the Precipitant, and re-action of the Dissolvant: This may be observed in the hot waters of Mineral Baths, which stink extreamly of Sulphur; because a bituminous and a sulphureous spring, happening to joyn with a nitrous, and vitriolous spring,
do whet, and heat one another, and so produce the sulphureous smell. Obs. 3. That if you pour a good quantity of common VVater upon these Curds, that presently they are precipitated into a yellow powder; be∣cause, the said VVater dissolves all the Salts that remained in the said Curds; so that then the Antimonial Sulphur, being free from all tyes and bonds, precipitates it self into a powder of a much livelier colour, than that of the Curds: because, now the Sulphur has thrown off the Salts, and appears under its own natural colour of Sulphur. Obs. 4. That the golden Diaphoretick Sulphur, is nothing but a fix'd Sulphur of Antimony, drawn from the Faeces of Antimony, opened and melted by Niter: for, the volatil Sulphur of An∣timony is so much the more venomous, as it is volatil; and that which is least volatil, is vio∣lently vomitive and purgative: but, this being fix'd, is only diaphoretick and opening: and for a proof that the said Diaphoretick Sulphur is but a fix'd Sulphur of Antimony, do but let the said Faeces of the Regulus of Antimony lye two or three days upon the ground, and there will rise of it self, without any Artifice, a kind of a yellow Moss all over your Faeces, which is nothing but the true Sulphur of Antimony purified. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It is a powerful Diuretick and Diaphoretick, it serves principally to pro∣voke the Monthly Courses of Women, being taken in the weight of twenty or thirty Grains, either alone, or with Saffron, Savin, and Sene,
of each ten or twelve Grains, infusing them twelve hours in White-wine, and so continuing for two or three days together; to the same end, may be received by a Tunnel, the vapour of the Lexivium of the said Faeces, before their preci∣pitation into Curds. And take notice here, that if the said Powder have not been carefully wash'd and sweetned, that it may chance to purge, and provoke vomit too. The Diaphoretick Antimony, or the Diaphoretick Mineral. TAke one pound of Male Antimony, or of the Regule of Antimony, or of the Regulus of Mars, and four pound of pure Salt-peter; powder them very fine, and searce your Antimony through a Silk Sieve; then mingle them together, to the end the Niter may well inflame the Antimony; in the mean time, set a Camion, or great Crucible upon a Round, in a great circulatory Fire; when your Cruci∣ble is red-hot, then with a wooden Ladle, throw in a Ladle full of your matter, cover your Pot to keep in the smoak; which being past, do as at first, and put in another Ladle full, so con∣tinuing, till you have consumed all your matter; then continue the Fire, taking off the cover from your Crucible, till there come out no more va∣pours, which will be in half an hours time; after which, take off your Crucible: for, if you did let it stand any longer, your matter would become a
red Liquor, which being cold, would settle in a lump, like the Liver of Antimony, and would have the same Vertues, because the excessive heat would have opened its body a-fresh: then, take out your matter by Ladle-fulls, with a Tin Ladle, and throw it as hot as you can, into a great stone Pan, full of cold Water; and do not throw it in of a sudden, lest some of the matter should sparkle upon your hands and face; but dip in your Ladle by little and little; when you have done all your matter, then wash your hands, and with them stir and break the said matter, precipitated to the bottom, till the Water become as white as Milk, and your matter as small as you can make it. Sepa∣rate by Inclination the said milky Water from its Faeces, who are a fix'd Niter, undissolvable in Water, and which you may throw away: Let this milky Water stand three or four hours, to the end, that all your white powder may preci∣pitate to the bottom; then separate by Inclina∣tion this Water, which will be good for the Itch: then pour on more Water, and do so, till it come away insipid. Having poured off the last Water, there will remain a kind of white Pap, which put into a Coffin of white Paper, over a glass or earthen Vesica, so all the Water will run into the Vesica, and there will remain a white lump, which you must dry leisurely in the shade, upon the bottom of a Sieve. Being very dry, and in little white brittle pieces, you may keep them so, or powder them, and put them into a glass Vial, well stopped. If you desire to reduce this Ma∣gistery into Trochishs, you may do thus. When
it is yet Pap, put it into a glass Tunnel, and stop the bottom of it with your finger, till your mat∣ter be setled; then let go your finger, and let your matter drop out, in drops, upon a Marble, and so it will be formed into Trochisks; dry them in the shade, and not in the Sun: for, the rever∣beration of its beams, would alter the white co∣lour, which is the beauty of these Remedies: all Magisteries may be trochiskated in the same way, and then must be kept in a glass Vial well stop'd. Obs. 1. That in this Composition, we make use of Male Antimony, rather than of the Fe∣male; because, being heavier, it is better; and for the same reason we use the Regulus of Anti∣mony, and rather the Regulus of Mars, because it is already more purified of the venomous part of its volatil substance. Now in this Remedy we do pretend, that all that part of the Antimony which has been opened by the Niter, is absolute∣ly devested of its purgative and emetick substance, that is, of all its volatil Salt, and Sulphur: there∣fore we ought not to use the Female Antimony, which has more of this volatil substance than the Male. But the Regulus of Antimony is better; because, as it is devested, as well of a considera∣ble part of its volatil substance, as of its terre∣streity, it is fitter to be purified, and entirely re∣fin'd from all its malignous qualities: and yet the Regulus of Mars is best of all; because, in it the emetick Vertue is already fixed by Mars, in∣corporated with the Antimony. You must also take notice, That they that seek the Philosophers
Stone in Antimony, prefer Mineral Antimony before all others, thinking, that because it has not been melted, it is impregnated with all its vertue; and therefore ought to be used also in this Operation: but without diving any further in this Well of Democritus, I will only say, That for the use of Physick, Mineral Antimony is the most malignant of all, and it is devested of these ill qualities, only by long and reiterated fusions and evaporations. Obs. 2. That we use here very fine Niter, because we are not only to open, and melt the Antimony (for common Niter would do that) but also so to penetrate the Antimony, as to cause an eva∣poration of all its volatil, purgative, and emetick substance. Now common Niter cannot do this, because, having a terrestrious substance, and a fix'd Salt in it self, it would not be fit to maintain a long and penetrating fusion. Obs. 3. That for the same reason we put three times as much Niter upon the said Dosis of An∣timony, and for the same reason we keep the An∣timony, and the Niter upon the Fire half an hour after their Flagration and Projection, till all the smoak be vanished, and with it, the emetick and purgative qualities, which the Niter had opened, and set loose in the Antimony: but, if after that, you continue your Fire, it will produce the same effect in the Antimony, that the Niter did; that is, it will discover, and bring forth a new eme∣tick, and purgative vertue, as we see it is done in the Vitrum Antimonii, or glass of Antimony, and yet not be able to make it evaporate: for, that
belongs to Niter to do: and by this you will per∣ceive, that one must be a good Artist, that pre∣pares this Remedy well. Obs. 4. That you must with all the care imagi∣nable, wash, and edulcorate your Magisterie of An∣timony, else in stead of being simply Diaphoretick, and opening, it would prove vomitive; because, that though the volatil part of your Niter has carried away with it all the volatil substance of the Anti∣mony, that it had un-chain'd, and set at liberty, yet the fix'd Salt of the said Niter, remaining in the Antimony, retains some part of the emetick substance; therefore, it is necessary, by frequent Lotions, to dissolve the said fix'd Salt, and so ex∣tract it. And here again, you see the great pains and care that an Artist is at, in preparing of this Remedy, so excellent, and so much used. Obs. 5. That the Diaphoretick Antimony, is nothing but an Antimony most intimately pene∣trated, and opened by Niter, and all its emetick and purgative vertues evaporated, and carried away with the said Niter, by a long and great Fire, and then afterwards edulcorated by washing and Lotions. Its Ʋse and Vertues: 'Tis a powerful Diapho∣retick, and an excellent Diuretick, apperitive, and desopilative: it is used with good success against all Venereal Diseases; as old Gonorrhaea's, being mingled with some Venice Turpentine, that has been brought to the consistence of Colophone, as we shall teach in the Chapter of the Diuretick Pills. It is very good against the Small Pox, in the weight of a Five Shillings piece of Gold, in
Water, or Syrup of Cinamon, taking it three days together, to make the small pox come out, and dry; against all opilations, and tumours of the Spleen, the Pancreas, and the Mesentery; incorporating it with the Salt of Tamaris, the Mercurius dulcis, the Crocus martis apperitivus, and scummed Honey, as it is here frequently practised with good success. The Black and Acid Oyl of Antimony. TAke of Antimony, fine Niter, Brimstone, of each one pound, powder them and mingle them well together; then fire this mixtion, in the same way, and manner, and in the same Vessels that we taught to make the Spirit of Sulphur in. There will rise a va∣pour, as red as blood, and there will stick to the sides of the Bell, and of the Pan, and upon the surface of the water, a little skin of the same colour: all your Matter being consumed, take your red flowers and mingle them with your wa∣ter, which is already impregnated, with the acid Spirit of these three Minerals. Put all this into a glass Matrass, unluted, and let it be but three quarters full. Pose your Matrass on a Round, in a small circulatory Furnace, continuing a gentle fire, till your flowers melt, and go to the bottom, and that there appears no Sulphur
swimming upon the Liquor, which will look thick, and of a red dark blackish colour: but take care, that the ebullition be not such, as to run over; or break your Matrass. 'Tis in this case, that one must be a good Artist, and acquire by attention, reason, and experience, a way of Operating surely, and easily. This done, take off your Matrass, and pour out your liquor very hot into a white earthen Pot. When it is cool, separate by inclination the black and acid Oyl, and you will find in the bottom of your Pot a congealed lump of yellow reddish Sul∣phur, keep the said Oyl in a Glass, well stop'd, and keep your Sulphur to serve you in the making of the Salt of Brimstone. Obs. 1. That Niter is here used to open the body of Antimony, the Brimstone is employed to fix its emetick quality; and the Brimstone, if it were not joyned with Niter, would not be able to inflame the Antimony: for the Brim∣stone being stifled in these vessels, would presently go out, but the Niter once a-fire, though after∣wards stifled, yet sets the other combustible bodies that are with it, a-fire also, till they be con∣sumed. Obs. 2. That the smoak and flowers of this Matter are red, because of the Sulphur of the Antimony, which is redder than ordinary Sul∣phur, and so communicates its redness to the ordi∣nary Sulphur; it is not the Niter that gives this colour: for, we see that in the Diaphoretick An∣timony, it whitens the Antimony.
Obs. 3. That this Oyl of Antimony is of a blackish red, because of the yellow tincture of Sulphur, mingled with the black tincture of An∣timony: and this Oyl is acid, because of the Spi∣rits of Sulphur and Antimony, which both are acid: for, as for the Spirits of Niter, they are all evaporated with the water, in which they were, and the Spirits of Sulphur remain to fix those of Antimony. Obs. 4. That the black and acid Oyl of Anti∣mony, is but an acid Spirit of Antimony, fixt by the Spirit of Sulphur. Its Ʋse and Vertues: 'Tis a good diuretick, and desopilative; it purges gently without pro∣voking vomit: the Dosis is, from three to six drops, in a Glass of a Laxative decoction, or in some broth. The Butter of Antimony, of which is made the Mercurius vitae, or the Emetick powder, or the powder of Algarot, and the Cinnaber of Antimony. TAke a good corrosive sublimate, and Male Antimony (or rather of the Regulus of An∣timony) of each four ounces, powder them, then mingle them, and put them into a glass Retort, luted all over, except in one place towards the
top, and then you must leave a gap to look through: fill your Retort quite full, if you will; for there is no danger of the matters run∣ing out of the Retort in substance; and besides, a gentle fire will presently distill as much of it, as is desired. Pose your Retort upon a Round, in a small wheel fire, and fit to it a Glass Recei∣ver, there will presently rise a white vapour, which being dissolved, will distill in form of a whitish Oyl, call'd the Oyl of Antimony, and which in the Receiver, congeals to a kind of Butter. Take great care your fire be not too strong, lest your Mercury revived, should come into the Receiver, and the Cinnaber of Antimony likewise, for that would render your powder yellow, which ought to be white: give then a moderate heat, till by the gap left in your Re∣tort, you perceive all your Matter to be melted into a lump, clear and transparent, like melted Silver; and then you may be sure, that the Oily substance is distilled, therefore take off your Retort. This done, warm your Recipient so melt the Butter within it, which pour out immediately into a small Glass Retort, unluted, and set it in the same Furnace, with the same degree of heat, fitting a Receiver, and so rectifie this oyl once, for to rectifie it twice, would be to diminish so much of its vertue, that in stead of seven grains for a Dose, you would be forc'd to give fourteen. But observe, That if in either of these distillations any reviv'd Mercury should be raised by too great a fire, and so come
into the Receiver: then separate gently, by in∣clination, the Oyl that swims on the top. This rectification being done, you must warm again your Receiver, so as to melt the Butter; and when it is melted, pour it presently into a Glass Bell, full of cold water; the water will become as white as Milk, stir it a little, and your Butter will precipitate to the bottom, in form of a white powder: as soon as you perceive that, separate by inclination this first water, which we call Pontick, that is, Sea-water, and is Mineral; for, you must not let this first water, lye long upon your Precipitate, lest this water should contract an aciditie, as great as that of Spirit of Vitriol, and so corrode, dissolve, and diminish a good part of your Precipitate. The Water of this first Lotion, being poured off, pour on presently as much again, and stir your Bell as you did before: then separate by inclination, and continue so doing, till your powder be edulcorated, and your water come away insipid: then filtrate the rest in white Paper, as has been said in the Chapter of the Diaphoretick Antimony. You shall have a very white powder, called the Emetick powder of Algarot; which keep in a glass, close stopped. Towards the end of the first distillation, in your luted Retort; if you have a mind to have the Cinnaber of Antimony, give a violent fire of entire suppression, without any Receiver to your Retort; continue it, till your Retort be sunk and almost melted. This fire will drive the Mercury to the end, and middle of the neck
of your Retort, and when the Operation is done, it will be either revived into Quick-silver, or turned into a gray blackish powder; there will also be driven to the mouth of the Retort, an Antimonial substance, which at the end of the Operation, will appear in form of a crust, as thick as the back of a Knife, and which outward∣ly is of a grey colour; but being pared, is within red, and is called Cinnaber of Antimony. Now in the bottom of this luted Retort, you will find a congealed lump, which is the rest of your An∣timony revived: For, in this Operation, there rises but a small portion of your Antimony, to mingle with the corrosive Mercury, and there rises a little more by the violence of the fire, to make this Cinnaber of Antimony; but the greatest part remains in the Retort revived. Now to see these three substances together, after this violent fire, you must take off your Retort, let it cool, then shake the neck to make the Quick-silver fall out, whether revi∣ved, or in a grey Powder; then break your Re∣tort, to find in the neck the Cinnaber of An∣timony, and in the bottom a lump of the said An∣timony, melted and revived to its first na∣ture. This done, weigh your Butter of Anti∣mony, and your Mercury, as well that which is revived, as that which is in powder, and you shall see, that all this will weigh a little more than the Corrosive sublimate, which you have made use of in this Operation. Weigh like∣wise the said Cinnaber of Antimony, and the lump of Antimony revived, and you'l see, that all
this weighs a little less than the Antimony, which you have employed in this Operation; and that shews, that the said Emetick powder comes partly from the Mercury, and partly from the Antimony. Obs. 1. That we use here corrosive, not dulci∣fied Mercury; because, the dulcified having lost its corrosive Salts, would not be able to open the Antimony, and turn it into Oyl: and besides, there would not result out of it an Emetick, because Mercury does provoke vomit, but by its corrosive Salts. Obs. 2. That we use here the best Antimo∣ny, nay the best Regulus, because, being well purified and separated from its Sulphur, and its most malignant salts, there is produced of it a more gentle Emetick; and therefore it is better and whiter with the Regulus, than with the Male Antimony; but then, you will have no Cinnaber by augmenting your fire, but only there will stick a Mercurial Chrystalline Salt to the sides of the Retort. Obs. 3. That the Emetick powder of Alga∣rot, is nothing but a good quantity of Mer∣cury, made volatil by a less quantity of An∣timony, by the means of the fire, and the volatil Salts that are in the corrosive sublimate, then devested of the said Salts, and sweetned by Lotions. The vertue and use of the powder, is known by its name, which speaks it to be a vomitive, and that it performs much more gently, than the Crocus metallorum; because, the Antimony
we employ is purer, and in less quantity; and be∣cause, that the great washings have carried away the venomous Salts. Its Dose in persons grown up, is five Grains; you may give eight in some Conserve, or the yolk of an Egg, or in any Li∣quor appropriated. The Ʋse and Vertues of the Butter of Antimony: 'Tis a powerful Corrosive, it eats away Warts, and burns pocky Cancers in a moment: but, if it be applyed to any nervous part, it causes an in∣flamation for four and twenty hours: it is ex∣cellent for the exfoliation of Bones, and for the Gangrene. The Ʋse and Vertues of the Pontick water: It is excellent for Ulcers, Itch, Scabs, the Gangrene; you may use it in stead of Spirit of Vitriol, by mingling three or four drops in a Julip, in putrid and burning Feavers. The Ʋse and Vertues of the Cinnaber of Antimony: It is a great Sudorifick in the Pox. The Dosis is, from eight to fifteen Grains. Bezoard Mineral. TAke as much as you will of Butter of An∣timony, melt it gently before the Fire, then pour it into a glass Bell, or Cucurbite, set it in a Chimney, lest the vapours, which you must raise, should offend you. Pour upon it some Spi∣rit of Niter, drop by drop, for else the ebullition would be such, and the red vapours so strong,
that the matter would run out of the Vessels, and the vapours hurt your Brain. Continue this Injection, till the Mercury and Antimony, which are in form of Butter, be absolutely dissolved by the said Spirit; which you shall know, by pouring on some new Spirit of Niter: for, if there be no ebullition, nor smoaking, then the dissolution is performed; you must pour as much Spirit of Ni∣ter in weight, as you have used Butter of Anti∣mony; your dissolution will appear all along of a yellow colour. As soon as it is done, pour up∣on it, all at once, a quart of Sea-water actually cold; this Precipitant will presently make all your Liquor of a milky colour, and will preci∣pitate your Butter to the bottom, into a very white powder, if you let it stand ten or twelve hours, to the end your Magistery have more time to precipitate entirely: then separate by in∣clination your Sea-water, impregnated with the Spirit of Niter, which was the dissolvant, and pour on common Water, till it come away sweet and insipid; filter the rest through a white Paper, dry your powder, and keep it in a glass Vial well stopped. Obs. 1. That, if instead of Sea-water, you had made use of common Water for your Precipita∣tion, you would have turn'd your Dissolution in∣to a white Liquor, but you would never have precipitated your powder; because, that though common Water does much weaken the dissol∣vant, yet it does not do it so much as Sea-water, which, because of its Salt, contrary to the Salt of Niter, does fight with the said Niter, and in the
conflict, causes the sharpest, and most active part of the Niter to evaporate; and so to forsake its hold, as to let the Butter of Antimony fall, and precipitate to the bottom, in form of a white powder. Obs. 2. That, that which we call Sea-water, is made thus, Take four ounces of common Salt, boyl it to dissolution in a quart of Water, in a brass Kettle, then filtrate it through the brown Paper. Obs. 3. That in the great ebullition and effu∣mation, caused by the Spirit of Niter, all the emetick and purgative vertue, which was in the said butter of Antimony, is evaporated, and at last carried away by reiterated Lotions. Obs. 4. That Bezoard Mineral is nothing else but a Magistery, or Precipitate, compounded of a good quantity of Mercury, and a small quantity of Antimony, both being calcin'd, and opened by the Salts of the corrosive Mercury, then de∣vested of the said Salts, by the Spirit of Niter, so that there remains in this Magistery, no other but a Cordial, Bezoardick, Sudorifick vertue. Its Ʋse and Vertue: 'Tis an excellent Sudori∣fick against the Pox, the Scurvy, all putrid and venomous Feavors. The Dose is, from eight to twelve Grains, in some Conserve; but observe, that if you mingle it with Conserve of Red Roses, it becomes immediately green, for the Reasons that we shall alledge hereafter.
The Calcination, or Calx of Lead. TAke Lead, beat it into fine thin plates, and take also of powder'd Brimstone as much, lay them stratum super stratum, in a glaz'd Pot, which set upon two Bricks in the Furnace of a great wheel Fire, and half Suppression; there leave it, till the Brimstone (which of its self, by the heat of the Pot, will take fire) be quite out, and have a care you do not let it stand longer, for fear of melting your Lead, and so reducing it to its first metallick consistence; therefore take off your Pot, and with an Iron Spatula stir your calcin'd matter, to hinder it from getting in∣to a lump; then take it out, and powder it in a Morter, then searce it in a silken Sieve, till it be reduced to an impalpable powder. Obs. 1. That we use brimstone to calcine Lead, because nothing but Brimstone will take Fire, all alone, and burn a good while; Niter would not take fire all alone with Lead, and indeed ne∣ver is inflamable, but when he is joyned with some combustible Body, as Tartar, Antimony, Charcoal, or Brimstone; and if we did use here Niter, with some of these Bodies, its flame would be too swift to calcine Lead. Obs. 2 That we use a vernish'd Pot for this Calcination, because our Calx is of the same Na∣ture with the Lead of the Pot; and therefore is not in danger of being spoyled: and besides, the vernish will not be corroded by the Sulphur, be∣cause
it is not a dissolvant powerful enough to cor∣rode a glazing, so dried, and fastned: for, if the Lead which you will calcine, were not beaten into very thin plates, and Sulphur mingled with it, e∣very where, it would hardly be calcin'd. Obs. 3. That the Calx of Lead thus calcin'd, is nothing but Lead opened, and dissolved by the Spirit, and Salt of Sulphur; and the said Lead will remain in the nature, of a Calx, but as long as there will be some of the Spirit, and Salt of Sulphur incorporated with it: therefore, if you continue your Fire any time after the Calcina∣tion, you will evaporate this Spirit and Salt, and so your Lead, devested of them both, will return to its first metallick Nature. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It serves to dry, and cica∣trize old Ulcers, when they are cleansed before, and almost fill'd with flesh, by mingling it with some Unguent, as the Diapompholixa, with Hogs grease, reducing it to the consistence of a Plaister. Out of it also is drawn the Salt of Saturn, instead of Lytharge, Ceruse, or Minium.
The sweet Chrystals of Saturn, the sweet Salt of Saturn, not Crystal∣lized. The Oyl of Saturn, the Magistery, or Precipitate of Saturn. PUt as much distill'd Vinegar, as you please, into a glazed earthen Pan, set it upon a tre∣foot, making under a Fire of Coals, and dry Wood, till it begin to simper, and boyl slight∣ly; then put into it by little and little, as much as you please of Lytharge of Gold, or of Silver pow∣der'd, stirring it continually with a wooden Spa∣tula: after it has boyled a little, take off your Pan, and let your Vinegar which is impregnated with the Lytharge settle a while, then pour off the said Vinegar, while it is warm: this done, pour more Vinegar upon the Lytharge, left in the Pan, boyl it, stir it, separate it, and then put more, doing so till all the Lytharge be gone; then filtrate your Dissolutions, while they are warm, through a Coffin of brown Paper, over a glass Cucurbit, which set in a Sand-fire, up to the neck in the Sand, and evaporate all your Filtra∣tions, till they become as red as Bloud, and are covered with a little skin, or Pellicule: then pour them out into little white Dishes, and there let them cool; when they are cold, you shall see that a
great part of the Liquor is congealed into Cry∣stals, or white Christalline Needles, as sweet as Sugar to the taste, and as thin as the Needles of Male Antimony: then gently pour out of these same Dishes a red Oyl, with a Sugar of Saturn, left in the bottom un-crystallized: then take out your Crystals, and keep them in a glass Viol well stopped with Cork, else they will fall into a Calx; and in another Viol keep the said Oyl of Saturn, whh is nothing but the tincture of Saturn, drawn by the Vinegar. If by chance, in evapo∣rating your Dissolutions, you were gone beyond the Pellicule, so as your matter begins to look thick and glutinous, then there would be no cry∣stallizing of it; and therefore, evaporate it to a driness, to make the Salt of Saturn, not crystal∣lized, or make the Magisterie of Saturn. Which is made thus: Take the said red glutinous Oyl of Saturn, or the Dissolution of Saturn, evaporated to the Pellicule, and pour on three or four ounces of either of them, three or four spoonfuls of Spi∣rit of Sulphur, which presently will cause the Dissolution of Suturn to curdle into white Curds, which by little and little will precipitate to the bottom into a white powder. This done, pour on common water, to take away the acidity, both of the Vinegar and Spirit of Sulphur; but pour on Water but once, else all your powder would be spent in a second Water; because, this powder of Saturn, being half calcin'd, is made dissolvable in Water by that little Vinegar, which remains incorporated with it; separate by Inclination this first Water, and filtrate the rest
through a Coffin of white Paper, or make Trochisks of it, through a glass Tunnel, as has been taught in the Chapter of the Diaphoretick Antimony. Obs. 1. That you must take a glazed earthen Pan, not a Stone, or Glass one; because there is no fear the Vinegar should corrode the Lead of the Vernish: for having been baked in an O∣ven, it sticks so fast to the earth, that the Vine∣gar cannot corrode it, neither if it did, were it amiss, since it is here used but for Saturn; a stone one would be unfit, for it would fly, and break, and that happens to all vessels▪ of this Ware, except to Retorts; for, there the fire circulating equally on all sides, hinders its breaking, which is not the like case in Pans: for, there the bottom only being heated, and the rest cold, they easily break, because of their great driness. For, they are made of one part of a stone powder'd, which is as dry, and as brittle as Glass, and of one part of lean earth, which is not unctuous at all; a Brass Basin would not be proper; for the distilled Vinegar would spend its force in extracting the Salt of the Verdigreece, which mingled with that of Saturn, would make it look green. Ob. 2. That in this Operation we make use of Lytharge rather than of Ceruse, or Minium; be∣cause, the Lytharge, having passed the fire of Coppel, is a more Spongeous open body; and therefore more penetrable by the distilled Vine∣gar, and so will yield a greater quantity of Salt and Ceruce, which has a closer body, be∣cause
it has been opened only by distilled Vine∣gar, which extracts the Ceruse from the Lead, and for the Minium, though it be Ceruse, made red in a Reverberatory fire; yet its body is not so open, as the body of Lytharge; because, it is so re-united, that it is almost recondensed into its Metallick nature. Obs. 3. That before we put the Lytharge into the Vinegar, we make the said Vinegar boil a little; to the end, it may the easilier penetrate, and dissolve so much of the Saturn, as it can load it self withal, and we let the said Lytharge boyl but a little time; because, no more is re∣quired for the Vinegar to impregnate it self with Saturn; and if it should stand any longer on the fire, the evaporation would be begun, which ought not to be, till all your dissolutions are together. Obs. 4. That we use here distilled Vinegar for a dissolvant; because, it is not necessary to have a more powerful corrosive to dissolve Lead, which is a soft penetrable Metal; yet, simple Vi∣negar would not be so fit, as the distilled; as well, because it is not so penetrating, as because it is not separated from its flegm: besides, if it were red, it might spoil the white colour of your Cry∣stals, or Magisterie. Obs. 5. That all your Lytharge is dissolved at last, by reiterated additions of Vinegar; because, that Lytharge is all Lead, and if there should re∣main any part of it un-dissolved, it would be, because you have not poured Vinegar enough on.
Obs. 6. That you must stir with a Wooden patule, this dissolution of Saturn, and not with an iron one; because, the iron would black it, whereas your design is to preserve the white∣ness of the Salt, which you are to draw from it; and iron blacks, as well by its self, as by its Vitriol. Obs. 7. That all your dissolutions being put together, you must evaporate them to the con∣sumption of three parts, and till there appear a saltish skin, or Pellicule upon the surface of the Liquor; else they would not congeal into Cry∣stals when cold. For, having too much flegm, that salt Spirit of the Vinegar, which hath dis∣solved Saturn, remains dissolved its self, in the flegm: but, when by a gentle ebullition, and evaporation of the said flegm, the Salt Spirit remains alone, then it Chrystalises easily in a cold place, since it begins to do it already in a hot one, as you see it does by its Pellicule. Obs. 8 That we pour this dissolution, thus evaporated, into white ware dishes; because being warm, it would break a stone, or Glass one, and in an earthen glazed one, the Cry∣stals, because of the glasing, would spoil their whiteness Obs. 9. That these Crystals are in figure like to needles, and somewhat triangular. Some are small, and those are in the bottom; others are greater, and those are upon the brims, and have more of a triangular figure: they are white, be∣cause they are a Calx, or Philosophick calcina∣tion
of Saturn, made by a dissolvant, which can∣not alter their colour; and they are in taste a little acid, and very sweet, or sugarins, acid, because of the Vinegar: sweet, because that Lead, being the sweetest of all Metals, has like∣wise a very sweet Salt, and thus the Salt of Lead is amongst the Salts of Metals the same, that the Salt of the Indian Canes is almost the Salts of vege∣tables. Obs. 10. That when you pour two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of Sulphur upon your dis∣solution, then this acid, being of a contrary na∣ture to the acid of the Vinegar, fights with it, and weakens it so, as to make it lose its hold, and so your Lead presently curdles, and is precipitated into a white powder. Obs. 11 That the Spirit of Sulphur is fitter for this precipitation, than any other acid, be∣cause it makes whiter, sweeter, and more plea∣sant, not only this, but all Magisteries. The Spirit of Vitriol blacks; the Oyl of Tarter has an unpleasant taste of Urin; the Spirit of Salt would be apt to fix with this Magistery; and the Spirit of Niter is too sharp. Obs. 12: That the Crystals of Saturn are nothing but Lead, dissolved and calcin'd Phi∣losophically in distilled Vinegar, then coagulated into Crystals, by the evaporation of the flegm, and part of the sharpest Spirits of the Vinegar, and so yet retaining a good part of the acid of the said Vinegar. And as for the Magistery, it is likewise Lead dissolved, and calcin'd by Vinegar, then eva∣porated, then precipitated into a white powder,
by the Spirit of Sulphur, or some other acid, and at last, devested by lotions of the acid and sharp part of the Vinegar, and the said Spirit of Sulphur. The Use and Virtue of the dissolution of Sa∣turn, before its evaporation into Crystals, or into the Magistery, is to cool, and appease the pain, and and hardness of Inflamations; take away redness of the face, and Eresipilae's; the affected part being washed with lint dip'd in it. This mixtion is of a milky colour; and therefore is called Virgina's milk. The Crystals and Magistery have the same vertue, to cool and appease the pain, take away redness, soften hardness caused by inflamation, and attenuate and resolve Tumours: for this purpose, you put five or six grains of them, and as much white Vitriol into a Glass of Rose water, and Plan∣tin mingled, and then in it we dip a thin slice of raw Veal, and lay it upon your Eyes inflam'd, and full of pain, and redness. The same water may serve for the redness of the face, and Erisipelas, dipping in it Linnen, and so applying it to the part affected: as for the oyl of Saturn, it may be mingled with some of your cooling unguents, as the Cerat of Gallen, or the unguentum rosatum, or Populeum, to mollifie, soften, and take away the redness of all inflamed parts; and, if you have not this Oyl, you make use of the Salt of Saturn in its place, for the same end.
The Crocus Martis aperitivus. TAke of filings of Steel, or Iron, two parts, and of powder'd Brimstone one, mingle them together, and put them into an unglazed Earthen Pot, set it upon two bricks in a Furnace of Reverberation and Suppression, there let it stand, till all the flame of your Brimstone be spent, and after that, give the fire continually for an hour, then take off your pot, break it while it is hot, and presently put the matter into an iron, or Brass Morter, and powder it while it is warm, then spread this powder (which then will be of a colour of Violets) upon a Marble, the air will change the colour to brown, then powder it again, and searce it very fine, and keep it in a glass well stopt. Obs. 1. That we use Brimstone, to open and calcine the body of Steel, or Iron; but, that we put half as much Brimstone, as Iron; because, we intend here but a slight calcination: and the more you put, the stronger will be the cal∣cination, and your Mars will be the more ape∣ritive, or opening; they are powder'd toge∣ther, that they may the better penetrate one a∣nother. Obs. 2. That this calcination ought not to be done in an earthen glaz'd Pot, lest by the violence of the fire, the Lead of the Vernish should melt, and mingle with your Steel, by the activity and flagration of your Brimstone.
Obs. 3. That you must powder your calcin'd Mars, while it is hot: for, when it is cold, it grows hard, and so would not be so easily re∣duced to powder. For, even Mars not calcin'd, being actually hot, is soft, and malleable; and therefore, if calcin'd it is more; but both, when cold, do fall to their natural hardness. Obs. 4. That the filings of Steel, or Iron, from black that they were, do become purple by this half calcination, and pulverisation, being impregnated with this colour, by the Brimstone which naturally makes a blew flame; and at last this Purple colour being exposed to the air, becomes brownish, because the fine Sulphure∣ous part evaporating, leaves your Mars to its natu∣ral colour. Obs. 5. That this Crocus Mortis Aperitivus, or opening Saffron of Mars, is nothing but the filings of Steel or iron, half calcin'd, and opened by the Brimstone. This name of Saffron does not fit it well, except you mean a burnt saffron; for this powder is not red as Saffron is. Its Ʋse and Ʋertues: It has the same Vertues as the aperitive Saffron of Mars following; and besides, it serves to make the second Saffron of Mars, and also to make the Christalised Salt of Mars, and the astringent Saffron of Mars.
Another Crocus Martis aperitivus. TAke the Saffron of Mars, prepared above, put it into a stone Dish or Pan, and pour upon it Spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur, to the height of two fingers above your matter, letting it imbibe and impregnate it self for three or four days, then put your matter (which will be in form of Paste) into a great Crucible, and fill it up to the brim, to the end, the heat may work more upon it; set this Crucible upon two Bricks, in a reverberatory Furnace, giving at First and all along for the space of eight hours, the greatest Fire you can; then take off your Crucible, break it with a Hammer, take out your matter, and while it is hot, pow∣der it in a Brass or Iron Morter; then let it cool in the Air, upon a Marble, and it will become red as Saffron, searce it, and keep it close, and well stopped. Obs. 1 That the Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitrial, with which we wet the said Saffron of Mars, which is already aperitive, serves to open it more, and calcine it Philosophically, and that the great Fire does it more perfectly. Obs. 2 That this second aperitive Saffron of Mars, is nothing but Mars opened by four Keys, viz. By filing and powdering, and then by three calcinations, of which, the first is done by the flagration of the Brimstone; the second, by the pouring on of the acid Spirit; and the third, by a Reverberatory Fire of eight hours. Now it be∣comes
opening, because its Salt is set at liberty by these Agents. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a powerful desopi∣lative; it serves against the yellow Jaundice, the Green Sickness, it provokes the Courses of Maids and Women, and it opens the Spleen, and Me∣sentery, taken from half a dragm to two, either in the yolk of an Egg, or in a little Conserve of Roses, or some proper Syrup. The Infernal Stone. Take a little Matrass with a straight long neck, let the belly of it be luted half way, put into it two parts of Aqua-fortis, and one of Silver of the purest, cut or beaten into thin long Plates, so that they may go into the neck of the Matrass, and be the easilier dissolved by the Aqua-fortis; fill but one third part of the belly of your Vessel, set it upon a Round, covered with Sand in the little Wheel-Fire Furnace, giving a small Fire to help the dissolution of the Silver, and to consume the Dissolvant, so as after a gentle boyling, your matter may dry, and change into a black scum, not unlike a Pumice Stone; then encrease your Fire, to melt this scurn half petrified, and conti∣nue your Fire, till the boyling cease, and that there rise no more vapours; which will be a sign that your matter is in fusion: then without any delay, pour out your matter into little Brass, or Iron Moulds, prepared on purpose: for, if you
delay the pouring of it out, or if you let it cool in the Matrass, off from the Fire, your matter will be reduced to a white powder, which is the Calx of the Moon, that is, of Silver: and this will thus come to pass, by the almost total consump∣tion of your Aqua-fortis; and therefore, it is neces∣sary to retain some of it in the said calcined Sil∣ver; to the end, it may keep the consistence of a Stone: if to this Calx of silver, you give a vio∣lent Fire, and add to it half a spoonful of Borax, it will return to its first metallick Nature, and appear like Silver in hardness and consistence; because, that the great Fire, and the Borax toge∣ther, carry away even the least drop of Aqua-fortis which did keep the said Silver in the nature and consistence of a Calx. Obs. 1. That the Matrass which we use here, must be but little, because we do not ordinarily prepare much of this at a time; then your Fire being small, the matter cannot run out, parti∣cularly, where you leave two thirds of your Vessel empty. The Matrass must have a long strait neck, for the greater convenience in pouring out your matter into its Moulds. This Matrass must also be of a strong Glass, such as comes from Lorrain; and besides, must be luted in its bottom half way, lest a naked Fire, drying up the matter, should break the Glass. Obs. 2. That we use here a double quantity of Aqua-fortis to the Silver; not that it is necessary to double the Dose of the Agent, to dissolve the Patient; but, because we desire to make the greater quantity of this Infernal Stone, which will
be softer and less black; for Silver may be cer∣tainly dissolved, with an equal Dose of Aqua∣fortis: and in this case, the Stone would be hard∣er and blacker, and in less quantity: It contains not so much Salt, is sooner consumed, and the Aqua-fortis has not had time to calcine the Silver throughly, from whence the Calx remains blacker, harder, and heavier; which you will easily perceive, if you take notice, that the same thing happens in the making of the ordinary Lime; for, there you shall see some stones, that have not been well calcin'd, look black, be hard, heavy, and crumble less, than the others that have been well calcin'd. Obs. 3. That we may make this Infernal Stone of Niter, instead of Aqua-fortis, and then it will be whitish, and less caustick, and instead of black∣ing the Skin, and Teeth, which it touches, it will only make them look yellow; because, it is the Vitriol that blacks in the Aqua-fortis, and whets the corrosive virtue of Niter; and take notice here, that none of the other acids, and corrosives can corrode Silver, nor by consequence, serve in this Composition. Obs. 4. That to make a good Infernal Stone either white, greyish, or black, you must use Cop∣pel Silver; for, if you make it with Silver, where there is a mixtion of Copper, your Stone will be green, and soft, will easily melt of it self; from whence you may conclude, that there is no making of it with Lead, or Tin, which yet are softer than Brass; and as for Iron, it can never be dissolved, and brought into a potable Liquor,
because of its great driness and terrestreity. And as for Gold, you may easily make of it an Infernal Stone, of the same vertue, by dissolving it in ex∣cellent Aqua-fortis, or in Spirit of Salt, whet by Salt decrepitated; but then, you would have your Labour for your pains, for Coppel-Gold, or Leaf-Gold, is too dear. And as for the Marcassites or half Metals, they are not fit for this Opera∣tion, because that their dissolution evaporated, and reduced to a Calx, cannot keep in consistence of a Stone, but remains in powder. Obs. 5. That to give to the Infernal Stone, that firm compact consistence, which is neces∣sary for it, to be of use, it is not enough to dry your dissolution, with a moderate heat, to the consistence a scum half petrified, but you must, when you are gone so far, encrease your fire, and melt the said scum, then in the same instant, pour out your matter: for, if you let it cool in the Ma∣trass, the rest of the Aqua-fortis would evaporate in the cooling, and so there not remaining enough to corporifie the said Calx, it would fall into a pow∣der, which would be the Calx of the Moon. Obs. 6. That to make little Moulds of Lattin, you must hold it a little time over the fire, then it will be maniable and flexible, and not apt to break, then cut off a piece, and roll it about a stick as thick as a quill, and as long as your finger, and so tye it close, remembring to turn up the bottom, so as nothing may go through: then daub it with our Lute, letting it dry; then when you will use it, take out the stick, and in its place pour your matter, which will be condensed
into petrified Cylenders; which you will easily get out, by taking away the Lute, and cutting the thread that ties your Mould together. Obs. 7. That the Infernal Stone, is nothing but a little Coppel-Silver, dissolv'd and calcin'd Phi∣losophically by Aqua-fortis, then coagulated by the evaporation of the greatest part of the said Water; and at last petrified by the fusion of the said coagulated matter, which has retained e∣nough of the Aqua-fortis, to be in the consistence of a Stone. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a gentle and pleasant Escarotick, it consumes by touching all Warts, proud Flesh, Cancers, Ulcers, and red Spots; if you wet with a little Water the said Warts and Spots. It appeases the pain of the Teeth, using it as has been said, upon the part of that Skin, and Cartilage, that makes the hollow of the Ear: the crumbs of this Stone powdered, and incor∣porated with a Suppurative, consume likewise ill Flesh, rotten in Ulcers. It serves likewise to dye the Beard black, if you put the weight of two or three grains of it into a spoonful of Water, distilled from the green shells of Walnuts; then with a pencel, or some such thing, pass it over your hair three or four times, observing to hold between it and your skin, a little Comb; for else this Water fails not to black the skin, wherever it touches; and that because of the Vitriol that is in the Aqua-fortis: and if sometimes the hair grow green, it is because there has been dissolved in the Aqua-fortis Silver, mingled with Copper, in stead of pure Coppel-Silver.
Cauteries. PUt a pound of Quick-lime into a stone Pan, pour upon it by spoonfuls about four ounces of common cold Water, not all at once, but by little and little, that so you may gently, and with∣out smoak, slack it, and so retain a good part of its volatile and fusible Salts, which will contribute very much to the fusion of the matter of your Cauteries; and so make them fitter to be mould∣ed into any shape. And besides, it will make them more caustick; for, all volatile Salts are more caustick than fix'd ones. Your Lime being well slack'd, and in the consistence of paste, pour at once upon it as much Water as will reduce it to the consistence of thin Pap, and then put to it immediately two pound of good gravell'd Ashes heat red-hot before-hand, for an hour, in a re∣verberatory Furnace, and in an unglazed Pot: but, you must put them in by spoonfuls, as hot as possibly you can, as we have already taught, in the making of the Diaphoretick Antimony. This done, pour upon this matter, about four quarts of Water, which is as much as is requi∣site to dissolve all these Salts, and so let it stand twelve hours, to the end your Water may be well impregnated; and thus you will have a Lixivium: which you must separate by Inclination from its Faeces, into a copper Basin, which by reason of its Vedigreece, will whet your Cauteries more and more, and make them look blewish. Set this Basin
on a gentle Fire, and evaporate your Lixivium, till it be dry, and have the consistence of a grey Salt. If then you desire to use them, as they are in a lump, and without shape, take off your Basin, and take out your Cauteries by pieces, and keep them in Glass Vials well stopp'd: if you will have them well shap'd, then when your Lixivium is dried to the consistence of a grey Salt, encrease your Fire, and melt the said Salt, and when it is melted into a blew Liquor, then with an Iron Spatula red-hot (else the Salts would presently congeal, and stick to it) take up as much as you please, and let your lump fall by drops, upon a cold Marble, there they will be shaped like half Beads; when they are cold, take them off with a knife, and keep them in glass Vials, well stopp'd with Cork, to keep the Air from them. Conti∣nue this, till you have shaped all your matter, and that the remaining become black, and dry, upon which, if you pour some of your Lixivium, which you must have preserv'd on purpose, it will dissolve, and be fit to be moulded as the rest. At last, if there remain, as there will, some black dry matter, you may wash your Basin clean, and throw that away. Obs. 1. That Lime contains two Salts; one fix, and the other Volatile: the fix is dissolv'd in the Water which slacks the Lime; the volatil evoporates in the smoak, and boyling, with this distinction, That if you pour upon it at first all your Water, and so cause a huge ebullition, and smoking, then all the volatil Salt flies away; but if you slack it by little and little, pouring
only some spoonfuls at a time, then there being but a gentle ebullition, and gentle smoak, the vo∣latil Salts are but weakned, and so do dissolve in the Water. Now when you make Lime-water, to serve to the making of the Phagedenick Water; there it is not necessary to slack your Lime so gently, because it suffices, if you retain the fix'd Salt, that so it may be able to dry and consume putrid Ulcers; but when you make the Lime-water to serve to the making of Cauteries, then you must strive to keep in the Volatil Salt; be∣cause it is the Volatil Salt, that makes the fix'd Salt, of both Lime and Ashes, to be fusible: and therefore, if you will shape your Cauteries, and make them more Caustick, you must retain the volatil Salt. Obs. 2. That gravell'd Ashes are a Calx, pro∣ceeding from the Calcination of the Lees of Wine and old pieces of Casks, which ordinarily are of Oak, so that this Calx contains the Salt of the Lees of Wine, and the Ashes of the said Casks of Oak: the best sort, is that which is blue, and well dried; and you may easily perceive, that it is a Vegetable Salt, and indeed nothing but Tartar calcin'd, or a Salt of Tartar. Now this Salt is fusible, as it has been said: besides, we heat it red hot, and throw it into this Lime-pap, there to dissolve. Heretofore we made use of Ashes of common Wood, of Cabbage, and Bean-stalks; and we may use it still, but this does as well, and is to be had easily at Paris. Obs. 3. That in this Operation, we use no  of glazed Earth, lest the Salts of Lime
and Ashes should corrode the Lead, and so dull their point, and activity, to no purpose, which they are to preserve to cauterize therewith the places, they are applied to; nay, if you do but eva∣porate your Cauteries in a vernish'd Pan, they will lose much of their force. Obs. 4. That these Cauteries are nothing, but a Salt composed of the fix, and volatil Salts of Quick-lime, and gravell'd Ashes; which having been dissolved in common water, have by evapo∣ration been coagulated in a moderate heat, then having been melted by a greater heat, have been coagulated by cold upon a Marble. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The name shews its cau∣stick escarotick vertues; this kind of Cautery pro∣duces its effect in a small time, and yet gently e∣nough, it is always dry, if it be kept well stopp'd in a glass Vial; but, if it be too dry, it cannot dis∣solve upon the skin: therefore, while you prepare all things for its application, put it to soak in a spoonful of water. The Magistery or Precipitate of Bismuth. SEt a Cucurbit Glass, Bell, or Head, upon any thing within a Chimney, that so the infecti∣ous vapours may not poyson the room, and offend by their stench the Artist, and Spectators: put into your Vessel four ounces of Bismuth, well powdered in a Brass Mortar, pour upon it one or two spoonfuls of Spirit of Nitar, which present∣ly will produce an ebullition, and a stinking in∣fectious
smoak; when they are past, pour on again a like quantity of Spirit of Niter, which will cause the same effect; continue this till you have spent eight ounces of Spirit of Niter: if you pour on too much at a time, your ebullition will be so violent, that all your matter will run over your Vessel, and be lost, and the smoak will be so thick, that by its stinking red vapours, it will go near to do you some mischief. When you have thus spent all your Spirit of Niter; though after the last Projection, all your Bismuth be not dissolved, and devour'd by the said Spirit, ne∣vertheless, separate by inclination, your dissolu∣tion, while it is warm, from that part of the Bis∣muth, which remains undissolv'd in the bottom of your Vessel, and you must pour this Dissolution into a precipitatory Vessel of Glass, or white-ware; and there it will be congealed into a thousand lit∣tle transparent white Cristals. In the mean time, pour by little and little, and at divers times, some new Spirit upon the Bis∣muth left in your vessel, to the end, you may dis∣solve all the pure and good Bismuth that is left in this lump; for, there will remain at last a few black Faeces, which cannot be dissolved. Sepa∣rate by inclination this second Dissolution in an∣other Glass, or white-ware Vessel, and there let it Crystallize as the former: then take all your Crystals, and mingle them together in a Glass Bell, and there melt them with a gentle heat, and when they are melted, pour upon them a quart of Sea-water actually cold, which will pre∣cipitate them into a white Curd, which Curd,
will by little and little dissolve into a white pow∣der: then separate by inclination this first Water, pour on more, and so continue till your powder be entirely sweetned; nay, do it three or four times after that your water comes away insi∣pid; for, if there did remain the least Acrimony in this powder, it would wrinkle the Face, which it ought to whiten: filtrate this powder through a white Paper, and let it dry upon the said Paper in the shade, taking care to cover it, lest the dust should come at it; and do not dry it by the Fires side, or in the Sun-beams; for then it would re∣turn to brown-blackish colour. When it is very dry, put it into a glass Vial, well stopped, and you have the true Magistery, or precipitate of of Bismuth. Obs. That Bismuth is a kind of Marcassite of Silver; and that therefore it is almost as good as Silver, to make by its calcination a good Fucus, or Cosmetick: for, it is certain, that the Precipi∣tate of Silver, made in the same way as this, does much excel the Precipitate of Bismuth. Obs. 2. That to make the Dissolution of Bis∣muth in Spirit of Niter, you must take a Vessel very broad towards the top, and therefore a glass Bell is the fittest, to the end, that the vene∣mous vapours, that rise out of the matter, may the sooner and the easilier be gone; therefore in a Matrass, these vapours being streightned, would re-impregnate themselves, and make your matter yellow, instead of white. Then your vessel must be Glass, or White-ware; for, in an earth∣en glaz'd Vessel, your powder would grow black,
because it would dissolve the Lead of the Vernish, and a stone, or unglazed one, be less fit, because the Spirit of Niter might lose, and insinuate it self in the pores of the said Earth. Obs. 3. That though Aqua-fortis can dissolve Bismuth, yet we use it not; because, by its Vitriol the Calx of the Bismuth would be so blacked, as to be useless in the design of whitening the skin. Obs. 4. That your dissolution being poured into a glass, or white ware vessel, does there congeal into a thousand little white Chrystals, transparent and saltish, because that the Spirit of Niter being loaden with the quantity of a Metalick body, Christallises as Metals use to do, after their dissolution. These Crystals are white, because that the Bismuth is as white as Silver, and they melt by a gentle fire, because they were congealed by cold. Obs. 5. That Sea water does precipitate dis∣solved Bismuth in a white curd, and white pow∣der, because that the Sea-salt which makes the Sea-water, being contrary to the Salt which makes the Spirit of Niter, attakes and fights with it, and so the Niter being weakned, because, that in this conflict its sharpest part evaporates away, lets go the Bismuth, which it had seized upon, and immediately the said Bismuth falls into a white curd and powder. 'Tis true, that the common water by moistening the Spirit of Ni∣ter, does much weaken it; but, if in this water there had not been some Sea-salt; the Calx of Bismuth would never have been well separated
from its dissolvant, neither would it have been precipitated to the bottom of the Vessel. Obs. 6. That you must dry this Magistery in the shade by little and little, and not in haste, or by the fire side, or in the Sun-beams, lest it recover its brown dark colour; for the actual heat, either of the Fire, or the Sun, would revive in it a black burned Sulphur, which sticks to the surface of this remedy: from whence, Ladies that use it may learn, that they must by a double reason keep it in the shade, as well to conserve their own natural beau∣ty, as the artificial beauty which they borrow from this Magistery. Obs. 7. That the Precipitate or Magistery of Bismuth, is nothing but a Calx of Bismuth calcin'd Philosophically by the Spirit of Ni∣ter, and then precipitated by the contrariety of the Sea-water, and sweetned by reiterated Lo∣tions. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is in Physick an excel∣lent desicative for Ulcers, as well as the Magiste∣ry of Saturn, and it is likewise a most excellent Cosmetick or Fucus, to make the face and hands white and fair, either by rubbing them with the powder alone, which insinuates its self in∣to the pores of the skin, or else by applying a Pomatum made of one dragm of the said precipi∣tate, and two dragms of Ʋnguentum Pomatum, which you may prepare if you will, with one ounce of white Virgin Wax, and four ounces of Oyl of sweet Almonds, or Acorns, or of Beans, or of the four cold seeds.
The Spirit, Oyl, and Extract of Guaiacum. TAke a great Stone Retort; lute it every where up to half its neck, lest it should break towards the end of the Operation: fill it up to the neck with Guaiacum, cut either into pie∣ces, or shavings; place it upon the hollow part of the cover of an Earthen Pot, full of ashes, which must be set upon the two Iron Barrs that are in a small Reverberatory Furnace, lute and stop the gap of the Furnace which is above the neck of the Retort, till you have made it even with the top of the Furnace, then fit to the neck of your Retort, a great Glass Receiver, or an Earthen one, if you will, or a great Pitcher which is easilier made clean; because you may put your hand into it even to the bottom; lute the said Recipient to the Retort, cover the Fur∣nace with its top, that is, an Earthen Pan turned the inside downwards, and with a hole in its middle, big enough to pass an Egg through, or else with two or three rounds of Bricks, as has been described in the great Reverberatory Fur∣nace: then put some lighted Coals into your Furnace, and give your fire by degrees, adding to it after a little while three or four Faggot-sticks yet have a care you do not over-heat your Vessel, lest your Receiver break by the violence of the vapours which also may lose themselves through
the luted conjunction of both the Vessels: the true mark of a fit heat will be, if you can endure to lay your hand a pretty while upon the Recei∣ver, this distillation is to last eighteen or twen∣ty hours without interruption; the Spirit, comes first alone, and in a Glass Receiver ap∣pears in the form of white vapours: then the Oyl, with the rest of the Spirits, comes forth in the same form also, and does dissolve into a brown blackish liquor, which goes to the bot∣tom of the Receiver: for all Spirits, and all Oyls, do distil in forms of white vapours, except Spi∣rit of Niter, and Aqua-fortis made with Niter, which therefore are called the flying Dragon, as well because of their redness, as of their ma∣lignity. The mark, that the distillation is en∣ded, will be, if your Receiver be cold, though there be an excessive heat in the Furnace; for, that is a sign that there comes nothing more in∣to the Receiver. When all is cool, then unlute the Receiver, by wetting the lute with a wet cloath, and pour out your Oyl and Spirit of Guaiac together, into a glass Tunnel, and by one of these two ways, separate the Spirit from the Oyl. First, take a glass Tunnel, which hold with one hand, and with a finger of the same hand stop its lower orifice, then pour in your Liquor; the Oyl will presently go to the bottom, the Spirit will swim above, and upon the surface of the Spirit will swim some black drops of Volatil Oyl of Guaiac: Then set a glass Vi∣al under the neck of your Tunnel, and let go half your finger which stops the said orifice, and so
the Oyl will pass into your Viol, and when you see that it is almost all passed, then stop the ori∣fice again with your finger, and pour the flegm or Spirit into another Vial. Do thus by all the spirit, and Oyl, you have in your Receiver, but by this way you will never separate the Oyl from the flegm so well, but there will be some in it still. Therefore use this second method which will do it entirely and infallibly. Take a Coffin of brown Paper, wet it with common water, or with Spirit of Guaiacum, if you have any, place it upon a Glass Tunnel, and pour into it the Oyl and the spirit together; the Spirit being watrish will pass, and filtrate through the said Coffin of Paper, and the Oyl will remain; which afterwards you may easily con∣vey into another Vial, by breaking the bottom of your Paper Coffin with a little stick; if you do not wet throughly the said Coffin of Paper before you pour into it the Oyl and Spirit, the Oyl will stick to the Paper, and hinder the fil∣tration of the flegm: If your Oyl do not come kindly out of your Receiver, because it may be it is cold, and so condensed; present your Re∣ceiver to the fire to dissolve; your Oyl will be black and stinking, as the Oyl of Jet, and your spirit will be of a brown colour. Out of one pound of Guaiacum, you'l draw about one ounce and a half of Oyl, and ten ounces of Spirit: and there will remain about four ounces of Coals in your Retort: you may kindle this Coal, and burn it to ashes, and of these ashes make a Lixivium, and out of this Lixivium draw
the Salt of Guaiacum, to the same uses and purpo∣ses, as the Oyl and Extract. If you desire to have a Spirit of Guaiacum, pu∣rified from the greatest part of its flegm, and corrected of its stench, you must rectifie it in a stone Cucurbite, or glazed one, with a glass head in a Sand furnace, the insipid flegm will come first, that you may throw away; then the Spirit will come very acid, which keep, for those uses which we shall speak of anon. To make the Extract of Guaiacum, put some Oyl of Guaiacum, to evaporate and thicken into the form of an Extract, into a Cup or a Sand-fire or else draw the tincture of the Oyl of Guaiacum, with Spirit of Wine, and so evaporate it to the consistence of an Extract. Obs. 1. That for this Distillation, we use a stone Retort, because it is not necessary to use a glass one, which would be dearer, and the Spirit is not corrosive enough to corrode this Stone-Me∣tal, as the Spirits of Niter, Salt, or Vitriol would do; besides, that the necks of your glass Retorts are so narrow, that the chips of Guaiacum can hardly be got into them. Obs. 2. That if you use pieces of the heart of the Wood, which are hardest, and by consequent fuller of Oyl, you will obtain more Oyl, than from the shaving; and there is no danger in fil∣ling the belly of your Retort with them, because it is not a body apt to swell and run over. Obs. 3. That Guaiacum yields a good deal of Oyl and Spirit, because it is full of Sulphur, and Mercury; the Wood yields better than the
Bark, and the Wood in little pieces, yields more than in shavings, or great cuts; for, by their thickness, they retain more of Sulphur and Mer∣cury. This Oyl and Spirit are very Salt, and therefore the Wood is heavie, for the Salts give the heaviness to Mixtes. The Oyl is black and foetid, because it has been distilled in a naked Fire, without any intermedium; and it is heavie, because of its Salt; as also sharp, for the same reason. The Heart of the Wood yields more Oyl, than that part which is near the Bark; which you may perceive by the eye, for the heart is blackish, and the other is yellowish, like Box, which is the European Guaiacum. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Spirit is somewhat drying and detersive; it is excellent for Burnings and old Ulcers, washing them with some Lint dipped in it; besides, if you put five or six drops of it in a bottle of Sudorifick Decoction, it will work a greater effect, than if there were a great quantity of Guaiacum in the said Decoction; be∣cause, this Spirit has the force of the Guaiacum, and besides, much more activity, and penetration, by the tenuity of its Spirituous substance. The Oyl of Guaiacum is very drying, detersive, and cleansing; it therefore cures rarely well old putrid hard Ulcers, the Gangrene, and the Caries, or Rot of the Bones. Besides, you may give by the Mouth two or three drops of it in a spoonful of Cinamon Water, for a windy, or bilious Colick. The Extract of Guaiacum is very drying, and Sudorifick, and it is given in form of Pils, for Ve∣neral Diseases.
The Spirit of Box. The Oyl of Ash, &c. THe Spirit and Oyl of the Wood of Box, of the Wood and Bark of Ash, as likewise of all other Woods, and Aromatick Barks, are drawn in the same way, as the Spirit and Oyl of Guaiacum. The Wood of Box yields more Spirits a great deal, than the Wood of Guaiacum; but it yields so inconsiderable a proportion of Oyl, that out of four pound of Wood, you will have but one ounce of Oyl, though four pound of Spirit of Flegm; because this Wood is fuller of Sulphur than Guai∣cum, but is not so heavie, nor so Salt. Its Spirit has almost the same vertues, as the Spirit of Guaiacum; the Oyl likewise has the same vertues, with the Oyl of Guaiacum, but is most particularly excellent for all Contusions, Ulcers, pain, and rottenness of the Teeth. The Wood of Ash, yields about as much Spirit and Oyl, as Box; its Bark yields but little Spirit, and no Oyl at all. Its Spirit is an excellent topical Remedy for deafness, and tingling of the Ears, because it does incide, and resolve the humours, and flatuosities which lie in the Meatus auditorius, and in the first concavity of the Ear. Its Oyl is also most excellent for the Rot, or
Caries of the Bones, and for the pain of the Teeth; it appeases the pain of the Kidneys, and Spleen, if the said parts be anointed with it. The stinking, or foetide Oyl of Cloves. TAke Cloves, whose tincture has been al∣ready extracted by Spirit of Wine, (for it would be ill Husbandry to use others, and so lose their Aromatick tincture; particularly, since when, they have yielded their tincture, they are never the worse for this Operation) put what quantity you please of them, into a glass Retort, well luted, place it upon a Round hol∣low earthen Pan, in the Furnace of a great cir∣culatory Fire, fitting to it a great glass Receiver; give at first a very strong violent Fire, and conti∣nue it till there appear no more vapours in the Receiver: these vapours are white, and do turn into black caustick, stinking Oyl. Out of one pound of Cloves, you may have about two ounces of Oyl, and eight ounces of Flegm. Obs. 1. That we use here a glass Retort luted, because that stone Retorts are too big for the small quantity of Cloves, which is ordinarily us'd in this process. Obs. 2. That you need not care, if you fill your Retort with Cloves, because they do not swell no more than Woods, or Barks; you may also fill it half full.
Obs. 3. That Cloves contain much Sulphur, and sharp Salt, from whence it comes that they yield much Oyl, and that very sharp and caustick. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Oyl being very sharp, and biting, is most excellent for Ulcers in the Pox, and all other putrid and vene∣mous ones; as also it is good to exfoliate, or open the superficies of rotten Bones, and for the Gangrene. Its Spirit is acid, and very good in Tettars, or Ring-worms. The Oyl of Jet. TAke some pieces of Jet, put them into a glass Retort well luted, filling it up to the neck; place it upon a Round hollow earthen Pan, in a circulatory Fire, and fit to it a great Receiver, which lute well to the neck of the Retort, give at first a small circulary Fire, then the great circu∣lary Fire, and then a Fire of Suppression; there will appear in the Receiver, an abundance of white vapours, which will dissolve into Spirit and Oyl. This Operation must last ten or twelve hours, with a continual Fire, and four pound of Jet in your Retort: out of one pound, you will have about two ounces of Oyl, and ten of Spirit. Separate by a glass Tunnel the Oyl, that goes to the bottom, from the Spirit, which will swim above, and keep them apart in two glass Vials;
upon the Spirit you will perceive swimming, di∣vers thick drops of Volatil Oyl of Jet, which you may leave with the said Spirit. Obs. 1. That we use here a Glass Retort luted for the same reason alledged in the Chapter of the Oyl of Cloves. Obs. 2. That we fill the Retort without any intermedium, because Jet is a dry substance, which does not swell, no more than other Woods and Roots. Obs. 3. That Jet is a Rocky Stone, which is drawn in great quantities out of some Quarrys near Tholous in France; and this Stone is very bituminous, having much Sulphur, a good deal of Salt, and very little flegm; from whence it pro∣ceeds, that it yields a good deal of Oyl, mode∣rately sharp, and heavy. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Oyl is most excellent for the suffocations of the Matrix; because of its extraordinary ill smell, being much more stink∣ing than the Oyl of Guaiac, or Karabe, it serves also to dissolve all bruises, and contusions of the feet, proceeding from walking too much, the flegm has the same, but less vertue than the Oyl.
The Oyl of Mirrha and other Gums. TAke a glass Retort well luted, fill it half full of Mirrha, broken into lumps, place it in the Furnace of a circulatory fire. Fit to it a great Receiver of Glass, and give the fire by degrees, there will rise an abundance of white vapours, which in the Receiver will dissolve into a flegm, and an Oyl: this Operation will last five or six hours: Out of one pound of Mirrha, you will have seven or eight ounces of Oyl, and five or six of flegm, separate by a Glass Tunnel the Oyl from the flegm. Obs. 1. That we use here a Glass Retort well luted, for the reasons alledged in the distillation of the stinking Oyl of Cloves. Obs. 2. That we fill the Retort but half full, because that the Myrrha does swell a little be∣ing heated, and so if the Retort were full, might run over in substance: yet because it is a rosinous dry Gum, it is not necessary to give it any inter∣medium. Obs. 3. That Mirrha is a Gumme Rosin, having much Salt, Sulphur, and flegm, and therefore yields a good deal of Oyl, which is very bitter and heavy, as also a great deal of flegm. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Oyl is very deter∣sive, because of its great bitterness, and there∣fore
serves to ripen and Suppurate wounds, being mingled with the ordinary digestive: it hinders the Gangrene, being mingled with the Aegyptiac, or other like unguent: it stinks extremely, and therefore being smelt to, helps the suffocations of the Matrix. The Oyls of Mastick, Oblibanum, Storax, Ben∣jamin, and all other Gumms, except Camphire, are made in the same way and method, and with∣out intermedium, as the Oyl of Myrrha. The Oyl of Bricks, or of the Philosophers. PUt five pound of powder'd Brick into a Glass Retort well luted, then pour into it one pound of Oyl of Olives, either with a Tunnel or a Paper Coffin, in case the neck of your Retort be so straight, that you cannot pour into it otherwise without spilling. Do not fill above two parts of your Retort, left the oyl in boyling should run out in its proper sub∣stance, and carry the Brick along with it, before it distill. Place your Retort upon a Round hollow Earthen Pan, in a circulary fire, and fit to it a Receiver. Give the Fire by little and little, and have a care you do not put your Coals near the Retort before the flegm be entirely distilled off, which you will know when you shall hear that your matter makes no more noise in the Retort: then encrease the fire, and
lay your kindled Coals near the Retort, and at last give a fire of suppression, by covering your Retort, with kindled live Coals. There will come two Oyls, one red, and the other black and stinking, the distillation ought to be per∣formed drop by drop, and besides these drops there come fumes, that is a sign that the fire is too strong, therefore lessen it. This distillation will last four or five hours: out of one pound of Oyl of Olives, and five pound of Bricks, you will have about four ounces of Oyl, and half an ounce of flegm; separate by a glass Tunnel, the flegm that will go to the bottom, from the Oyl which swims upon the top: if you rectifie this Oyl in a little glass Retort in a sand-fire, it will become yellowish and less stinking. Obs. 1. That we use a glass, and not a stone Retort, because the Oyl would penetrate the last, and cannot penetrate the first. Obs. 2. That we give an intermedium to the Oyl of Olives, because it can never be distilled alone and would sooner break the Retort, than distill: and this intermedium, is rather powderd Brick then any thing else; because it being a spongious porous substance, it is sooner im∣bib'd, and then having little flegm, because it has been baked, it is fitter for this Operation, where much flegm would be prejudicial, and would go near to break the Retort by its combat with Oyl. Some quench pieces of Bricks red hot in Oyl, then powder and distill them, but they have a ve∣ry small quantity of Oyl, and yet they must use a great Retort, and a great Reverberatory fire.
Obs. 3. That the Oyl of Bricks is nothing bu Oyl of Olives distilled, having acquired by distillation a Tenuity and Thinness of sub∣stance, which makes it very penetrative, and warming, and also very stinking; the Brick com∣municates no vertue to it, and is only an interme∣dium. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Oyl is very pene∣trating, inciding, and resolving, and therefore is most Soveraign for the pains and swellings that come from cold humours, as in the Sciati∣ca, and also for contusions and blows. The Oyl of yellow Wax. TAke five parts of Clay, or powder'd Bricks, put them into an Earthen glazed Pan, and pour upon them one part of yellow Wax, melted: incorporate them well together, and make little Balls and Cylinders to put easily into a glass Retort well luted: fill it up to the neck, place it upon a round hollow Earthen Pan, in a circulary Fire, fit, and lute to it a Receiver, give the fire by degrees, as in the Oyl of Bricks, your matter being once hot, the flegm begins to boyl, and make a noise and comes out first in form of a white Vapour, then the Oyl also in the same form of white vapours, which are condensed into a very red stinking Oyl, which when cold, congeals into
butter as yellow as Gold: This Operation will last four or five hours. For, a pound of Wax, out of which you will have fourteen ounces of Oyl or Butter, and half an ounce of flegm. If you rectifie this Oyl divers times in a little glass Retort by a sand fire, it will become as white, and as clear, as whites of Eggs, and will not stink so much. Observe, That there are no other observations to be made upon this process, than what has been already observed in the making of the Oyl of Bricks. Its Use and Vertues are likewise the same; but besides, it is most excellent for the clefts of the Breasts in women. The Oyl of Yolks of Eggs. PUt twenty or thirty Eggs into a Kettle of cold water, set your Kettle upon the fire and boyl your Eggs till they be hard, then scale them, and take out the Yolks; put all these Yolks together into a frying-Pan, which set upon a Trevet, and make a good flaming fire under the Pan, then, crumble all your yolks with an Iron Spoon, and so turn them now and then, continue thus doing, till almost all your yolks be reduced to a black Oyl, and that there remains but a few burnt black Faeces; pour this Oyl, into a little Earthen Pot, keeping with your spoon the Faeces from going in with it; this
Oyl does not congeal, because it has been drawn with a great Fire, and you may use it without any other preparation; but, if you desire to have it clearer, and more penetrating, then rectifie it in a glass Retort in a sand-fire: it will become as yellow, as Gold, and will congeal like Butter. If you rectifie it in a naked fire, it will not be so yellow, but it will congeal a little, for by both of these rectifications by a gentle heat, the stinking Sulphur remains in the Retort, and if was this Sulphur that made it stink, and kept it from congealing, which is proved by this fol∣lowing experience, which is another way of clarifying the said Oyl, viz. Put the said Oyl into a double Matrass, for a month, over a gentle fire, or in a Lamp Furnace, or ashes, or in Horse∣dung, the Oyl will clarifie its self most perfectly; because its Faeces will go to the bottom; and then you may easily separate the clarified Oyl from its Faeces. Obs. 1. That if you put your Eggs into the water when it boyles, that they will scarce be hard enough, and therefore will not be fit to yield their Oyl, beeause they retain while they are not hard, somthing of a superfluous humidity, and in the Pan they would crackle and sparkle, and hardly afford any Oyl. Obs. 2. That this Oyl, though when it comes from the Pan, be blackish, has not nevertheless any ill taste nor smell, but when it is rectified, it becomes sharp and stinking. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a most excellent Bal∣samum drwn from Volatils; it is anodyne, astrin∣gent,
agglutinative, and mundificative; and there∣fore most excellent for all burnings and fresh wounds, as also for the cleavings of womens breasts, and likewise for the descent of the bow∣els, by anointing the part, then applying a band∣age, or truss. There is another way of making this Oyl, viz, to heat your yolkes in the Pan till they begin to grow red and to burn; then put them into a coorse linnen cloth, Oyl'd with Oyl of Al∣monds, and so put this cloth under a press, and press out the Oyl, but this Oyl has not the force of the other drawn by the method we have alrea∣dy set down. The Oyl of Karabe, and the Ambred Spirit of Wine. REduce into a gross powder some yellow Amber, (you may make use of the pie∣ces which the workmen that work in Am∣ber pare off, and you shall have it cheaper, than at the Droguists) put four ounces of it in a glass Retort well luted, and pour upon it eight ounces of Spirit of wine, so as your Retort be not above half full, set your Retort on a Round hollow earth∣en Pan, in the circulary Furnace, and fit to it a good ample glass receiver, which you must not lute to the Retort, lest the vapours of the spirit of wine,
which cannot be contained in the Receiver, should break it: but be careful in luting the gap of the furnace, about the neck of the Retort, lest the flame should reach the Receiver, and there set on fire the vapours of the Spirit of Wine, and from thence the flame would get into the Retort. If such a thing should happen, the remedy would be, to stop presently the mouth of the Retort with some Lute, to choak the flame. Encrease your Fire by degrees, and when you perceive that the Receiver is not very warm, then encrease your Fire more, and give a Fire of Suppression, to the end, you may drive out the Oyl of Amber, together with the Spirit of Wine: continue your Fire, till you perceive no more clouds in your Receiver, for that is a sign that all the Oyl is ex∣tracted, and distilled from the Amber: you will find two ounces of black Oyl of Carabe, or Am∣ber, and eight ounces of Spirit of Wine impreg∣nated, with the red Tincture of the said Karabe, separate by a glass Tunnel, the Oyl from the Spirit. Obs. 1. That we distil Amber with Spirit of Wine, to the end, we may have the vertue of the Amber in a higher degree for penetration, and less stinking. It may be distilled all alone, and without intermedium; because, that though, it be a bituminous Body, nevertheless, it is so dry, that it does not swell in the Retort: but, when it is distilled alone, its Oyl is as black as Jet, and much of a worse smell, and cannot become yel∣low, but by reiterated rectifications. Obs. 2. That if upon the said Oyl of Amber,
you put Spirit of Wine, it will presently be tin∣ged with it, and will have the same vertue as the Spirit of Wine, that has been distilled with Amber. Obs. 3. That Amber is a bitumen so oylous, that it is almost all Oyl, and contains but very few faeces: since out of one pound of Amber, you may draw fourteen ounces of a black Oyl; inso∣much, that it is nothing but a bituminous Oyl, congealed by a little terrestrial substance. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Oyl of Amber is ve∣ry bitter, and stinking, and therefore excellent in the suffocations of the Matrix; either taken in∣wardly, in the quantity of three of four drops in some appropriated water, or else smelt to, or a∣nointed upon the Temples; it is most excellent in old Wounds, and particularly of the nervous parts, because of its detersive balsamick vertue. The Spirit of Wine ambred, or tinged by yel∣low Amber, is likewise a most excellent Remedy, taken in the same way, for the suffocations of the Mother, and for the falling Sickness. It is be∣sides, a most excellent exteriour Remedy for the Palsie, the Sciatica, the Cold Gout, all cold Fluxions, and all bruises of the Nerves. And this, because of the great tenuity, and penetra∣tion of its substance, and its resolutive, and bal∣samick vertue: but, when you do rub any affe∣cted part with this Remedy before the Fire, have a care you come not too near, lest the Fire should catch hold of and burn the party.
The Oyl of Camphire. PUt two ounces of Camphire slightly pow∣dered, into a Matrass of an ordinary size, and pour upon it four ounces of spirit of Ni∣ter, shake your Vessel gently for half a quarter of an hour, to the end, that this agitation may whet the Spirit, and make it operate the sooner upon the said Camphire; then let them stand together, far from the Fire, within two hours the Spirit will dissolve the Camphire, without any sensible ebullition or smoak, and there will swim upon the Spirit, a clear transparent Oyl. Separate by the glass Tunnel, the said Spirit which will be at the bottom, and will have lost a good part of its caustick Acrimony; keep your Oyl in a glass Vial well stopped. Obs. 1. That this Oyl of Camphire, is nothing but Camphire dissolv'd by Spirit of Niter; for, if you throw a little Water upon this Oyl, the Camphire will presently be coagulated into its first white consistence, and smell, because that the water by weakning the Spirit of Niter, which kept the Camphire in dissolution, makes it lose its hold, and so the Camphire precipitates to the bottom. Obs. 2. That of all the Gums and Rosins, none but Camphire does melt into Oyl in its dissolu∣tion, by Spirit of Niter, which may extract the tincture of the other Gums, but cannot dissolve them.
Its Ʋse and Vertues: are to exfoliate the Rot of the Bones, by the strong penetration, and dry∣ness of both the Spirit of Niter, and the Cam∣phire; therefore is it most excellent wherewith to touch the Nerves, that are bare, and naked in wounds; for it consumes gently, the sharp hu∣mour which falls upon them, and makes the said wounds most grievous, and by its own nodyne, and mollifying vertue of the Camphire, it takes a∣way a great deal of the pain of the said Nerves. The Spirit of Wine Campherised. PUt as much Camphire as you please into a Matrass, pour upon it Spirit of VVine, till it be four fingers above your matter; fit to this Matrass another little one, and so make a double vessel; lute them well together; with slices of Paper, place your Vessel in a Sand-Furnace, and there let it stand, till the Camphire be entirely dissolved in the Spirit of VVine: the Spirit will then be clear, and transparent as before, and the Camphire will have a pleasant smell. There is nothing to be said about the dissolution of Cam∣phire, by Spirit of VVine, since Camphire is a kind of Gum-Rosin, and that Spirit of VVine has the vertue of dissolving all Gums by the ho∣mogeneity of its substance, and the tenuity of its parts. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It is a most excellent anody∣num to appease the Tooth-ach, by putting a litle
Cotton dipp'd in the said Spirit of Wine, to the pain'd Tooth, and it is good to help the paines in the Ears, by dipping in it some black Wool, cut off of the Stones of a black Ram, and so put into the Ear. The Aromatick tincture of Cloves. PUt of whole Cloves, what quantity you please, into a Matrass, and pour on well rectfied Spirit of Wine, to the height of four fin∣gers above your matter, make a double Vessel, with another small Matrass, fitted to the first, and well luted together; place this vessel in a Sand-heat, and there let it stand, till the Spirit of Wine be dyed of a red-blackish colour; separate by inclination this tincture, and keep it in a glass Vial well stopp'd. Of this tincture, may be made a Syrup, by putting to it a sufficient quantity of Sugar, and so boyling of it to the consistence of a Syrup: or you may make of the said tincture an Extract, by evaporating your tincture to the con∣sistence of an Extract. The Ʋse and Vertues of the Tincture, Syrup, and Extract, are, to comfort and strengthen the Stomach, by consuming cold, superfluous hu∣mours, take away the pains of the Colick; it is excellent against all Faintings of the Heart, and kills worms in the body. The Dosis is a spoon∣ful of the Tincture, or Syrup, and a Pill of the Extract, or else you apply Linnen dipt in the
said Tincture, upon the Stomach, Belly, and Navel. Cinnamon Water. PUt four ounces of whole Cinnamon, not powdered, two pound of White-wine, or Sack, into a Glass, or Stone Cucurbite, place it in a Sand Furnace, with a glass Head, and Receiver, there will be distilled a Water ve∣ry clear, and full of Spirits, which from time to time you must take, and pour out of your Recei∣ver, to the end, it be not mingled with the gross flegm, which will come at last of a whitish, muddy colour. Obs. 1. That you must not distil Cinnamon-water in a Cucurbite of glazed Earth, lest the Cinamon should whet the Spirit of Wine, and make it corrode the Lead of the Vernish, and so being impregnated with the Saturn, alter its own vertue. Obs. 2. That the Water of Cinnamon, is no∣thing but the purest part of the Wine, impreg∣nated with the Volatil Aromatick Salt of Cina∣mon. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a good Cordial, for∣tifies the Stomach, facilitates, and helps the de∣livery of Women in Child-bed; the flegm of this Water is fitter to make the Syrup of Cinnamon, than common VVater, by infusing in it some new Cinnamon, and aftr the straining, dissolve in it
a sufficient quantity of Sugar, and so boyl it up to a Syrup. This flegm contains a little Spirit of Wine in it, with a little of the Volatil Salt of the first Cinnamon; and so is fitter to open, pene∣trate, and extract the substance of new Cinna∣mon, than simple common water. The Spiritus Ardens, or burning Spi∣rit of Honey. The sweet Tincture of Honey. The stinking, or faecid Oyl and Spi∣rit of Honey. The stinking Tincture of Honey. PUt into a Glass, or Stone, or glazed Earth Cucurbit, one pound of good Honey, and two pound of white-wine; place your Cu∣curbite in a Sand-Furnace, and set it half way into the Sand, fitting to it a glass Head and Re∣ceiver, give a good Fire, and continue it till all be distilled, and that you hear nothing boyl in the Body; then there will remain a very black, thick Honey: keep the distilled Liquor, which will be of two sorts, the first will be clear and transparent, and in a small quantity, and in this is the burning Spirit of-Honey, and the Spirit of Wine. The second will be of an Orange colour, and more in quantity, and contains the flegm of the Wine, with the sulphureous Tincture of the Honey.
Take the Faeces of the said Distillation, put them into a Stone Retort well luted, and put to them alike quantity of River-pibble-stones cal∣cin'd; place your Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace, fit to it a great glass Receiver, and give your Fire from the first to the last degree, for the space of some hours, till there come out of the Retort, neither vapour nor liquor; then you will have in your Receiver, a Spirit, and stinking Oyl of Honey; and there will yet remain some Faeces in your Retort. If upon these Faeces you pour Spirit of Wine, till it be four or five fingers above your matter, you may have by digestion in a Matrass, or double Vessel in a Sand-Furnace, a foetid Tincture of Honey, as red as Claret VVine. The Ʋse and Vertues of all these Tinctures, Spi∣rits, and Oyls, Are to make the Hair grow stiffer and thicker upon Bald-heads. The Vinegar of Saturn. The Butter, or Balsamum of Saturn. BOyl some distilled Vinegar in a Brass, or Tin Skillet, or in a glaz'd Pipkin; pour it out boyling hot upon Minium, or Seruse, or Lytharge of Gold or Silver, reduc'd to powder, or upon calcin'd Lead; let your matter be in a glaz'd Pan, and you must have so much Vinegar, as may be four or five fingers deep over your matter. Stir
it a little with a wooden Spatula (not with an Iron one, for it would black both your Liquor, and the Salt to be extracted out of it) in an hours time your distilled Vinegar will become sweet and sugar'd, and impregnated with the Salt of Saturn. To make the Butter, or Balsamum of Saturn; melt one ounce of white Wax, in a little glaz'd Pan, then put to it four ounces of Oyl of Olives, mingle them well with a wooden Spatula, pour this mixtion immediately into a Brass Mortar, and upon it, a glass full of the Vinegar of Saturn, stir them well together with a Brass Pestle, till the Oyl and Wax be both impregnated with the Salt of Saturn, contain'd in the said Vinegar, and that all the Composition be thick and white, as the soft Ointment of white Roses. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Vinegar serves to appease inflammations and pains, being applied outwardly to any part, by Linnen dipp'd in Vir∣gins Milk, made of one spoonful of this Vinegar, and a glass of Water; it may also be useful in In∣jections, in recent and fresh Gonorrhaea's, to ap∣pease the violence of the pain. And observe, That this Vinegar, pour'd upon any distill'd Water, does not whiten it, nor make it like Milk. The Butter, or Balsamum of Saturn, serves to cool and appease the ardour of inflammations, as well of the Stones, as of the Hemorrhoides, and other parts: as also, it produces the same ef∣fect in Erisypelases.
The Plaister of Saturn. PUt one pound of Oyl of Olives into a ver∣nish'd Pan; add to it four ounces of well powder'd Minium, or Mine-Lead, and so boyl them together; stirring them sometimes with an Iron Spatula, till they be reduced to the con∣sistence of a Plaister, as black as Jet; you may add to it a little Wax to give it a Body. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is most excellent in dis∣solving those fleshly Excrescences, and Ulcers called Wolfes. The Extract of Hellebore. PUt half a pound of the Roots of black Helle∣bore, cut into little bits, into a capacious Matrass, pour on Spirit of Wine, four fingers above your matter; fit to it another little Ma∣trass, to make a double Vessel; place it in a Sand-Furnace, and there let it stand in digestion three or four days; and let not the belly of your Ma∣trass be above a quarter-way in the Sand, nor do not make your fire so great, as to make your Spirit of Wine boyl; for, then part of your Spi∣rits would exhale, and be gone; yet, let there be heat enough to extract the red Tincture of the Roots. Separate this Tincture by Inclination, or if there be any Faeces, filtrate it through a
Coffin of brown Paper; pour this Tincture into a glass Body, which set in the same Sand-Fur∣nace, and fit to it a glass Head and Receiver, and so draw off by Distillation, as much Spirit of Wine, as you poured on, which will serve you for other uses; then take off the Head, and eva∣porate your matter to the consistence of an Ex∣tract like Honey. In the mean time, boyl the Roots left in the Matrass in a quantity of common Water, to make a Decoction, which strain through a course Linnen, then clarifie it with Whites, and Shells of Eggs, and evaporate it in a stone, or glaz'd earthen Pan, to the consistence of an Extract, which you may mingle with the precedent, if you think good. We draw these two Extracts separately, and with different menstruums, because, that the Spi∣rit of VVine extracts only the gummy rosinous part, and cannot extract the saltish: and the common Water does quite contrary. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It purges Melancholy most commonly with a loathing, and sometimes with vomiting. An Essence for the Tooth-ach. PUt of the Spirit of Wine campherized, of the Tincture of Cloves, of the Oyl of Box, of the Oyl of Guaiacum, of the black Oyl of Sulphur, and if you will, of the Tincture of
Opium, of each an equal part, there will result an oily red transparent Liquor, which you must keep in a glass Vial well stop'd. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a most excellent Re∣medy to appease the Tooth-ach, and draw off the sharp humour that falls on the Teeth; you must pour some of it into a glass, and then dip a little Cotton, of which make a Pellet, as big as a Pea, and apply it to the Tooth, or in its hollow part, if there be any; there will presently distil from it a good deal of Water, and the pain will cease. Turpentine Pills. PUt four ounces of clear transparent Turpen∣tine of Venice, into a glaz'd Disn; pour up∣on it three times as much water, boyl them together with a gentle heat, till your Turpen∣tine look white, and not yellow, as before; then take out a little of it upon the point of a Knife, and let fall a drop or two, upon a pewter Plate; if you see that the drop, when cold, does not stick to your fingers, then it is boyl'd enough to make Pills of; so take it off, and pour cold Water into your Pan, that will precipitate the Turpentine in a white Paste: take this Paste, and knead it with your hand to wring the Water out, you may wipe your Turpentine, with some Linnen, but you must do it gently, lest while it is warm, the Linnen should stick to it; then add to it one ounce of a Diaphoretick Antimony, half an ounce
of Salt of Sulphur, and as much of Cremor Tartari, incorporate them together into a lump, which will soon grow hard, but will easily grow soft again, being handled before the fire. Keep this Mass for Pills, in a Hogs bladder, well oyl'd with Sallet Oyl. Its Ʋse and Vertues: These Pills do dry up, and stop Gonorrhaea's when they have flow'd enough, by giving half an ounce for Dosis, for the space of a fortnight or three weeks. For those that can∣not swallow Pills, you must boyl your Turpen∣tine a little more, till it grow so hard upon the Plate, as to be broken in pieces, powder this in a mortar, and add to it the same Druggs, as above. The Dosis mentioned will be the same here, and must be dissolv'd in white Wine, or in Broth, or in some Decoction, or appropriated Water. The distilled Water of Plants. PUt a good Hand-basket full of leaves, (for Example of Plantane) new gather'd, and fresh, into the Brass Vesica, add to them about four quarts of Water, to the end, the Herb may boyl during the distillation, and that in boyl∣ing, the said Water may extract, and be impreg∣nated with the vertue of the plant; yet, let not your Vesica be above three quarters full, lest the Water in boyling, should carry the substance, and not the vapours into the Moors-head. You need not put any sponges into the neck of the Ve∣sica,
as you do in the distillation of the Spirit of Wine, because these sponges would hinder the passage of your vapours; fit to your Vesica its Moors-head, bordered with its Refrigeratory; and make use also of the second Refrigeratory, that is, of the two Hogsheads full of Water, as has been taught in the distillation of Spirit of Wine; this will further the distillation of your Water very much. Give at first a good Fire of Coals, and two or three Fagot-sticks, continue this Fire, and moderate your Distillation so, as to make a little stream of Water come always into your Receiver, into which it will not fall perpendicu∣larly, as the Spirit of Wine does, but a little arch∣wise. As soon as with this little stream you per∣ceive that there come vapours into the Receiver, lessen your Fire, to hinder the loss of these va∣pours, which spend themselves in vain. If your Distillation be performed but slowly, and drop by drop, or in a very little stream, falling per∣pendicularly, then encrease the Fire, that you may not lose your time by an unnecessary pro∣traction of the Distillation. From time to time empty your Receiver, and immediately pour it through a glass Tunnel into a stone Pitcher. As soon as you perceive, that there comes into your Receiver a muddy Water, then be sure, that all the good part of your Operation is at an end; because, this muddy VVater proceeds from the burning of the Plants, which begins to send forth its Spirit, and stinking Oyl; therefore give over distilling, put out your Fire, take out the Grounds of the Herbs left in the bottom, and
throw away the muddy Water that you shall find there with them; after which, begin a new Di∣stillation with new Herbs, and new Water. When you have gathered all your Water into stone Pitchers, put into them some Saltpeter, well purified, and crystallized, half a dragm to every pound of Water. Obs. 1. That you must not put your Water into an earthen Vessel unglazed, because, at last it would lose its self entirely, through the pores of the Potters-Earth, which is very porous and spongious; therefore, always put it in Glass, White-ware, or glaz'd Vessels, or Stone, because that these are very dry and thick, and there is no danger in glaz'd Pots, because your VVater has no Acrimony wherewith to corrode the glazing: all the danger is, that the Frost should break them; for preventing of which inconvenience, you must keep your Vessels in a warm deep Cellar, or in a Box full of Hay. Obs. 2. That the refin'd crystalliz'd Niter which you put in your Water, serves to preserve it for many years; and that Niter is fitter for this pur∣pose, than the fix'd Salt of the Plant, which would be very tedious to extract, by drying and burn∣ing of the Faeces, then infusing the Ashes, then fil∣trating this Lixivium, then evaporating it to the consistence of a Salt. Obs. 3. That you must presently stop your stone Pitchers with a Cork stopple; and it is not ne∣cessary to expose them to the Sun-beams. Obs. 4. That to make Rose-water, it is better to put pale Roses well picked, into a great
earthen glazed Pan, and add to them water and common Salt: for example, upon six pounds of Roses, as many quarts of water, and one pound of common Salt, and so let them macerate and fer∣ment two or three days, then put them into the Vesica, and distil them: observe, that during the distillation, and after it is done, the Rose wa∣ter does smell but very little of the Roses: but if you will quicken the smell, it is but setting your Pitchers some days in the Sun, covered only with a white Paper: then take them, and stop them close with a cork stopple, and set them up, Its Ʋse and Vertue: It is the same with the vertue of the Plant it is distilled from. The soft Conserve of Leaves and Flowers. TAke a deep large Pan, set it in such a Furnace as the great Reverberatory Fur∣nace, throw a handful or two of sand in∣to your Pan; then place in it a stone Pitcher of a quart, five quarters full of water; fill up your pan with sand, so as to bury the belly of the pitcher in sand. Then put into the mouth of the Pitcher, a Glass, or Tin Pipe, as big as your little finger, and a foot long; being bended in its middle angular-wise; one end of it must be so streight, that a drop of water may not go
through in substance, the other end must be pretty wide: put the wide end lapt about with a little Linnen into your pitcher, and then make a fire in your Furnace, and cause your water to boyl; as soon as it boyls, there will come out with violence at the little end of the Pipe a moist burning vapour: which will stream above half a foot beyond the Pitcher, and yet not a drop of water with it: set under this vapour a pan full of Leaves or Flowers newly gathered and fresh; having before hand sprinkled upon them two or three spoonfuls of Spirit, or Flegm, or Vitriol, or Sulphur; these Leaves or Flowers will fade by little and little, as they receive this penetrating vapour. In the mean time, you must turn them continually, till they become like a thick hasty pudding, which will be in half a quarter of an hour; then take out these Flowers thus prepa∣red, put in more, continuing so, till you have prepared all your Leaves and Flowers, then put them all together into an Earthen Pan, and add to them double their weight of fine Sugar, well powdered and searced; incorporate them well together with your Spatula; and thus you will have a very pleasant good conserve, which will keep as long as that which is made by beat∣ing the herbs in a Mortar, keep it in white ware pots. Obs. 1. That we have filled our Pitcher but three quarters full, to the end, that the water in boyling, should not come out through the little end of the Pipe in its own substance, but in Vapour.
Obs. 2. That the Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur, with which we sprinkle the said Leaves, or Flowers, serves for two ends: First, it revives and quickens their natural colour, preserves it, nay, and re-cals it, if it were a decaying; Secondly, it is as a Salt to these Leaves, or Flowers, to preserve them from corruption. Obs. 3. That in all seasons, even in winter, you may by this method make a soft, or Liquid Con∣serve of Roses, with dry Roses, whose dying yel∣lowish colour, you may this way revive, and make them of a lovely red. But the Operation will be somewhat tedious, for it will last an hour, but also the Conserve will last and keep longer, than if it had been made of fresh Roses. Obs. 4. That if you take a straight Pipe, half a foot long, and put the wide end of it into the nose of the cover of the Brass Vesica, which must be half full of water; then the Sulphur that shall come out of the streight end of the said Pipe, will do the same effect, as the Engine described already. Obs. 5. That if you sprinkle the Conserve of Flowers of wild Popies, with Oyl of Tartar, made per deliquium, or by dissolution of its Salt; and then stir the said conserve, it will be∣come of the colour of Violets, like Syrup of Vi∣olets, and if you sprinkle the conserve of Roses with the said Oyl of Tartar, and then stir it; it will become as green as growing grass.
The Lime Water and Phagede∣nick Water. TAke four or five pound of quick-Lime in stones, and not in powder, and choose such stones as are very well calcin'd; put them into a barrel knocked out at one end, or into a great stone Pot; throw upon it at once two pale fulls of water, and then stir it with a stick; reiterating the agitation from time to time: there will be a very great ebullition & smoak, in which the volatil Salt of the Quick-lime will evaporate, in two hours or thereabouts the boyling will cease, and the Quick-lime will fall to the bottom: upon the surface of the Water there will remain a thin transparent white Ice, which is the essen∣tial Crystallized Salt of the Quick-lime; let this water stand for some days, stirring it from time to time that it may be well impregnated with the Salt of the Lime; or else at first, you may se∣parate it by inclination from the Lime that is in the bottom, and then filtrate it through a brown Coffin of Paper, and so keep it in great Glass, or white Ware Bottels, or Stone ones if you will; provided they be all well stopped with Cork stopples. Obs. 1. That here we quench, or slack the Quick-lime on a sudden, & all at once, and so by a great ebullition and evaporation, the volatil Salt of the Lime is dissipated: for in this remedy
we do not need the volatil Salt, as we do in our Cauteries; it is enough here, that the Water be impregnated with the fixt Salt of the Quick∣lime, to be fit to cleanse and dry Ulcers. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It consumes the super∣fluous humours in Ulcers; resists corruption, drys them and cicatrises them. It serves also for mealy Ring-worms, for the Itch, Scales, and Erisy∣pelases, for Inflammations: but you must have a care to make it more or less sharp, according to the nature of the distemper, and the sensibility of the part you intend to apply it to: which to do, you need only put more or less common water, according as you will have it, more or less acrimonious: for, the force of this water is in its Salt; which you cannot sweeten but by en∣creasing the dose of common water, and dimi∣nishing that of the Salt. Therefore it is but trifling to make two or three Lime waters one after another upon the same Lime. To make the Phagedenick water; put two pound of the said Quick-lime Water into a Glass Bell, or an Earthen white Ware Pan, and put to it, from half a dragm to a dragm, of Corrosive Sublimate well powdered, (in an Earthen white Ware Dish with an Earthen Pestle.) This Water, and the Sublimate, after the first stirring of them together, will become presently of an Orange colour, the Sublimate will go to the bottom, and is called the Orange-Sublimate. If you have a desire to make your Phagedenick Water weaker, pour upon it two pounds more of Lime Water; then the wa∣ter
and the Sublimate will change their Orange colour into a Lemmon: keep this water, toge∣ther with its Sublimate, in a Glass Vial well stopped for your use. Obs. 2. That the Sublimate from white becomes yellow or orange colour, when mixt with the Lime water, because that those Sulphureous Salts, of which the Corrosive Sublimate is not devested, being to engage with the Salt of the Lime, are quickened, and so revive their colour in the con∣flict, so much as to communicate their tincture to the VVater and Sublimate. Its Ʋse and Vertues: In this VVater we dip Linnen, and apply it to old rotten Ulcers, full of frothy flesh, to consume the ill flesh; correct the putrefaction, cleanse and produce better flesh, and at last dry them, and bring them to cicatrize. The Magistery of Coral. The Salt of Coral. TAke as much as you please of red Coral (that which is in little branches is the best) beat it to a fine powder in a Brass Mortar, and put it into a Glass, Stone, or VVhite-ware Vessel, pour upon it Spirit of Sulphur two or three fingers high above your Matter; let them stand together, far from the fire, and there the Coral
will dissolve; while it dissolves, there will be an ebullition with a little noise, which ceasing, marks to you that the Spirit is loaden with as much of the Coral, as it is able to dissolve; and it has lost its great acidity and sharpness. Pour off by inclination this dissolution, and put it in∣to a Vessel apart, then pour new Spirit upon the Faeces, and continue so doing, till you have dis∣solved all the Coral. This done, put all your dissolutions together into a Glass Bell, and pour upon them cold water, in such quantity, and so often, till at last your water come away with∣out any taste; filterate that which remains through a Coffin of white Paper, upon which let it dry, or make Trochisks of it, as has been taught in the Chapter of the Diaphoretick Antimony. Obs. 1. That to make your dissolutions you must not take an earthen glazed Pan, lest your Spirit of Sulphur should spend its force upon the glazing, and black and spoyl your Ma∣gistery, nor you must not take a Vessel of pot∣ters earth unglazed, because that this earth being porous, would imbibe and consume the Spirit in its porosities: now your Stone Vessels are of a thick compact Matter, and your White-ware is a kind of glass. Obs. 2. That instead of Spirit of Sulphur you may use Spirit of Vitriol, but because Vitriol na∣turally blacks all it comes near, your Magistery will not be so white; you may also make use of distilled Vinegar, or juyce of four Lemmons; but we do not, because we should need too great a
a quantity, and so it would prove dearer, and your Operation would only be longer, but not better. Obs. 3. That the Magisteries of Crabs eyes, Pearls, Bezoard, mother of Pearl, are all made the same way as the Magistery of Coral; yet we shall give a description of some of them by ano∣ther method. Obs. 4. That both the Magistery, and the Salt of Coral, are nothing but a Calx of Coral; or a Philosophick calcination of it, by the corrosion of the Spirit of Sulphur: all the difference that is between the Magistery and the Sulphur, is; that the Magistery is a Calx slackened, washed and sweetened by common water, and so freed from the acrimony of the Salt of Sulphur, whereas the Salt of Coral is a Calx, yet impreg∣nated with some rest of Spirit of Sulphur, incor∣porated in it by crystallization, or not dri∣ven away by the fire in the drying; from whénce it proceeds that the Magistery is infi∣pid, but the Salt of Coral is acid and biting upon the Tongue, and from thence it has the name of Salt, though in effect it be no salt: for it is not to be dissolved in water, and is properly a Stone, salted by the impregnation with the Spirit of Sulphur: for, if you go about to dissolve it, there will be in the water nothing but some Spirit of Sulphur, so that if you continue sweet∣ning this Salt, you will at last make the Magistery of Coral of it. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Magistery and Salt of Coral have the same vertues with pure Coral;
but they are exalted, because the body of Coral being opened, is more penetrating, and so fitter to carry its astringent corroborative faculty to the remotest parts of the body? yet it is certain, that there where the design is only to take away the Acrimony of those humours, which do corrode the Stomach and Intestines; there, I say, ordi∣nary Coral, well powdered, is better than its Ma∣gistery; because, that the Chymical Operation will be performed in the body with more benefit, by those corrosive sharp humours, which meet∣ing with the Coral, fall to dissolving of it, and so dull their own Acrimony, which is the most malignous thing in the body. We see neverthe∣less by experience too, that if upon the Magistery of Coral, you pour new Spirit of Sulphur, or of some other Acid, there will be a more sudden and stronger ebullition, though it last not so long as in the first dissolution of Coral; and therefore, the serous sharp Humours of the body, may pro∣duce the same effect upon the Magistery. But the Dissolvant meeting not with so much resi∣stance in Coral already opened and calcin'd, as in natural Coral, does not work with so much force, and therefore dulls not its activity, nor loses so much of its Acrimony after the dissolu∣tion.
The Balsam of Saint John's Wort compounded, drawn by the Spirit of Wine. Put into a Matrass five or six ounces of Spirit of Wine, put to it Myrrhe, Aloes, and San∣guis Draconis, all well powdered, of each a dragm; place your Vessel in a Sand-fire, to make your Gums dissolve; which will be done in two or three hours time, then add to them as much of the dry Flowers of Saint John's Wort, as you can take up with your thumb and four fingers; the Spirit of Wine, though it have dissolved the Gums, will yet extract the Balsamick Tincture of the said Flowers; next day take off your Ves∣sel out of the Sand, and strain all your matter through a Linnen Cloath, by pressing it while it is warm, then dissolve in it half an ounce of Ve∣nice Turpentine, by setting your matter for half an hour upon a Sand-fire; thus you will have a red, unctuous, and mucilaginous Balsam. Observe, That if you had extracted the Tin∣cture of your Flowers, before the Tincture of the Gums, the Spirit would have been weakned, because it would not only have been loaden with the oyly part of them, but also with the flegm, and therefore would not have been able to dis∣solve the said Gums. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a most excellent Bal∣sam for all green Wounds, Contusions, and for the Sciatica.
The Corrosive Sublimate. YOu must have two Pans of Potters-Earth unglaz'd, which must be turned up-side down, one upon the other, and be so exactly fit, as to make but one Pan in this situation; and therefore they must have been baked together in a Potters Oven; in the uppermost, must be a hole big enough to put an Egg into; then take Quick∣silver, and good refin'd Niter deflegmated, of each a pound, common Salt well decrepitated, and green Vitriol well calcin'd into red, of each half a pound; powder your Salts, and incorporate with them your Quicksilver, by beating them to∣gether in a Marble Mortar, with a Wooden Pe∣stle, and sprinkling distill'd Vinegar upon them, till you have reduced them to a kind of paste; put this paste by pieces into the Pan, by the hole left in the top, and then stop it with Lute, so as to leave only a vent of the bigness of a good big Pin; place your undermost Pan: up to the brim, in the Furnace of the Fire of great Reverberation; taking care to leave in your Furnace three gaps, to give the Fire Air, viz. one over against the Fire-room, and one of each side, for else your Pan being set so deep into the Furnace, would go near to suffocate, and put out your Fire: give at first a strong Fire, and when you have brought it to the highest and last degree, continue it twelve hours. While the Operation lasts, you must have a care to keep open the little vent, that is left in
the Lute; you may therefore, with a Wire, gent∣ly open it from time to time, that so your matter may send forth freely its most fiery vapours, which else would break your Vessel, and in the breaking spread such a malignity by their abundance, and sudden eruption, as would go near to infect you. After twelve hours, let your Fire go out, and when your Pan is cold, break the uppermost part of it, and you will find a loaf two or three fingers thick, sticking to the sides of the lowermost part, as white as Snow; icy in its circumference, and crystalliz'd in its middle. Obs. 1. That in France we do not make much of this Sublimate, because we can have it six times cheaper from Venice, where common Salt, Mer∣cury and Vitriol are very cheap, because they are not far from the Mines, and near the Sea. The Hollanders do also bring some to Paris, but they sophisticate it commonly with white Arsenick: We have taught to discern this cheat in the Chap∣ter of the dulcified Sublimate. Obs. 2. That the Corrosive Sublimate is no∣thing but Quicksilver, calcin'd and incorporated with Niter, and the Spirits of common Salt, and Vitriol by the Fire, which sublimes all these Vo∣latils into one lump. The common Salt and Vi∣triol remain in the bottom of the lowermost Pan, almost as heavy as when they were put in, because that they are naturally fix'd; the fix'd Substance of the common Salt, and deflegmated Vitriol, serve to hinder the melting of the Niter; and the Spi∣rits of these two serve to corrode the Mercury, and make it strongly corrosive, by the conjunction of all these Salts together.
Its Ʋse and Vertues: 'Tis the strongest Corro∣sive of all, it serves to make the dulcified Mercu∣ry, the Emetick Powder, the Phagedenick Water, and that Unguent, which for the violence of its inflaming and burning Operation, is called, The Devil's Ʋnguent: It is the poison we call Rats∣bane, and kills Rats and Mice by burning their entrals, as if they had live coals in them; produ∣cing the same effect in all Animals, and men too, if they swallow any of it. The Antidote of it, is not any Theriaca, or Victan, or other Cordial; there is nothing but Water in abundance, that by humecting and wetting the Salts, is able to take away their Acrimony, though Oyl be very good too; for, Oyl and Grease, because they cannot dissolve, and melt these Salts, make them at least remain without force upon those parts which are oyled or greased, as we may see in the operation of Cauteries, applied to a very fat man; for, as soon as they have corroded the skin, they are fain to stay there, and shew their caustick vertue no further; because they meet with the Panicula Carnosa, or Adiposa, which stays their action, there is nothing but a waterish humidity, which by melting of these Salts, gives them leave to work.
The Balsam of Sulphur, drawn by the Oyly Spirit of Turpentine. PUt into a Matrass four ounces of Flowers of Brimstone, or else Brimstone powder'd very fine, and one pound of Spirit of Turpentine, in∣corporated with its Oyl, such as the Merchants send from Provence to Paris; let your Matrass be but half full, place it in a Sand-fire, and fit to it another Matrass, and so make a double Vessel. In this heat the Spirit will begin to simper, and presently after the Brimstone will melt, and dye the Spirit of a fine colour, as red as a Pomegra∣nate: govern your Fire so, as to hinder your Spi∣rit from boyling; in one or two hours the Ope∣ration will be done. Then take off your Vessel, and pour out your Dissolution, while it is warm, into a stone Vessel, or of glaz'd Earth; in it, the Sulphur, as it grows cold, will go to the bot∣tom, and congeal in a yellow lump, and the Tincture will remain above; when your Tin∣cture is cold and clear, by the falling down of the Brimstone, pour it off by inclination, and keep it in a glass Vial. Obs. 1. That this Spirit of Turpentine has drawn not only the red Tincture, but also the ill smell of the Brimstone, so as to lose its own odour. Obs. 2. That the Brimstone, which you find after the Operation done, weighs almost as much as when you put it in, having communicated to
the Spirit of Turpentine little besides the colour, and smell of Brimstone. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a most excellent Ano∣dinum, and Ripener for the wounds of the ner∣vous parts, and is very good for pains in the ears, by putting some drops of it into them. The Essence of Musk, and Amber∣greece, drawn by Spirit of Wine. PUt into a small Matrass, one dragm of Am∣bergreece, and half a dragm of Musk, well powder'd before hand; pour upon them five ounces of Spirit of Wine, seal up your Matrass hermetically, and put it into a little earthen Pan full of Sand, up to half the belly; set it in the Sun for forty days, in the hottest time of the year, from eight of the clock in the morning, till seven at night; keeping behind your Matrass a Tin Leaf, to receive the Sun-beams, and reverberate them upon the glass. The Musk and Ambergreece will be almost quite dissolved in the Spirit of Wine, and will dye it of a red colour, like a Ru∣by; break the neck of your Glass, and pour out your Essence into a glass Vial, well stopp'd, and waxed, and above the stopple, put a piece of an oyled bladder. Obs. 1. That Ambergreece being a kind of Bi∣tumen, and Musk being of an oyly nature, they may easily be dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and communicate to it their Tincture.
Its Ʋse and Vertues: One drop of this Essence perfumes for ever whatsoever it touches, that can imbibe it; and is much more pleasant with a double quantity of Ambergreece, than with equal parts of Musk and Ambergreece, because the odour of the Ambergreece is sweeter, and that of the Must stronger. The Tincture of Tartar, or Spirit of Wine clarified. TAke as much as you please of Tartar calcin'd to whiteness, properly called Salt of Tar∣tar, or of Ashes made of burnt Lees of Wine, call'd Gravell'd Ashes; put either of them into a Crucible, or unglaz'd stone Pot, place it in a Wind-Furnace, till your matter be blew, like Vitriol of Cyprus, which may be done in an hours time: take off your Pot, and with a brass Spoon take out your matter, and powder it while it is hot, in a brass Mortar, and then put it into a Ma∣trass, which you must stir, and shake in your hand, to the end the heat of the matter may ex∣tend its self equally to all the parts of the Glass, and not break one by over-heating it. Let your Matrass have two parts empty, pour into your matter Spirit of Wine, till your Glass be half full; place this Vessel in a Sand-Furnace, giving an or∣dinary Fire according to Art; let it stand till the Spirit of Wine become as red as a Ruby, then pour off by inclination this Tincture, pour on
more Spirit upon the Faeces, and reiterate this as long as the Faeces will yield any Tincture, there will remain a good quantity of the said Faeces, which you may re-calcine, and use as other Salt of Tartar; keep your Tincture. Observe, That Tartar being a sulphureous and inflameable Salt, may take the colour of blew, and communicate a red Tincture to the Spirit of Wine. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is the most powerful and penetrating Desopilative that is; it produces its effect strongly and gently, so that for the ob∣structions of the Spleen, the Pancreas, the Me∣sentery, and the Mesaraick Veins, there is not the like remedy amongst Chymists nor Galenists; for, by the Spirit of Wine, it dissolves all the most tenacious Viscosities in the little Veins, and pores of the Belly: and by the Salt of Tartar, it carries away all the impurities of the said parts, so that no Soap can cleanse more than this Tincture. Its use is to be dissolved from ten to thirty drops, in some Broth, or appropriated Water, to take every morning fasting for some days. The Spirit, and foetid Oyl of Tartar. TAke a glass Retort luted up to half its neck, if you do make but a little of this Remedy, or if you make a great deal, take a Stone one, fill it up to the neck with good Tartar of Montpellier,
either red or white, beaten to a fine powder: place your Retort upon a Pot-cover full of Ashes, in the small reverberatory Furnace, if you use but two or three pounds; or in an Earthen Bowl, in a great circulatory Fire, if you use but half a pound: fit a Receiver, and give your Fire by degrees; there will soon come forth a white dark vapour, which will continue all the time of the Operati∣on; the Flegm comes first, then the Tartar takes fire in the Retort, and is in a flame, and from the smoak of this flame, come the Spirit and Oyl. Continue your fire, till there come no more out of the Retort, and till your Receiver be clear, and cold, though the Fire be violent under the Retort: out of one pound of Tartar, you will draw about ten ounces of Spirit, with its Flegm, and two oun∣ces of Oyl; in the Retort will remain four ounces of a black Salt, which you must dissolve in Water, then filtrate and coagulate to use, as the true Salt of Tartar, being entirely devested of its Flegm, Spirit and Oyl, and so being a pure Salt; for the Tartar contains but very little Faeces, or Earth. Observe, That in this Operation, we perceive that Tartar is a very sulphureous Salt, since it takes fire in the Retort, and there comes from it a blackish Oyl, stinking, and inflameable, and that the Faeces do remain black, and burnt in the Retort. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Oyl is indifferently stinking and caustick; it serves for Ring-worms, and exfoliation of Bones, or for Farsey in Horses: the Spirit is acid, when rectified, and is good against the Stone and Gravel.
The Spirit and Aromatick Oyl of Ju∣niper Berries. Put fresh Juniper Berries into a Brass Vesica, till it be half full, fill one third more of the Vesica with common cold water, let them in∣fuse twenty four hours in the Vesica, with a gen∣tle fire, to extract afterwards the better the oyly Essence of your Berries, having all this while stopt the mouth of your Vesica with a Linnen∣cloth; take out this cloth, and fit to your Brass body its Mores-head, border'd with a refrigera∣tory, and a moveable Pipe, and do as has been taught in the distillation of the waters of Plants; that which will first come, will be the Aromatick, Balsamick Essence, or Oyl of Juniper Bays, toge∣ther with a little flegm, or inflegmated Spirit; and then the rest of the flegm will follow. Out of a peck of Berries, you will not have above two ounces of Essence, or Oyl, all the rest will be flegm, or Spirit inflegmatized. Obs. 1. That because we can draw but a very small quantity of Oyl or Essence, not only out of Juniper Berries, but also out of all Balsamick and Aromatick Leaves, Flowers, Rinds, Barks, Roots, Woods, Berries, and Seeds, therefore we have found the way of using Spirit of Tur∣pentine, separated by three or four Rectifications from its red Oyl, putting three or four ounces upon every peck of Berries; to the end that be∣ing incorporated with the Essence of Juniper, it may augment, and encrease the quantity of the
said Essence, and yet not change its qualities; but if you should put more than three or four ounces of this Spirit on a peck of Berries, the smell of the Turpentine would predominate, and so spoil your Essence: thus the Provensals prepare and multiply their Essences, and by affording them cheap, make them become common. But I could wish that they would leave off sophisticating them, and sell them as dear as they stand them in, and are really worth; particularly, those Es∣sences that are to be taken inwardly; but the covetousness of those that sell, and the sparing way of the buyers, will never give way to this. Observe, That when you have put to your Ber∣ries the Spirit of Turpentine well rectified; the first liquor that comes is the said Spirit impreg∣nated with the oyly Essence of your Juniper Ber∣ries. Obs. 2. That there are two ways to separate the oyly Essence from its flegm. The first, is by a glass Tunnel or a Coffin of brown Paper wet before hand with common water; or with the Spirit of your Berries, as it has been said before: only observe, that most of the Essences do swim upon their flegm, and therefore, that in separa∣ting them by the glass Tunnel, the first thing that runs out, must be the flegm; and by the Coffin, 'tis also the flegm that goes through; the Oyl remains; which you draw out by making a hole in your Paper Coffin towards the bottom, and holding a glass Vial under to receive your Oyl.
The second way is, to put into a glass Matrass, with a short neck, all the flegm with which the Oyl is distilled; and then make a rowl of Cotton like the Wick of a Candle; of which put one end into your Matrass, to make it touch the said Es∣sence, and let the other end hang into a glass Vial, tied with a pack-thred to the neck of the Matrass: your Essence will by little and little im∣bibe the Cotton, and at last run quite through it, till it come out at the other end, and fall by drops into your Vial. Obs. 3. That the Balsamick, and Aromatick Essence, or Oyl of Juniper, as of all other Balsa∣micks, and Aromaticks, is nothing but the subtlest part of its Sulphur and Volatil Salt, because of its Sulphur it retains the smell of the Berries, and the yellow colour of their Tincture, and because of its volatil Salt, it retains the taste, and Acrimony of the said Berries; in these two, the Salt and Sul∣phur, consists the excellence of this simple; but, because the Oyl of Juniper has but little Salt, therefore it swims upon its flegm, and having been drawn by common water, it has pre∣served the natural smell, savour, and tincture of the Berries; and thus it happens to all drogues of this nature: for, if you distil them in a naked fire without water, there will come from them a stinking caustick Oyl, as we have taught in the Chapter of the distillation of the stinking Oyl of Cloves. But before this stinking Oyl, we do or∣dinarily draw from Aromatick drogues by the intermedium of water, all their Essence and Bal∣samick Oyl, which is a kind of Virgin Oyl, be∣ing
the purest part of them. After its extra∣ction, there remains yet in the Faeces a thick gross terrestrial saltish Oyl, which we draw without intermedium by distillation ad latus in a glass Re∣tort luted in a naked fire: and because this Oyl is drawn without intermedium in a naked fire, and by the combustion and flagration of the said Drugs, therefore it is black and stinking, and of an ill taste, and much more caustick than the A∣romatick Oyl, which contains less of the Volatil Salt, the flegm having shared a good part of the said Salt, with the Oyl; but in the foetid Oyl, the Volatil Salt is as it were shut in, and not carried away by its flegm, whereof it has very little. If you rectifie your Essence of Juniper in a little glass Retort in a Sand-fire, there will come off a Spirit, which is the Spirit of Turpentine, which you had added to it, and there will re∣main in the Retort a pure Essence of Juniper as yellow as Gold, and as thick as true Bal∣sam. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Essence of Juniper Berries helps the Tooth-ach, Deafness, the Rot of the Bones, the Colick, and the Gravel. Its flegm, or Spirit, serves to prepare the extract of Juniper, as we shall teach hereafter. The Aromatick Essence of Cloves, Cinnamon, Pepper, Aniseed, Fennel seed, Rosmary-leaves, Thyme, Marjorum, Savin, Jesmin-Flowers, O∣range-Flowers, Orange and Lemmon Peels, and generally of all Roots, Barks, Rinds, Woods, Berries, Seeds, Leaves, and Aromatick Flowers,
whose oyly Tincture may be easily extracted in water, are drawn the same way as that of Juniper Berries: but those Woods, Roots, and Barks that are of a thicker and more compact substance, and which will not easily yield their oyly Tincture in water, must be used without water, in a Retort and naked fire, to extract their Oyl, which by consequent must be black, stinking, and caustick, as the Oyl of the Wood, and Bark of Guiac, &c. The stinking and black Oyl of Juniper. FIll a Stone or Glass Retort luted, with the Berries of Juniper, that have already yielded their Aromatick Oyl. Place it upon an earthen Bowl full of ashes, in a small Reverberatory Fur∣nace, there will come abundance of white Va∣pours, which in the Receiver will dissolve, some into an acid Spirit, and some into a Black Oyl, stinking, and caustick: Out of a pound of Ber∣ries, you will have about two ounces of this Oyl, and twelve of acid Spirit, and if you use fresh Berries, that have not served, you will have the double of stinking Oyl: separate by a glass Tun∣nel the Oyl from the Spirit. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Oyl is good for Ring-worms, for the Tooth-ach, the Rot of the Bones, and all old Ulcers.
The Extract of Juniper. PUt into the Brass Vesica, or double glass ¦sel, a peck of Juniper Berries fresh gather and pour upon them distilled water of Junip three or four fingers high above them: if yo have not enough of the said Water, you may su¦ply your want with common Water. Place yo Vesica in a circulary fire, or in any of the Reve¦beratory Furnaces with a small fire, or if you  a double glass Vessel, set it in a sand Furnace wi a good fire; there let it stand twenty four hour till the tincture be extracted; which pour o gently into a Brass Basin, or into an Earthe Pan; place it upon a little Furnace over a nake fire; and make it boil as soon as you can; whe it boils, throw into it five or six whites of Eggs, with the Egg-shells, and so continue to make it boil, till your whites of Eggs be hard, and loaden with the Faeces of the Tincture, then pour off this clarified Tincture from its dregs, and strain it through a Linnen, or Flannel-strainer; hindring your whites of Eggs from coming away with the Tincture into the stone Pan you receive it in; then evaporate it gently in a Sand-Furnace to the consistence of an Extract; a stone Pan is fitter than a glazed Earthen one, because the stone one is much thinner in the bottom, and every where, than a glazed one, and may therefore be sooner penetrated by a sand heat.
Its Ʋse and Vertues: This extract is called the ermans Treacle, because that in Germany they se it frequently as we do here Treacle; and it is ndeed a great preservative against the Plague, nd a rare Antidote against poisons; it strengthens the stomach: the dose is from a scruple to two dragms. All extracts of Berries, Leaves and Flowers, are made the same way. The Laudanum. TAke four ounces of good Opium, and if it be soft, cut it into pieces with a Knife; or if it be dry, powder it in a Mortar, and have a care that the powder rising do not at last work upon you the same effect that a double Dose of pills of Opium would do. Put this Opium with∣out any other preparation into a Matrass, and pour upon it Spirit of Wine, till it be four or five fingers above your matter, and that your Matrass have a third part empty, lest your menstruum, in stead of extracting the Tincture, should evaporate and be gone. Place your Vessel in a sand Furnace, up to half the belly in the sand, fit to it another little Matrass, and so form a double Vessel; lute them well together with Pa∣per and Glew, that so nothing may exhale: make a good fire, and let your Vessel stand a whole day, the next day separate your Tincture from its
Faeces, and pour new Spirit of Wine to them, which also must stand a day, and then be poured off: then for a third time, put new Spirit of Wine to extract the remainder of the Tincture, which done, put all your Tinctures together in∣to a stone Pan. Place this Pan either in a sand Furnace, or in a Balneum Mariae; if it happen that you are then distilling of Spirit of Wine in the Brass Vesica, you may place your Pan upon the Moors-head, which may serve in stead of a Balneum Mariae; evaporate gently your Tin∣ctures to the consistence of an extract: If you desire to draw off most of your Spirit of Wine, put your Tinctures at first into a glass Cucur∣bit, and distil them in a Sand-fire, till they begin to grow thick; and then pour them into a stone Pan, and evaporate them, as hath been said. Obs. 1. That all those preparations practised upon Opium ordinarily, do rather cleanse it, and purifie it from its Faeces, than free it from any venomous substance, or malignous quality; there∣fore if you take of that Opium which is in little even Cakes, neatly environed with Leaves; you may give it without any other preparation at all, only beat it warm in a Mortar, and so form Pills of it. Obs. 2. That in the belief that most have, that the thin Volatil substance of Opium, is that which causes its malignity, they have studied all ways imaginable whereby to devest it of this Volatil substance; as by drying it over the fire, and so causing this Sulphureous subtile substance to eva∣porate:
but it is not against reason to believe, that in this exsiccation, or drying, the flegm alone, which is innocent enough, is the thing exhal'd, and that Opium in its whole substance is of a subtle, Volatil, Narcotick nature, and in that consists its Malignity. Obs. 3. That we use Spirit of Wine for a dis∣solvant, because it draws much more perfectly this Tincture than any other liquor would, be∣cause that Opium is of a thick, glutinous, juicy nature, and Spirit of Wine is the best Dissolver of all Gums: besides, the design being to be∣numb the senses, the Spirit of Wine, which has the same faculty, is most proper, and being a cordial, is a rare corrective of that malignity which we suppose in Opium. Some are of opi∣nion, that distilled Vinegar would be a fitter menstruum, because they pretend by it to fix a little the Volatil nature of the Opium, and hin∣der the fumes which make it to arise to the head. To which I answer, with this distinction, That if the design be to appease the Head-ach, and correct Insomniums, then Laudanum prepared with Spirit of Wine is best; but if it be to stop a Diarrhaea, or Dysentery, or asswage the pains of the Colick, then Laudanum prepared with Vinegar is fittest; because the Spirit of Wine carries one to the Head, and the Vinegar keeps the other down in the Belly: but we must have one of these menstruums, if we will ex∣tract the Tincture of Opium well: for pure Vi∣negar smells too much of Vinegar; common Water is not strong enough, because of the vis∣cosity
of the Opium, which requires a penetra∣ting dissolvant. Obs. 4. That if your Opium be very clean, and without Ordure, it will turn almost all of it into Tincture, and leave but very few Faeces; and so the extract of Opium is but a purified Opium, de∣livered from all mixture of other things, and devested of some of its own indissolvable terre∣streity. Obs. 5. That in Authors, you meet with an infinite number of descriptions of Laudanum; and all the variety is produced from nothing, but from a different mixtion of ingredients; but certainly the best Laudanum is the simplest, and such as we have described it. Saffron, Pearls, Corral, Treacle, Musk, Ambergrease, and other ingredients which are added, serving for nothing but to take up more room, and often are quite opposite and contrary to the design intended by giving Opium, so far they are from augmenting the vertue of it. Its Ʋse and Vertues are, to make those sleep that are troubled with continual waking, and in∣tolerable Insomniums, not to be overcome by or∣dinary Somniferous remedies; to asswage great head-ach, to thicken and soften all sharp humours flowing to the breast, to stay loosnesses, dysente∣ries, and help pains in bilious colicks and dysen∣teries. But have a care you give not Laudanum while the body is full, and has not been evacuated sufficiently by Blood-letting, Clysters, and a mo∣derate diet; nor when there is a copious Fluxion upon the breast, caused by a thick humour, nor
when there is pain and stopping of breath, nor when the patient is very weak, and has but little natural heat. The dose is from one grain to two, or three, or four at most, and you must never give the highest dose, without having given the first and second without effect; it is ordinarily given in form of a little Pill. The Tincture of Roses. PUt into a Brass Pot, or into an earthen glazed Pan, four pound, or two quarts of water; set it upon a Furnace in a naked fire, till it begin to simper, and then put into it two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, and stir it with a woodden Spatula to the bottom, then throw into it a good handful of red dry Ro∣ses of the year you are in, and stir all together again with your Spatula, and so let them stand till the water begin to boil, then take off your Vessel, cover it, and when the matter is cold, strain your Tincture through a Cloth, or a Coffin of brown Paper, it will be as red as a Ruby, and will keep four or five months without danger of corruption. Obs. 1. That if you did put your Roses into the water, before the Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitriol, you would lose your Spirit afterwards in the Ro∣ses, without effect, but the water being sharpned first, is fit to extract and revive the Tincture of the Roses. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a very pleasant
cooler, being Cordial, and strengthening, and most excellent for the Liver, the Kidneys and the Stomach. The Milk, or Precipitate, or Ma∣gistery of Brimstone. TAke four ounces of Flowers of Brimstone, and sixteen ounces of common Salt decre∣pitated and powdered, mingle them well together: which, that you may the better do, put a spoonful of each at a time upon a Marble stone, and there grind them to an impalpable powder; wet this powder drop by drop with distilled Vi∣negar, till you have reduced all into the consi∣stence of Pap, or hasty Pudding, then scrape it together with a piece of Horn, and continue do∣ing thus, till all your matter be grown'd, and thus prepared: in the mean time, boil six pound or three quarts of common water, in a Brass Kettle, and when the water boils, throw in all this lump of Matter, and after it has boil'd a little, add to it half an ounce of white Roch-Alom in powder, and stir it with a Woodden Spatula, keeping your Kettle on the fire, till all be dissolved in the water, which then will be of red∣dish muddy colour; and this will happen in half an hours time, then take off the Kettle, let your dissolution cool; in cooling, the Brimstone will precipitate to the bottom in a whitish colour:
when it is all precipitated, pour off gently the Water, which will be impregnated with the com∣mon Salt and Alom: pour common Water upon your whitish Matter to sweeten it, and do so till the Water come away insipid, and that the Mat∣ter be entirely freed from the Acrimony of the Vinegar, Alom, and common Salt: filtrate that which remains through a Coffin of white Paper, or through a glass Tunnel, as has been taught heretofore; and you have the Precipitate or Ma∣gistery of Brimstone. Obs. 1. That our design being here to open and whiten the body of Brimstone, we use the Flowers of Brimstone; because, that by reason of their impalpability, which they have contracted in their sublimation, they are fitter to be incorpo∣rated with common Salt, and to become whiter than common Brimstone would be, which would be very hard to be powdered so fine, as the flow∣ers of Brimstone are already. Obs. 2. That we use common Salt, to open, calcine, and whiten the body of Brimstone, and we use it decrepitated, and three times as much in quantity as the flowers of Brimstone, to the end it may do its work the better: for the fur∣thering of which we also add distilled Vinegar, which quickens the common Salt, by incorpora∣ting it with the Sulphur. Obs. 3. That for this incorporation we use not a Brass Mortar, because it might black the powder by the attraction of the Tincture of the Metal, but we use a Marble and Stone one, where the finest things may be easily made
finer, so that a hair might be broken upon it. Obs. 4. That Brimstone alone would never dissolve in water, though never so exactly pow∣der'd, because that being exteriourly of a greasie, oleaginous nature, and its Salt being altogether buried in its own substance, all the ways of being dissolv'd are taken away from it. But if you add to it common Salt, by means of the distilled Vi∣negar, and the Levigation of it, then all being one body, it happens that the Salt and Vinegar in their dissolution do engage the Brimstone to dissolve at the same time; but then it is necessary that your water should boil some time, to hasten the dissolution of these bodies, and so the Sulphur being a little opened, and calcin'd by the common Salt and Vinegar, does at last afford its Tincture to the said water. Obs. 5. During the ebullition of the common Salt and Brimstone in the common water, we add a little Alom to whiten and scowre the Brim∣stone, for Alom is a very dry white Salt, and Brim∣stone quite contrary, is a very oyly mucilaginous one; we do not use Roman Alom, because that it is red, and would communicate its colour to the Magistery of Brimstone, which ought to be white by reason of the common Salt. Obs. 6. That the Brimstone is precipitated all alone without any Precipitant, as soon as the wa∣ter grows cold, because its dissolution in water was not perfect, and the strength of the Salts be∣ing dulled by the coldness of the water, they can no longer retain the Brimstone above water. Obs. 7. That the Precipitate, or Magistery of
Brimstone, is but Brimstone Philosophically cal∣cin'd by common Salt, and distilled Vinegar, and scoured by Alom, then sweetened by washings, and so whitened in form of a powder. Its Ʋse and Vertues: 'Tis an excellent dryer, or dissicative for all Ulcers, and therefore is fitter to make the Balsam of Brimstone, either with Spi∣rit of Turpentine, or with Walnut-Oyl, than or∣dinary Brimstone, or the Flowers of Brimstone: It is particularly good against all Ulcers of the Lungs, to ripen the Fluxions that fall from the Breast, and help the Expectoration of Flegms, and also to dry away the humours which flow that way. It may be taken either in a spoonful of Sy∣rup, or in some Conserve, or you powder with it a Toast spread with fresh Butter, or Oyl. The Dosis is, from half a dragm to a dragm. And if at the same time you will strengthen the Stomach, and gently loosen the Belly, you add half a dragm of Rhubarb in powder upon your Toast, you may put it into a spoonful of some pectoral Water; but it is not so easie this way, because, by its lightness, it swims upon the Water; and that so, in stead of swallowing it, a good deal will remain in your mouth. You may likewise use it in a Pomatum, against the Itch and Scabs, because that this Brim∣stone hath acquired not only a singular whiteness, but has also lost all its ill smell, which makes all the Unguents and Balsams of Sulphur so stinking and unpleasant: but it would be a dear Unguent, because you can hardly prepare much of this Ma∣gistery at once, nor without great pains and cost.
The Magistery of Pearls. TAke one ounce of Oriental Pearls, which are better, and much dearer than the Oc∣cidental; reduce them to a fine powder, in a Brass Mortar, which must be covered with a Leather Cover, in which is a hole to put your Pestle in; put this powder into a Glass precipi∣tatory Vessel, and pour to it Spirit of Sulphur, or distilled Vinegar, or juice of Lemmons, four or five fingers high above the matter; there will presently be caused a little simpring, or boiling, which ended, stir your matter with a stick; then suffering it to settle a little, pour off your Dissol∣vant, which will be loaded with some part of the said powder of Pearls, and will be as white as Milk. Pour more Dissolvant upon the matter left, and do as at first, continuing this Operation, till all your powder be dissolved; then gather together all your Dissolutions, in the same precipitatory Vessel, or in another, if you will, and pour up∣on them great quantity of common Water divers times, to sweeten and wash the said Dissolution, and continue this till the Water have carried away all the Acrimony of the Dissolvant. After you have poured out the last Water, your matter will remain like Pap; which put into a paper Coffin, and there let it dry in the shade upon a Sieve; you will have the Magistery of Pearls, as white as Snow, in little mis-shapen pieces, which
you may keep as they are, or else powder them: or if you please, you may at first, before your matter be dry, form them into Trochisks, as has been taught. Obs. 1. That we reduce the Pearls to a fine powder, that they may be easilier dissolved, by a less quantity of Dissolvant; in the powdering of them, the Mortar is covered, because, that Pearls being small, and round, and hard, would in beating, be apt to leap out of the Mortar, and be lost, if it were not covered. Obs. 2. That we rather use here Spirit of Sul∣phur, than distill'd Vinegar, or juice of Lem∣mon; because it dissolves them easilier than ei∣ther of the other, insomuch, that one pound of Spirit of Sulphur, will sooner dissolve an ounce of Pearls, than twelve pound of distill'd Vinegar, or juice of Lemmons; besides, that the Spirit of Sulphur is more cordial and pectoral than either of them. Obs. 3. That the Spirits of Salt, Niter, and Vitriol, are not proper for this Operation, be∣cause of their too great corrosive faculties, which would go near to rest in the Magistery, and then we should be obliged to sweeten it so long, till at last the Water of the Lotion would carry away with it a good part of the Magistery. We may say as much of the Oyl of Tartar, made per deli∣quium, in a wet place, or by the dissolution of the Salt of Tartar in common Water; besides, the Spirit of Vitriol would black the whiteness of the Magistery, and the Oyl of Tartar would make it rough to the feeling.
Obs. 4. That common Water is sufficient to precipitate the said Magistery, and weaken the Spirit of Sulphur, so as to make it lose its hold: because that the dissolution of Pearls by the said Spirit, having been performed without the help of an external heat, and without any great pene∣tration, there is no need of any strong fight be∣tween the Dissolvant, and the Precipitant. Obs. 5. That the Water of the first sweetning, has a little smell of Ambergreece, if the dissolution be with the Spirit of Sulphur: for, Pearls open∣ed by this Spirit, have such a smell. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Magistery is a great Cordial against all venomous Feavers, the Small Pox in Children, the pains of the Spleen; it is likewise good for Consumptive persons, and a∣gainst Loathings, and desires to vomit, caused by sharp serosities. The Dose is from a scruple to a dragm. It is also a Fucus, being mingled with some proper Pomatum. Some brag, with ostentation, of a Water of Pearls; but it can be nothing else but this Magi∣stery, mingled with some Cordial Water, which, if stirred, becomes as white as Milk; for, as for the true Milk of Pearls, which is the Dissolution of Pearls in the Spirit of Brimstone, it cannot properly be called Water of Pearls, because that by reason of its sharpness, it is not potable. The Water of the first Lotion of your Magistery, is excellent to scour and whiten the hands.
The Calx of Oyster-shells. TAke of the uppermost part of Oyster-shells, what quantity you please, wash them, and cleanse them in warm Water, and let them dry upon a Lettice in the Sun. Then take six or eight Tiles, made in the form of a half-Circle, of such a proportion, as that two of them join'd to∣gether, may fill the inward Round of the Labo∣ratory of a Reverberatory Furnace, leaving the space of an inch empty between the sides of the Furnace, and the said Tiles, to give the fire play round about, and betwixt the said Tiles; for, there must be also in two or three places of their Circumference, a Brim of an inch deep, to let the flame in to calcine those matters that shall be set upon them. Place two of these Tiles upon the Iron Bars of the Laboratory, and upon them place three or four other rows of Tiles, loaden with Oyster-shells, one upon another, so as there be half a foot left empty of the top of the Labora∣tory; then cover your Laboratory with an ear∣then Pan, turn'd upside down, in whose bottom is a hole: give a great Fire at first, with Wood and Coals, and when it is come to the last degree, continue that twelve hours; the flame passing upon your Oyster-shells, will calcine them, and reduce them into Calx, as white as Snow, and so brittle, as to fall into powder if you touch it. Obs. 1. That we take only the upper part of the
Oyster-shells, because that part is whiter and thin∣ner, and easier to calcine, than the lower part. Obs. 2. That we wash them in warm Water, before we calcine them, that we may scour them, and cleanse them from a certain mucilaginous or∣dure, which in the calcining would leave a black∣ness, and spoil the beauty of your Calx. If you desire to scour your Oyster-shells a better way, af∣ter you have washed them in warm Water, put them into a stone Pan, and pour upon them di∣stilled Vinegar, one finger high over the matter, and so let them soak one day, then take them out, and dry them in the Sun, before you calcine them. Obs. 3. That the Calx of Oyster-shells is very Salt, so that by the same method that we draw the Salt of Vegetables and Animals, we may like∣wise draw this Salt in good quantity; that is, by dissolution in common Water, filtration, and evaporation of your Lixivium, till it be dry. This Calx is composed of two substances, viz. of a good deal of white Virginal Earth, and of a good deal of Salt, both fix and volatil; by means of which, the said Oyster-shells are naturally heavy. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Calx is most ex∣cellent for the Gravel, because of its Salt; it is ve∣ry opening, and dries up (by means of the two substances it is composed of) all superfluous hu∣midities of the Body. The Dose is from twenty to thirty Grains in some Conserve, Preserve, or Syrup.
The Magistery and Calx of Egg-shells. TAke a good sufficient quantity of the shells of Hens Eggs new-laid, and clean, wash them in fair Water, and then dry them, as we do Oyster-shells; put them into a stone Pan, or a glass Bell, and pour upon them Spirit of Vinegar, that is, distilled Vinegar, separated from its Flegm, five or six fingers above the mat∣ter; it will presently begin to simper, and will dissolve the Egg-shells: as soon as it has done, and that by laying your Ear to, you perceive no more noise, then your Egg-shells are dissolved, and the Dissolvant is loaden with its proportion of the dissolved substance, and has lost its Acri∣mony, and sharpness in the combat. This done, stir your matter with a woodden Spatula, and by this agitation, your Dissolution will be turned into white Curds. Let it settle, and then pour off this curdled Dissolution into a stone Glass, or White-ware Vessel; after which, pour on more Vinegar, and do as at first, till all your matter be dissolved. Having put all your Dissolutions into one Vessel, pour upon them a great quantity of clear cold Water; stirring them with a woodden Spatula, the Water will become at first as white as Milk, and the Magistery will precipitate to the bottom, then the Water will be clear and sow∣rish: pour off this Water, and pour on more, till you have entirely sweetened your Magistery,
and that your Water come away insipid: put the remainder into a Coffin of white Paper, through which, the Water that remains will filtrate; and you will have remaining the Magistery of Egg-shells, which you must dry in the shade, upon the bottom of a Sieve. To make the Simple Calx of Egg-shells; Take a good quantity of the newest, and cleanest, well washed, and dried, bruise them between your hands, and fill them with an earthen Pot un∣glazed; which set in a Potters Oven for nine days, and you will have a Calx as white as Snow. Obs. 1. That you must take new and clean Egg-shells, to the end, that being free from all soiling, and dirt, the Spirit of Vinegar may the easilier corrode them; for all smoot and ordure in a thing, does dull the action of a Dissolvant; and if you should calcine them with this ordure upon them, they would grow black, and spoil your Calx. Obs. 2. That you must use the Egg-shells of Hens, and not of Ducks, Geese, or Turkeys, be∣cause that Hens Egg-shells are easilier calcin'd, being thinner, by reason that a Hen is a more temperate Animal; Water-fowl are hotter, and by reason of their heat, do concoct, and harden their Egg-shells more than other Fowl; and from thence comes that you must have a greater quan∣tity of your Dissolvant, employ more heat, and spend more time to calcine the Eggs of Water-fowl, than of Hens, whose Egg-shells do also pro∣duce a whiter Calx than any of the others.
Obs. 3. That we use here Spirit of Vinegar de∣flegmated, to dissolve the said Egg-shells; for, if it were undeflegmated, it would not be strong enough to corrode the hardness of the Egg-shells; you might use Spirit of Sulphur, but it is too dear; and Egg-shells are not so hard, but that they may be dissolved by a weaker Dissolvant, than Spirit of Sulphur, or Spirit of Niter, which would do well, and produce a very white Calx: but for Spirit of Vitriol, and Aqua fortis, they would altogether spoil your Operation, by com∣municating a blackness to your Calx, which ought to be extream white. Obs. 4. That the Magistery of Egg-shells is no∣thing but Egg-shells Philosophically calcin'd by their dissolution in Spirit of Vinegar, then preci∣pitated by the cold Water, into a white Calx, and sweetened by reiterated Lotions, then filtred and dried in the shade. As for the simple Calx of Egg-shells, it is a calcination of them, made by a strong fire of nine days, so as to be reduced in∣to a substance, containing much of white Virgi∣nal Earth, and a little Salt. If you wash this Calx, you take from it all its Salt and sharpness, and there will remain an insipid Virginal Earth, of the nature of the Magistery. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a good desiccative which dries up Ulcers without corrosion; there∣fore it is very good for these Ulcers that affect that Coat of the Eye, called Cornea: it is also a very good Fucus, for if you rub your hand and face with it, without mingling it with any Pomatum, it will so insinuate its self
into the pores, as to produce a rare white∣ness. The Calcination of Venice Tale. TAke four ounces of Venice Talc, which crum∣ble between your fingers; then take four pound of whole River-pibbles, not of the biggest, nor of the least size, put into a white Leather Bag, gather'd at each end, both your Pibble-stones, and your Talc, and then shake it, as the Pin∣makers do, when they whiten their Pins: do this for an hour, then take out your Talc, and put it into a Silken Sieve, and searce it; take that which could not pass through, and put into the Bag, and so shake it again, as at first; then searce it, and do thus till all your Talc be reduced to a white im∣palpable powder, like Meal-dust. Obs. 1. That we use here a Bag of Sheeps-skin, white and clean, and well dressed; because that a Bag of black Leather would black your powder; and so would it do, if it were not very clean, and well dressed; a Linnen Bag would not be fit, be∣cause that the finest part of the powder would go through it, besides the danger of its breaking, or wearing out in this agitation. Obs. 2. That we use River-pibbles, and not Mountain ones, because that the River ones are whiter, harder, and smoother than other, and therefore fitter for this Operation. Obs. 3. That Venice Talc is improperly said to
be calcin'd by this Operation; for it is nothing but Talc very well powder'd, by this ingenious method, which reduces it into a finer and whiter substance than could be done by a Pestle in a Brass Mortar, or by a violent fire, and tedious calci∣nation. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is the finest of all Fu∣cuses to apply, without Pomatum, to the skin, penetrating the pores, and sticking to them by its unctuosity or oyliness more than any other. It may be useful other ways too. The Salt of Crystal Venice. TAke one pound of the transparentest Crystal, put it into a Crucible of a reasonable size, and set it in a great reverberatory Furnace for eight hours, till it be melted down; then take off your Crucible, and when it is cold, break it, and take out your matter, which in a Brass Mortar you must reduce to an impalpable powder; mingle this powder with its weight of Nitar, well puri∣fied and reduced to powder; put them in a Cru∣cible, which set in the same Furnace, and cover it with a little earthen cover; continue a rever∣beratory Fire for six and thirty hours together, or till the matter yields no more fumes: then take off your Crucible, and presently break it, and powder your matter in a Brass Mortar, while it is warm: then throw it by spoonfuls into a Kettle full of boiling water, and there let it boil, till
your Water be half consumed away; filter the said dissolution, while it is warm, through a cof∣fin of brown Paper: evaporate your filtration by a good fire, either in the same Kettle, or in an earthen-glaz'd Pan, till there remain nothing but a powder, as white as flower, in the bottom of the Vessel; taking care to stir the said powder with an iron Spatula, lest by so great a fire it should melt again. Obs. 1. That we take here Venice Crystal, be∣cause it is the best. Obs. 2. That we calcine first the Crystal in a great reverberatory fire, till it be melted, to the end we may so open it, as to be able to reduce it to an impalpable powder, and so make it fit to be calcined by the Niter. Obs. 3. That we calcine a second time the said Crystal with fine Niter, to open its body better, and so the Niter may communicate to it its fix'd Salt, and that of the body of the Crystal, and of the body of the fix'd Salt of Niter, there result one body, and one Calx. Obs. 4. That we dissolve this Calx of niter'd Crystal in hot Water, and afterwards we filter it, and then evaporate it to a dry powder, to the end, that by this dissolution and filtration, the Salt of Niter be whiter. Obs. 5. That this Salt of Crystal, is nothing but Crystal incorporated with the fix'd Salt of Niter; so that it is more properly a Calx, than a pure Salt. The Crystal communicates nothing but its Virginal Earth, and the Niter, nothing but its fixt Salt; and therefore, Crystal containing in its
self no Salt at all, this Remedy ought more pro∣perly, to be called Crystal niter'd. Crystal is a clear transparent Glass, and Glass is a Crystal less clear, and transparent; the only subject matter of both of them made by Art, is a congealed Virginal Earth, hardened under the form of Pibble Stones, and Crystalline River Sand. This matter cannot be melted, and pu∣rified, but by the Salts both of Vegetables and Minerals; and after the fusion, and vitrification of the said Sand, and Pibble Stones, all the Salt is separated, and comes away from it, so as there remains not any in either Glass, or Cry∣stal. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a powerful Diure∣tick, it drives away Gravel, and breaks the britle Stones of the Kidney; it dryes up Gonor∣rhaea's. The Salts of Corals, Pearls, fragment of Ru∣bies, Topaz Stones, Emeralds, Diamonds, and other precious Stones, are to be prepared in the same way, and have the same vertues with the Salt of Crystal, by reason of their calcination, and also the Diuretick and Lithontriptick, or Stone-breaking vertue of the fix'd Salt of Niter. The Flowers of Benjamin. TAke as much powdered Benjamin, as you please, put it into a Crucible, proportion∣ed to the quantity of your matter, so as it
Here is the Figure of your Iron Round. be but half full: put your Cru∣cible into a Round Iron, that has two branches on each side, which must be placed upon the second row of Bricks of a circulatory Furnace, so that your Crucible be suspended in the middle of the Furnace, and the fire must strike immediately upon it: fit to the top of your Furnace a great earthen Coffin (glaz'd or unglaz'd) made like a mould for a Sugar-loaf; as broad in the bottom as the Furnace, and in its top must be left a little hole to give the fire air; lute it to the Furnace, give a moderate fire under the Crucible; the Benjamin will rise presently, and totally in dry fumes, which will stick to the sides of your Cof∣fin, in form of a white Snow, or Meal-dust, which will have the odour of your Benjamin, but more exalted and penetrating, because of its attenuati∣on. At half an hours end, take off your Coffin, and with a Feather scrape off all the Flowers, which presently shut up in a Glass Bottle well stopt with Cork, there will remain in the Cru∣cible nothing but oyly black Faeces. Obs. 1. That we apply the said earthen Coffin to the brim of the Furnace, and not to the brim of the Crucible, lest the heat striking the outside of the Coffin, should make the Flowers once sub∣lim'd, melt and resolve into their first nature. Obs. 2. That we use here an earthen Coffin, and not a Paper one, as most Chymists do; be∣cause, with an earthen one, of the mentioned breadth, we gather a greater quantity of flowers; besides, an earthen Coffin may always serve,
whereas you must change your Paper one, and in that interval you lose many vapours that might have been converted into flowers. Obs. 3. That the flowers of Benjamin are Ben∣jamin its self melted in a Crucible, then elevated in dry vapours under the form of a white snowy powder, as the flowers of Sal Armoniac; for Ben∣jamin is a Rosinous Gum very dry, and totally volatil, and from thence proceeds, that as soon as it is hot, it rises in vapours, which being dry, are converted into a very white flower or Snow. In this Operation Benjamin loses its red colour, and acquires a very white one, because that of what colour soever the body that is converted into flowers be, the flowers still must be white; be∣cause, it is their volatil Salt which predominates over them, and which by consequent must invest them with that colour which is natural to all, and particularly to volatil Salts. The red colour of Benjamin consists in a little gross heavy Sulphur, which cannot be raised but by the violence of the fire, which is not needful in the sublimation of the flowers, but only in the distillation of the Oyl of Benjamin. Their Ʋse and Vertues: These flowers are most excellent to ripen old coughs, and to help out flegms, because that they are all Volatil and Bal∣samick Salt.
The Flowers of Antimony. POwder one pound of Crude Antimony, or ra∣ther of Regulus; put it to an Earthen Cu∣curbit unglazed; place it upon the two Iron Bars that are in the great Reverberatory Furnace, so that the neck of the Cucurbit be four fingers higher than the top of the Furnace, Lute your Vessel round about to the Furnace, and fit to this Cucurbit an Earthen Pot turn'd upside down, so that the brim of your Cucurbit enter within the said Pot a little: This Pot must have in its bot∣tom an hole as big as an Egg. Lute well the conjunction of these two Vessels, and to the up∣permost of them fit another Pot a little less, ha∣ving also a hole in its bottom, and then put upon this another, yet less, and having a hole of the same bigness, and so fit, as that its brim must go into the brim of the inferiour Pot, then fit to this another less still, and having a hole also, and at last fit another and fifth pot, having a hole of the bigness of your little finger, and having its brim inserted into the brim of the Pot under it. They must be thus less and less by degrees, as the Pyramide grows higher, and have a care that you lute well all the conjunctions of these several Pots. Give at first a violent fire, and continue it to the highest degree for forty eight hours, and all the while keep the little uppermost hole well stopt with some of our Lute; your Antimony will be melted in your Cucurbit, and
then it will rise, and be sublim'd in dry vapours, which will stick to the sides of the said Pots, in the form of flowers, as white as Snow. In the first Pot they are yellow, in the second red, and in the third white, your Operation having lasted out the time prescribed, put out your fire, and as soon as your Pots are cold, unlute them neatly, and with a feather scrape away all the said flow∣ers, putting white to white, red to red, yellow to yellow. Obs. 1. That for this Operation the Regulus of Antimony, is fitter than Crude Antimony, be∣cause that the Regulus being already separated from its Faeces, is all sublimed, and so makes a greater quantity of flowers, both better and pu∣rer: for Crude Antimony contains four times as much Faeces as it does Regulus, which is the purest part of the Antimony. Obs. 2. That the Flowers of Antimony are of three colours; the white do contain nothing of the venomous Sulphur of Antimony, and are therefore coloured, of the colour of the Volatil Salt of Antimony: the yellow do contain a little of the said Sulphur, and are therefore somewhat tinged; but the red do abound with the said Sulphur, and are therefore highly dyed. Obs. 3. That we fit divers Pots one upon an∣other, to receive all these Flowers, of different colours; the white in the first, the yellow in the second, and the red in the last: we leave a hole in the uppermost Pot, to give the vapours a little air, but it is not so big as in the lowermost
pots, lest the finest flower should be lost through so wide a hole. Obs. 4. That we give at first a great fire, and continue it forty eight hours, to keep always the Regule or Antimony infusion and effumation, else it would yield no flowers. Obs. 5. That you must not use stone pots; for the violence of the fire would break them; nor Earthen glazed pots of potters earth, because that the glazing would melt and fix the Antimony; but you must use strong pots of potters earth un∣glazed. Obs. 6. That the Flowers of Antimony are no∣thing but the Regulus of Antimony, or the purest part of the Antimony made Volatil, and sublimed into dry vapours, by the strength of the fire, and so converted into a fine impalpable powder, called Flowers. The white contain only a part of the body of the Regulus, and a good deal of the Vola∣til Salt of Antimony; the yellow contain a part of the body of the Regulus, and little of the Vo∣latil Salt; and so do the red with a good deal of the malignant Sulphur of Antimony. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The white Flowers pro∣voke sweat, and sometimes vomiting, and are very good against pestilential Feavers; the yellow do provoke vomiting with violence, and the red much more, and with convulsions; therefore there is no use of them, only they enter in the compo∣sition of the Plaster of Paracelsus, or of some others, as you shall find in Authors: the dose is, from three to seven grains.
The Flowers of Brimstone. PUt a great Earthen glazed Cucurbit into a small Reverberatory Furnace; so that be∣tween it, and the Furnace sides, there be the thick∣ness of a Crown piece left empty, and the body of your Cucurbit must not be above half sunk into the Laboratory. Then stop with Lute all the upper circumference left empty, betwixt the Furnace and your Vessel, leaving only three little holes equally distant from one another, to give the fire vent. Then line the neck of your Cucur∣bit without, with slices of Paper, covered with starch, as if it were to fit a head to it; and in stead of a head, fit an Earthen glazed pan; not turn'd upside down, but having a hole in its bottom, of such a capacity as to receive the neck of the Cucurbit. Lute them well together with slices of Paper, starched both above and under the jun∣ction of the Pan with the neck of the Cucur∣bit; fill this Cucurbit with yellow Brimstone in powder till it be half full, and then fit to this earthen pan another of the same metal, which must be whole, and turned upside down upon the first, so as its bottom be half a foot distant from the neck of the Cucurbit, there must be in the bottom of this second Pan a little vent hole, of the bigness of the point of a bodkin, to give air to the vapours of your Brimstone, which else would make your Pan fly about your
ears: give your fire by degrees, and continue a pretty good fire, till there come no more fumes out of the little hole, which for a pound of Brim∣stone will happen in three quarters of an hours time. Then put out your fire, and let your Ves∣sels cool; when they are cold, separate them one from the other, they will be lin'd with a thick crust yellow and light, and which being bruised between your fingers, is easily reduced to an im∣palpable powder; scrape off this crust with a knife, and you have the Flowers of Brimstone, out of each pound you will have twelves ounces of Flowers by this method. Obs. 1. That we use here yellow Brimstone, that is in great rowls; because, that it is the purest and best; separated from its Mineral Earth, and therefore will yield more, and fairer Flowers; the green, or gray Brimstone, show by their co∣lour that they are not so pure, and by consequent not so fit for this Operation. Obs. 2. That we use here a glazed Pan, as well because that Brimstone has not force enough to corrode the glazing, as because that being gla∣zed, the Pans are smoother, and so it is easier to scrape off your Flowers: a stone Cucurbit would break, and you would hardly scrape off all your Flowers in a stone Pan, whose surface is un∣even. Obs. 3. That a great Reverberatory fire is not necessary in this Operation, because that the Brimstone is easily melted, and when melted, is easily raised in Flowers. Obs. 4. That the Flowers of Brimstone are
nothing but Brimstone purified from its Faeces, and sublim'd in dry vapours, by the means of the fire which has melted it, then converted into im∣palpable yellow Flowers in the sublimatory Ves∣sels. Its Ʋse and Vertues: These Flowers have the same, but a more exalted Vertue than ordinary Brimstone, because of the Thinness and Tenuity of their substance; interiourly they are used for the same end, as the Magistery or Milk of Brim∣stone, and exteriourly they are used in Unguents for the Itch and Scab, and for the Farcy in Horses, incorporating it with Oyl of Olives and fresh Butter. But you must be careful to use first ge∣neral remedies, for Brimstone is so drying, that it presently dries up, not only the Itch and Scab, but also so parches the skin, as to make it incapable of receiving the impurities of the body, and of being transpirable; from which are caused many violent diseases, if the said impurities be not em∣ptied by general remedies, both before and after the use of Brimstone. The Rosin or Magistery of Jalap. TAke as much Jalap as you please, well clean∣sed from its ordures, and dried in the Sun, then powdered and put into a Matrass. Pour upon it good Spirit of Wine, four or five
fingers above your Matter, and let your Matrass have a third part empty: fit to it another Ma∣trass to make a double vessel, place it in a sand fire, and there let it stand twelve hours, in which time your spirit will acquire a Tincture as red as Claret Wine: pour off that, and pour on more spirit to the Faeces, in twelve hours it will have extracted a new Tincture, which pour off also. If you will, you may pour on more spirit, but if your second Tincture be not high colour'd, it will not be worth your pains, and cost to pour on more Spirit of Wine: gather together your Tin∣ctures to draw out of them, and precipitate ei∣ther the Rosin or the Magistery. If you will be content to lose your Dissolvant, and so convert all your Tinctures into Rosin, pour them into a great glass Bell full of cold water, and presently your Tincture will precipitate to the bottom, in the consistence of a white Rosin, separate all the liquor that swims above it, and loosen and take away your Rosin, which did begin to stick to the bottom of the Vessel; put it into a glass, either whole or in pieces, which being cold, will grow as hard as Rosin or Colophone. If you will draw off your dissolvant, and change your Tinctures into a Magistery, put them all in∣to a glass Cucurbit, of such a proportion, as not to be above half full with them; place it in a Balneum Mariae, and fit to it a head. Give the fire by degrees, and draw off by distillation about half the Spirit of Wine to use in other such uses, then pour the remainder, while it is warm, into a glass Bell, full of cold water; and pre∣sently
the Tincture of your dissolvant will be precipitated, not into a Rosin, but into a white Curd, which by little and little, in half a quar∣ter of an hours time, will be converted into a white Rosinous powder. Separate by inclinati∣on the water, and pour two or three times cold water upon this powder, to separate it well from its dissolvant; then filter the remainder through a Coffin of white Paper, and dry it in the shade, keep this powder or Magistery in a Vial well stopt. Obs. 1. That we take Jalap very well cleansed from its ordures, that we may have a fairer Rosin, and more of it, and that it is first dried in the Sun, to the end that its waterish humidity being gone, it may not dull the action of the dissolvant, and so it will be able to extract easilier the Resi∣nous Tincture of Jalap. Obs. 2. That common cold water precipitates your Tincture into a Rosin, or a Rosinous pow∣der, because that weakening the Spirit of Wine by its quantity, it makes it lose its hold, and so let fall to the bottom that sub∣stance which it had seized upon in the dissol∣ving it. Obs. 3. That the precipitate of Jalap is more properly called a Rosin, than a Gum; because it would dissolve better in oyly liquors, as Ro∣sins do, than in waterish liquors, as Gums do. Obs. 4. That when your Tincture is thrown into cold water, before it be evaporated half away, it then precipitates in consistence of a
Rosin, but when it is evaporated half away, then it is precipitated in consistence of a Curd, which comes to a Powder. Obs. 5. That the Rosin or Magistery of Jalap, is nothing but the Rosinous part of Jalap separa∣ted from all the terrestrial part which remains in the Matrass, and from its volatil Salt, which has been dissolved in the Dissolvant, or in the Preci∣pitant. Its Ʋse and Vertue: It purges by stools with∣out procuring Vomit; it has a gentler way of operating, than pure Jalap taken in substance; because it is devested of its Volatil Salt, which is its sharpest part. The Dose is, from six to twelve grains, or thereabouts, in form of Pills or Bolus, with some Conserve, or some such thing. The Rosin, or Magistery of Scammony. TAke good clean Scammony, & powder it, then fasten a leaf upon a little woodden Square, or Frame, upon the Paper spread your powder, place it over the vapour of Brimstone, which you must throw from time to time into a Chasing∣dish full of Coals, and in the mean time stir con∣tinually your powder with a woodden Spatula, and do not approach it too near the Fire, lest it should melt, and so become a lump, as before;
for, if such a thing should happen, you would not be able to make the flegm, and the volatil, and sulphureous malignant salts of the Scammony to evaporate, which is the thing you aim at. Your Scammony being thus prepared, you shall extract out of it a Tincture, as red as blood, in a glass double-Matrass, with Spirit of Wine; of which Tincture make the Rosin or Magistery, in the same way that you make the Rosin or Magi∣stery of Jalap. Its Ʋse and Vertues: The Rosin of Scammony, purges gentlier than Scammony in substance, be∣cause it is devested of a great deal of its sulphu∣reous volatil Salt, by the burning vapour of the Brimstone. The Spirit of Wine, and common Water have set at liberty, and dissolved the rest of the volatil Salt, and the terrestrial part, or Faeces, remain in a small quantity in your Matrass. The Dose is from ten to twenty grains. The Cremor Tartari. TAke four pound of white Tartar of Mont∣pellier, in great lumps; wash them well in common cold Water, and then dry them upon boards in the Sun; this done, beat them in a brass Mortar, and searce them to a very fine powder. In the mean time, let there be a pale of Water boyling in a Brass, or Copper Kettle, and into it throw your Tartar by spoonfuls, and so let it boyl for two hours, stirring it continually
with a woodden Spatula; then take off your Kettle from the fire, and filter your Dissolu∣tion while it is warm, through divers Coffins of brown Paper; evaporate your filtrations in ear∣then glaz'd Pans, over a naked fire, till by their boyling, there appear a kind of a skin upon the surface of the said Decoction: then take off your Pans, place them in your Cellar, and in three or four days there will be congealed to the bottom and sides of your Pans, great quantity of Crystals as white as Snow, and of a triangular and square Figure Pour out the Water that remains in your Pans, if it look dirty, keep it, and boyl it again to a consistence of a skin, then congeal it in your Cellar, and so draw out all the Crystals left in it; dry your Crystals either in the Sun, or in a dry place; then gather them, and put them into glass Vials well stop'd: and thus you have that which Chymists call Cremor Tartari, or Crystal of Tartar. Out of one pound of Tartar, you have foor ounces of Crystals, and twelve of Faeces. Obs. 1. That for this Operation, we chuse Tartar of Montpellier, because, it is much salter than the Tartar of any other part of France; because, that at Montpellier they use great Hogs∣heads, or rather Tuns, that serve twenty or thir∣ty years, so that there gather to the sides of them, a Tartar three or four fingers thick, and by con∣sequent very saltish; besides that, the strength of the Wine of those parts, makes their Tartar bet∣ter; and at last we chuse white Tartar, because it contains more Salt than the red. Obs. 2. That we wash well the lumps of Tar∣tar,
before we powder them, to the end, we may cleanse them from a kind of terrestrial dreggs, which remain upon the said Tartar, in form of a powder: by washing, part of this powder goes to the bottom, and part of it makes the Water look muddy. Obs. 3. That we powder and searce it, that we may extract easilier, and more abundantly, the said Crystal of Tartar. Obs. 4. That we boyl it in a great quantity of Water, and that a good while, that we may ex∣tract all its saltish substance. Obs. 5. That it is thrown in by spoonfuls, and not altogether, that so the dissolution of its Salt be the better performed, and sooner; and for the same reason the Water is not cold, but boyling hot. Obs. 6. That we stir it continually with a Spa∣tula, else it would remain in the bottom of the Kettle, in a lump, and so being touched by the Water, but on one side, it would not so easily dis∣solve. Now your Spatula must be of Wood, and not of Iron, lest the blackness of the Iron, by the acidity of the Tartar, come off, and spoil the beauty of your Crystals. Obs. 7. That we boyl our Tartar with Wa∣ter, in Brass or Copper Kettles, and in earthen Pans, because that the Salt of Tartar is not sharp enough to corrode Brass, Copper, or the glazing of Lead; and therefore, there is no danger it should be loaden, or impregnated with their sub∣stance, and particularly, if it be uncalcin'd Tar∣tar, and dissolved in Water.
Obs. 8. That your Tartar having sufficiently boyl'd in Water, and the Water being impregna∣ted with all its Salt, we filter this dissolution through a brown Paper-coffin, that so we may separate all the terrestrial indissolvable part of it, which will remain in the Coffin of brown Paper; this filtration is performed while the Dissolution is warm, that so the Salt may pass with it, which would go to the bottom, in form of a white pow∣der, if the Dissolution were cold. Obs. 9. That to crystallize the Salt of Tartar uncalcin'd, and dissolv'd in Water, you must eva∣porate above half of your Water, till your Salt begin to coagulate; which you observe, by that little skin, that gathers upon the surface of your Water; then by taking off your Vessels, and placing them in a cold place, as the Cellar, the Salt is formed into Crystals, and is freed from the Water, which kept it in dissolution. If you had continued your evaporation, till your matter had been dry, there would have remained in the bottom of your Vessel, a white Salt in powder, but it is much more pleasant, to have it in the form of Crystals. Obs. 10. That the Crystal of Tartar, or Cremor Tartari, is nothing but Tartar scoured, and whitened by Lotion, pulverisation, boyling in the Water, filtration, evaporation, and coagula∣tion, or crystallization made in the Cellar. It is composed of two substances; one is saltish, the other is terrestrial: The first, dissolves in any Water; the second, only in warm Water: and as soon as the Water is cold the Crystal frees its
self from it, and coagulates in the bottom, in form of a white powder, if there be a good deal of Water; but, if there be but a small quan∣tity of Water, it coagulates into white Crystals, sticking to the sides of the Vessel. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a great Aperitive, De∣sopilative, and Diuretick. It purges gently some∣times, but its principal effect is always by way of Urine. The Dose is, from half a dragm, to two, taken inwardly in broth: It is often min∣gled with Opiates, and also with purgative Po∣tions; but, then you must swallow them more than luke-warm, else it would coagulate, and re∣main in the bottom of the Cup, or Glass: some also do dissolve of it in Clysters, to the weight of two dragms, or half an ounce. The Cremor Tartari Calybeatus, or the Steel'd Crystal of Tartar. TAke four pound of white Tartar of Mont∣pellier, wash'd, dry'd, powder'd, and searc'd, as has been said in the precedent Chapter. Mingle with it two ounces of the Crocus, or Saf∣fron Aperitive of Mars, or Iron; throw this mixtion by spoonfuls into a Kettle full of boyling Water, stir it continually with a wooden Spa∣tula, and boyl your Water half away; then take off your Kettle, filtrate the rest while it is warm, put your Filtration into earthen Pans unglazed,
and evaporate it in a gentle fire, to the Pellicule, as you do in the Salt of Saturn; then set it in a Cellar to congeal, and in three or four days, there will strike to the bottom, and sides of your Pans, a good many clear Crystals of a fine green co∣lour, round in figure, and a little sharp; sepa∣rate by inclination the remainder of the Liquor of the Pans, and evaporate it again, and set it to crystallize, as the first; set your Crystals in the Sun, by placing your Pans on one side, that all the Liquor may run from them; when your Crystals are very dry, loosen them with the point of a Knife, and put them into Vials to keep: let them be well stop'd; for, if the air come at them, they will dissolve again, or at least grow wet, and lose their colour. Obs. 1. That you must take the Crocus Martis aperitivus, or opening, and not the astringent; because, that the Astringent is devested of its Salt. Now here we pretend to the proper Salt of Mars, and to mingle it with the Salt of Tartar. By this Mixtion the Crystal of Tartar acquires the green, colour of the vitriolick Salt of Mars, and the facul∣ty of dissolving in cold Water. If instead of the Saffron of Mars, you had added the Salt of Tartar calcin'd, you would have made Chrystals of white Tartar dissolvable in cold Water; for, either of those two Salts of Mars, or calcin'd Tartar, would prove a Corrective to the terrestrial and indissol∣vable substance of the Cremor Tartari. Obs. 2. That we evaporate the Dissolution of these two Salts by a gentle fire, that we may keep in their volatil Salts, which by their mixtion,
do whet and attenuate one another, and so are disposed to fly away; which, if they did, then your Crystals would not so easily crystallize. Obs. 3. That the Steel'd Cremor Tartari, is nothing but the Cremor Tartari incorporated with the vitriolick Salt of Mars, by their dissolution in Water, the evaporation to a Pellicule, or skin, and the crystallization in a cold Cellar. Its Ʋse and Vertues: 'Tis a more powerful opener and desopilative, than the Cremor Tartari: It is most excellent against the Yellow Jaundice, the Green Sickness, and to provoke the Monthly Courses, if stopped. The Dose is, from half a dragm to a dragm, in some Broth, or appropri∣ated Water. The Virginal Milk of Benjamin, and Storax. TAke of Benjamin and Storax, of each two ounces, reduce them to a fine powder, and put them into a Matrass, pour on Spirit of Wine, so as the matter be covered four or five fingers deep, with the said Spirit; let your Vessel stand in a cool place, for two or three days; in this time the Gums will be dissolv'd, and will colour the Dissolvant with a red transparent co∣lour, like a Ruby, and withal, will communi∣cate to the Dissolvant their smell most perfectly: pour off this Tincture, and keep it in a glass Vial for your use: when you intend to make of it
Virginal Milk, put about a spoonful of this Tin∣cture into a precipitatory Vessel, as a glass Bell, &c. and pour on it, about a pint of cold Water, your Tincture and VVater will be both as white as Snow, and your Tincture will be incorporated with the VVater, without precipi∣tating to the bottom. Obs. 1. That the Benjamin and Storax, con∣taining but very little of terrestrial impurities, do dissolve almost totally in Spirit of VVine, which by the thinness, penetration, and evenness of its substance, dissolves easily, and without heat, the said Rosins. Obs. 2. That the red Tincture is turn'd as white as Milk, when it is dissolv'd in three or four times its quantity of VVater; because, that the common VVater does force the Spirit of VVine which was impregnated with these Bodies, to let go its hold, and so it does to all Dis∣solvants. Its Ʋse and Vertues: This Virginal Milk serves to refresh and whiten the skin; it is excellent against all rednesses, inflammation, and Ere∣sypela's.
The Precipitate, or Magistery of Silver, or Luna. TAke one ounce of the purest Silver, beaten into Plates as thin as Paper; then cut it into little bits, and put it into a Matrass with a long neck, pour upon it three ounces of Aqua fortis, made with Niter and Alom; and so let your Silver dissolve in it, without heat; pour out your Dissolution into a glass Bell, and pour upon it a quart of Sea-water; the Silver will presently turn into white Curds; which in a small time, by little and little, will precipitate into a powder, as white as Snow, and as shining as pie∣ces of Diamonds; separate by inclination your Sea-water, impregnated with the Aqua fortis, and pour on more cold common VVater, so often, till at last it come away without any saltish taste, which is a sign that your powder is dulcorated; filter the remainder through a Coffin of white Paper, and let it dry in the shade; you will have a Calx Precipitate, or Magistery of Luna, most admirably fair, and white, and glittering; put it into a glass Bottle well stop'd, and keep it for your use. Obs. 1. That you must take the finest, purest Silver; for, if there were the least mixtion of Ve∣nus, or Copper in it, the Magistery, instead of being white, would be green, like Vitriol. Obs. 2. That you must take Aqua fortis, made on purpose with pure Niter, and Alom; for, the
Spirit of Niter alone, would be too sharp, and your Magistery would hardly be sweetned from all Acrimony, which might, if there remain'd any, corrode and spoil the face it is laid up∣on. As for common Aqua fortis, made with Niter and Vitriol, it would be worse; not only because it is sharper than Spirit of Niter, but also, because of its having Vitriol amongst it, which would make your Magistery black. Alom is much fitter to be added to Niter, because it has little Acrimony, and great quan∣tity of Flegm; insomuch, that Alom is no∣thing but a part of Virginal saltish Earth, and a great deal of Water congealed, and crystallized together. Obs. 3. That Sea-Water precipitates the Calx of Silver, for the Reasons which we have said in the Chapter of the Magistery of Bismuth. Obs. 4. That the Magistery of Silver, or the Moon, is nothing but a Philosophical calcinati∣on of Silver, by the means of Aqua fortis, preci∣pitated by Sea-Water, and sweetened by frequent Lotions. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is the best of all Fucuses, according to the esteem and opinion of Ladies; because of the choice of the matter, and of the Dissolvant; and also, because it is dearer than the others: the great price of things, serving often to create an esteem for them.
The Tincture of Gold, or Aurum Potabile. TAke a hollow branch of Crystal, as thick as your finger, and two or three foot long, thrust it half way into warm Ashes, to heat a little, and so dispose it to endure a greater heat, without flying; then present it, by little and little, to the fire of a reverberatory Fur∣nace, then put it quite into the Furnace, and hold it in the middle of the flame, to make it grow red and soft; there must be over against the Fire-room-door, a hole, by which another must put in the end of a little Crystal Twig, made as small as a thread, which he must heat likewise, and soften, and when it is soft, he must fasten it to the end of the great branch, which you hold; then let him draw this Rod, or Twig to himself, and the branch will follow, and stretch like Paste, and you may make as many Rods, and as small as you please of it. Having made divers little Rods of Crystal by this method, you must guild them one after ano∣ther with Ducket Gold in Leaves; buy therefore a Book, containing six and twenty Leaves of Ducket Gold, take one of these Leaves, and spread it upon a Cushion made of Calves Lea∣ther, and with a sharp Knife, cut it into little slices, of half a fingers breadth, then wet with spittle one end of your Crystal Rods, and apply it to one of these slices, turning it upon the
Cushion, to make the Gold stick; then continue wetting it a little higher, and apply it to another slice of Gold, and do so till you have guilded all your Crystal Rods, one after another, using a little white Cotton, to press your Gold, and make it stick. This done, put them to dry in an Oven, after the Bread is taken out; when they are dry, apply another lay of Gold to them, and then dry them; do thus seven times, so that each Crystal Rod be covered with seven lays of Gold. Then powder grosly all of them guilded and dried, and put them into a Crucible, which set in a VVind-Furnace, give a great fire, and continue it, till your matter be melted; then take it out, and powder it, it will look yellow: let your powder be very fine. Put this powder into a long-necked Matrass, and put to it a dragm of the Salt, called the Salt Anatron, or the Salt of Glass; it is the fix'd Salt which sticks to the bottom of the Kettles, where Salt-peter is boyled: if you can come by none of this Salt Anatron, put in common Sea-Salt de∣crepitated, and pour upon it also Spirit of Salt, well rectified, and devested of its flegm, four or five fingers above the matter: this Spirit being whet and sharpened by the addition of the Salt Anatron, or common Salt, will corrode and dis∣solve the said Gold, in three or four hours, with∣out fire, and in this action will lose its force; so that it will have no Acrimony left, but only a pleasant acidity, and it will be impregnated with the Tincture of Gold; in the mean tim, it will
not operate at all upon the Crystal, which will remain in the bottom of your Vessel, in its own substance, fit for other uses, as we shall teach hereafter. VVhen you see your Spirit well tinged with the colour of Gold, then pour it off, and put to your matter the like quantity of the Salt Anatron, or of Sea-Salt decrepitated, in its place, and as much rectified Spirit of Salt, to draw off another Tincture; and do so as long as your Spi∣rit does draw any Tincture, and till it come away as sharp as it went in. Put your Tinctures together, they will make a Potable Gold, as yel∣low as a Topaz, and of no taste. If you put them into a small glass Body, with a Head of the same, in a Lamp-fire, and draw off by Distilla∣tion half your Dissolvant, there will remain a Tincture of Gold, more lively, and acid, and also potable. Obs. 1. That we use Crystal as an intermedium, for Gold, which without any intermedium, could not be calcin'd, but would melt: and if it be not calcin'd, then it will not dissolve in so gentle a Dissolvant, as Spirit of Salt. Now there is no intermedium better than Crystal, for all other Metals would melt, and mingle with Gold; Minerals, besides their metallick qualities, would also impart to the Gold the Corrosion, and Acri∣mony of their Salts: but, Crystal containing but a very little Salt, and a great deal of Earth, it does not mingle, nor communicate to the Gold any Acrimony, and yet by the driness of its sub∣stance, it hinders the melting of Gold, and so fur∣thers its calcination.
Obs. 2. That the Gold and Crystal being cal∣cin'd, are powder'd; because, that so the Gold is easier to be dissolved by so gentle a Dissolvant, as Spirit of Salt. Obs. 3. That we use Spirit of Salt to dis∣solve Gold, already calcin'd; because, that though there be more powerful Dissolvants, (as Aqua fortis made with fine Niter, and deflegmated Vi∣triol, or Colcothar; as also, Aqua regalis, which is made with Niter, Vitriol, and Salt Armoniack) yet these Dissolvants are too corrosive, before and after the dissolution of the Gold to be potable, and the Spirits of Vitriol, or Sulphur are not sharp enough; so that the Spirit of Salt alone, has force enough to dissolve Gold, and make it potable after its dissolution; and yet this Spirit must be rectified too, and whet and sharpened by the addition of Salt Anatron, or common Salt decrepitated. Obs. 4. That the Crystal which remains in the Matrass, after the dissolution, must be well dul∣corated, or sweetened, and then may serve for a Dentrifice, or cleanse Teeth, by wetting a corner of a Towel in common Water, and then putting it into the said powder, and with it rub your Teeth: or, it may serve to make the Salt of Cry∣stal, as we have said already. Obs. 5. That the Gold is potable, but as long as it remains dissolved in the said Spirit of Salt, and that you must not mingle it with any Liquor whatsoever; for, if you do, it will precipitate your Gold into a yellow powder; and so you will lose your Tincture.
Obs. 6. That potable Gold, is nothing but Leaves of Gold calcin'd with Crystal, and dis∣solved in rectified Spirit of Salt. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It cannot be doubted, but that this Potable Gold has the vertues of Spi∣rit of Salt, that is, it is excellent against pesti∣lential and putrid Feavers, to purifie the Blood, drive out Gravel, whiten the Teeth; and also, it may be said to have the vertue of the Water of Pearls, and being thus prepared, consumes all sharp humors in the Body, as Pearls thus prepa∣red do: so that it is not without reason, that this Remedy is esteemed as good against Cancres and venomous Ulcers, and pestilential Feavers. The Dose is, six or eight drops in some Broth, or ap∣propriated Water: and for the Teeth, you may put a spoonful of it in two spoonfuls of Rose-Water, or Flower of Orange, or Jasmin. It has likewise the vertue of preserving your Wine in your Cellar for many years, by putting about half a pound of this Potable Gold into a Hogshead of Wine; but except it be very rare Wine indeed, and that you desire to have it of many years, it would cost you more than it would be worth. The Salt of Vitriol, or the Crystals of Venus. TAke Verdigreece, or Spanish Green, as much as you please, powder it in a Brass Mortar, and stop your Nose close, left the
venomous vapours should poyson you; put it in∣to an ample Matrass, with a long neck, so that it be three quarters empty; pour upon it good distilled Vinegar, so that your Matrass be almost quite full, place it in a Sand-fire, and by fitting to it another Matrass, make a double Vessel of it, in twelve hours time you will have a blew Tin∣cture, like true Turquoises; pour off this Tin∣cture into a stone Pan; pour on more distilled Vinegar upon the Faeces, to extract a new Tin∣cture; and do this till there remain nothing but brown Faeces in the bottom of your Matrass: then take a glass Cucurbite, and apply to the bottom of it a leaden, or iron Ring, tied to it by four pack-threads, which are fastened to a pack-thread tied about the body of the Cucurbite; put all your Tinctures into this Cucurbite, which set in a Kettle full of Water, where it cannot swim, nor lean more on one side than the other, because of the weight it has at the bottom; draw off the distilled Vinegar, till you see that there is a thin skin begun to be formed upon your Tincture; then take out your Cucurbite, and set it in a cool place, as a Cellar: in three or four days there will be in the bottom, and upon the sides of your Vessel, divers Crystals of a lovely blew-like Turquoises. This done, pour off by inclination, all the Wa∣ter that is not congealed, and evaporate it in a Cucurbite, in a Balneum Mariae, as has been said already; reiterating the evaporation, and cry∣stallization of the said Water or Tincture, till there remain very little of it.
Then put together all your Crystals into ano∣ther Matrass, pour upon them distilled Vinegar, enough to dissolve them; you may make use of that Vinegar, which you drew off from your first Tincture; place your Matrass in a Sand-fire, and make a double Vessel of it; in three or four hours time, the dissolution of your Crystals being done, filter it while it is warm through a brown Paper, and receive your filtration in a stone Pan; there will congeal in this Pan, great quantities of Crystals, which will change their blew colour, into a green one, like Emeralds, and half trans∣parent. Pour off by inclination the Water that shall not congeal; then set your Crystals in the Sun, to dry them well, and when they are well dryed, take them out of the Pan, and put them into a glass Vial, well stopp'd, to keep for your use. Obs. 1. That to extract the Salt of Venus or Copper, we use Verdigreece; because that Ver∣digreece is nothing but Venus dissolv'd, extract∣ed, and calcin'd Philosophically by the acid Spi∣rit of Wine: Now it is impossible to extract the Salt of any Body, before it be calcin'd; and as for Metals, they cannot be calcin'd otherwise than Philosophically, that is, by the corrosion of some acid Spirits; for fire, though never so vio∣lent, can but melt them, and evaporate some part of them. Obs. 2. That we use here distilled Vinegar, to dissolve Verdigreece, and extract its Tincture and Salt; because it contains but little of a tartareous Salt, or Salt of Tartar, which being joined with
the Salt of Venus cannot hurt; but Aqua fortis, Aqua regalis, the Spirit of Niter, Brimstone, or Vitriol, contain a great deal of corrosive Salt, which would alter the Salt of Venus, and make it corrosive, being joyned with it; for, it cannot crystallize without them. Obs. 3. That you must use here glass and stone Vessels, and not of vernish'd, or glaz'd Potters Earth; because, that the sharpness of the Verdi∣greece would corrode the glazing, and impreg∣nating its self with Lead, would spoil the bright∣ness of your Crystals; and if your Vessel were un∣glazed, then the Verdigreece having, by its disso∣lution in distill'd Vinegar, acquired a singular sharpness, and penetration, would insinuate, and lose its self in the pores of the Vessel. Obs. 4. That we distil, and evaporate the Tincture of Verdigreece, in a gentle heat of Bal∣neum Mariae, lest in a greater heat, the sulphureous part, and volatil Salt of Venus should exhale, and be gone, since it is in that sulphureous part, that consists the greatest vertue of this Remedy, and it is it, that contributes most to the crystalli∣zation. Obs. 5. That the Crystals of Venus change their blew dark colour, into a green transparent one, by the means of reiterated dissolutions, and crystallizations; which Operations, do purifie these Crystals from their blew terrestreity; and that the true colour of the purified Salt of Venus, is to be as green as an Emerald. Obs. 6. That the Crystals of Venus are nothing else, but the Salt of Venus extracted from the
Calx of Venus, which is Verdigreece, by a gentle Dissolvant, which is distilled Vinegar: then after evaporation of half of the Dissolvant, crystallized in a cool place. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a powerful Diure∣tick, and Desiccative, and therefore most excel∣lent against Gonorrhaea's. Its Dosis is, from three to six grains, in a Pill of Turpentine, that has been boyl'd to a consistence of Colophone, conti∣nuing to take of it three days together. There may be also drawn out of it a Spirit, fit to pre∣cipitate all sorts of Dissolutions. The Crystals, or Salt, or Vitriol of Mars. TAke five or six pound of the opening Saffron of Mars, called commonly, Crocus Martis aperitivus, as it has been described in this Book; powder it in a Mortar, and searce it through a silken Sieve, then throw it by spoon∣fuls into a Kettle of ten or twelve quarts of boyl∣ing Water, stirring it continually for two hours together, with a Ladle, or Spatula of Iron, till the Water be half boyled away; then take off your Kettle, and filtrate your Liquor while it is warm, through a brown Paper; evaporate your Filtration in a Sand-fire, to the Pellicule, in stone or glass Vessels, and afterwards set them in the Cellar; in two days there will be a good many green transparent Crystals, sticking to the sides
and bottom of your Pans. Pour off by inclina∣tion the Water that is not congealed, and evapo∣rate it again, and crystallize it: then gather all your Crystals together, and put them into a glass Vial well stopp'd. As for the powder of Mars devested of its Salt, which will remain in your Coffins of brown Paper after filtration, dry it, and keep it to make the Astringent, or binding Saffron of Mars. Obs. 1. That to extract the Salt of Mars, we take the opening Saffron of Mars; because it is nothing but Mars calcin'd by the means of Brim∣stone, and a Reverberatory fire. Now, it is not possible to have the Salt of Mars, if it have not been first calcin'd: and it cannot be calcin'd by fire alone, which would only melt it, as it does other Metals; you must therefore calcine it Phi∣losophically with Brimstone, whose Salt and Spi∣rit corrodes and calcines Mars. Obs. 2. That to extract the Salt of the Crocus Martis aperitivus, it is enough to powder and searce it, and throw it into a great quantity of boiling Water, which has force enough to draw to it the Salt of the Calx of Mars, or Croous Mar∣tis aperitivus. Obs. 3. That the Crystals of Mars are of a green transparent colour; because that Mars is drawn out of a vitriolick Earth, which indeed does con∣tain nothing but pure Vitriol, which by the vio∣lence of fire, is changed into a metallick Body, the hardest and blackest of all Metals; and being opened by the Agents and Dissolvants of Chy∣mistry, doth communicate this colour.
Obs. 4. That if you do not keep these Crystals in a Vial well stopp'd, as soon as the Air comes to them, they will be covered with a kind of white Meal, which will spoil their transparency, and greenness; and that Mars being a very dry Metal, and for this reason, the hardest and less flexible of all the Metals, it easily dries, and is converted in∣to this white mealy substance. Obs. 5. That these Crystals of Mars, are nothing but the Salt of Mars, extracted out of the open∣ing Calx of Mars, by the sweetest of all Dissol∣vants, which is common Water, boiling hot, then evaporated, and crystallized. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is an opener, or ape∣ritive, much stronger than the opening Saffron of Mars, because it is the pure Salt of Mars, se∣parated from its terrestrial indissolvable part; and is therefore excellent against the Green Sickness, the Yellow Jaundice, and to provoke the Month∣ly Courses. The Dose is from a scruple to a dragm in Broth, or some Syrup: you may add to it a dragm of the Extract of Savin, to augment its vertue. The Astringent, or binding Saffron of Mars. TAke the powder of Crocus Martis aperiti∣vus, which remains in the Coffin of brown Paper; after you have filtred the Dissolution of the said Crocus Martis aperitivus in common
Water, which powder will be then devested of all its Salt of Mars: fill with it a Pot of Potters Earth unglazed, place this Pot in the Furnace of the great Reverberatory Fire, and give the Fire for eight and forty hours; then take off your Pot, and break it, and while it is hot, powder your matter in a Brass Mortar, and then set it in the air upon a Board, or upon a Marble Stone; when it is quite cold, searce it through a silk Sieve, and keep it in wooden, or glass Vessels. Obs. 1. That though the said powder of Mars be devested of its Salt, yet we reverbe∣rate it a great while, that so all its Salt may evaporate, and the Remedy be the more A∣stringent, which is the only intention it is to answer. Obs. 2. That we use not a glaz'd Pot, lest in the reverberation the glazing should melt by the violent heat of the Fire, and mingle with the Mars. Obs. 3. That we powder the said Mars, while it is warm, that we may powder it easilier, and make a finer powder of it. Obs. 4. That we searce it through a Silk Sieve, that so we may make it so impal∣pable, as that in passing through the Stomach, it leaves no hard gravelous substance, that might offend the Coats of the Stomach, or Intestines. Obs. 5. That the Astringent Saffron of Mars, is nothing but Mars calcin'd Philosophically, by Fire and Brimstone, devested of its Salt, by its dissolution in common Water, then rever∣berated,
powdered, and searsed, to be reduced to an impalpable powder. Its Ʋse and Vertues: It is a powerful Astrin∣gent inwardly taken; and exteriourly applied, it stops the Bloody Flux, the Hepatick Flux, and all Diarrhaea's. Its Dose is, from half a dragm to two, in some Conserve, or Preserve, or Bolus: It stops likewise bleeding of the Nose, by powdering some Cotton with this powder, and filling the Nostrils with the Cotton thus powdered.
A Little TREATISE OF CHYMISTRY OR, An Abridgement of the precedent TREATISE. Of the Hermetick Lute. TAke of Potters Earth, Sand, and Horse∣dung, equal quantity of each, and knead them together with a little Water, or Whites of Eggs, to a soft lump: this serves to make Bricks in a Mould, to cement your Bricks in the structure of your Furnaces, to lute your Vessels, and to fill up the holes, chinks, and cracks of your Furnaces and Vessels.
Of Hermetick Furnaces. AFurnace to distil, with the Vesica covered with its Refrigeratory, Waters, Aromatick Essences, and Spirit of Wine; it has an Ash-hole, a Fire-room, and a Laboratory; the Laboratory must be as high as the Vesica, and half a finger in its circumference wider than the Vesica; you must put Wood and Coals into the Fire-room. A Furnace for a violent Reverberatory Fire, serving to draw the Spirits, and Oyls of Mine∣rals, and Metals, in a glass or stone Retort luted, or in an iron one: it is like the precedent, only the Laboratory must be of the height of the Re∣tort; and that there must be a gap to put the neck of the Retort out at, and must have an inch in circumference, more than the Retort; then in the Operation, you must add to it three Layes, or Rounds of Bricks, lesser still towards the top, and fill the holes with pieces of Brick or Iron: Wood and Coals are the materials of your Fire. A Furnace for a Circulatory Fire, and of Sup∣pression, serving to distil the Flegm, Spirit, and Oyl of Seeds, Berries, Woods, Barks, Roots, &c. in a stone or glass Retort luted: it is built like the precedent, only the Ash-hole, and Fire-room are not separated from one another, and that you must cover the top of your Furnace with an earthen Pan, that has a hole in its middle: Wood and Coals are your fuel.
A furnace for a Wheel Fire, serving to sublime the Salts of Minerals and Metals, in a Matrass of Glass luted: it is made of two Rounds of Bricks, without Cement or Lute, leaving a little space between the Bricks. You must put an earthen Bowl in the middle, to set your Matrass on, and kindled Coals round about it. A Furnace for a Circulatory Fire, and of Sup∣pression, serving to calcine and melt Minerals, and Metals, and to calcine Vegetables and Ani∣mals in Crucibles, or great Pots of the same Earth: It is made of two Rounds of unluted Bricks, set at a little distance one from the other, that the air may come in; it is enough to make it two fingers above the Crucible, when set in its earthen Bowl: you must lay round about as high as the Vessel, kindled Coals. A Furnace for a Circulary Fire, and of Sup∣pression, serving to distil Oyls, acid Spirits, and Flegms of Gums, Rosins, VVax, in a glass Retort luted. It is built as the precedent, only there must be a place for the neck of the Retort to come out at. The same Materials of VVood and Coals for your Fire. A Furnace to distil in a Balneum Maris, or Mariae, or vaporous Bath, all sorts of Liquors, to evaporate the Extract of Salts, and for all other Operations. It is made of divers Layes of Bricks luted together; there is in it an Ash-hole, a Fire∣room, and a Laboratory, and in the top of the Laboratory three little gaps, to give a passage to the Flame. You must put your Coals in the Fire∣room, and a Kettle with a brim in your Labora∣tory.
A Furnace for the Fire of Ashes, or Sand, wet or dry, serving to distil and rectifie all sorts of Liquors, and for Infusion, Digestion, Tinctures, Evaporation, &c. It is made of an Oval Lay of Tiles, and three other Oval Layes of crooked Bricks, cemented with our Lute, Plaster of Paris and Water: so that the Oval Rounds grow wi∣der, as they rise higher, and that there be in one end of the Oval a double door, for the Ash∣hole and Fire-room; then building a square about the said Oval, with broken Tiles and Mortar, add one perfect Round of Bricks, leaving a little gap over against the Fire-room-door; then ap∣ply your iron plate, and add two or three Rounds of Bricks more to make the Laboratory; at last, put upon the said iron Plate, Ashes or Sand, an inch thick. A Wind-Furnace for violent Fusions, is made by building a Furnace of a Circulary Fire, and Suppression, upon the bottom of a Hogshead; in which bottom, there is a hole as big as ones head, which is covered with a Grate, well ce∣mented with Lute and Plaster. The Hogshead must be knocked out at the lower end, and ele∣vated from the ground about half a foot. Of Spirit of Wine. TAke as much Brandy as you please; put it into the Copper Vesica, placed in its proper Furnace, fit to it its cover, or Moors-head, bor∣dered
with its Refrigeratory, then fit to the nose or pipe of the said cover, and to the pipe of Cop∣per, that passes through two Hogsheads full of Water, a little moveable pipe to joyn them toge∣ther. Light the Fire in the Furnace that serves to distil Aromatick Essences, the Spirit will come in a stream. This Spirit of Wine is not good to be taken inwardly; if it be not rectified in a glass Cucur∣bite and Alembick; the first is excellent for bur∣nings, the second is proper to dissolve Gums and Rofins, to take inwardly, and to draw their Tin∣ctures and Extracts. Of Salt of Tartar. TAke of Tartar and Niter powdered, equal parts, mingle them, and having put them into a glaz'd earthen Pan; set fire to them with a red hot Iron, stirring them continually, till the Niter be consumed, and the Tartar calcined. It is aperitive and diuretick. The Dose is, from one to two dragms. The Regulus of Antimony. MIngle three pound of Male Antimony, with one pound and an half of common Niter, as much of Tartar, four ounces and an half of pow∣dered
Charcoal; put this mixtion by spoonfuls into a pot heated red-hot, in a Furnace of a Cir∣culary Fire, and Suppression, till your pot be full; then encrease your fire, stirring your matter from time to time with a stick, which you must not put to the bottom, till all be melted; then take off your pot, and when it is cold, break it, you will find in the bottom the Regulus, and the Faeces on the top. Of it, is made Vinum Emeticum, everlasting Pills, and Cups, and the Diaphore∣tick, its Faeces, serves to make the Golden Sul∣phur Diaphoretick. Of the Liver of Antimony, of which is made the Crocus Metallorum. MIngle one pound of Male or Female Anti∣mony, with half a pound of common Ni∣ter powdered, put them by spoonfuls into a Cru∣cible, or pot of the same Earth, heated red-hot in a Furnace of a Circulary Fire, and Suppression, covering your pot at each spoonful, then encrease your fire, and stir incessantly your matter, with a stick, till it be in Fusion; take off your pot, and pour into a Mortar the melted Liquor, retaining the Faeces from going in with it; your matter being cold, is called, Liver of Antimony; and being powdered, is called, The Saffron of Metals, or Crocus Metallorum. Of it, is made the Vinum Emeticum. The Dose is, one ounce in a pint of VVine, of which take
one or two ounces inwardly, and four or five ounces in a Clyster. The Spirit and Oyl of Guaiacum. FIll up to the neck, a great earthen Retort well luted, with shavings, or little pieces of the VVood of Guiacum; place it in a small Reverbe∣ratory Furnace, fitting to it a stone Receiver, or a glass one, and covering your Furnace with an earthen Pan, that has a hole in the bottom; then by a moderate heat of twelve, sixteen, or twenty hours; you will have the Spirit and Oyl toge∣ther, which separate either by a glass Tunnel, or by a coffin of brown Paper, wet with ordinary VVater. Of the Ashes or Coals re-calcin'd, you may make a Lixivium, and extract the Salt. This Oyl is good for old Ulcers, for the Gan∣grene, and Rot; and two or three drops in Cin∣namon-water is good for the Colick, the Spirit is good for Burnings, Ulcers, and for the Pox, in a Decoction of Guaiacum. Crystal Mineral. THrow fine Niter powdered into a Pot, set in a Furnace of a Circulary Fire, and Sup∣pression, and let it be quite full at first; being melted, throw into it four or five times, at each
time a spoonful of powder'd Brimstone; then pour out by little and little, your melted Niter, into a Brass Kettle, shaking the Kettle, and dip∣ping it into cold Water: dissolve your Niter, thus prepar'd in warm Water; filter it through a brown Paper, and evaporate it to a Pellicule; then setting it cool, you will have fair Crystals, which are the true Crystal Mineral, or Sal Prunellae. It cools, opens, and resists Corruption taken inward∣ly, from a scruple to a dragm, and in a Clyster, from a dragm to half an ounce. The Spirit and Oyl of Box ARe made as the Spirit and Oyl of Guaiacum, only this Wood yields much Spirit, but lit∣tle Oyl: the Oyl is good for the putrefaction, and pain of the Teeth, for Contusions and Ulcers. Of the Regulus of Mars. POwder and mingle two pounds of Male An∣timony, with one pound of Tartar, and one of common Niter, six ounces of filings of Steel, and two ounces of powder'd Charcoal. It is made as the Regulus of Antimony, and there results of it a Regulus containing seven ounces of Antimony, with the six ounces of filings. It purges by stool, and vomit, in powder, or in vessel with Wine, and serves to make an excellent Diaphoretick, which never provokes vomit.
The Spirit of Salt. TAke one part of common Salt, and five of Potters Earth, dried and powdered, fill with it a glass Retort well luted, place it in a Furnace of a great Reverberatory Fire; give the fire by degrees, and continue the last degree for twenty hours. Its vertue is Diuretick, it drives away Gra∣vel, and breaks little britle Stones, whitens the Teeth, and preserves from the Plague, and all Corruption. Of the Red Precipitate of Mercury. PUt four ounces of Mercury, and six ounces of Aqua fortis in a Matrass of glass luted up to half its Body; place it in a Furnace of a moderate Circulary Fire, till the Aqua fortis be evaporated; then give a Fire of Suppression, till there rise a yellow vapour upon the brim of the Matrass; then take it off, and when cold, break your Vessel, and you will find in the bottom a Red Precipitate, of an Orange colour.
Of Spirit of Niter. PUt one part of fine Niter, to four parts of dried Potters-Earth, fill a glass Retort well luted, then distil it in a great Reverbera∣tory Fire, and have a care of its vapours in distil∣ling it. Its Ʋse and Vertues: Are to dissolve Mercury, Camphire, and Metals, and is better for interior Remedies than Aqua fortis. Of Turbith Mineral. PUt two ounces of Mercury, and three ounces of Spirit of Niter, into a glass Retort, luted up to half its neck, place it in a Furnace of a Circulary fire, giving a gentle fire, till the Mercury be dissolved and dried; then take off your vessel, and let it cool, then pour upon it one ounce of Oyl, or Spirit of Sulphur, and evaporate it by the same fire, reiterating this three or four times, then burn upon it Spirit of Wine; break your Vessel, and you will have a white lump: which powder, and wash in warm Water, till the Wa∣ter come away insipid. Dry this matter in a Sand-fire, and burn upon it Spirit of Wine, three or four times, it will make your Mercury as yellow as Gold; then give it a melting fire, which it will endure very well, without losing any thing, be∣cause
of the fixedness it has acquired by the Spirit of Sulphur. Of the white Precipitate. PUt eight ounces of Mercury, and one pound of Aqua fortis, into an ample glass Retort with a long neck, shake your vessel, and heat it a little upon warm Ashes, till your Mercury be dissolved; then pour your Dissolution into a glass Bell, and pour upon it a quart of Sea-water, to precipitate your Mercury; separate your Sea-water, and sweeten your Precipitate with com∣mon Water, then dry it in a coffin of white Pa∣per. It is used with Pomatum, to rub Ring-worms withall. Its internal Use is, To purge in the Pox, from three to eight grains. Of the golden Diaphoretick Sulphur. BOyl in common Water in a Kettle the Faeces of Regule of Antimony, or Regule of Mars; filter their Lixivium through a brown Paper, pour two or three spoonfuls of Vinegar, or of some acid Spirit upon all this Lixivium, it will curdle, grow yellow, and stink, then pouring Water upon it, precipitate your Tincture thus curdled, into a powder of the colour of Saffron, which you must edulcorate, or sweeten, to take away the ill smell, then dry it in a coffin of Paper.
Its Ʋse, is to provoke the Monthly Courses, from eight to twelve grains, by whetting its ver∣tue with twice or thrice as much of Sena, Saffron, and Savin, or by receiving the vapour of the Lixivium, in sitting over a Close-stool. Of the Oyl of Eggs. PUt twenty or thirty Eggs into a Kettle of cold Water, boyl it till your Eggs be hard, take out the hard Yolks, and put them into a Frying-pan, over a flaming fire, bruise them, and turn them often with an iron Ladle, till they be almost all turn'd into Oyl, which separate from its Faeces while it is warm; you may recti∣fie it if you please in a glass Retort, in a Circulary Fire, or rather in a Sand-fire, which will make it yellow, and incapable of congealing. Its Ʋse is, That it is a very good Balsam for green Wounds, Burnings, Ruptures, or falling of the Guts into the Scrotum, and for Wounds in the Nerves, Ligaments, and Membranes which are uncovered. Of the Oyl and Spirit of Ash-wood. THey are drawn as the Spirit and Oyl of Box, and this wood yields but very little Oyl. Its Vertue is, For pains in the Kidneys, Spleen Teeth, and for the rotting of Bones, applied out∣wardly.
Of distilled Vinegar. TAke a glass, stone, or glaz'd earthen Cucur∣bite, fill it half full with good Vinegar, place it in a Sand-heat, fitting to it its Head and Receiver; give at first a great fire, stop the Registers and Doors of your Ash-hole, and Fire-room, continuing your fire, till you have drawn off, within half a pint, all the Vinegar you put in; you may rectifie it upon its Faeces, and separate the Flegm, which will come first, from the acid Spirit, which will come last, half in half, or thereabouts. Its Ʋse is, To dissolve Pearls, Corals, Fish-shels, to make of them Magisteries, and to extract the Salt of Metals. Oyl of Camphire. PUt into a Matrass or Vial two ounces of Camphire, and four ounces of Spirit of Ni∣ter, shake them together, and let them stand till the Camphire be dissolved: separate by a glass Tunnel the Oyl which will swim upon the Spirit. Its Ʋse is, To moderate the pains of the Nerves that are naked and uncovered in a Wound, and to exfoliate rotten Bones.
Of Spirit of Wine campherized. PUt as much Camphire as you please, into a Matrass, and pour to it as much Spirit of Wine as shall be three or four fingers above it, fit to it another Matrass, and make a double Vessel: place it in a Sand-heat, till your Cam∣phire be dissolved. The Ʋse is, For the Tooth-ach, and for Deaf∣ness, applied to the Tooth in a little Cotton, and put into the hollow of the Ear, with a little Wool cut off from the Stones of a black Ram. Of the Aromatick Tincture of Cloves. PUt into a Matrass, as many Cloves as you please, and pour upon them Spirit of Wine, to the height of three or four fingers above the matter; place it in a Sand-heat, till the Spirit be died of a blackish red: separate your Tincture, and make of it either an Extract, or a Syrup. The Ʋse of the Tincture, Is to fortifie the Sto∣mach, and Heart; ease the pains of the Colick, kill VVorms taken inwardly, and applied out∣wardly, inform of an Epithema. The calcination of Lead. TAke Lead beaten into thin plates, and Brim∣stone powder'd, of each equal parts; make
Stratum superstratum in a glaz'd earthen Pot; place it in a Circulary Fire, and of Suppression, till your inflamed and burning Sulphur be consumed; take it off from the fire, and stir it with an Iron Rod, then powder it, and searce it. Its Ʋse is, To dry up old Ulcers, and Scabs, being incorporated with Grease, or Diapompho∣lix, and also from it, is drawn the Sugar of Saturn: The stinking Oyl of Cloves. PUt of Cloves what quantity you will, into a glass Retort luted, place it in a Circulary Fire, there will come into the glass Receiver white fumes, which will congeal into a black Oyl, stinking and caustick. It serves to exfoliate rotten Bones, it cures the Gangrene and pocky Ulcers. Of the Oyl and Butter of Antimony, of which is made the Mercury of Life, or Emetick Powder, or of Algarot. Of the Cinnaber of Antimony. Of Mercury and Antimony revived. PUt Corrosive Sublimate, and Mineral Anti∣mony in Powder, of each four ounces, into a glass Retort luted, leaving a gap to look in at;
place it in a small Circulary Fire, till all the Oyl be distilled into a glass Receiver, and that you see in the bottom of your Retort, a bright melt∣ed lump; then give a fire of Suppression, till your Retort begin to grow soft, and be half melted: break it, there will come out of the neck, Mer∣cury half quick and revived, and half in a blackish powder. In the entry of the neck, you will find a greyish Crust, and in the bottom a lump of An∣timony reviv'd, and made crude again; Then put your Oyl of Antimony, which being congeal∣ed, is called Butter of Antimony, into a little Retort, to be rectified once only in a small Cir∣culary Fire; throw it into some Water, which being impregnated with the Mercurial Salts, is called the Philosophical Vinegar; pour off this acid Water, and sweeten your white powder with other water, till it come away insipid. This powder is called Mercury of Life. The use of the Emetick powder, is, To cause vomiting, and to purge gently in intermittent Feavers, and Dropsies; the Philosophick Water is good for the Itch, Scabs, Ring-worms, and Lice; the Cinnaber of Antimony is a Sudorifick for the Pox. Of the Oyl and Tincture of Karabe. FIll a glass Retort, luted up to the neck, with Karabe powdered, pour upon it Spirit of Wine, up to the neck too, place it in a Circulary
Fire, and fit to it a large glass Receiver; give your fire by degrees, till you come to a fire of Suppres∣sion, and that there appears no more vapours in the Receiver: separate the Oyl that goes to the bottom, from the Spirit that swims on the top. The Use of the Tincture of Karabe, is, For the Palsie, the Sciatica, the cold Gout, all cold Fluxi∣ons, and bruises of the Nerves. The Oyl is good against the suffocations of the Mother, and old Wounds. Of the Oyl of Jet. FIll a Retort of glass, well luted, with Jet in pieces, up to the neck; place it in a Circula∣ry Fire, and fit to it a glass Receiver, giving the fire by degrees, as in the Oyl of Karabe, and se∣parate the Oyl from the Spirit, that will swim on the top. The Use of the Oyl, is, for the Suffocation, or Fits of the Mother, for all Contusions and Bruises. Of the Butter, Cream, or Nutritum of Saturn. PUt into an earthen glaz'd Pan, Minium, or Lytharge, or Ceruse, or calcin'd Lead, as much as you please; pour upon it boyled distill'd Vinegar five or six fingers above the matter; stir it with a wooden Spatula; an hour after melt an
ounce of white Wax in an earthen glaz'd Pan, and add to it four ounces of Oyl; pour this mix∣tion into a Mortar, and upon it a glass full of the said Vinegar of Saturn, stir it, till it be in a con∣sistence of Butter, or Balsamum. The Use of this Balsam, is, To cool, and asswage pain, and extinguish Inflammations; to dissipate and ease the Hemorrhoids. The Use of the Vinegar of Saturn, being dissol∣ved in a small quantity in Water, is, To appease Inflammations, and to serve for Injection in Go∣norrhaea's, being mingled with a little Water of Barley. Of the Oyl of Bricks, or the Philo∣sophers Oyl. PUt five parts of powdered Bricks, and one part of Oyl of Olives, into a glass Retort luted, and bigger than needs for so much matter; place it in a Circulary Fire, which by little and little, you must bring to the highest degree, or Fire of Suppression; the Flegm will come first, then a stinking, thick, red Oyl, which being rectified, will become yellow, clearer, and less stinking. The Use of this Oyl, is, For Contusions, the Sciatica, and cold Defluxions.
The Oyl of yellow Wax. POur one part of yellow Wax melted, upon five parts of powder'd Bricks, make with it little Balls, and with them fill a glass Retort, luted up to the neck; give the same Fire, as in the Oyl of Bricks; the Flegm will come first, then a red stinking Oyl, which will congeal into a yellow Butter, which being rectified, will become clear, and white, and less stinking. The Use of it, is the same as of the Oyl of Bricks. Of the Extract of Hellebore. PUt half a pound of the Roots of black Helle∣bore, and upon it as much Spirit of Wine as will cover it three fingers high, into a double Matrass; draw the Tincture in a Sand-fire, for three or four days, evaporate the said Tincture in a glass Cucurbite, in a Sand-fire, to a consi∣stence of Honey. The Use is, To purge Melancholy, it causes Loathing and Vomiting. The Dose is, from ten grains to a scruple. Of Aqua fortis. PUt into a glass Retort common Niter & un∣deflegmated Vitriol in powder, and leaving third part of your Vessel empty; distil them in a Fire of Reverberation, or Suppression, giving it
by degrees. A little Flegm will come first, then the Spirit in red vapours. The Use is, To dissolve Minerals and Metals, and to give force, and penetration to Dyings, or Tinctures. Of the Infernal Stone. PUt two parts of Aqua fortis, to one part of Coppel Silver, cut into little pieces, in a small Matrass half luted; evaporate the Aqua fortis in a Circulary Fire, till your matter be dry, with a black scum upon it; then give a melting fire, till there rise no more vapours: then take off your Matrass, and let your matter cool, or else pour it into little moulds. The Use is, To consume Warts and proud Flesh, to cure Cancres, the Ulcers of the Mouth, and the Gangrene, by touching them with this Stone. Of the burning Spirit of Honey. PUt one pound of Honey, and a pint of White Wine into a glass Cucurbite, or an earthen one; distil them in a Sand-fire, till you hear that it boyls no longer, and that there remains nothing but a black Honey in the bottom. The Use is, To dye the Beard and Hair.
Of the Arcanum Corallinum. POur warm Water upon the Red Precipitate of Mercury, till at last your Water come away insipid, then pour upon it Spirit of Salt, in a glass Cucurbite; dry it in a Sand-fire, that will fix the Mercury; then sweeten with cold Water the said Mercury fixed, till the Water come away insipid; then reverberate it in a Cru∣cible, it will become as red as Coral; then burn upon it Spirit of VVine, two or three times. The Use of it is, To purge, and provoke vo∣miting gently, and cure the Pox. The Dose is, from three to six grains. Cinnamon-Water. PUt four ounces of Cinnamon, and a quart of White Wine, into a glass, or stone Cucur∣bite, fit to it a Head and Receiver of Glass, distil them in a Sand-fire; there will come at first a clear Water, and toward the end, a whitish mud∣dy one. The Use of the first Water, is, To fortifie the Stomach, and comfort the Heart, and to facili∣tate, and further the delivery of Women in Child∣bed. The second Water may serve in the confe∣ction of the Syrup of Cinnamon, by infusing the Cinnamon before you dissolve your Sugar in it.
Of the sweet Sublimate. TAke of Corrosive Sublimate, and Quick∣silver, of each a like quantity, powder your Sublimate in a white Dish, with a Pestle of VVhite-ware, stopping your nose close; then add to it the Quicksilver, and when they are half incorporated together, add a little distil∣led Vinegar, to make a wet powder; put this mixtion into an unluted Matrass, with a straight neck, place it in a Circulary Fire; after the eva∣poration of the Vinegar, stop the Matrass with a Paper stopple; continue your fire, till your mat∣ter be elevated from the bottom of the Matrass, take off your Matrass, break it, and take out the Sublimate, which cleanse every where: powder it, and put it into a greater Matrass, half luted, to be sublim'd a second time in the same fire, which you must encrease towards the end of the Operation, till there remain little or nothing in the bottom of the Matrass. Take off your Matrass, and break it, and keep this Sublimate in a glass Vessel well stop'd. Its Use is, To purge gently, from twenty to forty grains, it fluxes in four or five Doses, one after another. Of the Salt of Saturn. PUt as much distilled Vinegar as you please, into a glaz'd Pan, which set upon a Trevet over a
fire of Wood and Coals, and add to it as much as you please of powder'd Lytharge, stirring it with a wooden Spatula; then, after it has boyled a little, let it cool, pour off the distilled Vine∣gar impregnated, and pour on more; reiterate the boyling, till there remain no Lytharge; filter your Dissolutions, and evaporate them in a Sand∣fire, in a glass Cucurbite, till your matter become as red as Blood: then put it into VVhite-VVare Dishes to congeal into white Crystals, as sweet as Sugar, and there will remain a red Oyl, sweet also, which has the same vertue as the Salt. It is a Collyrium for the Eyes in Ophthalmies; it is good to inject in Gonorrhaea's, and it is ex∣cellent for redness of the Face, or Erysipelases, in VVater, or Ʋnguentum Rosatum. Of the Diaphoretick Antimony. TAke one pound of Mineral Antimony, or the Regule of Antimony, or Mars, four pound of fine Niter, powder them, and mingle them together, and put them in fagration and fusion by spoonfuls, in a great Pot of the Crucible Earth, heated red-hot in a fire of Suppression, covering at each time the Pot; continue the fire till the vapours cease; then take it off, and with a Lat∣tin Ladle, pour out the matter gently into an earthen pan full of VVater: bruise between your hands the matter thus quenched. Pour off the white milky Dissolution, within 2 or 3 hours, pour off the VVater of that which is precipitated
to the bottom, and sweeten it, till your water come away insipid; then filter your Magistery, and dry it in the shade. The Use of it is, That it is a powerful Diu∣retick, and Diaphoretick against Venereal Disea∣ses, the Small Pox, and all long Distempers. The Dose is, from ten to twenty grains, and more. Boyl four ounces of Venice Turpentine into the consistence of Colophone, in a kettle full of Water, and mingle with it, while it is warm, an ounce of Diaphoretick Antimony, half an ounce of Niter sulphurated, and as much Cream of Tartar; form of it Pills, which will be excellent for old Gonorrhaea's. Of the binding Saffron of Mars. PUt two parts of filings of Steel, and one part of powder'd Brimstone, all at once, into a Crucible heated red-hot in a fire of Suppression, till the Brimstone be consumed, and an hour af∣ter, take off your Crucible, and powder present∣ly your matter; spread this powder, that is now of the colour of Violets, upon Tiles, and it will become brown. It is good in bloody and Hepatick Fluxes, in the weight of a dragm: It augments the binding vertue of Plasters.
The opening Saffron of Mars. SPrinkle the binding Saffron of Mars in a stone pan, with Spirit of Vitriol, or Brimstone, two fingers above the matter, which in two or three days will be a kind of paste, with which, fill a large Crucible, and set it in a Reverberatory Fire for eight hours, then powder it, while warm, and searce it. The Ʋse: This Saffron is good against the Yel∣low Jaundice, it provokes the Monthly Courses, and opens the Spleen, from half a dragm to two. Of the Spirit of Sulphur. PLace a stone Cup half full of Sand, upon a little Pot, placed in the middle of a great earthen Pan, a quarter full of Water; put into it a spoonful of powder'd Brimstone, and with a red Cart-nail set it on fire, put presently a glass Bell over the Pan, the Brimstone will burn, the Spirit will impregnate the Water, and the Flow∣ers will produce a little skin; reiterate all that, till you have thus consumed four pound of Brim∣stone; then mingle your Flowers, and your im∣pregnated Water in a Matrass with a short neck, and evaporate in a Circulary Fire the Flegm, till your Brimstone be dissolved, and that your Spirit grows black; pour it all into a stone, or White-ware
Vessel, while it is warm; the Brimstone will be congealed in the bottom, and you shall have half an ounce of black Oyl, or Spirit of Brimstone. It cools, purifies the Blood, preserves from the Plague, fixes Mercury, dissolves Pearls and Coral, and cures Cancers, and Warts. Of the Spirit of Vitriol, and Oyl of Colcothar. FIll a glass Retort, throughly luted, with green Vitriol calcin'd to a grey colour, in a great Crucible in a Circulary Fire, and of Suppression; place it in a Furnace of great Reverberation, till there appear black spots upon the Receiver; then pour off your Spirit of Vitriol, which is as clear as Water, encrease your fire, you shall have a black Oyl very acid, and there will remain a Colcothar in the Retort. The Use of both is, To cool and resist Cor∣ruption, against all Distempers of the Liver, Kidneys, against burning and pestilential Fea∣vers; it serves also, to dissolve Pearls, Coral, Crabs Eyes, Egg-shells, &c. but it is not strong enough to dissolve Metals.
Of the Oyl of Myrrha. FIll with Myrrha in pieces, a glass Retort lu∣ted; place it in a Circulary Fire, fitting to it a great Receiver; there will come out a Flegm, and an Oyl, both together; separate them one from another, with a glass Tunnel. The Use of the Oyl is, Against Fits of the Mo∣ther by smelling to it; it cleanses and ripens Wounds, being mingled with the Digestivum; and hinders the Gangrene, being mingled with the Egyptiacum. Of Cauteries. SLack half a pound of Quick-lime in a stone Pan, by pouring Water upon it, by little and little, till it become like pap; in the mean time, heat in a Crucible, in a Fire of Suppression, two pounds of gravell'd Ashes, and throw them hot into the said pap, then pour upon it sufficient quantity of Water to dissolve your Salts; after twelve hours infusing, pour your Lixivium into a brass Basin, and evaporate it till it be dry: and thus, as it is, you may use it as people do other Cauteries. If you melt this matter, you may mould Cauteries upon a Marble. The Use is, To cauterize; when they are
moulded, they are dryer, and must be well wet before their application. Of the Red acid oyl of Antimony. POwder and mingle fine Niter, Brimstone, and Antimony, of each a pound; set fire to your matters by little and little, in an earthen pan, un∣der a glass Bell, as you do the Spirit of Brimstone; then evaporate it in a Matrass of a short neck, till your Brimstone be melted, and your Niter ex∣haled, and that your Oyl appears red and thick, taking care that your matter in boyling do not run over; pour all your matter into a little stone pot, or of White-ware, and when it is cold, it will congeal into a fair reddish Sulphur. The Use of the Oyl is, To cure by touching the Ulcers and Cancres of the Pox; it purges with∣out provoking vomit, from eight to eighteen drops. Of Besoard Mineral. MElt some butter of Antimony, and pour it into a glass Bell, and add to it, drop by drop, and at divers times, Spirit of Niter in equal quantity, for fear of too great an ebulli∣tion; when the smoak and boyling cease, pour to it a pint of Sea-water filtred and cold, there will
be produced a white Precipitate; after twelve hours, pour off this Water, sweeten your Preci∣pitate with common Water, then filter the re∣mainder through a coffin of Paper, and keep your powder well stop'd. Its Use is, To be an excellent Sudorifick for malignant Feavers, and the Pox. The Precipitate of Bismuth. PUt four ounces of powder'd Bismuth into a glass Bell, and pour upon it, by little and lit∣tle, eight ounces of Spirit of Niter, having a care of too great an ebullition, and of the veno∣mous vapours of the said Spirit. The ebullition being ceas'd, and the dissolution perform'd, and cold, it will crystallize. Pour upon it Sea-water, to precipitate the Magistery, pour off your Sea∣water, and pour on common Water to sweeten it, filter the remainder through a Paper coffin, and let it dry in the shade. The Use is, To dry Ulcers, and to be a Fucus being mingled with Pomatum. The spirit and oyl of Turpentine. FIll a glass Retort luted with the waterish Spi∣rit of Turpentine, with its Oyl, distil it in a Circulary Fire, till three parts of four come away,
which will be the Spirit, and there will remain in the Retort a thick red Oyl; rectifie your Spi∣rit so often, till there remain no Oyl in it. The Oyl is a good Anodynum for wounds of the nervous parts; the Spirit is a good Diuretick, dissolves Gums, extracts Tinctures of Aroma∣tick Plants, and serves to make the Balsam of Sulphur. Of the sulphurated Niter, call'd Sal Antifebrile, or the salt against Feavers. TAke four ounces of Brimstone, or its Flow∣ers, and mingle them with eight ounces of fine Niter; fire this mixtion by degrees in an earthen Cup, set in a stone Pan, in which is a quart of Spirit of Urine, covering the pot with a Bell; then take the Faeces of the calcin'd Brim∣stone, and powder them, and mingle them with the Spirit of Urine impregnated with the Spi∣rits of Niter and Sulphur; let them infuse twelve hours in this stone Pot, till they be dissolved, fil∣ter the Dissolution, and evaporate it in a short necked Matrass in a Circulary Fire, till it come to a white scum; then diminish the Fire, and eva∣porate it, till it cease boyling, and have a care that the too much boyling do not break your Vessel; pour this matter, while warm, into a White-ware Dish, and it will congeal like Cry∣stal
Mineral. To mould it, you must melt it, and then pour it into a Vial, or melt in the Vial, and then break your Vial by cold Water, and take away all the Glass with the point of a Knife. The Use: 'Tis a powerful Diuretick and cooler, it resists Corruption, it drives Gravel, cures Fea∣vers, softens Metals. The Dose is, from twenty to thirty Grains. FINIS.
