V121 15076156 103173
Flores Solitudinis. Certaine Rare and Elegant PIECES; Viz. Two Excellent Discourses Of 1. Temperance, and Patience; Of 2. Life and Death. BY I.E. NIEREMBERGIUS. THE WORLD CONTEMNED; BY EUCHERIUS, BP of LYONS. And the Life of PAULINUS, BP of NOLA. Collected in his Sicknesse and Retirement, BY HENRY VAUGHAN, Silurist. Tantus Amor Florum, & generandi gloria Mellis. London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Princes Armes in St Pauls Church-yard. 1654.
TO THE TRUELY NOBLE And Religious Sir CHARLES EGERTON Knight. SIR, IF, when you please to locke upon these Collections, you will find them to lead you from the Sun into the shade, from the open Terrace into a private grove, & from the noyse and pompe of this world into a silent and solitary Hermitage: doe not you thinke then, that you have descended (like the dead) in Occidentem & te∣nebras, for in this withdrawing∣roome (though secret and seldome fre∣quented,) shines that happy starre, which will directly lead you to the King of light. You have long since quitted the Publick, & to present you now with some thing of solitude and the contempt of
the world, would looke like a designe to Flatter you, were not my Name, ar∣gument enough for the contrary. Those few that know me, will (I am sure) be my Compurgators; and I my selfe dare assert this, you have no cause to su∣spect it. But what ever the thoughts of men will be, I am already sure of this ad∣vantage, that we live in an age, which hath made this very Proposition (though suspected of Melancholie,) mighty pleasing, and even meane witts begin to like it; the wiser sort alwaies did, for what (I beseech you,) hath this world, that should make a wise man in love with it? I will take the boldnesse to describe it in the same character which Bisselius did the hansome concubine of Mahomet the great: Puella tota quanta, nil erat aliud Quàm Illecebra picta, delicatus harpago, &c. The whole wench (how compleat soe'r) was but A specious baite; a soft, sly, temp∣ting slut;
A pleasing witch; a living death; a faire, Thriving disease; a fresh, infecti∣ous aire; A pretious plague; a furie sweetly drawne; Wild fire laid up and finely drest in Lawne. This delicate, admir'd Inhantresse (even to those who enjoy her after their owne lusts, and at their owne rate,) will prove but a very sad bargaine; she is all deception and sorrow. This world and the prince of it are the Canker-Rose in the mouth of the fox; Decipit, arefit, pungit. But those future, supreme fru∣itions which God hath in store for those that love him are neither Phantasmes, nor fallacies; they are all substantiall and certaine, and in the Apostles phrase, , a far more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. Nothing can give that, which it hath not, this transiory, changeable and corrupt world cannot af∣ford
permanent treasures. All it gives, and all it shewes us, is but trash & illu∣sion. The true incorruptible riches dwell above the reach of rust and theeves. Man himselfe in his outward part, which was taken out of the world, feeles the like passions with the world, he is worn, wased, dissolved and changed, he comes hither, he knowes not how, and goes from hence, he knowes not whither. Nescio quò vado, valete posteri! was the Roman's Epitaph: One generation commeth, and another passeth away. Pro∣perant & decurrunt in abscondi∣tum, they hasten and drive on to their appointed place, untill the great day of accompt. All the severall shapes and gestures we see in this wild Masque of time are but so many disguises which the Spirits that first assumed them, cast off againe when they have acted their parts. Most elegantly did Augurelli∣us sing to Peter Lipomanus upon the death of his sister Clara;
Amaena, Petre, cum vides, &c. Peter, when thou this pleasant world dost see, Beleeve, thou seest meere Dreames and vanitie; Not reall things, but false: and through the Aire Each where, an empty, slipp'rie Scene, through faire. The chirping birds, the fresh woods shadie boughes, The leaves shrill whispers, when the west-wind blowes. The swift, fierce Greyhounds cour∣sing on the plaines, The flying hare distrest 'twixt feare and paines; The bloomy Mayd decking with flowers her head, The gladsome, easie youth by light love lead; And whatsoe'r heere with admiring eyes Thou seem'st to see, 'tis but a fraile disguise
VVorne by eternall things, a passive dresse Put on by beings that are passive∣les. All the gay appearances in this life seeme to me but a swift succession of ri∣sing Clouds, which neither abide in any certaine forme, nor continue for any long time; And this is that, which makes the fore travell of the sonnes of men to be nothing else, but a meere chasing of shadowes. All is vanity (said the Royall Philosopher,) and there is no new thing under the Sun. I present you therefore with a discourse perswading to a contempt & a deser∣tion of these old things which (our Saviour tells us) shall passe away; And with an historicall, faithfull re∣lation of the life and happinesse of a devout, primitive father, who gave all that he had upon earth to the poore, that he might have treasure in heaven.
Some other Additions you will finde, which meeting now in this volume under your name, will in their descent to posterity, carry with them this fai∣rest Testimonie, I loved you. This (Sir) is my maine and my sole designe in this Addresse, without reservati∣on and without flattery, for which re∣spect, and for no other, I beleeve you will accept of what I have done, and looke up∣on my suddaine and small Presents, as upon some forward flowers whose kinde hast hath brought them above ground in cold weather. The incertainty of life, and a peevish, inconstant state of health would not suffer me to stay for grea∣ter performances, or a better season; least loosing this, I should never againe have the opportunity to manifest how much and how sincerely I am Sir Your Servant and well-wisher Henry Ʋaughan. Newton by Ʋske neare Sketh-Rock. 1653.
To the onely true and glo∣rious God, the Sole disposer of Life and Death. O Doe not goe, thou know'st I'le dye, My Spring and Fall are in thy Booke! Or if thou goest, doe not deny To lend me, though from far, one looke! My sinnes long since have made thee strange, A very stranger unto me; No morning-meetings (since this change) Nor Evening-walkes have I with thee. Why is my God thus hard and cold, When I am most, most sick and sad? Well-fare those blessed dayes of old, (Lad! When thou did'st heare the weeping O doe not thou doe as I did, Doe not despise a love-sick heart! What though some Clouds defiance bid, Thy Sun must shine in every part.
Though I have spoyl'd, O spoyle not thou, Hate not thine owne deere gift and token! Poore Birds sing best, and prettiest show, When their neast is fallen and broken. Deare Lord! restore thy Ancient peace, Thy quickning friendship, mans bright wealth; And if thou wilt not give me Ease From sicknes, Give my Spirit health!
To the Reader. CAndidus & medi∣cans Ignis deus est. So sings the Poet, and so must I affirme, who have been tryed by that white and refining fire, with healing under his wings. Quarrelling with his light, and wan∣dring from that fresh and competent gourd, which he had shadowed me with, drew those Sun-beames upon my head, whose strong and fervent vibrations made me oftentimes beg of him, that I might dye. In these sad Conflicts I dedicated the Remissions to thy use, Reader, & now I offer them to thy view. If the title shall offend thee, because it was found in the woods and the wil∣dernesse, give mee leave to tell thee, that Deserts and Mountaines were the Schooles of the Prophets,
and that Wild-hony was his diet, who by the testimony of the Sonne of God, was the greatest amongst those that are borne of women. It may be thy spirit is such a popular, phan∣tastick flye, as loves to gad in the shine of this world; if so, this light I live by in the shade, is too great for thee. I send it abroad to bee a compani∣on of those wise Hermits, who have withdrawne from the present generation, to confirme them in their solitude, and to make that rigid necessity their plea∣sant Choyse. To leave the world, when it leaves us, is both sordid and sorrowfull; and to quitt our station upon discontents, is nothing else, but to be the pes of those Melancholy Schisma∣ticks, who having burnt off their owne hands in setting the world on fire, are now fallen out with it, because they cannot rule it. They are Spirits of a very poore, inferiour order, that have so much Sympathy with worldlie things, as o weepe at Parting; And of
as low a Parentage are those, that will be sick of Leap-yeares & Sublunarie mutations. I honour that temper, which can lay by the garland, when he may keepe it on: which can passe by a Rosebud, and bid it grow, when he is invited to crop it, — Whose gentle measure Complyes and suits with all estates; Which can let loose to a Crown, and yet with pleasure Take up within a Cloyster gates. This Soule doth Span the world, and hang content From either pole unto the center, Where in each Roome of the well-furnished tent He lyes warme and without adventure. Prince Lewes, the eldest Son of Charles King of Naples, at the age of twenty one yeares, and just when he should have been married to the youthfull Princesse of Majorica, did suddenly at Barcel∣lon put on the rouh and severe ha∣bit of the Franciscans: The Queens
and Princesses theye met to solemnize the marriage of his sister Blanch with James King of Aragon, imployed all their Rhetorick to disswade him from it; but to no purpose, he loved his Sack-cloth more then their silks, and (as Mounsier Mathieu (alluding to that young Princesse,) speakes of him,) Left Roses to make Conserve of thornes. Resolution, Reader, is the Sanctuary of Man, and Saint Pauls content is that famous Elixir, which turnes the rudest mettall into smooth and ductible gold: It is the Philoso∣phers secret fire, that stomack of the Ostrich which digests Iron, and dis∣solves the hardflint into bloud and nu∣triment. It was an honest Reply that his Cook made unto the Duke of Mil∣lain, when worsted in a great battell by the Florentines, the over passionate resentment of so unexpected a repu'se, made him quarrell with his meate: If the Florentines (said he) have spoy∣led your tast, that is no fault of
mine; the meate is pleasant, and well drest, but the good successe of your Enemies hath made your ap∣petite ill. I protest seriously unto thee, and with∣out Scepticisme, that there is no such thing in this world, as misfortune; the foolish testinesse of man arising out of his misconstruction and ignorance of the wise method of Providence, throwes him into many troubles. The Spouse tells us, that the fingers of the Bride-groome are deckt with Beryll and pretious stones: what ever falls upon us from that Almighty hand, it is a diamond; It is celestiall trea∣sure, and the matter of some new bles∣sing, if we abuse it not. God (saith the wise King,) created not Evill, but man (who was created upright) sought out many inventions: these indeed be get that monster; his ill di∣gestion of his punishment (which is a kinde of divine diet,) makes him to pine away in a sinfull discontent. If
thou art sick of such an Atrophie, the precepts layd down in this little booke (if rightly understood, and faithfully practised) will perfectly cure thee. All that may bee objected is, that I write unto thee out of a land of darke∣nesse, out of that unfortunate region, where the Inhabitants sit in the shadow of death: where destruction passeth for pro∣pagation, and a thick black night for the glorious day-spring. If this discourage thee, be pleased to remember, that there are bright starrs under the most palpable clouds, and light is never so beautifull as in the presence of darknes. At least in∣treat God that the Sun may not goe down upon thy own dwelling, which is hartily desired and prayed for, by Hen: Vaughan. Newton by Ʋsk in South-vvales. April. 17. 1652.
Two Excellent DISCOURSES Of 1. Temperance and Patience. Of 2. Life and Death. Written in Latin by Johan: Euseb: Nierembergius. Englished by HENRY VAUGHAN, Silurist. — Mors Vitam temperet, & vita Mortem. LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at the Princes Armes in St Paul's Church-yard. 1654.
OF TEMPERANCE AND PATIENCE. THe Doctrine of good living is short, but the work is long, and hard to be perswaded, though easie to bee learnt: for to be good, is of all things the most easie, and the most ready, if wee could learne but one other Art, which Antisthenes termed the most necessary, I will add, the most difficult, and that is, to forget to doe Evill. I find that peace and joy have two handles, whereby we may take hold of them, Patience, and Temperance. Rule thy Evil with these, and then thy will may rule thee well. Horses are ruled with bridles and spurs. In prosperity use the first, that is, restraine, or keepe in thy selfe. In adversity the last, that is, Incite,
and use thy selfe to a gallant Apathie, and contempt of misfortunes. Generous and metlesome Coursers when they are brea∣thed, or rid abroad, are compelled to tram∣ple upon those very things, whose first sight startled and terrified them; doe so with thy selfe: tread under thy feet thy most hideous adversities; so shalt thou forget the feare of fortune, which makes men un∣fit for vertue. Patience in adversity is tem∣perance in prosperity. Nor can it be easily resolved, which of these two excells: This is most certaine, that noble sufferance is as necessary to man, as the virtue of tempe∣rance. Some few Crosses thou canst beare well, but fortune can afflict thee with many, and thou by patience (the greatest of vir∣tues) must afflict her with more; for — The naked man too getts the field, And often makes the armed foe to yeeld. It costs not much to live well, and it is as cheape to learne it. The whole Art is com∣prised in these two words, Patience, and Temperance. In these lies all the My∣sterie of Peace: you would think it a Se∣cret of the Priests of Ceres, it is so unknown to any, but sacred minds. These are the Domestick Gods of tranquility, and the tutelar Angels of good men: beleeve with
Epictetus, that the Quintessence of all Phi∣losophie is squeezed into these two, beare and forbeare. He neither obtaines, nor retaines his joy, that doth not abstain, and sustaine. These are the two Poles upon which tranquility and vertue move. To obtain peace, you must bear; to retain it, you must forbeare. An odd way of fruition; By refusing you ob∣taine, and by suffering you preserve: by refusing the favours, and suffering the spite of fortune. By this very carriage did Dio∣genes beleeve that he had quite deposed and overthrown her: hee crowned his temples with branches of Pine, the old Isthmian ceremonie, and walked like an absolute vi∣ctour in the Sacred Games. Being required by a crosse fellow, not to usurpe that honour till he had lawfully strived, he answered, that he had overcome two enemies, Pleasure and Griefe, the one by forbearing, the other by bearing. Make not thy self a Woman: thou hast (if thou wilt use them) both Temperance and Patience, the best Stra∣tagems, and Countermines against the Wiles of Fortune. Her storms and suddain furies (which are alwaies clean, and without dissimulation,) thou mayst break and overcome by bearing; Her Arts, her deep and cankerd hatred, by listning to
Reason, and a warie, stayd Circumspecti∣on, while she spends and wasts with her owne malice. The wrath of furious and hasty persons is sincere, and without arti∣fice; It hath no poyson, but what breakes out presently at the tongue, or the hand: Fortune too, when in this humour, is lesse Noxious, for She makes then an indiffe∣rent use of all Tooles, and disposeth of them without Study. But when She be∣gins to hate, She becomes slow and wea∣ry, and not contented with open valour, addes to it Treachery. She pines with the Memory of her old favours, and that She may pull down what She built, adornes her most deadly Intentions, as Poverty and grievous Miseries, in the dresse of Feli∣city. All her projects, machinations and Engines to Torture and vex Man, amount to no more, then to give him what he would not have, and to deny him what he would have. He breaks her neck that ab∣staines from the first, and contemnes the last. But here is our double Disease, by which Virtue Conceived for a great end, together with Felicity, become both abor∣tive, that wee neither rightly wish, nor rightly abstain, loath, or love, but doe both most absurdly, most preposterously.
We Covet most unseasonably, when even necessity is necessary, and this to him that wants, is no more then a wish. We covet, I say, such things as fortune hath not, and in a time when they may not be had. Wee would have Cherries in January: These wishes are their own Torments: Fortune too most Commonly gives them but cold Comfort. Why should we Covet extrane∣ous Goods? It is better to serve the necessi∣ty of the time, then to be a slave to For∣tune. Wee are set upon longing like Woe∣men with Child, that labour with strange appetites and depraved stomacks; that loath healthfull Viands, and (which in them is very strange) abhorre sweet meats; That affect raw, absurd compositions, that eat lime, Charcoles and Ashes, that in the dead of Winter long for Summer-fruits, and in Summer for Winter-fruits. What dost thou think is bearing and forbearing? It is to be even with Fortune, discreetly to abstaine, discreetly to will, and to covet nothing. Abstain then: otherwise what wilt thou do by Coveting, but make way for Fortune, and enlarge her Empire? Though she would not, she must needs hit thee. Her being blind, hinders not but she may shoote well: When the mark is have at all, and every where: an Archer with∣out
out Eyes cannot misse it. Though unwill∣ing, her Arrowes cannot wander from him, whose lust wanders after all things. She will hit him without Ayming, whose hope aymes at every thing. No Weapon falls in vaine amongst a multitude. Her scope to hurt, is the same scope thou takest to wish. Thou must know that the Command of Fortune over man about these outward things, lies in the midst of the will, as the hand in the midst of a bended bow. If thou holdest thy will by the middle, then art thou master of both ends, and mayst doe any thing. If thou commandst the one halfe, I will not say, thou hast no hold at all. Liberty hath two Limbs, to Will, and to refraine: The one is a stronge Arme, the other a weak Hand: What thou hast not, thou mayst refraine from wishing to have, but no man can have what ever he would have. When you refrain from will∣ing, then have you Power over all things; when your will lusteth, then you are sub∣ject to all things. Outward goods are fleet∣ing things, and the faithfull servants of unfaithfull chance. O how great a trea∣sure, how provident and infallible a sup∣ply against these sudden Ebbs and dimi∣nutions is a regular and resolute will!
Why are we troubled at them! We are too hard for Fortune, and by much too hard, if wee command but the one halfe of our will; that maimed and halting hand (if I may so speak) will overtake and bring back the most averse and winged Felicities. It will enrich us sooner and su∣rer then all the Treasures of Croesus: Those are but beggerie before thee if thou covet them not, if thy will be not a begger. Not to will, makes thee securely rich, even when thou wilt, that is, when thou doest will nothing. Thou makest Fortune poore by leaving her no power over thee, and no∣thing in her self, wherewith to please thee; I meane to deceive thee. Thou wilt be richer than Attalus by contemning his store, and of greater power than Midas; for his was placed in fruition and touch∣ing, but thine in absence and emptinesse. By wishing nothing thou hast all, yea those things which thou seest not: and what wonder then, if those things thou seekest not, being abundantly enriched by thy most pretious povertie? It was Divine∣ly argued by Eusebius, That he onely should be esteemed rich, who was perswaded that he had enough. For those that adde still to what they have already gotten, and never thinke that they can get enough, though
richer than Midas, are most poor and mise∣rable beggers; because they are nothing rich in their own minds. And in another place, An unreasonable covetousnesse (saith he) is sooner driven away with the losse of riches allready gotten, then by a plenteous and dayly accesse of more treasures. Where∣fore thou art then only rich, and possessest all things to thy mind, when to have no∣thing is in thy will: When ever thou say∣est, It is enough, thou hast all. Yea, thou hast more then thou shouldst have. All that comes afterwards doth but load and overwhelme thee. Of such an Immoderate use is Tempe∣rance, and I Judge Patience to be of no lesser. Happily it may be easier; for having learnt to abstain, we may the better sustain. Impatience ariseth naturally out of Cupi∣dity, and feare is the Daughter of hope. Cast these away, and you will find, that an adverse Fortune may be entertained, not onely with Patience, but with much well∣come. Crates, or Zeno (a gallant man, if either of the two) being at Sea in a great storm, caus'd all his goods (wherewith the Ship was Loaden) to be thrown over board, and thanked Fortune for the kind∣nesse: doe thou the like, and appro∣ving of thy misfortunes, say, It is well
done, Fortune, thou hast read me a good lesson, thou hast had care of my Soul. I thank thee that thou art Come thy selfe to fetch these burthens, which I should have brought thee home. Thou hast dealt cour∣teously to lend me their use, and to prevent their Abuse. I like thy Method, and prefer thy advise to thy favours; I know thy mean∣ing. I must make a wise use of these crosses, I must have recourse to virtue, to my self, and to my God. Thou dost not onely Incite, but compell me to goodnesse. I am brought safe to shore, by the splitting of the Ship: hereafter I will be better provided. Behold, thou hast left yet behind thee some movea∣bles, which thou shouldst have taken with thee, they are thine by right. Thou gavest me so many things, that thou canst not well remember them. I desire not to conceale them, take all thy Reliques and appenden∣cies with thee, all that is here besides my selfe; I hold thy leavings not worthy of acceptance from the mind of man. I wish that we would so deal with Fortune, as a certain old man did with theeves that came to rob his house. Take with you (said he) all that you see here. They did so, lea∣ving nothing behind them but an empty purse; which the old man tooke up, and following after, called to them; Take this
also with you, which you forgot to put up. Fortune perhaps amazed at such a Noble, Serene disposition, would restore all: It is most certaine the Theeves did. But let a Christian reject this figment of Fortune, and in all worldly mutations acknow∣ledge and kisse the divine hand. But if after all this, thou wilt not ex∣cuse the outward and ravenous manners of Fortune; there will be no Just cause for thee to accuse them, having received no damage by her. If thou wilt purge thy mind from wishes and hopes, thou mayst safely place thy selfe before her very Ar∣rowes, and defie them. And truly I believe it will be thy most secure station. When Stratonicus saw an unskilfull fellow shoot∣ing at Buts, he got presently close to the VVhite, as the onely place free from dan∣ger: and being asked his reason for that unusual Refuge, he answered; Least that fellow should hit me. Fortune (we say) is blind; stand then in her way: She hits that the least, which she most aimes at; but if all her shafts should fall upon thee, they can draw no blood from thee, as long as thou art not drawn by covetousnesse. If you break off the point of the Weapon, it cannot hurt you. Our own Covetousnesse is Fortunes edged toole; take that away,
and you disarme her, and secure your selfe: blunt weapons wound not to blood. I suppose now that Epictetus his abridge∣ment, or reduction of Philosophy into two words, Abstain and Sustain, will seeme prolix enough to you. The first we have past through; the second and last, I meane Sustain, or the Art of bearing well, wee shall find tedious enough. Hee cannot be said to wish for nothing, that finds fault with that which he hath. This bearing well is to desire nothing but what wee have. A Serene, bright Will then, not cloud∣ed with thick and muddy desires, will find the burdens of Fortune to be very light: For Fortune of her selfe is very light and easie, but she hath for pannels our own Lusts, which are heavier than her packs, and without these shee puts not one loade upon us. Nothing tires and weighs us down but our own wishes, which evills (being ignorant that our burthen pro∣ceedes from them,) we multiply with an Intent to ease our selves, but in the meane time the weight increaseth. A certain plain Countryman wearied with ploughing, and returning home from the field after his daies task, tyed the Plough to his Asse, and afterwards mounted himself upon his
back; but the tyred Asse, and overloaden, could not stirre from the place; whereupon the Country-man lights, and with the Plough upon his backe remounting the Asse, tells him, Now I hope thou canst goe well, for it is not thou, but I that carry the Plough. Wee are every day as ridiculous, though not so harmlesse as this Country∣man. Wee study with new cares and new desires to ease and diminish our old lusts; which not onely keepes under, but choaks and presseth to death all the seeds of Joy and Content. This is nothing else, but to retain the former load undiminish'd, and to put another on the top of it. As long as we tolerate these burthens, we become intol∣lerable to our selves, without any exagge∣ration of Fortune. Let us shake them off, let us cast off hope, that troublesome Tym∣pany; so shall we find Fotune light, and be able to bear both her and our selves. All things may be born of him, that bears not future Evills; Those are grievous burthens, which miraculously oppresse us, and so strangly accommodate themselves to our hurt, that they exist in the heart, and vexe it, before they can exist in time. Not one∣ly Evil, but Good, when it is hovering and uncertain, doth afflict us. Of Evills them∣selves there cannot come so many together
upon us, as we can feare: fortune can throw at us but few darts at one time, and were she not still furnished by our lusts, we should quickly see her quiver empty. Abstinence then, or the restraining of our desires is the Nurserie of patience, by a like title as the toleration of evill and good But when I name Patience, I speake not of a Simple thing; for there is not onely patience in Evill, but in Good also, and this later is sometimes the most difficult. There is one when we suffer, and another when we act. There be also other divisions of Patience. Holy Ephrem makes it three∣fold: the first towards god, the second to∣wards the tempter, or wicked Angel, and the third towards man. I shall add a fourth, and the most difficult of all, towards our selves; or I will make it onely twofold, first towards those that are without us, the second and last towards our selves, or those commotions which fight against us from within. This last is the greatest, because it teacheth us to beare those pressures which lean upon us, and bow us down. It is harder to resist those weights which come forci∣bly upon us from above, then those which come oppositly, or over against us. The beasts can draw more after them, then they can carry upon their backs. Man hath e∣nough
to beare within himselfe: but evills are a great familie, and keep aswell with∣out doores as within. Every minute of our tranquility is purchased with patience; It is the great Sacrament of peace, the Sanctu∣ary of Security, the Herald and the badge of felicity. What will it availe us to be at peace with those that are without, while we suffer intestine warres and tumults with∣in? let us have peace in our selves, and ha∣ving mastered the rebellion and disorders of the will, let us be the patients of our sadnesse, yea of our Impatience, and some times of our patience. As nothing is more accidentall to man then to suffer, so should he conclude, that nothing is more necessary for him than pa∣tience. It is the naturall medicine for all humane calamities, with which (as the heart with Dittany) wee pull out the heads and splinters of those arrowes which the mighty hunters of this world shoot at us. Nature dealt not more unkindly with man, than with other creatures: The Boare is cured with Ivie, the Dragon with wild-lettice, and the Snake with Fennell. Others have their cure nearer, in their owne mem∣bers: his tongue is the Balsom to a woun¦ded dog; and the Catholicon of man is silence and patience. But did I say
that to suffer was accidentall to man? I blot out that errour, and affirme, It is neces∣sary: wherefore patience is most necessary; for by that we are freed from a slavish suf∣ferance, as by a certaine gifted premuniti∣on and defensive faculty. By patiently en∣during we become impassible. The minde is invulnerable, unlesse in the fits of impa∣tience, as Achilles was in the heele. Think not the Art of patience to be any more, then not to suffer voluntarily; at least, not in spight of thy will. Hee that gently en∣dures, doth by a short cut free himself from the tedious labours and numerous punish∣ments of life. Necessities should be cheare∣fully borne. The hands, the feet, and the other limbs will sooner fail to execute their duties, then to be Insensible of paine. The sick, the maimed, yea and the dismembred are not so morcified, but they are subject to sensation. It was an excellent saying of Herod the Sophist, when hee was pained with the gout in his hands and feet; When I would eat, (said he) I have no hands; when I would goe I have no feet; but when I must be pained, I have both hands and feet. So entire and whole are we alwaies to griefe; which sufficiently sheweth, that the soundnesse of man is best seene in his patience; and such a strong necessity of
suffering is laid upon us, that when our limbs faile us in their offices, they must not faile of sufferings. Thou wilt aske then what can they suffer, when without spirit and motion? I will tell thee; Not to be apt to suffer, is their suffering. Nothing is lacking to the misery of man, though his limbs should be wanting, his griefe by that defect will abound the more. Deeply, and into the Inmost Closets of our hearts should that saying of the Tema∣nite descend, Man (said he) is borne unto trouble, and the bird to flye. Observe, if the birds be unfurnish'd of any thing for flight: they are all over arm'd for it; Their Bills are keen and sharp-pointed, and serve like foredecks to cut their aire; Their pi∣nions are two swift rowers, and the fea∣thers in both wings placed orderly every one longer then the other represent soe many oares. Their traines are the Sternes, with which they bend their whole bodies, and govern them in their flights, and with their feete and crooked clawes like An∣chors, they stick and fasten themselves to the green branches, which are their Ha∣vens, and shady Harbours. Though thou hadst never seene them use their wings, yet by their very Structure, thou would'st Judge that those feathered Sayles were
design'd for the aire, and flying. Man is every way as well accoutred for trouble. Observe him: Thou shalt find nothing wanting that may conduce to his passion, though he wants much of Patience. Man is every way most exactly trimmed and a∣dorned for trouble; He was made unfit for labour, that he might be fit for sufferings; He hath no wings to fly from them, he is poor, infirme, naked, defencelesse; and (which is worse than all) forsaken of himself: Betwixt nakednesse and poverty he is on all sides exposed and appointed for misery, as the bird is for the flight. Thou shalt observe all this in him; for wanting all the necessaries which support life, he is surrounded onely with those sad necessi∣ties and intanglements which make life grievous and burthensome; as a Sparrow is drest and cloathed all over with those soft habiliments which make his flights easie and pleasant. The onely difference betwixt them is this, that those Instruments of flying may faile the birds, but those of suffering cannot faile Man. So carefull was Nature of Mans condition, that she would not trust Fortune with his relatives. The Eagle may casually lose his sharpnesse of sight, the Roe her swiftnesse, and the Lyon his strength; but Man while he lives can∣not
not misse of afflictions. There is a greater care had of our affaires; And to a glori∣ous end are these Calamities made sure un∣to us, if wee can make them benefici∣all. The first token, and evidence of life is crying. The Prim-roses, or first blossoms of it are teares; from these it take its inaugu∣ration. Man is not borne before he suffers: Yea, he grones and complaines in his very passage into the World. The first homage he payes to life is sufferance, and from that minute to his last, he becomes (as Blesen∣sis saith) a constant tributary to misery. I Judge him that murmurs at this payment, that kicks under this generall burthen, to wrong and disesteem the Noblest Nature, I mean Man; and to be worthy of this ve∣ry puishment, not to be at all. He is a most vile abuser of Humane Nature, that thinks it not worth his patience, and values him∣selfe at a most sordid rate; let him beare in his manhood, what he bore in his Infan∣cie, and not be ashamed of his Investiture, because he felt affliction, before he felt the light. It is the first lesson we are taught here, and the last that wee shall learn. All other Creatures, as soone as they are born, make some use of their strength; but Man knowes no use of any thing but teares: He
must afterwards be taught the cause of them. We must teach him every thing, but weeping. All other things are given him for his labour, but teares he can have for nothing. This onely faculty was bestowed upon him gratis, all other concessions are the rewards of his paines; but teares were given him freely, because they ease and allay his sorrowes. This convenient Salve did nature ordain for some inevi∣table Sores. She prepared this Oyle to allay the aking of those stripes the World gives us, which without this Native Oyntment would have smarted more: for those wounds, whose anguish is not vented at the Eyes, lie heaviest upon the heart. And by this I am induced to believe, that it is naturall for man to Suffer, because he onely naturally weepes. Every extraneous felicity of this life is violent, or forced; and these constrained, though splendid Adiuncts of Fortune are therefore short, because noe violent thing can be perpetuall. To suffer is the naturall condition and man∣ner of man, this is believed to be his misery: without patience, I confesse, it is. Nature never failes us in those things which are needful, much lesse divine pro∣vidence and grace: Wee shall therefore ne∣ver faile of Sufferings, because they are
the great Necessaries, & Medicines of Hu∣mane Nature. Wee read of many men that never laught, but never heard of any that never wept. Democritus himself came weep∣ing into the World; none ever came without labour, none without griefe. Thou wilt ask, why man, the only creature addicted to beatitude, should bee borne to trouble? why through the vale of teares travells he to the house of joy? why is he alone, being capeable of felicity, made sub∣ject unto misery? Because he is borne for virtue, the next and readiest instrument to attaine beatitude. Now troubles, or miserie are the masse, or first matter of virtue, and without this hard rudiment, without this coyne of sorrow he cannot purchase it. Nor are the good offices which these calamities doe for us, either meane or few; for where∣fore flowes, yea overflowes the divine mer∣cy upon man, but because he is miserable? wherefore is Gods sure power and saving arme stretched out, but because he is fraile? wherefore are his comforts and refreshments so plentifully showred down, but because he is sorrowfull and helplesse? wherefore is his liberality and most faithful providence seen every minute, but because he is poore and constantly needy? yea wherefore is Im∣mortality, everlasting pleasures, and a glo∣rious
resurrection secured unto us, but be∣cause our bodies are mortal, and subject to death and putrefaction? By this time per∣haps you see the appositnesse of that com∣parison which Eliphaz made betwixt man and a bird. The bird by nature lifts himself above the earth upon his wings, he passeth from hence into the cleare confines and neighbourhood of heaven, where he dwells for a time, and looks with contempt upon this inferiour darksome portion of the world: when hee descends towards the earth, he keepeth still above us, he lodgeth in the height and freshnesse of the trees, or pitcheth upon the spires or ridges of our houses, or upon some steepe rock, whose height & inaccessibleness promise him secu∣ritie; something that is eminent and high he alwaies affects to rest upon. Man likewise ordained for heaven, and the contempt of this spot of earth is by his very calamities borne up and carried above the world, yea into heaven, as an Eagle by the strength of his wings ascends above the clouds. O the depth of the riches of the wisedome of God! O the mercifull designe, and devic of his providence! who knowing our cor∣rupt nature, hath laid upon us a necessity of seeking those blessings, whose inestima∣ble value ought to stirre us up to a most voluntary
and diligent searching after them. To this necessity by the same chain of his providence hath hee tyed utility. These are sufficient motives to perswade us to patience. It was wisely said by some Arabian, that the hedge about patience was profit: for he that thinks gaine to be necessary, must think labour so too. All∣though Fortune should be so prodigal as to poure all her Treasures into the bosome of one man, and not repent when she had done; yet would this very man sometimes feele strong exigencies in indigencie. Pom∣pey, and Darius were both hardly distrest with thirst; they that were Lords of so many Rivers, did then wish for one drop of Wa∣ter. Alexander the Great, in some of his expeditions was like to perish with cold, though his Dominion did in a manner ex∣tend to the very Sun; for in the East (which I may call the Suns House,) he was such an absolute Lord, that (bating the Power to forbid the Sun to rise) there was nothing more could be added to his conquests. Seeing then that labour or troubles are a necessity imposed upon man, it followes, that there are other labours belonging un∣to him, which are also as necessary; and those I shall terme Voluntarie Labours. O these the Elegant Philosopher Eusebiu
hath excellently spoken; Voluntary La∣bours (saith he) are necessary, because of future Labours which hang over our heads: he will beare those with more ease when they fall upon him, who of his own accord, and beforehand hath exercised himself in them: But you see that in this course also the maine remedy is patience. He that suf∣fers willingly, suffers not, even that which is necessary to be suffered. One wedge drives out another. Venemous bitings are allayd by Venemous Medecines; therefore in necessary troubles, there is a necessity of voluntary Labours, that Violent Evills meet not with Obstinate Wills: but the unavoydablenesse of suffering would not be grievous, nor the necessity or Law of Nature any way rigorous, did not we by our owne exaggerations adde to their weight, and our owne pain. Wee helpe to encrease our owne Cala∣mities by reasom of our Inerudition, as Di∣philus tells us, who adviseth even the hap∣py man to learn miseries. What can wee doe more becomming our fraile condition, then to teach our Mortality the troubles of life, which are certain prolusions, or arguments of death? What is more beneficiall, then to learn great tryalls and dangers, that wee may leave that servile custome of fearing?
Fortune, whose burthens we ought to bear as willingly, as if wee desired to undergoe them? It is a great rudiment of patience to suffer willingly, when we least expect suffe∣rings. It is strange, that although wee see nothing in the course of this life more fre∣quent then miseries, yet will wee not be perswaded that they may fall into our share: Our griefes come most commonly before we believe they may come. Nothing can make us believe, that we may be mi∣serable, untill misery it selfe assures it to us. The mind therefore should be tryed and prepared for it, with some lusorie or mock-misfortunes. Nor must we give eare to De∣mocritus, whose saying is, That if there be any things for us to suffer, it is good to learn them, but not to suffer them. It is good indeed to learn them, but if they must be unavoydably suffered, what will our learn∣ing of them avail us? A most ridiculous advise, in my Judgement: And if the Au∣thor of it had been wise, he had laught at nothing more then at this his owne Con∣clusion. It is good to learn to suffer Evills, but not to be evill. It will benefit us much to learn to suffer them, if not as they are Evills, yet lest wee our selves become Evill; for such we shall be by impatience. Besides
the overcomming of reall evills, there re∣maine other slight hurts, as the discourte∣sies of nature, chance and furie, of our ene∣mies and our selves also, which we cannot avoyd; but these last are no evills, but the sheaths or quivers of evills; out of these either our opinion, or our impatience draw evills upon our selves. Bion used to say, that it was a great evill, not to be able to beare evills. Without this ability, life can∣not be pleasant to any, and in this consists the skill and knowledge of life. Let the mind then learne to buckle with these rude toyles of life, and by a frequent velitation or light skirmishing with trou∣bles so improve it selfe, that when we cme to deale with the serious hand, and close en∣counters of fortune, we may receive her at sharpe, and like active, vigilant Duellists, put by her most Artfull and violent thrusts. One Salustius that lived in the time of Sim∣plicius did put upon his bare thigh a bur∣ning cole, and to keepe in the fire did gent∣ly blow it, that he might try how long hee could endure it. I beleeve that fire did put out and quite extinguish all the burnings and raging flames of incensed fortune. If crosses foreseen are alwaies held light, those we tast and make experiment of before they come, must needs be lighter, because after
tryall we feare them not: feares are the fore∣teh of miseries, which bite us sorst, and mst intollerably. It was a most ridiculous judgement which that Sybarite (mentio∣ned by Serinus) past upon the valour of the Spartans. This tender Citizen travelling by chance into Lacedemon, was so amazed at the severe discipline of that manly nati∣on, who brought up their children in all rigorous and laborious exercises, that being returned home hee told the Fidlers of A towne in the higher Ca∣labria in Italy 20. miles di∣stant from Rome: the In∣habitants were mightily given to pleasure, and taught their horses to dance to the pipes; which the Crotoniatae their deadly e∣nemies obser∣ving, brought into the field a company of minstrels: the Sybarits horses bearing the pipes began to dance, and disordered their Army, by which meanes they were overthrowne to the num∣ber of 300000. Sybaris, that the forward∣nesse of the Spartan Youths to dye in battell was, because they would not be compelled any longer to such a toylsome life. This soft fellow knew not how much Industry could prevaile against misfortune, and patience against passion. That valour of the Spartans was not despayre, but the vir∣tue of suffering perfected. Their voluntary labours at home had so excellently im∣proved them, that they could
not onely slight the necessary and common afflictions of life, but overcome also (by a noble volunteering,) the very prerogative of fate, violating even the violence of death, while they dyed unconstrayned and undisturbed. Mithridates his feare of be∣ing poysoned, made him use himselfe to a venomous diet, by which he came at last to disgest all sorts of poysons without any prejudice to his health: so that after∣wards when he would have poysoned him∣selfe in good earnest, he could not possibly doe it. By this destroyer of mankind did he secure himselfe even from himselfe, and by long acquaintance made this deadly enemie a faithfull friend: he fed life with the provision of death. By a like sagacity should we forearme our selves against the conspiracies (if I may so say) of nature. Let us labour against labours; It will much availe us: our very feares will prove com∣forts; by using our selves to sufferance, the Antidote of life, which is Patience, be∣comes effectuall. Of such great importance is this assiduous exercise in troubles, that it lets in the na∣ture of Constancie, and is a sure manuducti∣on to that sincerest vertue. The Roman Fencers, players for prizes, barbarous and dissolute livers, if but indifferently skild,
received their wounds without grones, or any alteration of gesture or countenance, because they would not be judged pusilla∣nimous, nor cowardly decliners of danger; If at any time they fell by the violence of wounds, they sent presently to know their masters pleasures, (because they would sa∣tisfie them,) for they themselves were con∣tented to dye; If their masters (finding them incurable) bad them prepare for death, they would presently hold forth their throats and receive the sword most willingly. O the serious faith of Playes! O the faith of Players in serious dangers! It is all one then, whether thou thinkest fortune a meere pageant and pastime, or not; Thou shouldest obey with an Im∣mortall faith even to the death. Let a wise man execute the commands of his cre∣ator, let him like a faithfull souldier of JESUS CHRIST certifie his great master, that he is ready and willing to doe him service, that he will lose his life, & choose rather to dye, then not to submit to his pleasure. The conflicts of a good man with calamities are sacred: he is made a specta∣cle to the world, to Angels and men, and a hllowed Present to the Al∣mighty. Let him in this state overcome his Enemies! A more glorious garland then
the Olympick Olive-branches shall crown an enduring Patience, which by an hum∣ble, but overcomming Sufferance wearies the hands of those that beat us. It is the part of a wise man, to tire and weare out the malice of his Enemies. I say not by Suffering, but by Patience, which makes him neither their Patient, nor trampled upon, but a trampling overcomer. This was the glory of Melancoma, who lived not one day without an Enemy. In the most vehement season of the yeare, hee judged his single-selfe hard enough for his two Adversaries: He could beare with the Sun, his most obstinate Antagonist, though fighting against him in the heate of the Summer with so many hands as he had Rayes.: When he might have gotten the Victory by Opposition, he would not but by Submission. Hee considered, that the best might be overcome by the worst, if force should take place. That Victory was in his Judgement the Noblest, when the Enemy, yet whole and without any hurt, was compell'd to submit. There is he over∣thrown, when not by wounds, but by him∣selfe. Therefore what vice, and a spurious Pa∣tience did in the Roman Fencers, let Virtue and true Patience performe in thee: and
what custome and exercise wrought in Melancoma, let reason and Judgement worke in thee: What reason effected in Possidonius, let grace effect in thy heart, and let not grace which workt mightily One of the Courti∣ers of the Emperor Traian, and after∣wards a most glorious Martyr. Being in Chase of a Stagge, he observed betwixt his hornes the signe of the Cross, and heard a voice out of his mouth, speaking to him in the Latin tongue, Cur me persequeris? Whereupon leaving his game, he retyred presently into his own house, and having called together his wife and children, were all baptized and received the Christian Faith. But in the per∣secution under Ha∣drian, he and his wife Theophila for their faith∣fullnesse to JESƲS CHRIST, were burnt together in a brasen bull; And so having over∣come and endured unto the end, they received the morning star, and crownes of life, which shall never be taken from them. See Volater lib. 15. in Eustathius, and sufficiently in many o∣thers, languish and faile in thee alone. The power of God is perfected in weaknesse, giving us some prelibations (as it were) of it self; whither by bearing with our In∣firmities, or by our bea∣ring his Operations. I believe this last: for the glory of an almighty power against a weake thing would be very small; how litle then a∣gainst Infirmity it selfe? That power is truly glorious, and hath mat∣ter for glory, which pre∣vailes
against the mind, a free unconfined thing, and holds it firme though surrounded with Infirmities: The power of God Glories more in prevailing against us, then against our infirmities. Bt if wee seek for more delicate or easie remedies, and dare not arme our selves a∣gainst misfortunes with this harnesse of proofe, bcause we think it too heavy; It remaines that we must make use of either Hope, or Expectation. Evills that are fore∣seen, lose much of their edge: But because we promise our selves the favours of For∣tune (of whom we have alwaies a good opinion, though wee seldome speak well of her, and she deservs as ill,) our calamities, while this credulous remissnesse keepes us from looking to thm, find way to sur∣prize and oppresse us at once. Against vi∣olent misfortunes we may not use violence. Expectation will sometimes serve us best, if it be accompanied with a strong and ir∣remisse beliefe, that the Crosse is at hand, and will not delay. For what happens in this life more frequent, than unthought of events? Wee meete oftentimes even in one day with matter of grief, and matter of Patience. It is strange, that for those two meales we eat in the day, wee are all the day, and all our life long providing:
But for trouble, for griefes and sadnesse, which take not up two houres in the day, but all the houres and daies of our lives, wee never think to make any preparation. Cast up (if thou canst) how many things must be had to humor the pride of mans appe∣tite; more than for a Sacrifice. It is no small state, nor ceremonie that the belly is serv'd with: How many men doth this worms-meat Imploy, Cookes, Bakers, Fishers, Fowlers, Hunters, Sheepfeeders, Herdsmen, Millers, Colliers, and Butchers? How many Instruments, Spits, Pots, Tri∣vets, Cauldrons, Chasing-dishes, Char∣gers, Platters, and a thousand other uten∣sils of gluttonie? And to what end is all this preparation? But to please one palate once in the day, or twice at most. O foo∣lish men! Wee are ever providing for plea∣sures, but never for troubles, which not twice, but for a great portion of our time, (if not continually) wee must needs en∣dure. Who against the certain approach of an Enemy, will be secure and quiet, and upon the comming of a friend watchfull and sollicitous? Why do we provide so much for pleasures and vanitie, and pro∣vide nothing against the day of trouble and miserie? We are guarded about with Cloaths of state, Canopies, Couches, Silk-Curtains,
Feather-Beds and Pillowes; wee arme our selves for delights and softnesse, for sleeping and eating, because they are e∣very daies works; but hear not every day telling us, that the Evill day is behind. We labour to provide for the backe and the belly, why not for the better part, why not for our fraile condition? The Sense of the secure liver is too too delicate: The affliction of the Inconsiderate or unprepa∣red too bitter. Chance throwes downe the carelesse violently: and Fortune tires the idle even to vexation. The rude and unex∣perienced in troubles afflicts and mace∣rates himselfe with an impatient mind in the very midst of his most affected bla∣dishments, and in the bosome and calme of all his pleasures. I hold Impatience to be a kind of Night-Mare which comes upon us waking, or the Day-hag of life: This troublesome disease (for our time of rest is his time of misule, and when wee are sleeping, then is he stirr∣ing,) sets upon us when wee are most at ease, and with a certain strange heavinesse seemes to oppresse and smother us, when in the meane time that weight which so much oppresseth us, is laid on by our owne Imagination: and this sometimes makes us crye out, as if wee were killed;
others, according to Lucretius, Struggle & grone as if by Panthers torne Or Lyons teeth, which makes them lowdly mourn. Some others seem unto themselves to dy. Some clime steep solitudes & Mountains high, From whence they seeme to fall inanely down, Panting with fear, till wak'd, and scarce their owne, They feel about them if in bed they lye, Deceiv'd with dreams, and nights Ima∣gerie. But the greatest trouble of all, is, that without any hope of remedy, they vainly strive and endeavour to shake off this sha∣dow of heavinesse; In vain with earnest struglings they contend To ease themselves: for when they stir & bend Their greatest force to do it, even thenmost Of all they faint, and in their hopes are crost. Nor tongue, nor hand, nor foot will serve their turne, But without speech and strength within they mourne. What more expresse Image can there be
of Impatience lying heavily especially up∣on those, who drouse away their time in a vitious rest and Idlenesse? They are opprest, cry out, rage, and vainly resist, without any burthens but what their own fancy layes upon them. They feele the weight the hea∣vier, the more they stirre it, without they shake it quite off. To refuse, or not will∣ingly to undergoe burthens, is the onely burthen of Impatients. But if they would awake to themselves (which of necessty they must, for when can the will be more Rational, than when necessity is unreason∣able) all these factitious weights and seem∣ing heavinesse would quickly vanish: Force must not be used against Fortune, but Pa∣tience. This excells so much in strength, that it bears all: For it bears what ever it will, and for this very reason because it Wills. Samson carryed away the does, the two posts, and the barre of the Gate of the City of Gaza; but this strength lay in his haire, like the locks of Nisus and Pterelaus. A miraculous strength; but weakly secured. The strength of Patience is more safely seated; It lyes not in a lock, which may be cut off by some Dalilah, or Comethe, or Scylla, or any womanish and fearfull hand. To Will, is the Sanctu∣ary of its strength; by being willing it is
not onely enabled to bear, but also beareth. The backe and shoulder of Patience is the Will. This voluntary fortitude of the mind will do all its businesse, without the help of outward Engines; It needs not the assist∣ance of the Armes, nor the weak use of wishes. The strength of Virtue is not exter∣nal, but in it self. There remain also other necessary Indu∣rances, though not to those that suffer them allready, yet to others that may, or are about to undergoe them: For the preser∣vation of our Country & liberties we ought patiently to suffer even unto death. It is not too deare a rate to pay that debt wee owe to Nature, for the defense of Nature in our publick Persons: To this we want not the Incouragement of examples. What ever hath been suffered heretofore, may be suffered now by us. But if those presidents rather cool, then provoke our Courage, why dare not wee suffer a little, seeing they suffered so much? To teach us this Virtue of Patience, and strengthen our ruinous brittle condition, the motherly love and fatherly care of the eternal, Divine mind, did provide and disperse through certaine spaces and Intervalls of time (like knots for the strengthning of a weak reed,) per∣sons of such eminent Patience and Piety,
as might by their examples sustaine and beare up mankind, untill the Antient of daies, and Father of Immortality himself should descend into this mortall life, and be born for Patience, and for death. In the meane time, that the populous World might not want a Glasse to dresse them∣selves by, he sent these to be the substitutes and forerunners of his mighty and inimi∣table Patience. The first he consecrated to this dignity was Abel, in whom Patience (saith holy Aldhelmus) was Original, as Sinne was in Adam. God joyned Pa∣tience to his Innocence by a certain Origi∣nal Justice or claim in him; but to the rest of the Just it descends together with suffe∣rings, by right of Inheritance: to none more, to none better then to the Innocent. But now even by this, those suffer most, that should suffer least, the good and the Just. But those sufferings are most sacred, that are most unjust. Adam found out afflicti∣ons, and Abel Patience; the medicine presently followed the disease. Evills were the Inventions of Sinne, Patience was the Device of Innocence. So that Patience as their peculiar Treasure abounds more, and is more beloved by the Just, then by any else. But that Posthume Cry of Abel pro∣ceeded not from Impatience: For God
would not have taken to himself the cause of one dying discontentedly, and with In∣dignation; but as devout Alexandrinus saith, , &c. Abel the Just dy∣ing unjustly was the first of men that shewd the foundations of death to be ruinous; wherefore he being dead yet speaketh. Death, whose right came by unrighteous∣nesse, laid ruinous foundations indeed, be∣cause ill-layd, upon the Just dying unjust∣ly. It hath cause to grieve, that it erred so fouly in its first stroke, seeing it might have made a better beginning in wicked Cain. But there was Divinitie in it, that death taking possession of mankind by the Mur∣ther of the Just, might be justly extermi∣nated and swallowed up in Victory by the undefiled Virgin-Prince of the Just, who for that end was born of a Virgin. Ephrem saith, that death howled or lamented in her very beginning, which shewed what would be her end. The Hern by instinct of Na∣ture Chatters and mourns, before he be∣comes the prey of the Falcon. Death dyed by him, over whom she had no power. On∣ly there is the night of death, where sin, where corruption lives. Another tie of Constancy laid upon the World, after a convenient space, was Job, who retained his Patience after prosperity,
and after Innocence. Patience is no where merrier, nor better contented with it self, then in the Innocent. Integrity and For∣tune seldome lodge together. Adversity is the Whetstone which keepes it from rust, and makes it shine. No Virtues can subsist without troubles, which are their foode. They live not commodiously, where their Provision is farre from them: Wherefore holy and Just men have adversity alwaies (like a Well) at their dores. I shall take up then with that saying of Eliphaz: Affliction comes not forth of the dust, nor doth trouble spring out of the ground; but rather from Heaven; and comes oftner to holy and heavenly livers, then to Worldly and unrighteous persons. After Job, and at a convenient distance from his time was Tobiah appointed, who instead of Celandine, made use of Patience to heal his Eyes: being blindd by the Swallows, he found a more pretious me∣dicine then their Hebe, and his glory is more by bearing with the living, than bu∣rying the dead. This holy man also after Innocence, though not after prosperity, retained his Patience; untill at last the Son of God himselfe, after Impassibility and Allmightinesse, became wofully passible, and humbled himself to the death of the Crosse:
of so great an example was Patience wor∣thy, and so necessary was this voluntary passion of God himselfe to our fatall ne∣cessity of suffring. By this mighty exam∣ple of himself he hath sanctified Patience to be the All-heal, or Universal Antidote of Evills, and the Soveraign Lenitive of sor∣rowes. Divinely did one sing to the blessed JESUS. . Thou the Nepenthe easing griefe Art, and the minds healing reliefe. At this secret Counsel of the Almighty, did the rude Instincts, or hallucinations ra∣ther of the old Heathens (proceeding, noe doubt, from their sense of Humane misery.) blindly aime. They dreamt of some Son of God to be the great exemplar of Pati∣ence, and pattern of Virtue; but finding none, they made and proposed to them∣selves Hercules the Son of Jupiter, for a president of continuall Patience, Obedience and Virtue: about whose labours and at∣chievements, Antiquity hath mighti∣ly pleas'd it self with lies and Fables. This (indeed) they rightly apprehended, that labour or troubles are rather repugnant to, then unworthy of Divinity; they held them becomming Virue, and withall ne∣cessary,
that they might adorne Patience with these two Jewells, the reward of suffering, and the dignity of the Sufferer. But the Truth of God hath now outdone the Fictions of men; It hath exceede all they did licentiously wish, but could not hope for. Our Patience is now sufficiently instructed by the SONNE of God, who is the pleasant remedy and Panacea of E∣vills. The blessed JESUS breathed no∣thing but Patience, nothing but mild∣nesse in his life, in his Doctrine. These are the great examples which true Christians should follow; not those of spurious Patience, and a narrow, heathen fortitude, which after it had born some E∣vills indeed, dyed at the root, and could not bear it self. Seneca (otherwise in ma∣ny things a very true, and sometimes a Christian Philosopher,) proposeth to his readers the example of Cato; but I utterly reject it; for he destroyed himselfe, because he could not save his Common-wealth. What Constancy was here, though in a state that concern'd not his private happi∣nesse? or what manner of Constancy was that, which durst not endure and hold out, but was overcome, not by irrecoverable, fallen affaires, but falling: Not collasped and ruin'd, but tottering and doubtfull?
I confesse, it was a spectacle, which the Eye of God Intentive to his great and va∣rious works might behold with glory: and I confesse him a brave Heathen, Ill-dispo∣sed. But I see nothing glorious and excel∣lent in him, nothing of true worth, but what I can find as wel in the most degenerate and womanish Sardanapalus. If wee look upon Cato amidst the publick ruines, wee shall finde him overthrowne and laid along, where an old wall stands up, no Enemy ha∣ving touch'd him. A most unworthy man▪ (if he was a man,) to fall thus basely like a Woman; who at the noyse of any thing suddenly thrown down, casts her self to the ground, and squeaks though untouch'd, and far enough from danger. But thou wilt say, Though all things became subject to one man, though his legions possest the Earth and his Navies the Seas, yea though Cae∣sars own regiment was in the gates, yet Cato made his way out. An honest voice, if it were not flattery: I tell thee he did not make his way, but sneakt and fled out most shamefully: His legs could not carry him off, and therefore hee ran away upon his hands. But it is all one, flye with which he will, it is a plain flight; his busie and searching fear, which in him (by reason of a sudden, unmanly astonishment) was
most Sagacious, shew'd him this postern or backdoor, which he most basely fled out at. But what could that man be afraid of, that had born so often the Assaults of For∣tune? He feared that very same Fortune: How can that be, (say'st thou) seeing he had coped with her so long before? For that valour let him thank his errour: He belie∣ved Fortune (according to her old vogue) to be still inconstant, he expected that the Tyde should turne; but finding her obsti∣nate, and resolved in earnest to the contra∣ry, he feared her last blow, and providing for himself by a most dastardly tendernesse, did with his owne hands dresse and make a wound to his own liking. To be patient, or to suffer as wee please, is not Patience. He could bear the anger, but not the ha∣tred and feud of Fortune. That is poore valour, that bears onely the flourishes and pickearings of an Enemy, but dares not receive his full charge. A weak man will for some time stand under a great burthen; but he that carries it through, and home, is the strongest. Cato then was a most base, pusillanimous combatant; hee quitted his ground, and left Fortune in the field, not only unconquer'd, but untir'd, and flou∣rishing with a whole Arme, which hee had not yet drawn bloud from: What Incon∣stan∣cy
can be greater then his, who was more Inconstant than Vertiginous Fortune? Or who more a Coward then he, that fled and ran away swifter and sooner than her wheeles? To call Cato then either con∣stant, wise, or good, is most unjust; nay more, it is an Injurie to mankind, to call him a man, who hath deserved so ill of Wisedome and men, by thinking that any Cause, or Chance in this World can be worthy of a wise mans death. I would he had read the Conclusion of Theodorus, not the dissertation of Socrates! Theodorus Cythereus most truly affirmed, that there never can be cause enough for a wise man to cast away his life; And he proves it by invincible reason: For him (saith he) that contemns humane Chances, to cast away his life because of them, how contrary is it to his own Judgment, which esteems nothing good, but what is Virtuous, nothing vitious but what is evill? I wish, when he did read Socrates, that he had also understood him! for then he should have heard him condemning that , or mad re∣fuge of selfemurther, and commanding him not to stirre out of his appointed sta∣tion without full Orders from the great Generall of life. Why then dost thou cry up Cato for a great leader, who was a most
cowardly common Souldier, that forsook his Charge, and betrayed the Fort intrust∣ed to him by the Prince of Life? But here thou wilt reply, that his last nights con∣templation, just before he quitted it, was Immortality. The end he did study it for, made it then unseasonable: And I know not (seeing he was but an Imperfect speculator in the Doctrine of Immortality,) why hee should be so hasty to try whither Eternity was perishable, or not, by casting away his own. He should have expected it, as he did expect the change of Fortune, which till that night he alwaies esteemed Mortall: He should have prepared for it by makeing triall of his Constancie before Eternity. What praise then either of Patience, or Fortitude hath he deserved? he did no more then the most effeminate, Hemon and Sar∣danapalus. O the glorious Act of Cato then, equall to his, that handled the Spin∣dles! An Act of Women, Evadne, Jocasta, and Auctolia. An Act of Whores, Sap∣pho and Phaedra. An Act of Wenches, Thysbe, Biblis, Phillis and Anaxarete. An Act of Boyes, Iphis and Damocles. An Act of Doting, decrepit men, Aegeus, Se∣sostris and Timathes. An Act of Crazie, diseased Persons, Aristarchus and Era∣tsthenes. An Act of Madmen, Aristotle,
Empedocles, Timagoras and Lucretius. A rare commendation indeed for a wise man, to have done that which Whores, Wenches and Boyes, sick men and Madmen did, whome either the Impatience of their lust, or Fortune made Impatient of life. Whi∣ther thou wilt say, that Cato kill'd himself to fly from Fortune, or to find Immortali∣ty, thou canst in neither deny his Impati∣ence either of Joy, or else of feare, and in both of life. I would he had been as pa∣tient now of life, as he was sometimes of thirst! That voice of Honour, upon the Sands of Libya, was his! where (the R∣man Army like to perish with thirst) a Common Souldier that had taken up a litle muddy Water in his Helmet, present∣ing it to him, had in stead of thanks this bitter rebuke, Base man! & couldst thou think Cato alone Wants courage to be dry, &, but him, none? Look'd I so soft? breath'd I such base desires, Not proofe against this Libye Sun's weak fires? That shame and plague on thee more justly lye! To drinke alone, when all our troops are dry.
Here was a glorious Voice, and there fol∣lowes it a more glorious hand: For, with brave rage he flung it on the Sand, And the spilt draught suffic'd each thirsty band. This manly Virtue he degenerated from in his last Act, and all his friends wisely bending to the present necessity, hee onley broke. The people being all taken, he only fled. To see Cato a sufferer in the publicke miserie, had been a Publick comfort; they would have judged it happinesse to have been unhappy with him. It is Honour to suffer with the Honourable, and the Ty∣ranny of Fortune is much allayed, and almost welcome to us, when shee equally rageth against the good and Noble, as a∣gainst our private selves. If, as he refused the remedy of thirst, he had also rejected this ill remedy against misfortune, his glory had been perfect. Wee must then be the Patients of life; and of this Patience (which I thinke the greatest of any,) wee have two eminent ex∣amples in Job and Tobiah, who not onely provoked by Fortune, but by their wives also, defended their Calamities in the de∣fense of life. For the other Patience in
death (which is the least,) the example of Abel sufficed, designed by the wonder∣full Counsell of God (untill the mani∣festation of his Son, that great Arch-type of Patience in life and death,) to suffer, though Innocent, a violent and unexperien∣ced death, that the first onset of fate (which was most furious,) meeting in him with an unconquerable Patience, might be so what tamed, and the weapons of death ha∣ving their edge dulled in the first conflict, might afterwards be of lesse terrour to mankind. Just Abel was the first that shew'd us the way of dying, when the name of death, as yet untri'd, was most formidable unto life; that he might teach man Patience in his death, and leave it to posterity as a Medicine found out by him. But when men (by a sad experience grown wise,) found out a greater Evill then death, which to religious men was this sinfull life, and to the miserable and Impa∣tient their own lives; then were Job and Tobiah set forth the convincing examples of Patience in life, who endured a life more bitter than death, lest by not enduring, they should, to their misery, adde sinne. They taught the World that Patience was a better Medicine for Evills than death, and withstood the opinions of the Luna∣tick
people. Falsely did Euripides (arro∣gating a laudable Title to death,) terme it The greatest medicine of Evills, . As if he in another place had not term'd it the greatest of Evills. If death then be not its own Medicine, how can it be the Medicine of Evills? It is an Evill great e∣nough, that it is not the Medicine of E∣vills; but that sufficeth not, it is also the greatest Evill. Aeschylus is in the like er∣rour, for it is called by him The Physician of incurable Evils, . A most ridiculous appellation: How can that be the Physitian of incurable Evills, which is it selfe such an incurable Evill as their owne Machaon could not resist? E∣qually false is that of Sophocles, The last Curer of diseases is death. . If death it selfe be a disease, which must, and shall be healed, how can it be the last curer of diseases? But these men (after the Common manner of Physicians,) held the
cure of great Evills to consist in desperate remedies, as obstinate diseases are expell'd by strong and Diaphoretick Medicines: Health indeed is dear unto us, and death, I confesse, puts an end to all its diseases, and to all Medicaments too. It takes away the disease sooner and oftner then any other remedy; but these Poets themselves (as sick men say of their Potions) deny not but it is bitter. . It is better to live ill, then to dye well, Saith Euripides himselfe in another place; such a good opinion had hee of death. It had beene but a sorry provision for man∣kind, if God had given us no other Medi∣cine against Temporal Evills, but death. The cure of our miserable condition had been both imperfect and uncertain, and to our sad necessity there had been added ne∣cessarie despair, when the cure of small E∣vils had been by a greater, and the great Evill it self left incurable. But (Glory to the blessed Jesus!) wee are both fully cred, and faithfully cared for! That which can cure all Evills, must be something that is not Evill; Therefore death cannot cure them, because it is an Evill; for God created it not, but it came
into the World through the envy of the Divell: Good men hold it to be Evill, & the bad find it so. Thou wilt ask then, what is the Medicine of Evills? I answer, it is that, which is the Medicine that strength∣ens us to bear the violence, and the pangs of death; that which the very Enemies of it cannot deny to be good, I mean Patience: that which being made Evill by abuse, yet in that state hath been commended by men that were not Evil, by Seneca in his Cato, Dion in his Melancoma, and Philo in his Pancratiastes: So winning and attractive is the Virtue of Patience, that the very sha∣dow of it procures reverence, and make the very abuse and corruption of it lauda∣ble. If then the Counterfeit of it could beautifie vice, and make it amiable even to wise men, what wonder is it, if the Sub∣stance be a protection and ornament to Virtuous persons? This is the Medicine which Leonides gave against death. Let those Titles therefore which death usurped, be vindicated by the right owner. Patience then is the best medicine of Evills; It is the cure of the Incurable, the last Physitian, the Ease in death, the mollifying Oyle, the gentle purge, the pleasant Potion, and that I may recover its right to another Title which death usurped from the pen of B∣etius,
It is a sanctuary that lies alwaies open to the distressed. Lastly, lest I should deny that, which even the envy of Fortune could not deny, Patience (as Zeno elegant∣ly said,) is the Queen regent of all things, yea of that rebellious changling Fortune. But let us adde to the certainty of the cure, the easinesse of comming by the medicine: We need not send for it into Forraign Re∣gions, nor dig it out of Mines, nor extract it out of the Veines of Herbs, or the vital parts of beasts: Wee need not go for it to the Apothecary, nay I shall adde, wee need not wish for it; It is already in our custody, a manuall Antidote that is alwaies about us, and in us, effectuall for all things, and ready for all men. It is a Physitian we need not call upon; not like death, that forsakes the wretched, and those that earnestly long for it, that hath no pitty upon teares, but keeps off, — And will not hear the Crie Of distrest man, not shut his weeping Eye. Hitherto we have taken view but of one side of Patience, and that halfe of her which she opposeth to Evills. Every part of her is lovely and excellent: and if we re∣move now from this Collateral station to
a direct, we shall behold her intire beauty, and how well shee deserves of good. The Sacraments of this Virtue are two: To suffer Evill: to do good: Nobly doth she celebrate both; with her there is no Evill, without her there is no good. I think her the Mart, and Mother-City of all that is good. Every Virtue is a Colonie of Pati∣ence, planted and nourished by her. Vir∣tues owe their Original to her, she is part of it, and in every one of them. She is their holy fire, their Vesta, and Lararium, or private Chappell; they are her Nuns or Virgins, what ever they have, either sacred or glorious, is from her: To the perfection of man there is nothing more necessary: For as Brasse must be first melted, and af∣terwards cast; so the hard and rigid mat∣ter of Virtues must be softned and dissol∣ved by Patience, that man may become a glorious and living Statue of Divinitie. No marvell, that wee require labour and hard∣nesse in Virtuous persons, seeing wee ex∣pect it from Smiths; A certain Just Law of all the World hath exacted it to be the price of Virtue. Beare what thou wouldst not, and thou shalt enjoy what thou wilt. Labour is the good mans purse: Patience is his Gold: Onely an obstinate, sordid Idlenesse makes men poor, not onely in bo∣dy
but in mind also: Without Patience they cannot possesse their own Soules. Nei∣ther Nature, nor Virtue, nor Fortune (and this last thou wilt perhaps think strange,) trust us with their goods without this. Prosperity, when it is lent to man, dispen∣senth its treasures to none so plentifully, as to the laborious: Without a blow it stroaks us not. The sweet-meats it brings are not eaten, but in the sweat of the face. It was truly said of Fortune, Give bread to the poor, but give him thy fists for sauce. . The Snake will easily slip through our hands, unlesse we grasp her with Figleaves, or some knotty, rough grass; Fortune is very slippery, and without labour, and a strong hand, she will not be held. Honest gaine breeds most Joy, I shall adde most security, when it is gotten with most pain. La∣bour is the earnest we give for after-Joyes, which are an addition, or consequence ra∣ther, attending the other fruits of it. Though it goes before them, yet it is re∣freshed with their following after; As hun∣ger, which is a Natural sauce, sweetens the meat, and the Joyes of the eater, even before e eates: Wee look with most delight upon
those things which wee think to be our own, and we think them most, which wee have most labour'd for. Patience is a cer∣tain Title to possession, but labour gives the Right. The Mother loves those chil∣dren best, and as most hers, which shee brought forth with most pain. Hony is ga∣thered of bitter herbes; they that love not the bitternesse, must not eate of the Honey. The drones of Attica (saith Tzetzes,) will not touch the hony of Hymettus, be∣cause it is gather'd of Thyme, which the At∣tic drone cannot endure to light upon. The Noble Xenophon loved no glory, but that which was purchased by his owne In∣dustry. The glory of God himselfe is not with∣out labour, which he hath shew'd unto us by his works, and amplified in particu∣lar natures according to his wisdome, for our example. Wickedly did Hermogenes think of that Supreme, eternally active Mind, esteeming him to rest, by reason of idlenesse and inefficacie, though elegantly refuted by Afer in these words, his glory is the more in that he hath laboured. God doth not onely looke upon, and rule the World, he made it also; And which of these, thinkst thou, is most worthy of glory? is it not to have made it? What is
more glorious then to have made glory? In the present Sabbath and solemnity of Gods rest, the workes which he hath made, declare his glory unto men, whose task also is, to work. Besides, this first curious draught of his Almighty hand contributes something to the perfect beauty of his im∣mortal, last one; for the Divine Eye (re∣flecting upon this proofe,) will ad∣orne that building of holinesse and glory with everlasting strength, and an in∣violable, Celestial freshnesse. God made not man by a Fiat, as he did the rest of the Creatures, but fell to work himself, and like the Potter that first tempers, then fashions the Clay, he made him by make∣ing, not by speaking. That one royall crea∣ture capable of felicity, was consecrated for beatitude, and the Divine likenesse with the ceremony of labour: Here man was instructed, before he was made: he re∣ceived the exemplar of living before he received life: Idlenesse was forbidden him, before he had the Power given him to be active. But when he gave him life, he gave him also with it another Specimen, or Item of labour, breathing into him, as if he had used respiration (which refresheth the laborious,) to shew man the use of his breath. All things that were created for the
service of mankind, were by the manner of their Creation (which was with a Fiat, or command,) taught to be obedient and humble: But man was first ordained for Dominion, afterwards for labour; And God himself, the Lord of all, labour'd in his Creation, that Hee might make him to be in love with his Ordinance, and that God (plotting as it were a∣gainst himself,) might by that love of man be induced to love him the more, and to esteeme him more his owne Creature then any other, because he onely (like his Creatour) loved Activity, and the use of life. And this I believe is the meaning of Xenophon: Labour (saith he) is a certain over-measure, or extraordinary favour of love. So glorious an Ornament is Patience, either in suffering, or else in doing, I believe in both (for Labour, without the good of Patience, is good of it selfe,) that for no other end, but to be thought temperate and wise, the Pythagoreans commended abstinence, the Stoicks severity, the Cynick exceeded to rigour, the Gymnosophists to cruelty, and a face of madnesse and despair. Every one of these adorned his Heresie with Patience, and all the rude statues they erected to wisedom, were crowned
with this Virtue. Edesius being sent by his Father to traffick into Greece, quitted the Merchant, and turn'd Philosopher: His Fa∣ther upon his return receiving him with stripes, and hee patiently bearing them, asked him, what he had learnt in the Schooles of the Philosophers? He answered, To bear your anger dutifully: With the same testimony did another Scholer of Zeno a∣dorne the Stoa: but Possidonius was hard∣lier provoked then either; he was so tortu∣red with bodily pain, as if the disease had maliciously laboured to confute his princi∣ples: but how far it prevailed, appeares best by his own words; It is to no purpose, (said he) vex me as much as thou canst, thou shalt never make me give thee an ill word. So carefull was he of the reputation of his Master. But Dionysius Heracleotes, not able to rule his passions, lost the repute of a Phi∣losopher. So much doth that Majesty and tacite reverence wee admire in Virtue de∣pend upon Patience. Patience doth that for the private man, which their life-guards doe for Kings: It keepes him safe, and reverenc'd. It is the minds main-guard, that preserves the Au∣thority of Virtue, and secures the Virtuous person, lest Evills should make him Evill. It is in the oppressed a certain tutelar An∣gel,
and the sacred Guardian of their Spi∣rits from Affliction. Most appositely did Halitargius call Patience the Conserva∣trix of our Condition. O how great is the Glory of Virtue, whose Guard and atten∣dant is Patience, the Queene of all things! She is not onely the Crown and Ornament of Philosophie, but the badge and Garland of the Christian warriour. She is not one∣ly honour'd by the Impatient themselves, but by the furious and Salvage. Abraames, almost slaine and martyr'd by the Indian Infidels, did with this one weapon not onely resist, but overcome a whole City: And that with more expedition then Caesar, and with better successe then Alexander; for to such admiration and reverence of his person did his patience drive them, that in the very midst of the storme his persecutors bcame suddenly calme, begging forgive∣nesse with teares, and with the generall consent of the people elected him for their Patron and President, whom a little before (having not seen this pearle of Patience,) they design'd for destruction and death. It was the Majesty of this Immoveable, Se∣rene Virtue, that forced them to this mi∣raculous Election, adjudging it of most royall Excellencie, and most worthy of So∣veraignty.
Leander told the Fathers, met at Toledo, that Patience would either win, or overcome her adversaries. Solon knew this: For be∣ing checkt by some standers by, because he suffered an uncivill fellow to spit upon him, he answered: Fisher-men, that they may catch one whiting, suffer themselves to be dashed over with the fome and flowings of the Sea-waves; and shall not I do the like to catch a man? Whither he catched him, or not, I cannot tell: But I am sure, that John Fernandius, a Servant of JE∣SUS CHRIST, and a Fisher of men, catch'd a whole Kingdome with that very baite. Hee preaching to the Indians in the street, one barbarous Infidel, having gathe∣red his mouth full of sordid spittle, came pressing through the crowd to the place where he stood, and delivered it just in his face; but he nothing moved therewith, and neither rebuking the Barbarian, nor dis∣composing his former gesture, persisted in his Masters businesse, and preach'd on: His Doctrine though powerfull, after the silent Rhetorick of this publick example, might for that time have beene well spared. Here was the foundation of the Churches of Ja∣pan and Amangucia: This very Indian (and none before him) becomming the first fruits of that region unto CHRIST.
So glorious a document of Patience made him envy our Divine Philosophy, that en∣vy made him Ambitious, and his holy Ambition made him a Christian. So gain∣full an Industry is Patience, and such a compendious Art of overcomming. Most wholsome is the advice of Pimenius: Ma∣lice (saith he) never overcomes malice, you must overcome malice with good∣nesse: But if we could overcome one Evill with another, why will wee not reserve that Glory for Virtue? By such a blood∣lesse Victory did Motois overthrow his Ad∣versary; from whom he fled most valiantly, lest he should offend him; I do not say with his hands, but with his sight; for Pati∣ence hath no hands, but shoulders. His Ad∣versary pursues: Motois had lockt himself up, & became his own prisoner, esteeming it guilt enough, that another could be angry with him: But hearing that his Enemy was come in (being only Impatient till he had shewed more Patience,) hee breakes open the door, bids him welcome, and like one that had offended, desires to be forgi∣ven, and afterwards feasts him. This story I have touch'd upon, that thou maist see how powerfull an Instrument of tranquil∣lity, and a quiet, happy life, Patience is, that makes peace to beare fruit in another
mans soyl, and civilizeth forraigners. How fruitfull then is she at home,? How prospe∣rous a dresser of Virtues in himselfe is the patient man, that will not suffer the pro∣pagation of Vices in another? But Leander said, that Patience doth either overcome, or else win her Enemies; I say, she doth both win and overcome: She wins men, and overcomes Fortune; nay, she makes her (though unwilling) a most officious servant of Goodnesse. The name of Patience is not an empty, titular Honour; it hath also very large and prince∣ly revenues for the maintenance of Virtue. That Fable of the Divine in holy Maxi∣mus is truth. He saith, that wise men dwell in the shadow of a tree, which the more the people cut it, growes the more. It strives, and vies with the Iron; or to borrow the Poets expression, , It lives when kill'd, and brancheth when 'tis lopt. His own Mythology is most elegant: By this tree (saith he) is signified wisedom, which tur es misfortunes into Ornaments, trouble into Virtue, losse into gain, and scars into beauty: For the Patient and wise liver, like the Serpent of Lerna, when he is most mangled, is most entire; he drinkes
in fresh spirits through his very wounds, his courage is heightned by them, and his spilt blood, like dew, doth cherish and re∣vive him, Like some faire Oke, that when her boughes Are cut by rude hands, thicker growes: And from those wounds the Iron made, Resumes a rich and fresher shade. The benefit then wee receive from Pati∣ence, is twofold: It diminisheth the sor∣rowes of the body, and increaseth the trea∣sure of the mind: Or to speak more proper∣ly, there is one great benefit it doth us, It turnes all that is Evill into Good. Most apposite to this, is that of Nazian∣zen, Patience digesteth misery. Concoction and Digestion of meats are the daily miracles of the stomack: they make dead things contribute unto life, and by a strange Metamorphosis turne Herbes, and almost all living Creatures in∣to the Substance of Man, to preserve his particular Species: No otherwise doth Vir∣tue by Patience (which is her stomack,) transform and turne all damages into bene∣fits and blessings, and those blessings into it
self. Lupines, or bitter Pulse, if steep'd in water, will grow sweet and nourishing: Patience doth macerate miseries, to fatten it selfe with them. Certaine Divine Raies breake out of the Soul in adversity, like sparks of fire out of the afflicted flint. The lesser the Soule minds the body, the lesser she adheres to sensibility, shee is by so much the more capable of Divinity, and her own Nature. When her Den of flesh is secure and whole, then is she in darkness, & sleepes under it: When it is distressed and broken, then is she awake, and watcheth by some Heavenly Candle, which shines up∣on her through those breaches. The wounds of the Body are the windowes of the Soul, through which she looks towards Heaven; light is her provision, shee feedes then upon Divinity. Sublime is that rap∣ture of the most wise Gregory, — .— —one food the best for all Is to feed on the great Gods mind, & draw An Immense light from the bright Tri∣nity. Death it self, which the lust of eating brought into the World inedible, or as
Zeno saith, indigestible, is eaten, digested and transubstantiated into life by Patience, begun in Abel, and perfected in JESUS CHRIST. So that now, that saying of Pirrho, who affirm'd, that there was no difference betwixt death and life, is no longer a Paradox; nor need we make use of that shrewd exaggeration of Euripides: who knowes (said he) but this which we call life, is death, and death life? we see, that men, when they are (as we speak) a∣live, are then only sick, but the dead nei∣ther sicken, nor suffer any sorrowes: Cer∣tainly the death of a good liver is eternal life. Every Action of a wise man is a certain emulation of Death; wee may see it exprest in his patience. The Soul by this Virtue disintangles, and frees her selfe from the troubles of Mortality: For the frivolous flesh burning with fevers, or drown'd in dropsies, or any other diseases, the atten∣dants of corruption, which possesse and fill up the narrow Fabrick of Man; the Soul (as in great inundations, when the lower roomes are overflown) ascends to the bat∣tlements, where she enjoyes a secure, healthfull ayre, leaving the ground-roomes to the tumult and rage of the distemper'd humours. She ascends thither, where griefe
cannot ascend. Carneades, comming to visit Agesilaus grievously tormented with the Gout, and turning his back to be gone, as if impatient of the violence and insolencie of the disease (whose custome it is to shew litle reverence towards the best men, the prerogative of Vire can give no protection to Nature,) Agesilaus pointing from his feet to his brest, calls him back with this Check, stay Carneades, the pain is not come from thence hither. Hee shew'd by this, that his mind was in health, though his feet were diseased, and that the pain had not ascended thither, where the Soule sate inthroned. At this height she hath two priviledges more then ordinary; she is lesse affected with the body, because at some distance from it; and hovers above griefe, because above sensibility; shee is nearer to God, and dresseth her selfe by his beames which she enjoyes more freely, as from a kind of Balconie, or refreshing place, having onely a Knowledge, but no Sense of the bo∣dies affliction. From this place she over∣lookes the labours and conflicts of the flesh, as Angels from the windowes of Heaven behold Warre, and the Slaughter of distract∣een. One benefit more shee hath by Pa∣tience, that though shut up in the body, yet shee can have a tast of her glorious
posthume liberty. Death looseth the Soule from the body, it breaks in sunder the secret bonds of the blood, that she may have the full use of her wings, and be united to Di∣vinity. Patience, though it doth not quite loosen the chaine, yet it lengthens it, that she may take the aire, and walk some part of the way towards Home: Though it frees not the Soul from the body, yet it gives her liberty and dominion over it. He that is tyed up by a long Cord, is within the compasse allowed him untyed, and a free man. The Spirit of man incensed by ad∣versities, and collected into it selfe, is by a certain Antiperistasis made more ardent and aspiring: Fire is never stronger, nor more intense then amongst Water; In the bosome of a cloud it breakes forth into thunder: So this Divine Spark, which God hath shut up in Vessels of Clay, when all the passages of pleasures are stopt, his raies (which before were diffused and extrava∣gant) returne into it selfe, and missing their usuall vent, break forth with such vi∣olence, as carries with it sometimes the ve∣ry body, and steales the whole man from passion and mortality. The Levitie of fire is of greater force, then the Gravity and Massinesse of Earth: His Spirit is unresista∣ble, and the unknown force of it will blow
up the greatest Mountains, and the strong∣est Castles this earth affords. Hitherto have I discoursed of outward E∣vills, I shall now consider the Inward, and how Patience is their Antidote. You have seen her Prerogative over Fortune, and re∣puted Evills, which are called Evills, be∣cause they seem to be so, not because they are so; as disgrace, grief, and poverty. All these are but fictitious Evils, which Custom and Humane error have branded with that injurious denomination: for in these con∣tingencies there is no reall Evill, but the Evill of opinion; neither is any man mise∣rable but in his own conceit, and by com∣parison. The glory of Patience would be but poor and trivial, if it could doe no more then take away, or beare with such frivolous and fictitious troubles as these: If it prevailed onely against Evills, which we do not suffer, but invent. Its true glory is, that it subdues true Evills: Not that it bears them, but that it removes them far from us: Not that it endures them, but than it abstaines from them: For truly to suffer Evil, is to do Evil, whose Agent al∣waies the Patient is, by reason of a most ill impatience: But Patience is onely ex∣cellent, because it suffers not. This worst kind of Evil is therefore the greater, be∣cause
because when 'tis in acting, it is not seen; and were it not afterwards felt, there would be no place left for Virtue. This is the usu∣all method of Vice, a flattering, Comical entrance, and a Tragical exit. The force and malice of Evil Actions may be gathe∣red by their Nature: They are so power∣fully hurtful, that when they cease to be, they cease not to torment us: and so ma∣lignant, that while we act them, they flat∣ter us, that being Acted, they may afflict us: While we are doing them, they conceal and deny themselves; but being done, they appear to our sorrow. Wherefore he that will lead a blessed, a joyfull, and a peaceful life, must make it his whole work, to do no work, but what Religion and Virtue shall approve of. What peace and security can he enjoy that will revenge himselfe, (what more would cruelty have?) accor∣ding to his own lust? What life can he be said to live, that kills himselfe to please his inordinate affections? What joy can he have, whose troubled conscience is his continual Executioner, racking and tor∣menting him in the very embraces of smi∣ling Fortune? No outward Fomentations will serve turne against that Indisposition to which fevers and fire are but coolers. Wee can provide against the violence of
winter and Summer-weather when and how we please: But the inward heats and colds, the raging accessions of the Spirit admit no cure. Patience, though Fortune should assist her, will never heal the wounds of conscience. He that suffers by the guilt of Consci∣ence, endures worse torments then the wheel, and the saw: As that heat which as∣cending from the liver, and the region of the heart, doth diffuse it selfe through the body, is greater then the united flames of the dog-star and the Sun. What tor∣turing invention of Amestris, Phertima, or Perillus did ever so afflict distress'd wretch∣es, as the fury of his owne Conscience did torment Orestes, though freed from all men but himself? no Tyrant is so cruel as a guil∣ty spirit: Not Scylla with his prison, Siuis with his Isthmian pine, Phalaris with his bull, Sciron with his Rock, nor Faunus in his Inne. The Pelusians when they pu∣nished Parricides, conceived no torture so answerable to the heynousnesse of the crime, as this inward Divine revenge; nei∣ther the Pliny menti∣ons this pun∣ishment: the parricide after his apprehension, to aug∣ment the horror of his conscience, was first whip with rods dipt in the blood of his murthered parents: and afterwards together with a dog, an ape, and a cock (Creatures which shew litle reverence towards their sires) he was thrust alive into a strong sack, and so thrown into the Sea. Sack, nor the Lime∣kil
pleased them so much as this gnawing worm, the terrible and luctual excogita∣tion of the wise Father of Nature. They ordered therefore, and enacted it for a Law, that the murtherer for three daies and three nights should be pent up in some nar∣row roome together with the naked body of the slaine, and be forced to look upon it, whither he would, or not; which was effected by putting him in such a posture, as permitted him not to look any way, but just upon the dead. The Sicilian Tyrant himselfe knew that conscience was a more cruell torment then the bull of brasse. This made him spare the most unnaturall and bloody offenders, that they might be tor∣mented, not with scalding metalls, and glowing Iron, but by a damning consci∣ence. The first penaltie for murther was conscience: The first Actor of a violent death was punished with life: He that first saw, and introduced death, was thought worthy of no other punishmen, but the se∣curity of life, which he first shewed to be not secure: for it is a more mercilesse pu∣nishment then death, to have long life secu∣red with a killing conscience. So he that
brought murther first into the World, was first punished with the terrourr of consci∣ence: Which are then most torturing, when health and strength are the capital punishments. The Protoplasts themselves, the parents of death, and of mankind too, who gave us death before they gave us life, thought it a greater plague then death, to be still alive, and yet to be guilty of death? They would have fled to death, to flye from themselves. Apposite to this is that of Marius Victor, —They faine would (if they might) Descend to hide themselves in Hell. So light Of foot is vengeance, and so near to sin, That soon as done, the Actors do begin To fear and suffer by themselves: Death moves Before their Eyes; Sad dens, and duskie groves They haunt, and hope (vain hope which fear doth guide!) That those dark shades their inward guilt can hide. You see now that conscience, even amongst The inhabi∣tants of Pelusium, a town in the borders of Egypt, now called Damiata; It was built by Peleus the fratri∣cide, from whom the Citizens desceded.the Pelusians, was held a legal
and politick punishment, that in Phalaris it was a Tyrannical devise, in Cain the Di∣vine vengeance, and in Adam and Eve, the Justice of Nature. God, Nature, Reason, and fury it selfe (which in this case must not be defined madnesse,) do all beare witnesse, that selfe-condemnation, or the guilt of conscience is of all others the most bitter and avenging torment. Adde to this, that the certainty of it is as infallible, and inevitable, as the extre∣mity and fiercenesse of it are implacable: there was never any Tyrant so cruel, but would pardon some offender: There was none so severely inquisitive, but some might either escape from him, or deceive him: But the rigour of conscience permits nei∣ther favour, flight, nor fraud. It is utterly inexorable, and neither our feete will serve us to ran away, nor our hands to free us: whither shall a man ran from himselfe, from the secrets of his own spirit, from his life? No man can be an Impostour or dis∣sembler with his own heart, no man can undo what he hath already done: to have sinned is the remediless plague of the Soul. It was a slow expression of Victor, that Vengeance is near to sinne. It is swifter then so: It is not consectaneous, or in chase of it, but coetaneous with it, and its foster-sister
The punishment hath the same birth with the offence, and proceedes from it; It is both the Sister, and the Daughter of it: Wickednesse cannot be brought forth without its penalty: The brest that conceives the one, is big with the other, and when the one is borne, he is delivered of both. It is a fruitfullnesse like that of Mice, whose young ones are included the one in the other, and gene∣rate in the very wombe. Conscience, while man thinkes of Evill, even before he acts, doth rebuke that thought: so that the punishment is praeexistent to the crime, though in the reigne of Virtue it is noise∣lesse and uselesse; as penal Lawes are dead letters, untill they are quickned by offen∣ders. It is then in its minority, and without a sting, or else it is asleep, untill the Cry of Sinne awakes it. In the state of Evill, Con∣science is the first and the last revenger: when smal offences are wiped out, enormous crimes like capital letters will still re∣main. No man can find a Sanctuary to save him from himself. No evill doer can so fly for refuge, as to be secure, though he may be safe: Hee will be afraid in that place, where he thought not to fear: Though he fears not the friends of the murthered, yet
he finds that within him, which makes him sore afraid: He may escape the Execu∣tioner and the sword, but he will be over∣taken by himselfe; and being safe, hee will be afraid even of his safety: Though he may find fidelity in his fellow-Tyrants, yet shall he find none in his own bosome, which is ever clamorous, and spues out blood and guilt. Nature deviseth such a punishment for evill doers, as that which tyed living Malefactors unto the putrid Carkasses of dead men, that the hor∣rour and stench of them might afflict their spirits, and the quick flesh be infected and devoured by the dead and rotten. The punishment sticks fast unto us after the of∣fence, whose carkasse is terrour of Consci∣ence, Shame, and a gnawing remorse, that feeds still upon the faulty, but is not satis∣fied. The guilty person can have noe peace, But night and day doth his owne life molest, And bears his Judge and witnesse in his brest. Adde to this, that Reason which in all other pressures and misfortunes is the great Auxiliary and Guardian of man, is in an offended Conscience his greatest Enemy,
and imploys all her forces to his vexation and ruine. Fortune therefore is not the onely cause of our contristation; we our selves do arm adversities, and put a sword into the hand of griefe to wound us with; we are stick∣lers against our selves. Evill Actions afflict more then Evill Fortune; We are not one∣ly troubled that it was Chaunce, but that it was our Choice. It is the worst kind of misery, to be made miserable by our owne approbation. That evill which we procure to our selves, must needs grieve us more, then that which we casually suffer: Noe damage is so doleful, as a condemning con∣science. Truly, I do believe, that the onely misfortune of Man is Sinne. And so very bad and mischievous a Cheat it is, that when it is most punished, wee think it most prospers; neither can Fortune be justly termed Evil, but when she is the Assistant of Evill men, and the surety for Evill doing. This permitted successe makes the affaires of the most unrighteous to be estee∣med Just: This is a felicity like that of beasts, which we put into pleasant and well watered pastures, that they may be fed for slaughter. Against this true misfortune, as well as the false and seeming, Patience must be our Antidote; not by bearing, but by
abstaining from it. Patience in this Case must elevate it selfe, and passe into a virtu∣ous anger and contempt of sinfull prospe∣rity: We must be piously impatient of all their proffers and poisonous allurements; Impatient, I say, that we may patiently o∣vercome them. Therefore as I have formerly exhibited the Art of bearing well to be the onely remedy against Fortune: So now I shall demonstrate to you, that the Art of abstain∣ing well, is the sole medicine against these true and inward misfortunes: Differing diseases must have different cures. Patience is the poyson that kills Fortune, and the Balm that heales her stripes: but a sacred impatience, or abstinence from Sinne is the Antidote of Conscience; and the Basis or foundation of this holy impatience is transcendent and triumphant Patience. To mitigate or overcome Fortune is a trivial trick: Flattery will do it, if we can but de∣scend to approve of, and commend all that she doth. To preserve the peace of Con∣science, wee must be rigid, and censo∣rious: We must speak home, and truly: We must examine before we Act, and admit of no Action that wil be a just cause but for to blush. The approaches of Fortune are ab∣struse: She moves not within the light of
Humane wisedome; or if she doth, the strength of her Prerogative lies betwixt Willingnesse and Constraint: It is a kind of fatal fooling: Man playes with his Stars untill they hurt him: But the cause of an e∣vill Conscience is within our view, and may be prevented by Counsell; For no man can Sinne against his Will, or without his Knowledge. One naile must drive out ano∣ther: He that would avoyd damnation, must avoid also those things which are damnable: He cannot grieve too much, that grieves only to prevent Eternal griefe. The helps we use against Fortune are after∣games. But the Salves of Conscience must precede the wound; the cure of spirituall diseases is their prevention. In the affaires of this World the best man is the experi∣enced: But in the distresses and affaires of Conscience, he is the wisest that is most ig∣norant. A noxious Knowledge is death, and every Sinner is a Fool. The wisedme of Doves is innocence, and that which makes the light to shine is its simplicity. Light is a Type of Joy, and Darknesse of Sorrow: Joy is the fruit of innocence, and sorrow of Sinne. The sorrow we take for Fortune is hurtfull: Those teares, like tempestuous droppings, if not kept out, will rot the house: But the sorow for sinne
is healing. Penitential tears are the Ole of the Sanctuary: God gives them, and after∣wards accepts them: they both cleanse us and cherish us. When Marble weepes, it washeth off the dust: Worldly teares are the waters of Marah; the tree that swee∣tens them, must be shewed by the Lord: The waters of the pool the word in the He brew signifies, the house of pow∣ring out: which in a secret Alle∣gorie may very well concerne man. Be∣thesda heal'd not, untill the Angel stirred them; without true remorse teares profit not: but if they have that Ingre∣dient, they are showers which the Lord hath blessed, and must not be stopped, although they might. As courage, and a joyfull heart are the ripe fruits of innocence, so shame and sorrow are the hopefull buds and prim∣roses of it. Contrition is the infancie of Virtue: Therefore that sadnesse must not be expelled which expelleth Vice. It is an invention of the Deity to destroy Sinnes: That they might be either unfruitfull, or fruitfull onely to their owne destruction: For this we have two instances from Na∣ture, in the Mule and the Viper: Whereof the one is barren, and the other unhappily fruitfull. Nature is carefull that Evills may not multiply, or if they do, that they may not prosper. The Mule is barren, lest there
should be an increase of Monsters. Apposite to this, is that saying of Gregory Cerame∣us, &c, Evils (saith he) are deny∣ed from God the power of propagating, as mules have not the faculty to preserve their kind by generating one another. The Viper notwithstanding is a mother, but shee brings forth her owne destruction: The birth of her young ones is her death. So sor∣row, that is the child of sinne, is the death of it also. Let therefore this saving destroy∣er of sins be made much off, let this godly sorrow be still cherished, and never rebu∣ked: he that dryes up his teares, before he is cleansed, takes delight in his filthinesse, and like the lothsome drunkard, would sleep in his vomit: Penitent afflictions should never be resisted but by precauti∣on. Hee then that would not drink of this Wormwood, must be sure to refuse the sugred venom of sinne: No man is Evill for no∣thing. Every defect in life is occasioned by a defect of Patience: because we cannot en∣dure to be constantly good: because we are impatient of continuall holinesse. Two E∣vills attend upon Sinners, the Evill of sin, and the Evill of Punishment, which is the Evil of sorrow: To escape the last, we must abstain from the first: wee must be either
impatient of the first, or else the patients of the last: Unlesse wee will suffer a litle to avoid offences, wee must suffer much af∣ter we have fallen into them. A short displeasure is better then a long torment: This previous Patience of abstaining, frees us from two subsequent Evils: The pain of Conscience untill we repent, and after that the pain of Penitence: These two are the Appendants, or retinue of every sinne; A seasonable, innocent forbearance is the fense against them both: one small griefe averts these two great ones: How whole∣some and comfortable is that Patience which prevents sinne and sorrow, the Con∣sequent of it? But Virtue, when it is most healthfull, is in the estimation of some re∣puted to be poyson: For no other reason do they reject it, of whome Theodotus elegant∣ly sings, Virtues faire cares some people measure For poys'nous works, that hinder plea∣sure. This Patient abstinence from Evill is the Mother of holy Joy, it keeps the mind pleasant and serene: What is there, or what can there be more beneficial, or de∣lightfull to man, then a pure, innocent conscience, where all the Virtues (like
busie Bees) are in constant action, as in a fair, flowry field, or rather in Paradise? where all is Divine, all Peacefull, nothing polluted, no feare, no distraction. In this state, as Theophanes saith, The wise man is adorned with a Godlike Conscience, and a mind becomming the very Deity. What is there more joyful, then to be master of such a Power, as cannot be violated by Tyrants and Torments? It was a golden and Victo∣rious saying of Tiburtius: Every punish∣ment is poor, when a pure Conscience keepes us company: For as the guilty can receive no comfort: So the Innocent cannot lose his Joy. The Joy of Conscience is Natures recompence, the coalescent reward, or fruite of integrity, an entailed happinesse, the native blandishment of life, and the minds mighty purchase: What happier gaine can be, then to rejoice alwaies, for what wee have done but once? or what greater da∣mage then an unrighteous gain? It was bravely said by Chilo, that the heavist losse was to bee chosen before base gain: That will grieve us but once, the other alwaies. The losse of temporal goods will trouble us but for a time, but a lost Conscience will tor∣ment us Eternally. What greater liberty can there be, then not to fear any thing? And
what can he be affeard of, that is not frighted by the guilt of his own spirit? when Periander was asked, what liberty was? he answered, A good Conscience. And another saith, that Man should with Virtue arm'd, and hearten, d be, And innocently watch his Enemy: For fearlesse freedom, which none can con∣troule, Is gotten by a pure and upright Soul. Sinne makes remisse and cwardly spirits to be the constant slaves of misery: what li∣berty, yea, what joy can he have, or what dares he do, Whose guilty soul with terrours fraught, doth frame New torments still, and still doth blow that flame Which still burns him: nor sees what end can be Of his dire plagues, and fruitful penalty? But fears them living, and fears more to dye. Which makes his life a constant Tragedy. Therefore to preserve the mirth and peace of Conscience, righteous, or honest Actions are mainly conducing, and should
be alwaies our imployment; for this is the appointed task of man, and it is his myste∣rie too. The hand is the best Sacrifice. The Antient Portugals used to dedicate to their Gods the right hands of their cap∣tives; but offer thou thine own, and not a∣nothers. To be onely without Vice, is a vi∣tious commendation: Nay, it is not com∣mendable at all, but self-indulgence, or a flattering of our owne corrupt inactivity. To such a passe is man come, that he is not ashamed to do lesse for Virtue, then the vitious will do for Vice. It is a most poore and fordid glory, to be onely not numbred amongst the bad: It is a base degree of praise, to be reputed onely not base. To be without Vice, is not to be good: Not to be vitious, and to be Virtuous, are two things. To refrain from Evill, is scarse not Evill, especially if we proceed no further: For to be able to be good, and not to be throughly so, is, if not Evill, a neighbourhood to E∣vill. True praise consists not in a bare absti∣nence from Evill, but in the pursuance & the performance of good. It sufficeth not there∣fore that we doe nothing which may afflict us, but we must withall doe something that may exhilarate us. This we must remem∣ber, that to do good is one thing, and to become good is another; Although we can∣not
become good, unlesse wee doe good; But we become good, not because we have done good works, but because we did them well. Discretion, which considers the man∣ner of doing good, orders the Action so excellently, that oftentimes there is more goodnesse in the manner, then in the Acti∣on: What will it availe us to do good, if it be not well done? It is to write faire, and then to poure the Inke upon it. Actions cease to be good, unlesse well acted, they are like excellent colours ill-layed on. The more glorious thy intention is, the more carefully thou must manage it. Indiscretion is most evident in matters of importance: One drop of Oyle upon Purple, is sooner seen, then a whole quart that is spilt upon Sack-cloath. The Ermyn keepes his whitenesse un∣stained with the hazard of his life: Hee va∣lues himselfe at a most sordid rate, that esteems lesse of Virtue, then this beast doth of his skin; that prefers a foule life to a fair death, that loves his blood more then his honour, and his body more then his Soule. Ennius saith, that the way to live, is, not to love life. Life is given us for another cause, then meerly to live: he is unworthy of it, that would live onely for the love of life; the greatest cause of life is Virtue: what
more absolute madnesse can there be, then to make life the cause of sin, yea the cause of death, And for lifes sake to lose the crow of life? What greater unhappinesse, then to dye e∣ternally by refusing death? The Virtuous youth Pelagius, rather then he would lose his Innocence, suffered the most exquisite and studyed torments of that impure Ty∣rant Habdarrhagmanus: He suffered many deaths before he was permitted to dye: Hee saw his limbs, his hands, and his sinewes cut in sunder, and lying dead by him, while he yet lived. This preservation of their honour some chast beauties have paid dearly for. It cost Nicetas his tongue, A∣mianus his Eye, Saint Briget her face, A∣pollonia her teeth, and Agatha her breasts: The lovely Cyprian Virgin paid her life for it. Nature even for herself doth lay a snare, And handsome faces their own traitours are. The beauty of Chastity is best preserved by deformity, and the purity of life by a contemptible shape. The Shoomaker is carefull of the neatnesse of a shooe, which is made to be worn in
durt and mire: And shall man be negligent to adorn his Soul, which is made for Hea∣ven, and the service of the deity? Every artificer strives to do his worke so, as none may find fault with it; And shall we do the works of life perfunctorily and de∣ceitfully? All that makes man to be re∣spected, is his worke, as the fruite doth make the Tree: and a good work can ne∣ver be too much respected. Keepe thy selfe alwaies in respect by doing good: Thy own dignity is in thy own power: If thy works be good, thou shalt be accounted good too; If better then any, thou shalt be acknowledged for the best. Man is the effect of his own Act, he is made by those things which he himself makes: Hee is the work of his own hands. A rare priviledge, that permits men, and impowers them to make themselves: Thou hast leave to be whatsoever thou wouldst be. God would not limit thy happinesse: He left thee pow∣er to encrease it, to polish and beautifie thy selfe according to thy own mind. Thy friend, or thy neighbour cannot do it: Thy owne good must be thy owne industry. Virtue, because she would be crosse to For∣tune, is not adventitious. It is our great happinesse, that this great good must not be borrowed. Blessed be that Divine mer∣cy
which hath given us means to be saved without the assistance of our neighbours, who have endeavoured to damn us! That almighty hand which first Created man in the Image of his Creatour, finished him not, but left some things for him to doe, that he might in all things resemble his maker. It is one thing to be an Idol, or Coun∣terfeit, and another to be a lively Figure and likenesse: There are many Coppies, which are not assimilant to their Originals, like Pictures that have not so much as an ayre of those faces they were drawn by. To the Politure and sweetning of the Di∣vine Image, there are some lines expected from thine owne hand. If some expert Sta∣tuary, suppose Phidias himselfe, should leave unfinished some excellent peece, like that Statue of Minerva at Athens, and out of an incurious wearinesse, give himself to some obscure and Artlesse imployment, or to meere Idlenesse, wouldst not thou much blame and rebuke him for it? And canst thou deserve any lesse, if by a loose and vitious life thou wilt either totally deface the Image of God in thy selfe, or else leave it unfinished? Doest thou think that God is maimed, seeing thou doest leave his Image without hands,
I mean, without good works? Dost thou think that he is blind, seeing thou dost ex∣tinguish, or put quite out that discerning light and informing wisdome which hee hath given thee? Hee that doth not inte∣grally compose himself, and will not care∣fully strive for perfection, would represent God to be imperfect, and a Monster. Vir∣tuous manners (saith holy Maximus) are types of the Divine goodnesse, by which God descends to be represented by man, as∣suming for a body those holy habits, and for a soule the Innocent dictates of wisdome in the spirit, by which he makes those that are worthy, to become Gods, and seals them with the true character of Virtue, bestow∣ing upon them the solid riches of his infalli∣ble and immortal Knowledge. Work then while it is day, while it is life-time; work and cease not: Finish this expectation, this great spectacle, not of men onely, but of God and Angels. Remember that the rewards and applause of this World are but a Paint of eternity: The so∣lid and permanent glory is given in Heaven, When every man shall have praise of God. The Limbner is carefull to beautifie and shew his utmost skill in that peece, which hee knowes to be intended for judicious eyes: Thou art not to paint, but really to
make a living Image of the Divine mind, which also must be examined and judged by that searching eye, from which nothing can be hidden: have a care that no ill mix∣ture, nothing disproportionable, nothing uneven or adulterate may be found in it. The presents we offer to the true God, must be true and solid works, not the fictitious oblations of Jupiter Milichus: Why wilt thou delight in a maimed Soule, or which is worse, in a Soul whose best part is dead? Thou hadst rather have a member cut off, then hanging dead by thee: Thou wouldst then onely wish for its company, when it would be no hindrance to thee. And canst thou endure the immortal Soul to be sick of death, to be sick in his best part, in the head? wilt thou suffer thy mind to drowse, to be paralytical and senselesse, never think∣ing of God, nor of doing good? In such a liver, the beauty of his immortal part is crusted over with an incurable leprosie; and reason, which is the Soules Counte∣nance, is most ingloriously ecclipsed. The Task of life is to labour, and the Sacra∣ment of the Soule is to work rationally. Idlenesse is a Parenthesis in the line of life: When we do nothing, wee do not live. Slothfullnesse is a dead Existence, a
kind of sleep when we are awake: That life is empty, that is not filled with the care of living well. It was truly said by Possidoni∣us, that one day of a learned mans life, was more pleasant, then all the years of the un∣learned: One houre, one minute well spent, is to be preferred before a sinfull, voluptu∣ous for-ever. Time is a sacred thing: it flowes from Heaven, it is a thred spun from thence by the motion and circumvo∣lution of the spheres. It is an emanation from that place, where eternity springs. The right use of it, is to reduce it to its O∣riginal: If we follow time close, it will bring us to its Fountain. It is a clue cast down from Heaven to guide us thither. It is the younger brother of eternity, the one must be sought in the other. It hath some assimila∣tion to Divinity: it is partly knowable, and partly not: Wee move in it, and wee see it not: It is then most invisible; when most present. If we be carefull of it, the be∣nefit is ours: If wee neglect it, we cast away our selves. Hee lives not at all, that lives not well: And hee that lives ill, shall dye worse: Hee suffers a living and sensible death: It is death, because it wants the fruit of life; and it is sensible, because it is with losse and punishment. Many ill livers com∣fort themselves with a vain conceir, that
the state of death is senselesse: But Vice and Idlenesse are more malitious deaths, they carry with them the penalty of sense: They are fertill in evills, and barren of good, like a cursed ground that bringes forth nothing but thornes and thistles. You expect grapes from your vines, & corn from your Fields, but no Fruit at all from your selves: Were you made to be good for nothing? for shame be your own dressers, Manure your selves, and prune your vain and noxious affections. Man himself is his own pretious Soile, his own fruitfull field, and thriving Plant: let him that expects fruits from extraneous things, tast first of his own. Good workes are the apples of this Heavenly Plant. The Vine and the Field, though they bear not for themselves, pay their annual proventions. If they had beene left to their first fruitfullnesse before the Curse, they had exceeded in a most ube∣rous, spontaneous fertility; if they should yeild nothing now, they would be good for nothing. Man bears fruit for himselfe, and may bear as much as he pleaseth: Wilt thou then keepe backe thy own provision? Wilt thou pine thy selfe? or by burying thy talent in the dust, be an enemy to thy own soule, and envious towards o∣thers?
Virtue in my opinion is like to Musick: it pleaseth most of all the Virtuous man himself; and it pleaseth also the vitious, whose Conscience doth force him to ad∣mire that in others, which he neglects in himselfe. Musick delighteth both the Musician, and the unskillfull. Musick built the Walls of Thebes; and Virtue must build the new Hierusalem. Musick and Virtue are the performances of the hand, and the Cordials of the mind. Every lover of Virtue is Musical, that is so say, he is pleased with the suffrages of his own Con∣science, and solaced with the Celestiall flights of his pure Spirit: Hee loves the works of Virtue (not to gain the peoples applause,) but for Virtues sake, whose beauty and power are best seene in her workes. Honesty is one of the liberal Arts, it is a trade of Conscience, not of gaine. Craftsmen shew their skill in their works: The Sculptor in his Cuts, the Painter in his limnings, and the Goldsmith in his Plate. To do something, not the manner of doing it, is their care: Their worke may be well done, though negligently, and without much Art. The Limner may give a stroke in hast or anger, which nei∣ther Judgement, nor curiosity can ever match. Giotto's circle, though drawn per∣functorily,
surpassed the most elaborate pee∣ces of other Arsts. Virtue alone makes no use either of errour or chance, and this she doth meerly to oppose Fortune. In vir∣tuous actions, if wee erre in doing, though we do good, yet the worke of Virtue is not well done. In other Arts, one Exemplar, or Act may serve to shew the Artificers skill, though he should never work more: But it is not so in Virtue; As we cannot know a skillfull Musician, unlesse he plaies upon some Instrument; so Virtuous men are not manifested untill they Act: He that will give any proofe of himselfe, must needs be active; but to be so once, is not acti∣vity. Virtue is a most usefull thing, and the use of it dyeth not after it is used: For all∣though all the actions of man are transito∣ry, yet when they proceed from Virtue, they are permanent. I advise thee therefore to be permanent, yea to be immortal. Care not for those things which the World esteems to be enduring, as Gold, and the Wealth of Fortune; those will make them wings and fly away, when thou doest least look for it. Care thou for those things which the people, and their Hypocritital rulers value not, because they believe them to proceed from a sheepish and rewardlesse
tamenesse, and not from grace, and the secret dispensations of the God of peace. Care, I say, for Righteousnesse and Inno∣cence; Care that thy Actions be upright: These are the treasures which the World believing to be transient, shall find one day to be truly solid and permanent. Thou hast read somtimes that advice of the Apostle, Redeem the times: That is to say, what thou doest well at one time, thou shalt have it at all times: Thy good Actions, withr∣soever thou goest, will bear thee company: They are Companions of a most rare fide∣lity, and will leave thee neither in the hour of death, nor after death. When our friends cannot follow us, then do our good works travell with us, they are then our best friends, and overcome our foes. Envy it selfe is appeased with death, it falls off with the body. Malice knowes no posthume per∣secution, and the glory of Virtue in that state is above the reach of her Enemies: though they may disturb our temporal rights, they are too short to oppose our claime to immortality: The onely peaceful possession of the dead, is his good life, and righteous dealings: what wil it avail the rich oppressours of this World, to have their Carkasses buried in the abundance of their treasures, unlesse they mean by it, to restore
that unto the Earth which was dig∣ged out of her bowells? Gold and Sil∣ver are no ransome for unrighteousnesse. Virtue alone, which survives death, is the refreshment of the dead: He cannot be af∣feard to dy, who is assured of a better subsistance after death: Their dissolution is onely fearful to those, who lose all by it, and their life to boot. The Posthume Inhe∣ritance of man is his righteousnesse and in∣tegrity, which death takes not from him, but puts him in possession of them. Thou maist gather, that good or Virtuous works are proper and necessary to the Soul, out of mans natural desire of fame, and that in∣nate appetite of immortality which is planted in his Spirit: Nature de∣sires nothing which is not rational, and her perswasions, even when they degenerate, strain, and point at some primitive delights, and innocent priviledges which she was free to before her corruption. All secular glo∣ries dye with the body, goodnesse only is above the power of death: That faire part of life is kin to the Supreme good, and death cannot hurt it; yea it is secured by death, which kills envy, and frees the virtu∣ous both from the malice of their Enemies, and the possibility of failing in them∣selves.
Therefore the best imployment for man (if he will consider either his own benefit, or the approbation and liking of nature, which aimes also at immortality) is the work of virtue, yea far better then the work of reason. Many, while they study the reason of virtuous works, passe by virtue it self. By a fruitless study how to do good, they lose their time, and doe none at all. Theorie is nothing so beneficial as Practice. It is a true saying that Jamblichus cites out of Pythagoras; Every good thing con∣sists of substance and use, and not of meer knowledge. To be good, is to doe good. The knowledge of a skilfull Physitian profits not the sick, unlesse he falls to practise, and gives him something towards his cure. Learned Aphorisms heal not the diseased, but bitter Medicines. That Soul which can reason subtilly, and discourse elegantly, is not saved; but the Soul which doth good works: Knowledge and Faith without actual Charity are both dead. Neverthelesse there is amongst men a certain covetousnesse of Wisdome and Knowledge, as well as of Money. The acqui∣sition pleaseth them, but they will not set it out to use. As Usurers hoard up their mony, laying it out neither in pious works, nor for their own necessities, but suffer it to
lye under rust and darknesse: So some Lear∣ned men neither practise those excellent rules of Living which they have learnt, nor will they impart them unto others: They study stil more curiosities, being in the mean time incurious of their salvation. I will say of them, as Anacharsis said of the Athe∣nians, They know no use of money but to count it. There is no man poorer then the rich miser, and none more unlearned then the unpractised. Nature is contented with mediocrity: The World hath many things in it which humane affairs have no need of. Virtue also is perfected in few precepts: Though we fill the world with our Wri∣tings, it is not our Volumes that can make us good, but a Will to be so. Book-men write out of no other design, but to reform and civilize Mankind: They make several Assayes, numerous attempts, and then re∣new them. The Dice run not well alwaies, the last cast may carry more then all the former. Therefore to stir up and incline the Will to goodnesse, many things are necessa∣rie; but to be good there is nothing need∣full but willingnesse. We suffer our selves to be cheated by hope; we trust that when we have gathered so much knowledge as we covet, then we shall do all that we can d∣sire. O foolish and vain prcrastination.
Alchuvius terms it a Palsie, I am sure it is a madnesse. We stay like that foolish Beggar for a Mess from the Kings table, and in the mean time starve. We care not to use this present life which is our own, but study the secrets of another, which as yet is not ours. We would learn Mysteries, and some things that are either out of our way, or else beyond it. Christians should neither wander, nor sit down, but goe on; What is that to thee? follow thou me. Content is a private sphere, but wants nothing, and is e∣ver calme. They that study the world are (of the two) the worst Speculators. Po∣pular, politick persons live alwayes by e∣vents: Their ambition and firienesse makes their lives uneven, and uncertaine: inno∣cent, and undisturbed habits are the com∣panions of Humility. Giant-spirits, though they may flash sometimes with faire thoughts, have alwaies dark and stormy af∣fections. Men, or the most part of men, are like Swans, whose feet though ever in a li∣ving Bath, are alwaies black; but their wings and doune, which keep above those streames, are pure white. That part of our lives which is ever padling with the cur∣rent of Time, is foul and defiled; but that which soares above it, is fair and holy. Worldly businesse is the Soules Idlenesse.
Man, ordained to be King of the Worlds Republick, had been a meer Cypher, if without Soul-imployment. He had been created to no end without this Aime. If he for whom all things were made, will not endeavour to secure himself being made, he was made in vain. An ornament to the World he cannot be: He was not made with any great gaity, & his decaies are both numerous and hastie. If to be seen only, were the duty of created things, the Stars should have been onely fixt, and not moving. Stop (if thou canst) the course of the Sun, his restlesse and vast circmvolution: As moti∣on makes him bright and lively (for hee re∣joyceth to run his race) so standing still, and slothtfulnesse would make him sad and sullied; the beauty of the Firmament would be darken'd, the freshnesse of the earth would fade, and the whole family of Nature missing those cherishing beames, would pine and decay: Rivers would fall asleep, Minerals would prove abortive, and the mourning world would wast away un∣der darknesse and sterility. But the Sunne though he should not move, would not be uselesse; his very sight is beneficial. Hee is the created light of the visible world, a marvellous vessel, and an ornament in the high places of the Lord. But man for whom
all these things were made, without he b active and serviceable to his own Soule, is good for nothing. There is nothing more pleasant, nothing more peacefull, nothing more needfull then an industrious, Wise man, and nothing more impertinent, and uselesse then the sluggard. The rest of the mind is the motion of Virtue, and the idle∣nesse of the idle is the disturbance of his Spirit. He that doth nothing, is of lesse use, and by much worse then nothing it selfe. Wouldst thou be reduced into that unnaturall Vacuity of not being, which is without form and void? Cease to do good, and it is done. The fruitlesse tree must be cut down: Doest thou ask why? That it may not be; yea, that it may be nothing, and not cumber the ground. Annihilation is more profitable then a fruitlesse being. In this Family of Nature, every one hath his task: None may be idle. The best and the Noblest are the most laborious. Consider Heaven, the first Exemplar of agility; the brightest and the most active Elements are the next to it, and above them move the Stars. Fire is the Suburb of Heaven: The Earth which is cold and dull, like an Iland lies most remote, and cut off (as it were) from the neighbourhood of light. Nothing hath commerce with Heaven, but what
is pure: he that would be pure, must needs be active: Sin never prevailes against us, but in the absence of Virtue, and Virtue is never absent, but when wee are idle. To preserve the peace of Conscience, wee must not feare sufferings; if the hand of man wound us, God himselfe will cure us: But if wee wound our selves by resisting him, the hands of all his creatures will be against us, because ours was against his. Having now taught you how to master Adventitious, Personal Evils, and to pre∣vent the Evils of Conscience; It orderly followes, that I should teach you how to subdue and triumph over Publick Evils, or National Calamities. The sufferings of just persons wound the heart of a wise man, when his own cannot grate upon it. For∣tune, that could neither hurt him by force, nor by fraud, drawes blood from him through the sides of others. The righteous liver is troubled more with the losses of his neighbours, then with his own. Hee whose patience could not be overcome by passion, lies open and naked to the assaults of compassion. The life of the wise man is the most pretious and profitable, he lives not only for himself, but for others, and for his Country: The safety of the imprudent is his care, as well as his own: Hee is not
onely their compatriot, but their patriot and defender. Excellent is that rapture of Menander, —True life in this is shown, To live for all mens good, not for our own. He onely truly lives, that lives not meerly for his own ends. To live is not a private, but a publick good: The Treasure of good living is diffusive. The Civil Guardian lookes to the goods of his VVards: but the wise man is the naturall Tutor of the peo∣ple, and lookes to the publick good, and to the aged as well as those that are in their Minority. It will therefore be worthy our paines, to consider and enquire how such men should carry themselves in popu∣lar and grand mutations; Whither they should change their Nature, or their Man∣ers, or retain them both, when both fortune, knaves and fooles are most changing. In National alterations, a wiseman man may change his outward carriage, but not his inward: His mind must be dry and unmo∣ved, when his Eyes flow with teares: Hee must bestow a compassionate, Fatherly look upon the afflicted, and those that are soe weak, as to believe that temporal sufferings can make them miserable. But neither his tears, nor those that he bewailes, must
work so far upon him, as to break his in∣ward peace by admitting of fear, or hope, or the desire of revenge; and though hee himself stands in a secure station, from whence he can both distresse & defeat For∣tune, yet must he helpe also to redeem o∣thers; he must take the field with his For∣ces, and set upon her with open valour, do∣ing good (as Tzetzes saith) to all men, and abolishing every where the power of For∣tune. If hee finds that the brests of others are too narrow to entertaine Royall Rea∣son, hee must labour by Stratagems, by Manuductions, and inducing circumstan∣ces to incourage and strengthen them; Hee must not leave them, untill he hath secu∣red them. Antisthenes said, that a good man was a troublesome burthen. Who but insipid wretches, that have no feeling of their misery, will assent to this position? A good liver is troublesome to none, but to the bad, and he is by so much the more pre∣tious and desirable. That wound which makes the patient senselesse; is more dan∣gerous then that which smarts and grieves him. But if their misery when it is made apparent to them by the good man is thereby diminished, and they acknow∣ledge themselves to have been made so by their own vain opinion; it is just that they
confesse Virtue to be healing, and that by her meanes they found helpe from a strangers hand, when their own were in∣firm and helplesse. O Virtue, the great le∣nitive of man-kind! Yea of those who are thine Enemies! Thy hand heals him, that would hurt thee, As Egypts drought by Nilus is redrest, So thy wise tongue doth comfort the op∣prest. Yea, the Evill by whose association thy purity was never defiled, thou dost helpe by the good. In every virtuous man I hold that saying to be true, which Venantius spoke of the great Captain Bonegissus: His hand restores, his Counsel secures: whom Fortune rejects or casts out of her armes, he taketh up and guards them in his. And hence I am induced to differ in my opinion from Philo, about that saying of the Jews Law-giver, that a wise man hath heavy hands. What wonder is it if they be so, seeing the imprudent, the afflicted, and th disconsolate, who are grievous and heavy to themselves, do all depend and hang pon his armes, like Infants upon their mothers? To help these hangers on, he must needs be bowed, and by speaking faire to their
grievances, begin to redress them. This is the property, or rather the prerogative of the constant and wise man; Hee can descend safely from the Sphere of his owne happi∣nesse to mingle with, and to comfort the miserable. Noe man by standing still can rescue one that is carryed away by a vio∣lent torrent, and ready to be drowned; nor if he also be overcome by the same stream, can he save the other. It is one thing to be thrown down, and another to be bowed down. He that would not be thrown down, must look to the liberty of his Will, and not submit it to Fortune. But to restore, or raise up others, it is necessary that he must bow. No man can take up a Child that is fallen, but by bending himselfe: To cure the ill-affected, we must in some things in∣cline to their affections. Comfort is a poti∣on of that nature, that heals not the sick, without an appearance of the same indispo∣sition in the very Physitian: The patient will otherwise suspect that for poyson, which is meant for his health. Hee that is ill-affected, wil be unwilling to believe that another which is not so, can have any skill to cure him: And he that labours with the same disease, can neither cure others, nor himself. Therefore he that would minister comfort unto the distressed, must of ne∣cessity
have his will above the Tyranny of Fortune, he must have a mind that is invul∣nerable, and yet seem to be very tender and sensible of her lightest strokes. It is one thing to be subject to these affections, and ano∣ther to rule them: To be had of them, and to have them. He that would loose others, must not be bound himselfe. When Mus∣nianus observed a Troop of horse, that was under his command, to halt, and make a stand, expecting some Omen from a bird that had suddenly pitched before them, he bent his bow, and riding up to the front of the Troop, shot at the bird, and killed him: Then laughing at their folly, he told them, that there was but litle advice or help to be expected from such irrational creatures, that were not onely ignorant of the destiny of others, but could not foresee their own ill luck. Wee must look first to our own safety, afterwards to others: The hand of the helper should make the first assay upon himself: He that experimentally knowes, he can swim, is fi to save ano∣ther that is in danger to be drtowned. But when I speak of tendernesse, and a seeming complyance with the weaknesse of others; I mean not dissimulation. I allow a community of tears, but not of the cause of tears. Let the miserable bewail their mi∣sery,
and let the wise man mourne with those that mourn, because they mourne a∣misse, not because they suffer. Let him not mourne for the power of Fortune, but for the weaknesse of man. When a friend of Solon found him weeping, hee told him, That tears were not the potion against For∣tune, and would therefore profit nothing; I know it well (said Solon) and that is it which I Lament. He bewailed the tears of others, not the cause of their tears: That is it which a wise man (the enemy and the avenger upon Fortune,) may justly bewail, to see men weep, when weeping a∣vailes not. He is troubled, not because they suffer, but because they will not be com∣forted; yea, because they will not be men: He thinkes not that it is Evill to suffer worldly afflictions; Nay, hee knowes it is good, but he knowes withall that worldly sorrowes slay the Soul. This is the consi∣deration that calls forth his tears: Hee wisely distinguisheth, that man is not made miserable by any outward accidents, but by his own opinion: For no man is made unhappy, because he exists, or is, but because he thinks himselfe to be so: The wise man bewailes a greater Evil then the Evil of misfortune, and that is the in∣ability of some men to beare Evil. Hee
mourns not because they are Patients, but for their impatience. The true or reall E∣vil which he knowes to be in them, is their ignorance of false or reputed Evills. That which causeth him to weep, is their causelesse weeping. He that disguiseth his constancie thus, dissembles not. I make not a wise man to be impassible, but enduring and compassionate, yea the Patient of compassions: Though I exempt him from the crowd and populacie; I place him not above Humanity: Though he is no peere of the Multitude, yet he descends to pitty them: But we doe not therefore disturb his peace and serenity, because he is mercifull and condoling; but because it is his ex∣pectation, his desire. He is not stormy, nor treacherous, nor base, but courteous, libe∣ral and happy; he is in all estates master of himself; he is kept fresh and pleasant by the secret Joyes and vivifications of an un∣offended Conscience. It was well said by the School-Divine; That the tears of the righteous were the smiles of their Soules. Gregory Nazianzen commended his Brother Cesarius for his honest dissimulati∣on with the dissembling Court. He was in∣wardly an Anachorite, and outwardly a Courtier. In publick and splendid af∣faires
affaires (which are more seducing and in∣constant then private,) this policie is ne∣cessary: Wee should alwaies have a snare ready for them, that we may escape theirs. In the downright blowes of Fortune, that is, in our own domestick losses, We should be sincere and naked; we should put on no∣thing but our native complexion, and a se∣rene mind. In this Case, wee should be so undaunted, as to looke upon upon Fortune, and overcome her without any weapons, we should set naked upon her, not onely without defensive armes, but without cloaths. In the dangers of others, we must deal otherwise; wee must use all means to secure them: Wee must deal with Fortune as she deals with us, by disguises and stra∣tagems: All her wares are but gilded clouds, a Superficiall wash; they are not that which they seem to be; to be true to our selves, wee must be false to these, wee must not trust them. Shee cannot require more from us, or better, then what shee gives: Her Good, and her Evill are both counterfeits, and he that dissembles with them, offends not. The riches of this world are not sound within: Wee may not for thir sakes corrupt our Soules, and be mad like unto them. Let the peace of Conce shine within, upon a white
and undefiled Throne, though wee look mournfull and ragged without. No Man deals better, or more justly with this World, then he that lends her his face, but keeps his heart. This is the Nature of the World, to give us a fair looke, and an empty hand. Consider thy selfe: How of∣ten hast thou been that Creature, which thou didst not seem to be? All the accou∣trements of Fortune, all her pomp, and the transitory course thereof, when laid out with the best advantage, seemes to me but a Stage-play. Her most glorious favou∣rits passe by like Whifflers, which carry Torches in their hands onely to shew the deformity of their vizards: They hasten away, and like To speedy posts, bear hence the Lamp of life. All the glory of this World, hath dark∣nesse, and treachery in it. It passeth gloo∣mily by us, like high-way-men that tra∣verse the road with veiled faces: hee that will be even with this Counterfeit, must clap on a vizard too, and by an honest dis∣simulation, preserve himself. In the funeralls of our friends, our kind∣red and benefactors, wee may moderately mourne; but we must not lose our Patience,
nor that Christian peace, which is the gol∣den fruit of faith and hope. The great mer∣cy of God hath so provided, that Evill when it sets upon us, is but an apparition; there comes good presently after it. To live well, we have in our selves more then enough: we need not any extraneous help; our very desiring of it, makes us miserable. So excellently best is our condition, that the blessed life is ours gratis, but misery we must hunt after. The happy life needes neither riches nor wishes; Misery cannot be had without desiring, and it is never gi∣ven without Covetousnesse, which is the price paid for it. Wee suffice of our selves for a happy life; why not for meere life, which is something lesse? shall we think our selves poor, because we abound with the means of happinesse? As long as the batte∣ries of Fortune cannot shake the mind, nor make the wil to fly into shivers; the heart is whole, and our peace is secure: Her must∣ers and preparations seem formidable but to children only: Take off the helmet, or vizard of Evil, and underneath it, you will find good: Hast thou lost a friend that took care for thee like a mother, and fur∣nished the like a Father? that very losse is an occasion of greater gain, though at first it appears not. Parents sometimes to sport
with their Children disguise themselves: The Child at the first sight is dejected, but having taken off the Masque, he findes his Mother: He laughs, kisseth and embra∣ceth her, and if shee comes again in that dresse, he fears her not. Who would not be astonished at that furious Army of E∣vils, which fought against holy Job? It was a sad sight to see a Father, after the losse of his Children, and substance, to lye lan∣guishing under the Tyranny of a devouring Ulcer, And where? upon a dunghill, the very sink of uncleannesse and corruption. But this frighted him not: Hee was so farre from thinking it an Evil, that he played with the worms, and made that, which his friends esteemed for vengeance and mi∣sery, to be his meditation and mirth: Hee was sure that he was innocent, and retain∣ing his integrity, he could not misse of joy. He saw through that Crust and Scab, the sure mercies of God: His beautifull and healing hand, shined through that loth∣some Veyle. He desired not the comforts of his kinred, nor his friends: he said to cor∣ruption, thou art my Father, and to the worms, you are my Sisters. This was onely a shel, or seeming Evil; but the kernel, or substance that lay within it, was solid and reall good. As Children deal with nuts, so
good and wise men deal with Calamities; they break the shell, and eate the kernell: both the Good and Evill of this World have their fucus, and outside: Hee that knowes that, and knowes how to take it off, is a knowing man, and knowes how to use them. This lesson Saint Paul taught the Citi∣zens of Corinth. Let them that weep (saith he) be as though they wept not: and they that rejoyce, as though they reoyced not: And they that buy, as though they possessed not. He allowes onely an illusive and seeming commerce with the World: Hear his rea∣son, and you will acknowledge his Justice: The fashion of this World (saith he) pass∣eth away, or is transient and deceiving: That which men call fruition in this World, is but face-acquaintance: All tem∣porall possession is but a looking on, the things themselves passe away. They are still in a Cryptical, unperceived motion, when we suppose them to be fast lockt, and fettered in our armes: They creep from us like a mist or smoke, which in confused and silent Evolutions steales out at the top of the chimney, after it hath fouled it within.
All worldly things, even while they grow, decay, As smoke doth, by ascending, wast away. Saith Dionysius Lyrinensis. The Apostle would have us to put on the same disposi∣tion, and to be even with this great decei∣ver by a like deception. Let us give it but a glimpse, and halfe a face, as it gives us but a transient and flattering salute. Let us weep and not weepe, rejoyce and not re∣joyce, use it and not use it. This wee can never Act handsomly without personating, or rather mocking this Arch-cheat. When our Eyes flow with tears, we must keep our Consciences smiling and pleasant: Wee must have Heraclitus his face, and Demo∣critus his heart. The forehead is the In∣dex of the mind; but the Soul of the just must shine, when his face is most clouded. Wee must not give our strength unto the World, that is to say, we must not seri∣ously affect it: In all our negotiations with it, we must stand at a distance, and keepe our affection for him, who must be loved with all the heart, with all the strength, and with all the Soul. Saint Paul (when he made use of this expression,) had respect, I believe, unto the rites of the Roman The∣ater, the Comick and Tragick Lawes of
their Poets, which together with their Government, were dispersed into all civill climates: He applied to the various repre∣sentations, suddain changes and successive showes of the Stage, where Truth moved in disguise, and the serious travels of the Sons of Men, were by Masquers and perso∣nating Counterfeits solidly Acted: Where the short flourish of humane affaires did wither by degrees, and ended in a sad Ca∣tastrophe, while the Poets plot upbrayded the vanity of States-mens policie. The World is a meer Stage; the Master of the Revels is God; the Actors are Men; the Ornaments and flourishes of the Scenes are honour, power and pomp; the transitory and painted Streams of Mortality, which passe along with the current of time, and like flowers, do but onely appeare, when they stay longest: Hee that enjoyes them most, doth but smell to them, and the shortest fruition permits as much. What else was the Majesty of the Assy∣rian Empire, but a tractitious, vanishing apparition, a slight Flash of transient glo∣ry? It shot by like a falling star, and was presently succeeded by the Medes and Per∣sians: after them came the Macedon, and last of all the Roman. The Kingdomes of mortall men are not Immortal: they are
no better then their Rulers. Where is Ni∣nus now, where is Semiramis, Cyrus, Da∣rius, Alexander, Antipater, Ptolomie, Julius Caesar, Octavian, and Tiberius? Where now are these Patriarchs of ambi∣tion, these weak roots of the Assyrin, Me∣dian, Persian, Macedonian, Asian, Egypti∣an, and Roman greatnesse? What is become of these Primats of pride, these eldest Sons of Fortune, these prosperous disturbers of mankinds peace, before whom the world be∣came dumb, like a Sparrow before a Kite? what a deep Silence! What a thick darkness is now drawn over them! Nothing remaines of them but their names, and the bare Skeleton of glory: Their onely boast, is, that they have been: Our onely Knowledge, is, that they are vanished. Nay, it is most certain, that we Vixere fortes ante Agamem∣nona multi; sed omnes Illach y∣mabiles urgen∣tur, ignotique longâ nocte, ca∣rent quia vate sacro. know not all their names; those we are acquainted with, are not many: so ruinous a thing is humane glory, though held by mortal men to be im∣mortal. They are deceived: It leaves neither Reliques, as their bodies do; nor Inscriptions, like their Sepulchers. The glory of men is more mortal then their Carkasses. Their bones remain after heir Funerals, after the fire, &
Executioner; And thir teeth may be seen, when they can neithr snarl, nor bite. But their fame is edibl, it is devred by time without Fre, a, without Aire; for by no reing pserity, it becomes dumb, and missh their ongues, by whose speak∣ing it lives. All the felicity of men is a dream, it comes on they know not how, and when it vanisheth, they cannot so much as discern its Back-parts. If these re∣corded Empires, these famous Yoaks and Burthens of the World came so suddenly to nothing; what will be the lot of these petty fetters, these leaden manacles that we are bound with? If those massie and mighty weights were so clearly blown off; what will become of these loose Packes, which have nothing to balasse them, but feathers, but chaffe and motes? Those uni∣versall Monarchies founded upon the principall Cities of the World, whose Co∣lony was the whole Earth: Those Cities whose bulwarks did threaten the Clouds, whose Armies and Fleets made the Earth to tremble, and the Seas to grone: whose Lawes (like Oracles) were held sacred and unalterable; found no security against the Arm of God, which tears the Crowne from the Head, and the Scepter from the right hand of the Lawgiver. He considers
in his dwelling plc, like a clr  upon hbs: e  the things that are to ce: He th the Nations with the Sve of : He bowes upon them, and they wth  and hall not be planted. And why tin ou the that these dry and fading  fourish for ever? All temporall trimphs have their date: they passe away in a sure and uninterrupted course, and when they begin to decay and unloade themslves, then they are swiftest. All the pomp of this World, is but gilded empti∣ness, a nine daies blossome, whose beauty drops into the same Mould from whence it sprung. It is the Consciousnesse of their delusion, that makes these worldly ho∣nours fly from us so fast; lest if they should stay long, wee should discover their Cose∣nage; the discoverer then would be ashamed of his dot age, and the discovered would blush at his deceit. Therfore Saint Paul, in these versible and transitory fashions of the World, would have us to personate Stage-players, who when they weep, grieve not; when they by, they posssse not; when they com∣mand, they are without authority. Seeing the World is but a play, and a fable, hee would not have us to act in earnest. Play∣ers Act the lives of others, not their owne:
I wish that we could do so too. Excellent is that advice of the divine, To live a stranger unto life. Why should I be troubled with the af∣faires of others, more then with their A∣gues or Feavers? he that lives without the Affections of this life, is master of himself, and looks upon all things, as Spectators do upon Stage-playes, who are without passion, because without Interest. The Actors care not how the Scenes varie: they know, that when the Play is ended, the Conquerour must put off his Crown in the same Ward-robe where the Fool puts off his Cap. Take this wholsome Counsel of resting quiet in the degree appointed thee, not from the mouth of Musonius, Te∣letes, or Epictetus, who adviseth thee to be a Pantomime, or shifting Masquer in these worldly Enterludes, but from the mouth of Saint Paul, that great Doctour of the Universe. Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. That Supreme, Eternall mind is the mast∣er and deviser of this worldly Drama: Hee brings on the persons, and assignes them their parts. Art thou called to be a servant?
be not troubled at it: Hath he ordained thy life to be short? desire not to have it lengthned: If poor, desire not to be made rich. What part soever he hath appointed for thee, be contented therewith, and Act it faithfully. It is thy duty to represent the person thou wert chosen for, and not to choose; that is the prerogative of thy great master. If it be his will, that thou shouldst Act a begger, a sick man, or an afflicted, let it be thy care to act it well, and to meddle with no other action. The stageplayer is not commended, because he acts the part of a Prince, but because hee acts it well, and like a Prince. It is more commendable to act a foole, a begger, or a mourner to the life; then to act a King, or a Philosopher foo∣lishly. In the beginning, the midle, and the end of thy Course, keep thou to thy part. The best way of acting is to make thy heart consentaneous to thy tongue, thy deeds to thy words, and thy conversation to thy doctrine. In all the tumults and combusti∣ons of this World, keepe constant to thy station; comfort the afflicted, and envy not the wicked; despise not the one, and flatter not the other: remember thy Creator, and forget not thy end. Gloria tibi mitissime Jesu!
OF LIFE and DEATH. THE People think Life to be the greatest good, and Death the great∣est evill. They are mightily de∣ceived: And as in the least bles∣sings, so in this, which is the greatest, they greatly erre. For Life, if thou livest not well, is the greatest evill; and Death, if thou dyest not ill, is the greatest good; and dye ill thou canst not, unlesse thou livest ill. A life that is not good encreaseth evils and wickednesse; and the death of the good sets an end to afflictions and miseries. Those that are sick of the Jaundis, judge the sweetest honey to be the most bitter: So evil men e∣steem Death to be evill, because of their e∣vill conscience; but Death is not so to any, but to those onely, whose evill lives end in the evill of endlesse death. This controversie I shall decide with such reasons as must not be numbred, bu weighed. If wee look upon Philosophy, it takes part with Death, and is
the first that marcheth into the field against this popular error. It teacheth us that this hideous nothing, this imaginary fear of the multitude should be alwayes contemned, and sometimes desired. How many wise men hath this contempt of Death made Immor∣tall? For those, who by a continual remem∣brance of death, did compose and regulate their lives, are now by the memory of their virtuous lives vindicated from death. So∣crates perfected his wisdom by his willing∣nesse to dye; Pythagoras by his gentlenesse; Anaxagoras dyed merrily; One of the In∣dian Gymnoso∣phists, who feeling himself a little sick made a great Bone∣fire, and in the pre∣sence of Alexan∣der burnt himselfe therein. Alexan∣der a little before asked him, What he would have? hee answered, I shall see thee shortly. Which fel out, for he dyed at Babylon few days after. Calanus resolutely; hee would not stay to be tame∣ly besieged by her, but sal∣ly edout, and took her. he surprized death and al of them despised her. No definitions we can give will suffice to make Death odious, every one will make it desirable. Whither you consider what Death is, or what are the effects, or con∣sequents of it; whether the e∣vil or the good attending it; or whether Death it self be a meer evill or meer good all make for it. For though it should be an evill, yet the good
that comes by it exceeds that evill; and be∣ing evill, it cannot be so great an evill as all those evils it puts an end to. What one thing hath Life that is desira∣rable? Contentions, and obstinate, busie mi∣series, whose frequency and number hath made them lesse feared then Death, which comes but once: Whose assiduity, or daily malice to afflict us, hath by a long custome made us not valiant, but senslesse and block∣ish. Orpheus defined Life to be the penalty of Soules; and Aristotle added, That it was a punishment like to that, which tied the living to the dead, mouth to mouth, and breast to breast. The pure and eternal Soul is tyed to the putrid and wasting carkasse. If God should now suddenly create a man, giving him withall in that very instant the perfect and free use of his mind, and should then bring before him all Mankind (as he did all living creatures before the first man) and shew him in this mixt multitude some weeping and sighing; some without eyes to weep; some without hands; others without legs; some sick and languishing; others eaten up with horrid, impure ulcers; some beg∣ing; others quarrelling; some plotting trea∣son, and washing their hands in innocent blood; some old and decrepi, quivering, trembling, and leaning upon staves; some
distracted, and bound up in chains; others plundered, tortured, murthered, and mar∣tyred; their murtherers in the mean time pretending Religion, Piety, and the Glory of God: And after all this outward Scene, should so enlighten his eyes, that he might discover another inward one, I meane their secret thoughts, and close devices, their ty∣ranny, covetousnesse, & sacriledge varnished outwardly with godly pretences, dissembled purity, and the stale shift of liberty of Con∣science: Is there any doubt to be made, think you, but after such impious, and astonishing spectacles, he would quickly repent of his existence or being, and earnestly desire to be dissolved again, that he might rest in peace, and not be cast into this hospital, and valley of villanies which we call the World. It is for this cause, that wise Nature is so slow and niggardly in her dispensations of reason and maturity unto man, lest a sudden perfection should make us loath her, and lest the ne∣cessary evils of life understood in grosse, and upon our first entrance into life should dis∣courage us from undergoing those miseries which by degrees, and successive conflicts we more willingly struggle with. Abner the Eastern King, so soon as his son was born, gave order for his confinement to a stately and spatious Castle, where he should be de∣licately
brought up, & carefully kept from having any knowledg of humane calamities; he gave speciall command that no distressed person should be admitted into his presence; nothing sad, nothing lamentable, no∣thing unfortunate; no poor man, no old man, none weeping nor disconsolate was to come near his Palace. Youthfulnesse, plea∣sures, and joy were alwaies in his presence, nothing else was to be seen, nothing else was discoursed of in his company. A most ridi∣culous attempt to keep out sorrow with bars and walls, and to shut the gates against sadnesse, when life is an open door by which it enters. His very delights conveigh'd dis∣pleasure to him, and grief by a distast of long pleasure found way to invade him. So con∣stant is pleasure in inconstancy, that conti∣nual mirth turns it into sadnesse. Certainly though Abner by this device might keep all sorrows from the presence of his son, hee could not keep them from his sense: Hee could keep out, and restrain external evils, but could not restraine his inherent affecti∣ons. His son longed; this made him sad in the very midst of his joyes. And what thinkst thou did he long for? Truly, not to be so cumberd with delights. The grief of pleasures made him request his father to loose the bonds of his miserable felicity. This
suit of the Son crost the intentions of the Father, who was forced to give over his device to keep him from sadnesse, lest by continuing it, he should make him sad. He gave him his liberty, but charged his atten∣dants, to remove out of his way all objects of sorrow: The blind, the maimed, the de∣formed, and the old must not come near him. But what diligence is sufficient to con∣ceal the miseries of Mortality? they are so numerous, that they may as soon be taken out of the world, as hidden from those that are in the world. Royal power vail∣ed lesse here then humane infirmity; for this last took place in spight of the first. The Prince in his Recreations meets with an old man, blind, and leprous; the sight asto∣nisheth him; he startles, trembles, and faints, like those that swound at the appari∣tion of a Spirit; enquires of his followers what that thing might be? And being in∣wardly perswaded that it was some fruit of humane life, he became presently wise, dis∣liked pleasures, condenmed mirth, and de∣spised life. And that his life might have the least share here, where Fortune hath the greatest, he rejected the hopes and blandish∣ments of life, yea that which is to many the price of two lives, his Kingdom, and royal Dignity: He laboured with all diligence to
live so in the world as if he had been dead, that by avoyding sin, the cause of sorrow, he might be, though not safe, at least se∣cure. If this single accident made him so much offended with life, what (think you) would he have done, had his liberty been universal, and unbounded? What if he had seen the inside of those stately Tombes wee build for the worms to eat us in, where they feed upon such fat oppressors as have been fed here with the tears and pillage of the oppressed? What if he had narrowly searched every corner of the world, and seen those necessary uncleannesses in which the birth of man is celebrated, in which this miserie is inaugurated, by the paines of the Mother, and the cries of the Infant? What if he had entred into their bed∣chambers and bosomes, where some sit weeping, others wishing; some surfeited and sick with fruition? where some mourn for their wives, others for their children; some pine and starve with want, others are full and vomit; some are troubled with lack of necessaries, and others are as much vexed with abundance and superfluity? What if after all this search, and wide dis∣quisition he could not have found one house without some misfortune, and none with∣out tears? What if he had been admitted
into the breasts of all those, whom either domestick, hidden griefs, lingring diseases, worldly cares, or an insatiable covetousness is ever tormenting? Perhaps thei sight of so many evils had driven him to a refusall of life, in which we doe so dye with mise∣ries, and by which miseries doe so live in us; at least he had earnestly wished and groaned for some means of redemption from so miserable a bondage. If any had brought him the joyful news of liberty, and affirmed that some were already made free, he had certainly envyed them very much, and would have been impatient to know the means. But when it had been told him that the device and release was death, I do not onely think, but I verily beleeve that he had both approved of it, and would have sought for it more then for hidden trea∣sure. He had judged it not onely desirable and convenient, but necessary, and the great∣est felicity, and favour that the living could expect. If some solitary travellour, shut up in a wilderness, and surrounded with wild beasts, should on the one side see a Tiger making towards him, on the other a Lyon, and from some third place a scalie, winding Serpent, or a Basilisk, which kils with is very looks,
Whose hissings fright all Natures mon∣strous Ills, His eye darts death, more swift then poi∣son kils. All Monsters by instinct to him give place, They fly for life, for death lives in his face; And hee alone by Natures hid com∣mands Reigns Paramont, and Prince of all the sands. If these, with a thousand more, as Bears, Leopards, Wolves, Dragons, Adders, and Vipers were gathered together about him, and ready to seize upon him, what would not he give to be freed from the violence and rage of such destroyers? What greater felicity could he desire, then to be redeemed from such an horrid and fatall distress? And is it a lesser blessing to be delivered from greater evills? We are surrounded with calamities, torn by inordinate wishes, hated by the world, persecuted, prest, and trodden upon by our enemies, disquieted with threatnings, which also torture and dishearten some; for in pusillanimous dis∣positions fear makes words to be actions, and threats to be torments. Death is a di∣vine
remedy which cures all these evil Death alone is the cause that temporal mi∣series are not eternal. And I know not how that came to be feared, which brings with it as many helps, as the world brings dama∣ges. Danger it self is a sufficient motive to make us in love wth security. Death only se∣cures us from troubles: Death heals, and glo∣rifies all those wounds which are received in a good cause. When Socrates had drank off his potion of hemlock, he commanded that sacrifices should be offered to Aesculapius, as the Genius of Medicine. He knew that Death would cure him. It was the Antidote against that poysonous Recipe of the Athe∣nian Parliament. Tyranny travels not be∣yond Death, which is the Sanctuary of the good, and the Lenitive of all their sorrows. Most ridiculous were the tears of Xerxes, and worthily checkt by his Captain Arta∣bazus; when seated on the top of an hill, and viewing his great Army (wherein were so many hands as would have served to o∣verturn the world, to levell mountains, and drain the seas, yea to violate Nature, and disturb Heaven with their noyse, and the smoak of their Camp) he fell to a childish whining, to consider in what a short portion of time all that haughty multitude, which now trampled upon the face of the earth,
would be layd quietly under it. He wept to think, that all those men (whose lives not∣withstanding hee hastned to sacrifice to his mad ambition) should dye within the com∣passe of an hundred yeares. The secular death, or common way of mortality, seemed very swift unto him, but the way of war & slaughter he minded not. It had been more rational in him to weep, because death was so slow and lazie, as to suffer so many impi∣ous, inhumane souldiers to live an hundred years, and disturb the peace and civill socie∣ties of Mankind. If as hee saw his Army from that hill, he had also seen the calami∣ties and mischief they did, with the tears and sorrows of those that suffered by them, he had dried his eyes, and would not have mourned, though he had seen death seising upon all those salvages, and easing the world of so vast an affliction. He would not have feared that, which takes away the cause of fear: That is not evill, which re∣moves such violent and enormous evills. If I might ask those that have made experi∣ment of life and death, whither they would chuse (if it were granted them) either to live again, or to continue in their state of dissolution, I am sure none would chuse life but the wicked, & those that are unworthy of it; for no pious liver did ever repent of
death, and none ever will. The Just desire not this life of the unjust, which (were it offered them,) they would fear it more, (now being at rest,) then ever they feared death, when they lived. The story runnes that Stanislaus the Polonian, a man of mar∣vellous holinesse and constancy; had the opportunity to put this question, and the respondent told him, that he had rather suffer the paines of dissolution twice over again, then live once: He feared one life, but did not fear to dy thrice. Having this Solution from the experi∣enced, it is needless, and fruitlesse to questi∣on on the living. If Soules were Praeexistent, as one Origen dreamt, as Cebes, Plato, Hermes, and other Philosophers, the great Fathers of Hereticks, have affirmed; Wee might have reason to conclude, that they would obstinately refuse to be imprisoned in the wombs of women, and wallow in Seminal humours. What if it were told them, that they must dwell nine monthes in a thick darknesse, and more then nine years (perhaps all the years of their so∣journing) in hallucinations, and the dark∣nesse of ignorance? what if the paines, the exigencies, the hunger and thirst they must endure, before they can be acquainted with the miseries of life, were laid before thm?
The Infant while he is yet in the womb, is taught necessity. Quest for foode makes him violate that living Prison, and force his way into the World. And now comes he forth, (according to the Sentiment of Hippocra∣tes,) to seek for Victualls; the provision which proceeded from his Mother, being grown too little for him. But he comes from one prison into another, and breaks through the first to enlarge his own, which he carries with him: But if the Soules hus incarcerated (like Prisoners through a grate) might behold the various plagues and dis∣eases of those that are at liberty, as Palsies Passions of the heart, Convulsions, Strangu∣ries, the Stone, the Gout, the Wolfe, the Phagedaena, and an hundred other horrid incurable Evils, such as Pherecides, Anti∣ochus, and Herod were tormented with, or that fearful sicknesse of Leuthare, which was so raging and furious, that she did eat her own flesh, and drink her blood in the extremity of the pain: Or if they might see those Evills, which man himselfe hath sought and found out for himself; as emu∣lations, warres, bloodshed, confusion, and mutual destruction; Is there any doubt to be made, think you, but they would wish themselves freed from such a miserable estate; or that their intellectuall light were
were quite extinguished, that they might not behold such horrid and manifold ca∣lamities. Plato imputed the suspension of Reason in Infants, and the hallucinations of Childhood to the terrour and astonish∣ment of the Soules, which he supposed them to be possessed with, because of their sudden translation from the Empyreal light, into the darke and grosse prisons of flesh, and this inferiour World; as if such a strange and unexpected change (like a great and violent fall,) had quite doated them, and cast asleep their intellectuall fa∣culties. Proclus assisted this conjecture of Plato, with another argument drawne from the mutability, and the multitude of Worldly Events, which in the uncertaine state of this life, the Soules were made sub∣ject unto. Adde to this, that the merriest portion of life, wihch is youth, is in both sexes bedewed with tears, and the flowers of it are sullied, and fade away with much weeping, and frequent sadnese. Children also want not their sorrowes: The Rod blasteth all their innocent joyes, and the sight of the School-master turnes their mirth into mourning. Nay that last Act of life, which is the most desirable to the Soul, I mean old Age, is the most mi∣serable.
The plenteous Evills of frail life fill the old: Their wasted Limbs the loose skin in dry folds Doth hang about; their joynts are numm'd and through Their veines not blood, but rheumes and waters flow. Their trembling bodies with a staffe they stay, Nor doe they breath, but sadly sigh all day: Thoughts tire their hearts, to them their very mind Is a disease; their Eyes no sleep can find. Adde to these usuall infirmities, the con∣fluence of adventious maladies: For all the former distempers and corruptions of life gather themselves together, and make head in old age; when the inward strength, and expulsive power of Nature is decayed, when wee are almost dead, then do they revive and rage most of all. Rivers are no where more full, nor more foule then to∣wards the Channell-end. But this generall decay I acknowledge to be a great bene∣fit, because it drives away all voluptuous and unseemly delights from the aged, that their Soules may be lively and in health, when the hour of dissolution comes. And indeed it is necessary, that griefes and un∣pleasantnesse should lay hold upon age, because men (who are alwaies unwilling
to think of dying,) may be thereby wea∣ned from the delights of life, and learn to dye before the day of death. Seeing then, that the temporal life is in all its portions so full of misery, it is not irrational to con∣clude, that Soules (if they were praeex∣istent,) would be very unwilling to sub∣mit to this sad Bondage of flesh and blood. Nor do I wonder that Isis, in his sacred Book, writes, that the Soules, when they were commanded to enter into the bodies, were astonished, and suffered a kind of Deliquium, or traunce; and that they did hisse and murmure, like to the suspirations of wind. Camephes sets down their com∣plaints: , &c. Miserable wretches! in what have we so foulely trespassed, what offense so heinous and worthy of so horrible a pun∣ishment have we committed, as to be shut up and imprisoned for it, in these moist and cold carkasses? Our Eyes from henceforth shall not behold the Divine spirits, for wee shall onely peepe through two small Spheres made of grosse and corrupt humours. When we look towards Heaven, we shall have one∣ly the liberty to grone for the presence of our Creatour, but see him we may not; for we shall see then by a Secondary light, which is the light of the lower World, and
not be permitted to use our own discerning light, &c. We shall hear our Kinred rejoy∣cing in the air, and mourn that we are not partakers of their liberty, &c. But thou great Father and maker of Spirits, who doest dispose of all thy works as it pleaseth thee, appoint we beseech thee some terme to our sad bondage, and let this punishment passe quickly over us, that we may be re∣stored again to our celestiall liberty, to be∣hold (without obstruction) the perfect beauty of all thy works, &c. They com∣forted themselves with the thought of the bodies dissolution, and petitioned before thir captivity, that their inlargement might be hastned: when they were exclu∣ded from the heavenly life, there was no greater blessing then the death of the body, which sets an end to the earthly. Hee that loves death, hates a transitory corrupt condition, and he that hates his own life here, shall keep it unto life erernall. I do verily believe, that to him that throughly considers it, no part of life can be desireable. It is altogether so full of sor∣rowes; It is a peece weaved of calamities and troubles, yea, life it selfe is its owne vexation. As those that travell in rough, uneven and mountainous roades are alwaies gasping and weary, which makes them sit
down often, to recover their spent breath, and refresh themselves, that having reach'd the brow and crown of the hill, they may walk onwards with more delight, and be at leasure to feed their Eyes with the beau∣teous prospect, and freshnesse of those green & flowry plaines which lye extended before them: So this troublesome and tumultuous life hath need of death, for its ease and re∣past, as a state in which it doth repaire and strengthen it selfe against the fair Journey and progresse of eternity. Frail and weary life cannot last, and hold out untill the Indiction of immortality; So long a jour∣ney cannot be performed without subsi∣ding; A resting place must be had: Death is the Inne where we take up, that we may with more chearfullnesse set forwards, and be enabled to overtake, and to keep com∣pany with eternity. Nay, so fraile is life, that it cannot expect, or stay for the day of death without some prevening recreati∣ons: It travells by Stages, and Periodical Courses, where it breathes, and gathers strength against the next motion. As tyred travellours make frequent Pauses in the ve∣ry Roade, and cannot stay for the refresh∣ment of lodging; So life, by reason of the importunity, and the multitude of hu∣mane troubles, cannot endure or hold out
till it reacheth the Inne, which is death; but is driven to rest in the shade upon the way-side; for sleep (the shadow of death) is nothing else but a reparation of weary and fainting life. So much more excellent then life is death, that life is driven to be sustain∣ed by so many deaths, that is to say, the mortal life is necessarily preserved by sleep, which is the usher & Masquerade of death. Reedes, because they are very weak and brittle, are strengthned with distinct knots or joynts, which makes their length firme, and keepes them from cleaving: So life, if it were not refreshed and mantained still by successive, set allevations of certain prolusi∣ons of death, would fall asunder and va∣nish upon its first appearance. Hitherto we have discoursed of life, let us now consider death, and compare it with life. If death in its shadow and pro∣jection be the recreation of life, how de∣lightfull will it be at home, or in it self! Wearinesse is a preparative which makes rest pleasant: That Recipe which succeedes bitternesse, must needs be sweet. Charide∣mus used to say, That through all tem∣poral things there was a chaine drawne, whereof one link was pain, and the other pleasure: That these succeeded one another, and so (said he) after great sorrowes
there come greater joyes. What greater sor∣rowes can there be, then the sorrowes of life? There is therefore no greater pleasure then the pleasure of death, which succeed those great sorrows. Phalaris said, That men held life to be pleasant, because they suspected death to be grievous and irksome. He speaks after the sense of the people, and abuseth life, not esteeming it to be good, but be∣cause he thinks death to be Evill. I shall crosse his saying, and inferre that death should be esteemed pleasant, because wee are sure that life is painfull: But there is an appearance of something like errour, be∣cause we see many here, that passe through their whole lives without any troubles or discontents. That felicity is rare and adul∣terate, and happens most commonly to those that desire it not: look not upon those few which escape in this storme, but upon those which are drowned: these last are innumerable, thought it is thought other∣wise, because they are sunk into the bot∣tom, and cannot be seen. Admit not, I beseech thee, for a testimo∣ny against Death, those ejulations and tears which darken Funerals, and make foul weather in the fairest faces. Opinion makes the people compassionate, and they bewail not the party that is dead, but their owne
frailty. Call not for evidence to the teares of strangers, because thou knowest not whence they flow; but call for it to thine own, for none of us is happy or miserable but in his own sense which makes us any thing. What reason hast thou to think life better then death, because others mourne when thou dyest, who when thou wert born, didst weep thy selfe? It is madnesse to judge our selves miserable, because others think so. The solemnities of death are contrary to the ceremonies of life. At the birth of man others laugh, but he himself weeps. At his death others weep, but surely hee rejoyceth, unlesse his ill life hath made his death dead∣ly. Nor must thou think that his joy is ei∣ther little or none at al, because it is not ma∣nifested unto thee: Thou mayst lye watching by the side of one that dreams of Heaven, & is conversing with Angels, but unlesse hee tells it thee when he is awaked, thou canst discover no such thing while he sleepes. The Infant that is born weeping, learns to laugh in his sleep, as Odo and Augustine have both observed: So, he that bewailed his birth with tears, welcomes the shadow of his death with smiles: He presaged mi∣series to follow his nativity, and beatitude his dissolution. Weeping is natural; tears know their way without a gide: Mirth is
rude, and comes on slowly, and very late, nor comes it then without a supporter and a leader: It must be taught, and acquired. Weeping comes with the Infant into the world; Laughing is afterwards taught him; the Nurse must both teach, and invite him to it. When he sleeps, then he sips and tast∣eth joy; when he dies, then he sucks and drinkes it. Mourning and grief are natural, they are born with us; Mirth is slow-paced, and negligent of us: The sense of rejoy∣cing (if we beleeve Avicenna) comes not to the most forward child till after the for∣tieth day. Men therefore weep at thy death, because it is an experiment they have not tryed; and they laugh at thy birth, because the miseries of thy life must not be born by them. Thou onely art the infallible diviner of thy own frail condition, who refusest it with teares, which are the most proper ex∣pressions of unwilling, & constrained nature. But as the ceremonies of Life and Death are contrary, so he that is born, and he that dyes, have different events. Death to some seems to destroy all, but she restores all: By discomposing things she puts them in their order: For he that inverts things that were beore inverted, doth but reduce them to their right Positure. The Funeral rite of the Tbitenses (who are certain East-Indians)
is to turn the inside of their garments out∣ward; they manifest that part which before was hidden, and conceale that part which before was manifest; by which they seeme, in my opinion, to point at the liberty of the soul in the state of death, and the captivity of the body, whose redemption must bee expected in the end of the world. This in∣version by death is reparation, and a prepa∣rative for that order wherein all things shall be made new. Most true is that saying of the Royal Preacher, . A good name is above precious ointment, and the day of death is better then the day of ones birth. But thou wilt ask, To whom is the day of death better than the day of his nativity? It is in the first place to him that dies; True (thou wilt say) if he be a just and holy man; Yea (say I) though he be wicked. Who doubts that there can happen in all their lives a better day to the just and honest, then the day of death, which frees them both from seeing, and from feeling the miseries which are in this world? As for the unjust, it is most certain, that no day can be more beneficiall to them, then that which sets an end to their impieties, tyranny, perjury, and sacri∣ledge. To deny a sword to one that would
murther himself, is benevolence; to deny money to a Gamester that would presently cast it away, is courtesie; and to deny life to those that would use it to their owne damnation, is Mercy, and not Judgement. But to whom besides these is the day of death better then the day of life? Certain∣ly to God Almighty; because in that day when the wicked dye, his Justice on them, and his Mercy towards his own are conspi∣cuous to all, and acknowledged by all. And to whom else? Not to speak of the rich and ambtious, It is good to all men, to the whole Creation, and to Nature it self: For in that day the fair order and prerogative of Nature is vindicated from the rage and rape of lustfull, intemperate persons: It becomes constant, consonant, and inviolable, by put∣ting off those gross vestiments wch make her productions subject to the assaults and vio∣lence of man, who is the most perverse and shamelesse defacer of Gods Image in himself, and the most audacious and abhominable contemner of his Ordinances in his works, by using them to a contrary end, and quite different from that which their wise Creator made them for. But let us not consider the goodnesse of death by those evils onely which it freeth us from, but by the blessings also which it
brings along with it. Their soules are by some men less valued then Fortune and tem∣poral power; Some cast away their lives to winne a Crowne, yea the Crowne, and the Kingdome of another. They plot to forfeit a Crown of Eternall glory, by usurping a transitory one: They murther their owne soules by shedding the blood of some inno∣cent persons, permitted to be overcome by men, that they might have power with God, and prevail. Shall the short soveaign∣ty and sway of some small corners and spots of earth be compared to the everlasting tri∣umphs in the Kingdom of Heaven? The death of the sufferer is in this case the most gainfull; the more he loseth by it upon earth, his gain is by so much the greater in heaven. The shorter our stay is here, our time above (if reckon'd from the day of our death) is the longer, but hath no end at all; and the more our sufferings are, the greater shall our glory be. Hegesias the Cyrenian, when he praised death, promised not these blessings of Immortality, but onely an end of temporall miseries; and yet he did so far prevail with his Auditors, that they pre∣ferred death to life; they contemned the one, and so lusted after the other, that they would not patiently expect it, but did im∣patiently long for it; they fel upon their own
swords, and forced death to come on, by turning life out of doors before her lease was out; and had not Ptolomie by a special E∣dict silenced his Doctrine, he had robbed him of more subjects then ever War or the Plague could have taken from him. Before the blessed Jesus had made his entrance through the veile, and opened the way to heaven, the reward of righteousnesse and sanctity was long life, the peculiar blessing of the Pariarchs: It was a favour then not to appear before perfect purity, a Judge of infinite, and all-seeing brightnesse, with∣out an Advocate or friend to speak for us, in the strength and heat of irregular youth∣fulnesse, when not so much as time had sub∣dued or reformed the affections; but now bcause Christ is gone thither before, and hath provided a place for us, the greatest blessing, and highest reward of holynesse is short life, and an unseasonable, or a violent death: For those harsh Epithets (which are but the inventions of fearfull, and sinful livers) are swallowed up of immortlity, & an unspeakable heavenly happinesse which crowns and overflowes all those that dye in Christ. Wee consider not those blessings which death leads us to, and therefore it is, that we so frequently approve of our most frivolous, wordly wishes, and sit weeping
under the burthens of life, because we have not more laid upon us. A certain ground∣lesse suspition, that death is evill, will not suffer us to believe it to be good, though the troubles of life make us complement, and wish for it every day. This foolish fear and inconstancy of man, Locmannus (one of the most antient Sages of Persia, and ad∣mitted also into the Society of the Arabian Magi,) hath pleasantly demonstrated in the person of an Old man, loaded ith a grat burthen of Wood; which having quite tyred him, he threw down, and called for death to come and ease him: Hee had no sooner called, but death (which seldome comes so quickly to those that call for it in earnest,) presently appeared, and demands the reason, why he called? I did call thee (said he) to help me to lift this burthen oft wood upon my back, which just now fell off. So much are we in love with miseries, that we fear to exchange them with true happiness: we do so doate upon them, that we long to resume them again, after wee have once shaked them off; being either faithlesse and wavering, or else forgetfull of those future joyes, which cannot be had without the funerall and the death of our present sorrowes. What man distrest with hunger, if hee
sate upon some Barren and Rockie bank, bounded with a deep River, where nothing could be expected but Famine, or the Fury of wild beasts; and saw beyond that stream a most secure and pleasant Paradise, stored with all kinds of bearing Trees; whose yielding boughes were adorned and plente∣ously furnished with most fair and delicate fruites; If it were told him that a little be∣low, there was a boate, or a bridge to passe over, would refuse that secure conveyance, or be affeard to commit himself to the calm and perspicuous streames, choosing rather to starve upon the brink, then to passe o∣ver, and be relieved? O foolish men! For Gold, which is digged out of the Suburbs of Hell, we trust our selves to the raging and unstable Seas, guarded with a few planks, and a little pitch; where onely a Tree (as Aratus faith) is the partition betwixt death and us: And after many rough disputes with violent perills, and the fight f so many more; wee perish in the unhappy acquisition of false happinesse; the Sea either resisting, or else punishing our covetousnesse. But to passe into our Heaven∣ly Country, into the bosome and embra∣ces of Divinity, into a Realm where For∣tune reigns not, wee dare not so much as think of it. Who after long banishment,
and a tedious pilgrimage, being now come near to his native Country, and the house of his Father, where his Parents, his bre∣thren, and friends expect him with longing, would then turn back, and choose to wan∣der again, when he might have joy, when he might have rest? God the Father ex∣pects us, the blessed Jesus expects us, the mild and mourning Dove doth long and grone for us: The holy Virgin-mother, the Angells our friends, and the Saints our kindred, are all ready to receive us. It is through death that wee must passe unto them: Why grieve we then, yea, why re∣joyce wee not to have this passage opened? But let us grant that death were not in∣evitable, yea, that it were in the power of man, and that every one had a particular prerogative given him over destinie; So that this greatest Necessity were the great∣est freedome, yea, that man could not dye, though he desired death: Yet in this very state, would hee be troubled with Fortune and Hope. He would be a fool that would not venture to dye, to enjoy true felicity: That would choose rather to live alwaies in the changeable state of most unchangea∣ble and lasting miseries, then to put an end to them all by dying once. It is madnesse
to feare death, which (if it reigned not up∣on the Earth) wee would both desire and pray for. It was wisely adjudged by Zaleucus, that death ought to be publick∣ly proclaimed, though men had been im∣mortall. Had death been arbitrary, and at every mans pleasure, I believe we had estee∣med it as desireable as any other joy; now because it is Imperial, and above us, let it not seem too much, if wee grant it to be tol∣lerable. It was absurdly said by on, that death was a necessary Evill, and ought therefore to be patiently born. His Inference was good, though from a bad Principle: Death is rather a necessary good: And if necessity makes Evils to be tolerable, there is more reason, it should make good so. Death because it is good, should be made much of; and wee should rejoyce that it is ne∣cessary, because that makes it certain. How great a good is that, by which it is necessa∣ry that we be not miserable! Which frees the captive without ransome, dismisseth the oppressed without the consent of the oppressour, brings home the banished in spite of the banisher, and heals the sicke without the pain of Physick: Which mends all that Fortune marred; which is most just; which repaires and makes even all the dis∣orders and inequalities made by time and
chance; which is the blessed necessity that takes away necessary Evills? He had erred less, if he had mentioned a necessity of bearing life patiently, whose more proper definition that sorry proverbe is; for it casts us into necessary Evills against our will, and is the cause that wee willfully meddle with Evills that are unnecessary. It is a dis∣creet method of nature, that infuseth the Soules into the body in such a state that is not sensible of their captivity, lest they should murmur at the decrees of the great Archiplast. What wise man that were neare the terme of his appointed time, if he were offered to have life renew'd, would consent to be born again, to be shut up in flesh, & fed for nine months with excre∣mentitious obscenities, to bear all the igno∣minies of Nature, all the abuses of For∣tune, to resume the ignorance of Infancie, the feares of Childhood, the dangers of youth, the cares of manhood, and the mi∣series of old age? I am of eliefe that no man did ever live so happily, as to be plea∣sed with a repetition of past life. These E∣vills which with our owne consent wee would not have reiterated, wee are driven into without our consent: They are ne∣cessarily inferred, that they may be will∣ingly borne, to shew the necessity of Pati∣ence.
Wee are born on condition, that wee must dye. Death is the price or reward of life: It is the Statute-law of mankind, and that ought to be born as a publick good, which (were it not already enacted) would be the spontaneous petition of all men. Cer∣tainly if life were without the Jubile of death, it were just to refuse it, as a servi∣tude which hath no year of release. Let us now clearly prove, that death is not Evill, out of her assimilation and con∣formity to those things, which are most excellently good. None leade a better life, then those that live so, as if they were dead, Rom. Cap. 6. ver. 7. For he that is dead, is freed from Sinne. Therefore that which is the exemplar of goodnesse, cannot be Evill: The onely true praise of the li∣ving, is to assimilate death: He is the most commendable liver, whose life is dead to the World, and he is the most honest that lives the least to it; whose Soul listens not to the body, but is at a constant distance from it, as if they were dissolved; or though it sojournes in it, yet is not defiled by it, but is separated from sensuality, and uni∣ted to Divinity. What is the reason (thinkest thou,) that the Divine Secrets are revealed to men most commonly in their sleep; because that similitude of death is
most pleasing to God. Life is a wild and various madnesse, disturbed with passions, and distracted with objects; Sleepe (like death) settles them all; it is the minds Sabbath, in which the Spirit, freed from the Senses, is well disposed and fitted for Divine intimations. The Soul is then a∣live to it selfe, while the body reigns not, and the affections are ecclipsed in that short Interlunium of the temporall life. Philosophie, or humane Knowledge is nothing else but a Contemplation of death; not to astonish or discourage men, but first to informe, and then to reform them: for the fruit of Philosophy is Virtue, and Vir∣tue is nothing else but an imitation of death, or the Art of dying well, by begin∣ning to dye while we are alive. Virtue is a certain Primrose, a prolusion or Assay of dying. Therefore that by which man be∣comes immortall and eternall is the pre∣face, and the Inchation of death. This is the main drift of Philosophy, to make life com∣fortable by conforming it unto death, and to make death immortality by regulating life. Death is intollerable to him only that hath not mortified his desires, while he yet lives; but expects to swallow up death, and all the powers of it at once; that is to say, in the hour of death. We cut our meate,
and feed on it by bits, lest we should be choaked by swallowing it whole; so death, if it be assayed and practised by degrees, will be both pleasant in the tast, and wholsome in the digestion; if we mortifie one affect∣ion to day, and another to morrow. Hee that cannot carry a great burthen at once, may carry it all by portions. Philoso∣phy acts the part of death upon the Stage of life: it kills sensuality, and makes death most easie to be born by teaching us to dye dayly. What can be more grievous then death unto him, who together with his own, feeles the paine of a thousand other dying cupidities? We faile not to bewaile the losse of one thing, whither honour, pleasure, or a friend: How much more when we loose all at a blow, and loose e∣ternal life in one short minute? The Soule of the wise man frees her selfe from the bo∣dy in an acceptable time, she casts off the delectations of the flesh, and the cares of this World while it is day-light, that shee may enjoy her self, and be acquainted with God before the night comes. She finds by experience, that her forces are more vigo∣rous, and her light more discerning, when she is not sullied with Earthly negotiati∣ons, and the gross affections of the body; she finds that covetousnesse, love and feare
permit her not to see the truth, and that the affaires of the body are the Remora's of the Spirit: and therefore she concludes, that he must neglect the cryes of the flesh, and be attentive onely to the voyce of God; and upon these considerations, shee shakes off that Bondage; she deserts the fa∣miliarity and consultations of blood, that she may advise with, and discerne the most clear light of truth; she casts off pleasures, by which even Spirits are made subject to sense and pollution. The truth is most pure, and will not be mani∣fested, but to the pure and the undefiled: Therefore all the scope and the end of Vir∣tue is, to separate the Soul from the body, and to come as near death as possibly may be, while wee are yet alive. This is the cause that wise men do so much love and long for death, at least they fear it not. How can he feare death, who by dying passeth into the life of the blessed? Who hath already delivered himselfe from more feares and inconveniences then death can free him from? Yea from those dangers which make death fearfull? Who before his dying day, hath disarmed and over∣come death? Shall he that all his life-time desired to be separated from the body, re∣pine at the performance and fullfilling of
it? It were most ridiculous, if hasting to∣wards home, thou wouldst refuse the helpe of another to convey thee thither with more speed, and be angry at thy arrival in that Port, whither thou didst bend thy course since the first day thou didst set forth. There is no man that seeking for a friend, will not rejoyce when he hath found him. No man will be angry if another perfects what he did begin, but was not able to finish. Nature by death perfects that which Virtue had begun in life, and the endea∣vour dies not, but is continued, and thrives by a necessary transplantation. While he yet lived, he denyed himselfe the use of the bo∣dy, because it hindrd the course of the Soul; and the body dying, he doth but persist in the same just denyall. It is a greater plea∣sure to want, then not to use what wee doe not want. This Correlation of Death and Virtue I shall exhibite, or lay out to your view, by a discussion of those honours which each of them procures. As Virtue by the Consideration of death, ordereth and pre∣serves her Majesty; so by imitating death, she obtaines the reverence and admiration of all: What more reverend thing can wee labour for, then that, which by our reve∣rence of it, makes the worst livers to be re∣puted
not bad? As those who are Evill, are loath to believe themselves to be such, be∣cause of an innate reverence due from every man to Virtue, which makes them love the repute of Excellencie, though not inherent, and rejoyce to be accounted good of them∣selves, or in their own esteem, though they be evill, taking pleasure in that self-decep∣tion: So those who have beene vitious in their lives (out of the reverence wee owe to death,) wee dare not speak evill of when they are once dead; Nay, it is not civil, nor pious, to mention the dead with∣out commendation, either by praise, or else by prayer, & our Christian well wishes, as if they had been most deserving in their lives. So powerfull is the Majesty of death, that it makes the most contemptible, vene∣rable. Those we most envie while they live, we speak well of when they are dead. Ex∣cellent is that observation of Mimner∣mus, Against the Virtuous man we all make head, And hate him while he lives, but praise him dead. Envy pursues us not beyond the grave, and our honour is not free and secure til we are layd in it. That humble and quiet dust
stops the lying and malicious mouth. So∣crates foresaw that his draught of hemlock would (after his death) make his very ene∣mies his worshippers: He saw his Statues erected by the same decree that did cast him downe: And what was the motive (thinkst thou) that made his enemies wor∣ship him dead, whom they persecuted li∣ving? There is amongst the people a secret tradition that whispers to them, that those who are freed from the miseries of this life, live happily in another world. Now happi∣nesse even in their opinion is worthy of ho∣nour; therefore the honour or veneration which death exacts, is a certain tribute, or a debt rather that is due to happinesse; and if for this thou wilt advise with thy Aristotle, he will not deny it. The Lacedemonians bestowed the Olympick palms and honours (which whosoever won in his life time, he was accounted most happy) upon all that dyed, without exception, or extenuation; adorning the statutes of some, and the tombes of all with the green and flourishing Laurel, esteeming every one of the dead as happy as the most fortunate Victor that li∣ved. The antient Romans held the greatest honour of the living to consist in the re∣nown of their dead Ancestors: They judged him to be highly honoured, that
was enjoyned by any dying persons to per∣form some extraordinary service for them, as an Embassie, or some other weighty ne∣gotiation: And One of the Counsellors of A∣lexand the great. Calli∣stratus in his first book of Questions affirmes, That Embassadors so employed are the most honourable; because that the suffrages and election of dying men is most venerable, as being then upon the borders of immortality, and discerning more then those who are yet in the midst of life, and more in the clouds of thick-sighted humanity. That honour is the greatest which is done us by the honourable. Nor is this glory of death a Relative of the Soul only; Looke well upon the body, that provision of the worms, a frail and perishing objects, but ful of Majesty. We are nothing so moved, nor doe we so gravely compose our selves at the presence of a King, as at the sight of a dead body. With how much awfulnesse doth it lye along! with what a secret mysterious command doth it check all about it! It is a silent, abstruse Philosopher, and makes o∣thers so too: Nor is it onely venerable, but sacred, and the Depositum, and Index of an almighty Restauratour. The honour of Sepulture is a part of Religion. Now, if it be argued that goodnesse
consists onely in utility, or benefits, it fol∣lows that nothing is good, but that which profiteth: Death then is the best, and the greatest subordinate good of all; for the death of others benefits those that see it, and their own death is most profitable to those that mind it. The Lamae (who are the Priests of the Tehitenses) are in this point the most excellent Philosophers in the world: When they prepare to cele∣brate prayers,The pipes of death used by the Lamae. they summon the people together with the hollow, whispering sounds of certain Pipes made of the bones of dead men; they have also Rosa∣ries, or Beads made of them, which they carry alwayes about them, and they drink constantly out of a Skull: Being asked the reason of this Ceremony by Antonie Andrada, who first found them out; one that was the chiefest amongst them, told him, that they did it, Ad Fatorum memoriam. They did therefore pipe with the bones of dead men, that those sad whispers might warn the people of the swift and invisible approach of death, whose Musick they ter∣med it, and affirmed it to be the most ef∣fectuall of any; That the Beads they wore
did put them in minde of the fraile estate of their bodies, and did in prayer-time re∣gulate and humble their thoughts; That a constant commemoration of death was as beneficial to the Soul as devotion, & there∣fore they carryed them alwaies about them as the powefull Momento's of their approaching departure out of the Land of the living. To this he added, that their drinking in a skull did mortifie their affections, represse pleasures, and imbitter their tast, lest they should relish too much the delights of life; Lastly, he added that this constant representation of death, was an Antidote against all the sinfull Excesses and deviations of man. With the same Me∣dicine they secured themselves from other iniquities: When they were to swear con∣cerning any thing, they laid their hands upon certain Images set with the bones of dead men, by which ceremony they were put in mind of the last Judgement, and the Account which the dead and the Quick must give in that great, that impar∣tiall and censorious day. Certainly this was no barbarous, but a very humane and elegant Philosophy, which taught men to season, and redeeme all the daies of their lives, with the memory of the one day of their death. Admirable was the memory
of Mithridatés, who was master of two and twenty Languages, and could readily discourse in every one of them; and no lesse happy was that of Cyrus, Themist∣cles and Seneca; but a constant memory of mans miseries, and his death exceeds them all. As the rootes of the tree in the Ile of Malega, upon that side which lookes to∣wards the East, are an Antidote or preser∣vative, but those which spread Westward are poysonous and deadly: So the Cogi∣tations of a Christian, which are the Roots by which hee stickes to Heaven (for every Christian is a Tre reversed,) when they look towards the West, or setting point of life, are healing and salutiferous; but those which reflect still upon temporall things, and his abode in this World are de∣structive and deadly. Nature doth every minute commend unto us this memoriall of death. Hermes in his sacred book con∣tends, that respiration was given to man, as a sign of that last efflation, in which the Soul parts from the body. Wee should therefore as often as wee breath, remember death, when we shall breath our last, when the Spirit shall returne unto him that gave it. Our whole life is nothing else but a repea∣ted resemblance of our last expiration; by the emission of our breath we doe retaine
it, and (as I may say) spin it out. God gave it not continual and even, like fluent streames, or the calme and unwearied E∣manations of light, but refracted and shifting, to shew us that we are not perma∣nent but transitory, and that the Spirit of life is but a Celestial Gale lent us for a time, that by using it well, we may secure it Eternally. Another Hermetist adviseth us, Adorare relliquias ventorum, to make much of, and to honour our Soules, which are the breathings, and last dispensa∣tions of the still fruitful, and liberal crea∣tor: This we can never do but by a fre∣quent study of our dissolution, and the frailty of the body. Of such an effectuall goodness is death, that it makes men good before it comes, and makes sure of Eterni∣ty by a virtuous disposing of time. Thinke not that evill, which sends from so far the beams of its goodnesse. There is no good liver but is a debtor to death, by whose lendings, and premunitions we are furnish∣ed and fitted for another world. The certainty of it, and the incertainty of the time and manner, (which is the onely circumstance that seemes to offend us,) if it were seriously considered, de∣serves to be the most pleasing & acceptable; for amongst all the wondrous Ordinances
of Divine providence, there is none more Excellent for the Government of man then death, being so wisely disposed of, that in the height of incertainty it comprehends and manifests an infallible certainty. God would have us to be alwaies good, to keepe in his likenesse and Image: Therfore it is his will, that we should be alwaies uncertaine of our most certain death. Such is his care of us, lest the knowledge of a long life, and a late death should encourage us to multi∣ply our transgressions, as the notice of a swift dissolution might dishearten and asto∣nish us. But being left now in a possibility of either, we are taught to live soberly, and to expect the time of our change in all ho∣lynesse and watchfullnesse. The possibility of dying shortly, doth lessen the cares of life, and makes the difficulties of Virtue easie. Bondage and Slavery (if it be but short,) is to those that suffer it the lighter by so much: And a large allowance of time makes us slow to Virtue, but a short portion quickens us, and the incertainty of that very shortnesse makes us certaine to be good. For who would weep, and vexe himself for worldly provisions, if he cer∣tainly knew that he should live but one month? and how dares he laugh, or be negligent of his Salvation, that knowes
not whither hee shall live to see one day more, yea, one hour? The incertainty of death makes us suspect life, and that sus∣pition keepes us from sinning. The world was never fouler, nor more filled with abo∣minations, then when life was longest, when abused Nature required an Expiati∣on by waters, and the generall submersion of her detestable defilers. Theophrastus did unjustly to raile at Nature, and con∣demne her of partiality▪ when he envyed the long life of some plants and inferiour creatures, as the Oake, the Hart, the Ra∣vens; some of which live to feed and flye up and down in the World above five hun∣dred years. He quarrelled with the wise dispensations of Divinity, because a slight suite of feathers, and a renew'd dresse of greene leaves could weare out a building that lodged a rationall Soul, and the breath of the Almighty. Both his wish and his reason were erroneous: He erred in desiring long life, and in judging happi∣nesse to consist in the multitude of yeares, and not the number of good workes. The shortnesse of life is lengthned by living well: When life was reckond by centuries, the innumerable sins of the living so offen∣ded God, that it repented him to have made impenitent man: Those that sinned
out of confidence of life he punished with sudden destruction. That long liv'd gene∣ration had made the world unclean, and be∣ing polluted by their lives, it was purged by their deaths. He shorten'd afterwards the lease of life, reducing it to an hundred and twenty years, that by the diligence of frequent death, he might reform the past disorders of long life, and prevent them for the future, teaching both sexes to a∣mend their lives by giving them death for their next neighbours. So beneficiall is death, so much profits the certain∣ty of it, and as much the incertainty: The ignorance of the day of death is in effect the same with the knowledge of it; the first makes us watch, lest it come upon us unawares; and the last (though it might name the day to us) yet could it not arme us better against it, perhaps not so well. This incertainty of dying, certainly se∣cures us from many errors; it makes us prudent, provident, and not evill. Death therefore is a device of the Almighty, and a wise instrument of divine policy. Zaleu∣cus so highly approved of it, that he was about to enact and proclaime a Law for dying, had he not found it already pub∣lished by the edict of Nature: And in his Preface to those Laws made for the Lo∣crenses,
he warns them, , &c. To have alwayes before their eyes that time, which is to e∣very one the end of life, because a hearty repentance for all former injuries seiseth upon all men that thinke of death, and an earnest desire or wishing, that all their acti∣ons in life had been just. Wherefore it is expedient that in all our dealings and thoughts death should act a part, and be our familiar counsellor, ever present with us; so shall we be carefull to doe all things vir∣tuously and justly. Death then is most ne∣cessary to govern mankinde, because the memory of it keeps us in awe, and conform∣able to virtue. All Commonwealths that follow the method of Nature, must approve of this Law of Zaleucus, and death in all their consultations should guide their lives. Certainly in the Government of the re∣bellious Generation of Man, Death hath been the most awfull Engine of the Deity; without this stern he guided them not: When man was immortall, God saw it necessary to preserve his immortality by death; he injoyned the Law of Abstinence to Adam, under the penalty of dying, which is continued still by the same artifice of death, lest iniquities should be immor∣tall,
& wickedness should escape punishment: by the patience and submission of his only Son to death he restored dead men to life, he conferred upon him all his lost honours, renewd and confirmed his old prerogative, and together with the salvation of his Soule gave him a sure promise, that his body all∣so should be made Immortal; but in all these favours, and after full reconciliation, he would not remove death, but continued it still, and the incertainty as well as the certainty of it. This divine devise of death so pleased God, and was so necessary for the good of man, that though by the me∣rits of his dying Son he changed all the former things, blotting out ordinances, abolishing Ceremonies, & opening the gates of Heaven to all believers, yet would not he Exterminate death. It was out of his mer∣cy that he refused to abrogate it, that while corruption reigned, death also might reign over it, lest this poyson should want its An∣tidote. We have therefore no just cause to complain of death, which is an Invention conducing to our great good, and the incer∣tainty of the time (though it most vexeth us) is notwithstanding the most beneficial Cir∣cumstance that attends it. The time of life is certainly known, & there is but one entrance
to the light of this World: The Ceremony of dying is not formal; It keeps not to one time, nor one manner, but admits of all times, and many manners. Life comes into the World but one way, but hath many waies to go out. It was the benevolence of God to open so many doors to those that flye for refuge. One way is more then e∣nough to find out dangers, but to escape them, many are but necessary. Death is not a burthen of seaven or nine monthes, but life must have time before it sets forth. And what are the first encounters of it? Tears nd Bonds. It cannot avoyd Evills, and it is afea∣red to bear them; therefore it delaies time, and when it cannot lurk any longer, it comes forth Crying. Death leads us forth to joy and liberty: Therefore it stayes not, it seeks no corners nor protractions. Nor doth death free us onely from suffering Evills, but keeps us also from doing any: To be good every day, thou mst dye dayly. The incertainty also of the time of death, and the manner of it, like a busie Monitour, warnes thee to do good, and to be good at all times, and in every place, pri∣vate or publick: And the inevitablensse of it takes away all Excuse or pretensions for thy impreparation.
The Glory of death, is also much aug∣mented by its facility, in redressing the difficulties of life. It is not without the Divine counsel, and a speciall priviledge that the Soule of man is so easily parted from the body; the life of beasts is more tenacious, and will suffer much indignitie and fury before it leaves them. There is n living creature more fraile, none more weak then man; the lightest strake fells him; the Soul is very nice, and will quickly cast off the body if it persists but in the least Indis∣position. A single hair killed Fabius, and a Grape Anacreon; these contemptible in∣struments destroy'd them as effectually as the thunderbolt did Esculapius. Coma dy∣ed as easily as he could wish, and Baptist a Mirandulus as he could think: His Soule quitted his body without any grudging, without a disease, without poyson, with∣out violence, or any fatall mischance. No door can keep death out, it defeats life with its own weapons, and kills us with the ve∣ry Cordials and comforts of it. Perhap no kind of death is more violent then th which sets upon us with the forces o le, because it kills when life is most vigorous and pleasant. Their owne wishes have de∣stroyed many: And life hath oftentimes pe∣rished by her own contrivements. Clidemus
was killed with honour, Diagoras with joy, Plato with rest, and Philemon with laughter. This last is both a merry, and a frequent destroyer, and freed Sicily from one Tyrant. Death also makes use some∣times of our very virtues to exanimate us: Shame killed Diodorus, and the Mother of Secundus the Philosopher dyed with blushing, and an excessive modestie. Life is a fraile possession, it is a flower that requires not rude and high winds, but will fall in the very whispers and blandishments of fair weather. It is folly to labour to re∣tain that which wil away; to fly from that which will meet us every where, yea, in the way we fly, is a vain and foolish in∣dustry. Whither we seek death or avoyd it, it will find us out: Our way to fly, and our very flight end both in death; by hasting from it, we make hast to it. Life is a journey, whose end cannot be mist; it is a steady ayming at dissolution: Though we fetch wide Compasses, and traverse our way never so often, we can neither length∣en it, nor be out of it: What path soever we take, it is the Port-roade to death. Though youth and age are two distant Tropicks of life, yet death is as near to the one, as to the other: And though some live more,
and some lesse, yet death is their equal neighbour, and will visit the young as soon as the old. Death is a Crosse, to which many waies leade, some direct, and others winding, but all meet in one Center: It matters not which thou takest, nor whi∣ther thou art young or aged: But if thou beest young, thou maist come sooner thither, then the old, who is both doting and weary. It was necessary that a Sanctu∣ary being provided for the distressed, the way to it should be easie, pervious, and at an indifferent distance from all parts. Good should be diffusive, and the gate that leads to it, must be without doors and bolts. The entrance into this life, is narrow and diffi∣cult, it is difficultly attained, difficultly re∣tained, and lyes alwaies in the power of a∣nother. Every man may take life from us, none can take death. Life is subject to the Tyranny of men, but death is not; life makes Tyrants, and death unmakes them. Death is the slaves prerogative oy∣all, and the Sabbath of the afflicted. Leo Iconomachus the Emperor, made the birth of both sexes tributary: but death never paid taxation. It was not lawfull in his reigne to get Children without paying for them; every Infant so soon as borne, was to give
him contribution, they paid then the Ex∣cise of life. Death onely frees us from these Impositions of Tyrants. And wilt thou then condemn liberty, and that maturity of death by which it ripens every age? wilt thou the divine liberality blame, because thy life is short, or may be so? thou hast no reason to find fault with the years already given thee, because thou shalt not have more: thou mayst as well quarrel with Nature, because she made not thy dimensions larger, and thy body heavier by eighty or a hundred pounds: he that measured thy proportion, measured thy time too: and too much of this last would have been as troublesome and un∣weildy as too much of the first: for Long life, opprest with many woes, Meets more, the further still it goes. Death in every age is seasonable, benefi∣cial, and desirable: It frees the old man from misery, the youthfull from sin, and the in∣fant from both. It takes the aged in the full∣nesse of their time; It turnes the flowers of youth into fruit; and by a compendious se∣cret improvement, matures infancy, leading it into the Gate of Heaven, when it cannot go one step upon Earth, and giving it the
wings of a Dove to flye, and be at rest, be∣fore it can use its feet. To these past arguments of the goodnesse of death, I shall adde another. Death in the old world, (before the manifestation of God in the flesh,) was the publick index, or open signe of hidden divinity. It is the gift of God, who gives nothing but what is good. The Divell playing the Ape, and labouring to imitate the Inimitable Jeho∣vah, did by asserting death to be the great∣est good, mainly fortifie those abominable rites and honours conferred upon him by his blind worshipers: When they petiti∣oned him for the greatest blessing that the Gods could give to man, he (by the per∣mission of the true God whom they had deserted) would within three daies stran∣gle them in their beds, or use some other in∣visible meanes to set an end to their daies. Thus he served Triphonius, Agamedes, and Argia for her three Sons: This mise∣rable mother requested of him, that hee would give the best thing to her children, that could be given to men: her petition was granted, and within a very short time they received that which she thought to be the worst, namely death. So great is the ods betwixt seeming to be, and being really:
betwixt opinion and truth: yea that death which we judge to be the worst, I meane the immature, is oftentimes the best. What greater good had deckt great Pom∣pey's Crown Then death, if in his honours fully blown, And mature glories he had dyed? those piles Of huge successe, lowd fame & lofty stiles Built in his active youth, long, lazie life Saw quite demolished by ambitious strife: He lived to weare the weake and melting snow Of lucklesse Age, where garlands seldom grow. But by repining fate torne from the head. Which were them once, are on another shed. Neither could I ever grant that the death of Infants and Children, though common∣ly bewail'd as unseasonable, were the pa∣rents misfortunes, but the courtesies rather, and mercies of the almighty. To omit Amphiaraus, and other Ethnick instances; I shall make use of a true and Christian History, which in these later years, was the great admiration of King Philips Court. Didacus Vergara, a most noble hopefull outh, adorned with all those vertues which eautifie a blooming life, was famous in
the mouths of all good men, and as deare in their hearts. But what was the reward (thinkest thou) of his virtuous life? An immature and almost a sudden death; So that it is not to be doubted, but it was a divine favour. Being to go into bed, he spoke to his sister, O what manner of night will this be unto me! I beseech you, deare sister, furnish me with some candles, and leave one to burn by me. Abought mid∣night he suddenly called, so that all the fa∣milie was awaked, and got up; to whom he told that he should dye that night; and desired them to send presently for his Con∣fessour. They all imagined that he had been troubled with some dream, especially his Father, a most renowned Physitian, when he felt his pulse to beate well and or∣derly. But notwithstanding all this, they omitted not to send for his Confessour, who was Gasper Pedroza: He (as if touch∣ed with some Divine presension) was at that dead time of the night awake, and be∣ing come to the sorrowfull Father, he told him, that Didacus was expected in another World before day, that the Virgin-Qeene of Heaven had revealed so much to him, and that hee would be gone as soon as the Sacraments could be administred unto
him. It fell out just so: For those sacred so∣lmnities were no sooner ended, but he was dissolved, as if he had stayed onely for that spirituall refection to strengthen him in his Journey. He left this dark and low World towards the first breakings of the day, and ascending to eternity upon the wings of the morning. He might have past from thence with lesser noise, and in a shor∣ter time; but he expired more solemnly then so; and yet without weary accessions, and the Tyranny of sicknesse: He stayed for the saving institutions of his redeemer, the busi∣nesse that detain'd him so long, was Hea∣ven, and not the tumults of a tyring and obstinate dissolution; all this proves it to have been the hand of God, and not an unfortunate, sudden death; the precise Actions of the deity must be attended with unusuall circumstances. Whome God doth take care for and love, He dies young here, to live above. There is room enough for life within the compasse of few years, if they be not cast away: Think not that to last long, and to live long is the same thing: every
one that hath stayd long upon earth, hath not lived long. Some men find fault with death, be∣cause no experiment can be made of it, without an absolute dissolution: they would dye twice, to trye what kind of state it is, that they may be fitly furnished a∣gainst the second time, when they must dye in earnest. But this is madness, and were it granted them, the good they pretend would not be performed. For he that will cast away one life without preparing for death, wil not fear to hazard another; des∣perate malefactors will take no warning by rprieves. Besides, what benefit would there be by dying twice, seeing that of ne∣cessity they must live twice too, and so be twice miserable, if not twice impious? It is strange, that these men who fear death, and adjudge it to be evill, should desire to have it doubled, and that which, by their good will, they would not tast once, they will beg to chew and swallow downe twice; whereas if death were an Evill, it would be so much the lesser by comming but once. The miseries of life are nothing so civill; they are instant, importunate, and outragious; they will reinforce them∣selves, and set upon us twice or thrice,
yea, a thousand times. Death is more modest, she wearies us not as long as wee are well: When our disorders have turned the harmony of life into discord and noise, then shee comes to cast those murmurers asleep, and to give the Soul peace: He is no troublesome guest that comes but once. But it were a great happinesse, thou wilt say, if men did experimentally know what it is to dye: Truely this Felicity is not wanting: Death is a most admirable, inge∣nious Excogitation: Though we dye but once, yet do not we dye at once: We may make, yea we do make many assaies or tryals of dying: Death insinuates it selfe, and seizeth upon us by peecemeals; it gives us a tast of it self: It is the Cronie, or Con∣sort of life: So soon as we begin to be, we begin to wast and vanish; we cannot ascend to life, without descending towards death: Nay we begin to dye before we appeare to live; the perfect shape of the Infant is the death of the Embryo, childhood is the death of Infancie, youth of Childhood, Manhood of youth, and old age of Man∣hood. When we are arrived at this last stage, if we stay any long time in it, and pay not the debt we owe, death requires interest; she takes his hearing from one,
his sight from another, and from some she takes both: The extent and end of all things touch their beginning, nei∣ther doth the last minute of life do any thing else, but finish what the first began. We may know also what death is, by the apparition or Image of it. We see it, and make tryal of it assiduously: we cannot act life one day, but wee must act death at night: Life is a Terrace-walke with an Ar∣bour at one end, where we repose, and dream over our past perambulations. This lesser rest, shewes us the greater; the Soule watcheth when wee sleepe, and Conscience in the Just as well as the unjust will be ruminating on the works of life, when the body is turned into dust. Sleepe is no∣thing else but death painted in a night∣peece; it is a prelibation of that deepe slum∣ber, out of which we shall not be awaked untill the Heavens be no more: We go to bed under a Scene of Stars and darknesse, but when we awake, we find Heaven chang∣ed, and one great luminary giving light to all: We dye in the state of corruption, errours, and mistinesse: But wee shall be raised in glory, and perfection, when these clouds of blacknesse that are carried about with diverse winds, and every Enemy of
truth shall vanish for ever, and God alone shall be all in all. We affect sleepe naturally, it is the reparation of man, & a laying by of cares. The Coppy cannot match the pattern: if we love sleep then, why should wee hate the Idaea of it; why should we feare death, whose shadow refresheth us, which nature never made, nor meant to fright us with? It was her intention to strengthen our hope of dying, by giving us the fruition of this resemblance of death; lest we should grow impatient with delay, she favour'd us with this shadow and Image of it, as Ladies comfort themselves with the pictures of their absent lovers. There is no part of life without some portion of death, as dreames can∣not happen without sleepe, so life cannot be without death. As sleepe is said to be the shadow of death; So I think dreams to be the shadowes of life, for nothing de∣ceives us more frequent then it: When we shal be raised from death, we shal not grieve so much because the joys of life were not real, as because there were none at all. It was said by one, that he had rather dream of being tormented in Hell, then glorified in Paradise: for being a∣waked, he should rejoyce to find himselfe in a soft featherbed, and not in a lake of
unquenchable fire: But having dreamt of Heaven, it would grieve him that it was not reall. Paracelsus writes, that the watching of the body is the sleep of the Soul, and that the day was made for Corporeall Actions, but the night is the working-time of Spirits. Contrary natures run con∣trary courses: Bodies having no inherent light of their own, make use of this out∣ward light, but Spirits need it not. Sun∣beams cannot stumble, nor go out of their way. Death frees them from this dark Lantern of flesh. Heraclitus used to say, that men were both dead and alive, both when they dyed, and when they lived: when they lived their Soules were dead, and when they dyed, their Soules revived. Life then▪ is the death of the Soule, and the life of the body: But death is the life of the Soule, and the death of the body. I shall return now to prosecute the Com∣mendations of death, because it comes but once. Death (like the Phoenix) is onely one, lest any should be ill. That which comes but once, is with most longing look∣ed for, and with most welcome entertain∣ed. That poor man, the owner of one Ewe, nourished her in his bosome, she did eate of his meat, and drank out of his Cup,
as Nathan exemplified. The Father that hath but one Son, hath more cares, then he that hath many; so should we be more carefull to provide for death which comes but once, then for the numerous and daily calamities of life: By providing for that one, wee turne the rest all into so many joyes. Whatsoever is rare, whatsoever is pretious, it is single, and but one. There is nothing so rare, nothing that is compara∣ble to a good death. But it is not the uni∣versality or diffusivenesse of it that makes it so, but the contempt and the subduing of it; hs death is most pretious, by whom death is contemned. Dissolution is not a meere merit, but a debt we owe to nature, which the most unwilling must pay. That wisedome which can make destiny to be her servant, which can turne necessity into virtue, Mortality into Immortality, and the debt we owe to nature into a just right and Title to eternall glory, is very great. What greater advantage can there be, then to make Heaven due to us, by being in∣debted to nature, and to oblige Divinity by paying a temporal debt? Clemens call∣ed them Golden men, who dyed thus; that is to say, when it was necessary to dye. They made necessity their free will,
when either the publick liberty, the prero∣gative of reason, or the word of God call∣ed for their sufferings: For though death be a debt due to Nature, yet in these cau∣ses, Nature doth willingly resigne her right, and God becomes the Creditor. If we pay it unto him before the time of pure resolution, Nature is better pleased with that anticipation, then if we kept our set day: He is the best debtour, that paies be∣fore the time of payment. The day of pay∣ment by the Covenant of Nature is old age, but the good man paies before the day. If the noblenesse of thy mind will not incite thee to such a forward satisfaction; let the desire of gaine move thee, for the sooner thou payest, the more thou dost ob∣lige. Hee that suffers an immature death for the good of his Country, for the sacred lawes, or the vindication of the truth of God, and not for his owne vain glory, doth free himselfe from the Natural debt, and doth at the same time make God his debtour, and all mankind? To a man that dyes thus, all men are indebted: God owes him for the Cause, and men for the effect: The last doth at least set us an example, and the first improves the faith, and gives life to Charity.
Adde to this, that this great good of a passive death, is a voluntary imitation of the Son of God, who laid down his life for the life of the World: And it is also done without our industry; this great virtue, this glorious perfection requires not our care and activity to bring it about. This death is most pretious and the best, because it is executed by others, and not by our¦selves: To suffer death, not to dye, is glo∣rious. If prisoners break their chaines, it is neither their glory, nor their security, but augments their Guilt, and hastens their condemnation: So he that violates his own body, and makes way for the Soul to flye out with his own hands, is damned by the very Act: but if another doth it to him, it is both his Salvation and his Crown. The heathens esteemed it no honour for Cap∣tives to have their bonds loosed: It was their freedome, but not their glory. When the jugde himself did break off their Chaines, that they accounted honorable. By this Ceremony did Vespasian and Titus ac∣knowledge the worth of Joseph the Jew: This vindicated his integrity: By cutting his bonds with their Imperial hand, they freed him both from captivity and dis∣grace. Titus said, that if they would break off
his fetters, and not stay to take them off, his honour would be so perfectly repaired by it, as if he had been never bound, nor over∣come. The same difference (in point of honour) is betwixt the naturall death and the violent: betwixt dying when wee are full of daies, and the death which Ty∣rants impose upon us, when we are mang∣led and grinded by their fury. This honour is then greatest, when the body is not dis∣solved, but distorted and broken into pee∣ces. Certainly the best men have ever pe∣rished by the violence of Tyrants; nature (to preserve her innocence) being very backward and unwilling (as it were) to take away such great and needfull exam∣ples of goodnesse. Treachery and violence were ordained for the just in the dath of Abel; who dyed by the wicked. This bet∣ter sort of death was (in him) consecrated to the best men; those persons whom Na∣ture respects, and is loath to medle with, envy laies hands upon: Whom the one la∣bours to preferre, the other plotteth to de∣stroy. Nor deals she thus with the good on∣ly, but with the eminent and mighty too: thus she served Hector Alexander and Cae∣sar: the goodliest object is alwaies her aim. When Thrasybulus the Astrologer told A∣lexander
the Roman, that he should end his daies by a violent death, he answered, that he was very glad of it, for then (said he) I shall dye like an Emperour, like the best and the greatest of men, and not sneak out of the World like a worthlesse, ob∣scure fellow. But the death of these Glorioli was not truly glorious: I have onely men∣tioned them, because that a passive death (though wanting religion) hath made their honour permanent. That death is the truly glorious, which is seald with the joy of the sufferers spirit, whose Conscience is ra∣vished with the kisses of the Dove: Who can look upon his tormentour with de∣light, and grow up to Heaven without di∣minution, though made shorter on Earth by the head. This is the death which growes preti∣ous by contempt, and glorious by dis∣grace: Whose sufferer runs the race set be∣fore him with patience, and finisheth it with joy. We are carefull that those things which are our own, may be improved to the utmost; and why care wee not for death? what is more ours then mortality? Death should not be feared, because it is simply, or of it self, a great good, and is evill to none but to those that by living
ill make their death bad: What ever evil is in death, it is attracted from life. If thou preservest a good Conscience while thou livest, thou wilt have no feare when thou dyest, thou wilt rejoyce and walke homeward singing. It is life therefore that makes thee fear death: If thou didst not fear life, if life had not blasted the joyes of death, thou wouldst never be afraid of the end of sorrowes. Death therefore is of it self innocent, sincere, healthfull, and de∣sirable. It frees us from the malignancie and malice of life, from the sad necessities and dangerous errours we are subject to in the body. That death, whose leaders are Integrity and virtue, whose cause is Reli∣gion, is the Elixir which gives this life its true tincture, and makes it immortal. To dye is a common and trivial thing, for the good and the bad dye, and the bad most of all: but to dye willingly, to dye gloriously is the peculiar priviledge of good men. It is better to leave life volun∣tarily, then to be driven out of it for∣cibly: let us willingly give place unto posterity. Esteem not life for its own sake, but for the use of it: Love it not, because thou wouldst live, but because thou mayst do good works while thou livest. Now the
greatest work of life is a good death. If life then ought to be lesse esteemed then good works, who would not purchase a good death with the losse of life? why should we be afeared of politick, irreligi∣ous Tyrants, and an arm of flesh though guarded with steele? Nature it selfe threa∣tens us with death, and frailty attends us every hour: Why will we refuse to dye in a good cause when 'tis offered us, who may dye ill the very next day after? let us not promise our selves a short life, when our death assures us of eternal glory. But if it were granted that death were neither good nor honourable, but evill and fearfull, why will not we take care for that which we fear? Why do we neglect that which we suspect? Why, if it be evill, do not wee arme and defend our selves a∣gainst it? we provide against dangerous contingencies, we labour against casuall losses, and we neglect this great and enevi∣table perill. To neglect death, and to con∣temn death are two things: none are more carefull of it, then those that contemne it; none feare it more then those that neglect it; and which is strange, they fear it not because they have neglected it, but they neglect it, when they fear it: they dare not
prepare for it, for fear of thinking of it. O the madnesse and Idlenesse of mankind! to that, which they adjudge to be most Evill, they come not onely unprepared, but unadvisedly, and without so much as forethought. What mean we, what do we look for? Death is still working, and wee are still idle, it is still travelling towards us, and we are still slumbering and folding our hands. Let us awake out of this darke and sleepy state of mind, let us shake off these dreams and vain propositions of di∣verse lusts: let us approve of truth and rea∣lities, let us follow after those things which are good; let us have true joy made sure unto us, and a firm security in life, in death. Sickness and death, you are but sluggish things, And cannot reach, a heart that hath got wings. FINIS.
THE WORLD CONTEMNED, IN A Parenetical Epistle written by the Reverend Father EƲCHERIƲS, Bishop of Lyons, to his Kinsman ƲALERIANVS. Love not the VVorld, neither the things that ar in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 Ioh. 2.15. They are of the world, therefore speake they of the world, and the world heareth them. Chap. 4. vers. 5. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. Ioh. 15. verse 18. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the world, out I have cho∣sen you out of the world; therfore the world hateth you. ver. 19. Remember the word that I said unto you, the Ser∣vant is not greater than the Lord: if they have perse∣cuted me, they will also persecute you: If they have kept my saying, they will keepe yours also. v. 20. London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Armes in St Pauls Church-yard. 1654.
Advertisement. HEribert Ros-weyd published this peece at Antwerp 1621. It is men∣tioned by Gennadius cap. 63. e Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis; and Erasmus (long before Ros-weyd's Edition) writ some Notes upon it. The Author Eu∣cherius was a Roman Senatour, but being converted to the Faith, he left the Senate, and lived in a poor Cell by the river Dru∣entium, where his Wife Galla died. His two daughters, Consortia, and Tullia, ha∣ving learnt Christ, continued both in the Virgin-life, & signorum gloriâ claruerunt. He sate Bishop in the chair of Lyons (as I find him placed by Helvicus) in the year of our Lord 443. Some will have him a Century lower, but that difference weakens not the certainty of it. The peece it self (in the Ori∣ginal) is most elaborate and judicious, and breaths that togatam elegantiam which in most of the Roman Senatours was not more acquired▪ then natural. What this Valerian was (more then our Authors Kinsman, by whose pen his name lives) is not certainly known. Some will have him to be Priscus
Valerianus, the Prefect, or Deputy of France, mentioned by Sidonius Apollinaris: Others are willing to let him passe for that Valeri∣an, whose Homilies now extant were pub∣lished by Sirmondus. But as it is not deter∣minable, so is it not material: This we may safely conclude, that he was a very eminent, noble. Personage, and one that followed too much after temporal pomp, and the powers of this world; though neither of them could lend him so much light, as would keep him from obscuritie. To bring down these top-branches, Eucherius layes the Axe to the root of the tree, by shewing him the vanity, and the iniquity of riches and honours, the two grand inticements of popular spirits. And this he doth with such powerfull and clear reasons, that to virtuous and peaceful minds he hath renderd them not only con∣temptible, but odious. Much more might have been spoken against them, but (seeing the Age we live in, hath made all his Ar∣guments, Demonstrations) he hath in my judgement spoken enough. H.V.S.
EƲCHERIƲS to his Kinsman VALERIANƲS, &c. THEY are happily linked in the bond of blood, who are held to∣gether by the bond of love. And for this gift (which is descended upon us from the Father of lights,) both you and my selfe may greatly rejoyce: Whom love as well as kindred hath uni∣ted, and those two faire obligations have betrothed in one entire affection. One of them wee tooke from the Fathers of our flesh, and the other from our private dis∣positions. This double tye by which (love binding us on the one side, and blood on the other,) we are mutually knit together; hath inforced me to inlarge my selfe in this Epistle with some excesse more then usuall; that I might commend unto your Consideration the Cause of your owne Soul, and assert the work of our profession
to be, that Supreme beatitude which is onely true, and capable of those things which are Eternal. And indeed your own pious propension is not repugnant to the profession of holy living, who already by a forward felicity of manners have in some points prevented, and met with many things which are taught uno us by sacred learning: So that by the meanes of provident and discreet Nature, you seem unto me to have seized upon many duties of Religion; as the Con∣cessions and Indulgences of our good God towards you, whose gift it is, that the Di∣vine wisedome should partly find in you, and partly conferre upon you the riches of his Kingdome. But although (by the hands of your Father, and Father in law,) you have been allready advanced and seated upon the highest pinnacles of temporall honours, and are still adorned and surrounded with il∣lustrious titles descending from them both; Yet I desire, and long to find in you a thirst of greater and far higher honours, and shall now call you not to Earthly, but Heaven∣ly honours, not to the dignities and splen∣dour of one short age, but to the solid and enduring glories of eternity: For the one∣ly true and indelible glory is, to be glori∣fied in Eternity.
I shall therefore speak unto you, not the wisedome of this World, but that secret and hidden wisdome which God ordained befor the World unto our glory. I shall speake with much care and affection to∣wards you, and with very little respect or animadversion of my selfe; for I have in this attempt considered more, what I wish to see perfected in you, than what I am able to do in my self. The first duty of Man ordained and brought forth into this World for that end, (my most dear Valerian!) is to know his Creatour, and being known, to confesse him, and to resigne or give up his life (which is the wonderfull and peculiar gift of God,) to the service and worship of the giver; that what he received by Gods free donation, may be imployed in true devo∣tion, and what was conferred upon him in the state of wrath and unworthinesse, may by an obedient resignation make him pre∣tious and beloved. For of this saving opi∣nion are we; That as it is most certain, that we came forth first from God, so should we believe it, and presse on still towards him: Whereupon we shall conclude, that he onely, rightly and divinely apprehends the purpose of God in making man, who understand it thus, That God himself made us for himself.
It is then our best course, to bestow our greatest care upon the Soul; So shall that which is the first and highest in dignity, be not the lowest, and last in consideration. A∣mongst us Christians, let that which is the first in order, be the first cared for; let Salvation which is the chiefest profit be our chiefest imployment. Let the safeguard and the defense of this, take up all our forces; let it be not only our chiefest, but our sole delight. As it surpasseth all other things in excellencie, so let it in our care and consideration. Our Supreme duty is that which wee owe to God, and the next to it apper∣taines to the Soul. And yet these two are such loving correlates, that though every one of them is a duty of Supreme conse∣quence, and such as by no means we may presume to neglect or omit, yet cannot wee possibly performe any one of them with∣out the other. So that whosoever will serve God, doth at the same time provide for his own Soul; and he that is carefull for his own Soul, doth at the same time serve God. So that the state of these two sove∣raign duties in man, is by a certain com∣pendious dependencie and co-intention ren∣dred very easie, while the faithfull perfor∣mance of the one, is a perfect consumma∣tion
of both: For by the unspeakable ten∣dernesse and mercy of God, the good wee do to our own Soules, is the most accepta∣ble service and sacrifice that we can offer unto him. Much Physicall curiosity, much care and many strict observations are bestowed up∣on the body; much pain it undergoes in hope of health; and deserves the Soule no Medicine? If it be but fit and necessary, that diverse helps and means of healing are sought for the body, for the recovering onely of a temporall and transitory health, is it not unjust that the Soul should be ex∣cluded, and be suffered to languish and pu∣trifie with deadly and spirituall diseases? Shall the Soul onely be a stranger to those proper and pretious remedies ordained for it by the great Physitian? Yea rather, if so many things are provided for the body, let the provision for the Soul be far more a∣bundant: for if it was truly said by some, that this fleshly frame is the servant, and the Soul the Mistris, then will it be very undecent and injurious, if we shall preferre and place the servant before the Mistris. It is but a just claim, that the better part should require the better attendance; for with constant and intentive diligence should wee look on that side, where the
greater dignity and our most pretious trea∣sure is laid up. It is not agreeable to rea∣son, and it takes from the honour of our imployment, that we should subject it to the unworthier party. The flesh being all∣waies inclined to vitiousnesse, drawes us back to the Earth, as to its proper center and Originall: But the Soul being descen∣ded from the Father of lights, is like the sparks of fire still flying upwards. The Soule is the Image of God in us, and the pretious pledge of his future muni∣ficence. Let us imploy all our innate forces, and all outward Auxiliaries for the preser∣vation of this: if we manage▪ and defend it faithfully, wee take care for, and protect the intrusted pledge and purchased possessi∣on of God. What conveniencie can wee have to build, unless we do first of all lay the foundation? but to him that hath design'd a superstructure of true blessings, the fun∣damentall must be Salvation. And if hee hath not laid that foundation, upon what can the Consequences he hopes for be builded? how shall he be filled with the Increase of those remunerations and after-blessings, that wants the first fruits, and denies the rewarder? what portion can he have in the joyes of Eternity, that will be wanting to his own Salvation? How can
he live the life of the blessed, that wil not rise from death? or what will it benefit him to heape up temporal provision, and the materials of this World; when he hath stored up nothing for the comfort of his Soule? Or as our Lord JESUS CHRIST hath said, What is a man profited, if hee gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? There can therefore be no cause for sparing and laying up, where it is manifest, that the Soul is already lost; where Salvation is forfeited, what gaine or profit can be hoped for? Or wherein shall the true treasure be laid up, or wherewith shall he receive it, when the Soules pretious vessell, and the storehouse of Eternal joyes is utterly ruined and broken? let us there∣fore while we have time, labour for true riches, and make earnest hast to that holy and Heavenly commerce, which is worth our looking and longing after. Eternall life may be obtained in a very few daies: Which daies though they should be blest with an inoffensive and untainted holinesse of life, yet because they are but few, are to be lightly esteem'd of: for nothing can be rich in value, which is but short in duration: Nor can that procure any long or durable joyes, whose time of existence or abode is narrow and transient. The short
Accommodations of this life have but short effects. It seems therefore but just un∣to me, that to the joyes of this present life (if it hath any) we should preferre the true and indubitable joyes of that which is everlasting. For the felicity we enjoy here, is at best but temporal, but the other is eternal; and the fruition of a transitorie, uncertaine happinesse is but a frailty and accident; but the possession of inviolable and never ending joyes, is triumph and security. It is clear then, that the Eternal life is most blessed; for what other thing can be named, or thought upon, that is more happy then e∣verlasting life? As for this present short life, it is so very short, that it is withall most miserable. It is prest and assaulted on every side with surrounding, inevitable sor∣rowes, it is distrest with many evill de∣fects, and tost to and fro by secret and pe∣nal accidents. For what is there in all the whole World that is so uncertain, so vari∣ous, and so replenished with troubles, as the course of this life? Which is full of la∣bour, full of anguish, fraught with cares, and made ominous with dangers: which is distracted with violen and suddaine mu∣tations, made unpleasant with bodily dis∣tempers, afflicted with thoughtfullnesse,
and mentall agonies, and lies naked and open to all the Whirlwinds of time and Chance? What benefit then, yea, what reason have you to turne aside, and run a∣way from Eternal joyes, that you may pursue and follow after temporall mise∣ries. Do not you see, my dear Valerian, how every one that is provident (even in this life,) doth with plenty of all necessaries furnish that cottage or field, where hee knowes he shall reside? and where he a∣bides but for a short time, his provision is accordingly, where he intends a longer stay, he provides likewise a greater supply? unto us also, who in this present World (being straightned on every side) have but a very short time, are Eternall ages reserv'd in the World which is to come; if so be that wee competently provide for an Eternall state, and seeke onely what is sufficient for the present, not perversely bestowing the great∣est care upon the shortest and smallest porti∣on of time, and the smallest care upon the time of greatest and endlesse extent. And indeed I know not, which should soonest, or most effectually incite us to a pious care of life Eternal, either the blessings which are promised us in that state of glo∣ry, or the miseries which we feel in this
present life. Those from above most lo∣vingly invite and call upon us; these be∣low most rudely and importunately would expell us hence. Seeing therefore that the continuall Evills of this life, would drive us hence unto a better, if we will not be in∣duced by the good, let us be compelled by the Evill: Both the good and the bad agree to incite us to the best, and though at diffe∣rence amongst themselves; yet both consent to make us happy. For while the one in∣vites us, and the other compells us, both are sollicitous for our good. If some eminent and powerfull Prince having adopted you for his Son, and co-partner, should forthwith send for you by his Embassador; you would (I believe) break through all difficulties, and the wea∣risome extent of Sea and Land, that you might appear before him, and have your adoption ratified. God Almighty, the Ma∣ker and the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all that is in them, calls you to this adoption, and offers unto you (if you will receive it,) that dear stile of a Sonne, by which he calls his onely begotten, and your glorious Redeemer. And will you not be inflamed and ravished with his Divine love? will you not make hast, and begin your Journey towards Heaven, lest swift
destruction come upon you, and the honors offered you be frustrated by a sad and sud∣den death? And to obtain this adoption, you shall not need to passe through the unfrequented and dangerous Solitudes of the Earth, or to commit your selfe to the wide and pe∣rillous Sea: When you will, this adoption is within your reach, and lodgeth with you. And shall this blessing, because it is as easie in the getting, as it is great in the consequence, find you therefore backward or unwilling to attain it? How hard a mat∣ter to the lukewarme and the dissembler will the making sure of this adoption prove? for as to the faithfull and obedient it is most easie, so to the hypocrite and the rebellious, it is most difficult. Certainly, it is the love of life that hath inslaved us so much to a delectation, and dotage upon temporal things. Therefore do I now advise you, who are a lover of life, to love it more. It is the right way of perswading, when we do it for no other end but to obtain that from you, which of your owne accord you desire to grant us. Now for this life which you love, am I an Embassadour; and intreat that this life which you love in its transient and mo∣mentary state, you would also love in the
Eternal. But how, or in what manner you may be said to love this present life, un∣lesse you desire to have it made most excel∣lent, perfect, and etternally permanent, I cannot see; for that which hath the power to please you when it is but short and un∣certain, will please you much more, when it is made eternal and immutable: And that which you dearly love and value, though you have it but for a time, will be much more deare and pretious to you, when you shall enjoy it without end. It is therefore but fit, that the temporall life should look still towards the Eternal, that though the one, you may passe into the other. You must not rob your selfe of the benefits of the life to come, by a crooked and perverse use of the present. This life must not oppose it selfe to the damage and hurt of the future: For it were very absurd and unnatural, that the love of life should causse the destruction and the death of life. Therefore whither you judg this tempo∣rall life worthy of your love, or your Con∣tempt; my present argument will be every way very reasonable. An excellent Dilemma. For if you contemne it, your reason to do so, is, that you may obtain a better: and if you love it,
you must so much the more love that life which is eternall. But I rather desire, that you would e∣steem of it, as you have found it; and judge it to be (as it is indeed) full of bitternesse and trouble, a race of tedious and various vexations; and that you would utterly for∣sake and renounce both it, and its occupa∣tions. Cut off at last that wearisome and endlesse chain of secular imployments, that one and the same slavery, though in several negotiations. Break in sunder those cords of vain cares, in whose successive knots you are alwayes intangled, and bound up, and in every one of which you travell is renew∣ed and begun again. Let this rope of sands, this coherencie of vaine causes be taken a∣way: In which (as long as men live) the tumult of affairs (being still lengthen'd by an intervening succession of fresh cares) is never ended, but runnes on with a fretting and consuming sollicitousness, which makes this present life, that is already of it selfe short and miserable enough, far more short and more miserable. Which also (accord∣ing to the successe or crosnesse of affairs) lets in divers times vain and sinfully rejoy∣cings, bitter sorrows, anxious wishes, and suspitious fears. Let us last of all cast off all those things which make this life in respect
of their imployment but very short, but in respect of cares and sorrows very long. Let us reject, and resolutely contemn this un∣certain world, and the more úncertain man∣ners of it, wherein the Peasant as well as the Prince is seldom safe, where things that lye low are trodden upon, and the high and lofty totter and decline. Chuse for your self what worldly estate you please: There is no rest either in the mean, or the mighty. Both conditions have their miseries, and their misfortunes: The private and obscure is subject to disdain, the publick and splen∣did unto envy. Two prime things I suppose there are, which strongly enchain, and keep men bound in secular negotiations; and having bewitch'd their understanding, retaine them still in that dotage; the pleasure of riches, & the dignity of honours. The former of which ought not to be called pleasure, but pover∣ty; and the latter is not dignity, but vani∣ty. These two (being joyn'd in one subtile league) set upon man, and with alternate, insnaring knots disturb and intangle his goings. These (besides the vain desires which are peculiar to themselves) infuse in∣to the mind of man other deadly and pesti∣ferous lustings, which are their consequents; and with a certaine pleasing inticement
sollicite and overcome the hearts of Man∣kind. As for Riches (that I may speake first of them) what is there, I pray, or what can there be more pernicious? They are seldom gotten without Injustice; by such an Ad∣ministrator are they gathered, and by such a Steward they must be kept; for Covetous∣nesse is the root of all evils. And there is indeed a very great familiarity betwixt these two, Riches Divitiae & Vitia. and Vices in their names, as well as in their nature. And are they not also very frequently matter of disgrace, and an evill report? Upon which consideration it was said by one, that Every rich man is either a tyrant himself, or the son of a tyrant. Riches were tokens of Injuries. In the possession of corrupt persons they pub∣lish to the world their bri∣bery and unrighteousnesse, and elswhere, they allure the eyes, and in∣cite the spirits of seditious men to rebellion, and in the custody of such they bear wit∣nesse of the sufferings, and the murther of innocent persons, & the plundering of their goods. But grant that these disasters should not happen, can we have any certainty, whither these things that make themselves wings, will fly away after our decease? He layeth
up treasure (saith the Psalmist) and know∣eth not for whom he gathers it. But suppose that you should have an heir after your own heart, doth hee not often∣times destroy and scatter what the Father hath gathered? doth not an ill-bred son, or our ill choice of a Son-in-law prove the frequent ruin of all our labours and sub∣stance in this life? What pleasure then can there be in such riches, whose collection is sin and sorrow, and our transmision, or bequeathing of them anxious and uncer∣taine? Whither then at last will this wild and deviuos affection of men carry them? You know how to love accidental and external goods, but cannot love your own self. That which you so much long for is abroad, and without you; you place your affection upon a forraigner, upon an enemy. Returne, or retire rather into your selfe, and be you dear∣er, and nearer to your own heart then those things which you call yours. Certainly if some wiseman, and skilfull in the affaires of this world, should converse, and come to be intimate with you, it would better please you, that he should affect your per∣son, then affect your goods; and you would choose, that he should rather love you for your self, then for your riches; you would
have him to be faithful unto man, not to his money. What you would have another to performe towards you, that doe you for your self, who ought to be the most faith∣full to your self. Ourselves, ourselves wee should love, not those things which wee phantastically call ours. And let this suffice to have been spoken against Riches. As for the Honours of this world (to speak generally, and without exception▪ for I shall not descend to particulars) what di∣nity can you justlt attribute to those things which the base man, and the bad, as well as the noble and good, promiscuously ob∣tain, and all of them by corruption and am∣bition? The same honour is not conferred upon men of the same merits, and dignity makes not a difference betwixt the worthy and the unworthy, but confounds them. So that which should be a character of de∣serts, by advancing the good above the bad, doth most unjustly make them equal; and after a most strange manner there is in no state of life lesse difference made betwixt the worst men, and the best, then in that state which you term honourable. Is it not then a greater honour to be without that honour, and to be esteemed of according to our genuine worth, and sincere carriage
then according to the false gloss of promis∣cuous, deceiving honours? And these very things (how big soever they look) what fleeting and frail appear∣ances are they? We have seen of late men eminently honourable, seated upon the very spires, and top of dignity, whose incredible treasures purchased them a great part of the world; their successe exceeded their own desires, and their prodigious fortunes amazed their very wishes: But these I speak of were private prosperities. Kings them∣selves with all their height and imperious∣nesse, with all their triumphs and glory shined but for a time. Their cloathings were of wrought of gold, their diadems sparkled with the various flames, and dif∣fering relucencies of precious stones; their Palaces were thronged with Princely atten∣dants, their roofs adorned with gilded beams, their Will was a Law, and their words were the rules and coercive bounds of Mankind. But who is he, that by a temporal felicity can lift his head above the stage of humane chances? Behold now, how the vast sway and circumference of these mighty is no where to be found! their riches and precious things too are all gone, and they themselves the possessors and ma∣sters of those royal treasures! most late,
and most famous Kingdoms (even amongst us) are now become a certaine fable. All those things which sometimes were repu∣ted here to be very great, are now become none at all. Nothing I think, nay I am sure, of all these riches, honours, powers went along with them from hence: All they took with them was the pretious substance of their faith and piety. These onely (when they were deprived of all other attendants) waited on them, and like faithfull, insepa∣rable companions, travelled with them out of this wrold. With this provision are they now fed; with these riches, and with these honours are they adorned. In these they rest, and this goodnesse is now their greatnesse. Wherefore, if we be taken at all with ho∣nours and riches, let us be taken with the true and durable ones: Every good man exchangeth these earthly dignities for those which are celestiall, and earthen treasures for the heavenly. He layes up treasure there, where a most exact and inconfused diffe∣rence is made betwixt the good and the bad; where that which is once gotten shall be for ever enjoyed; where all things may be obtained, and where nothing can be lost.
But seeing we are fallen into a discourse of the frailty of temporal things, let us not forget the frail condition of this short life. What is it, I beseech you, what is it? Men see nothing more frequently then death, and minde nothing more seldome. Mankinde is by a swift mortality quickly driven into the West, or setting point of life, and all posterity by the unalterable Law of succeeding ages and generations follow af∣ter. Our fathers went from hence before us; we shall goe next, and our children must come after. As streames of water falling from high, the one still following the other, doe in successive circles break and terminate at the banks; so the appointed times and successions of men are cut off at the boun∣dary of death. This consideration should take up our thoughts night and day; this memoriall of our fraile condition should keep us still awake. Let us alwayes thinke the time of our departure to be at hand; for the day of death, the farther we put it off, comes on the faster, and is by so much the nearer to us. Let us suspect it to be near, because we know not how far. Let us, as the Scripture saith, make plain our wayes before us. If we make this the businesse of our thoughts, and meditate still upon it, wee
shall not be frighted with the fear of death▪ Blessed and happy are all you who have al∣ready reconciled your selves unto Christ! no great fear of death can disturb them, who defsire to be dissolved that they may be with Christ; who in the silence of their own bosomes, quietly, and long since pre∣pared for it, expect the last day of their pilgrimage here. They care not much how soon they end this temporal life, that passe from it into life eternal. Let not the populacy and throng of loose livers, or hypocriticall time-pleasers per∣swade us to a neglect of life, neither be you induced by the errours of the many to cast away your particular salvation. What wil the multitude in that day of Gods judge∣ment avail us, when every private person shall be sentenced, where the examinations of works, and every mans particular acti∣ons, not the example of the common peo∣ple shall absolve him? Stop your ears, and shut your eyes against such damnable Prece∣dents that invite you to destruction. It is better to sow in tears, and to plant eternal life with the few, then to lose it with the multitude. Let not therefore the number of sinfull men weaken your diligence of not sinning; for the madnesse of those that sin against their own soules, can be no autho∣rity
unto us; I beseech you look alwayes upon the vices of others as their shame, not your example. If it be your pleasure to look for exam∣ples, seek them rather from that party, which though the least, yet if considered as it is a distinct body, is numerous enough: Seek them (I say) from that party, wherein you shall find those ranged, who wisely understood, wherefore they were born, and accordingly while they lived, did the busi∣nesse of life; who eminent for good works, and excelling in virtue, pruned and drest the present life, and planted the future. Nor are our examples (though of this rare kind) only copious, but great withall, and most illustrious. For what worldly nobility, what ho∣nours, what dignity, what wisdom, what eloquence, or learning have not betaken themselves to this heavenly warfare? what soveraignty now hath not with all humili∣ty submitted to this easie yoke of Christ? And certainly it is a madnesse beyond error and ignorance for any to dissemble in the cause of their salvation. I could (but that I will not be tedious to you) out of an in∣numerable company produce many by name, and shew you what eminent and famous men in their times have forsaken
this World, and embraced the most strict rules of Christian Religion. And some of these (because I may not omit all,) I shall cursorily introduce. Clement the Roman, of the stock of the Caesars, and the Antient Linage of the Se∣natours, a person fraught with Science, and most skillfull in the liberall Arts, be∣took himself to this path of the just; and so uprightly did he walk therein, that he was elected to the Episcopal dignity of Rome. Gregorie of Pontus,Gregorius Thauratur∣gus. a Ministr of holy things, famous at first for his humane learning and elo∣quence, became afterwards more eminent by those Divine Graces con∣ferr'd upon him. For (as the Faith of Ec∣clesiastical History testifies,) amongst other miraculous signes of his effectual devotion, he removed a Mountain by prayer, and dri∣ed up a deep lake. Gregory Nazianzen, another holy Fa∣ther, given also at first to Philosophie and humane literature, declined at last those Worldly rudiments, and embraced the true and Heavenly Philosophy: To whose in∣dustry also wee owe no meaner a person then Basil the Great; for being his intimate acquaintance, and fellow-student in secular
Sciences, he entred one day into his Audi∣tory, where Basilius was then a Reader of Rhetorick, and leading him by the hand out of the School; disswaded him from that imployment with this gentle reproofe, Leave this Vanity, and study thy Salvation. And shortly after both of them came to be famous and faithfull Stewards in the house of God, and have left us in the Church, most usefull and pregnant Monuments of their Christian learning. Thou hast his life annexed to this Epistle: as a pre∣cedent after these precepts.Paulinus Bishop of Nola, the great Ornament and light of France, a person of Princely revenues, pow∣erfull eloquence, and most accomplish'd learning, so highly appro∣ved of this our profession, that choosing for himself the better part, he divided all his Princely Inheritance amongst the poor, and afterward filled most part of the World with his elegant and pious writings. Hilarius of late, and Petronius now in Itaelie, both of them out of the fulnesse of Secular honours and power, betook them∣selves to this Course; the one entring Hilarius about this time (which was 435. years after Christ) did lead a monastical life; but upon the death of Honoratus, he was elet∣ed his successor in the Bishoprick of Orleans, in which dignity he continued not long, for being addict∣ed to solitarinesse, he resigned it, and turned into the Wildernesse. into the religion, the other into the Priesthood.
And when shall I have done with this great cloud of witnesses, If I should bring into the field all those eloquent Conten∣ders for the Faith, Firmianus, Minutius, Cyprian, Hilary, Chrysostome and Am∣brose? These I believe spoke to themselves in the same words which St. Au∣gustine. another of our profession used as a sparre to drive himelfe out of the Secu∣ar life into this blessd and Heavenly voca∣tion; They said, I believe: What is this? The unlearned get up, and lay hold upon the Kingdome of Heaven, and we with our learning, behold where we wallow in flesh and blood. This (sure) they said, and up∣on this consideration they also rose up, and tooke the Kingdome of Heaven by force. Having now in part produced these re∣verend witnesses, whose zeal for the Christi∣an faith hath exceeded most of their suc∣cessours, though they also were bred up in secular rudiments, perswasive eloquence, and the Pomp and fulnesse of honours; I shall descend unto Kings themselves, and to that head of the World, the Roman Em∣pire.
And here I think it not necessary that those Royal, religious Antients of the old World should be mentioned at all. Some of their posterity, and the most renowned in our Sacred Chronicles I shall make use of; as David for Piety, Josiah for Faith, and Ezechias for Humility. The later times also have been fruitfull in this kinde, nor is this our age altogether barren of pi∣ous Princes, who draw near to the Know∣ledge of the onely true and Immortal King, and with most contrite and submissive hearts acknowledge and adore the Lord of Lords. The Court, as well as the Cloyster, hath yeelded Saints, of both Sexes. And these in my opinion are more worthy your Imitation, then the mad and giddy Com∣monalty; for the examples of these, carry with them in the World to come Salvati∣on, and in the present World, Autho∣rity. You see also how the dayes and the years, and all the bright Ornaments and Lu∣minaries of Heaven, do with an unwearied duty execute the commands and decrees of their Creatour; and in a constant, irremis∣sive tenour continue obedient to his ordi∣nances. And shall wee (for whose use thse lights were created, and set in the firma∣ment,) seeing we know our Masters will,
and are not ignorant of his Commande∣ments, stop our ears against them? And to these Vast members of the Universe it was but once told, what they should observe unto the end of the World; but unto us line upon line, precept upon precept, and whole volumes of Gods Commandements are every day repeated. Adde to this, that man (for this also is in his power) should learn to submit himself to the will of his Creator, and to be obedient to his Ordi∣nances; for by paying his whole duty un∣to God, he gives withall a good example unto men. But if there be any that will not returne unto their maker and be healed, can they therefore escape the Arme of their Lord, in whose hand are the Spirits of all flesh▪ Whither will they fly, that would avoyd the presence of God? What Covert can hide them from that Eye which is eve∣ry where, and sees all things? Let them heare thee, holy David, let them heare thee. Psalm 139. Whither shall I go from thy presence, or whither shall I flee from thy Spirit? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou
art there: if I make my bed in Hell, b∣hold thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea; Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand stall hold me. If I say, surely the darknesse shall cover me: even the night shall be light about thee. Yea the darknesse hideth not from thee, but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. Therefore (willing or unwilling) though they should absent themselves from the Lord of all the world by their Wills, yet shall they never be able to get their persons out of his Jurisdiction and Supreme right. They are absent from him indeed in their Love and affections: But he is present with them in his prerogative and anger. So then being ranagates, they are shut up, and (which is a most impious madnesse) thy live without any consideration or regard of God, but within his power. And if these being earthly Masters, when their servants run away from them; with a furious and hasty search pursue after them; or if they
renounce their service, prosecute them for it, and become the assertours of their owne right over them; why will not they them∣selves render unto their Master which is in Heaven his most just right? Why will they not stay in his Family, and freely offer themselves unto his service, and be as im∣partial Judges in the cause of God as in their own? Why with so much dotage do we fixe our Eyes upon the deceitfull lookes of tem∣poral things? Why do we rest our selves upon those thornes onely, which wee see beneath us? Is it the Eye alone that wee live by? Is there nothing usefull about us but that wanderer? We live also by the eare, and at that Inlet wee receive the glad ty∣dings of Salvation, which fill us with ear∣nest grones for our glorious liberty and the consummation of the promises; Whatsoe∣ver is promised, whatsoever is preached unto us, let us wait for it with intentive wishes, and most eager desires. That faith∣full one, the blessed Author of those pro∣mises assures us frequently of his fidelity and performance, let us covet earnestly his best promises. Bt notwithstanding this which hath been spoken, if a sober and virtuous use were made of the Eye, we might by that
very faculty be drawn to a certaine sacred longing after Immortality, and the powers of the World to come; if that admiration, which by contemplating the rare frame of the World wee are usually filled with, were returned upon the glorious Creatour of it, by our praises and benediction of him; Or if we would meditate what a copious, active and boundlesse light shall fill our eyes in the state of Immortality, seeing so fair a luminary is allowed us in the state of corruption: Or what transcendent beauty shall be given to all things in that eternall World, seeing this transitory one is so full of Majesty and freshnesse; There can be no excuse for us, if we sollicite the faculties of these members to abuse and perversenesse: Let them rather be commodi∣ously applyed to both lifes, and so minister to the use of the temporall, as not to cast off their duty to the Eternal. But if pleasure and love delight us, and provoke our Senses, there is in Christi∣an Religion, a love of infinite comfort, and such delights as are not nauseous and offensive after fruition. There is in it, that which not onely admits of a most vehe∣ment and overflowing love, but ought all∣so to be so beloved; namely, God, blessed for evermore, the onely beautifull, delight∣full,
immortal and Supreme good, whom you may boldly and intimately love as well as piously; if in the room of your for∣mer earthly affections, you entertain Hea∣venly and holy desires. If you were ever taken with the magnificence and dignity of another person, there is nothing more magnificent then God. If with any thing that might conduce to your honour and glory; there is nothing more glorious then him: If with the splendour and excellencie of pompous showes, there is nothing more bright, nothing more excellent. If with fairnesse and pleasing objects, there is no∣thing more beautifull. If with verity and righteousnesse, there is nothing more just, nothing more true. If with liberality, there is nothing more bountifull. If with incor∣ruption and simplicity, there is nothing more sincere, nothing more pure then that Supreme goodnesse. Are you troubled that your treasure and store is not proportiona∣ble to your mind? The Earth and the full∣nesse thereof are under his lock: Do you love any thing that is trusty and firm? There is nothing more friendly, nothing more faithfull then him: Do you love any thing that is beneficial? There is no greater bene∣factor. Are you delighted with the graviy or gentleness of any object? there is nothing
more terrible then his Almightinesse, no∣thing more mild then his goodnesse. Do you love refreshments in a low estate, and a merry heart in a plentifull? Joy in pros∣perity, and comforts in adversity are both the dispensations of his hand. Wherefore it stands with all reason, that you should love the giver more then his gifts, and him from whom you have all these things, more then the things themselves. Riches, Ho∣nours, and all things else, whose present lustre attracts and possesseth your heart, are not onely with him, but are now also had from him. Recollect your dispersed, and hitherto ill-placed affections, imploy them wholly in the Divine service. Let this dissolute love and compliance with worldly desires become chast piety, and wait upon sacred affaires. Call home your devious and run∣nagate thoughts, which opinion and custome have sadly distracted; and having supprest old errors, direct your love to his proper object, bestow it wholy upon your Maker. For all that you can love now is his, his alone, and none else. For of such infinite∣nesse is he, that those who do not love him, deale most injuriously: because they cannot love any thing, but what is his.
But I would have an impartial judge∣ment to consider, whether it be just for him to love the work, and hate the Workman; and having cast by, and deserted the Crea∣tor of all things, to run and seize upon his creatures every where, and without any dif∣ference, according to his perverse and insa∣tiable lust. Whereas it behoved him rather to invite God to be gratious and loving to him, by this very affection to his works, if piously layd out. And now man gives him∣self over to the lusts and service of his own detestable figments, and most unnaturally becomes a lover of the Art, and neglects the Artificer, adores the Creature, and despiseth the Creator. And what have we spoken all this while of those innumerable delights which are with him? or of the infinite and ravishing sweetnesse of his ineffable Goodnesse? the sacred and inexhaustible treasure of his Love? or when will it be that any shall be able to expresse or conceive the dignity and fulnesse of any one Attribute that is in him? To love him then is not onely delightfull, but needfull: For not to love him, whom even then when we love, we cannot possi∣bly requite, is impious; and not to returne him such acknowledgements as we are a∣ble, whom if we would, we can never re∣compence,
is most unjust: For what shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards us? What shall we render unto him for this one benefit, that he hath gi∣ven salvation to man by faith, and ordain∣ed that to be most easie in the fact, by which he restored hope to the subjected world, and eternal life unto lost man? And that I may now descend unto those things which were sometimes out of his Covenant, I mean the Nations and King∣domes of the Gentiles, doe you think that these were made subject to the Roman pow∣er, and that the dispersed multitude of Mankind were incorporated (as it were) into one body under one head for any other end, but that (as Medicines taken in at the mouth are diffused into all parts of the bo∣dy) so the Faith by this means might with more ease be planted and penetrated into the most remote parts of the world. Other∣wise by reason of different powers, customs, and languages, it had met with fresh and numerous oppositions, and the passage of the Gospel had been much more difficult. Blessed Paul himself describing his course in planting the Faith amongst this very peo∣ple, writes in his Epistle to the Romans, That from Hierusalem and round about to Illyricu he had fully preached the Gospel
of Christ. And how long (without this preparation in the fulnesse of time) might this have been in doing, amongst Nations, either innumerable for multitude, or bar∣barous for immanitie? Hence it is that the whole earth now from the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof, from the farthest North and the frozen sea breaks forth into singing, and rings with the glo∣rious name of Jesus Christ. Hence it is, that all parts of the world flock and run to∣gether to the Word of Life: The Thracian is for the Faith, the African for the Faith, the Syrian for the Faith, and the Spaniard hath received the Faith. A great argument of the divine clemency may be gathered out of this, that under Augustus Caesar, when the Roman power was in the height, and Acmie, then the Almighty God came down upon the earth and assumed flesh. Therefore that I may now make use of those things, which you also are versed in, it may be clearly proved (if any skilled in your Histories would assert the truth) that from the first foundation of the Roman Empire (which is now one thousand one hundred and eighty five years ago) what ever additions and growth it gathered either in the
reign of their first Kings,This letter was written in the year of our Lord 435. or afterwards un∣der the administration of Consuls, all was permitted by the onely wise, and almighty God to prepare the world against the com∣ing of Christ, and to make way for the propagation of the Faith. But I return thither, from whence I have digrest. Love not the world (saith St. John) neither the things that are in the world; for all those things with delusive, insnaring shews, captivate our sight, and will not suffer us to look upwards. Let not that faculty of the eye which was ordained for light, be applyed to darknesse, being created for the use of life, let it not admit the causes of death. Fleshly lusts (as it is divinely spoken by the Apostle) war against the soul, and all their accoutrements are for the ruin and destruction of it. A vigilant guard doe they keep, when they are once permitted to make head, and after the man∣ner of forraign and expert enemies, with those forces they take from us, they poli∣tickly strengthen and increase their own. Thus hitherto have I discoursed of those splendid allurements, which are the chief∣est and most taking baits of this subtile world, I mean Riches and Honours. And with such earnestnesse have I argued against them, as if those blandishments had still
some force. But what beauty soever they had, when cast over heretofore with some pleasing adumbrations, it is now quite worn away, and all that paint and cousenage is fallen off. The world now hath scarce the art to deceive. Those powerfull and be∣witching lookes of things, beautiful some∣times even to deception, are now withered, and almost loathsome. In former times it laboured to seduce us with its most solid and magnificent glories, and it could not. Now it turnes cheat, and would entice us with toyes, and slight wares, but it cannot. Reall riches it never had, and now it is so poor, that it wants counterfeits. It neither hath delectable things for the present, nor durable for the future; unlesse wee agree to deceive our selves, the world in a manner cannot deceive us. But why delay I my stronger arguments? I affirm then that the forces of this world are dispersed and overthrown, seeing the world it self is now drawing towards its dissolution, and pants with its last gasps, and dying anhelations. How much more grievous and bitter will you think this as∣sertion, that for certain it cannot last very long? What should I trouble my self to tell you that all the utensils and moveables of it are decayed and wasted? And no marvell
that it is driven into these defects, and a consumption of its ancient strength, when now grown old and weary it stoopes with weaknesse, and is ready to fall under the burthen of so many ages. These latter years and decrepitness of time are fraught with evils and calamities, as old age is with diseases. Our forefathers saw, and we still see in these last dayes the plagues of famine, pestilence, war, destru∣ction, and terrours. All these are so many acute fits and convulsions of the dying world. Hence it is that such frequent signs are seen in the firmament, excessive Ecclip∣ses, and faintings of the brightest Lumina∣ries, which is a shaking of the powers of heaven; sudden and astonishing Earth∣quakes under our feet, alterations of time and governments, with the monstrous fruitfulnesse of living creatures; all which are the prodigies, or fatall symptomes of time going indeed still on, but fainting, and ready to expire. Nor is this confirmed by my weak assertions onely, but by sacred authority and the Apostolical Oracles: For there it is written, that upon us the ends of the world are come, 1 Co. 10.11 Which divine truth seeing it hath been spoken so long agoe, what is it that we linger for, or what can we expect? That day, not one∣ly
ours, but the last that ever the present world shall see, calls earnestly for our pre∣paration. Every hour tels us of the com∣ing on of that inevitable hour of our death, seeing a double danger of two finall dis∣solutions threatens every one in particular, and all the world in generall. Wretched man that I am! the mortality of this whole frame lyes heavily upon my thoughts, as if my own were not burthensome enough. Wherefore is it that we flatter our selves a∣gainst these sure fears. There is no place left for deviation: A most certain decree is past against us, on the one side is written every mans private dissolution, and on the other the publick and universal. How much more miserable then is the condition of those men (I will not say, in these out-goings, or last walks of time, but in these decayes of the worlds goodly things) who neither can enjoy ought that is pleasant at the present, nor lay up for themselves any hope of true joyes hereaf∣ter. They misse the fruition of this short life, and can have no hope of the everlast∣ing: They abuse these temporal blessings, and shall never be admitted to use the eter∣nall. Their substance here is very little, but their hope there is none at all. A most wretched and deplorable condition! un∣less
they make a virtue of this desperate ne∣cessity, and lay hold on the onely soveraign remedy of bettering their estate, by sub∣mitting in time to the wholsome rules of heavenly and saving reason. Especially be∣cause the goodliest things of this present time, are such rags and fragments, that he that loseth the whole fraught, and true treasure of that one precious life which is to come, may be justly said to lose both. It remaines then, that we direct and fixe all the powers of our minds upon the hope of the life to come. Which hope (that you may morefully and clearly apprehend it) I shall manifest unto you, under a type or example taken from temporal things. If some man should offer unto another five peeces of silver this day, but promise him five hundred peeces of gold, if he would stay till the next morning, and put him to his choice, whither he would have the sil∣ver at present, or the gold upon the day following, is there any doubt to be made, but he would chuse the greater sum, though with a little delay? Goe you and doe the like: Compare the Crummes and perishing pittance in this short life, with the glori∣ous, and enduring rewards of the eternall: And when you have done▪ chuse not the least and the worst, when you may have
the greatest and the best. The short fruition of a little is not so beneficial, as the expecta∣tion of plenty. But seeing that all the fraile goods of this world are not onely seen of us, but also possessed by us: It is most ma∣nifest that hope cannot belong unto this world, in which we both see and enjoy those things we delight in: For Hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? Rom. 8. ver. 24. Therefore however hope may be abused, and misapplyed to temporal things, it is most certaine that it was given to man and ordained for the things that are eternal; otherwise it cannot be called hope, un∣lesse something bee hoped for, which as yet (or for the present life) is not had. There∣fore the substance of our hope in the world to come is more evident and manifest, then our hope of substance in the present. Consider those objects which are the clearest and most visible; when we would best discern them, we put them not into our eyes, because they are better seen and judged of at a distance. It is just so in the case of present things and the future: For the present (as if put into our eyes) are not rightly and undeceivably seen of us; but the future, because conveniently distant, are most clearly discerned.
Nor is this trust and Confidence wee have of our future happinesse built upon weak or uncertain Authors, but upon our Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST, that allmighty and faithfull witnesse, who hath promised unto the just, a Kingdome without end, and the ample rewards of a most blessed eternity. Who also by the in∣effable Sacrament of his humanity, being both God and Man, reconciled Man unto God, and by the mighty and hidden mystery of his passion, absolved the World from sinne. For which cause he was mani∣fested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed upon in the World, and received into glory. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him,Philip. Chap. 2. ver. 9, 10. and gi∣ven him a name which is a∣bove every name: that at the name of JESUS every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth. And that every tongue should confesse that the Lord JESUS is in glory, both God and King before all ages. Casting off then the vaine and absurd pre∣cepts of Philosophy, wherein you busie your selfe to no purpose, embrace at last the true and saving Knowledge of Christ.
You shall find even in that, imployment enough for your eloquence and wit, and will quickly discern how far these precepts of piety and truth surpasse the conceits and delirations of Philosophers. For in those rules which they give, what is there but adulterate virtue, and false wisedom? and what in ours, but perfect righteousnesse and sincere truth? Whereupon I shall Justly conclude, that they indeed usurpe the name of Philosophy, but the substance and life of it is with us. For what manne of rules to live by could they give, who were ignorant of the first Cause, and the Fountain of life? For not knowing God, and deviating in their first principles from the Author, and the Wel-spring of Justice; they necessarily erred in the rest: Hence it happened, that the end of all their studies was vanity and dissention. And if a∣ny amongst them chanced to hit upon some more sober and honest Tenets, these presently ministred matter of pride and Superstitiousnesse, so that their very Virtue was not free from vice. It is evident then, that these are they, whose Knowledge is Earthy, the disputers of this world, the blind guides, who never saw true justice, nor true wisedome. Can any one of that School of Aristippus
be a teacher of the truth, who in their Doctrine and Conversation differ not from swine and unclean beasts, seeing they place true happinesse in fleshly lusts? whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame. Can he be a Master of Sobriety and Virtue, in whose School the rio∣tous, the obscene, and the adulterer are Phi∣losophers? But leaving these blind leaders, I shall come againe to speak of those things which were the first motives of my writing to you. I advise you then, and I beseech you, to cast off all their Axioms, orgeneral Max∣ims collected out of their wild and irregu∣lar disputations, wherein I have knowne you much delighted; & to imploy those ex∣cellent abilities bestowed upon you in the study of holy Scripture, & the wholsom in∣structions of Christian Philosophers. There shall you be fed with various and delight∣full learning, with true and infallible wise∣dome. There (to incite you to the Faith) you shall hear the Church speaking to you, though not in these very words, yet to this purpose, He that believes not the word of God, understands it not. There you shall hear this frequent admonition; Feare God, because he is your Master, honour him be∣cause he is your Father. There it shall be
told you, that the most acceptable Sacri∣fice to God are justice and mercy. There you shall be taught, that, If you love your self, you must necessarily love your neigh∣bour; for you can never do your selfe a grea∣ter Courtesie, then by doing good to ano∣ther. There you shall be taught, that, there can be no worldly cause so great, as to make the death of a man legal or needfull. There you shall hear this precept against unlaw∣full desires. Resist lust as a most bitter ene∣my, that useth to glory in the disgrace of those bodies he overcommeth. There it will be told you of Covetousnesse, That it is better not to wish for those things you want, than to have all that you wish. There you shall hear, that he that is angry, when he is provoked, is never not angry, but when not provoked. There it will be told you of your Enemies, Love them that hate you, for all men love those that love them. There you shall hear, that he laies up his treasure safeliest, who gives it to the poor, for that cannot be lost which is lent to the Lord. There it will be told you, that the fruite of holy marriage is chastity. There you shall hear, that the troubles of this World happen as well to the just, as the un∣just. There it will be told you, that it is a more dangerous sicknesse to have the mind
infected with vices, then the body with dis∣eases. There to shew you the way of peace and gentlenesse you shall hear, that amongst impatient men, their likenesse of manners is the cause of their discord. There to keepe you from following the bad examples of others, it will be told you, That the wise man gains by the fool, as well as by the pru∣dent: the one showes him what to imitate, the other what to eschew. There also you shall hear all these following precepts. That the ignorance of many things is better then their Knowledge; and that therefore the goodnesse or mercy of God is as great in his hidden will, as in his revealed. That you should give God thanks as well for ad∣versity, as for prosperity; and confesse in prosperity, that you have not deserved it. That there is no such thing as Eare; and for this let the Heathens examine their own Lawes, which punish none but willfull and premeditating offenders. There to keep you stable in faith, it will be told you, That he that will be faithfull, must not be suspi∣tious; for we never suspect, but what wee slowly believe. There also you shall hear, that Christians when they give any attenti∣on to the noyse and inticements of their passions, fall headlong from Heaven unto Earth. It will be also told you there, that
seeing the wicked do sometimes receive good things in this world, and the just are afflicted by the unrighteous, those that be∣lieve not the final Judgement of God after this life, do (as far as it lies in them) make God unjust, and far be this from your thoughts. There it will be told you about your private affaires, that what you would have hidden from men, you should never do, what from God, ye should never think. There you shall here this rebuke of decei∣vers; It is lesser damage to be deceived, then to deceive. Lastly you shall hear this reproofe of self-conceit, or a fond opinion of our owne worth; flye vanity, and so much the more, the better thou art: all o∣ther vices increase by vitiousnesse, but va∣nity is oftentimes a bubble that swims up∣on the face of Virtue. These few rules, as a tast and invitation, I have (out of many more) inserted here for your use. But if you will now turn your Eyes to∣wards the sacred Oracles, and come your self to be a searcher of those Heavenly trea∣sures, I know not which will most ravish you, the Casket, or the Jewell, the Lan∣guage or the Matter. For the Booke of God, while it shines and glitters with glo∣rious irradiations within, doth after the manner of most pretious gems, drive the
beholders Eyes into a strong and restlesse admiration of its most rich and inscrutable brightnesse. But let not the weaknesse of your Eyes make you shun this Divine light, but warme your Soul at the beames of it, and learne to feede your inward man with this mystical and healthfull foode. I doubt not but (by the powerful working of our mercifull God upon your heart,) I shall shortly find you an unfeyned lover of this true Philosophie, and a resolute op∣poser of the false; renouncing also all worldly oblectations, and earnestly cove∣ting the true and eternall. For it is a point of great impiety and imprudence, seeing God wrought so many marvellous things for the Salvation of man, that he should do nothing for himself: and seeing that in all his wonderfull works he had a most speciall reguard of our good, we our selves should especially neglect it. Now the right way to care for our Soules, is to yeild our selves to the love and the service of God: For true happinesse is obtained by con∣temning the false felicities of this World, and by a wise abdication of all earthly d∣lights, that we may become the Chast and faithfull lovers of the Heavenly. Wherefore henceforth let all your words and actions
be done either to the glory of God, or for Gods sake. Get Innocence for your Com∣panion, and she is so faithfull, that she will be also your defendresse. It is a worthy en∣terprise to follow after Virtue, and to per∣form something while we live, for the ex∣ample and the good of others: nor is it to be doubted, but the mind, by a virtuous course of life, will quickly free it selfe from those intanglements and deviations it hath been formerly accustomed to. That great Phy∣sition to whose cure and care we offer our selves, will daily strengthen and perfect our recovery. And what estimation or value (when in this state) can you lay upon those glo∣rious remunerations that will be laid up for you against the day of recompence? You see that God, even in this life, hath merci∣fully distributed unto all (without any difference) his most pleasant and usefull light. The pious and the impious are both allowed the same Sunne, all the creatures obediently submit themselves to their ser∣vice: And the whole Earth with the full∣nesse thereof is the indifferent possession of the just and unjust. Seeing then that he hath given such excellent things unto the impious, how much more glorious are those things which he reserves for the pi∣ous?
he that is so great in his free gifts, how excellent will he be in his rewards? He that is so Royal in his daily bounty, and ordinary magnificence; how tran∣scendent will hee be in his remunerations and requitalls? Ineffable and beyond all conception are those things which God hath prepared for those that love him; And that they are so is most certain: For it is altogether incomprehensible, and passeth the understanding of his most chosen vessels to tell, how great his reward shall be unto the just, who hath given so much to the unthankfull and the unbelieving. Take up your Eyes from the Earth, and look about you, my most dear Valerian; spread forth your sailes, and hasten from this stormy Sea of Secular negotiations, in∣to the calme and secure harbour of Christi∣an Religion. This is the onely Haven into which we all drive from the raging Surges of this malitious World. This is our shel∣ter from the lowd and persecuting whirl∣winds of time: Here is our sure station and certain rest: Here a large and silent recesse, secluded from the World, opens and offers it selfe unto us. Here a pleasant, serene tran∣quillity shines upon us. Hither when you are come, your weather-beaten Vessell (after all your fruitlesse toiles) shall at last find rest,
and securely ride at the Anchor of the Cross. But it is time now that I should make an end. Let then (I beseech you,) the truth and the force of Heavenly Doctrine Epito∣mized here by me, be approved of and used by you to the glory of God and your own good. These are all my precepts at present: pardon the length, and acknowledge my love. Gloria tibi mitissime Jesu!
Primitive Holiness, Set forth in the LIFE of blessed PAULINUS, The most Reverend, and Learned BISHOP of NOLA: Collected out of his own Works, and other Primitive Authors by Henry Vaughan, Silurist. 2 Kings cap. 2. v.r. 12. My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsmen thereof. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1654.
TO THE READER. IF thou lovest Heaven, and the beauty of Immortality, here is a guide will lead thee into that house of light. The earth at pre∣sent is not worth the enjoying, it is corrupt, and poysoned with the curse. I exhort thee therefore to look after a better country, an inheritance that is undefiled and fadeth not away. If thou doest this, thou shalt have a portion given thee here, when all things shall be made new. In the mean time I commend unto thee the memorie of that re∣storer, and the reward he shall bring with him in the end of this world, which truely draws near, if it be not at the door. Doat not any more upon a withered, rotten Gourd, upon the seducements and falshood of a most odious, decayed Prostitute; but look up to Heaven, where wealth without want, delight without distst, and joy without sorrow (like undefiled and incor∣ruptible Virgins) sit cloathed with light,
and crowned with glory. Let me incite thee to this speculation in the language of Ferarius: Define tandem aliquando prono in terram vultu, vel praeter naturam brutum animal, vel ante diem silicernium videri. Coelum suspice, ad quod natus, ad quod e∣rectâ staturâ tuendum tenendumque factus es. Immortalia sydera caducis flosculis prae∣fer, aut eadem esse Coeli flores existima∣to nostratibus Amaranthis diuturniores. Farewel, and neglect not thy own happiness. H.V.
THE LIFE OF HOLY PAƲLINƲS, THE BISHOP of NOLA. BEn Sirach finishing his Cata∣logue of holy men (to seal up the summe, and to make his list compleat) brings in Simon the Sonne of Onias: And (after a short narration of his pious care in repairing and fortifying the Temple) hee descends to the particular excellencies, and sacred perfections of his person. Which to render the more fresh and sweet unto poste∣rity, he adornes with these bright and flow∣rie Encomiums. 1. He was as the Morning-star in the midst of a cloud, and as the Moon at the full.
2. As the Sunne shining upon the temple of the most high, and as the Rain-bow giving light in the bright clouds. 3. As the flower of Roses in the spring of the year, as Lilies by the rivers of waters, and as the branches of the Frankincense-tree in the time of sum∣mer. 4. As fire and Incense in the Censer, and as a vessel of beaten gold set with all manner of precious stones. 5. As a fair Olive-tree budding forth fruit, and as a Cypresse tree which groweth up to the clouds. 6. When he put on the robe of honour, and was cloathed with the perfection of glory, when he went up to the holy Al∣tar, he made the garment of holinesse ho∣nourable. Most great (indeed) and most glorious Assimilations, full of life, and full of fresh∣nesse! but in all this beauty of holinesse, in all these spices and flowers of the Spouse, there is nothing too much, nothing too great for our most great and holy Pauli∣nus. The Saints of God (though wandring in sheep-skins, and goat-skins, in caves, and in mountains) become eminently fa∣mous,
and leave behind them a more glo∣rious and enduring memory, then the most prosperous tyrants of this world; which like noysome exhalations, moving for a time in the Eye of the Sun, fall afterwards to the earth, where they rot and perish un∣der the chaines of darkness. The fame of holy men (like the Kingdome of God) is a seed that grows secretly; the dew that feeds these plants comes from him, that sees in secret, but rewards openly. They are those trees in the Poet, Which silently, and by none seen, Grow great and green. While they labour to conceal, and ob∣scure themselves, they shine the more. And this (saith Athanasius in the life of Anto∣nie the great) is the goodnesse of God, who useth to glorifie his servants, though un∣willing, that by their examples he may con∣demn the world, and teach men, that holi∣nesse is not above the reach of humane na∣ture. Apposite to my present purpose is all this prolusion, both because this blessed Bishop (whose life I here adventure to pub∣lish) was a person of miraculous perfections and holynesse, and because withall he did most diligently endeavour to vilifie his own excellent abilities, and to make himselfe of
no account. But Pearls, though set in lead, will not lose their brightnesse; and a virtu∣ous life shines most in an obscure lively∣hood. In the explication of his life I shall fol∣low first the method of Nature, afterwards of Grace: I shall begin with his Birth, E∣ducation, and Maturitie; and end with his Conversion, Improvements, and Perfe∣ction. To make my entrance then into the work, I finde that he was born in the City of Burdeaux in Gascoyne, in the year of our Lord three hundred and fifty three, Con∣stantius the Arian reigning in the East, and Constans in the West, and He subscribed to the damnable here∣sie of Arius, as both Hierome and A∣thanasius testifie a∣gainst him. Liberius being Bishop of Rome: In a Golden Age, when Religion and Learning kissed each o∣ther, and equally flourish∣ed. So that he had the happines to shine in an age that loved light, and to multiply his own by the light of o∣thers. It was the fashion then of the Ro∣man Senatours to build them sumptuous houses in their Country-livings, that they might have the pleasure and conveniency of retiring thither from the tumult and noyse of that great City, which sometimes was, and would be yet the head of the World.
Upon such an occasion (without doubt) was Burdeaux honoured with the birth of Paulinus, his Fathers estate lying not far off, about the town of Embrau, upon the River Garumna, which rising out of the Pyrene hils washeth that part of Guienne with a pleasant stream, and then runs into the Aquitane sea. By this happy accident came France to lay claime to Paulinus, which she makes no small boast of at this day. But his Country indeed (if we follow his descent, which is the right way to find it) is Italie, and Rome it self; his Ancestors were all Patricians, and honour'd (by a long succession) with the Consular purple. His Patrimonies were large, and more be∣comming a Prince then a private man; for besides those possessions in the City of Bur∣deaux, and by the River Garumna, he had other most ample Inheritances in Italy about Narbone and Nola, and in Rome it self. And for this we have a pregnant te∣stimony out of Ausonius, who labour∣ing to disswade him from Evangelical po∣verty, and that obscure course of life (as he is pleased to term it) layes before him (as the most moving arguments) the desola∣tion of his ancient house, with the ruin and sequestration (as it were) of his large pos∣sessions; his words are these.
Ne raptam sparsam{que} domum, &c. Let me not weep to see thy ravish'd house All sad & silent, without Lord or Spouse, And all those vast dominions once thine owne, Torn 'twixt a hundred slaves to me un∣known. But what account he made of these earth∣ly possessions, will appeare best by his own words in his fifth Epistle to Severus: Ergo ihil in hunc mundum inferentibus substan∣tiam rerum temporalium quasi tonfile vlls appit, &c. God (saith he) layes these temporal accommodations upon us that come naked into this world, as a fleece of wooll which is to be sheared off. He puts it not as a load to hinder us, whom it behoves to be born light and active, but as a certain matter which rightly used may be beneficial. And when he bestow∣eth any thing upon us, that is either dear or pleasant to us, he gives it for this end, that by parting with it, it may be a te∣stimonial, or token of our love and devo∣tion towards God, seeing we neglect the fruition of our best present things for his sake, who will amply reward us in the fu∣ture.
He had conferred upon him all the or∣naments of humane life which man could be blest with. He was nobly born, rich, and beautifull, of constitution slender and delicate, but every way fitted for virtuous imployment; of an excellent wit, a happy memory, and, which sweeten'd all these gracious concessions, of a most mild and modest disposition. To bring these seeds to perfection, his Father (having a care of him equall to his degree) caused him to be brought up under the regiment of Decius magnus Ausonius, a famous Poet and Ora∣tour, who at that time kept a School of Grammar and Rhetorick in the City of Burdeaux. The Ingenuity and sweetnesse of Paulinus so overcame and ravished Au∣sonius, that he used all possible skill and di∣ligence, to adorne and perfect those natural abilities which he so much loved and ad∣mired in this hopefull plant. The effect was, that he exceeded his Master. Ausonius upon this being called to the Court by the old Emperor Valentinian; Paulinus gave himselfe to the study of the Civill Law, and the acute and learned pleadings of that age, wherein he was so excellent, that the Emperor taking notice of his Abilities, took order for his Election into the Senate, and this a very long time before his Tutor
attained to that honour. This praecedence of eloquence and honour Cedimus ingenio quantum praecedi∣mus aeyo, Assurgit Musae nostra Ca∣maena tuae. Sic & fastorum titulo pri∣or, & tua Romae Praecessit nostrum sella curulis ebur. Ausonius himself confesseth; but ha∣ving a greater witnesse, I shall leave his testimony to the Margin, to make room for the other. Take then (if it please you) the Judgement of that glorious and Eloquent Doctour Saint Hierome, for thus he writes in his thirteenth Epist. to Paulinus, O si mi∣hi liceret istiusmodi ingenium non per Ao∣nios montes & Heliconis vertices, ut poe∣tae canunt, sed per Sion, &c. O that I were able (saith he) to extoll and publish your ingenuity and holy learning, not upon the Aonian hills, or the tops of Helicon (as the Poets sing) but upon the Mountaines of Sion and Sinai; that I might preach there what I have learnt from you, and deliver that sacred mysteries of Scripture through your hands; I might then have something to speak, which learned Greece could never boast of. And in another place, A most pregnant wit you have, and an infinite treasure of words, which easily and aply flow from you, and both the easinesse and the aptness are judiciously mixt.
To these Divine favours already con∣ferred upon him, God added another great blessing, the Crown of his youth, and the Comfort of his age; I meane Therasia, a Noble Roman Virgin, whom he tooke to wife in the midst of his honours, and who afterwards (of her owne free will) most joyfully parted with them all, and with her own pleasant possessions to follow Christ in the regeneration. At this height of honours, & growing re∣pute, he was employ'd (upon some concern∣ments of the Empire) into Italy, France, and Spain; Where he was detained (together with his dear consort) for the space of almost fifteen years; during which time, he secret∣ly laboured to make himself acquainted with the glorious Fathers of that age, and (the Spirit of God now beginning to breath upon him) hee was strongly moved to embrace the Christian Faith. In these travells of his, it was his fortune to arrive at Millaine, where Saint Augustine, and Alypius, the Bishop of Tagasta in Africk, did the Sojourne; here by accident he was known of Alpyius, though unknown to him; as we see it often fall out, that great persons are known of many, which to them are unknown. Much about this time (which was the
eight and thirtieth year of his age,) he re∣tired privately with his wife into the City of Burdeaux. And the hour be∣ing now come, that the singing of birds should be heard, and the lips which were asleep should speak: Hee was there by the hands of holy Delphinus (who then sate Bishop in the Sea of Burdeaux,) publickly baptized, from which time forward he re∣nounced all his Secular acquaintance, asso∣ciating himself to the most strict and pious livers in that age, especially to Saint Am∣brose the Bishop of Millan, and Saint Mar∣tin the Bishop of Tours. That he was bap∣tized about the eight and thirtieth yeare of his age, is clear by his owne words in his first Epistle to Saint Augustine, Nolo in me corporalis rtus, magis quam spiritalis exor∣tus aetatem consideres, &c. I would not (saith he) that you consider my tempo∣rall age, so much as my spiritual; my age in the flesh is the same with that Cripple, who was healed in the beautifull gate by the power of Christ working by his Apostles; but my age in the regeneration is the same with the blessed Infants, who by the wounds in∣tended for Christ himself, became the first fruits unto Christ, and by the losse of their innocent blood, did foreshew
the slaughter of the Lamb, and the passi∣on of our Lord. Now for the first, Saint Luke tells us, That the Cripple upon whom this miracle of healing was shown, was a∣bove forty years of age (Acts Chap. 4. ver. 22.) and for the Infants, the Evangelists words are, that Herod sent forth his messengers, and slew all the Male Children that were in Bethlem, and the Coasts there∣of, from two years old and under. So that considering all the Circumstances which offer themselves for the clearing of this point, it will evidently appear, that he was baptized (as I have said before) in the eight and thirtieth year of his age. The onely Instrument which God was pleas'd to ordain, and imploy upon the Earth for his Conversion, was his dear and Virtuous Wife Therasia; Which makes me con∣jecture, that she was borne of Christian pa∣rents, and had received the faith from her infancie. This Ausonius his old Tutor, (who was scarce a good Chrihian,) for∣gat not to upraid him with in most injuri∣ous termes, calling her Tanaquil, and the Imperatrix of her Husband: To which passionate passages (though sadly resented) Paulinus rplyed with all the humanity and sweetnesse which language could ex∣prsse. Thus Ausonius barks at him.
Undè istam meruit non foelix Charta repulsam? Hostis ab hoste tamen, &c. —how could that paper sent, That luckless paper, merit thy contempt? Ev'n foe to fo (though furiously) replies; And the defied, his Enemy defies: Amidst the swords and wounds ther's a Salute. Rocks answer man, and though hard, are not mute. Nature made nothing dumb, nothing unkind: The trees and leaves speak trembling to the wind. If thou doest feare discoveries, and the blot Of my love, Tanaquil shal know it not. To this Poetical fury, Paulinus reposeth with that Native mildnesse, which he was wholly composed of: Continuata meae durare silentia linguae, Te nunquam tacito memoras; placit am{que} latebris Desidiam exprobras; neglectae{que} insuper addis
Crimen amicitiae; formidatam{que} Juga∣lem Objicis, & durum iacis in mea viscera versum, &c. Obdurate still, and tongue-tyed you accuse (Though yours is ever vocall) my dull muse; You blame my Lazie, lurking life, and adde I scorne your love, a Calumny most sad; Then tell me, that I fear my wife, and dart Harsh, cutting words against my dearest heart. Leave, learned Father, leave this bit∣ter Course, My studies are not turn'd unto the worse; I am not mad, nor idle; nor deny Your great deserts, and my debt, nor have I A wife like Tanaquil as wildly you Object, but a Lucretia, chast and true. To avoid these clamours of Ausonius, and the dangerous sollicitations of his grat kindred and friends, he left Burdeaux and Nola, and retyred into the Mountan∣ous
and solitary parts of Spaine, about Barcine and Bilbilis upon the River Sale. Two journeyes he made into Spain, this last, and his first (before his baptism) upon the Emperours affairs; he Sojourned then in new Castie, in the City of Complutum now called Alcala de henares, where his wife Therasia was delivered of her onely Son Celsus, who died upon the eighth day af∣ter his birth. Holy Paulinus in his Pane∣gyrick upon the death of Celsus the Son of Pneumatius, by his Wife Fidlis, takes occasion to mention the early death of this blessed infant, Hoc pignus commune superno in lumine Celsu Credite vivorum lacte favis{que} frui. Aut cum Bethlaeis infantibus in Para∣diso (Quos malus Herodes perculit invi∣diâ,) Inter odoratum ludit nemus, &c. This pledge of your joint love, to Hea∣ven now fled, With honey-combs and milk of life is fed. Or with the Bethlem-Babes (whom Herods rage Kill'd in their tender, happy, holy age)
Doth walk the groves of Paradise, and make Garlands, which those young Martyrs from him take. With these his Eyes on the mild lamb are fixt, A Virgin-Child with Virgin-infants mixt. Such is my Celsus too, who soon as given, Was taken back (on the eighth day) to Heaven, To whom at Alcala I sadly gave Amongst the Martyrs Tombes a little grave. Hee now with yours (gone both the blessed way,) Amongst the trees of life doth smile and play; And this one drop of our mixt blood may be A light for my Therasia, and for me. These distant and obscure retirements he made choice of, because he would not be known of any, nor hindred in his cours; Which at Nola, and the adjacent parts of Rome (where his Secular honours an I antient descent made all the people obse∣quious to him) could not possibly be
effected Besides very few in those Western parts (especially of the Nobility) had at that time received the Christian Faith; for they look'd upon it as a most degenerate, unmanly profession: such a good opinion had those rough times of peace and humi∣lity. This made him lesse looked after by the Inhabitants of those parts; and his own friends not knowing what became of him, began to give him over, and not onely to withdraw from him in their care, but in their affections also, giving out that he was mad, and besides himself. But all this mo∣ved him not: he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, he counted all things dung that he might gaine his Saviour, and hee fainted not, but endured, as seeing him that is invisible. The first step to Christianity (saith Saint Hierome) is to contemne the censures of men.St. Hierome Ep. 26. This foundation he laid, and upon this he built; he had given himselfe wholly to Christ, and rejected the world; he tooke part with that man of sorrowes, and suffered the scoffs and reproaches of these men of mirth. The people are the many waters, he turn'd their froth and some into pearls, and wearied all weathers with an unimpaired Superstitie. Hee was sounded upon that Rock, which is not
worne with time, but wears all that op∣pose it. Some dispositions love to stand in raine, and affect wind and showers beyond Musick. Paulinus sure was of this temper; he preferred the indignation and hatred of the multitude to their love, he would not buy their friendship with the losse of Heaven, nor call those Saints and propaga∣tors, who were Devills and destroyers. What courage he had in such tempests, may be seen in every line almost of his workes; I shal insert one or two out of his 6th Epistle to Severus: Utinam, frater mi, digni habe∣amur qui maledicamur, & notemur, & conteramur, atque etiam interficiamur in nomine Jesu Christi, dum non ipse occida∣tur Christus in nobis. &c. I would (saith he) my dear brother, that we might be counted worthy to suffer reproach, to be branded and troden upon; Yea, and to be killed for the name of Christ, so that Christ be not killed in us. Then at last should we tread upon the Adder, and the Dragon, and bruise the head of the old Serpent. But (alas!) wee as yet relish this World, and do but pretend to love Christ; we love indeed to be commended and cherished for professing his name, but wee love not to be troubled and af∣flicted for his sake. And in his first Epistle
to Aper; O blessed displeasures (saith he) to displease men by pleasing Christ! Let us take heed of the love of such, who will be pleased without Christ. It is an observation of the Readers of Saint Cypri∣an, quod in ejus scriptis singula propè ver∣b Martyrium spirant, that through all his writings, almost every word doth breath Martyrdome. His expressions are all Spirit and Passion, as if he had writ them with his blood, and conveyed the anguish of his sufferings into his writings. I dare not say so much of Paulinus, nor of any other Father of the Church; but I fear not to say that Paulinus both durst, and (had he beene called to it) would have laid downe his life for the love of Christ. Four yeares hee spent in these remote parts of Spain, during which time, he did lead a most solitary and austere life, labou∣ring by all meanes to conceale and vilifie himself. But a City that is built upon a hill cannot be hidden; his holinesse and humi∣lity had so awaked the Common people dwelling about the place of his abode, that they would not rest again till they had him for their Minister. This most honourable and sacred charge he would by no meanes adventure to undergo, judging himselfe a most unworthy vile sinner, not fit to deale
in holy Scripture, much lesse to handle and administer the mystical Elements of life. But God, who had ordained him for it, would not suffer this. For the people (not without violence and some rudeness,) carried him away to Barcinoe, where ho∣ly Lampius, then Bishop of that Sea, did upon Christmasse day by the laying on of his hands, consecrate him a faithfull stew∣ard and learned dispenser of the Mysteries of God. This passage we have fully related in his sixth Epistle to Severus, Nos modo in Barcinonensi (ut ante Scripsram) civi∣tate consistimus, &c. I live now (saith he) as I formerly writ to you in the Ci∣ty of Barcinoe, where (since the last let∣ters received from you) I was by the vio∣lence of the people (God, I believe, ha∣ving foreordained it) compell'd to enter into holy Orders upon that day in which our Lord was born. I confesse it was done against my will, not for any dislike that I have to the place (for Christ is my witnesse, that my highest desire was to begin my imployment in his house with the office and honour of a door-keep∣er) but having designed my selfe (as you know) For Nola. elsewhere, I was much terrified with this sudden and unexpected pleasure of the
Divine will: However I refused it not, but submitted with all humility, and have put my necke into the Yoke of Christ, though altogether unworthy and unable. I see now that I have medled with things that are too wonderful for me; I am made a Steward of the Secrets of the Al∣mighty, and honourd with the dispensa∣tion of Heavenly things, and being call∣ed nearer to my Master, I am exercised about the Body, about the Spirit, and the glory of Jesus Christ. The narrow∣nesse of my understanding cannot com∣prehend the signification of this high and sacred dignity, and I tremble every minute (when I consider my own infir∣mities) to thinke of the great burthen that is laid upon me. But he that gives wisedome to his little ones, and hath per∣fected praise out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, is able to finish what he begun in me, that by his mighty work∣ing, I may be made worthy, who was most unworthy to be called. The Priest∣hood is an Office belonging to the King∣dome of Heaven. It is an honour that is ranged upon holy ground, and by it selfe. Worldly dignities, which are but humane inventions, are, and may be acquired (with lesse offence) by humane meanes,
as bribery, ambition, and policie. But to take hold of this white robe with such dirty hands, is nothing lesse then to spit in the face of Christ, and to dishonour his Ordinance. He that doth it, and he that permits it to be done, agree like Herod and Pilate, to dispise and crucifie him. They that Countenance and ratifie such disor∣ders, take care to provide so many Judasses to betray Christ, and then vote the treason to be lawfull. Every man can speak, but every man cannot preach: Tongues and the gift of tongues are not the same things: The wisdome of God hath depth and richs, and things hard to be spoken, as well as milk, and the first principles of his Ora∣cles. Wee have amongst us many builders with hay and stubble, but let them, and those that hired them, take heed how they build; The tryal will be by fire, and by a consuming fire. The hidden things of dis∣honest, the walking in Craftinesse, and the handling deceitfully of the word of God they are well versed in; b true sanctifie, and the Sirit of God (which Saint Paul thought he had) I am very sure they have not. A modest reader would now thinke that Paulinus had removed himselfe farre enough from the elaborate temptations,
and clamorous pursuits of Ausonius; But even in this will he be deceived. For at the fourth years end, did the Incantations of this busie and obstinate Charmer find him out. God (no doubt) providing for the security of his servant all that while, by delaying them in severall regions, or else by concealing the abode of his beloved vota∣ry, from this pursuer of Soules. For with all the artifice and strength of wit, did he set upon him in this last letter, which the divine providence suffered not to come in∣to his hand, till he had set both his hands to the plough, and seald his conformation with that indelible Character. And now having set a hedge about his beloved, he suffered this Fowle of the Evening to fly o∣ver, which chattered to him in these me∣lodious numbers. Vertisti, Pauline, tus dulcissim mores? &c. Sweet Paulinus, is thy nature turn'd? Have I so long in vaine thy absence mourn'd? Wilt thou, my glory, and great Romes de∣light, The Senates prop, their oracle, and light, In Bilbilis and Calagurris dwel, Changing thy Ivorie-chair for a dark Cell?
Wilt bury there thy Purple, and contemn All the great honours of thy noble stem? To this Roman Magick, and most per∣nicious Elegancy, Paulinus replyed with a certain sacred and serene simplicity, which proved so piercing, and powerful, that he was never after troubled with the Poetry of Ausonius. —Revoe andum me tibi credam, Cum steriles fundas non ad divina per∣catus? Castatidis supplex averso numine mu∣sis, &c. Shall I beleeve you can make me return, Who pour your fruitless prayers when you mourn, Not to your Maker? Who can hear you cry: But to the fabled Nymphs of Castalie? You never shall by such false Gods bring me Either to Rome, or to your company. As for those former things you once did know, And which you still call mine, I freely now
Confesse, I am not he, whom you knew then; I have dyed since, and have been borne agen. Nor dare I think my sage instructor can Believe it errour, for redeemed man To serve his great redeemer. I grieve not, But glory so to erre. Let the wise knot Of worldlings call me fool; I slight their noise, And heare my God approving of my choice. Man is but glass, a building of no trust, A moving shade, and, without Christ, meer dust: His choice in life concerns the Chooser much: For when he dyes, his good or ill (just such As here it was) goes with him hence, and staies Still by him, his strict Judge in the last dayes. These serious thoughts take up my soul, and I While yet 'tis day-light, fix my busie eye Upon his sacred Rules, lifes precious sum, Who in the twilight of the world shall come
To judge the lofty looks, and shew man∣kind The diff'rence 'twixt the ill and well inclin'd. This second coming of the worlds great King Makes my heart tremble, and doth time∣ly bring A saving care into my watchfull soul, Lest in that day all vitiated and foul I should be found: That day, times ut∣most line, When all shall perish, but what is divine. When the great Trumpets mighty blast shall shake The earths foundations, till the hard Rocks quake, And melt like piles of snow, when light∣nings move Like hail, and the white thrones are set above. That day, when sent in glory by the Father, The Prince of life his blest Elect shall gather; Millions of Angels round about him fly∣ing, While all the kindreds of the earth are crying,
And he enthron'd upon the clouds shall give His last just sentence, who must die, who live. This is the fear this is the saving care, That makes me leave false honours, and that share Which fell to mee of this fraile world; lest by A frequent use of present pleasures I Should quite forget the future, and let in Foul Atheism, or some presumptuous sin. Now by their loss I have secur'd my life, And bought my peace ev'n with the cause of strife. I live to him, who gave me life & breath, And without feare expect the houre of death. If you like this, bid joy to my rich state, If not, leave me to Christ at any rate. Being now ordained a Minister of holy things, and a feeder of te flock of Christ, that he might be enabled to render a joy∣full account at the appearance of the great Shepheard, he resolved with all convenient expedition to sell and give away all his large and Princely Possessions in Italy and France; which hithert he had not disposed of; for he looked upon his great Patrimo∣nies as matters of distraction and backsli∣ding,
the thoughts and solicitousnesse a∣bout such vast revenues disturbing his pious affections, and necessarily intruding into his most holy exercitations. Upon this rare re∣solution he returnes with his faithfull Con∣sort into France, leaving Barcinoe and holy Lampius in much sorrow for his departure. For though hee had entred there into the Ministery, yet was he no member of that Diocesse. And here (saith Uranius, who was his Presbyter, and wrote a brief narra∣tion of his life) did he open his Treasuries to the poor and the stranger. He did not on∣ly refresh his neighbours, but sent messen∣gers into other remote parts to summon the naked, and the hungry to this great Feast, where they were both fed and cloathed with his own hands. He eased the oppres∣sed, freed the captives, payd the debts of whole families, and redeemed divers per∣sons that were become bondslaves to their creditors. Briefly, he sold all that he had, and distributed the money amongst the poor, not reserving one penny either for himself, or his dear Therasia. Saint Am∣brose in his thirtieth Epistle to Sabinus confirmeth this relation: Paulinum splen∣dore generis in partibus Aquitaniae nulli secunum, venditis facultatibus tam uis quametiam conjugalibus; &c. Paulinus
(saith he) the most eminent for his Nobi∣lity in all the parts of Aquitane, having sold away all his patrimonies, together with the goods of his wife, did out of pure love to Jesus Christ divide all that vast Summe of Money amongst the poor; and he himself from a rich Snator is be∣come a most poor man, having cast off that heavy secular burthen, and forsaken his own house, his country, and his kin∣dred, that he might with more earnest∣nesse follow Christ. His Wife also, as nobly descended, and as zealous for the Faith as himself, consnted to all his de∣sires, and having given away all her own large possessions, lives with her husband in a little thatch'd cottage, rich in no∣thing but the hidden treasures of Religi∣on and holinesse. Saint Augustine also in his first book de Civitate Dei, and the tenth Chapter, celebrates him with the like testimony: Our Paulinus (saith hee) from a man most splendidly rich, became most poor most willingly, and most richly holy. He laboured not to adde field unto field, nor to inclose himself in Cdar and Ivory, and the drossie darke gold of this world, but to enter through the gates into the precious light of that Ci∣ty, which is of pure gold like unto cleare
glasse. He left some few things in this world, to enjoy all in the world to come. A great performance certainly, and a most fair ap∣proach towards the Kingdom of heaven. He that fights with dust, comes off well, if it blinds him not. To slight words, and the names of temptations, is easie, but to deale so with the matter, and substance of them, is a task. Conscience hath Musick, and light, as well as discord and darknesse: And the triumphs of it are as familiar after good works, as the Checks of it after bad. It is no heresie in devotion to be sensible of our smallest Victories over the World. But how far he was from thinking this a Victo∣ry, may be easily gathered out of his own words in his second Epistle to Severus; Facile nobis bona, &c. The goods (saith he) I carried about me, by the slipping of my skirt out of my hand, fell easily from me: And those things which I brought not into this World, and could not carry out of it, being only lent me for a time, I restored again. I pulled them not as the skin off my back, but laid them by, as a garment I had some∣times worne. But now comes the diffi∣culty upon me, when those things which are truly mine, as my heart, my Soul, and my works must be presented
and given a living Sacrifice unto God. The abdication of this World, and the giving of our temporall goods amongst the poore, is not the running of the race, but a preparing to run; it is not the end, but the beginning, and first step of our Journey. Hee that striveth for masteries, shall not be crowned, except he first strive lawfully; And he that is to swimme o∣ver a River, cannot do it by putting off his cloathes onely, he must put his body also into the stream, and with the moti∣on of his armes, his hands and feete, passe through the violence of the Brook, and then rest upon the further side of it. And in his 12th Epistle, he cries out, O miserable and vaine men! Wee believe that wee bestow something upon the poor: wee trade and lend, and would be counted liberall, when we are most cove∣tous. The most unconscionable userers up∣on Earth are not so greedy as we are, nor their interest and exactions so un∣reasonable as ours. We purchase Hea∣ven with Earth, happinesse with misery, and immortality with rust and rotten∣nesse. Such another Divine rapture is that in his Poems.
— Et res magna videtur, Merc ari propriam de re pereunt salu∣tem? Perpetuis mutare caduca? &c. — And is the bargain thought too dear, To give for Heaven our fraile subsistence here? To change our mortall with immortall homes, And purchase the bright Stars with darksome stones? Behold! my God (a rate great as his breath!) On the sad crosse bought me with bit∣ter death, Did put on flesh, and suffe'rd for our good, For ours, (vile slaves!) the losse of his dear blood. Wee see by these Manifesto's what ac∣count he made of this great deed; so great, that none now adaies thinke of doing it. Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, is a commandement, as well as, take up the Crosse and follow me. This last cannot be done, but by doing the first. Well sell oftentimes, but seldome give:
and happily that is the reason we sell so of∣ten. He that keeps all to himselfe, takes not the right way to thrive. The Corn that lies in the Granarie will bring no harvest. It is most commonly the foode of vermine, and some creatures of the night and darknesse. Charity is a relique of Paradise, and pitty is a strong argument that we are all descen∣ded from one man: He that carries this rare Jewell about him, will every where meete with some kindred. He is quickly acquain∣ted with distressed persons, and their first sight warmes his blood. I could believe, that the word stranger is a notion received from the posterity of Cain, who killed A∣bel. The Hebrewes in their own tribes, called those of the farthest degree, brothers; and sure they erred lesse from the law of pure Nature, then the rest of the Nations, which were left to their owne lusts. The afflictions of man are more moving then of any other Creature; for he onely is a stranger here, where all things else are at home. But the losing of his innocency, and his device of Tyranny have made him un∣pittied, and forfeited a prerogative, that would have prevailed more by submission, then all his posterity shall do by oppositi∣on. Not to give to one that lacks, is a kind of murther: Want and famine are destroy∣ers
as well as the sword, and rage very fre∣quently in private, when they are not thought of in the Publick. The blessed JE∣SUS who came into the World to recti∣fie Nature, and to take away the inveterate corruptions of man, was not more in any of his precepts, then in that which bids us Love one another. This is the cement not onely of this World, but of that other which is to come. Blessed are the mercifull; and, give to him that asketh thee, proceeded from the same lips of truth. And in his de∣scription of the last judgement, he grounds the sentence of condemnation pronounced against the wicked upon no other fact, but because they did not cloath the naked, feed the hungry, and take in the stranger. Love covers a multitude of sins, and God loves the chearfull giver. But this is not our whole duty: though we give our bodies to be burnt, and give all our goods unto the poor, yet without holinesse we shall never see the face of God. Darknesse cannot stand in the presence of light, and flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdome of God. The great difficulty then (as our holy Bishop here saith) is to become a living sacrifice; and truly the next way to it, is by an E∣vangelical disposing of these outward in∣cumbrances; this will open and prepare
the way before us, though it takes nothing from the length of it. The Hawke proines and rouseth before she flyes, but that brings her not to the mark: Preparations, and the distant flourishes of Array will not get the field, but action, and the pursuance of it. His Estate in France being thus disposed of, he retyred into Italy; where having done the like to his Patrimonies there, hee came to Millaine, and was honourably re∣ceived by holy Ambrose, then Bishop of that Sea. But these gay feathers of the World, being thus blown off him, by the breath of that Spirit which makes the dry tree to become green, and the spices of the Garden to flow out, all his kindred and for∣mer acquaintance became his deadly Ene∣mies. Flyes of estate follow Fortune, and the Sun-shine; friendship is a thing much talked off, but seldome found; I never knew above two that loved without selfe-ends. That which passeth for love in this age, is the meere counter to it; It is policie in the cloathes of love, or the hands of Esau with the tongue of Jacob. These smooth Cheats the World abounds with: There is Clay e∣nough for the potter, but little dust where∣of commeth Gold. The best direction is Re∣ligion; find a true Christian, and thou hast
found a true friend. He that fears not God, will not feare to do thee a mischiefe. From Millaine he came to Rome, where he was honourably entertained by all, but his own kindred, and Siricius the great Bishop. It was the ill Fortune of this zea∣lous Pope, to be offended not onely with Paulinus, but with that glorious Father Saint Hierome. It was a perillous disso∣lutenesse of some Bishops in that Century, to admit of Lay-men, and unseason'd per∣sons into the Ministry. This rash and impi∣ous practice Siricius had, by severall strict Sanctions or decrees, condemned and for∣bidden; and it is probable that the reason of his strange carriage towards Paulinus and Hierome was, because he would not seem to connive at any persons that were suddenly ordained, though never so deser∣ving, lest he should seeme to offend against his own edicts. It is a sad truth that this pernicious rashnesse of Bishops (fighting ex diametro with the Apostolical cauti∣ons) hath oftentimes brought boars into the Vineyard, and Wolves into the sheep∣fold; which complying afterwards with all manner of Interests, have torne out the bowels of their Mother. Wee need no ex∣amples: Wee have lived to see all this our selves. Ignorance and obstinacie make He∣reticks:
And ambition makes Schisma∣ticks; when they are once at this passe, they are on the way toward Atheisme. I do not say that Ecclesiastical polty is an invio∣lable or sure sense against Church-rents; be∣cause there is a necessity that offences must come, though wo to them by whom; but rules of prevention are given: and there∣fore they should not be slighted. The Bride-groom adviseth his spouse to take these foxes while they are litle. In a pleasant field halfe a mile distant from Nola lies the Sepulcher of the blessed Martyr Felix. To this place (which from his youth hee was ever devoted to,) did Paulinus now retire. It was the custom of ho∣ly men in that age no onely to live near the Tombs of the Martyrs, but to provide also for their buriall in those places; because they were sure, that in the Resurrection, and the terrours of the day of Judgement God would descend upon those places in the soft voyce, that is to say in his love and mercies. Eusebius is his fourth Book, and the sixth Chapter of the life of Constantine tells us, how that great Emperour gave strict order for his buriall amongst the Tombes of the Apostles, and then adds, . Saint Chrisostome in
in that homilie which hee writ to prove that Christ is God, gives the same relation, , &c. The Em∣perors of Constantinople (saith he) esteeme it for a great honour, if they be buried not within the shrines of the Apostles, but at the Gates of their Temple, that they may be the door-keepers of those poor fishers. So Marcellina, descended from the consular Nobility of Rome, refused to be buried a∣mongst her Ancestors, that she might sleepe at Millaine with her great Brother Saint Ambrose, where shee lies under this Epitaph. Marcellina, tuos cum vita resolveret artus; Sprevisti patriis, &c. Life, Marcellina, leaving thy faire frame, Thou didst contemne those Tombes of costly fame, Built by thy Roman Ancestours, and lyest At Millaine, where great Ambrose sleeps in Christ. Hope, the deads life, and faith, wich never faints, Made thee rest here, that thou may'st rise with Saints.
To this place therefore near Nola in Campania (a Country lying within the Realm of Naples, and called now by the Inhabitants Terra di Lavoro,) as to a cer∣tain Harbour and recesse from the cla∣mours of their friends, and the tmptations of the World, did Paulinus and Therasia convey themselves. His af∣fection to this holy Paulininus calls him a Martyr, quia multa pro Christo passus, ersi non occi∣us. Mar∣tyr was very great: for fre∣quenting Nola, when he was yet a youth, he would oftentimes steale privately to visit his Sepulcher: and he loved the possessions which his Father had left him in those parts above any other, because that under pretence of looking to his estate there, he had the convenience of resorting to the Tombe of Felix; where he took in his first love, and in the seaven and twenti∣eh year of his age, made a private vow to become a Servant o Jesus Christ. This Fe∣lix was by a descent a Syrian, though born in Nola, where his Father (trafficking from the East into Italie, had purchased a very fair estate, which he divided after∣ward betwixt him and his Brother Hermi∣as; but Felix following Christ, gave all to his brother. The frequent miracles mani∣fested at his Tombe, made the place
famous, and resorted to from most parts of the world. Saint Augustine, upon a Controversie betwixt his Presbyter Boni∣face, and another fellow that accused him, when the truth of either side could not be certainly known, sent them both from Hippo to Nola, to have the matter decided upon Oat, before the Tombe of Felix; and in his 137th Epistle, hee sets down the reason, why he sent them so farre. His words are these: Multis notissima est sanctitas lo ci, ubi Felicis Nolensis corpus conditum est, quò volui ut peragrent, quia inde nobis facilius fideliusque scribi potest, quicquid in eorum aliquo divinitus fuerit propalatum. The holinesse (saith he) of that place where the body of Felix of Nola lies interred, is famously knowne to many; I have therefore sent them thi∣ther, because that from thence, I shall be more easily and truly informed about any thing that shall be miraculously dis∣covered concerning either of them. Paulinus had not lived very long in this place, but it pleas'd God to visit him with a very sharpe and tedious sicknesse. Hee had now (upon Earth) no Comforter but The∣rasia; His Estate was gone, and his con∣tempt of that made the World contemne him. In this solitude and poverty, he that
tries the reines and the heart, begins to take notice of this his new servant, and the first favour he conferred upon him was a disease. Good Angels doe not appeare without the Ecstasie and passion of the Seere: without af∣flictions and trialls God will not be fami∣liar with us. Fruit-trees if, they be not pru∣ned, will first leave to beare, and after∣wards they will dye. Nature, without she be drest by the hand that made her, will finally perish. He that is not favour'd with visitations, is (in Saint Pauls phrase) a bastard, and no Son of the Superiour Jeru∣salem. Paulinus had put from him all oc∣casions of worldly sorrowes, but he want∣ed matter for Heavenly Joyes. Without this disease, hee had not known so soone, how acceptable his first Services were unto his Master. This sicknesse was a pure strata∣gem of love, God visited him with it for this very purpose, that he himselfe might be his Cordial. Man and the Eagle see best in the day∣time, they see by the light of this World: but the Paulinus will have the word which is commonly used in the Latin, to be Nicticora, from and , which signifies the apple or can∣dle of the eye, and not from . And this he saith was told him by a holy man, that had lived a long time in the deserts of Egypt, where he observed the na∣ture of this bird of night, and the Pelican. night-Raven
is a bird of Mysterie, and sees in the darke by a light of her own. Paulinus hought now (like the servant of Eli∣sha) that hee had not a friend in all the World to be of his side; but God removes the mist from his Eyes, and shewed him a glorious Army of Saints and Confessours, who during the time of his sicknesse, did so throng and fill up his Cottage, and the fields about it, that neither his Palace in Rome, nor his house in Burdeaux could ever boast of such a number. These Com∣forters he hath recorded with his own pen in his first Epistle to Severus; viderant pu∣eri tui, &c. Your men (saith he) that were here with me, have seen, and can tell you with what constant diligence all the Bishops, and my brethren the Cler∣gy, with the common people my neigh∣bours, did minister unto me all the time of my sicknesse. Unto you, who are unto me as my own soul, I take leave to boast and glory in this mercy of the Lord, whose goodnesse it is, that I am so plen∣tifully comforted. There is not one Bishop in all Campania that did not come personally to visit me, and those whom either a farther distance, or their
own infirmities would not permit to tra∣vel, fai'd not to visit me by their Presby∣ters & letters. The Bishops of Africk all∣so with the beginning of the spring, sent their particular letters and messengers to comfort me. Thus he that forsakes hou∣ses and brethren, and lands to follow Christ, shall receive an hundred fold even in this World, and in the world to come life everlasting. As touching the letters or Embassage ra∣ther of the African Bishops to Paulinus, it happened on this manner. Alypius, the Bishop of Tagasta in Africk, had at Mil∣lain (as I intimated before) taken speciall notice of Paulinus: And the rumour of his Conversion (as the actions of eminent and noble personages passe quickly into the most distant regions,) had filled with joy not onely the Churches of Africk but the most remote corners of Christianity, even the very wildernesse and the scattered Isles, which in those daies were more frequented by Christians, then populous Continents and splendid Cities. Alypius upon this (because he would not loose so fair an op∣portunity to ground his acquaintanec,) dispatcheth a letter from Tagasta to Pau∣linus, to gratulate his conversion to the Faith; encouraging him withall to hold
fast his Crown; and for a token, sent him five of Saint Augustines bookes against the Maichaeans, which in that age (when the Invention of the Presse was not so much as thought of,) was a rich present. Pauli∣nus was so taken with the reading of these Volumes, that he conceived himself not onely engaged to Alypius, but to Au∣gustine also. Whereupon he sent his servant from Nola with letters full of modestie and sweetnesse to them both, and with particu∣lar commendations to other eminent lights of the Church then shining in Africk. These letters received by Augustine and Alypius, and communicated by them to the other Bishops, and the African Clergy, were pre∣sently Coppied out by all, and nothing now was more desired by them, then a sight of this great Senatour, who was tur∣ned a poor Priest, and a fool (as Saint Paul saith) for Christ his sake, and the off-scou∣ring of the World. But above all, the Soules of holy Augustine and Paulinus (like Jo∣nathan and David, or Jacob and Joseph) were knit together, and the life of the one was bound up in the life of the other. The perfect love and union of these two, can by none be more faithfully, or more elegantly describd, hen it is already by Saint Augustine himself. I shall therefore insert
his own words, the words of that tongue of truth and Charity;August. Epistol. 22. ad Paulin. O bone vir, O bone frater! lei dico ut toleret, quia adhuc lates oculos meos, latebas animā meā, & & vix obtem∣perat immo, non obtemperat. Quomodo ergo non doleā quod nondū faciem tuā novi, hoc est, domū animae tuae, quam sicut meā novi? legi enim literas tuas fluentes lac & mel, praeferentes simplicitatē cordis, in qua quaeris dominū, sentiens de illo in bonitate, & affe∣rens ei claritatē & honorem. Legerunt fra∣tres & gaudent, infatigabiliter & ineffabi∣liter tam uberibus & tam excellentibus do∣nis dei, bonis tuis. Quotquot eas legerunt, rapiunt; quia rapiuntur, cū legunt. Quàm suavis odor Christi, & quàm fragrat ex eis? dici non potest, illae literae cum te offerunt ut videaris, quantū nos excitent ut quaeraris: nam et perspicabilē faciunt, & desiderabi∣lem. Quantò enim praesentiam tuam nobis quodammodò exhibent, tantò absentiam nos ferre non sinunt. Amant te omnes in eis, & amari abs te cupiunt. Laudatur & bene∣dicitur deus, cujus gratiâ tu talis es. Ibi excitatur Christus, ut ventos & Maria ti∣bi plasare tendenti ad stabilitatem suam dignetur. Ibi conjux excitatur, non dux ad mollitiem viro suo, sed ad fortitudinem redux in ossa viri sui: quam intuam unita∣tem
redactam, in spiritualibus tibi taus firmioribus quantò castioribus nexibus co∣pulatam, officijs vestrae sanctitati debitis ir te, uno ore salutamus. Ibi cedri Libani a terram depositae, & in arcae fabricam com∣pagine charitatis erectae, mundi hujus fluct∣us imputribilitèr secant. Ibi gloria ut ac∣quiratur, contemnitur; & mundus, ut ob∣tineatur, relinquitur. Ibi parvuli, sie eti∣am grandiusculi filij Babylonis eliduntur ad petram, vitia scilicet confusionis, super∣biaeque secularis. Haec atque hujusmodi suavissima & sacratissima spectacula literae tu praebent legentibus; literae fidei non fictae, literae spei bonae, literae purae charita∣tis. Quomodo nobis anhelant sitim tuam, & desiderium defectumque animae tuae in atria domini? Quid amoris sanctissii spirant? Quantam opulentiam sinceri cordis exae∣stuant? Quas agunt gratias deo? Quas im∣petrant â deo? blandiores sunt, an ardentio∣res? luminosiores, an faecundiores? Quid e∣nim est, quòd it a nos mulcent, ita accendunt, it a compluunt; & it a screnae sunt? Quid est, quaeso te, aut quid tibi pro eis rependam, nisi quia totus sum tuus in eo, c us tot us es tu? si parùm est, plus certê non hbeo. O good man, O good brother! you lay hidden from my Soul, and I spoke to my Spirit, that it should patiently bear it,
because you are also hidden from my Eyes; but it scarse obeyes, yea it refuseth to obey. How then shall I not grieve, be∣cause I have not as yet knowne your face, the habitation of your Soul, which I am as well acquainted with as my owne? For I have read your letters flow∣ing with milk and honey, manifesting the simplicity of your heart, in which you seek the Lord, thinking rightly of him, and bringing him glory and honor. Your brethren here have read them, and rejoyce with an unwearied and unspeak∣able Joy, for the bountifull and excellent gifts of God in you, which are your riches. As many as have read them, snatch them from me; because when they read them, they are ravished with them. How sweet an Odour of Christ, and how fragrant proceeds from them? It cannot be exprest how much those let∣ters, while they offer you to be seen of us, excite us to seek for you: They make you both discerned and desired: For the more they represent you unto us, wee are the more impatient of your ab∣sence. All men love you in them, & desire to be beloved of you. God is blessed and praised by all, through whose grace you are such. There do we find that Christ
is awaked by you, and vouchsafeth t rebuke the winds and the Seas, that you may find them calme in your Course to∣wards him. There is your dear wife stir∣red up, not to be your leader to softnesse and pleasures, but to Christian fortitude; becomming Masculine again, and resto∣red into the bones of her Husband: whom we all with one voice salute and admire, being now united unto you, serving you in spiritual things, wherein you are coup∣led with mutuall embraces, which the more chast they be, are by so much the more firm. There do we see two Cedars of Libanus fell'd to the Earth, which joy∣ned tgether by love, make up one Arke, that cuts through the Waves of this World without detriment or ptrefacti∣on. There glory, that it may be acqui∣red, is contemned; and the World, that it may be obtained, is forsaken. There the Children of Babylon, whither litle ones, or of Maturer age; I mean the Evils of Confusion and secular pride, are dashed against the stones. Such sacred and delightfull spectacles do your let∣ters present unto us: O those letters of yours! Those letters of an unfained faith, those letters of holy hope, those letters of pure Charity! How do they
sigh and gaspe with your pious thirst, your holy longings, and the Ec∣statical faintings of your Soul for the Courts of the Lord? What a most sa∣cred love do they breath? with what trea∣sures of a sincere heart do they abound? How thankfull to God? How earnest for more grace? How mild? How zealous? How full of light?? How full of fruite? Whence is it that they do so please us, and so provoke us, to showre and raine upon us, and yet are so calm and so se∣rene? What is this I beseech you? or what shall I returne unto you for these letters, unlesse I tell you, that I am whol∣ly yours in him, whose you are altoge∣ther? If this be too little, in truth I have no more. These were the first effects of Paulinus his letters; but shortly after, St. Augustine sent him others, nothing inferiour to this first, either in affection, or Piety. And the year following, being elected by Valerius to fit his Coadjutor in the Sea of Hippo, where he afterwards succeeded him; It was resolved by them all, namely by Valerius, Augustine, Alypius, Severus, and Profu∣turus, the African Bishops, that a messenger should be dispatched into Campania to resent Paulinus with their several letters,
and the sincere gratulations of their re∣spective Clergy; which accordingly was performed. In the beginning of this year, which was the three hundred ninety and fifth after Christ, Theodosius Augustus the first, a most pious Emperour, and a Nursing Fa∣ther of the Church departed this life. The Ethnick writers hating his memory as vi∣rulently as his person, laboured with all manner of lyes and Libels to render him o∣dious and detestable to posterity. Holy En∣delochius awaked with these scandalous clamours, and the insolent aspersions cast upon so religious an Emperour, writes ear∣nestly to Paulinus, and prevailes with him, to imploy those excellent abilities bestow∣ed on him, in the defense of this faithfull Souldier of Jesus Christ, and Champion of his Spouse. This task Paulinus performed, as appears by his owne words in his 9th E∣pistle to Severus, to whom hee sent a Coppy of his learned Panegygick; however posterity have suffered in the losse of it. But we want not another witnesse: That learned Father, and happy translator of the booke of God in his thirteenth Epistle to Pauli∣nus, gives us a very fair and full account of it. Librum tuum quem pro Theodosio principe prudenter ornateque, &c. Your
booke (saith he) whihc elegantly and judiciously you composed in the defense of the Emperor Theodosius, and sent to me by He proved after∣wards a most de∣testable Heretick. Vigilantius, I have with much de∣light read over. What I admire in it, is your Method: For having excelled all other writers in the first parts, you excell your selfe in the last. Your stile is compact and neat, and with the perspicuity and pure∣nesse of Cicero, and yet weighty and sen∣tentious; for that writing which hath nothing commendable in it, but words, is (as one saith) meer prating. The con∣sequence besides is very great, and the coherence exact. What ever you infer, is either the confirmation of the antece∣dent, or the inchoation of the subse∣quent. Most happy Theodosius, to be vin∣dicated by such a learned Oratour of Christ! You have added to the glory of his Imperial robe, and made the utility of his just lawes sacred to posterity. But this rare peece, with many more mentioned by Gennadius, either through the envie of the Heathen, or the negligence of our own, are unfortunately lost; especially a Volume of Epistles written to his Sister, with some controversial peeces against the
Ethnick Philosophers, mentioned also by Saint Augustine in his four and thirtieth Epistle; and a most learned Treatise of true Repentance, and the glory of Martyrs. Much about this time, the name of Paulinus began to be famous in the East; and not onely there, but in all parts of the Christian World. It is almost incredible (es∣pecially in this age of Impieties and Abo∣minations) how much the example of this one man prevailed over all. The Course he ran, drew another wealthy and noble R∣man (I mean Pammachius) from the Se∣nate to the Cell; and all the Fathers of that age, when they prest any to holy living, and a desertion of the World, brought in Paulinus for their great exemplar, and a star to lead them unto Christ. St. August∣ine propounds him to Romanianus & Licen∣tius, Saint Hierome to Julian, and the Daughters of Geruntius; and Saint Chry∣sostome in his thirteenth homily upon Gene∣sis, sets him downe for a pattern to the husbands, and Therasia to the wives. The reverend Bishop of Hippo did very earnest∣ly sollicite him to come over into Africk, & he gives his reason for it in these words: Non imprudenter ego vos rogo, & flagito, & postulo, &c. Not unadvisedly doe I intreat and earnestly desire, and require
you to come into Africk, where the In∣habitants labour more now with the thirst of seeing you, then with the fa∣mous thirstinesse of the Climate. God knowes, I ask it not for my private satis∣faction, nor for those onely, who either by my mouth, or by the publick fame have heard of you; but for the rest, who either have not heard, or else having heard will not believe so great a change; but when they themselves shall see the truth, they will not onely believe, but love and imitate. It is for their sakes therefore, that I desire you to honour these parts with your bodily presence: Let the Eyes of our flocks also behold the glory of Christ in so eminent a Couple, the great exemplars to both Sexes, to tread pride under their feet, and not to despaire of attaining to prefection. And in his fifty ninth Epistle to Paulinus, when (according to the custome of those holy times) hee had sent his Presbyter to him to be instructed, he cannot (saith he) profit more by my Doctrine, then he can by your life. Saint Hierome useth the same Engine to bring down the high thoughts of Juli∣an: Art thou (saith he) nobly descen∣ded? So were Paulinus and Therasia, and far nobler in Christ. Art thou rich
and honourable? So were they: and from the height of honours and worldly rich∣es became poor and inglorious, that they might gain Christ. Dearly did Anasta∣sius, who succeeded Siricius in the Sea of Rome, affect this holy Bishop, as appears by his owne words in his sixteenth E∣pistle to Delphinus the Bishop of Burde∣aux. But amidst all these triumphs of the Church of God, for the conversion of so eminent a person, and the frequent gratu∣lations of learned men, exprest by their let∣ters or personall visits, there were none that raged with so much hatred and malice a∣gainst him as his own kindred, and former acquaintance. A Prophet hath no honour in his own Country, and those of his owne house will be his Enemies. There are no such persecutors of the Church, as those that do it for selfe-ends, and their private advantage. Sweetly doth he complain of these bitter, unnatural dealings in his fifth Epistle to Severus. Potiore mihi parente germanus es, quam illi quos caro tantùm & sanguis mihi sociat, &. You are my Bro∣ther now by a greater Father, then those who are tyed to me by flesh and blood onely. For where is now my great affi∣nity by blood? Where are my old
friends? where is my former acquain∣tance? I am become as a dream before them all, and as a stranger to my owne brothers, the Sons of my Mother. My kinsmen and my friends stand looking upon me afar off, and they passe by me like hasty floods, or the streames of a brook that will not be stay'd. They con∣vey themselves away, and are ashamed of me, who displeased them by pleasing God. And in his first Epistle, I beseech you (saith he) If I shall have need (for now my servants, and those I made free-men, are become my despisers,) that you would take care to send the old Wine, which I beleive I have still at Narbon, hi∣ther unto me, and to pay for the carri∣age: Do not fear, dear brother, to make the poor your debtor, &c. The Noble Spirit is the bravest bearer of indignities: and certainly extraction and a virtuous descent (let popular flatterers preach what they will to the contrary,) is attended with more Divinity, and a sweeter tem∣per, then the indiscrete Issue of the mul∣titude. There is an eminent difference be∣twixt flowers and weedes, though they spring from the same mould. The Ape con∣tending with the Lyonesse, told her, that she was a very fair creature, but very bar∣ren:
For you (said the Ape) bring forth but one at a birth, and I bring six, or more; 'Tis true (replyed the Lionesse,) but thy fix are six Apes, and my one is a Lyon. The greatest part of men, which we commonly terme the populacy, are a stiffe, uncivill generation, without any seed of ho∣nour or goodnesse, and sensible of nothing but private interest, & the base waies of ac∣quiring it. What Virtue, or what humanity can be expected from a Raymond Cabanes, a Massinello, or some Son of a Butcher? They have one barbarous shift, which Ti∣gers and Beares would blush to commit: They will cut the throats of their most ge∣nerous and Virtuous Benefactours, to com∣ply with times, and advantage themselves; Yea, they will rejoyce to see them ruined, and like inhumane Salvages, insult over their innocent and helplesse posterity. I could compare those fawning Hypocrits, that waite not upon men, but upon their Fortunes, to that smiths bitch in the A∣pologues of Locmannus the Persian, which sleeping in the forge, could not be awaked with all the noise of the hammers, the An∣vile, and the Bellowes: but if the smith would offer to stirre his teeth to eat, shee would start up presently, and attend upon him with all officiousnesse. She would
share with him in the fruits of his labours; but would not watch and look to the shop one minute while he laboured. Paulinus had now first lost these false friends, but was loaded for it with the love and commendations of true ones; And I know not which offended him most, to be despised by the first, or commended by the last. He had (like Saint Paul,) great hea∣vinesse, and continuall sorrow of heart, to see that his brethren and kinsmen accor∣ding to the flesh, hated him because he loved Christ: And on the other side, his humility would not suffer him to beare the labour of love, I meane the generall applause and sin∣cere commendations conferred upon him by his Christian friends. Severus in one of his Epistles written to him (after hee had spent some lines in the commendation of his zeale and constancie,) contrary to the custome of that plaine age, subscribed him∣self,Te multa dilectio ad mendacii peccatum traxit. his Servant. To the first he replyed, that his excessive love had drawn him to the sin of untruth: And the last he desired him to desist from, for this reason; Cave ergo ne posthac, &c. Have a care hereafter (saith he) that you who are a Servant of Christ, called unto liberty, terme nor your self the ser∣vant
of a sinner, and of one that is not worthy to be called your fellow-ser∣vant. The virtue of humility will not excuse the vice of flattery. Thus Gregorie the great, when Pope Anastasius had ex∣ceeded towards him in his laudatory elocu∣tions, blasted them all with this humble re∣ply; Quod verò me s domini, quod lucer∣nam, &c. Your calling me the mouth of the Lord, a shining light, and a strong helper, is nothing else but an augmen∣tation of my iniquity; for when I deserve to be punished for my sins, then do I in∣stead of punishment receive praise. Seve∣rus, in another of his Epistles to Paulinus, earnestly intreated him to suffer his picture to be taken by a limner, which he had sent to him for that purpose, that he might have it to set up, together with the picture of Saint Martin, before the sacred font in a fair Church which Severus was then in building. This friendly motion Paulinus was very much offended with, and would by no means consent unto, teling Severus, that too much love had made him mad; And in his eighth Epistle, reasoning with him a∣bout this request, What kind of picture (saith he) would you have from me, the picture of the earthly, or the Heavenly man? I know you love onely that incorrup∣tible
image, which the King of Heaven doth love in you. I am ashamed to picture what I am, and I dare not picture what I am not. But Severus resolving to force it from him, would not be satisfied with any other returne; whereupon he sent it to him, with these following verses, the elegant expresse of his unfeined humility. The first coppy relates to the pictures, and the latter to the Font. Abluitis quicun{que} animas & membra la∣vacris, Cernite propositas ad bona facta vi∣as, &c. You that to wash your flesh and Soules dw near, Ponder these two examples set you here. Great Martin shewes the holy life, and white; Paulinus to repentance doth invite▪ Martins pure, harmlesse life tooke Hea∣ven by force, Paulinus tooke it by teares and re∣morse. Martin leads through victorious palms and flowers, Paulinus leades you through the pooles and showres.
You that are sinners, on Paulinus look, You that are Saints, great Martin is your book. The first example bright and holy is, The last, though sad and weeping, leads to blisse. The verses relating to the Font, were these. Hic reparandarum generator fons animarū Vivum viventi lumine flumen agit, &c. Here the great well-spring of wash'd Soules, with beams Of living light quickens the lively streams; The Dove descends, and stirs them with her wings, So weds these waters to the upper springs, They strait conceive: A new birth doth proceede From the bright streams by an immor∣tall seed. O the rare love of God! sinners wash'd here, Come forth pure Saints, all justfied and clear.
So blest in death and life, man dyes to sins, And lives to God; Sin dies, and life begins To be reviv'd: Old Adam falls away, And the new lives, born for eternal sway. Nor did the manners of holy Paulinus differ from his mind: all his Garments, all the Utensils of his poor Cot, were so many emblems and memento's of humility. Grace is an Elixir of a contrary Nature to the Philosophers stone, it turn'd all the gold and Silvervessells of this great Senatour into earthen dishes and wooden spoons. Righteousnesse and honesty are alwaies poor. In his first Epist. to Severus, he presents him with some of this innocent furniture; Misimus testimonialem divitiarum scu∣tellam buxeam, &c. I have sent you (saith he) a platter made of a box-tree, for a testimoniall of my, riches; receive, it as a pledge or earnest of Evangelicall po∣verty, and let it be an example to you, if as yet you will make use of any Silver platters. To this he addes, that he was very desirous to be supplyed with some more ear∣then dishes, which (saith he) I do very much love; and then subscribs reason, quòd secundum Adam cognata nobis sint,
& domini thsaurum in talibus vasis com∣missum habeamus; because they are near kin to us by Adam, and because the trea∣sure of the Lord is committed to our care in such vessells. Certainly poverty (as man is now to be considered) is his best, and his true estate. Riches, though they make themselves wings, yet do they not fly to Heaven. The hm or house of gold, is the heart of the Earth, and mineralls are a fu∣el of hell-fire. Poverty was the Inaugurati∣on of the first man, who was made naked, and all his posterity are born, so. This onely have I found (saith Solomon) that God made man upright, but he hath sought out many invention. By Covetousnese we loose our uprightnesse: Wee come here light and easi, bt we load our selves afr∣wards with nnecessary burthens. Perditi tua ex te, these weights that we take up, sink us down: Our temporall misery as well at the Eternal is from our selves. The merriest creature that I can see, is the Paulinus calls Christ (mstically) a sparrow: Hc est ille passr, qui requirentibus se n viis hilaritèr ostend it; nunc in portis fit obvius, nunc in platis occurrit, nunc in muris vel turribus sub∣limis convocat ad se amatores suos, & invitat cos in altitudines habitationum suarum, ut im∣pleat vebum suum, & exaltatus omnia ad se tra∣hat. Quis dabit nobis pnnas columbae deargen∣tatas, ut pennati pervolemus ad bravîum su∣pernae vocationis, sequentes istum passerem soli∣tarium, qui est unicus dei filius, supervolitan∣tem, cui in altis habitat, & humilia respicit? Sparrow. This makes
me think, that hee is not troubled with forethoughts, which are the hands of co∣vetousnesse. What man and beasts scatter and leave behind them, is his provision: his table is laid every where, and the first bush he meets with, is his bed. Our Saviour, who knew the nature and thoughts of all created things, was pleased to send us to school to the birds. They are alwaies full of Musical livelinesse, and a certain bright freedome, which descends not so low as men and beasts. Spirits, when they have businesse upon Earth, must assume bo∣dies. Clarity and purification is a kind of poverty: it is a state that have cast off dregs & burthens. Divine is that saying of Gr. Piides. . Poor habits are naturally heaven-seekers. But Paulinus, though he was poor, yet was he charitable, and withall liberall. The widowes mite is more then the rich mens abundance. In the four hundred and tenth year after Christ, when the Gothes
raged in Italy, and had sackt Nola, Pau∣linus (amongst many others,) was taken prisoner by them;Lib. 1. d▪ Ci∣vitate de. And thus (saith Saint Augustine) as I afterwards learnt from him, did he then pray in his heart. Domi∣ne, ne excrucier propter aurum & argen∣tum; ubi enim omnia mea sunt, tu scis. O Lord suffer me not to be troubled with the losse of Gold & Silver, for thou knowest where all my riches are laid up. His trea∣sure was laid up in Heaven, where he com∣manded us to lay it, who foretold, that these calamities should come upon the World. And God (without doubt) had reguard unto his prayer, for the barbarous enemie leading all the rest into captivity, he onely was left behind. But amongst all these plunderings and outward afflictions, hee never failed in his daily almes to the poor, nor was the hand of his faithfull Therasia any way shortned. At last his store failing, and no more provision being left, then onely one loafe of bread; A poor man comming to the door for reliefe, Pau∣linus commands it should be given him. But Therasia (arguing with herselfe, that no begger could be poorer then Paulinus now was, and that it was as much charity to keepe it for him, as to give it to ano∣ther,)
conceal'd the loafe, and suffered the poor man to go without it. A day or two after, some men that were sent with relief to Paulinus, from his friends, arrive at No∣la, and tell him that they had been there much sooner, had not one of the ships, which was loaden with corn, been cast away almost in the Harbour; the rest that were fraught with Wine and other Victualls, being come safe to shore. Whereupon Pau∣linus turning towards Therasia, put her in mind of her overmuch carefullnesse, with these words, Understand now Therasia, that this great ship full laden with Cone, was cast away for that one loafe of bread which thou didst steale from the poore man. But passe we now to his Episcopall dig∣nity. In his own Workes we have not one line that mentions this Ecclesiasticall ho∣nour, nor any other passage of his life, that might but seem to conduce to his own glory. They breath nothing but hu∣mility, nothing but self-deniall and de∣dignation. Wee must be guided then through this part of his life by other Au∣thors, and such faithfull records as are come unto us, from the hands of learned and publick persons; who either upon the generall interest and concernments of the
Church, or their own private merits, and not by reflection were acquainted with him. The first that offers himself to us, is Uranius, his own Presbyter, who in that short nar∣ration which he wrote of his life, sets him forth to posterity in this following Cha∣racter; Cum autem ad summum sacerdotij gradum, &c. When he was honoured (saith he) with the highest degree in the Priesthood, he did not shew himself such a Bishop that desired to be feared, but one that endeavoured to be beloved. He was never so farre angry, as not in his anger to shew mercy. Nor could that man in∣deed be angry, for he regarded not ca∣lumnies, and he avoyded hatred. He ne∣ver sate in Judgement, but mercy sate close by him. He was truly such a Bishop as laboured to get the love of all. For hee lived a Consolation to all, and their great example to make sure their Salvation. Nor is this my voyce onely: even the barbarous Nations who knew my Lord Paulinus by report onely, will testifie as much. And worthily was hee beloved of all, who was a friend to all. For who was there cast down, and he did not lift him up? who ever called to him for help, and was not piously and comfor∣tably answered? For he was pious, ten∣der
hearted, humble and courteous, ha∣ting none, despising none. He gave to all, he cherished all: he encouraged the fear∣full, pacified the violent, those with his words, these with his example; Some he comforted with his letters, and those that wanted, with his mony. He loved not any riches, nor any treasures, but those which Christ promised to his fol∣lowers. Gold and Silver, and the other accommodations of life he approved of, if they were liberally given to the poor, not covetously hoorded up. Briefly, he had in him all goodnesse, for he loved Christ. Hee had Faith, Meeknesse, love towards his neighbours, a constant care of the poor, compassion upon the weak, and laboured for nothing in his life, but peace and charity. All his en∣deavours were to make men good, and to save their Soules. What place is there in the World, what solitude, what Seas which acknowledge not the good works of holy Paulinus? All men desired his acquaintance, and did extreamly long to have a sight of him. Who ever came to him without joy or who went from him, but he desired to stay longer? those that could not see him in the body, desired to see him in his writings; for he was
sweet and gentle in his Epistles, elegant and ravishing in his Poems. What more shall I say? The relations that may be given of him, would be scarse credible, but that his knowne integrity is above falshood. Nola was at this time a very famous and splendid City, nothing inferiour to the best Emporiums of Italie, and had withall a very rich Sea; which questionlesse was a great occasion, that the piety of this blessed Bishop was so renowned, and so fa∣miliarly spoken of in the most remote parts of the World. So the just and faithfull God exalteth those that humble them∣selves, and honours those that honour him. He had beene faithfull in those things that were his own, and was therefore intrusted with the treasures of the Church. Prosper in his second book, de vitâ Contemplativâ, and the ninth Chapter, tells us, how hee dis∣posed of them; Sanctus Paulinus (ut ipsi meliùs nostis) ingentia praedia quae fuerunt sua, vendita pauperibus erogavit: sed cum posteà factus esset Episcopus, non contempsit Ecclesiae facultates, sed fidelissime dispen∣savit. Holy Paulinus (saith he) as you best know, sold all those princely Possessions which were his own, and gave of them to the poor: but when he was af∣terwards
consecrated Bishop, he neglect∣ed not the revenues of the Church, but was a most faithfull Steward and dis∣penser of them. So faithfull, that when he lay upon his death bed, hee had not one piece left to relieve himself, but was driven to lay out for some Cloathes which he had given to the poor, a small summe of mony, which God ordained to be sent to him for that very purpose a litle before the hour of his dissolution. So that living and dying, he kept to the Apostles rule, and owed no man any thing but love. Hee was a great lover of learned and holy men, and confesseth in one of his Epistles to A∣lypius, that his affection to Saint Ambrose, was the first inducement which he felt to incline him to Christianity. His dearest and most intimate friends were Saint Au∣gustine, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome, Saint Martin the Bishop of Tours, Delphi∣nus the Bishop of Burdeaux, and Aman∣dus his Successour; Alypius the Bishop of Tagasta, Januarius the Bishop of Naples, afterwards a Martyr, Victricius the Rhoto∣magensis, Aper, Severus, and Nicetas of Daia. I may say of him as the Scripture saith of Moses, he was the meekest man upon the face of the Earth. He was not one∣ly obedient and serviceable to these Fathers,
and pillars of the Church, but to his own Presbyters and Domesticks: he judg∣ed himself the most unworthy, and the most unable of all his brethren. Vict∣or the Monk, sent from Severus to see him (according to the custome of those times) washed his feete. This was a ceremony, which in that age of holinesse could not be refused. But Victor by this did not onely wash his feet, but his face also; for he drew tears from him, because hee might not deny him the performance of that Evangelical service. Servivit ergo mi∣hi peccatori, & vae misero mihi quod passus sum; he served me a sinner (saith the holy Bishop) and woe is to me because I suffered him. But he staid not at tears, for as soone as Victor had done washing his feet, to re∣quite his service, he fetched him clean wa∣ter, and held the bason while he wash'd his hands. He was not like that insolent Ab∣bot that did cast off his humility with his Cowle, and being asked by his brethren, why he was then so proud, that was former∣ly such an humble Monk, made answer; that in his Monachisme, when he went so low, and stooping, he was searching for the keyes of the Abbey; but now having found them, he did hold up his head to ease himself.
This true carriage of an Evangelist, made him both honourd and beloved; the Church rejoyced, and glorified od for him, and the Court admired him. Holy∣nesse is a light that cannot be hidden: It is a candle set upon a hill: stars never shine more glorious, then when they are neare black Clouds. In the year of our Lord, four hundred and nineteen (a grievous Schism then happening in the Church,) there was a convention of certain Bishops and Fa∣thers at Rome, to quiet those groundlesse perturbations, and stop the breach. But Ho∣norius the Emperour, judging by his skil in the temper of those Church-men, that no good would be done without the pre∣sence of Paulinus, who then lay sick at Nola, dispatched his Imperial le∣ter to this holy Bishop, wherein he ear∣nestly intreated him (if possible) to shake off his present indisposition, and to repaire in person to the Synod, lest that great bless∣ing of peace, which he and the Church did earnestly hope and long for, might by his absence unfortunately miscarry. This royall record (because it is a monument of no lesse sincerity then concernment, and discovers unto us much of the face of those times) I shall verbatim insert.
Sancto & venerabili Patri, Paulino, Episcopo No∣lensi. TAntùm fuit apud nos certa sententia, nihil ab his sacerdotibus, qui ad Syno∣dum convenerant, posse definiri, cum bea∣titudo tua dé corporis inaequalitate causa∣ta, itineris non potuit injuriam sustinere, ut propter absentiam sancti viri, non qui∣dem obtentura: Interim tamen vitia gra∣tulantur, cùm prava & vetus ambitio, & cum benedicto viro sanctae{que} vitae diù velt habere certamen, ut contra haec Aposte∣licae institutionis bona, de praesumptis pr vim parietbus xistimet confidendum. O verè digna causa quam non nisi coronae tae beata vita designat! Dilatum ita{que} Judi∣cium nuntiamus, ut divina praecepta ex venerationis tuae ore promantur, qui ease∣cutus implesti; nec potest alius orum prae∣ceptorum lator existere, quam qui dignus Apostolicis disciplinis est approbatus. Spe∣cialiter ita{que} domine sancte, meritò vene∣rabilis pater, Justus dei famulus, divinum opus, contempo labore, tributum hoc no∣bis visitationis tuae (si ita dicendum est) munus indulge, ut postpositis omnibus,
quantùm temperantia his & tranquillitas suffragantur, Synodo profuturus, sine in∣termissione etiam desideriis nostris, & be∣nedictioni quam cupimus, te praestare dig∣eris. To the holy and reverend Father PAULINUS, Bishop of Nola. SUch a firm opinion have we that no∣thing can be agreed and concluded up∣on by the Bishops met in this Synod, (your Holinesse by reason of your bodily indisposition being not able to travel hi∣ther) that for your onely absence it is not like to continue: In the mean time offences triumph and rejoyce at it, and the old and wicked sinne of ambition, which of a long time desires to contend even with your holynesse and upright life, presumes now, and is confident that having forcibly taken the wall from us, it will carry you also against the whol∣somnesse of Apostolicall institution. O! a cause truly worthy not to be determi∣ned, but by your holy life, which is your Crown▪ we therfore dclare unto you, that
we have suspended our judgement for the present, that we may have the truth of these Divine precepts pronounced by your reverend mouth, who have both followed them, and fullfilled them: For none can be a fit arbiter of those rules, but he that hath approved himself worthy and con∣formable to Apostolicall discipline. Wherefore, holy Sir, worthily reverend Father, the faithfull Servant of God, and his Divine work, we intreat you par∣ticularly, that slighting the troubles of this Journey, you would favour us with this gift and tribute (if I may so speak) of your presence: and laying aside all o∣ther concernments (so far as your health and ease will permit,) be in your owne person at this Synod, and vouchsafe to lend your assistance to our desires, and that blessing which wee earnestly long for. Wee see by this letter in what account hee was with the Emperour, and that his integrity and holyness were not dissimulati∣ons and popular Fables, but experimentall truths so known and so believed; hee was a true Christian, and no Impostour. It was not the Custome, but the nature (if I may so say) of those Primitive times to love holy and peacefull men. But some
great ones in this later age, did nothing else but countenance Schismaticks and sedi∣cious raylers, the despisers of dignities, that covered their abominable villanies with a pretence of transcendent holinesse, and a certain Sanctimonious excellencie above the Sons of men. This Vaile (which then cousend weak eyes) is now fallen off their faces, and most of their patrons have by an unthought of Method received their re∣wards: The rest without doubt (though they shift themselves into a thousand shapes) shall not escape him, whose anger is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. But reture we to Pau∣linus: Whose Charity and tendernesse to∣wards the poor, was both inimitable and incredible; This iron age wants faith as well as mercy: When he had given them all he had, to the last that begged he gave himself. Gregorie the great, in the third Book of his Dialogues, and the first Chap∣ter, hath recorded this memorable passage. I shall cut it short, and in as, few words, as conveniently may be, give you all that is material. When the Vandals had miserably wastd Campania, and carried many of the inhabitants into Africk, blessed Pau∣linus gave all that he had both towards his own sustenance, and the reliefe of the
poor, amongst the prisoners and Captives. The Enemy being departed, and his prey with him; a poor Widow (whose onely Son was (amongst the rest of the Natives) by a Son in law of the King of the Vandals carried into Bondage,) comes to petition Paulinus for so much Money as might serve to redeem him. Paulinus told her that he had nothing then left, either in mo∣ney or other goods, but promised, if shee would accept of him, to go with her into Africk, and to be exchanged for her Son. The poore Widow taking this for a meere scoffe, turnes her back to be gone. Paulinus followes after, and with much adoe made her believe, that he meant it (as he did in∣deed) in earnest. Upon this, they tra∣vell'd both into Africk, and having op∣portunity to speake with the Kings Son in Law, the poor widow begged of him first▪ to have her son restor'd unto her Gratis: but the youthfull and haughty Vandal averse to all such requests, would hear her no farther; whereupon she presents him with Paulinus, and petitioned to have her Son set at liber∣ty, and the other to serve in his stead. The Prince taken with the comely and reverend countenance of Paulinus, asked him, what his occupation or trade was? Paulinus answered, that he never followed any
trade, but that he had good skill in dressing of Herbes and Flowers. Upon this, the Prince delivered her Son to the Widow, who took him home with her, and sent Paulinus to work into his Gardens. The Prince delighting much in Flowers and Sallets, would very frequently visit Paulinus, and took such delight in him, that he forsook all his Court-associ∣ates to enjoy the company of his new Gar∣diner. In one of these visits, Paulinus taking occasion to confer seriously with him, ad∣vised him to be very carefull of himselfe, and to consider speedily of some means to secure and settle the Kingdome of the Van∣dals This was about the year of our L. 428. about which time the Vandals after their excursi∣ons through Polo∣nia, Italy, Fran∣conia, and Anda∣lusia had setled in Africk, where they continued quietly until the reigne of Justinian, bu rebelling against him, they were together with their King Gillimer totally overthrown by the great Cap∣taine Beliarius An. Christi 533. in Mauritania; for (said he) the King your Father in law will shortly dye. The Prince some∣thing troubled with the suddain newes, without further delay acquaints the King with it; and tells him withall, that his Gardiner (whose pre∣diction this was) excell∣ed
all other men both in wisedome and learning. Whereupon the King requested, that he might see him; you shall, replyed the Prince, for to morrow when you are at dinner, I will give order that hee shall come in person with the dishes of Sallate to the Table. This being agreed upon, and accordingly performed, the old Tyrant upon the first sight of Paulinus exceeding∣ly trembled, and speaking to his Daugh∣ter, who sate next to him, to call to her husband, he told him, that the prediction of his Gardiner was very true; for yester∣night (said he) I saw in a dream a great tribunal with judges sitting thereon, and amongst them this Gardiner, by whose judgement a scourge which had been for∣merly put into my hands, was taken from me. But learn of him what his profession is, and what dignity he had conferred upon him in his own Country, for I cannot be∣lieve him to be (as he pretends) an inferi∣our or ordinary person. As soon as dinner was ended, the Prince stole from the presence into the Garden, and earnestly intreated Paulinus to tell him, who he was; I am (said he) your Gardiner, which you received in exchange for the Widowes Son. I know that, reply∣ed the Prince, but I desire to know your
profession in your own Country, and not the servitude you have put your self in with me for the present; To this Paulinus answered, that he was by profession a Bish∣op, and a servant of Jesus Christ the Son of the living God. At these words the Prince was mightily troubled, and request∣ed him to depart againe into his own Country, assuring him, that before he de∣parted, he would give him any thing that he should please demand. Paulinus replyed, that he would desire nohing, but to have those Captives which were carried out of Campania, set at liberty, and transported to their Native Country. To this the Prince consented, and for Paulinus his sake, fur∣nished them with shipping and all other necessaries for their voyage, and sent them home joyfull in the Company of their blessed and beloved Bishop. Some few daies after, th old Tyrant (as God had foretold by his holy Servant) departed out of this World into his owne place; And so that scourge which God had put into his hand for the punishment of a great part of the Christian World, was ta∣ken away, and the instrument cast into the fire. Wherefore whoever thou beest, that readest this book, and art a sufferer thy selfe, or doest see and grieve for the calami∣ties
of the Church, the oppression of the poor, & the violent perverting of judgement & justice in a province, do not thou marvel at the matter, nor vex thy self; for he that is higher then the highest, regardeth it, and there be higher then tey. Envy not the glory of Sinners, for thou knowest not what will be their end; but submit thy self under the mighty hand of God, expecting with patience the time of refreshing, and I do assure thee upon my Soul, thou shalt not be deceived, Paulinus, with all his joyfull Captives, was now landed in Campania, where all the Inhabitants, as upon a solemne feast∣day flocked together to welcome him, and to poure their joyes into his bosome; some received their Sonnes, some their brothers, and some their husbands: both the recei∣vers and the received were beholding to Paulinus. They commended, honou∣red and admired him: He exhorted, in∣couraged and confirmed them. Mutuall Consolations are a double banquet, they are the Churches Eulogiae, which we both give and take. What the Campanians most admired in Paulinus, was that which the Scripture commends in Moses: youthfull∣nesse in old age. He was now as earnest, as hearty, and as active for the glory of God,
as in his most vigorous years. His spiritu∣al force was not abated, nor the Eye of his Soul any way dimmed. Hee did not coole towards his setting, but grew more large, more bright, and more fervent. Bearing trees, when their fruit is ripe, bend their boughes, and offer themselves to the gathe∣rers hands. He knew that his time of depar∣ture was at hand, and therefore Moses-like he made his Doctrine to drop as the raine, and his speech distilled as the dew. Hee poured out his milk and his Wine, and made them drink abundantly. To labour in the heat of the day, and to give over in the cool, is great indiscretion, the con∣tention should be alwaies hottest towards the end of the race. I am now come to my last Paragraph, which all this while I did reserve for his Works of Piety. And these indeede (if wee consider his unworldlinesse, and religious poverty) were very great and very sump∣tuous. He repaired and beautified the four old Basilica's, or Churches, dedicated to the Martyr Felix, and built the fifth, which ex∣ceeded them all, both for beauty and large∣nesse. This he dedicated to our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. It was adorned with two stately Porches, the one opend towards the way of Publick resort, the other was a
private Postern; and the path leading to it, was through a pleasant green field set with fruit-trees and other shady wood, enced a∣bout with a very high and sumptuous wall; The entrance into this Court was through a fair Marble-Gate, in whose Front were cut these following verses. Caelestes intrate vias per amoena vireta, &c. Through pleasant green fields enter you the way To blisse; and wel through shades and blossoms may The walkes leade here, from whence di∣rectly lyes The good mans path to sacred Para∣dise. This Church was joyned to the other four, and an entrance made from the one into the other, by high and spatious Arches, supported with pillars of Marble. Through these pillars (whose height did almost reach to the roof,) as through a traverse was to be seene, by those that came from the old Chrch into the new, the picture of the Crosse, limned in most lively and glorious Colours, and hung with Garlands
of palms and flowers; above it shined a cleare and luminous skie, and on the Crosse, which was all Purple, sate perching a flock of white Doves; at the bottome of this Paisage were written these verses. Ardua florifera Crux, &c. The painfull Crosse with flowers an Palms is crown'd, Which prove, it springs; though all in blood' is drown'd: The Doves above it shew with one con∣sent, Heaven opens onely to the innocent. In the Courts belonging to this Church, were very faire and spatious walks, paved with stone, and covered over head against the violence of weather. The outside was supported with Pillars, and the Inner was divided into neat and cleanly Cells, opening towards the Walks, where the people that came thither to celebrate the Vigils of Felix, reposed them∣selves. Round about these Courts were great Cisterns, and Lavers of severall kinds of Marble most curiously polished, whose diverse-formes and colours were very de∣lightfull, and much recreated the behold∣ers.
The Porches, which were very large, and contained with in them many private Oratories, or places of prayer, were all rich∣ly pictured with sacred Histories out of the Pentateuch, the book of Joshuah, Judges and Ruth; This Church is fully described in his twelfth Epistle to Severus, and his ninth Natalis, when Nicetas came out of Daciae to see him. Ecce vidès quantus splendor velut aede renatâ Rideat, insculptum camerâ crispante lacunar In ligno mentitur ebur; tectoque super∣nè Pendentes lychni spiris retinentur ahe∣nis, Et medio in vacuo laxis vaga lumina nutant Funibus, undantes flammas levis aura fatigat, &c. You see what splendour through the spatious Isle, As if the Church were glorified, doth smile. The Ivory-wrought beams seem to the sight In graven, while the carv'd roofe looks
curl'd and bright. On brasse hoopes to the upmost vaults we tie The hovering Lamps, which nod and tremble by The yeelding Cords; fresh Oyle doth still repair The waving flames, vex'd with the flee∣ting aire. Having finished this Church, hee built another, not far from Nola, in a litle Town called Fundi, where his possessions (which he afterwards sold and gave to the poor,) were situate; this also de dedicated to our Lord Jesus, whom he used to call th Saint of Saints, and the Marty of Mar∣tyrs. In this Church in the great Isle lead∣ing to the Altar, he caused to be put up another peece of Limning, or sacred Pai∣sage, which for bauty nd excelncie ex∣ceeded all the formr. We have it most lively described and explained in these following verses. Sanctorum labor & merces sibi rite co∣haerent, Ardua Crux, pretiumque crucis subli∣me, corona, &c.
The paines of Saints, and Saints rewards are twins, The sad Crosse, and the Crowne which the Crosse wins. Here Christ the Prince both of the Cross and Crown Amongst fresh Groves and Lillies fully blown, Stands, a white Lamb bearing the pur∣ple Crosse, White shewes his purenesse, Red his bloods dear losse: To ease his sorrowes the Chast Turtle sings, And fans him swetting blood with hr bright wings; While from a shining Cloud the Father Eyes His Sons sad conflict with his Ene∣mies, And on his blessed head lets gently down Eternal glory made into a Crown. About him stand two flocks of difering notes, One of white sheepe, and e of spckled goates,
The first possesse his right hand, and the last Stand on his left: The spotted Goates are cast All into thick, deep shades, while from his right The white sheepe passe into a whiter light. But in all these sacred buildings, our most pious and humble Bishop did not so much as dream of Merit. He thought (as blssed Mr. Herbert did) that they were good works, if sprinkled with the blood of Christ; otherwise hee thought them no∣thing. It will not be amisse, nor perhaps needlesse, to produce his own words in his own defense: Nisi dominus aedificaverit domum, vano aedificantes labore sudabimus. Oremus ergo dominum, ut dum nos illi aedi∣ficamus domicilia quae videntur, ille nobis intus aedificet illa quae no videntur, do∣mum videlice illam non manufactam. Unlesse the Lord build the house, wee labour in vaine to build it. Let us there∣fore (saith he) pray to the Lord, that while wee outwardly build unto him these visible buildings, hee would build inwardly in us those which are invisi∣ble,
that is to say, the house not made with hands. How can a servant merit by making use of his masters goods? All we do, and all we give are but his concessions and favours first given unto us. Cum suis & hìc & ibi rebus loupletamur, in this World, and in the World to come all ou magnificence is but his munificence. But Paulinus was not onely outwardly pious, but inwardly also. He did so abound with private devotions, that all the time from his Baptism to his buriall, may be truly called his Prayer-time. All that he did think, all that he did speak, and all that he did write, was pure devotion. Either pub∣lick or private prayers took up all his tim. Our Saviour tells us, that Gods Elects cry day and night unto him,Luk. 18. and Saint Paul adviseth us to pray without ceasing, and in every thing to give thanks, for this (saith he) is the will of God in Christ Iesus concerning you. Holy Paulinus called Saint Paul his Master, having made himselfe his Disciple, hee would not neglect his commands: If you continue in my word (saith our Saviour) then are you my Disciples indeed. To this I shall adde his Conformity and obedience to the Church, a blessing of no
small consequence in all ages, especially in this age of Schismes and Heresies. Hee highly honoured the memory of the Saints of God, and was a most chearfull and de∣vout observer of Sacred Festivals, or holy daies. His pious affection to these blessed seasons, together with the necessity and convenience of them, he hath most elegantly and learnedly demonstrated in his Po∣ems. — hos per long a morantes Tempora, dum tardi splendens rota ver∣titur anni Sustineo intentis affecto pectore vo∣tis: Quos cupio totis mihi praelucere die∣bus, Vel quando veniunt ita compensare mo∣ras, ut Aestivis possent spatiis producere lu∣cem, Aut illum pensare diem, qui sistere Jussis Syderibus, longo lassavit lumine mun∣dum, Humanos duplicans dilatâ nocte labo∣res.
Ergo velut caelum stellis, & floribus arva Temporibusque annos dominus, sic ipse diebus Tempora distinxit festis, ut pigra di∣urnis Ingenia obsequiis, saltem discrimine facto, Post intervallum reduci sollemnia voto Sancta libenter agant, residesque per annua mentes Festa parent domino, quia Jupiter inte∣meratos Justitiae servare piget: delinquere sue∣tis, Parcere peccato labor est: decurritur omni Valle, per ascensum non est evadere cursu. Inde bonus dominus cunctos pietatis ut alis Contegat, invalidis niti vrtutis ad arcem Congrua sanctorum dedit intervalla die∣rum, Ut saltem officiis mediocribus ultima Christi Vestimenta legant, & eos sacra fimbria sanet.
Primus enim gradus est caelo pertex∣ere cunctos Continuâ bonitate dies, & tempore toto Pascha sacrum Christi Cultu celebrare pudico. Quod si mista seges tribulis mihi germi∣nat, & cor Incultum stimulat terreni spina laboris, Vel festis domino studeam me offere die∣bus, Ut vel parte mei tanquam confinia Vitae, Corpore ne toto trahar in Consortia mor∣tis. Englished thus. Those sacred daies by tedious time de∣lai'd While the slow years bright line about is laid, I patiently expect, though much distrest By busie longing, and a love-sicke brest▪ I wish, they may outshine all other daies, Or when they come, so recompence de∣laies
As to outlast the Summer-hours bright length, Or that fam'd day, when stopt by Di∣vine strength, The Sun did tyre the World with his long light, Doubling mens labours, and adjourning night. As the bright Skye with stars, the fields with flowers, The years with diff'ring seasons, month and houres God hath distinguished and mark'd; so he With sacred feasts did ease and beauti∣fie The working dayes: because that mix∣ture may Make men (loath to be holy ev'ry day,) After long labours with a freer will. Adore their maker, and keepe mindfull still Of holyness, by keeping holy daies: For otherwise they would dislike the wayes Of piety as too severe. To cast Old customes quite off, and from sinne to fast
Is a great work. To runne which way we will, On plaines is easie, not so up a hill. Hence 'tis our good God (who would all men bring Under the Covert of his saving wing,) Appointed at set times his solemne feasts, That by mean services, men might at least Take hold of Christ as by the hemme, and steal Help from his lowest skirts their Soules to heal. For the first step to Heaven, is to live well All our life long, and each day to excel In holynesse; but since that tares are found In the best Corn, and thistles will Con∣found And prick my heart with vaine cares, I will strive To weed them out on feast-daies, and so thrive By handfuls, 'till I may full life ob∣taine, And not be swallow'd of Eternall paine.
Two places upon Earth were most re∣nowned with the memory of our Saviour, Bethlem for his birth, and mount Calvarie for his passion. To extirpate all remem∣brance of his Humanity out of these places, Hadrian the persecutor caused the Idol of Jupiter to be set up, and worshipped in Mount Calvarie; and in Bethlem he built a Mosquie for that Egyptian block Adonis, which the Idolatrous Jewes called Tha∣muz. Some men amongst us have done the like: Two Seasons in the year were conse∣crated by the Church to the memory of our Saviour: The Feast of his Nativity and Circumcision, and the Feast of his Passion and Resurrection. These two they have ut∣terly taken away: endeavouring (in my o∣pinion) to extinguish the memory of his Incarnation and Passion, and to race his blessed name out of those bright columnes of light, which the Scripture calls daies. They will not allow him two daies in the year, who made the days and the nights. But it is much to be feared, that he who hath appointed their daies here, will allow them for it long nights. Holy Paulinus had now attained a good old age, the fore-runners (as Master Herbert saith) were come, and
the Almond tree did flourish: hee was all white with years, and worshiped (like Ja∣cob) leaing upon the top of his staffe. His virtuous and deare Therasia had died (I believe) long before this time; God ha∣ving ordained him to be hindmost, who was the stronger Vessell, and best able to bear her absence, and the unavoydable dis∣consolations of flesh and blood. And now (having for some time stood gazing after her,) he begins to follow, God visiting him with a strong paine in the side, which in a few daies did set him at liberty to over∣take her, by breaking the prison. Three daies before his dissolution, Sym∣machus and Hyacithinus, two Bishops of his acquaintance cme to visit him; where∣upon hee spoke to Uranius his Presbyter, that hee should prepare to attend him in the administration of the Sacrament; for (said he) I desire to receive it in the com∣pany of my brethren, which are now come to see mee. This sacred Solemnity was no sooner ended, but suddenly hee began to ask, where his brothers were? One that stood by, supposing that he had asked for the two Bishops, answered, Here they be: I know that, replyed Paulinus, but I aske
for my brothers Januarius and Martinus,Januarius was Bishop of Na∣ples, and a Martyr; and Martinus was the Bishop f Tours in France who were here with me just now, and promised to come to me again. And having thus spoken, he looked up towards Heaven, and with a voyce as chear∣full as his countenance, which seemed to shine and revive with joy, he sung out the one hundred and twen∣tieth Psalme, I lift up mine Eyes unto th hills from whence cometh my help. My help commeth from the Lord, who made Heave and Earth. This being done Posthumianus, ano∣ther Presbyter that was then present, told Paulinus, that there were forty shilling unpaid for the Cloathes which he had gi∣ven to the poor, before be fell sick. To this Paulinus replyed with a smile, that he re∣membred it very well: and Son (said he) tak no thought for it, for beleive me, there is on that will not be wanting to pay the debt of the poor. The words were no sooner out of his mouth, but presently there comes in from the parts of Lucania (now called Basilica∣ta) a Presbyter sent from the holy Bishop Exuperantius to visit Paulnus; who brought him fifty shillings for a token from
the Bishop. Paulinus receiving the money, blessed God, saying, I thank thee O Lord, that hast not forsaken them that seek thee. Of these fifty shillings he gave two with his owne hand to the Presbyter that brought them, and the rest he delivered to Post hu∣mianu to pay for the Cloathes which were given to the poor. The Evening now drawing on, hee re∣mained quiet and well at ease untill mid∣night: but the paine then increasing in his side, he was troubled with a great difficul∣ty, and shortnesse of breathing, which held him till five in the morning. The day be∣gining to break, he felt the usuall motions of holynesse awaking his Spirit, to which (though weak) he chearfully obeyed, and sitting up in his bed, celebrated Mat∣tins himselfe. By this time all the Deacons and Presbyters of his diocesse were gathe∣red together at the door, and came (like the Sons of the Prophets) to see the transla∣tion of their aged Father. After some short exhortations to holynesse and Christian courage, he lifted up his hands and blessed them, mindfull (it seems) of our Savi∣ours carriage at his ascension, whose peace he prayed might rest upon them. Shortly after (the pain still encreasing
and prevailing against him) hee became speechlesse, and so continued untill the E∣vening; when suddenly sitting up (as if hee had been awaked out of his sleep) he per∣ceived it to be the time of the Lucernari∣um, or Evening-Office, and lifting up his hands towards Heaven, he repeated with a low voyce, this verse out of the Psalmes, Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. About the fourth hour of the night, when all that were present sate diligently watching about him; his poor Cottage did suddenly shake with such a strong Earth-quake, that those who knee∣led about his bed were something disorde∣red with it, and fell all trembling to their prayers. The Guests of Eternal Glory were now entred under that narrow roof, where (after the abdication of his great worldly honours) he had lived so long in all holy∣nesse and humility. For in that instant of time (saith Uranius) he was dissolved, the blessed Angels testifying that they were present to conduct his happy and glorious Soul into the joy of his Master. By the like signe did Christ signifie to his Church in Hierusalem, that he heard their prayers when they were persecuted by the merci∣lesse Jews. Gregory the great, in the place
St. Paulinus to his Wife Therasia. COme my true Consort in my Joyes and Care! Let this uncertaine and still wasting share Of our fraile life be giv'n to God. You see How the swift dayes drive hence incessantlie, And the fraile, drooping World (though still thought gry,) In secret, slow consumption weares away. All that we have, passe from us: and once past Returne no more; like clouds, they seeme to last, And so delude loose, greedy mindes. But where Are now those trim deceits? to what darke sphere Are all those false fires sunck, which once so shin'd They captivated Soules, and rul'd mankind? He that with fifty ploughes his lands did sow, Will scarse be trusted for two Oxen now, His rich, lowd Coach known to each crowded street Is sold, and he quite tir'd walkes on his feet. Merchants that (like the Sun) their voyage made From East to West, and by whole-sale did trade, Are now turn'd Sculler-men, or sadly swett In a poore fishers boat with line and nett. Kingdomes and Cities to a period tend, Earth nothing hath, but what must have an end: Mankind by plagues, distempers, dearth and warre, Tortures and Prisons dye both neare and farre;
Furie and hate rage in each living brest, Princes with Princes, States with States contest; An Vniversall discord mads each land, Peace is quite lost, the last times are at hand; But were these dayes from the last day secure, So that the world might for more yeares endure, Yet we (like hirelings) should our terme expect, And on our day of death each day reflect. For what (Therasia!) doth it us availe That spatious strames shall flow and never faile, That aged forrests hie to tyre the Winds, And flowers each spring returne and keepe their kinds? Those still remaine: but all our Fathers dyed, And we our selves but for few dayes abide. This short time then was not giv'n us in vaine, To whom tyme dyes, in which we dying gaine, But that in time eternall life should be Our care, and endlesse rest our industrie. And yet, this Taske which the rebellious deeme Too harsh, who god's mild lawes for chaines esteem, Suites with the meeke and harmelesse heart so right That 'tis all ease, all comfort and delight. " To love our God with all our strength and will; " To covet nothing; to devise no ill " Against our neighbours; to procure or doe " Nothing to others, which we would not to " Our very selves; not to revenge our wrong; " To be content with little; not to long " For wealth and greatnesse; to despise or jeare " No man, and if we be despised, to bear; " To feede the hungry; to hold fast our Crown; " To take from others naught; to give our owne; These are his precepts: and (alas!) in these What is so hard, but faith can doe with ease?
He that the holy Prophets doth beleeve, And on Gods words relies, words that still live And cannot dye; that in his heart hath writ His Saviour's death and tryumph, and doth yet With constant care, admitting no neglect, His second, dreadfull comming still expect: To such a liver earthy things are dead, With Heav'n alone, and hopes of hav'n hee's sed; He is no Vassall unto worldly trash, Nor that black knowledge, by which pretends to wash, But doth defile: A knowledge, by which Men With studied care loose Paradise agen. Commands and titles, the vaine worlds device, With gold, the forward seed of sin and vice, He never minds: his Ayme is farre more high, And stoopes to nothing lower than the skie; Nor griefe, nor pleasures breede him any pain, He nothing feares to loose, would nothing gaine; What ever hath not God, he doth detest: He lives to Christ, is dead to all the rest. This Holy one sent hither from above A Virgin brought forth, shadow'd by the Dove; His skin with stripes, with wicked hands his face, And with foule spittle soyl'd and beaten was; A Crown of thornes his blessed head did wound, Nayles pierc'd his hands and feet, and he fast bound Stuck to the painefull Crosse, where hang'd till dead With a cold speare his hearts dear blood was shed. All this for man, for bad, ungratefull Man The true God suffer'd! not that sufferings can Adde to his glory ought, who can receive Accesse from nothing, whom none can bereave Of his all-fullnesse:: but the blest designe Of his sad death was to save me from mine;
He dying bore my sins, and the third day His early rising rais'd me from the clay. To such great mercies what shall I preferre, Or who from loving God shall me deterre? Burne me alive, with curious, skilfull paine Cut up and search each warme and breathing vaine: When all is done, death brings a quick release, And the poore mangled body sleepes in peace. Hale me to prisons, shut me up in brasse: My still free Soule from thence to God shall passe; Banish or bind me, I can be no where A stranger, nor alone; My God is there. I feare not famine; how can he be sed To sterve, who feedes upon the living bread? And yet this courage springs not from my store, Christ gave it me, who can give much, much more; I of my selfe can nothing dare or doe, He bids me fight, and makes me conquer too. If (like great Abr'ham,) I should have command To leave my fathers house and native Land, I would with joy to unknown regions run, Bearing the Banner of his blessed Son. On worldly goods I will have no designe, But use my owne, as if mine were not mine; Wealth I'le not wonder at, nor greatnesse seeke, But chuse (though laugh'd at,) to be poore & meeke. In woe and wealth I'le keepe the same stay'd mind, Griefe shall not breake me, nor joyes make me blind: My dearest Jesus I'le still praise, and he Shall with Songs of Deliverance compasse me. Then come my faithfull Consort! joyne with me In this good fight, and my true helper be; Cheare me when sad; advise me when I stray; Let us be each the others guide and stay;
Be your Lords Guardian: give joynt ayde and due; Helpe him when falne; rise, when he helpeth you; That so we may not onely one flesh be, But in one Spirit, and one Will agree. FINIS.
