V38 R14228 12428582 61921
The Ualiant RESOLVTION OF The Sea-men, Listed under the Commaund Of the Earle of VVarwicke, who upon Munday last most valiantly slew many of the Cavaliers, that were comming from Kingston to take Sion-house. and how they were constrayned to sinke their two ships; because the Cava∣liers should not take their Ordnance. Also a trve Relation of the meeting of both Armies betwene Brainford and Acton. Shewing the behaviour the Lord Robert, upon Brainford Bridge: slaying many of the Cavaliers with small losse of his owne forces. VVith the most valiant service of Colonell Hamp∣den, and Collonell Hollis, against Prince Rupert upon Turnham Greene, Together, VVith the most barbarous cruelty of of diverse Cavaliers, upon Mr, Peircy his wife at Acton. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Hanson, November 16. 1642.
The valiant RESOLVTION OF The Sea-men Listed under the command of the Earl of Warwicke, who upon Mun∣day last most valiantly beate and slew a great number of Prince Rubert his Fortes who were comming to take Sion-house. VPon Satterday last being the 12 of November Prince Rubert, who before, had lay scouting up and downe with his For∣ces, taking advantage of the misty Morn∣ing, advaunced his Eorces, and came toward Branford, the suddennes of whose comming was such, that the Inhabitants of the said Town were insensible of his comming
neither had they the least inteligence of his Approch, by resaon whereof he found but small opposition, vntill the Lord Ro∣berts who did not lye far off came with with his men. At the approch of the Lord Roberts with his men, Prince Rupert had allmost gotten the Bridg, but was stayed by him, so that without the losse of any of his men he got in to the Towne. And planted himselfe and his men upon the Edge of the Hils, and a bout twelf or one of the clocke in the after none who began to play afresh vpon the Lord Roberts and his Forces, but their orduance did little or no execution which caused a great discontent in the Cavaleirs and made them swere that the Divill was in the powder there Bulets in their great cannon did not fly halfe way of there intended purpose so that before, that before they could reach the mark they aimed that their power and vigor was spent. When Prince Rubert had played thus
some certain time but to small purpose our men who all this while had bin almost idle, the greatest part of their amunition being behind, were now encoraged with new suply of men and amunition, and al∣though they before had sustained som smal losse, yet they were not thereby dismaide, but made good afterwards for that they had suffered before now Colonell Hampden and Collonell Hollis came in with theire forces and with them greate store of Am∣munition, of which before there was great nede on the Parliaments side. And now being so well provided for the Enimy, they went brauely on, and with undanted sperit played with their great pieces vpon the Enemy, which peaces did brave execution and service that in a small space there fell of the Cavaleirs avery geat number, but of the Parliaments side very few.
The Cavaleirs perceiving their losse to be so great, and the losse on the Parliaments side to be so small, upon Sunday Night at bout eleaven or twelve of the clocke did quit that place, and Prince Rubert with all his forces fell backe to Kingflon; which Towne by the treachery of the inhabitants was delivered up unto the Cavaleirs, and the townsmen have since pulled up the Bridge; so that all passage for pursuite af∣ter them is hindred. And I cannot here passe by the inhuman and most barbarous actions of the Cava∣leirs at their entrance into Acton, amongst the rest one example being of a most bar∣barous nature, will render their conditi∣ons odious unto you. When they entred the town first of all, and were seated therein, some of the Cavaleirs went up and downe to plunder where they had intelligence a∣ny store of money, Plate, or jewels of va∣lue were; amongst the rest it happened that they came unto one Mr. Pierce his house, but he not being then who is a Brewer in
the Towne of Acton, they comming to this Mr. Pierce his house, did demaund the Mr. of the house, but he not being then within would not be content with that answer but fell to pillaging; Mistris Peircy the Brewers wife, having not bin delivered of a child above one weeke before, was very much affrighted at the vnruly carriage of the Cavaliers, and although she was weake yet thinking by faire perswasions and pro∣mises to appease them for the present came down and desired them that they would desist from such uncivill actions and that they should have what they could desire, or the house could supply them withall. These her faire speeches gave them but little or noe satisfaction but the more she intreated the more violent were they in the persecution of their violent misdeme∣nours, shee perswads but they were still as death as adders, and at the last one of them more cruell then the others, as she was standing by weeping did cock his pistoll, and shot her with her child in
her little babe in her Armes, such an act of barbarous cruelty I thinke scarce any Chrouicle can parralell such unhumane acts. Upon Munday, after the Cavaliers had lost Brainford, and sheltred themselves in Kingston, after some time, some of them came over the water againe and tooke Sion-house, thinking by this meanes to stop all provision from comming unto the City, but they were much deceived, for the Sea∣men who had listed themselves under the Earle of Warwicke tooke two small Pinisses mand with fourteene peeces of Ordnance, and with them gave many a brave shot a∣gainst the house, but could doe but little good by reason of the strength of the buil∣ding could do small execution. Vpon which they were constrained to draw away their ships, for want of the tide to carry them backe and likwise constrayned to sinke them least the Ca∣valiers should seize one the Ordnance, and by this meanes they have defeated the expectation of the Cavaliers. FINIS.
