V594 R18686 12439681 62073
depiction of the ships Sampson, Salvadore, and St George ye Sampson Salvadore ye St George These Silver-ships brought treasure to our shore Two hundred seventie thousand pounds and more; Color'd by Flemish and by Spanish Claimes; The Fraud's discover'd, Violet spoile's ye games By seasonable Protest, when Great Ones did decree. To th' Nation's Dammage, to haue set them free Reward is due: ô lett it not bee said The Worke is don; But Workman never paid Tho Violet
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS In the Court OF Admiraltie, Against the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, their Silver and Lading. AND An Accompt presented what Silver was taken out of the said Ships, and coined in the Tower, (being above two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds,) all which Silver the Com∣mon-wealth got by the chargeable Prosecution and Dis∣covery of Tho. Violet, who saved the Common∣mon-wealth this Silver, Dec. 16. 1652. As in this Narrative is Attested under the Hands of many Honourable Persons. Together with several Humble Proposals, for the Profit and Honour of this Com∣mon-wealth, in saving them many score of thousand pounds, 1. By making an Act against transporting Gold and Silver, 2. Against the culling and melting down the heavy currant Coines of the Nation. By removing the Obstructious of the Mint, and wayes propounded to make the Mint constantly coyn money. 4. For the just and due Regulation of the Manufactures of gold and silver Lace to prevent the daily cheats put upon the Wearers. 5. And for the making of a publick Copper Farthing, and a great Re∣venue propounded to be monethly paid out of the same for the relief of the maimed Soldiers: And several other Particulars humbly represented to the Parliament and Councel of State. By THO VIOLET of London, Goldsmith. Deut. 24. 14, 15. Thou shalt not oppresse an hired Servant, that is poor and needie, whether he be of thy brethren, or of the strangers that are in thy land within thy Gates. Ver. 15. At his day thou shalt give him his Hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sinne unto thee. LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1659.
To the RIGHT HONOURABLE John Lord Bradshawe, Lord Commissioner of the Great Seal of England, Tho. Lord Fairfax, Maj. Gen. Lam∣bert, Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, Sir Henry Vane, Sir James Harington, Lieut. Gen. Ludlow, Lord Whitlock, Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood, Josiah Barners Esq. Coll. Morley, Tho. Scot Esq. Col. Sydenham, Henry Nevill Esq Tho. Chalo∣ner Esq. All of them of the most honourable Councel of State. May it please your Honours, IT is a curious Art to make a Watch, and he must be a skilful Artist, that exactly sets a broken Bone, God for the sins of this Na∣tion, hath several times in this Age, took the Clock of this Common-wealth in pieces, and many of the pins and wheels have bin and are misplaced. It now requires great skill, to place and set every thing in its due order. Your Honours have a great work to do, God hath broken us in pieces, and divided our Councels, and none can unite us, but he that hath wounded us, he only must cure us, and bless and sanctifie all lawful means, or
else our disjoynted bones will never be truly knit, or exactly set. For this end hath God apointed a select num∣ber of honourable persons, of which number your Honours are Members, whose heart God hath fixed for this great Work, to revive the stones out of the heap of rubbish, and to build the Walls of our Jerusalem, though the Sanballats, Arabians and Ammonites be worth, and conspire altogether to fight against Jerusalem, to hinder this VVork. Right Honourable, if you will finish this good VVork you have begun, you must do as Nehemiah did, keep good watch day and night, because of your enemies, lest your ad∣versaries serve you, as they served Nehemiah, for they say you shall not know nor see till we come in the midst amongst them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease, if this be not prevented, this Parliament will have a fatal end. Presidents in Courts of Justice is a great Guide to all just Judges, especially when they have been made by the Grave and Learned,
and are recorded in the Sacred Bible, the chiefest Book that every good Statesman walks by; such Statesmen that walks by Ma∣chiavels rules, the wicked Maximes of these troublesom times, they do as Saul did when he left God, and went to the VVitch of Endor, he pretended to go to speak with Sa∣muel, and met with the devil, so these times have produced many a Fast, the pretence hath bin to seek God and Peace, when the true end hath bin to get to be the Head of a Party and Faction, to make division, and to get the Peoples money: The People are now very well acquainted with such canting, and as we know after a flash of lightning, there comes a clap of thunder, so hath it ma∣ny times fallen out, after Fasts hath followed an erecting of an High Court of Justice, or one remarkable oppression or other. I humbly present you here in this Epistle, with a good President made by a great Statesman Nehemiah, such a one as God hath recorded was a Saviour of his Countrey, a Builder up of Jerusalem, in the like case, and
in the like straits as it is now, or suddenly without Gods infinite mercy will be vvith us, he took this course. In the first place, he sought God, and prayed before the God of Heaven, and did not make a mock-Fast; then he used the means, he fell to his VVork, and built up the walls of Jerusalem, and did not only build, but he built wisely and poli∣tickly, and had there bin a Sanballat found amongst them, the people would have stoned him. On the lovver places behind the vvall, and on the higher places, he set the people after their families, vvith their svvords, their spears and their bovves; and vvhen he had set him∣self in a posture of defence, he made the peo∣ple to be his Guard, and delivered an Orati∣on to the Rulers and People, saying, Be not afraid of your enemies, remember the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sonnes and your daughters, your wives and your houses. I shall humbly desire your Honours to ob∣serve, vvhat vvas the effect of this orderly
and good posture. Nehemiah and his peo∣ple did not their work carelessely and by halfes, and spent their precious time in need∣lesse questions, but did all things upon sound advice. For when great things are quietly without Faction disputed, and the Result con∣cluded; then to use expedition and resoluti∣on is just policie. But all hasty and unadvised attempts at long running brings the Common-wealth in∣to great danger, and the Actors generally in∣to contempt and misery, many men in their designes thinking to catch a great Fish, but after long angling bring up a Frog; this daily experience hath shewed, and I can experi∣mentally say it to be true. For those men that read Machiavel, and make it their Rule to walk by, in stead of the Bible, because they are in great places, to practice Iniquity by a Law, as Ahab did for Naboths Viniard, who did not only cheat him of his Land and Inheritance, but robbed him of his Life, and to seem holy called a Fast, the effect of that godly Fast was to set two
mens sonns of Belial, to beare false witnesse that Naboth had Bsasphemed God and the King, sending a warrant for the Execution of innocent Naboth before ever they tryed him, that he should be ston'd to death right or wrong, what a sad End the Authors of this murder and robbery come to is well known, how many great and Noble Persons of the eminentest for quality in this Nation, have bin Trappaned and perjured out of their Lifes, Lands and Estates, and some of the witnesses upon their Death beds with horrour of Conscience, and great Remorse have con∣fessed the perjury that they were suborned by others, to the great scandal of the Justice of the Nation by such waies to get mens Estates. This is most apparent God is comming to visit for these things, and when man cannot bring the Delinquents to Justice, he causeth the guilty Persons one to punish another, till by the dividing and subdividing they are so weak, that as the flood cam upon the old world and destroyed mankinde, so by these divisions
the strength of the Nation is disjoynted. Every man upon and against his Neigh∣bour, making a passage and way for the com∣mon Enemy to come and swallovv the Inno∣cent with the guilty, if God be not mercifull. Moses divided the Red-Sea, and the Children of Israel passed over on dry Land, God hath by nature made a Sea betvveen us and our Neighbours, he hath hedged us in, and made a vvall of seperation between us and Popery, but our sins at this day are pluck∣ing down this wall, the wilde Bore of the For∣rest is come in amongst us, the Devil and the Jesuites have plaid their parts in this Nation, to the ruining of many Body and Soul, and to the admiration of Christendom, the Jewes Crucified Christ thinking to gratifie Caesar, Caesar a few years after paid them to purpose for Crucifying him. May it please your Honours, The ten Com∣mandements and Fonts for christning of children at the beginning of these Troubles were plucked down; and now comes Pulpits to be beaten in pie∣ces, and frequent tumults in several Churches
within the city of London, as lately at Ald∣gate parish hath bin done, which is a corner of the city, where many poor live, and are fit for any Insurrection. When I see children with a candle amongst powder or chips, I feare the burning of the house, or a blow with powder; when wee see the buds ap∣peare, the spring is near: these are as certaine signes of a mischief; as the plague-tokens are to a man that hath the Plague, the best symptomes are a purple fever; a shaking, an earth-quake, if not a dissolution. The pride and vanity of some Lecturers and Ministers, who in the Nation having studyed points of dissention and division, in¦stead of the Gospel of Christ preach themselves, (too much plenty have made them wanton.) No doubt but some of them do it with the ad∣vice of the Iesuits to make a separation in Coun∣tryes, Cities, Townes, Parishes and Families, till without Gods infinite mercy, the Iesuits bring a destruction both on the Churches and hou∣ses of the Nation, and on this Great Citie of London, and set every man to cut one anothers throats. Would not the end of these things bring
an unhappy deformation, instead of a blessed Re∣formation, when we are exposed to the fury of a forein Enemy by the vileness of the Iesuits, and folly of our own Divisions? What a divelish State trick vvas put upon the late Protector Oliver, and his Secretary Mr. Thurloe, by Sir Kenelm Digby, and several other Persons Jesuitically inclined, in setting the Protector on that fatal businesse of Hispa∣niola and Jamaica, without ever advising and consulting with many of the English Prote∣stant Planters, who had for many years lived in those parts, and had they had the honour to have been consulted with, they could have told them that those fiery Regions was not for the constitution of our bodies. That Fox and subtile Statesman Sir Ke∣nelme Digby, his very name should have bin fatall to the Protestants cause, if the Lord Protector Oliver and Mr. Thurloe would have bin pleased to remember the Gun-pow∣der treason. This fatal designe of Jamaica cost the Pro∣tector and the Commonwealth above tvvo
millions of pounds, beside the lives of above twentie thousand valiant Englishmen, destroy∣ed by the unhealthfulness of the Climate, and want of necessary Provisions; and when these valiant men were almost famisht, (who had they bin in any part of Christendom, the Spaniards durst not have look't them in the face, had they bin twice their number,) yet these gallant Souldiers were all like sheep led to the slaughter, and their blood spilt like wa∣ter on the ground, by the treachery of some of their Officers, who no doubt had private instructions from some then in power to do what they did, which upon examination was the cause they kept their heads upon their shoulders, and escap't both with lives and e∣states. May it please your Honours, I hope your Honours will pardon these sad and necessarie truths, proceeding from a loyal heart. I have formerly ventured my life many times to get the Common-wealth two hundred seventie eight thousand pounds in money, I now ven∣ture my self in these dangerous times to speak
truth. It is now as it was in the daies of Noah; no man but Noah and his Familie believ'd a flood would come, till it did come and sweep them all away. And if I be justly used, I may now in your streights bring you in presently as great a sum in money again as I saved you formerly abov three hundred thousand pounds, fevv of the Council of State when I undertook to disco∣ver the Spanish Ambassadors fraudulent claim to this Silver, I say there was but few of that Council did believe that I could ever get the State this Silver, or that I would be so faithful to refuse ten thousand pounds which was offe∣red me by the Claimers of this Silver, which is certified in this Book by severall honourable Persons to be true, should I bend my braines as much to study the disturbance of this Common-wealth, as I have ever done the peace and happiness of it, I could Demonstrate to you, a pen and Inkhorne-man as I am can do more service or disservice then many hundreds of Red-coats, I humbly pray my faithfulnesse be not paid with Ingratitude.
As for my own life, I desire to have it no longer preserv'd then I can serve and benefit my Countrey. I will wait on God, and ex∣spect an happie issue upon this my humble request, knowing that if the Reputation and Iustice of the State, and the Certificates of honorable persons be of any value in your Honours sight, my great expence, pains and faithfulness, shall have its due and promised Reward; considering that in these humble Proposals which I have propounded to your Honours for my satisfaction, I take no money from the publick, but humbly offer to pay in monethly a great Revenue to the maimed Souldiers, to regulate the abuses of the Ma∣nufacture of Gold and Silver Thread and Lace, to give a stop to the Transportation of Gold and Silver, to keep your Mint constant∣ly at work to coyn money, great quantities yearly: all which services are of very great consequence to the Common-wealth, the consideration of the premisses I humbly leave to your Honours, and remain Your Honours dutifull and humble Servant, TH. VIOLET.
THE TABLE. THO. Violets Petition to the late Protector Oliver, for getting the Common∣wealth two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds, and to be paid his reward according to Promise. p. 51. The Lord Protectors Reference 61 The Officers of the Mint, their Cer∣tificate concerning this businesse. 61 Several persons Affidavits of Tho. Violets Services. 63 A Copy of Tho, Violets Letter sent to the Lord Bradshaw. 67 Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Hills Let∣ter to Mr. Thurloe. 68 Doctor Walkers Warrants to the Examiners, Mr. How, Mr. Arnold, Mr. Dorislaws, Mr. Bud, concerning Tho. Violet. 69 Sir Tho. Viner, Sir Iohn Bark∣stead, Iohn Limbery, Maurice Thomson Esq. their desires to the Lord Bradshaw touching Tho. Violet. 74 Doctor Walkers Certificate. 90 Lord Com. Bradshaws Certificate, concerning Tho. Violets ser∣vice in staying this Silver. 80 Alderman Francis Allen Esq. his Certificate. 83 Sir George Fleetwoods Certifi∣cate concerning this service, and the Councel of States Promise and engagement to Tho. Violet for his reward. 84 Sir Iames Harringtons Certificate of many services done in staying this Silver, and in other Parti∣culars. 92 Sir Tho. Viner, Sir Iohn Bark∣stead, Gabriel Beck, Capt. Iohn Limbery, Edward Dendy, Henry Middleton, Maurice Thomson, Isaac Dorislaws, Esq. Certificate touching Th. Vi∣olets great service in the Silver-business. 99 The Late Lord Protector Richards Order to Gabriel Beck and Francis Bacon Esquires, touch∣ing Tho. Violet. 112 Francis Bacon and Gabriel Becks Certificate to the late Lord Pro∣tector Richard. 113. Tho. Violets Petition to the late Lord Protector, in the name of Edward Iohnson Esq. for the making of a publick farthing. 118 The late Protectors Warrant to Master Solicitor General Ellis, to prepare a Grant for these Far∣things. 120
An Account given to Sir Thomas Viner, Mr. Alexander Holt, &c. of this business of the Silver Ships. 122 The several abuses and obstructions of the Mint, with ways propound∣ed by Tho. Violet to set the Mint on work. 11 The late King Charles's Letter to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London. 33 An Account of what hath been taken from me by the Parliament. 38 An Order of the Councel of State, requiring Th. Violet to pay four∣ty pounds to the Committee of Sa∣lop for certain Bonds, with power to take the benefit of them, and sue them as he might have done, be∣fore any Sequestration. 47 Iohn Corbet Esq. his Receipt for the aforesaid fourty pounds. 48
To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of the Common-wealth of England, &c. AND TO THE RIGHT HONOƲRABLE THE COUNCEL OF STATE. I. THomas Violet of London Goldsmith, humbly presents this Narrative, concern∣ing his staying in the Court of Admiralty the Silver in the Ships Sampson, Sal∣vador and George, together with the Certificates and Reports of many Honour∣able Persons, attesting your Petitioners great service done this Nation, in his seasonable Applications to the Councel of State 1652. and his protesting in the Admiralty, against the dis∣charge of this silver, and discovering the frauds of the Spanish and Flemish Claimers, and in many other parti∣culars.
II. Further sheweth, that there was unloaded out of the aforesaid ships, 1653. upon your Petitioners discovery, the summe of two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds, which your Petitioners stayed by his Protest in the Admiralty, the same houre the Judges would have discharged it. And this sil∣ver was all coyned in the Tower. And Colonel Barkstead, Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, paid all this treasure to the Army and Navie, for the defence and service of this Common wealth, in 1653. and 1654. as will appear to your Honours, upon the sight of his Accounts concerning this businesse. III. These Particulars with many others, are certified to his late Highnesse Oliver Lord Protector, under the hands of Col. Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower, Alderman Viner, Capt. John Limbery, Doctor Walker, Serjeant Dendy, Maurice Thomson, Treasurer of the East-India Company, Serjeant Middleton, Isaack Dorislawes, Gabriel Beck Esquires, By vertue of his late Highnesse reference directed to them 13. July 1657. IV. The true Copies of these original Petitions and Certifi∣cates, and several other Transactions touching this silver, are here presented to your Honours view, to the end your Petition∣er may (after so long a delay of Justice) have his dearly earn∣ed reward. Your Honours, upon perusal of all the Premisses, will see it clearly proved, your Petitioners great expence, eminent zeal, faithfulnesse, and integritie, with the hazard of his life in this service of the Common-wealth. Your Honours Humble Servant, THO. VIOLET. May 25. 1659.
TO THE RIGHT HONOƲRABLE The LORDS and others of the COUNCEL OF STATE. VIZ. Thomas Lord Fairfax, Major Gen. Lambert, Col. John Desborough, Col. James Bury, John Bradshaw Serjeant at Law, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Sir Horatio Towns∣end, Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, Sir Henry Vane, Lieut, Gen. Ludlow, Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood, Major Saloway, Col. Dixwell, Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Josiah Barners, Col. Morley, Mr. Thomas Scot, Mr. Robert Wallop, Sir James Har∣rington, Col. Walton, Col. John Jones, Col. Sydney, Col. Sydenham, Mr. Hen. Nevill, Mr. Thomas Chaloner, Col. Downs, Lord Chief Justice St. John, Col. Thom∣pson, Lord Whitlock, Sir Robert Honywood, Sir Archi∣bald Johnson. May is please your Honours, YOur Petitioner did about the eighth of Decemb. 1652. deliver into the Coun∣cel of State a Written Paper, wherein was discovered, that at that present time a Practice and Combination was set on foot by several Merchants and others, to deceive the
Common-wealth of a great quantity of silver, above three hundred thousand pounds, which was then a∣board the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, then riding about Black-wall. Upon Examination of this Businesse at the Councel of State, the Councel within few dayes after, com∣manded and engaged your Petitioner in this service, and your Petitioner did faithfully promise the Councel his ut∣termost endeavours, to discover this fraud, and at his own charge to prosecute this Businesse in the Court of Admsraltie. The Judges of the Court of Admiraltie did appoint the 16. day of Decemb. 1652. to give sen∣tence for clearing these ships and silver, being to the value of about three hundred thousand pounds in silver, as appears by the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint; Whereupon your Petitioner came into the Court of Admiralty, the very day and houre the Judges were clearing the said silver, and at his own peril made his Protest in the Admiraltie against the Judges of that Court, and against all further Proceedings of theirs, to discharge this Silver in the aforesaid ships, till your Petitioners Witnesses were examined, and shewed the Judges many Reasons, being for the advantage and safety of the Common-wealth, for respiting for some dayes their Judgment. Thereupon the Court of Admiralty adjourned till the next day; and the Judges being very angry with your Petitioner for making the aforesaid Protest, and for what your Petitioner had said to the Judges in open Court, the
Judges thereupon command your Petitioner to attend the Council of State that very day in the afternoon, being 16 of December 1652. the Petitioner to answer before them for his mildemeanor (so the Iudges were pleased to call it) that morning in the Court of Admiralty. Your Petitioner did accordingly attend the Council of State that day, 16 Dec. in the afternoon, and upon full examination of the Business before them, the Council stayed the silver, and blamed the Judges for their com∣plaining of your Petitioner, and your Petitioner had thanks from the Council for what hee had done in his timely and seasonable staying this silver, and commanded to use what expedition hee could in proving that great quantities of the silver then aboard these ships appertain∣ed to the Merchants of Amsterdam. Thereupon your Pe∣titioner undertook to the Council of State to disprove the Spanish and Flemish clamors, and the Spanish Em∣bassadors pretences to all this silver in the aforesaid ships. And this discovery your Petitioner undertook to make to the Council of State at his own charge. The Council of State upon the considerations afore∣said, and to incourage your Petitioner to proceed, they did faithfully promise your Petitioner for this his service and discovery, that your Petitioner should be paid the sum of eleven thousand pounds out of the silver that should be taken out of these ships, and converted to the use of the Common-wealth, this summe of eleven thousand pounds, being the value of your Petitioners Estate, which
the Parliament 1643. upon mis-information against your Petitioner had sequestred. And the Council of State declared unto your Petiti∣oner, That if your Petitioner should fail to make good his undertaking in disproving the Spanish and Flemish Claims to all this silver, then aboard the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, that the undertaking would undo your Petitioner; for upon your Petitioners failing to make good proof of what he had undertaken, the Councel of State would report your Petitioner to the Parliament to be an Incendiary, therefore it highly concerned your Petitioner to be well assured of what he had undertaken, and also to be justly dealt withal when he had done this service. Upon the assurance of the Councel of State upon the aforesaid termes, your Petitioner engaged and under∣took this great, difficult, and dangerous service, where∣in your Petitioner employed above ten several persons, for about two years, and laid out of Purse, besides all his time and hazard, the summe of above seven hundred six∣ty five pounds, which he payes interest for at this very day, as is deposed by several Witnesses whom your Pe∣titioners employed in this service, and this is attested un∣der the hands of several Honourable Persons, to the late Lord Protector Oliver. May it please your Honours, besides this service your Petitioner did for the Common-wealth, he discovered to the Councel of State, in Jan. 1651. That from August.
to December 20. 1652. the Admiralty had discharged fifty eight ships, all loaden with rich merchandize, I printed the several daies of the moneth they were cleared out of the Court of Admiralty, the names of the ships, and the Master of the ships names, and the parties to whom these ships and merchandize was delivered at London; and that many of these ships after their discharge from hence, un∣loaded their merchandize at Amsterdam for the account of the Dutch, to the value of many hundred thousand pounds. Upon examination of this Business, the Council of State had certain intelligence from beyond sea that this information was true, and these Letters were remaining in Captain Bisheps hands who can testifie the truth. Whereupon your Petitioner humbly presented to the Council of State in writing several waies for the preven∣ting this abuse for the future, and the Judges in the Ad∣miraltie was removed, and other Iudges put in their pla∣ces, with particular instructions for the prevention of the former frauds put on the Nation. By which discovery made by your Petitioner, the Common-wealth got many score prizes, which were condemned as Dutch prizes, when they could not bring attestations from Hamborough under the Parliament Agents hands, viz Mr Bradshaws, that they really and tru∣ly belonged to Hamborough. The value of the Ships and goods by your Petitioners means discovered was amount∣ing to several score of thousand pounds, besides all the silver your Petitioner stayed, which the Dutch had cozen.
ed us of, had not your Petitioner acquainted the Council in Ianuary 1652 with the former cheats put on the Nati∣on, in printing a list of 58 Saile of ships, most of them Dutch prize, which the Common-wealth lost, for want of keeping a good Watch on the Actions of their Judg∣es and Officers in the Admiralty in those times 1652. 1653. It was nothing for ordinary Proctors in the Admiralty to get foure of five thousand pounds a yeare, by cozening the State in their prizes, till your Petitioner by his discovery to the Councel of State, spoiled their Trade for a great part of it. This discovery got your Petitioner the envy of many hundred Merchants, and others in the Admiralty. There was not a motion, nor any Proceedings in the Court of Admiralty, for about three yeares, touching the Silver Ships Sampson, Salvador and George, their silver and lading, but every day your Petitioner was required to give his attendance therein, at the Court of Admi∣ralty, and forced to employ at his own charge many per∣sons; and your Petitioner was required by Doctor Walker, at his own charge to employ many persons to breviate and have inspection into all the Records, Acts, Bills of lading, Pleas, Extracts, Allegations, and Inter∣rogatories, Witnesses, Depositions in the Silver busi∣nesse, as will appear under the hands of several per∣sons employed and paid by your Petitioner for that service. Your Petitioner did several times move the Councel of State, in December, January, February, March 1652.
to unload the silver out of the ships, to avoid the em∣bezeling thereof, there being above an hundred thou∣sand pounds stollen out of these ships, while the silver was in the River; there are bills of lading in the Ad∣miralty, for silver that was never delivered into the Tower, to the value of above a hundred thousand pounds in silver, which bills appertain to these ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George. Your Petitioner presented to the Councel of State, in 1652. 1653. several frauds and abuses put upon the Common-wealth, in the Sale of their Prizes, Ships, and Merchandize, by the indirect meanes of some Offi∣cers they intrusted to sell the same, sometimes the State hath been cheated fourty in the hundred, to the value of many score of thousand pounds in this businesse. Your Petitioner finding these papers that made this Discovery, which he delivered to Col. Joanes, and Mr. Thurloe, (by some bribing means) in the Custodie of some of the parties complained of; and that nothing was done to reform these abuses, but this business was stiffed. (And by your Petitioners discovery of the abuses for the service of the State, he had contracted the envie of ma∣ny guilty persons) Thereupon to shew to the world, what I had delivered in private to the aforesaid persons was true, and that I would justifie what I had com∣plained of privately, I printed the several frauds and cheats put upon the Nation by some of the Commissi∣oners for prize Goods, and some of their Officers and Agents, and demonstrated several wayes for the State to
finde it out, which was offered to be proved to be true, by Mr. John Day, and several others at that time, but the fate of the Common-wealth in those dayes was to be cozened, that makes the debts of the publick now at this time so great, and the Publicans of the time so rich. Your Petitioner by order of Parliament, as appears by your Records of the House, for several yeares was com∣manded to follow and solicite the getting of an Act to passe against transporting Gold and Silver. And your Petitioner made several overtures both for punishing and discovery of the offenders that had transported Gold and Silver, and melted down the silver coyn of the Nation; by whose fines many score of thousand pounds would have justly come to the State. But the guilty persons were then so powerfull in the Councills of the Parliament, that though the Parliament made several Committees of the House and Council of State, for the perfecting the Act and for discovery of the offenders, and referred the matter thereof to the consi∣deration of the Commissioners of the Navy, Offi∣cers of the Mint, and Farmers of the Customes, who all of them have certified the Parliament of the great mis∣chief and dammage the Common-wealth suffered by se∣veral evil-disposed persons, who for private lucre and gain daily transported the Gold and Silver of the Nation, to the unspeakable damage of the Common-wealth. This Bill being twice read in the House, and several times committed, yet by the power of some guilty Merchants, this good Act was stopt, smothered and sti∣fled,
and never finisht, though your Petitioner attended many yeares at his great expence and charges to have this good Act past, (And now at this day it is apparent to all people,) that you cannot receive in the payment of a thousand pounds twenty shillings in Gold, no Gold being stirring in the Nation, but in the hands of Game∣sters, Rooks, and Goldsmiths, they selling a twenty shillings piece in Gold for two shillings in the pound, more then the price current by Proclamation, which is against the Statute of the fifth and sixth of Edward the sixth. And to give your Honours an information of the present stock of Silver moneys, now current in this Nation, there is very little left but light and clipt money, the weightie silver money, being culled, melted down, and transported, by divers Goldsmiths and others, for private lucre and gain, to the unspeakable damage of the Common-wealth, especially at this time, now we have War with Spain. This your Petitioner hath often complained of to this Parliament, and hath humbly of∣fered them a remedy, but as yet nothing hath been done by them to prevent this mischief. There was several Committees appointed to regulate the abuses concerning the coyne, and removing the obstructions of the Mint these times, having appointed two Doctors of Phy∣sick to be the chief Officers of the Mint. Your Petitioner was required to give his attendance on this Committee, and commanded by them at his own charge to send for from beyond seas all the principal Coyns in Christendom, and to procure the Lawes, Orders and Statutes made beyond seas, for
the due regulating their Mints; and their Policies, how they used to draw bullion into their Mints: these Lawes your Pe∣titioner translated and printed, and presented them to the Com∣mittee of this businesse, for removing the obstructions of the Mint. And your Petitioner made Assayes of all these forraign Coynes of Gold and Silver, and writ down the just weight and standard of every several forreign Coyne, what proportion and value they held with the standard of our Mint, and what every forreign piece of Gold and Silver, would make to Merchants to be coyn'd in our Mint of London, and caused all the several stamps of the Coynes of forreign Gold and Silver to be engra∣ved, for the true information of all our English Merchants, who generally are not so expert in this mystery as the Dutch Merchants are. The true reason of this defect is this, viz. In England we have only our own Coynes of Gold and Silver goes currant, which makes our Nation in general never to study the intrinsecal value of forreign Coynes of Gold or Silver; whereas in Holland almost all forreign Coynes of Gold or Silver goes currant by Proclamation, therefore of necessity all Merchants and others must know the intrinsecal value of all forreign Coynes, what proportion they hold with their standard; and several Books which they call Placarts, are printed by Authority of the States, with the several Figures of the Coynes of forreign Gold and Silver, being marked in the margin at what price the several Coynes shall go, not being washed and clipt, and full weight. And the Dutch allowing these forreign Coynes to go cur∣rant, having publick banks of treasure, that makes them Ma∣sters
of their Exchange of moneys, the mysteries whereof very few of our English Merchants understand, for the reasons aforesaid. But had the Figures of all the forreign Coynes bin printed, which was prepared by your Petitioner, by order of the Ho∣nourable the Committee of the Mint, in 1652. your Petitioner humbly affirms to your Honours, that the printing thereof would have been a great guide and advantage to our Merchants, and the Nation, had Mr. Secretary Thurloe given your Petiti∣oner back again these Prints and Papers which was most model'd and acted by your Petitioner; but he buried them in Oblivion, as he did many other good Proposals, which your Peti∣tioner presented to him, for the service of the Common-wealth. Your Petitioner humbly offered, to the consideration of the Committee, for removing the obstructions of the Mint, that if they would set the Mint a work, they must take order to remove their chief Officers of the Mint; these Gentlemen, the present master. Worker and Warden, were never brought up to know the mysteries of the Mint, nor the private waies of correspondence with forein mints and merchants, and to make every winde bring grift to their mill, and to know what ships and merchants bring us in gold and silver, and to learn the mysterie to inforce them to coyn it; also to know what ships and merchants transport gold and silver without licence from the State, and to keep good intel∣ligence and watch upon their actions, that so the gold and silver en∣deavored to be unlawfully transported may be seiz'd and for∣feited. For a man to be his Crasts-master in this mystery, re∣quires as many years study as to be a Doctor of Physick, and is never to be learn'd by looking on an Ʋrinal.
Your Petitioner humbly saies, The Parliament had made a better bargain to have given these Doctors of Physick fortie thousand pounds for a pension, than to suffer that dammage they have received by the not imploying of the mint, daily gold and silver being imported into this Nation, and before ever it be coy∣ned transported out again without licence, to the great dammage and weakning of the stock of this Common wealth. There is silver and gold vast and great quantities brought daily from beyond the seas, and landed in this Nation, without paying of Custom, and this verie silver and gold is stoln out of the Nation again before ever it be coyned without licence or paying of Custom; so here is a Trade to the value of some hundreds of thousands of pounds by the year, for the particular profit of some covetous merchants, and the Common-wealth have no profit either by Excise, Custom or Coynadge; and till skilfull men in these Mysteries be imployed in the Mint, this mischief will not be stopt or removed either by Doctors or Apothecaries. Your Petitioner did formerly offer, and now doth humby offer unto your Honours, that he may be impowered and commissioned to be master-Worker and melter of the Mint, to undertake now at this time to set your Mint to work, notwithstandidg the pre∣sent Warre with Spain, provided your Petitioner may be impow∣ered by your Honours order for the execution of what he shall humbly propound for the honour of the State and service of the Common-wealth in this business. God send your Honours to order all these abuses by mee here presented, may be prevented for the future, and care taken where corrupt, ignorant and unskilfull persons are got into imploiment for the publick they may be removed, and trustie skilfull Officers put
in their imploiments. Your Petitioner humbly saies, This is a sure waie to abate and lessen the great engagements of the Com∣monwealth, when Drones are discharged and Bees imploied: for if your Honours take away the cause, the cure of the disease followes of course. OLIVER the late Lord Protector the 20. of April 1653. dismisses the Parliament, and the same day put a Guard of souldiers aboard the aforesaid ships, Sampson, Salvador, and St. George, then riding about Black wall. And shortly after unloads all the silver in∣to the Mint, which your Petitioner stayed for the use of the Common-wealth: your Petitioner can prove it by the Account of the Mint, that the silver which was taken out of the said ships, beside what was stoln and em∣bezeled, amounted to the summe of two hundred se∣ventie eight thousand odde hundred pounds, and Mr. Lieut. of the Tower, Col. Barkstead, paid out all this great Treasure. In reducing the Dutch, paying the Army, and other servi∣ces for the Publick, as will appear by the particulars of his Accompt; and your Petitioner never had farthing, so that this great Treasure your Petitioner stayed, was every pennie laid out in defence of the Common∣wealth, and subduing the Dutch. It was a great mercie of God to this Nation, that your Petitioner prevented the Dutch from getting this great Treasure, at that jun∣cture of time, 1652. that silver would have made work for us else, had the Dutch had it. When your Petitioner see all this money disposed of
by Col. Barkstead, and not one penny thereof paid un∣to your Petitioner, according to the promise of the Councel of State; yet at the same time your Petitioner to be daily commanded and enjoined by the late Lord Protector Oliver, and by his Councel, and by the Judg∣es of the Admiraltie, and Doctor Walker 1653. 1654. dai∣lie required at his own charge to attend and prosecute this businesse, and to pay about ten other persons for a∣bout two yeares, who assisted your Petitioner in the prosecution of this businesse, as appears by the Warrants of the Councel of State, Court of Admiraltie, Doctor Walker, all of them dated after the 20. of April 1653. which Warrants and Orders your Petitioner hath ready to produce to your Honours. Your Petitioner finding this unmerciful and hard usage in this businesse, to be dailie forced to borrow great summes of money at interest, and to expend the same in prosecuting this business in the Admiraltie to maintain the States claim to this silver against the clai∣mers, and your Petitioner never to receive one peny from the States for his service, he was enforced to petition the late Lord Protector OLIVER for his reward and sa∣tisfaction, according to the promise of the Councel of State, his Highness being one of the Members that had faithfully promised your Petitioner the summe of eleven thousand pounds when your Petitioner first undertook this service, before Col. Bingham and Mr Sadler. In his Petition hee sets forth the several services, char∣geable and dangerous imploiment, together with the
Councel of States engagements and promise, to pay your Petitioner eleven thousand pounds for this his dis∣covery and service, and named several of the Councel of State which knew this to be a truth, and that your Peti∣tioner wholly relied upon the Councels Promise as afore∣said (which was the true cause) that engaged your Peti∣tioner, to undertake this difficult, chargeable, and dan∣gerous task and emploiment. And had not your Petitioner borrowed above seven hundred sixty five pounds, and expended it all in this ser∣vice, which he payes interest for at this very day, besides your Petitioners daily attendance in the Admiralty, with about ten persons whom he paid and employed in this business to assist your Petitioner; had not your Petitioner done this, the Common-wealth had lost every penny of this great treasure. The late Lord Protector Oliver, upon your Petitioners addresses unto him, and after his daily attendance for a∣bove two years, with Petitions at Whitehall and Ham∣pton Court, for his dearly earned reward, the reasons wherefore the Protector delayed your Petitioner so long, before his reference touching this businesse, was (he knew the Referrees would certifie the debt, and that he knew I could prove his particular Promise, for the paying of your Petitioner eleven thousand pounds for this service which he made me at the Cock pit at Whitehall, before Col. Bingham and Mr. Sadler, who were of the then Councel of State, and brought me to him, to give him a particular Account what your Petitioner had done
in this businesse, your Petitioner by his importunity and daily attendance, following him every day, got his High∣nesse Oliver at last, to referre the aforesaid Petition to Col. Barkstead Lieut. of the Tower, Mr. Alderman Vyner, Capt. John Limbery, Doctor Walker Advocate for his Highnesse, Gabriel Beck, Serjeant Dendy, Maurice Thom∣son Treasurer of the East-India Company, Serjeant Middle∣ton, Isaac Dorislawes Esquires, or any three or more of them, to take your Petitioners Petition into their con∣sideration, to examine all the premisses, and thereupon to state and certifie your Petitioners case, (to his late Highnesse Oliver Lord Protector,) together with their opinions upon the whole matter, touching your Petiti∣oners reward and satisfaction for this service, as appears by the original Petition and Reference. All the aforenamed Referrees upon reading this Petition, and the transactions thereupon, after many dayes meeting, held it very necessarie for the clearing of the truth, to acquaint the Lord Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleet∣wood, and Francis Allen Esquires, with your Petitioners Pe∣tition, and his Highnesse Reference thereupon, in regard your Petitioner had named all the aforesaid Honourable perjons in his Petitions and Papers, amongst others, who both knew your Pe∣titioners services, touching the staying this silver, and were pri∣vie to the Councel of States Ingagements and Intentions, to pay your Petitioner eleven thousand pounds, when your Petitioner undertook to disprove the Spanish and Flemish Claimers. And upon Consideration of the Councels promise to your Petitioner,
as aforesaid, was the cause that made your Petitioner undertake this difficult, chargeable and dangerous service. And the aforesaid referrees received Certificates from everie one of the aforesaid ho∣norable persons, which Certificates set forth the great service done by your Petitioner, viz. That your Petitioner was upon his first undertaking of this Business looked on by the then Councel of State as the Great Wheel that set all on work, and set on foot this dis∣covery in getting the State this great Treasure, or else the State had lost it in the Admiraltie, and that these Actings of your Petiti∣oner, accompanied with great charge, hazzard and trouble, was the Cause (sine qua non) of the after-benefit received by the State upon conversion of this silver. That the Councel of States Ingagements and intentions to the Petitioner, at his first assuming the imploiment, was not without good reason uncommitted to wri∣ting, for avoiding of misconstruction. And the Councel of State did not onely promise the Petitioner the restoration of his Estate for his particular service of staying the Silver, but did also promise to confer upon the Petitioner an Ho∣norable Memorial, and had not the Petitioner had a real assurance from the Councel of State in 1652. for the paying of him the summe of eleven thousand pounds, the whole Businesse touching this Sil∣ver had been lost and left undertaken, had not the Petitioner had such an insurance and promise, and also relied on the same for a just Performance. It is true, they certifie that for some Reasons of State the Pe∣titioners (Thomas Violets) assurance and reward was not com∣mitted to writing, to avoid clamour and lewd tongues, but this o∣mission was not to frustrate the Petitioner of his dearly earn'd Re∣ward, the restoration of his Estate, or eleven thousand pounds.
These are but the Heads of the aforesaid Certificates, the Originals certifie all matters touching this Business at large, under the hands of the Lord Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, Francis Allen Esquires, every person severally certifies all the aforesaid referrees their particular knowledge of this Business. Col. Barkstead, Sir Thomas Viner, and all the before∣named Referrees, upon consideration of these Certificates, and upon sight of the attestation of the Officers of the Mint, and several other Witnesses, who depose, That Tho∣mas Violet was several times offered, and might have recei∣ved from the Claimers of Silver, (Merchants of Flanders then in London) the summe of ten thousand pounds to have desisted the prosecution of this Business in the Court of Admiralty, and to have betrayed the trust which the Councel of State imposed on him, to make a discovery of Spanish and Flemish fraudulent Claimes; and also upon sight of several orders of the Councel of State, the Judges of the Admiralty, and Doctor Walker, and several deposi∣tions taken in the Petitioners case, upon the whole matter all the aforesaid Referrees certifie his late Highness Oliver Lord Protector; viz. That upon Examination of Thomas Violets Petition, they finde that the Petitioner is a person who not onely deservs the making good of the Councel of States Ingagement and Promise unto him, for the true paying your Petition∣er Tho. Violet, the summe of eleven thousand pounds, but upon due consideration had of the great Travel, Charge, and Hazard, which your Petitioner hath undergone in
the Prosecution of this businesse, and your Petitioners great faithfulness in refusing to be corrupted, or betray the interest of the Common-wealth, as hath been fully proved unto them, as also upon the Attestation of Sir George Fleetwood and Sir James Harrington, concerning the Promise of the Councel of State to your Petitioner Tho. Violet, for the restoration to him his estate, or eleven thousand pounds, all these Referrees report to his late Highnesse Oliver Lord Protector, that they humbly con∣ceive upon the whole matter of Fact, that over and above the payment of eleven thousand pounds: that there be some signal reward conferred on the Petitioner for this his eminent service, that all other for the future may be encouraged to serve the interest of the Common-wealth, with that singular faithfulness and integrity, as the Petiti∣oner hath done, and they all certifie that they finde, It proved that the Petitioner by his chargeable prosecuti∣on of this business in the Court of Admiralty, hath con∣tracted debts, amounting unto the summe of seven hun∣dred sixty five pounds, which the Petitioner borrowed at interest, all his own estate being under sequestration ever since 1643. besides several other great summes of money your Petitioner borrowed at interest for his sup∣port ever since his sequestration, upon consideration whereof they finde the Petitioners Engagements are very pressing upon him, and they all humblie offer, that for the present, lest the Petitioner should be thrown into pri∣son, for the very moneys he hath expended in getting the Common-wealth this great treasure of two hundred
seventy eight thousand pounds, the just accompt there∣of they had seen presented unto them by Col. Bark∣stead. That his Highnesse Oliver Lord Protector, in consi∣deration of all the Premisses, would be pleased presently to pay the Petitioner Tho. Violet, some considerable sum of money to pay off his great engagements for the State, and for his support for the future, according to his qua∣lity, and that the remainder of the money to make up the summe of eleven thousand pounds be paid unto him according to the Promise of the Councel of State, the Petitioner Tho. Violet, having served the Common-wealth in this great businesse, with a great deal of resolution, faithfulness and activity. This Report is at large signed and certified to his late Highness, Oliver Lord Protector, the first of May 1658. by Col. Barkstead Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Alderman Vyner, Gabriel Beck, John Limbery, Edward Denly, Henry Middleton, Maurice Thom∣son, Treasurer of the East-India Company, Isaac Doris∣laws, as appears by the original Certificate. Your Petitioner petitioned the late Lord Protector Oliver 29. July 1658. and annexed the aforenamed Re∣port of the Referrees, and petitioned to be paid the sum of eleven thousand pound. The Lord Protector Oliver, upon reading the aforesaid Petition, and the Report annexed, refers your Petitioner for satisfaction, together with the Report of Col. Barkstead, Sir Tho Vyner, and others, for your Petitioners satisfaction unto his privy Councel, that they take consideration of all the maters therein contained,
so that the Petitioner may have and receive satisfaction according to Justice and Equity for this service 29. July 1658. but his death shortly following, nothing as yet hath been done for your Petitioners satisfaction. Your Petitioner thereupon in Octob. 1658. petitioned the late Lord Protector Richard for his satisfaction, and annexed the aforesaid Reports and Petitions (upon his Highnesse perusal of the same) he was pleased to referre the same unto the consideration of Francis Bacon late Ma∣ster of his Requests, and Gabriel Beck Esquires, Solicitor to the late Councel of State; They after many dayes meeting concerning this businesse, have certified ac∣cordingly, as Col. Barkstead, and the former Referrees have done, viz. for the due paying your Petitioner the summe of eleven thousand pounds, and that they hold the Petitioner to be a person very fit and useful to be em∣ployed in removing the obstructions of the Mint, and that the Petitioner be employed for regulating the Manu∣facture of gold and silver Wyre and Lace, which Cer∣tificates are here to be produced to your Honours, signed by Francis Bacon and Gabriel Beck Esquires, 18 Jan. 1658. Your Petitioner humbly prayes your Honours to take into consideration the great and eminent advantages your Petitioner did this Common wealth in staying this sil∣ver, at that juncture of time in Decemb. 1652. for had that silver come into the hands of the Dutch, they would have laid it all out in powder and shot agaiust this Com∣mon-wealth, as we employed it against them, as will
appear by Col. Barksteads Accompts, which moneys under God was a principal mean to reduce the Dutch; what ser∣vice this treasure did the Nation in that juncture of time, Christendome knowes, the Dutch then our enemies felt, and this Common wealth at this day enjoys the happy fruit of it. But had all advantages been home followed against the Dutch in the last War, we had grubbed up their greatnesse by the roots, and flayed his Zealand Lions skin, and broken their sheaf of Arrows to shivers, making them unable for ever to trouble us, (but we only pared their nailes, and parted with them upon too gentle con∣ditions, and made such a peace with them, that at this time they carry all our Trade from our Merchants in a manner, and do us more damage by being our feined friends, then they could do being our open enemies, the due consideration thereof is humbly hinted here to your Honours. And if your Honours require a more parti∣cular Accompt, I can demonstrate it to you in many par∣ticulars. May it please your Honours. These Certificats, though they doe declare the truth of your Petitioners service really performed, by a great number of Witnesses, yet without further consideration they pay not your Petitioners engagements, which were disbursed by him for the accomplishment of this service; and those Gentlemen that have lent their moneys reallie to your Petitioner, to enable him to do this service, look for real payment in moneys, and not in words, your Petitioners engagement at this daie for this
businesse of staying of the silver, being above fifteen hundred pounds. St. James saith what profit is it, if a Brother be naked or destitute of daily food, for one to say to him, be thou warm∣ed, and bee thou filled, if he supply him not with food and raiment, so likewise a bare Certificate, without further sup∣ply, will neither pay debts, nor cloath, nor feed a man, many words will not fill a bagg, (it is Justice that establisheth a Na∣tion, and payment of money quits debts, and not words) What a shame would it bee to those, that professe so much Justice, and reformation, as this age doth, to have it left to posterity and record, That your Petitioner that hath done this Common-wealth such an eminent service, in getting them more money then any man in this Nation ever did before, should not be justly rewarded, according to the promise and ingage∣ments of the Council of State, which made your Petitioner undertake this chargable, difficult, and dangerous service, your Petitioner might have had tenn thousand pounds from the Claimers, to have held his peace and bin quiet, and to suffer the Judges of the Admiraltie, to let this Silver passe, the truth of this is certified under the hands of many persons of quality, had your Petitioner taken this course, to have bin bribed off, it had bin most for his ease but lesse for his honesty. The Common-wealths interest, and his own reputation, in making good his promise and ingagement to the Lord Bradshaw and Coun∣cil of State he valued more then his life; your Petitioner hath done his duty, and will leave the issue to God. 'tis Solomon that saith a poor man delivered the City, yet no man remem∣bred the poor man, when he had done his work. I humbly
hope that your Honours Justice will prevent mee, that I may not have occasion to say the same, that is true of this Age, or leave so sad a memorandum of the ingratitude of these times. If the Rules of our Saviour were observed by men of power in this Nation at this day, to do to all People, as they would be done unto, your Petitioner should not have bin so long from time to time delayed with references, in so Just and equitable Petition. If your Petitioner hath not this his dearly earned reward, it will remain to posterity in print, to fright and terrifie all persons, and make them wary how they ingage for the future, upon English States-mens promises, when they shall see and read these Transactions and Certificates, If your Petitioner hath not satisfaction according to Justice, it would be a means to make other men to take money when it is offered, and not to trust to English States mens promises. About the 20. of April 1659. your Petitioner did ingage an Honourable person, to present to the Lord Richard Crom∣well the late Protector these very Petitions and Certificates, which I now present unto your Honours in print, I am credi∣bly informed, upon his perusal of them, hee was most honoura∣bly pleased to be verie sensible of your Petitioners sad sufferings, great expence, paines and fidelitie for the Common-wealth in this service. And that seeing all this Treasure (which your Petitioner stopt in the Ships Sampson, Salvador and George) was imploied and spent in the defence of the Common-wealth, his late High∣nesse was pleased to declare, to an Honourable person that in∣formed mee your Petitioner, his late Highnesse did think my
promised reward to be a just debt, and that the Common∣wealth ought to pay it, and had not the Government beene changed, I am assured from several honourable persons, his late Highness the Lord Richard Cromwell would have seen mee justlie paid the summe of eleven thousand pounds, and given me an honourable reward and Imploiment over and above. Your Petitioner implores your Honours to consider of all his premisses, and that as your Petitioner did this Nation the greatest service, that ever was done by any man of his condition, in saveing this Common∣wealth two hundred seventie eight thousand pounds, which was all imployed in defence of this Common∣wealth. Your Petitioners humble prayer is, after so long a de∣lay of Justice, he may have his dearly earned reward, the payment of the summe of eleven thousand pounds, in such wayes and in such maner, as your Petitioner may be inabled to pay off the great ingagements he hath layd out in this service, and to support himself according to his quality, and that others seeing your Justice, may for the future bee incouraged to serve the interest of the Nation, with that integrity, activity, and faithfull∣nesse as your Petitioner hath done, with the hazard of his life, and all that hee had dear in this world, your Petitioner having ingaged his Credit, and borrowed a∣bove fifteen hundred pounds which hee expended every penny in this service, and in his attendance to get sa∣tisfaction, and at this day oweth the summe at interest,
to save and gett the State this great Treasure, besides all his paines and hazard. These several Services and Proposals done by your Petiti∣oner, for the honour and profit of the Common wealth, your Honours will see them certified under the hands of the Lord Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleet∣wood, and Francis Allen Esquire, and that your Petitioner was faithfully promised the restoration of his estate, by divers members of Parliament and Councel of State, for several chargeable services your Petitioner had done the Parliament some years before, from the year 1648 to 1652. before your Petitioner undertook to stay the silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, and this is clearly demonstrated by the said Cer∣tificates. But upon your Petitioners happy and successful staying of this silver, and undertaking at his own charge to prosecute this discogery in the Admiralty, upon the Promise of the Councel of State 1652 to pay your Petitioner the summe of eleven thou∣sand pounds for this service, in lieu of his sequestred estate, which for so many yeares your Petitioner had solicited both the Councel of State and Parliament to have it. Sir James Harrington, and Sir George Fleetwood, fully and clearly certifie, that they think themselves bound in honour and conscience, to certifie the truth of their knowledge to his Highnesse Referrees, according to their Request and Desire, concerning the Councel of States promises and engagements to pay your Petitioner the summe of eleven thousand pounds, that so your Petitioner may have his dearly earned reward for this
great service, and not labour for the State in vain; And that if the rule of the Gospel were observed to do to other men as they would be done unto, your Petitioner could not be many weeks without receiving eleven thousand pounds, and over and above an honorable reward and memoriall from the State for this great service, and that the State in Honour and Just∣ice, was obliged to pay your Petitioner the above said summe, and that no doubt but so faithfull a service, so carefully and painfully performed would have a happy issue, and the Petitioners reward from the State would bee sutable to the greatnesse of the service, upon perusal of Sir James Harrington, and Sir George Fleetwoods Certificates, your Honours will see this more fully set down and amplified; The Lord Bradshawes Certificate for the substance is to the same effect, so is Francis Allens Esquire, who being a Goldsmith knew experimentally the great abilities in your Petitioner, to regulate and reforme the abuses in the Mint, and the servi∣ces and overtures of your Petitioner. 1650. 1651. 1652. of∣fered the Councel of State both to set the Mint on work, and to give a stop to the transporting of Treasure, he certifies your Petitioner had taken great paines, and spent much money in this business, (which had the humble advice and propo∣sition of your Petitioner then bin taken by the Parliament) you had filled the Nation at this day with Gold and Silver, and constantly imployed your Mint to the great honour and profit of the Nation, for all the Warr with Spain. Your Petitioner at this day humbly offers to set the Mint on work so he may be imployed, and not labour for the State in vaine, for your Petitioner to take the paines and bee at
the Charge, and other persons who have no skill in this bu∣sinesse, to run away with the profit: Your Petitioner hath too often bin so served by great men in power, and shall not do it againe for any ones pleasure whosoever. Thus have I humbly presented my services done for the State, and the Councils ingagements and promise for your Pe∣titioners satisfaction. It is a Rule set down by God and all Nations, Christians, Turkes, and Jewes, that there are degrees of rewards for vertue, and degrees of punishments for vice, the degrees of Punishments and Rewards are in all well-regulated Kingdomes and Common wealths put down, and the people know them that so they may not offend; and there is no offence to be justly punished, either by Gods Law or Mans, before a Law be made to give men the Rule, for the Apostle saith, I had not known sin but by the Law. And that punishment that is inflicted on a man, before a Law made to prohibit or restrain a man from doing the same, let it be inflicted by what Power soever, (must needs be a very great affliction and punishment sent of God for a mans other sins) and cannot as to men be said to be regularly done, especially where the offence is taken, and the punishment so heavy, as it shall deprive a man of all his e∣state, and keep a man almost foure yeares a Prisoner, in which time your Petitioner spent eight hundred pounds for charges, whereof nine hundred twenty eight dayes of that time, he was kept a close Prisoner, without ever being brought to a legal Trial, according to the Fundamental Lawes of the Nation by a Jury, the birth-right of every Englishman rich or poor; but after a mans estate is squandred, disposed, and given away to se∣veral Persons and Committees, for particular mens profit, and
upon false and untrue pretences, to the value of above eleven thousand pounds, as your Petitioner for many yeares hath pro∣ued and presented to the Councel of State and Parliament, ever since the year 1648. being much about the time your Petitioner was turned out of the Tower, without any legal Trial or Reason given for his Commitment, or the taking away of his Estate con∣trary to Magna Charta, and all the Laws of this Nation. God having given your Petitioner his freedom, your Petiti∣oner presentlie, to shew that he was oppressed, and the Parlia∣ment misinformed, and his estate unduly taken away, given and disposed of upon false and untrue pretences, for particular mens profit, to several Committees and others, the Petitioner did hum∣blie addresse himself for relief, to many honourable Members of Parliament and Councel of State, and presented them with the true estate of his sufferings in Print. The Cause of your Petitioners sufferings was for bringing up a Letter from Oxford 1643. from the late King, who had then a desire to emploie, and make your Petitioner Master-worker of his Mint at Oxford; which place the King did give me there, and the Petitioner had an Order from the House of Parliament, and a Passe from the Lord General Essex, about the 28. of Decemb. 1643. to go to Oxford to the King, upon condition to put in security in a thousand pounds, which security I did accordingly give, to make good my Exchange for one Mr. Hesilrigge, and did accordingly bring up my Exchange to Lon∣don, and left it with Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, about the 3. of Jan. 1643. And the late King Charles, upon my Exchange as aforesaid, commanded me to bring up a Letter from him to the Lord Mayor,
Court of Aldermen, and Common-Councel of the City of Lon∣don. I do confesse I honoured and loved the late King, for ma∣ny benefits received from him, and it was my dutie to obey him as my King, though I had never received benefits from him; but had I known there had been any Act or Order of Parliament to prohibite me or any other to bring up the said Letter at that time, or that the Parliament would have taken any offence against me for doing thereof, my principles at that time, and the whole course of my Actions since, hath clearlie demonstrated to your Honours and the World, that I would have humblie declined that emploi∣ment; for I have ever been an Honourer of the Parliament and my Countrie, as this Narrative will demonstrate to posteritie. The Tree is known by its fruit, and no man I humblie con∣ceive in the Nation of my condition, hath yielded better fruit, or ever got the Common wealth two hundred seventie eight thou∣sand pounds in silver, but your Petitioner. At the same instant of time Van Trump was in the Downes with the Dutch Fleet, upon the clearing of these ships out of the Admiraltie, to have conveyed them to Holland. This was a real Plot, not a feined one, as appears by the Commissions this day in the Court of Admiraltie, under the Great Seal of Holland, to De Weet and De Ruyter, their Vice-Admirals, to guard these ships from the English, upon the Petitions of the Merchants of Amster∣dam. I pray God England never forgets this deliverance nor the Councel of State the Performance of their Promise to your Petitioner for this discovery, your Petitioner going in danger of his life by the Claimers for several yeares for doing of this service. Here followeth the Copie of the late King Charles's Letter to the City of London.
To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved, Our Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Our City of London, and all other Our well-effected Subjects of that City. Charles Rex, TRustie amd Well beloved, wee greet you well: When wee remember the many Acts of Grace and Favour Wee and Our Royal Predecessors have conferred upon that our Citie of London, and the many examples of eminent Duty and Loyaltie, for which that City hath been likwise famous; Wee are willing to believe (notwithstanding the great defection wee have found in that place) That all men are not so farr degenerate from their affection to Ʋs, and to the peace of the Kingdom, as to desire a continuance of the miseries they now feel: And therefore beeing informed, That there is a desire in some principal persons of that City to present a Petition to Ʋs, which may tend to the procuring a good understanding between Ʋs and that Our City, whereby the peace of the whole Kingdom may bee procured; Wee have thought fit to let you know, That wee are ready to receive any such Petition, and the Persons who shall bee appointed to present the same to Ʋs shall have a safe conduct: And you shall assure all our good Subjects of that Our City (whose hearts are touched with any sense of Duty to Ʋs, or of Love to the Religion and Laws established; in
the quiet and peaceable fruition whereof, They and their An∣cestors have enjoyed so great Happiness), That wee have neither passed any Act, nor made any Profession or Protestati∣on for the maintenance and defence of the true Protestant Re∣ligion, and the Liberties of the Subject, which wee will not most strictly and religiously observe; And for the which, wee will not bee alwaies ready to give them any security that can bee desired: And of those Our gracious Letters, Wee expect a speedy Answer from you. And so Wee bid you farewell. Given at our Court at Oxford in the nineteenth year of our Reign, December 26. 1643. By his Majesties Command. GEORGE DIGBY. [I do most humbly desire the Common Council of the Citie of London, to certifie your Honours, if ever (amongst all their Records, ever since the foundation of their City) they find such a sad President as mine is; And whether that any Messenger from any former King of England suffered the loss of his Estate (to his damage at this day above twenty thousand pound, for bringing them or any their Ancestors the like Letter for peace, as I did from the late KING. And at that time (viz. in December 30. 1643.) there was sent and came from Oxford the Writs weekly under the Great Seal of England without any Countermand: My hard usage After∣ages
will hardly believe, had I not Printed it to Poste∣rity, that it may serve as a warning to prevent other Persons, from beeing got in the like Snares for the future.] For this cause I Suffered Imprisonment in the Tower almost four years, for bringing up the aforesaid Letter from Oxford to the Lord Mayor and Common Council of the City of London in December 1643. although I had an Order from the Hous of Commons (as appears by their Journal Book) and a Pass from the Lord Ge∣neral Essex to go to Oxford; for an exchange for Mr. Hesilrigge, Sir Arthur Hesilrige his Brother, and I left my Exchange with Sir Arthur Hesilrigge, about the 2. of January 1643. which were both procured for mee by Mr. Theophilus Ryley Scout-master General of the City of London, who was authorized to execute that place by the Common Council of London; and I was autho∣rized by the said Mr. Ryley to do the same (Mr. Ryley being impowered by the Parliament and Common Council of London to hold Intelligence in any the Kings Quarters, as by his Orders hee shewed me:) Mr. Ry∣ley was a man of a known & approved Integritie, and in great esteem with the then Parliament and Citie of London at that time, and would not have acted any thing but what was Just, and for the Parliaments service, ac∣cording to his Trust. (If hee had thought it other∣wise, if hee might have gotten a hundred thousand
pounds, upon my conscience) and that made mee to act this Business, to bring up the Kings Letter upon his Intreaty (as hee confessed upon his Examination;) and I justified my doing thereof by his Order, hee bee∣ing a publick Minister, and impowered to do it, as hee told mee. And also the Committee of both Nations was made acquainted with my going to Oxford, for the bringing up the said Letter which I brought from the late King (by Sir David Watkins Knight, I desired him to make the Parliament acquainted therwith, before ever I went to Oxford, and to have their approbation;) which Sir David Watkins (after he had spoken with them) told mee, I had their approbation to go to Oxford: And all this was done before any Law or Ordinance was made or declared to forbid mee or any other to do the same (that ever I heard of:) or to this day can hear of, and I humbly say, That before a Law made, there is no transgression, neither by Gods law nor Mans law. And I was not to question Mr. Ryleys power, abilities and trust, considering hee acted as a publick Minister, but to act according to his direction, so long as hee was in the said Office of Scout-master, I hav∣ing his Warrant and approbation for doing what I did. I have never read nor heard of so heavy a punishment as your Supplicant doth suffer under, before a Law made to give a man warning, to take heed how hee Transgress. And by the Statutes of 9. Hen. 3. cap 29. 5 Edw. 3. cap. 9. and 28. Edw. 3. cap. 3. No person (of what
estate or condition soever hee bee) shall bee put out of Land or Tenement, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor dis∣inherited, without being brought to answer by due process of the Law; which I have Petitioned for, by a legal trial many years, but could never obtain the same. May it pleas your Honours, Had there been a Pro∣clamation or Act of Parliament at that time to have prohibited mee, I should have then been afraid; be∣sides, Mr. Ryley should never have made mee act against a declared Law, nor the King neither. Now, forasmuch as your humble Supplicant hav∣ing ever since his Inlargement out of the Tower, made it his daily practice to study to serve the Common∣wealth, and doing such remarkable Services (as afore∣said) for the Common-welath, I do most humbly im∣plore your Honours most gratious Order for the restor∣ing mee to my aforesaid estate with damages, or the paying your Supplicant the summe of eleven thou∣sand pounds, according to the promise of the Council of State. 1652. May it please your Honours, If I would have be∣traied my Trust to the Common-wealth, about this Sil∣ver that was in the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, I could have had every penny of eleven thousand pounds paid mee by the Claimers of the Silver in those Ships; either in money here, or Bills of Exchange beyond
Seas: that money would have made mee live plenti∣fully in any part of Christendom. I do most humbly im∣plore your Honours, that I may have such Justice by your Ho∣nours goodness and benignity, as I may have cause never to re∣pent of my being faithfull to your Honours and the Common∣wealths Interest in this particular, concerning the Silver Ships, their Silver and Lading. I most humbly here present an Accompt of what hath been taken from me Tho. Violet; for which I most humbly desire satisfacti∣on, with my damages, or the summe of eleven thousand pounds, as was faithfully promised unto me by the most Honourable Councel of State, in December and Ja∣nuary 1652. for staying the silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, and disproving the Spanish Ambassadors Claim to this silver, which was above three hun∣dred
thousand pounds, my damages at this day by the taking my Estate 1643. is above twenty thousand pounds 25. May 1659. viz. VVHen I was first sent unto the Tower the 6th. of January 1643. my mother had of mine good Bonds and Bills in her hands taken away from her at several times, to the value of one thousand three hundred and odd pounds; Besides many of my Papers and accompts of great concern∣ment to the Common-welath; and as yet I cannot come to the knowledg who hath them: But this I am sure of, If there had been any thing in them that could have made against mee, there had then use been made of them. 2. My mother had at another time a Privy Seal ta∣ken from her, wherein the late King acknowledged hee owed me (for my expences in discovering the Trans∣porters of Gold and Silver) nineteen hundred threescore and eight pounds, which money I laid every penny out of my own purse to do the late King and Com∣mon-wealth that service: in prosecuting the Transport∣ers of Gold and Silver, in the Star chamber I caused them to be fined twenty fowre thousand one hundred pounds, besides several Merchants and others, who had their pardons from the late King, for transport∣ing
Gold and Silver, and melting down the heaviest Sil∣ver Coynes of England, viz. Alderman Wollaston, and Alderman Gibbs, Mr. Peter Fountain and several other Merchants, the terror of which sentence and punish∣ment, for some yeers did give a stop to transporting of Gold and Silver, to the great service and advantage of the Common-wealth, and if the Parliament please to passe the Act against Transporting Gold and Silver which has twise this Parliament been read in the House, and several times Committed, and impower your Pe∣titioner to see to the due execution thereof, your Petiti∣oner will give a stop to the Transportation of Gold and Silver, and discover the Offendors, if a Commission be granted to make enquiry of the same, according to former Presidents in Richard the Seconds time, by Act of Parliament. This Parliament was so careful to have these Offences prosecuted, that they excepted them out of the general Pardon, being the desire of the Committee of the Mint, as appears by this following Order. White-hall Janu. 24. 1651. Master Attorney Generall. AT a Committee of the Councel of State for the Mint, this inclosed exception was presented to the Committee to have it inserted in the generall Pardon. The Committee do hold it fit, for the bene∣fit of the Common-wealth, to have this exception inser∣ted
in that Pardon, and doe recommend it to you ac∣cordingly. viz. EXcept all offences done or committed by any person or persons whatsoever, in transporting out of England any Gold or Silver, in coyne or in bul∣lion without License, and all other offences in the un∣lawfull buying, selling, exchanging or melting down of any the current gold or silver coynes of England, or of any gold or silver bullion, against whom, or for which, any Information is now depending in the Court of Exchequer at Westminster. Ordered that Master Thomas Violet attend M. Attor∣ney Generall with this Order of the Committee, and also the Committee of Parliament for drawing the ge∣nerall Pardon to have these offences excepted. James Harrington. Herbert Morley. Your Petitioner did deliver this Order, to Mr. At∣torney Generall, and this exception is put into the ge∣nerall Pardon of this Parliament, as may bee seen up∣on perusal. 3. The Committee of Essex put mee out of Pos∣session of the Mannors of Battells and Patan-Hall in Essex, as appears by their Warrants. Of which Lands I had an Extent of One thousand pounds, for the pay∣ment of five hundred: and one Mr. Elconhead received
my rents ever since 1643, and never paid the Commit∣tee of Essex any thing, for your Petitioners Extent of five hundred pounds, and the same Elconhead injoyes your Petitioners Lands in Essex to this very day, by colour of the Sequestration of the Committee of Essex, to your Petitioners great damage. 4. The Committee of Shropshire seized, in my sist∣ers hands, in London, three Bonds due to mee, in two thousand pounds for the payment to mee Thomas Violet One thousand pounds, by the Lady Anne Waad, Edmond Lenthal, Phillip Cage and Charles Mordent Esq's. 1643. which Bonds were carried to Shrewsbury. 5. I had the Leas and Extent of ten severall Houses at the Posterne in Little Moor-fields; and the Tennants owed mee, when I was committed to the Tower, in arrears for rent above one hundred pounds: And for these sixteen years, I received no Rent of them. But one Mr. Elconhead hath received the Rents of them ever since, by colour of a Sequestration of the Com∣mittee of Middlesex. 6. I had the Office of sealing and surveying of all gold and silver Thread and Wyer: which prevented the making of all sleight and adulterate gold and silver Thread, and Wyer, granted to mee under the Great Seal, for three Lives, from the Late King; which Office cost mee Fifteen hundred pounds (to the Lord Treasurer Juxon, L. Cottingon, Sir. John Cook: Secretary of State, and Sir John Bankes the late Kings Attourney. The necessitie of keeping up that Office, to prevent the daily Cozenages and frauds of divers Silk∣men,
Wyerdrawers and Refiners in their making Cours, sleight and deceitfull Gold and Silver Wyer and Thread: Your Pe∣titioner formerly presented unto your Honours, and can prove it that forty thousand pounds a year in silver is wasted, be∣sides the Wearers daily Cozened for want of a due Regulation of gold and silver Thread, and Lace. And upon the Discovery of these notorious Cheats, 1635. (the late King and his Council appointed mee Surveyor and Sealer of the said Manufacture) I caused all the abuses to bee laid aside: I indicted some offenders, imprisoned some, caused others to stand in the Pillory, and made many of them that wrought adulterate cours silver run away out of London: By which means I angred many Cheating Wyerdrawers, Silk∣men and Refiners: and the late Kings Council and Com∣missioners setled such Rules and Orders, during the Regula∣tion of the Manufacture, as it was all made of good silver, and the Coin and Bullion of this Nation preserved; and your Suppli∣cant was bound, to the late King, to warrant all the Manufact∣ures either of gold or Silver, Wyer or Thread which hee seal∣ed, or surveyed in the Office, to bee good silver, and to make it good to any party grieved in the Nation; as appears by my Patent under the Great Seal of England. For which As∣surance, Surveying and Sealing, I was allowed to de∣mand and take an half penny for every ounce Troy, in Wyer, Spangles, Oes, &c. I surveyed; and 4 pence for every pound weight Venice, for all the Gold and Silver Thread I sealed with the Seal of my Office, being the Rose and Crown. And all that time the gold and silver Lace, was as good Silver and as duly assaied as the
Plate or Money of the Nation, and now it is made un∣der no Rule nor Government, but the Wearers many of them cheated by course and deceitfull Lace, Wyer, silver Thread, as I can demonstrate. 7. I had a Grant from the late King, under his Sig∣net, to bee Master-worker of the Mint in the Tower of London for my life, with the Fee of five hundred pounds a year, for executing that place; which Grant was taken from my Mother, out of her Custody, when I was sent to the Tower. 8. I had one quarter part of the Lady Villers Farm at the Custom-house, for the Importation of all gold and Silver Thread, Hatbands, Lace, and Copper, throughout England and Wales; which cost mee, a little before I was sequestred, above seven hundred pounds. And if the making gold and silver thread was put down in England, the Custom of gold and silver thread imported would make a farr greater Revenew then now it doth by the Excise; and the Manufacture, if it bee made here, ought to bee kept to a strict Regulation. Mr. Edwards and Mr. Tbornbury I imploied to Collect this duty at the Custom-hous. 9. I spent in my Imprisonment in the Tower for al∣most four years about eight hundred pounds, reckoning my Fees and Expences, and could never get Justice, though I petitioned to the Parliament as aforesaid, for many years to come to a legall Triall, knowing my self to bee innocent both by God's Law and the Laws of the Land; and by the testimony of a good consci∣ence,
which hath ever supported mee in and thorow all these great troubles. All this Estate was and is Se∣questred, to this day; (but my three aforesaid bonds, which I now have in my Custody,) besides my damage for my four years Imprisonment. 10. Since I came out of the Tower, by order of the Councel of State 1652. your Petitioner laid out (in the Pro∣secution of the Silver Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George) above the summe of seven hundred sixty five pounds, I borrowed every penny of this money, paying Inter∣est for it at this day. And by my Protest against the Discharge of these silver Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, and my Discoveries thereupon, by many good and legal Witnesses, Passengers and others in these Ships: I caused all the Silver to become the Common∣wealths: All which services I did (upon the faithfull promise of the Councel of State) in Decemb. 1652 to restore mee to all my Estate, or the full value of ele∣ven thousand pounds. John Corbet Esquire, one of the Members of this present Parliament at this day, and one of the Committee of Shropshire, meeting with your Petitioner in March 1655. was noblie plea∣sed to take notice of your Petitioners good endeavours to serve the Common-wealth; and seeing that your Petitioner had put out in Print, a List of his particular damages, and the particular Bonds, Houses, Lands, Offices, set down, which had been taken from your Petitioner his Mother and Sister, who had then a great part of his estate in their Custody, at the time of his imprisonment
in the Tower, and were plundred of it during that time of my Imprisonment there, by the title and name of Sequestration. This Noble Gentleman Mr. Corbet, being very sensible of my sufferings, and how your Petitioners estate had bin squan∣dred away, was pleased to tell your Petitioner he could do him a courtesie, in procuring to your Petitioner three Bonds taken from your Petitioner in two thousand pounds, for the payment of your Petitioner one thousand pounds 1644, which Bonds Mr. Corbet told me were at Shrewsbury in Shropshire, morga∣ged by that Committee for fourty pounds, which the Committee had laid out for publick use. Your Petitioner was glad to hear where these Bonds were, and to know who had them, though they day in Lavender for fourty pounds, your Petitioner for many yeares making diligent enquiry after them, and had never got true information where they were, had not Mr. John Corbet told him, and it was a thousand to one that these Bonds, being eleven yeares out of your Petitioners Custodie, that your Petitioner ever heard of them; or got them again into his hands. This Worthy Gentleman Mr. John Corbet advised me to make my Application by Petition to his late Highnesse Oliver Lord Protector, and to his Councel, for to have these Bonds re∣stored, and that if his late Highnesse and his Councel would give him order to do it, he wished me so well, be would procure your Petitioner these three Bonds safe and uncancelled, Provi∣ded your Petitioner would pay the Committee of Shropshire for them the summe of fourty pounds, which your Petitioner wil∣lingly offered to do, whereupon your Petitioner petitioned the late Lord Protector Oliver and his Councel for the aforesaid three
Bonds. And the Councel of State ordered John Corbet E∣squire, should attend them, to give them true information of this businesse, which accordingly he did, and thereupon this Order fol∣lowing of the Councel of State was made, and your Petitioner paid his money to Mr. Corbet accordingly. Friday, March 21. 1655 At the Counsel at White-Hall. UPon reading a Report from the Committee (to whom the Petition of Thomas Violet was refer∣red) praying that certain Bonds seized upon by the Com∣mittee of Salop may be delivered unto him. Upon consideration of the said Report, and for that the said Bonds are ingaged for forty pounds, which the said Committee imploied for publique use, Ordered by his Highnesse the Lord Protector and his Counsel, That upon the said Thomas Violets paying unto the said Com∣mittee the said summe of forty pounds, for which the said Bonds are ingaged, That the said Committee bee required to deliver up the said Bonds unto the said Tho∣mas Violet, and that hee bee at liberty to sue the same and to take the benefit thereof as formerly hee might have done; and that it bee referred to John Corbet Esq. to see the said Bonds delivered up accordingly upon payment of the said forty pounds. Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Counsell.
Mr. John Corbet I attended with this order; March 28. 1655. Hee was pleased to tell mee hee was to go down into Shropshire, and would speak with the Committee who were to receive the forty pounds, and then I should know where to pay my money, for hee told mee hee had never received Publique monies, and hee was verie unwilling to receive any now. But upon his return, upon my earnest intreaty and to save mee from further trouble, hee told mee hee would re∣ceive and keep this forty pounds in deposito, for the use of the Committee till he had order from them for the disposing of it. That transaction follows, viz. MEmorandum, That the 24th of May 1656. In obe∣dience to the Order of his Highness the Lord Protector and his Counsel of the 21. of March 1655. I John Corbet Esq. have delivered unto Thomas Violet of London God-Smith, three Bonds: the first bearing date the 6th of June 1638. of eight hundred pounds, for the payment of four hundred pounds within one year after the death of the Lady Anne Waad; in which Bond, the said Lady Anne Waad, Charles Mordent, Philip Cage, and Edmund Lenthal Esquires stand bound to the said Thomas Violet: and one other Bond of the 6th of June 1638. in six hundred pounds, for the payment of three hundred
pounds, within two years after the death of the said Lady Anne Waad; in which the Persons aforesaid stand bound to the said Thomas Violet: and one other Bond (of the same date) of six hundred pounds, for the payment of three hundred pounds, within three years after the death of the said Lady Anne Waad; in which Bond, the Persons aforesaid stand bound to the said Thomas Violet; The summe of forty pounds being paid by the said Thomas Violet, according to the said Order. JOHN CORBET. Witnesses then present. Edward VVatkins. VVilliam Davis. Edmund Cogan. John English Scr. The Lady Anne Waad of Battels Hall in Essex died about May 1643. And the Bonds are due to mee Thomas Violet, at this day as abovesaid. Your Petitioner may justly say his Estate was squandred a∣way, when a thousand pound of good Bonds of your Petitioners lay in lavender for eleven years for forty pounds, and your Pe∣titioner had never known where they had bin, had not Mr. Corbet tould him, your Petitioners humble Prayer to your Honours is, that seeing your Petitioner hath paid Mr. Corbet the forty pounds according to the aforesaid Order, and hath
these Bonds safe and uncancelled now in his Custody, and in consideration of your Petitioner services, in staying this Silver, That your Honours would be pleased in part of your Petitioners satisfaction of eleven thousand pounds by your Honours Order, to Impower your Petitioner by Authority of Parliament, to shew and Implead these Bonds, notwithstanding any Order of Par∣liament to sequester the said Bonds, and to Impower your Pe∣titioner to take out Judgement and Execution thereupon, not∣withstanding any Order or Ordinance to the Committee of Shrop∣shire, or any other Committee Touching or Concerning these Bonds. And my most humble Petition is to John Corbet Esquire, one of the Honourable members of this Par∣liament, that as hee received my money for the use of the Committee of Shropshire, and gave mee the first notice and discovery in whose Custody these Bonds were, so hee would now bee pleased out of his love to Justice, to certifie his knowledge of the truth of this Business; that so I may have Releif in this business according to Justice and equity. Hereafter followeth your Petitioners Peti∣tion to Oliver Lord Protector, and his Reference thereupon to Col. Bark∣stead, Alderman Viner, Capt. Iohn Lim∣bery, Doctor VValker, &c.
TO HIS HIGHNESSE OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the COMMON-WEALTH of England, Scotland, and Ireland, And the Dominions thereunto belonging. The Humble Petition of Thomas Violet. SHEWETH, THat your Petitioner did about the 8th of Decemb. 1652. deliver unto the Council of State a written Paper wherein was dis∣covered that at that present time a practice and Combination, was set on foot by the then Spanish Ambassador Don Allonso de Cardenas, with several other Merchants both Strangers and Natives, to deceive the State of a great quantity of Silver near fower hundred thousand pounds, which was aboard the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, then riding at Eriffe.
Which Persons before-named, had contrived by forged Bills of Lading, false Claimes and Claimers, with other fraudulent pretences to get cleared the Court of Admiralty the aforesaid Sil∣ver and Ships, and for the effecting thereof there was no Cost spared nor Stone left unturned, as appeared by intercepted Letters of Mr James Steniere, a principal Actor to have this Silver cleared, which Letters caused the said Mr. Steinere to be Commited to the Serjeant at Armes attending the Parliament, and by Mr. Pompey Callendrens Letter there was fifty in the hundred offered in Amsterdam, to ensure the said Silver and Ships out of our hands. Many of the Council of State did upon the intercepting these Letters concerning the Silver Ships, believe that the Spanish Ambassador had, for a peece of money to be paid him, claimed this Silver as the King of Spaines Treasure and his Subjects, colourably, but they knew not which way to discover it, and to prove the fraud, that so the State might have the Silver as Prize, (there lay the mistery) that then the Council could not fathom, and that made the Lord Bradshawe and severall of the Coun∣cil of State to ingage your Supplicant in this service, they telling your Petitioner that if this fraude was to be found out, they were assured your Petitioner could do it, if your Petitioner would be true to the State, whereupon your Petitioner did faithfully promise the Council of State his uttermost endeavours to disco∣ver this fraud, and within three dayes after your Petitioner hearing the Parliament had made an Order upon the request of the Spanish Ambassador, for the Judges of the Admi∣ralty to proceed to a speedy sentence concerning these Ships and Silver, thereupon about 8th of Decemb 1652. your Petitioner
made the Lord Bradshaw and Council acquainted, that hee had certain Intelligence and would prove it upon the perill of his Life by many credible Witnesses, that a great part of this Silver appertained to severall Merchants of the united Provinces, and that these Ships having unfree Goods in them, were by the Civill Law forfeited to the State, and upon the aforesaid Pa∣per which your Petitioner delivered into the Council of State, the Council of State sent for Doctor Walker your Highness Advocate, who told the Council of State that if what was alleadged in that Paper could bee made good, the Ships should bee stayed let the Judges say what they pleased. May it please your Highness. The Judges of the Admiraltie appointed 16th Decemb. 1652. to give sentence for the Clearing or Condemning these Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, and they ordered the Commissioners for Dutch prize Goods to bee then in the Court, but the Commissioners Mr. Hill and Mr. Wlson declared unto your Supplicant the day before they were to attend in the Admiralty, that they were Merchants, and a great part of their Goods and Estates in Spaine, and therefore they durst not for feare of having an Imbargo on their Estates in Spaine bee seen in the Court of Admiralty to stopp these Silver Ships, but they earnestly prayed and advised your Petitioner, that if hee knew any way to entitle the State to the Silver in those Ships, hee should doe the Common-wealth very great and acceptable service, and save the State all the Silver, which otherwise would be discharged that morning; for then there was no other person appeared to stay these ships and silver, but your Supplicant, either at the Councel of State, or with Doctor VValker your Highnesse Ad∣vocate,
And this Doctor VValker knowes to be a truth. In pursuance of entituling the State to this silver in the afore∣said ships, your Supplicant received a Command from the Coun∣sel of State 13. Decemb. 1652. That if your Supplicant would undertake at his own peril to disprove the Spanish Ambassadours Claim, and to prove that great quantities of the silver in the afore∣said ships, appertained to Merchants of the united Provinces, and Amsterdam, by good and legal Witnesses, That then not∣withstanding the Order of Parliament, your Petitioner should make his Protest in the Court of Admiraltie, against the dis∣charge of the said silver, till his Witnesses were examined. The Councel of State declaring, that if the Court of Ad∣miralty committed your Petitioner for making his Protest then the Councel would presently hear, and take cognizance of the same bu∣sinesse. The Councel of State further declared, that if your Supplicant should faile to make good what he had undertaken, he would be utterly undone, for that they would certifie your Petitioner to be an Incendiary, in presuming to contradict the Spanish Ambassadour, and Duke Leopoldus Agents, in af∣firming the silver belonged for a great part thereof to Merchants of Amsterdam, when the Ambassadour on his honour affirm∣ed, it was all for his Catholick-Majestie, and his Subjects Accompts, and none other. But if your Petitioner was so assured, as he would venture his life, liberty, and estate, to disprove the Spa∣nish Ambassadour, and Duke Leopoldus Agents claim, and prove great quantities thereof to appertain to the Dutch of the united Provinces then our enemies, by good and legal proof, and did perform this his undertaking, your Petitioner should not on∣ly be restored to all his estate the Parliament had taken from
him, being about eleven thousand pounds, for which summe your Petitioner had for severall yeares before Petitioned the Parliament and Council of State) but also your Petitioner should have both that Estate and a good reward over and a∣bove for his good service, and this Promise your Supplicant had from the Council of State and the Committee for forreign affaires, and that they would see your Supplicant justly and truely satisfied, and upon this Honourable assurance your Petitioner engaged and undertooke this great service, and when your Supplicant Petitioned the Council of State, for an Order of the Council or Parliament in writing for the States just performance, when hee had proved that great quantities of this Silver aboard the three aforesaid Ships appertained to the Dutch the Committee of forreign affaires, and the Lord Brad∣shaw was much offended that your Supplicant should scruple the Justice of the State, as not to bee fully rewarded according to the greatness of the service, Protesting it could not enter in∣to the heart of any honest man to scruple or suspect the Council of State so ungratefull, as not to performe there pro∣mise justly with your Petitioner, and had that Council of State continued in power, your Supplicant is assured in his Consci∣ence that hee had reeeived every penny of the summe promised, being eleven thousand pounds out of the monies as it was Coyned. The reasons that the Council of State did not give your Pe∣titioner a written Order for the restoration of your Petitioners Estate, or the value being eleven thousand pounds, was that if it was done either by the Order of Parliament or Council of State, then the Spanish Ambassador and other Nations would know,
that the Council of State had stayed that Silver contrary to an Order of Parliament, and had promised a reward to your Petitioner to make this discovery before the service done, which the Lord Bradshaw told your Supplicant at the Council-Board the Council would not (to get all the Silver in the Ships) bee knowne to make an agreement, to finde out Witnesses to have the businesse done, but that your Supplicant might rest assured on just and Honourable dealings, and the restoration of his Estate or eleven thousand pounds, If your Petitioner did by good and legall Witnesses disprove the Spaniards Claim to this Silver in the aforesaid Ships. Your Supplicant having proceeded so farre as to make his Protest in the Court of Admiraltie, against the discharge of these Ships and Silver, hee was necessitated to proceed to make his discovery, or else the undertaking it had undone him for ever, and your Petitioner acquainted the Council that to proceed in this discovery would bee very Chargeable, and your Suppli∣cant being under sequestration, unsupportable, but no allowance of money could bee obtained till your Petitioner had intituled the State to the Silver; and this being done on your Suppli∣cants part, the Council said your Petitioner might rest assured of just and Honourable performance, for the payment of your Petitioners eleven thousand pounds or his Estate. Your Petitioner being at or about that time, severall times offered by some Merchants of Flanders, Claimers of great quantities of the Silver, That if your Petitioner would desist and not prosecute this business in the Court of Admiraltie, hee should have paid him downe the summe of ten thou∣sand pounds, either in money here, or in Bills of Exchange, upon
the discharge of the Ships and Silver, but your Petitioner refu∣sed the offers of the Merchants, and made the Lord Brad∣shawe and the Council acquainted therewith, and valued more the safety and Honour of the Nation, and his own re∣putation in this undertaking, then the Spanish Merchants money, relying wholly on the promise of the Council of State for his just reward and satisfaction. Your Supplicants Expence and Charges in the prosecuting this business, in one year and a halfs time amounted to above five hundred pouuds, besides what summes of money your Suppli∣cant hath since expended, hee having imployed constantly ten severall persons, some of them lived in Spaine and Holland, and severall monthes your Petitioner imployed severall Mer∣chants and others in the Registry of the Admiralty, to inspect into all proceedings, Claimes, Exhibites, pleadings, Bills of Lading, and comparing many thousand sheetes of paper and writing, and translating many Bills of Lading and other transactions, all which your Petitioner did by the Command of the Council of State, and upon Warrants and Orders of your Highness Advocate Doctor Walker; Your Supplicant also imployed severall persons about Erisfe, Limehouse, Blackwall, Wap∣ping, and St. Katherines, to finde out where the Seamen and Passengers of these Ships lay, paying all charges of their mee∣tings, boate-hire, writing and transcribing all the proceedings, and printing them for the Parliament, to vindicate the Justice of the Nation in staying this Silver and Ships, for it is proved out of the mouthes of severall Passengers that came from Spaine that very Voyage. That vast and great quantities of this Silver appertained to the Dutch, and was delivered
in Spaine aboard these Ships for the accompts of Mar∣chants of Amsterdam, and by the Originall Letters un∣der the States generall Seale to their vice Admiralls de Witt and de Rutter, remaining now in your Highnesse Court of Admiralty, commanding them to Convoy and guard these Ships from the Parliaments Forces, and these Commissi∣ons or Letters were procured upon the Petition of the Merchants of Amsterdam, and by severall advices remaining in the Court of Admiralty, these Ships and Silver were bound for Holland, It is proved that when these three Ships first set Sale to go their Voyage, they went from Holland, and the Ports and Harbours of the united Provinces, also that severall Mer∣chants in London for their own proper accompts, had Silver Laden aboard these Ships this Voyage in Spain, which cleere∣ly disproves the Spanish Ambassadors Claime to all the Sil∣ver in these Ships, to bee only for his Master and his Subjects accompts, for Merchants Natives of London are not the King of Spaines Subjects, It is also proved that severall par∣cells of Silver aboard these Ships, were entered, and Bills made in feined names and colourably, to avoyd the taking and condemnation of the Silver and of these Ships, if they were taken by the English. It is also proved, that although the Bills of Lading were for Oastend, yet the Silver was consigned to Amsterdam. It is likewise proved by severall Passengers, that when these Ships had bin ten dayes at Sea, and hearing of the Warrs betweene the English and the Dutch, the Masters Books were alter∣ed, and all the Hollanders and Zelanders names were put out, and other names put in their stead, and after three times
perusall and examination of the names, the Bookes were writ∣ten out saire (which were the Bookes produced in the Court of Admiraltie) And the originall blotted Bookes, which were the true Bookes, were not to bee found, but when these Ships came into the Downes, the Purser of the Ship Sampson, tooke them and tyed them to an Iron Barr, and then threwe them into the Sea. These particulers with many others, are the volontary con∣fessions of severall Passengers in these Ships, being actors and parties in Spain, and privie to all these actions both in Spaine and on Shipboard, and the Confession of Dutch-men and Easterlings. Your Petitioner hath humbly presented these proofes and Witnesses to shewe the greatness of your Supplicants service, and the Justice of the Nation in staying and confiscating this Silver, so that it now cleerely appeares, the Claime of the Spanish Ambassador to this Silver, was but a fraudulent practice in him to have cozened the State, and cheated them of all this great Treasure. This business your supplicant effected with the assistanee of tenn other persons, in a year and halfes constant attendance, sitting up many daies and nights together when your Petiti∣oner first undertooke this service, being daily threatned to bee murthered by the Claimers, and expending above five hundred pounds in this service. All which particulers of your Petitioners prosecuting this business, and the charges hee was at for doing the same, is attested upon the Oathes of four credible Witnesses, who were imployed in this service, and were privie to your Petiti∣oners expence.
Which five hundred pounds your Petitioner borrowed, and hath ever since continued at interest, and is now above seven hun∣dred pounds; Severall Gentlemen lending the same to your Pe∣titioner out of their good will to the Nation in generall, and that your Petitioner might bee restored to his Estate againe, and had not your Petitioner borrowed this money to enable him to do this service, your Highnesse and the Parliament had lost every penny of this Silver, being about three hundred thousand pounds. Never any man as yet, brovght and saved your High∣nesse, and the Parliament so much money at one time in any age, as your Supplicant hath heard of; or read of. Your Petitioner trusts and hopes in God, and your High∣nesse, that so great service to your Highnesse and the Nati∣on, shall not go unrequited. What service this Treasure did your Highnesse, and the Nation at that conjuncture of time in 1653. Christendom knows, the Dutch (then our Enemies felt) and this Nation (under your Highnesse government) do enjoy and have the happy fruit of at this day. Your most humble Petitioner prayes your Highnesse to take all the Premisses into your Princely consideration. And that your Petitioner may have his estate, or the value thereof restored to him, in recompence of his services a∣foresaid. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. THO. VIOLET.
Whitehall, July 13. 1657. His Highnesse is pleased to referr this Petition to Sr. John Barkestead Knight, Lievtennant of the Tower of London, Sr. Thomas Viner Knight, Captaine John Limbery, Doctor Walker, Gabriell Becke, Serjeant Dendy, Maurice Thompson, Serjeant Middleton, and Jsaac Dorislaus Esquires, or any three or more of them, to take the Petition within written into their consideration, examine the premisses, and to State and Certifie the case to his Highnesses▪ together with their opinions upon the whole matter. Fol: 231. Fra: Bacon Here followeth an Attestation of my Protesting in the Court of Admiraltie against the Judges, clearing and discharging the said Silver and Ships, and against the Spanish Ambassadors Claims, just that Morning as they were discharging of the Ships and Silver, being the sixteenth day of Decemb. 1652. as appears by the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint under their hands, viz. WE, whose names are here under-written, here∣by certifie all whom it may concern, that we were present in the Court of Admiralty that day the
Judges of the Court were reported to proceed to a sen∣tence for the clearing or condemning of the ships Salva∣dor, George, and Sampson,) it being about the seventeenth of Decemb. 1652. And there we saw Mr. Thomas Violet, the same day in the Court present a Paper unto the Judg∣es, which he declared contained several Reasons and Ar∣guments to the Judges; for respiting their Judgment concerning the discharging of those ships, and several other Prizes, till he had examined several Witnesses on the behalf of the State, to disprove the Spanish Claimes concerning these Ships, at which time the Silver was aboard these Ships: After some time spent in arguing the business by Mr. Violet in behalf of the State, the Judges seeming to proceed to a sentence concerning the said Prise Ships, Mr. Thomas Violet made his Protest in the said Court of Admiraltie aganist the discharge of all or any of these Prises, declaring hee did it upon his owne accompt, till his Witnesses were examined in the behalf of the State: And that the Judges, if they should proceed to the contrary, should answer it to the Parliament and Council of State at their peril. Thereupon the Court desisted from proceeding in the said Businesse; and the Judges thereof required Mr. Violet to attend the Councel of State that afternoon, about his carriage that day in the Court of Admiraltie, touching these ships. Dated at the Mint in the Tower of London, December 23. 1654. Signed George Brett. Thomas Burch, James Hoore.
Here follow the Affidavits and Certificates of the truth of Tbomas Ʋiolets Service, made by honest men of clear reputation, (Mer∣chants and others) that he emploied, and were privie to the whole Proceedings in the Admiralty and other parts of this Na∣tion: and by what wayes and meanes he made these Discoveries, to entitle the State to this Silver, and disprove the Spanish Ambassadours, and the Spaniards Claims. The Affidavits follow; viz. JOhn Glover of London Merchant, aged about fourty years, maketh Oath, That Mr. Thomas Violet, having since December 1652. received several Orders and War∣rants from his Highnesses Councel, and Doctor Walker (Advocate for the Common-wealth,) to assist in the be∣half of the Common-wealth, against the Silver ships Sampson, Salvador. and George, and all their Silver and la∣ding: In pursuance of which service the said Mr. Violet hath constantly intreated his (this Deponents) assistance,
(amongst several other persons which he the said Mr. Violet emploied) for making discovery of the several frauds and practices of the Masters of those ships, and of several other Merchants, Claimers of the Silver and lading in the aforesaid ships, to deceive the State by their several Claims; And also of the several Bills of lading, and in several other particulars: in pursuance of this ser∣vice for the Common-wealth, for several moneths this Deponent, with one Mr. Simon Baldwine a Merchant, who lived a long time at Cades and St. Lucars in Spain, and with Mr. Violet this Deponent and they two did veiw and examine all the Bills of lading, and the se∣veral pleas and Exhibits, Extracts, and all other wri∣tings and papers which were brought in, and remain in the Registrie of the Admiraltie concerning these ships, silver and lading; the Register declaring that they had seen all the Transactions that was then upon record in that business, which were many thousand sheets; and that the said Mr. Violet had several Warrants from Doctor Walker to the Register and Examiners of the Admiralty, to require them, that the said Mr. Violet, and all such as he should nominate under his hand to the said Register and Examiner, should be impowered to make several Searches, which he this Deponent and the rest did almost every day for about three moneths: And this Deponent further maketh Oath, That after he and the rest had taken such Observations and Directions, as Mr. Thomas Violet had given order concerning the marks of several Bills of Lading, and several other particulars, both Mr. Simon
Baldwine and this Deponent delivered the Papers up to Mr. Violet, hee having imployed and contented us for our pains. This Business concerning the ships and sil∣ver, this Deponent came to be ingaged in at the request and entreaty of the said Mr. Violet, hee having heard how necessary and advantagious hee (this Deponent) should bee, in making this discovery of the truth of this busi∣ness; For that this Deponent for many years was an Inhabitant and merchants in Rotterdam, and had Com∣merce and Trade with most Townes in Holland, where Trading was stirring. And this Deponent know's many of the marks of the Bills of Lading of these Silver Ships, though they pretend to belong to Spaniards, Hamburgers and Flaunders, yet they are the same marks as divers Merchants of Holland give to their goods and Merchandize; And that since the War with Holland, divers Ships and their lading have been condemned in the Admiraltie, and made prize of, which had Silver and merchandize aboard them at the time of the condemning, with the same markes which are in these Ships (Sampson Salvador and George); And this Deponent further deposeth, That hee knoweth the said Mr. Violet imployed (besides Mr. Simon Baldwin,) several other people for the making these discoveries ever since Decemb. 1652. And this Deponent hath been imployed by the said Mr. Violet in this business for almost a year and a half in the finding out and searching this business; and the said Mr. Vi∣olet hath to his (this Deponents) knowledg, expended very great summes of monie in prosecution thereof, to the value of above five hundred pounds, besides all his pains, attendance and haz∣zard;
this Deponent having heard him several times threat∣ned and in danger of his life by several Merchants and others, Claimers of the Silver in these Ships: they having declared in this Deponents presence, That by the said Violets protesting in the Court of Admiraltie against the discharge of these Ships and Silver in Decemb. 1652. the day the Judges appointed for discharging the Ships and Silver, (and by his further prosecution against those Ships and Silver since) hee hath been and is the onely cause of hindering them of their Silver and Ships; And that they had had their Silver long since, had not Tho∣mas Violet undertaken the prosecution of this Business. And this, this Deponent hath heard affirmed several times by merchants and others, claimers, both at the Exchange and elsewhere. And this Deponent maketh Oath, That this Affidavit is for the affirming and justifying of Mr. Violets pains, hazzard and service in prosecution of this Business of the Silver ships and Lading. John Glover. Sworn the 27th November 1654. before mee ROBERT KELLEWAY, Master of the Chancery in Ordinary. Thomas Ley. John Gerrel. Both sworn the 25. of Novemb. 1654. before me JOHN PAGE. Simon Baldwin. Sworn the 17. of February 1653. before me JOHN PAGE.
A Coppie of my Letter sent to the Lord Bradshaw. 25th of March 1653. May it please your Honour, I Have left with Colonel Harbert Morley this day my Petition to the Council of State against Otho George: I humbly desire your honour to take notice, if the Council of State do not take some present order in it, to consider what encouragement my self or any man that serves the Common∣wealth in the discovery of the Ships, silver and Merchandize now brought in as Dutch prize shall have when they shall bee as∣saulted in the streets with Stilettoes and Poniards from Cap: Otho George, for being instrumentall to do the State ser∣vice: I have been advised by several friends for this eight dayes, not to come to the Exchange or Admiraltie, least I should bee murthered for undertaking this business, Mr. Joachim Pesler Chirurgon upon the Ship Sampson, now riding at Eriff, of which Ship Otho George is Captaine, and Jacob Elaes Otho George his Cabbin Boy, hath discovered the Silver in the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, that a great part thereof belongs to the Dutch For when they had been ten daies at Sea, the Purser was ordered by the Captain to go into the Fore-Castle, and take his Book and blot out all the names of the Hollanders and Zealanders, and, in their place, to in∣sert abundance of other names: for which discovery Captain Otho George did stab the Chirurgeon of the Ship. My hum∣ble prayer to your Honour is, That the examinations taken about
this business before the Lord Mayor of London, in the pre∣sence of Mr. Will. Reymes, John Carleton, Jonathan Symonds, These Examinations will imforme you at large. Your Honors humble servant THO. VIOLET. To Our most worthy friend John Thurloe Esquire, at White-hall, these present. The Commissioners for Prize Goods Letter to Mr. Thurloe. Mr. Thurloe, WEE have a certaine discovery that a great quan∣tity of Gold and Silver hath been stolne out of the Dutch prize ships that call themselves Hamburgers, wee desire, for the service of the State, to have a War∣rant to bring all the Bullion in the Dutch prise-ships on shoare; Wee have here enclosed sent you Mr. Tho∣mas Violets Letters to us, and his proofes taken in the Office; every houres delay of not taking the Silver a shoare is great losse to the State; Wee finde Mr. Violet the bearer hereof, very active and knowing to make these discoveries, and he hath done several good, and great services for the State already in this businesse, We
desire you to present the same to the Councel of State, We are Sir, Dated Dutch prize-Office, Decemb. 18. 1652. Your very Friends and Servants, Samuel Wilson, Richard Hill. A Warrant of Doctor Walkers, to the Exa∣miners Mr. How, and Mr. Arnold in the Court of Admiralty, December 1. 1653. MAster How and Mr Arnold, in the business of the three ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, and the Silver and Lading in those ships, Mr Violet was ordered to contribute and yield his assistance, to bring in Evidence on the behalf of the Common-wealth. I did heretofore signe a Warrant, that all the Proceedings might be shewed him: He now desires, that the names of all the Witnesses already produ∣ced on the behalf of the State, as also the Allegations and Mat∣ter upon which they were produced: as likewise, the names of all Witnesses produced on the behalf of the Claimers; and every one of them particularly, and the Allegations and Interrogatories upon which they have been produced, might be shewen to him.
I pray your Honours to consider, whether I could em∣ploy men in this Discovery for two yeares, and not to pay them for their paines, and yet I have not had one penny for this service. Doctor Walker knew that I employed many people every day in these Discoveries, seve∣ral of these being often with me, both at the Admiralty, and at his chamber; and he knew, I imployed none in this busi∣nesse but credible persons, as appears here under his hand. And could Doctor Walker have made this Discovery, or known the tricks of these Merchants, Masters of ships, and Pursers, by forged bills, and many other subtilties of Trade, which is not in his Law-books, but is common a∣mongst the Dutch Merchants in these times. Dr Walker would have saved me the labour and charge for employing people to make this Discovery, or from making my Protest in the Admiralty, and would have had the credit and thanks from the State for this Service and Discovery to himself. But this I dare say, though he be a great Lawyer, yet for the making of this Discovery, he was then 16. Decemb. 1652. utterlie ignorant of the way to do it, this being a subtilty amongst a few Merchants, and not to be read in the Civil Law-books, and had I not had all my Intelligence from their own crea∣tures, and plowed with their Heiser, I could not have done this service, or made this Discovery. And upon examination of this business at the Councel of State, Doctor Walker confessed that it was not his study nor his place to seek up and down to procure Witnesses, or to finde out waies to entitle the State to this Silver; and except I could bring legal Witnesse, the State must lose this Treasure: this hee declared several times before the Councel of State. But if the Passengers did confesse this Silver to be loaden, a great part of it for the accompt of Merchants of Ansterdam, as I had undertaken they would do, then hee would improve that Testimony to the uttermost for the States advantage, which indeed Doctor Walker did. And I proved these frauds by the testimony of about ten of the Passen∣gers, being all Dutchmen, Hamburgers and Lubeccars, and other Hans-towns men; and I had above fourscore witnesses the Passengers and Merchants more to examine in this businesse, many of them were after packed away by the Claimers, being Dutch marriners, and had money given them that they should keep out of the way and not be examined, and several Wit∣nesses waited many daies to be examined in the Admiralty and could not. Spanish Gold and Silver was plentifully bestowed on some in the Ad∣miralty, and they loved it well. The Claimers had their Instruments almost every night that stole silver out of these ships, to the value of many score thousand pounds, which I discovered to the Councel of State, as appeared by several papers which I presented to them. I imployed several men who spake the Dutch Language at my own charge, and gave them money to go on ship-board, and to drink freely with the Dutch marriners, and in their cups to fish out the secrets of this businesse, and when I had once got the end of the string, I would by other engines and instruments closely follow and never give it over till I knew the whole bottom of the Flemmish and Spanish cheats which they intend∣ed to put upon the Nation. These men that I imployed on ship-board for to make this Discovery for mee never appeared to mee in the Admiralty, lest the Spanish and Dutch Merchants and marriners should have discovered them to have been my spies. And to deal clearly with your Honours, they were none of them Book-men, Civilians, nor Lawyers, but such persons as be-skellom'd mee soundly in their cups with the Dutch marriners; and though I paid for the Brandey-wine, strong beer, Mum, and Spruce beere, pickle Herrings and Holland cheese, yet I never exspected from them good word or peny of money for all this charge and pains. If I were to do the like service again for the State, I would never look in any Books of the Civil Law, but consult with such persons as know how to humour a Dutch Skipper or marriner, and fish out his secrets. Thus have I clearly told you the waies and instruments I used to do the Com∣mon-wealth this great service. I now humbly exspect according to the Councel of States promise the summe of eleven thousand pounds for this service. And had I not undertaken it the Common-wealth had lost this Silver, which was to the value of two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds. This that he desires being just, I de∣sire that you would not put him off, but let it be done forthwith unto himself, and all such others as he under his hand shall nominate; for he employes others under him in searching into this businesse. He will nominate none but such as may be trusted in it. And I desire you in your several places to give him, and all that he shall employ, all rea∣dy dispatch and encouragement, that the businesse of the Common-wealth may finde no obstacle. Where there is publication, you may likewise shew him the Depositions and (I pray) let nothing that is just be denied him. 3. Septemb. 1653. Walter Walker.
3 September, 1653. MAster Dorislaus and M. Bud are now again desired to deliver unto Mr. Violet a Copie of the Specifi∣cations given in by the Masters and Commanders of the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George: as likewise, Copies of all the Pleadings Articulate Exhibited and admitted on the part of the Claimers of the Silver in any of these ships: And they are to go with him to the Register, and Examiners Offices; and to procure him a view of all the Bills of Lading, Extracts and Exhibites, either brought into the Office, or exhibited by any Claymers: And whatever Papers are, or shall bee exhibited by any Claymers: And whatever Papers are, or shall bee exhibited by any Clai∣mers in the three Ships. I do, as Advocate for the Com∣mon-wealth, desire Mr. Dorislaus to yeild all his endea∣vours and assistance, and also the Register, Examiner, and Deputy-Register in the Admiraltie from time to time to give Mr, Violet free admittance and view of all Acts, Bills of Lading, and Pleas Exhibited, and Extracts and Papers remaining in the Registry, or which shall come in: And to it readily and effectually; the same tending to the service of the Common-wealth; and being in order for preparing the Evidence fit to be produced for the Common∣wealth. I am in this Letter, by order of the Councel of State to Doctor Walker, en∣treated to make this Disco∣very, but now I have done the States-work with the hazard of my life, and vast expence, I cannot by Peti∣tions, Certificates, or Prayers, and many yeares attendance, get to be paid my most dearly earned re∣ward which the Councel promised me, being eleven thousand pounds; had I thought of this usage, I could have bin paid by the Claimers. If this discovery had bin so easily made, and had bin every bodies work to have found out the Spaniards Frauds, I should not have had these earnest Entrea∣ties from Dr. Walker, ac∣cording to the Orders of the Councel of State, of the 1. of Septemb. 1653. The Commissioners for Prize-Goods, have certified to Mr Secretary Thurloe, how active and knowing they found me to make these Discoveries; and had I not been so, the Nation had lost every peny of this great Treasure, amount∣ing to above two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds. And I do, according to the Order of the Councel of State of the First of September, 1653, earnestly desire and Entreat Mr. Violet, and also the Commission∣ers for Prize goods, and their Solli∣citors
and Agents; as also, the Proctor and Silicitors for the State, and every one of them, with all convenient speed, severally to set down in Writing all the Informa∣tions that they respectively know of, or can finde: And all the Evi∣dences and Proofs that may be dis∣cerned or produced on the part of the Common-wealth; That so a full Plea and Articulate Allegation may be prepared, and the Proofs brought in for the Common-wealth: And no Default bee done, suffered, or Committed 3. Septemb. 1653. Walter Walker. Here follows the Referrees Letter, with their de∣sires to my Lord Bradshaw.
WHereas by an Order of Reference from his Highnesse the Lord Protector, dated the 13th. of July 1657. the Petition of Mr. Thomas Violet, (con∣cerning his staying the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, and therein the Dutch silver) is referred to the consideration of Sir Thomas Vyner, and Sir John Barkstead Knights, Captain John Limbrey, Doctor Walker, Gabriel Beck, Maurice Thomson, Edward Dendy, Henry Middleton, and Isaac Dorislaus Esquires, or any three or more of them, who according to the said Order of Reference, are to examine, state and certifie the premisses, contained in the said Petition to his Highnesse, together with their opi∣nion upon the whole matter. And whereas upon reading the said Petition, of the said Mr. Thomas Violet, there are many particulars of service alledged by the Pe∣titioner, which he affirms the Lord Bradshaw to have knowledge of; It is therefore desired, in order to a speedy and effectual proceeding upon the said Petition, That Gabriel Beck Esquire, Mr. Serjeant Dendy, or either of them, will take the paines to wait upon the Lord Bradshaw, and in the names of the above-said Re∣ferrees, to Present the Petition and Reference relating to the said Thomas Violet, with the desire of the said Re∣ferrees, That his Lordship upon perusal of the same, will be pleased to certifie his knowledge of the premis∣ses, dated the one and twentieth day of August 1657. Tho. Vyner. Jo. Barkstead. Jo. Limbrey. Maurice Thomson.
This same Letter, which these aforesaid Referrees writ to the Lord Bradshaw, the Referrees out of their love to Justice, and to know the Truth; were pleased to write to Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, and Francis Allen Esquire, and sent them Copies of your Pe∣titioners Petition and Reference, subscribed by the afore∣said Referrees, that so these Honourable Gentlemen, up∣on the perusal of your Petitioners Petition, and the Re∣ference, thereupon would also be pleased to certifie their knowledge of the Premisses to the aforesaid Referrees, which they all of them were honourably pleased to cer∣tifie accordingly. For which Justice of theirs I am bound to pray for every one of them, the like great Obligations your Pe∣titioner owes to the following Referrees, let the issue of this Business be what God please, I have learned to sub∣mit unto his Providence, I am as clay in the Potters hands. And though I was very unwilling to print these Cer∣tificates and the Referrees report to their late Highnesses Oliver and Richard, knowing these Honourable Gen∣tlemen love to do the oppressed right for conscience sake, without blowing a Trumpet not looking for thanks from men, that so God may reward them openly. Yet the present posture of my business is such, that to demonstrate the many services your Petitioner hath done this Common-wealth, your Honours shall see it certified under the hands of twenty four Honourable and Credible persons, the Originalls I have ready to produce, I humbly crave pardon of these Honourable
Gentlemen for doing thereof without acquainting them therewith, it is both by the Lawes of God and this Nation, that out of the mouth of two VVitnesses every thing, shall bee established, both for mens Estates and Lifes by the Laws of this Land a Jury of twelve per∣sons either quit or condemn all persons of what degree soever. For your Honours Information, your Honours upon the perusal of these Certificates would see a con∣catenation of faithfull and difficult service, which your Petitioner at his great expence, charge, trouble, and losse of time, from the very houre your Petitioner was dis∣charged out of the Tower; viz. 1647 to the year 1651. the year before your Petitioner undertooke this great service of staying the Silver in the Ships Sampson, Salva∣dor, and George. In consideration of which service done as aforesaid, many of the Council of State and members of this Parliament, did promise your Petitioner the restorati∣on of his Estate, and they watched but for an oppor∣tunity to acquaint the Parliament therewith, that so his Estate may bee restored unto him againe, all these services and promises made by the Council in the year 1651. before ever this Silver was brought into the River, or the State had seased on it. May it please your Honours, in Decemb. 1652. before your Petitioner would undertake to make his discovery of the Spanish and Flemish fraudulent Claimes, to cozen the State of this Treasure, and to be at the
charge of prosecuting the same in the Admiralty, your Pe∣titioner was necessitated to come to a certain agreement about his estate with the Councel of State, and how he should be paid for this service, or else it had been a thing impossible for your Petitioner to have undertaken this task, or to have gone through with it, in respect the Councel of State would not advance any money to your Petitioner, but would rather have let this silver go in the Admiraltie, as it had gone, had not your Petitioner in the very minute of time stayed it, as is attested under the hands of the Officers of the Mint, whereupon your Pe∣tioner was forced to borrow great summes of money, to enable him to employ instruments to finde out the bot∣tom of this fraud. Several Gentlemen lent your Petitioner seven hundred sixty five pounds at interest, every penny spent in this ser∣vice; the reason that both made your Petitioner under∣take this difficult businesse, and made these Gentlemen lend your Petitioner this money, was upon the credit and faith of the Councel of States promise to your Petitioner, that if this silver was forfeited to the State, your Petitioner should faithfullie be paid out of the same the summe of eleven thousand pounds, in lieu of his estate, and this you will see clearly proved, and my friends knew me so well, that I would not to fail of your Petitioners un∣dertaking, and for that your Petitioner was and is ready to prove to the Councel of State, his damage is far greater by his Sequestration and Imprisonment then eleven thou∣sand pounds, the Councel of State did faithfully promise
1652. that over and above the paying of your Petitioner the summe of eleven thousand pounds, for this service of getting and staying this silver, your Petitioner should have an Honourable Reward and Memorial left to posterity for the same, and it was upon this score of getting my estate again off Sequestration, or eleven thousand pounds satisfaction, that I ever acted in this businesse of the sil∣ver, or in any other publick businesse from the year 1647. to 1651. or since 1652. to this time, for had I not been assured faithfully of my estate from the Councel of State, and relied on just performance; or had I had the least thought of such usage, and putting off from day to day with References and Reports now my work is done; when my business, and what I deserve is as well known (as the begger knows his dish, or a man knows his right hand from his left.) I do humblie declare reallie to all the world, (I would have remembred that saying, a man may be over just) or else I would have taken more consideration then I have done of my own preservation, when I was offered ten thousand pounds by the Clai∣mers for to have conniv'd and let the State be cozened of the silver in the Admiraltie, as they were at the time of many Dutch prize ships and goods. It could not enter into your Petitioners heart to exspect such delaies by re∣ferences and old Court tricks; had I thought of such dea∣lings, I had known a waie to paie my self. Had your Petitioner spent his spirits, time and estate to have studied disturbance and malignancie, as much as hee hath studied the honour, peace, profit and welfare of this Common-wealth,
the silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador and George had never been coined in the Tower, being two hundred seventie eight thousand pounds, but by the trea∣chery of some Merchants and others in the Admiraltie, had been cleared out of the Nation and sent to the Dutch. Had your Petitioner December 16. 1652. at nine of the clock in the morning in the Court of Admiraltie been possessed with the dumb spirit of malignancie, your Judges of the Admiraltie that verie daie and hour had cleared the aforesaid silver, the Admiral Van-Trump then lying on the Downes to have wasted the silver to Hol∣land; which had not your Petitioner prevented by sea∣sonable applications to the Councel of State, might have prov'd of sad consequence, and have cost many thousand English mens lives, and God knowes what other dam∣mages to this Nation, such an over-sight in the Court of Admiraltie might have brought upon this Na∣tion. Here followeth the Lord Bradshawes CERTIFICATE upon the Desire and Request to him, of Sir Thomas Viner, Sir Iohn Barkestead, Iohn Limbery, Mau∣rice Thompson Esquires, Authorised by his late Highness Oliver, to be Commissioners to Examine this Business.
The Lord Bradshawes CERTIFICATE. I Have perused the Petition and considered of the desires men∣tioned in the annexed Paper, and in compliance therewith so farr as my memory serves mee, which hath bin assisted by the view of several Orders, Certificates, Depositions and memori∣alls formerly made in the Petitioners Case, and now shewed unto mee, I signifie and declare as followeth. That although I may not take mee to make a narrative of Mr. Violets Case, much lesse to give a punctuall accompte, after so many years, of what passed at the Council, relating to that engagement of theirs asserted in the Petition (which to be in the manner therein set down) I can neither knowingly affirme nor deny, yet the Petitioners addresses in the time of the Warr with the Dutche, concerning the stay of the Ships which had the Silver in them being very remarkable, I can for the substance testifie, and do well call to minde the Petitioners tenders and in∣timations to the Council, and undertaking the service touching the Silver specified in his Petition, and that upon good delibera∣tion taken of the matter (the probability of his allegations being also much strengthened by the concurrant circumstances of some Letters about that time intercepted) he had thereupon very good encouragement given him by the Council, that (performing hs discovery) his paines, cost and care, should bee throughly considered, and he honourably rewarded, or was told or promised to that effect. Whereupon hee was Authorised and appointed by the Coun∣cil
to sollivite and assist in that whole business as by their Orders appeareth, and whilest that Council satt, was taken notice of as the maine Agent in the whole conduct thereof, as the proceed∣ings of those times will shewe, what the beneficiall consequence of that imployment, and what fruite thereof hath been to the State may bee better manifested, by others who have been at the Heline of Affaires since the 20th of Aprill 1653. the day of the dismission of the Parliament and old Council. But if I may offer my sence of the man and his actings, which I apprehend to be in part expected, my opinion was and is, that his seasonable interposition and protest in the Admiralty, appli∣cations to the Council, and discovery of the Dutch and Spa∣nish frauds touching the Silver Contested for, these actions ac∣companied also with great Charge, hazzard, and trouble on his part, as hee offers to Demonstrate, and affirmes to bee well knowne, adjoyning thereto for the legall part, the constant as∣sistance of the learned Advocate for the Common wealth, were the maine occasion (if not the causa sine qua non) of the after benefit received by the State upon conversion of that Silver, the Petitioner being looked upon as the great Wheele that sett all on work, as I believe it would bee testified for him by others, who had the honour to serve the Common-wealth in Council, when this businesse was first began, and afterwards untill the close of the same if they were consulted herein. His losses Anno 1643. and his disburstments aboute the Silver, for which hee prayes satisfaction and indemnity, I must leave to his own Evidencinge, and it seemes hee is ready for it. The Councils Ingagements and Intentions to him-wards, at
his first assuming the employment, were not without good reason uncommitted to writing for avoiding of all misconstruction, they proposing on the one hand a faire and just proceeding, and on the other all due encouragement to that person whose disquisition and effectual prosecution for making good the claime they knew must needs be very expensive, and liable to many difficulties and hazards from the multitude of the contrary interessed parties, and their many and powerful abettors: So as any one in reason may conclude, that without such assurance of the part of the Councel, and relying upon it on the Petitioners part, the whole business had miscarried, as left, un-undertaken, and un∣done. The Petitioners sore task and merit of the State in this par∣ticular: I shall not further meddle with; or take upon me to di∣vine or determine what the issue will, or should be as to his just re∣compence and compensation. His zeale, resolution, activity, and ability to promote the publick interest in divers respects, being known to me hereto∣fore in good measure, as I formerly held my self obliged to cherish, and so much as in me was to improve for the States advantage: So upon the occasion now offered, wherein the honour and justice of the State, and their profit also, as I conceive, is mainly in∣volved; I am very free to render him according to my best ob∣servation of him and his actings, this due and deserved Te∣stimony. Septemb. 5. 1657. John Bradshaw. This is a true Copy of the Lord Bradshaws Certificate on the behalf of Mr. Thomas Violet examined by me, Thomas Hewet, Iohn Rimmer.
Francis Allen Esq; Report, and certificate upon the desire and request to him of Sir Tho. Viner, Sir Iohn Barkstead, Iohn Limbrey, and Maurice Thomson Esquires. Gentlemen, I Have received an intimation from you as re∣ferrees by vertue of an order from his High∣ness the Lord Protector referring to a Peti∣tion of Mr. Thomas Violet concerning his staying the Ships Samson, Salvador and George: And the silver therein contained, That I would testifie my knowledge in writing concerning the same, or what else is contained in the aforesaid Petiti∣on, in a ready compliance with what is so intimated, I do in the first place say, That I had not the particu∣lar knowledge of those affairs, as they respect Master Violets actings in them, which other Honourable Per∣sons had, and therefore cannot testifie so particularly concerning those transactions as others may see just cause to do, on Mr. Violets behalf only, Thus much in general I can and do freely testifie, from my own ob∣servation and knowledge, that Mr. Violet did engage in that concernment of the staying the ships Samson Sal∣vador and George; and in discovering the fraudes endea∣voured to be put upon the State touching the silver in
them, contained with a great deal of industry, courage and unweariednesse; and indeed I conceive to his ve∣ry great charge and expence, besides his frequent at∣tending the Committee for the mint in several affairs, re∣ferring therunto, which could not but be expensive to him also; all which is submitted to your further consideration. 27 Octob. 1657. Francis Allen. This is a true copy of this certificate, witness Tho. Hewet, John Rimmer. Sir George Fleetwoods Report and Certificate upon the desire and request to him of Sir Thomas Ʋiner, Sir John Barkestead, John Limbrey, Maurice Thomson, Esquires. Gentlemen, MR. Thomas Violet shewing me his Petition to his Highness, and his Highness, and his desires mentioned in the an∣nexed Papers, and requesting me to certifie my knowledge of his services for the Common-wealth, I finde my self bound, as I am a lover of Justice and Truth, that would to the uttermost of my abilities have vice punished, and vertue rewarded, in pursuance whereof I do signifie, That I have known Mr. Violet for many years, he having daily recourse to my Ʋnele Watkins, during the time he had the office of head Searcher of the Port of London; They
advising together to get an Act pass against transporting gold and silver, and the Bill being brought by Mr. Violet into the Parliament, there was several references to the Committee of the Navy, Officers of the Mint, and Commissioners of the Customes to certifie their opinions: and they all centured and agreed in this, that the Parliament, (if they would have the Mint set on Work, and the gold of the Nation preserved) the Act against transporting gold and silver then depending in the House should be passed, this was Anno 1647. as appeares by the original Orders. These actings of Mr. Violet for the Publick, together with several proposals of Mr. Violets for the advancement of the Trade of the Nation, and Mr. Violets constant attendance for many years both at the Council of State and Parliament, and Council of Trade, to procure the restoration of his Estate: Cau∣sed many of the Members of the House and Council of Trade, and my self amongst the rest to take especial notice of the Man, and such of the Council and Parliament as were pleased to make use of him found in Mr. Violet a deep and profound insight into Mint-Busines, and Merchants affaires. And this good opinion of Mr. Violet procured him this be∣nefit in 1651. that many of the Council of State, and Parlia∣ment, waited an opportunity for to move in the House for Mr. Violets indemnity, and for the full restoratiln of his estate being about eleven thousand pounds. And this was promised to Mr. Violet 1651. a yeare before his undertaking this great service of staying the Silver menti∣oned in Mr. Violets Petition, and I am confident ▪ if Mr. Violet will take the paines to wait upon some of the Members
of Parliament and Council of State, he will have many honour∣able testimonies of this that I say besides my self. And this was the true ground, and original of Mr. Violets being taking notice of by the State of his abilities to make dis∣coveries of the fraudulent Claims of the Spanish Ambassador to the Silver in the Ships, mentioned in Mr. Violets Petition, all which Silver Mr. Violet by his seasonable discovery to the State, and by his protesting in the Court of Admiral∣ty in Decemb. 1652. was the only cause of getting the State this great Treasure mentioned in the aforesaid Petition of Mr. Violet, being three hundred thousand pounds, and the Parlia∣ment, and Council of State in 1652. imposed upon Mr. Vio∣let the whole care of the management of this businesse in the Court of Admiralty as to the discovering part of the Spanish Ambassadors fraudulent claimes, as appeares unto me by the view of several Orders and Warrants. It is most apparent in the whole proceeding in this difficult service, Mr. Violet had alwayes in his eye the restoration of his estate, or the value of eleven thousand pounds, and the particular of Mr. Violets demands to the Parliament in 1651. was about eleven thousand pounds, and had he not had a re∣al assurance from the Council of State in Decemb. 1652. for the restoration of his Estate, or the value, this great Bu∣siness had been lost and left un undertaken by Mr. Violet, had he not had both such a promise, (and also he relied on the same) for just performance, for Mr. Violet in this his high under∣taking ventured all his Estate, Life, Liberty, and expended in this service above five hundred pounds, as I finde by the de∣positions of foure persons employed in this service.
I remember well the appearing of the Spanish Ambas∣sador in the Parliament 1652. in December, demanding the Ships, Samson Salvador, and George, with their silver and lading. It is very remarkable, the courage of Mr. Violet, in giving the Ambassador of Spaine so high a charge in 1652, 1653. con∣cerning his undue practices to defraud the Nation of this sil∣ver: And yet the Ambassador never to vindicate his repu∣tation, nor to desire reparation, he being here above a yeare after: This shews apparently there was a design set on foot by the Spanish Ambassador to defraud the Nation in this bu∣sinesse of the silver Prises, for when I see the Spanish Ambassador make no Addresses to the Parliament for reparation, I was assured Mr. Violet would make him let go his hold and claime of this silver mentioned in his Papers, which he delivered into the House. Ʋpon perusal of Mr. Violets Papers I observed, that though the Parliament was dismissed 1653. the 20. of April, yet Mr. Violets sore task continued on him still, he being by that pre∣sent Council looked upon as the great wheel that set all on work∣ing, as to the discovering part, and this appeares under the hand of Doctor Walker in several Letters writing to Mr. Doreslaws, Mr. Bud the States Proctor, Mr. Arnold, Mr. How, to require them all in their several places to let Mr. Violet, and all such as he employs under him have the full view and inspection of all proceedings in the Register of the Admiral∣ty, and to require Mr. Violets attendance, he paying several persons, and expending in this business above five hundred pounds, as I finde it sworne by several persons. It is true for some reasons of State Mr. Violets assurance and reward was uncommitted to writing to avoid claimers, and
misconstruction of lewd tongues, and to carry an even hand both in respect of the claimers, and the Spanish Ambassador: But this omission was not to frustrate Mr. Violet of his dearly earned reward, the restoration of his Estate; many of the then Council of State, if they be attended by Mr. Violet, will say this could never enter into their thoughts. To set a man so sore a task; and strictly to impose on him his daily attendance, and to enable him to undergo this great and heavy weight to be assisted by ten several persons, foure of them swear Mr. Violet expended, besides all his pains, hazard, and labour, five hundred pounds in this service. And I am perswaded had not Mr. Violet undertaken this businesse in that very nick of time he did 13. of Decemb. 1652. and constantly and vigilantly followed, and agitated in this bu∣sinesse, both at the Council of State, and Admiralty; this great quantity of silver had been lost, and the State deluded with pretended claimes, and how seasonable a service this was at that conjuncture of time, and the happy fruit and effect so great a treasure brought to the Nation, is visibly to all men. My opinion is that for the Honour (and I may say profit of this Nation, to encourage all men for the future to be faithful to the Common-wealth, and to expose their Persons, and expend both their spirits and purses for the Honour and safety of the pub∣lick, as Mr. Violet hath done in this great undertaking, and brought it to a happy issue. That as the sum of money was the greatest that ever (I think) at one time was saved to this Nation by any one mans discovery, so his reward should be sutable, not only to have the ful restora∣tion of his Estate, which was faithfully, to my knowledg,
promised to him, both by many of the Council of State and Parliament before ever Mr. Violets undertaking this service mentioned in his Petition. But this service being finished, Crowns all his former undertakings, and in my opinion he not only deserves the full restoration of his Estate, but to have an honourable memorial left to posterity of his seasonable and faithful discoveries and services concerning the aforesaid silver, That so all others may be encouraged to trust to the faithful promi∣ses of the Council of State, when they shall see the States promises faithfully performed in such a conjuncture of time, as when the Government was changed. And I think I am bound in my conscience, that taking notice of such high proposals as were propounded either in Parliament or Council of State, during the time I had the honour to serve the Publick (amongst which I have and do hold this service mentioned in Mr. Violets Petition to be one of the first rank that was ever presented in Parliament or Council of State, when the work is finished,) I hold my self obliged, both in honour and conscience to give the undertaker, such as Mr. Violet, that hath in this business laboured all along to the perfecting of the work, The State having gotten by this discovery and undertaking, about three hundred thousands pounds (as M. Violet affirms to me so much money coined) he having finished his sore task, I think I am bound in justice to help him what I can, that so after so great paines and hazard Mr. Violet might not work in vain. And upon this account I make this certificate, whereof one part is upon my own knowledge and experience I have had of Mr. Violet, the other Part I refer to the Orders of Par∣liament, Council of State, Doctor Walkers warrants, and the Cer∣tificates of the Officers of the Mint.
And I wish for the due encouragement of all active Persons that shall hereafter venture upon great and high undertakings for the profit, honour, and safety of this State and Common-wealth, that Mr. Violets reward and compensation for this great service may alwayes be had in remembrance, for no doubt so great and faithful a service discovered so seasonably, will have a happy is∣sue, and the reward from the State will be sutable to the great∣nesse of the Service. Septemb. 22. 1657. G. Fleetwood. This is a true Copy of Sir George Fleetwoods certificate on the behalf of Mr. Thomas Violet, examined by me Thomas Hewet, John Rimmer. Doctor WALKERS CERTIFICATE. I Can truly, and do certifie, That when the Cases of and touch∣ing the Silver in the three ships, the Sampson, Salvadore and St. George, were depending in the Court of Admiralty, touching the same being Prize. And before the Argument touching the casting the Onus probandi thereupon in that Court were made; Mr. Thomas Violet did repair to the said Court of Admiraltie, and to my self, being Advocate to the then Parliament, and did produce from the then Council of
State, one order bearing date the 13. of Decemb. 1652. And also some other Orders of the then Council of State, whereby he the said Mr. Violet was ordered to repair to the said Court of Admiralty, and also to my self as Advocate for the then Parlia∣ment; And to look after and take care of those said businesses, touching the said Silver in the said three Ships or to such effect, and accordingly hee the said Mr. Violet was therein very care∣full, and industrious, and did by himselfe and others imployed by him, and at his owne charge take great paines in following the said businesse, and in searching after, and examination of the said Ships, Papers, and Bookes, and writings, and other matters that were exhibited into the Registers of the Admiraltie, and in making his observations thereupon, and collecting thereout what might make for the State, and looking after such other evidences as hee could finde out, (wherein hee was noe way remiss or negligent) and the said Mr. Violet did openly owne the same business in Court, and moved therein on behalf of the Parliament, and that earnestly and with zeal, and made or decla∣red some Protest therein in the said Court of Admiraltie. And did not only particularly apply himself to me, but did also in my hearing privately press it to some of the then Judges of the Admiralty. And I did finde that the said Mr. Violet, by his much publick owning and appearing therein in the behalfe of the Parliament and then Council of State, did contract much envy and ran great hazards of his person, and it cannot bee but that he did lay out and expend much money to such as he imployed therin. 10. March 1657. Wal. Walker. I shall humbly desire your Honours to observe that Doctor Walker
if hee had pleased, could have certified in this his Certificate, the day of the moneth I made my Protest against the Judges of the Court of Admi∣raltie, being the 16. Decemb. 1652. against their discharging this Silver, and the great Contest I had with them about it before I could get the Judges to Respite their Judgment, and that to his knowledge the Judges of the Admiraltie complained of mee to the Council of State that very day in the afternoone for doing this service, and that had it not bin for your Petitioner, the State had bin cozened of all this Silver. But because I prin∣ted the list of the Dutch prizes, and discovered the abuses and cheates put on the Nation by some Officers in the Admiralty, (no doubt but this business stuck in his stomack, and to gratifie some guilty persons that had cozened the State) and that made him to certifie my business by halfs, and but part of his knowledge. But it matters not as long as your Petitioner hath his services fully certified concerning this Silver business, under the hands of Sir James Harrington, Sir George Flettwood, and the Officers of the Mint. This memoriall I put down to let Doctor Walker know, that though hee could forget mee and certifie his knowledge by halfes, It may 'one' day Ile in my lot not to forget him, but to certifie my knowledge of him fully, when I finde a convenient time. If Doctor Walker could have made this discovery without mee, hee would never have intreated mee to doe it, as appears by his Orders and Letters to Mr. Dorislaws, Mr. Bud, Mr. How, and Mr. Arnold, Officers in the Court of Admiraltie. vid. fol. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. Sir. James Harringtons Report and Certifi∣cate upon the desire and request to him of Sir Thomas Viner, Sir John Barkstead, Iohn Limbery, Maurice Thomson Esquires. I Have read Mr Thomas Violets Petition, and his desires mentioned in the annexed Paper, as also the desires of the Referrees, and in compliance of his sad request,
so farr as my memory serves mee, which hath been re∣freshed by the veiw of severall Orders of Parliament, Council of State, Certificates, Depositions, and memo∣rialls formerly transacted in the Petitioners business, both concerning the Silver mentioned in the Petition, and severall other of Mr. Violets faithfull services done by him for this Common-wealth. I do signifie and declare, that from the yeare 1649. to the year 1653. being the time I had acquaintance with Mr. Violet, I observed that hee had a deepe profound judgement and insight into the secrets of our Mint in England, & knew the mistery and secrets of other Mints in forreign parts, and the severall Arts, misteries, and waies forreign Nations used to induce and draw Bullion both gold and silver to their several Mints and Countries, and the Lawes and ordinances forreign Nations made for hindering the exportation in every respective Countrey. And that both my selfe and others, my Associates of the Council of State, in business of high and great concernments as to the Civil part, especially concerning the Mint and Trade made use of him in many per∣ticular services for the Publique. And indeed for my selfe I must give him this just and due Commendations, that for all the time I knew him at the Council of State, hee was very diligent to ad∣vance the publique service, as will appeare by the Acts of the Council in those times, if recourse be there∣unto had. Which actings of his, and his diligent attendance at
the Council of State, was in prosecution for many years to obtain his estate which was taken from him by the Parliament, as hee constantly affirmed both to my selfe and others, my associates of the Council of State, when wee imployed him in many great busi∣nesses for the Common wealth, and this dilligent and vigi∣lant carriage of his, presented him both to the Parlia∣ment and Council of State, as a man whose abilities, acti∣vity, resolution and fideliry, was very necessary and serviceable for the benefit of the State, and great use was made of him in those times by the State, as ap∣peares by the Silver businesse, mentioned in his Petition. And that to those that knew him both in Parliament and Council of State, his trust and faithfullnesse was held in very good estemee, and his services were eminently taken notice of both by my selfe and divers others, both in the Parliament and Council of State, for seve∣rall years before Mr. Violet ingaged in this great under∣taking of staying the Dutch Silver in December 1652. mentioned in his Petition. And truly I must attest that both my selfe and se∣verall others of the Parliament and Council, looked up∣on Mr. Violet in this great undertaking of staying the Silver mentioned in his Petition, in the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, That Mr. Violet was the great wheele of the worke that got the State this great Trea∣sure, for hee both discovered to the Council of State, the fraude of the Spanish Ambassadour, and the fraudes
of the Dutch and Spanish Claimers to the Silver, which seasonable discovery of his at the Council stayed it, toge∣ther with his Protest in the Court of Admiraltie, being by him faithfully, and actively performed, the true At∣testation whereof was examined at the Council of State, and now shewed mee under the handes of the Officers of the Mint. By all which proceedings it appeares to mee that Mr. Violets engagements in this service, was not only the in∣strumentall occasion of getting the State this great Trea∣sure mentioned in his Petition, but the only cause, and without him and his Protesting in the Court of Admi∣raltie at that very instant nicke of time 16. Decemb. 1652. this great Treasure being about three hundred thousand pounds (as Mr. Violet affirmes to mee there was so much money taken out of the Sampson, Salvador, and George) had bin all let go out of the Nation, and bin dischar∣ged by the Court of Admiraltie, and of what preju∣diciall and dangerous consequence, such an oversight in the Court of Admiraltie might have produced to this Common-wealth at that conjuncture of time, when Van Trumpe the Dutch Generall was in the Downes, is obvi∣ous to all men to conjecture, as also the contrary, the great advantage and benefit that hath accrued to this Nation by Mr. Violets happie and succesfull Protesting in the Admiraltie against the discharge of this Silver, and opposing the Spanish Ambassador, and all their numerous interessed parties and Claimers, and their powerfull abettors joyned with it, the hard and volun∣tary
taske hee imposed upon himselfe (as I finde it sworne by severall Witnesses) and that besides all his paines and hazards, hee expended in this service above five hundred pounds. And I finde by Doctor Walkers Warrants directed to Mr. Dorislaus, Mr. Bud, Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Howe, the States Officers, and ministers in the Court of Ad∣miraltie, and by Orders of the Council of State, that since the 20th of Aprill 1653. Mr. Violet was required and en∣joyned not only to contribute his own endeavours, but also at his own charge to imploy many others in make∣ing this discovery, which I finde to be attested under Doctor Walkers hand, and by the Depositions of se∣verall Persons imployed by Mr. Violet, for that although the Parliament and Council of State were dismissed the 20th day of Aprill 1653 yet Mr. Violets fore taske, ex∣pensive, and dangerous imployment was imposed and continued on him till the State had gotten the Silver, and this appears by Warrants from his Highnesse Council, and Doctor Walker of a later date ready to bee produced, which I have seen. These actings of his, accompanied with great charge, hazard, and trouble, shewes to all the world Mr. Violets faithfull service, constant fidelity, and love to his Country. Upon due consideration of all the premisses, I am very willing to testifie my knowledge of Mr. Violet, according to that true worth and great abilities I know in the man, with his readines to serve his Countrey,
and I do it the rather because hee had severall times my faithfull promise (when I was a Councellor of State) that I would testifie his several services done to the Parliament, by which I conceive hee merited the indempnity and re∣storation of his estate before this great undertaking, men∣tioned in his Petition about the Silver in Decemb. 1652 but doing this service successfully in staying this Silver, I thinke my selfe therefore now much more bound in honour and conscience, after so longe a tryall of this mans patience, constancy, and fidelity, and his love to his Country, to give you my true observation of the man, both in his acting this and other great businesse, and this I attest upon my knowledge and experience of the man, and not upon hear-say. And if the rule of the Gospel be observed, viv. that all men do to others as they would be done to themselves, Mr. Violet cannot be many weekes without a full restora∣tion of his Estate or the value, and if Mr. Violet hath had such measure as he hath presented to the world in print, surely I must say he hath had hard measure, but I wish him not only his Estate, but also an honourable memori∣all to be left to Posterity of his great service, according to former engagements to him by some of the then Council of State, for this particuler service of the Silver mentioned in his Petition, this just due and deserved Testimony, I do give him this first of October 1657. James Harrington. This is a true Copy, Examined by us Thomas Hewet, John Rimmer, John Symes.
WHen I brought these aforesaid Certificates to the Commissioners, to whom the Examina∣tion of my services touching this Silver, was referred by the late Lord Protector Oliver, I offered to bring them the Testimonialls of several others of the Council of State, to affirme and attest to the same effect as these honour∣able Gentlemen had don. But the Referrees were pleased to say they had seen enough, and to forbid mee the troubling any others for conformation of what I had alleadged in my Petition, they declaring that these Certificates aforesaid had given them full and ample satisfaction, and that they were sorry I should bee so dealt with, and that they did see my sad sufferings, and would fully and effectually cer∣tifie the true State of my businesse to his Highnesse Oliver what I had merrited from the State, they not doubting but I should have not only the summe of eleven thousand pounds paid mee for this discovery and great service but also should receive an honourable reward over and above for the same. To Incourage others for the future to relie and trust to the Promises of the Council of State, and to be faith∣full in the trust that was imposed on them by the State. The Referrees telling your Petitioner, that in Justice, Prudence, Honour, and Policie, the States must pay mee, and that they could not expect but the end of my labours would come to a happy issue, and thereupon the aforesaid Referrees
were pleased to give mee this honourable Certificate following, con∣cerning the true State of my services, and the Council of States ingagements to pay mee the summe of eleven thousand pounds, and an honourable reward over and above. viz. May it please your Highnesse. WHereas by your Highness order of the 13th of July last, your Highness was pleased to referr unto us or any three of us Mr. Thomas Violets Petition here∣unto annexed, whereby wee are di∣rected to examine the premisses suggest∣ed therein, and to state and certifie the Case to your High∣nesse, together with our opinions upon the whole mat∣ter. In obedience whereunto wee having perused the said Petition, and finding many perticular services which the Petitioner thereby affirmeth were done by him and well knowne to the Lord Bradshawe, and many others of the late Council of State, and hee having named to us Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetewood, and Francis Allen Esquires, who (amongst other of the Council) knew the Petitioners great service done concerning the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, their Silver and Lading mentioned in his said Petition, and the Council of States intentions and engagements to him, when hee under∣tooke
to disprove the Spanish Ambassador, and Spanish and Flemish Claimers thereunto in the yeares 1652. and 1653. For the clearing of the truth of the Petitioners allega∣tions suggested in his said Petition, wee held it necessary to acquaint the Lord Bradshawe, and the said Sir James Harrington, Sir George Fleetwood, and Francis Allen Es∣quires, with your Highnesse said Referrence, and sent them Copies thereof with the said Petition, and with our desires that they would certifie their particular knowledges therein, that so wee might the better returne to your Highnesse the true state of the Petitioners Case. And wee have accordingly received Certificates from all the aforesaid Persons, which wee have hereunto annexed, together with the said Petition and Referrence for your Highnesse gracious peruseall, all which Testimonialls and Certificates set forth the great services done by the Petitioner, by his seasonably discovery of the Spanish Ambassadors, and Claimers fraudulent en∣deavors to deceive the Common-wealth in December. 1652. Wee have likewise perused severall Orders of Par∣liament and Council of State, that set forth the intended fraudes and Practices of Don Alonso de Cardenas, in coming in his owne Person to the Parliament and to the Council of State with severall other Merchants, and their Claiming the Dutch Silver then aboard the said Ships. And wee finde Mr. James Stenere committed by the Parliament for tamper∣ing
in this business; Wee finde it attested under the hands of Mr. George Brett, James Hoare, and Thomas Birch, all Offieers of your Highnesse Mint (they being then in the Court of Admiraltie the 16th of Decemb. 1652.) that the Petitioner by his active, faithfull, and seasonable Protest in the said Court (at that very instant nicke of time, and the very hower the Ships and Silver were in judgement before the Judges there, and upon dis∣charge) the Petitioner by his Protest stayed the Silver mentioned in the Petition, being to the value of above two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds in Silver, taken out of the aforesaid Ships and Coyned in your High∣nesse Mint, as the Petitioner hath proved to us upon the sight of some accomptes. And wee finde by severall Orders of the Council of State, and Orders from Doctor Walker the Common-wealth's Advocate, and by severall Depositions and Certificates that the whole weight of that businesse was imposed on the Petitioner by the Council of State in 1652. and 1653. as to the discovering part, and the Petitioner was required to prosecute this service after the dissolving of the long Parliament, by the Council of State then being. The Heads of the Lord Bradshaws Certificate. Wee also finde it attested by the Lord Bradshawe, that the seasonable interposition of the Petitioner, and his Protesting in the Admiralty, applications to the Council, and discovery of the fraudes, both of the Spanish, and Dutch, touching the said Silver, those actions of the Petitioner accompanied also with great charge, hazard, and trouble,
were the maine occasion if not the causa, sine qua non, of the after benefit received by the State upon conversion of that Silver, the Petitioner being looked upon by the then Council of State as the great wheele that set all on work, when this business first began and after til the close of the same; The Councels engagements and intentions to him wards at his first assuming the imployment, were not without good reason uncommitted to writing for avoyding all misconstruction, they proposing on the one hand a faire and just proceeding, and on the other all due incouragement to that Person whose disquisition and effectuall prosecution for making good the claime, they knew must needes bee very expensive, and liable to many difficulties, and hazards, from the multitude of the contrary interessed parties, and the many and pow∣erfull abettors, so as any one in reason may conclude, that without such assurance on the part of the Council, and relying upon it on the Petitioners part, the whole bu∣siness had miscarried, as left unundertaken and undone. The Petitioners sore task and merrit of the State, hee saith hee will not further meddle with; The Petition∣ers zeale, resolution, and ability, to promote the pub∣lique interest in divers respects being knowne to him in good measure, as hee formerly held himself obliged to cherish and (so much as in him was) to improve for the States advantage, so upon this occasion offered where∣in the honour and justice of the State and their profit (as hee conceived) is mainely inv olved; Hee saith hee is very free to render the Petitioner according to his best
observations of him and his actings, this due and deserved Testimony. Dated the 5th of September, 1657. The Heads of Sir James Harringtons Certificate. Sir James Harrington also certifies us, that the Petiti∣oner was the great wheele of the worke which got the State this great Treasure, for he both discovered to the Council of State, the fraudes of the Spanish Ambassador, and the Dutch and Spanish Claimers to the Silver, which seasonable discovery stayed it at the Council, together with his Protest in the Court of Admiralty, being by him faithfully, and actively performed, the true attestati∣on thereof was examined at the Council of State, and the Petitioner imployed several persons at his own charge in the prosecution of this businesse, being requi∣red by the Council of State to do it, by all which pro∣ceedings he saith it appeas that the Petitioners ingage∣ments in that service, was not only the instrumentall oc∣casion of getting the State that great Treasure mentioned in the Petition, but the only cause and without him, and his Protesting in the Court of Admiraltie, at that very in∣stant nicke of time the 16th of Decemb. 1652. this great Treasure (being about three hundred thousand pounds) had bin all let go, and further saith, that the Councll of State did not only promise the Petitioner, the restoration of his Estate, for this particular service of the Silver, but also an honourable memoriall, and that both himself, and others of his associates of the Council of State, in busi∣ness of great and high concernment (as to the Civil part) especially as to the Mint and Trade, made use of him in
many particulers for the Publique, and that he did observe that all the time he knew the Petitioner, which was from 1649 to 1653. the Petitioner was very dilligent to advance the Publique Interest. These actings of the Petitioner ac∣companied with great charge, hazard, and trouble, shewes forch to all the world the Petitioners faithfull services, constant fidelity, and love to his Country, this Testimo∣ny concerning the Petitioner, beares date under Sir James Harringtons hand the first day of October 1657. The Heads of Francis Allen Esq. his Certifi∣cate Mr. Francis Allen certifies, that the Petitioner did en∣gage in that concernment of staying the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, the Silver and Lading, and in dis∣covering the fraudes endeavored to be put upon the State, touching the Silver in them conteyned with a great deale of Industry, courage, and unweariedness, and indeed he conceives to his very great charge and expence, besides his freequent attending the Committee for the Mint in severall affaires referring thereunto, which could not but be expensive to him also. This Certificate beares date the 27th of October 1657. The Heads of Sir George Fleetwood his Certificate. Sir George Fleetwood likewise certifies, that the Petiti∣oner by his seasonable discovery to the State of the Spa∣nish Ambassadour, and Claimers fraudes as to the Silver mentioned, and his Protesting in the Court of Admiral∣ty in December 1652. was the only cause of geting this great Treasure mentioned in the aforesaid Petition, and that the Council of State in 1652 and 1653. imposed upon the Petitioner the whole care of the management of this business in the Court of Admiraltie as to the dis∣covering
part, and that the Petitioner was several times imployed by the Council of State, and members of Par∣liament, and such of the Council for the State or Parlia∣ment, as were pleased to make use of him, found in the Petitioner a deep and profound insight into the misteries of the Mint businesse, and Marchant affaires. And the said Sir George Fleetwood further saith, that it is most apparent in the whole proceedings of this businesse, that the Petitioner had alwaies in his eye the restoration of his Estate, or the value of eleven thousand pounds, which was the summe of Mr. Violets demand to the Parliament in 1651. which was promised the Petitioner by severall members of the Council and Parliament for service done before this great undertaking, and had not the Petitioner had a reall assurance from the Council of State in Decemb. 1652. for the restoring to him his Estate, or eleven thousand pounds for this service of the Silver, the whole business had bin lost, and left un-undertaken by the Petitioner, had he not had such a promise, and also relyed on the same for just performance, and he saith it is true that for some Reasons of State, Mr. Violets assurance and reward was uncommitted to writing, to avoyd claymor, and misconstructions of lewde Tongues, but this omission was not to frustrate the Petitioner of his dearly earned reward, the restoration of his Estate, as many of the late Council of State (if attended on by the Petitioner) would say this could never enter into their thoughts. This attestation under the hand of Sir George Fleetwood beares date 22th September 1657.
These Certificates with the former Attestations are briefly reported. The Originals specifying the Petition∣ers particular srvices, in this and other his undertakings, more at large are hereunto annexed. And whereas the Petitioner alledgeth in his Petition, that had he desisted the prosecution of the said businesse in your Highnesse Court of Admiralty, and betrayed the Trust the Councel f Stae eposed in him, he was seve∣ral times offered, and might have received in the yeares 1652. and 1653. from several Merchants of Flanders then in London, the summe of ten thousand pounds. Up∣on examination of this Allegation, we finde that the Merchants Claimers did several times offer the Petitioner ten thousand pounds, to have deserted this businesse of prosecuting against the Spanish Ambassador and Claim∣ers concerning this Silver. And this was confessed by the Merchants Solicitor to be true, as appeareth by two several persons Affidavits, viz. Mr. Thomas Hewet, and Mr. William Savill, taken before William Glascock Esq. one of the Masters in Chancery. And whereas the Petitioner alledgeth, That in the pro∣secution of this great businesse, for the space of about two years he was at the sole charge himself thereof, and paid ten several persons whom at that time he employed in this service, as he hath proved by Affidavit of foure Witnesses, viz John Glover and Symon Baldwin Merchants, Thomas Ley and John Gerrell Citizens of London, Sworn before John Page and Robert Kelloway Esquires, Masters in Chancery, in 1654. That the Petitioner to their
knowledge expended above five hundred pounds in this service in 1652. and 1653. We finde the Petitioners debts and engagements con∣tracted in the prosecution of this businesse of the Silver Ships to be very great, amounting unto the summe of seven hundred sixty five pounds, and upwards, which the Petitioner oweth at interest at this day. And he hath presented us a particular List of the several mens names, of whom the Petitioner borrowed the said money to do this service, the truth of which appears unto us by the Affidavit of the said Mr. Violet, sworn before Doctor Har∣rington, one of the Masters of your Highnesse Court of Chancery, besides several other great summes of money, which the Petitioner affirmes to us to have taken up at interest, for his necessary support and maintenanee ever since the Sequestration of his estate in 1643. May it please your Highnesse, upon this businesse of the Petitioner we have had many meetings. And being by your Highnesse Reference required not only to slate the Petitioners Case, but to certifie our opinions upon the whole matter; We do accordingly in all faithfulnesse and humility certifie to your Highnesse, That upon due consideration had of the great travel, charge and ha∣zard, which the Petitioner hath undergone in the prose∣cuting of this businesse, as hath been proved unto us as aforesaid. As also upon the Attestation of Sir George Fleetwood, and Sir James Harrington, concerning the Pro∣mise of the Councel of State to Mr. Violet, for the restorati∣on of his estate, or eleven thousand pounds.
Upon the whole matter, we do in all humble man∣ner certifie your Highnesse, that we finde the Petitioner is a person, who not only deserves the making good the Councel of States Promise to him as abovesaid. But also by your Highnesse goodness, bounty and favour, that there be some signal Reward conferr'd upon him for this his eminent service, according to the Promise of the said Councel, as by the Certificates of Sir George Fleet∣wood, and Sir James Harrington, hath been attested unto us, That so all others for the future, may be encoura∣ged to serve the interest of your Highness and the Com∣mon-wealth with all faithfulness, as it appeareth to us the Petitioner hath done. We have also considered of the Petitioners debts and expences contracted in this service, and for his support since 1643. and beleeve the Petitioners engagements at this present are very great and pressing upon him. Where∣fore being ordered by your Highness to certifie our opi∣nions upon the whole matter, We humbly offer unto your Highness, That for the present, (left the Petitioner should be thrown into prison, and thereby utterly ruined for the very moneys he hath expended in this service,) That some considerable summ of money in part may speedily by your Highness be assign'd unto him, for the paying of his debts contracted in this great service for the publick. And also that care be taken for his subsistence, according to his quality. And that the remainder of the money promised him by the late Councel of State as aforesaid, may be paid unto him, assoon as your High∣ness,
and the great affaires of the Common-wealth can permit, he having eminently and signally shewed his zeal, resolution and forwardness, with the hazard of his life in this service for his Countrey. All which we Humbly submit to your Highnesse Wisdome and Justice. 1. May 1658. John Barkstead Tho. Viner, Gabriel Beck John Limbery, Edward Dendy Henry Middleton, Maurice Thomson Isaac Dorislaus. Examined by us, Jo. Symes, Jo. Rimmer. WHen your Petitioner after much paines, pati∣ence, and attendance, had gotten all these a∣foresaid honourable Gentlemens Certificates, and Testimonialls aforesaid in May 1658. I cast about how I should bring my businesse to have it come to a good issue, that after so much delay I might have Justice. Thereupon your Petitioner, Petitioned Oliver Lord Protector, setting forth my former services, and backing the same with so many bulwarks, and Certificates, that in justice nor honour, I thought he could not delay me longer of my dearly earned reward, for I knew he could not deny a tittle in my Petition, but what I alledged I had fully proved, and that your Petitioner might be dealing with him for something to get some imployment till he paid me the summe of eleven thousand pounds.
I did offer in part of my satisfaction of eleven thousand pounds, to except of the imployment of Regulating the manufacture of gold and silver thread, with the fees I formerly had received, and I humbly offered to accept of this office at the value of two thousand pounds, this office being a part of my own Estate, for which I paid formerly 1500l. And had I not bin disturbed in the due execution, by some damo∣rous cheating Silkmen, and Wyer drawers and Refiners who make it their common trade to cozen the wearers of gold and silver lace, and have melted down within this twenty yeares of the Plate and heavy silver Coynes of the Nation to the value of a million of money, to the wispeakable losse of the Common-wealth, by wasting of the blood and sinews of this Nations money, which ought to bee kept in peoples purses to maintaine Trade and Commerce, and not to be put upon Womens Petticoats to be burst and wasted away. For to induce his Highnesse Oliver to grant me the said im∣ployment, I annexed to my Petition and Papers a Report of the Committee of Parliament for Trade, Dated June 16. 1657. the original Report I have readie to produce to your Honours, which Report certifies that they have had it fully proved before them upon many dayes Examination, the great abuses daily practised in the culling and melting down the currant silver coines of this Nation; for the expensive making Gold and Sil∣ver Lace, Wyre and Thread. They certifie under their hands the dailie abuses and cheats is put on the Wearers by the deceit∣ful making Gold and Silver Thread and Lace, and also by seve∣ral fraudulent practices in the making Gold and Silver Thread, that there is wsted of the stock of Silver in this Nation, about
thirty thousand pounds a year. And that at this day there is no Rule nor Order for regulating the Work-masters, nor the Workers, but every one is 'est to cozentle Common-wealth, and they have certified it by what several wayes they do it; as will appear upon your Honours Perusal of the Certificate of the Com∣mittee for Trade. And the Committee for Trade finding this to be a great abuse and cheat put on the Nation, have upon many dayes considerati∣on presented to that Parliament a Report of a Model and Way for the due Regulation of all these abuses, and recommend in their Certificate your Petitioner for the execution of that service, to be appointed the sworn Officer, and to take the fees for doing that service as formerly your Petitioner did, and that your Pe∣titioner for the future put in security in the Exchequer, to war∣rant all these Manufactures of Gold and Silver Lace, Wyre and Thread to be good silver, that is drawn, assayed, marked or sealed at the Office. And to warrant the same to be sterling silver accord∣ing to the Standard at the least, or to pay all damage to the Party or Parties grieved, and that all Gold and Silver Thread shall be duly spun, with a due proportion of Sil∣ver to Silk, to the end that the Silver may not be brushed and rubbed, of Lace, Buttons, and other sorts of works in Gold and Silver Thread, as it daily is, to the quantity, as hath bin proved to the Committee for Trade, of thirty thousand pounds a year. Whereupon his Highnesse refers this Petition July 13. 1658. and all the aforesaid Reports, together with a Re∣port of the Councel of Trade, for the regulating the Ma∣nufacture
of Gold and Silver Thread, to the considera∣tions of the Privie Councel, to take all the premisses into their consideration, and to see your Petitioner paid for these services in staying the Silver, and for his for∣mer losses according to Equity and Justice. And that if the Councel conceived it fit, I should have the emploiment to see to the due regulating the manufa∣cture of Gold and Silver Wyre and Lace, and to prevent the melting down heavy English money, as I desired, but the Protector soon after died before I could get the Coun∣cel of State to meet, and so I renewed my Petition to the late Lord Protector Richard, who signed this Order to Gabriel Beck, and Francis Bacon Esquires, viz. RICHARD P. WHereas wee are informed that Thomas Violet of London Goldsmith, hath formerly done our most dear Father of famous memory and this Nation severall great services, and that the said Thomas Violet hath made his addresses unto you, and in many particulars hath acquainted you with his humble desires and good affections to our service, and shewed you severall transactions which ought to be taken into our considerations, being (as wee are informed) both for our service, and the pro∣fit,
safety, and honour of this Nation. Wee therefore re∣quire you to give us an accompt of all such particulars con∣cerning the Publique, as the said Thomas Violet hath alrea∣dy acquainted you with, and if you conceive it fit for our ser∣vice, you are by these presents authorised to send for the said Thomas Violet, and to examine him upon any other questi∣ons or matters, which you shall conceive is fit for our service, and in what way the said Thomas Violet may be serviceable unto us and the Publique, and the result of your debates to present unto us in writing, with what expedition you can. Dated 28. October 1658. To our trusty and Welbeloved, Francis Bacon, and Gabriell Becke, Esquires. May it please your Highnesse. IN obedience to your Highnesse Order of Re∣ferrence dated 28. October last hereunto annex∣ed, wee have several times mett, and finde that Thomas Violet Petitioned your Highnesse royall Father for his promised reward, which Petition his late Highnesse 13 July 1657. referred to the Lord Barkstead, Sir Thomas Viner, and severall other Persons, and their
Report thereupon is hereunto annexed, which Report we have perused, and also severall Certificates of the Lord Bradshawe, Lord George Fleetewood of the Vache, Sir James Haning∣ton, and Francis Allen Esquires, and severall other Certi∣ficates of the Officers of the Mint, as also the Orders of the late Council of State, Depositions, and Orders of the Court of Ad∣miraltie, whereby it appears to us that the said Thomas Vi∣olet by his seasonable interposition, and Protest in the Admi∣raltie 17. December 1652. his application to the then Council of State, and his discovery of the Spanish and Dutch fraudes, touching the Silver in the Ships Sampson, Salvador, and George, being neere three hundred thousand pounds, this his discovery and prosecution in the Admiraltie, in all probabillity saved the State this great Treasure, or else the State had been cozened thereof, as appeares to us at large by all the aforesaid Certificates ready to bee produced to your Highnesse. Wee finde it proved and certified, that Thomas Violet expended seven hundred sixty five pounds in the prosecution of this service, besides all his time and hazard, which monies ap∣peares to us he tooke up at interest, for which he stands indebted to severall persons, and he hath proved to us he is every day in danger to be taken in execution, for the very monies hee expend∣ded in this service, to get the State this great Treasure. And wee finde it attested unto your Highnesse royall Father, by the Certificates of all the aforesaid Referrees, that the State did promise unto Thomas Violet, upon his undertaking at his own charge to do this service, to pay him the sum of eleven thousand pounds, and some other rewards for this service, in stopping the aforesaid Silver.
And it is further certified to your Highnesse royall Father by all the aforesaid Referrees, that they finde it proved that Thomas Violet was offered ten thousand pounds in the behalfe of the Claimers, to have desisted his prosecution in the behalfe of the State, touching this Silver. And we finde that the Lord Barkstead, Sir Thomas Viner and all the other Referrees humbly propounded to your Highnesse royall father as very fit and just, that a considerable summe of money bee presently paid unto Thomas Violet, for to discharge his debts, and for his support, lest otherwise hee should bee throwne into Prison and utterly ruined for the very money he hath expended in this service, and that care be taken for the future for Thomas Violets subsistence according to his quality, and that the re∣mainder of the money to make it up the summe of eleven thousand pounds, promised to him by the State for this service, may be paid unto Thomas Violet as soone as the great occasions of the State can permit. This Certificate is hereunto annexed and signed by all the aforesaid Referrees 1. May 1658. to your Highnesse royall Father. And wee humbly offer it as our opinions, that it is both just, and fit for the honour of the State, that the monies Thomas Violet hath expended in this service, and a due consideration for his support for the future be speedily paid unto him, to preserve him from a present ruine, and the remainder of the aforesaid sum to be paid him as soone as the great occasions of the Common∣wealth will permit And the Referrees do bold Thomas Violet to be a person ve∣ry fit and usefull for imployment either in your Highnesse Mint, or in the Office for the due Regulation of gold and silver wyer,
and Lace, &c. and in several other emploiments, as appears by several Certificates. And Violet himself hath made several Proposals unto us in writing for his satisfaction, which we have hereunto annexed for your Highnesse gracious perusal, In some of these Proposals we do humblie apprehend Thomas Vio∣let may be useful for your Highnesse and the publick service. All which we humblie submit to your Highnesse consideration. 18. Jan. 1658. Francis Bacon. Gabriel Beck. Examined by us Jo. Symes, Jo Rimmer. ABout the middle of April 1659. the late Lord Protector Richard, receiving these Certificates and this following Petition, blamed some persons whom he had interessed to give him a true Account of my sufferings, and of my abilities and willingnesse to serve the Common-wealth, that they had not done it before, but to shew that his late Highnesse put a great value of my services and sufferings, and of my abilities to serve the Nati∣on, (as some Honourable Gentlemen told me he did) he was plea∣sed upon the Reading this following Petition; to give me and some other Gentlemen which I had nominated in trust for my use, this ensuing Warrant for the making of a publick farthing for the use of England, Scotland, and Ireland, referring the Approbation and Confirmation thereof to the Parliament, to pro∣vide such Orders and Rules as they thought best for the good of the People
I used the name of Edward Johnson Esq. and some other Names for my use, and here followeth my Petition and Refe∣rence from his late Highness. And if the Parliament please to employ me in this service, and to grant me for thirty one years the entire and whole management of this Office, for making a common farthing. I will thankfully accept of the emploiment, and humbly and thankfully allow it as five thousand pounds paid unto your Petitioner from the Common-wealth, in part of his due debt of eleven thousand pounds for staying the aforesaid silver. And your Petitioner will be tied to pay the maimed souldiers, du∣ring the time of this Grant, twelve-pence upon every twenty two shillings in farthings, which shall be uttered by me or my Assignes, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, which will be a constant revenue, and I will pay it in monethly to the Treasu∣rers for the maimed souldiers. And if the State please to have farthings made of a smaller proportion, I will allow the souldiers five shillings for every twen∣ty two shillings, and yet these Copper farthings shall be above as heavy again do the ordinarie farthings that now passe a∣mong us.
To his Highnesse RICHARD LORD PROTECTOR of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. The Humble Petition of Edward Johnson Junior, Esq. &c. SHEWETH, THat there are many fraudes and deceits dai∣ly practiced by diverse petty Retayling Tradesmen, Chapmen and others, in makeing and uttering farthing tokens of their own stamping, almost every petty Re∣tayling Tradesman putting forth a severall farthing token not valueable without any Licence, some of Pewter, Tinn, Lead, Brass, and some of Copper, according to every mans fancy that makes their own farthing tokens. Great numbers of these Retayling Tradesmen breake, others remove themselves from one place to another, and many of them die insolvant, and their farthing tokens thus unduly uttered be∣iug not valueable, one of them not being worth in value the sixth part of a farthing, and some of their farthing tokens not worth the twentieth part of a farthing, the people of this Nation (especially the poorer sort) are daily cheated and cozened by these indirect practices.
To prevent these abuses for the future, your Petitioners hum∣bly pray your Highnesse that a common valueable farthing may be made of fine Rose Copper of a valueable weight (that is to say) of the weight of about halfe a quarter of an ounce Haver du poys to a farthing, and twenty two Shillings by tail, to weigh eight pounds Haver du poys, with the remedy of six pence under or over to pass currant within your Highnesse Dominions of England, Scotland, and Ireland, for all such persons as will make use of them for their necessity of change, and to prohibit all other far∣thing tokens now made, or to be made or uttered within your, Highnesse Dominions aforesaid That to have a valueable common farthing to be made, to pass currant within your Highnesse said Dominions, is so needfull a thing in the Common-wealth, and of such necessity for change, that the making of the same will relieve and accommo∣date many thousands of petty Tradesmen and poore people, as will plainly appeare unto your Highnesse, in our most humble Reasons and motives hereunto annexed, to which wee do most humbly Referr. Your Petitioners most humbly pray your Highnesse, in respect of the great charge, and trouble they shall undergo in performing this service for the good of the Common wealth, to grant unto them and their As∣signes and Deputies, the sole making and uttering of the aforesaid Common farthing for one and thirty yeares, and to prohibite all other farthings, and the making and counterfeiting of this farthing by any other, upon paine and losse of Estate and
imprisonment during your Highnesse pleasure, and in consideration thereof, your Petitioners will serve your Highnesse Dominions with valueable farthings of the goodnesse and weight aforesaid, and also pay unto your Highnesse Exchequer to your High∣nesse use, twelve pence for every two and twenty shillings in farthings, which shall be vented and uttered by your Petitioners, their Deputie, or De∣puties in England, Scotland, and Ireland, which will bee certaine revenew to your Highnesse of ma∣ny hundred pounds a yeare, and a great accommo∣dation and benefit to the poore of all your High∣nesse Dominions. And your Petitioners shall dayly pray &c RICHARD P. WEE have perused the Petition of Edward Johnson Junior Esquire, &c. together with the reasons hereunto annexed, and our will and pleasure is, that our Sollicitor Generall prepare a booke fit for our signa∣ture, for the erecting of an Office for the sole making, venting, and uttering of a Common farthing, to go currant in England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, according to the weight, proportions, and propositions, in their Petition, conteined with such Rules to be ob∣served
by the Petitioners, or their Assignes, for the stamps, figures, and Arms of the said farthings, as wee and our Successors shall appoint, and for the granting the same to the said Edw. Johnson Junior Esq; &c. and their Assignes and Deputies for one and thirty yeares. Reserving to us and our Successors twelve pence for every two and twenty Shillings of the said farthings, so vented and ut∣tered. And our Solicitor Generall is to attend and ac∣quaint the Parliament with this Petition, together with the reasons thereunto annexed, and with this our War∣rant. VVho are desired to Ordaine and appoint such Rules, Prohibitions, and Penalties, for the effectuall and better management of this service, the preventing of all former abuses, and restrayning of the Counter∣feiting, and importation of any the said farthings from the parts beyond the Seas, as they shall thinke fit and necessary for the carrying on of this Service for the good of the Common-wealth. Given at Whitehall the 19th day of Aprill 1659. To our Trusty VVel beloved Sir William Ellis Barron∣ett our Sollicitor Generall.
To my much honoured and worthy Friends Sr Thomas Ʋiner, Kt., Mr Alexander Holt, Mr John Sanders, Mr James Hore, Mr Will. Baldwine, Mr Will. Du-Gard, Mr Sarjeant Dendy, Mr Gabriel Beck, Mr Bovey, Mr Ed. Watkins, Mr John Heatly, Mr Lucas Lucie, Mr Thom. Packington, Mr Francis Bishop, Mr John Burredge, Mr Delabar, Mr Nowel, Mr Emery, Mr Hord. Worthy Gentlemen, and my good Friends: TO you of all others I am most obliged to give a par∣ticular account of this business, touching my staying this silver, mentioned in this Book, be∣cause, I could not have done this great service of staying the Shipps, Sampson, Salvador, and George, and prosecuting that business in the Admiraltie, but that I had the money to do it from you, and I owe it you at this day about 1500 l. I have formerly shewed unto most of you the Orders of Parliament touching this business, and what endea∣vours were acted by Mr James Steneer, and severall other Merchants, to cozen the State of all this great treasure: All the printed Transactions most of you have seen formerly, But the orders that mentions seaven severall Letters of Mr. James
Steneres, and severall other Merchants Letters which were read in Parliament. Mr. James Steneer writes to his Corres∣pondents beyond Seas concerning the geting them this Silver out of the Admiraltie, (wee, meaning himselfe and the rest of his con∣federates, have made a great many friends among the great ones to speake for us in the business when it comes before them, (a wise man may guess who those great ones were, and what great ones made a trade by cozining the Common-wealth in their Priz∣es) the Claimers of the silver at that time having stollen several scores of thousand poundes out of these Ships, so that they weree full of money and they could bribe any Person in power that would be corrupted, in another of Mr Steneres Letter that was read in the Parliament House, Mr. Stenere writes to his Correspon∣dents beyond Seas, that he must have a care what hee did write to them touching this Silver business, left his Letters should be opened, when he was brought to the Parliament Barr the first of December 1652. he rather chose to act the part of a foole, and a lyer, rather then to serve the Common-wealth to dis∣cover this design, for which tampering of his the Parliament committed him from the Barr to the Serjeant at Armes the first of December 1652. as appeares by the journals of the Parliament, at that time Van Trumpe the Dutch Admirall was in the Downes, and no doubt but his mouth watered after this Silver, there is a Commission under the great Seal of Holland, and the originall orders of the States Generall. Upon the petition of the Merchants of Amsterdam, to guard these ships and silver from the Parliaments forces, which will remain to posteritie to show the justice of this Nation in staying this silver for Dutch silver, the truth of this being also confest in the Admiraltie by many of the
marriners and passengers which came that Voyage from Spain, and that the Pursers books and many of the Bills of Lading were forged and altered at sea after that they had heard certainly by some ships that the Dutch were at warrs with England. The Parliaments Agent at Cades gave advice here to Mr Wilson his kinsman, the day that these ships set saile from Cades, and though they gave out there that they were to go for Dunkirk, yet their designed Port was Amsterdam, they being loaden for the greatest part upon the account of the Dutch, and the same was confest in the Admiraltie by many of the Passengers and others. Decemb. 14. 1652. The Spanish Ambassador Don A∣lonso de Cardenas, Embassador extraordinary for the King of Spain, came in person to the Parliament, and made an Oration in the House, claiming all this silver in these three ships to belong to his Master and for his Masters subjects account; which Speech hee also at the same time presented to the Parliament in writing both in Spanish and English, together with two bundles of pa∣pers touching this silver, which hee referred to the consideration of the House: And for several daies hee made his appearance at the Council of State, and put in the like claimes for this silver, hee ingaging his Honour that no part of it did belong to the Dutch, as will appear by the proceedings and the records of the Council of State, and Mr Stenier was bayled, and his busi∣nesse never called on to this day. While these businesses were transacted at the Parliament, Councel of State, and Admiraltie, I made the Lord Bradshaw and many of the Council of State acquainted with the whole pra∣ctice and fraud that was intended to be put on them by the afore∣said
parties, and that if they had not a special care, the Judges in the Admiraltie would discharge this silver, and the Dutch had rather it should be in the bottom of the sea than wee should have it. Upon this Information the Council of State commanded mee to attend carefully the motions of the Court of Admiraltie and the Merchants touching this Silver, and from time to time to give the Council an account what was done in the businesse. Whereupon, December 15. 1652. I made the Council ac∣quainted, That the Judges of the Admiraltie had appointed to bring these ships, Sampson, Salvador and George, their sil∣ver and lading to a judgment the next day, being Decemb. 16. in the Admiraltie; And that I did believe the Judges would cleare the ships, the Lord Bradshaw and some others of the Council askt mee what reason I had to say so or to suspect so: Whereupon I told them, the Commissioners of Dutch prize Goods had given me a warrant to go aboard these Dutch prize ships when I pleas'd, and to imploie whom I thought good to get acquaintance with the sea∣men aboard these ships. And I had certain intelligence, that Otho George, Captain of the Sampson, had commanded all his men to be in readinesse and had taken in fresh victualling and biskets, and that in a few daies they should be at Dunkirk, de∣claring that Van Tromp would do them no hurt though hee were on the Downes. Upon this discovery, many of the Council of State did appre∣hend the great dammage and danger the Nation was in if this great treasure should fall into the hands; of the Dutch, and af∣ter much debate I was commanded by the Council to attend in the Court of Admiraltie, Decemb. 16. all the while the Court sate, and if the Judges did go about to clear the silver, then I
should make my Protest against their proceedings, till my Wit∣nesses were examined that should discover the fraud: And the Councel likewise charged mee, That if the Judges askt mee by what authoritie I made my Protest, I should deny I had any or∣der from the Councel of State but I should do it upon my owne peril and account, if I were certain I could disprove the Spa∣nish Ambassador, and if I did prove that there was silver aboard these ships belonging to the Dutch, out of the first hundred thousand pounds that was coined of this silver, I should be paid eleven thousand pounds, being in lieu of my estate that I had for many yeares petitioned for, whereupon I told the Council the estate the Parliament took from me, endamaged me above sixteen thou∣sand pounds, many of the Councel replying (Perform you what you have undertaken, which we believe you are never able to do) and you shall have an honourable reward for this service, over and above eleven thousand pounds which you claim for your estate. I have done this service, and two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds the State hath had, and employed it for the desence of the Common-wealth, in paying the Army and Navy, as will appear by the Accounts of Coll. Barkstead; yet to this day the Council of State hath not performed their faithful Promise to me, to pay me eleven thousand pounds, and to give me an honourable reward over and above for this service. It is very remarkable, that there was a designe laid a∣mongst some of Mr Steniers great ones to cozen the State of this Treasure; and would I have been Knave, I might have been one of his great ones, and have taken ten thousand pounds to let the silver go, as in this Book is cortifiedby many honourable persons might have had.
And that to some in the Admiralty, my appearing in that Court to stay this silver was most distastfull and unex∣spected, and spoiled some peoples markets both in the Ad∣miraltie and other places too; for some of the Judges in the Admiralty, (Exton and Stevens) Decem. 16. 1652. were so farre from giving mee thanks for my discovery, and for making my Protest in the behalf of the State to save this silver (which had not their interest and profit layen another way they ought to have done) but they con∣trariwise openly in the Court before many hundreds of merchants have reviled mee and would of discharged this silver. And had I not received a command from the Coun∣cil of State the day before to act in that manner, to be sure to keep the Judges from discharging the silver, let the Judges say what they pleased, the Iudges would that mor∣ning have discharged the silver, and consulted together to commit mee; they disputed the businesse so lowd, that I and many others heard it: And the Iudges bid Wyeen the then Register of the Admiralty call on the ships Sampson, Salvador and George, not minding what I said: this can be proved by many merchants, and is fully certi∣fied by the Officers of the Mint. Whereupon I told Mr Wyeen the Register, that if he and the Iudges did discharge the silver in these ships, and did not forbear their sentence till my Witnesses were exami∣ned, I would make it the dearest daies work they ever did in their lives or to that effect. And I undertook before the Iudges in the Admiralty upon the peril of my life to dis∣prove
the Sanish Ambassador and Flemmish Claimes to this silver. Whereupon Monsieur Motett (the Spanish Am∣bassadors Secretary) hearing mee say so to the Iudges, was in a very great rage, and so were all the rest of the Clai∣mers. Whereupon I told the Iudges, that if they would clear the silver, notwithstanding my Protest, before my witnesses were examined, it was most apparent the Com∣mon-wealth was betrayed, and bribes given and taken by some great ones to cozen the Common-wealth of this silver, but it should not be in their power to do it, for I would prevent them. And that if the Iudges did proceed to discharge this silver, and that this silver come into the hands of the Dutch, the Iudges lives and estates could not make the Common-wealth satisfaction; for that Van Tromp the Dutch General was then on the Downer, and an hastie Iudgment, before the truth of this plot was discovered, would put this silver into the Dutch mens power, which might be of sad consequence to this Nation, and may cost many thousand English men their lives. VVhereupon all the Spanish and Flemmish Claimers were in a great rage, heat and discontent. Two of the Iudges (Exton and Stevens) told mee I had undone my selfe for ever, in making my Protest against the discharge of the silver, and by my other actions and words that day in the Admiralty; and so the Iudges com∣manded mee to attend the Council of State that after∣noon: And so the Court broke up, the Spaniards and
Flemmings cursing mee bitterly, and I exspected every mi∣nute to be murdered by them. The Iudges of the Admiralty prophesied truer then Lilly hitherto; for they told mee the staying of this silver would undo mee: for if the Council of State do not pay mee the eleven thousand pounds they promised mee, I have by my faithfulness, honesty and integrity to my Countrey in the protesting against the discharge of this silver in the Admiralty, and by my constant, chargeable and dangerous prosecution thereof, in getting the State two hundred seventy eight thousand pound, in refusing the Claimers money, when they offered mee ten thousand pounds to be silent and let the State be cozened of the sil∣ver: VVould I have been a knave I might have been rec∣koned among Mr Stenieers great ones, but my faithfulness to my Countrey in this particular service (if the State be not just to mee in their promise) will undo mee for ever. Gentlemen, I have formerly delivered a particu∣lar of some of your names, and the summes of mo∣ney I borrowed of you to to enable me to do this great service, all my owne Estate being under a sequestration, unto the Commissioners that were appointed to exam∣ine this businesse. Most of you knew when you lent me this monies, I was to lay it out in this businesse in the Admiraltie, and tenn honourable Gentlemen have Certified, I bor∣rowed of you and spent in this service seven hundred six∣ty five pounds, besides severall great summes of money
I payd some of you for Interest of this money ever since the year 1652. and great summes of money I have bor∣rowed to do the Council of State other services, as you may finde in this booke, Fol. 107. 108. I owe unto you all this 25th of May 1659. the summe of fifteen hundred fourtie and odde pounds, currant money of England, which sums I have laid out and a great deal more, in doing of this Common wealths service. Gentlemen, I have printed this Letter to acquaint the Councel of State, that some of you have commenced Suits, and I look every daie for your Executions to be ser∣ved on me, for the very money I laid out to save the lives of thousands of this Nation. I shall humblie leave it to the consideration of the Parliament, Councel of State, and all true Englishmen that are Lovers of their Countrey, and respect the credit of the Nation, when they shall reade what I have done in this service, so clearly proved. First, what the State and Common-wealth hath got, and the conjuncture of time when Van Tiumpe the Dutch Generall with the Dutch Fleets was in the Downes, and at that very time I was offered by the Claimers of this Silver, great Merchants of Flanders who was then in London to get this Silver out of the States hands, I have proved that these very Claimers severall times offered me the summe of ten thousand pounds, to have suf∣fered the State to be cozened of this Silver in the Ad∣miraltie, and had I not esteem'd and valued, the peace and prosperity of this Nation above my life, I would have
taken this money without any further trouble, and gone and lived in another Country, where I could have bin imployed in some Common wealths and States, and have bin honourablie and thankfully rewarded. I shall humbly desire the Parliament and Council of State to consider how many such malignants there is in the three Nations England, Scotland, and Ireland, if the Parliament could but finde a covee of ten such malignants in England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Dominions of Wales, to bring them in two hundred seventy eight thou∣sand pounds every one of them as I have done, such a summe of money would pay the debts of the Publique, if they can finde none of the breed but my self, I humbly desire then to preserve me for a Phenix, and to pay me eleven thousand pounds which I have so cleerly proved they owe me, and give me a Commission to go a Kite-catching for the Common-wealth, I shall humbly present them with a great number of pretended godly Buzzards, who since the year 1640. have cozened the Common-wealth of many hundred thousand pounds, I shall humblie shew them the wayes how they have done this, and finde out the men who from the bottome of basenesse and beggerie, have by unjust waies accumu∣lated to themselves vast estates, in these distracted and trouble some times, to the ruine of many thousands of families, whose cries for their oppressions have ascended up unto Heaven, and no doubt but is the principal cause of these sad distractions and divisions that are now amongst us.
If one Achan could trouble all Israel for stealing a golden wedge, and a Babylonish Garment, what disturbance will a thou∣sand Achans do, who have cozened the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland; for my part I humblie say clearly, that I never stayed this Silver in 1652. for any of the then Councel of States particular profit, I never minded either Oliver or Rowland, I did it for the service of the Common∣wealth, and Honour of the Nation, as I was a true Englishman, without respecting private persons; and let who will have the Government, or Supreme Power, I shall humbly demand it, as it is my right and due, my dearlie earned reward of eleven thousand pounds for this service. S. Paul saith, hee sought with beasts at Ephesus; I am sure of it, in this business, in staying this Silver, I was fain to encounter with beasts in the Admiraltie, at the Exchange, a ship-board, to make my self all things to all men, to spend my spirits, my money, make use of my Credit, engage severall of you Gentlemen to borrow great summs of money for mee, to get the State this great Treasure: and when I exspect my reward, to bee de∣layed with Referrees, and Reports, and Certificates, and to trouble all these honourable Gentlemen to spend their time for several daies in taking the Proofs and Collections, and as yet not to receive one dramm of justice, or one peny of Reward; to bee used as children are that look into a Fortune-book, to be directed from one spirit to an∣other: how honourable this usage will bee for the Com∣mon-wealth, to have this recorded to posteritie, I leave it to you, and all just men to judg.
So contrary to all humane exspectation hath Gods dealings been with mee in this business, that where my greatest fear was, I had no need to fear, and where my greatest confidence was, there I am miserably disap∣pointed. For I feared the Spaniards and the Claimers would kill me for staying this Silver, but that was a needlesse fear, for God hath kept me, I put my trust in man and thought assuredly, that it could never enter into the hearts of Gen∣tlemen, and an English Council of State, but thankfully and honourablie to pay me what they had promised faith∣fully, and I so dearly earned, which was for getting them two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds. The State to pay me in liew of my Estate taken from me, to my damage twenty thousand pounds, for which the Council of State agreed to pay me as aforesaid the sum of eleven thousand pounds, besides an honourable re∣ward. Had I served my God with that integrity, and broke so many nights sleep to study to please him, as I did to please the Council of State and man, God would not have left, nor disappointed me as man doth. Had the Coun∣cil of State an intention never to have paied me when I undertook their work, they had done both you and me a Courtesie to have chopped of my head, and eased me out of a troublesom world. Then I had not cozened you of your money, which I must be forced to do if the Council do not pay me, most of you know I could not pay you, till the State payed me,
and this some of you will attest, when required to be true, besides it grieves me to the Soule more for some of you, who out of good will to the Nation, borrowed great summes of money for me, and at this day are sued for the same and must pay it, that I should be made an in∣strument to Trappan you or any honest man for your good will to your Countrey, to cozen you of your money. It is true my body is at your service to imprison in a Goal, but it is money that you expect, and not my flesh or bones. How shamefull a thing would it bee, that it should be left to posterity, that Thomas Violet that saved this Na∣tion two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds, all imploied in the defence of the Nation, at such a time the Common-wealth was in Jeopardie, and in great streights for money, discovering this Plot the same day the Judg∣es in the Admiraltie would have discharged the Silver, and then it had bin presently conveyed to our enemies the Dutch. For which service and undertaking the Council of State faithfully promised him the summe of eleven thou∣sand pounds, and an honourable reward, Thomas Violet having gott the Common-wealth all this Silver as aforesaid, but no performance, no promise, nor word kept. That Thomas Violet might have had ten thousand pounds from the Claimers to have deserted this Trust, and to have conniv'd and let this Silver go, but he would not be false to the Common-wealth.
But constantly for two years being assisted by ten other per∣sons that followed this businesse in the Admiraltie, a Shipboard, and at the Exchange, and in severall other places, and with much Trouble, Charge, and Expence, to get the State the a∣foresaid great Treasure, borrowing fifteen hundred pounds of severall of his dear and loveing friends to do this service, who upon the Councils of State not performing with me, in paying me my dearly earned reward, were all cozened of their money, for I cannot pay you before the State pay mee, and if this should fall out to be true, would not all good men say, both you and I have had hard measure for our good will and fidelity for getting the State this great Treasure, and make other men for the future to take money when it is offered them. And not to play an after-game as I now do, to Petition for my due satisfaction. I pray God for the honour of this Nation, and of this Po∣sterity, that the Council of State take order for my satisfaction, and indeed I am perswaded in my Conscience, when the Council sees these Transactions attested by a multitude of honourable Wit∣nesses, and my services so great, that never any man of my quality had the like Contest with mightie men, and brought it to so happie success as I have don, that I shall be truly paid eleven thousand pounds, and the Damages will be considered for the forbearance of my dearly earned reward so long from 1653 to 1659. Gentlemen, I have presented to you the hardest usage that you or I can expect, and if I be not justly and honourably dealt with, let fortune doe her worst, I will trust and wait on Gods Provi∣dance, and tide out these troublesom times, ever keeping this rule where I receive Protection there will I pay obedience, let it be to
Oliver, or Rowland, and no longer then I can have Protection will I owe obedience, but I will study the happinesse and Honour of my Countrey so long as I live and breath, and let what will come this hath and shall be my rule to walke by. I now think it convenient to give you an accompt, by what waies I humbly propound to be paid by the Parliament and Coun∣cil of State this summe of eleven thousand pounds, and to take no money from them, but to bring them in greater summes of money, and also advantage the Nation many scores of thousand pounds, and fill the Nation with great Treasure of gold and silver, the Soldiers delight, and the Merchants darling, being that which is the mea∣sure of all things. Upon the peruseall of this narative, you will see a Watch taken in pieces, and to your eye you see the wheeles and springs that makes the motions and the parties imployed. A Painter may shew you the Colours before he workes, but the craft is in mixing and grinding them, and handling the pencel that makes the Picture. There is not one man of a hundred thousand that could, or can go through with this businesse, but the undertaking of it would brake his neck. It was God that inabled me, and kept up my spirits, and so he doth at this day, or else it had bin impossible but I should have sunke under the weight of so much op∣pression. The shewing you a Watch, and painting, inables you not to make either, without long study, Tooles and materialls. Here you see both the Theorick, and the practick part, that I have and can serve my Countrey. And me thinkes that rule in common Justice should be allowed
to me, that haveing made my proofe-piece as it is amongst most Lawyers or Tradesmen as a reading shews a man well verst in the Law, an excellent Picture once finished makes a man an approved Painter, and severall prizes skilfully played approves a man master of defence. I humbly present unto the Parliament and Nation, my getting the Common wealth this two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds to be my proof-piece, to shew to posterity, that the Garden of Eng∣land hath too few such malignant Violets, that would voluntari∣ly venture life, credit, and what is above life, have morgaged all my well-being for the future for fifteen hundred pounds to save this Nation, and refused ten thousand pounds when I was of∣fered to be bribed. Let any just man consider of what I have done, and no man can deny me this reward of eleven thousand pounds, that hath honesty, honour, or Conscience. When they remember Christs rule, do as thou wouldst be done un∣to, (I must put the number of such ungratefull persons, if the sad fate of State have left any of the breed in the Council of State not into the number of English States men, but they are of the breed of Machiavel,) and I hope not to finde one of them in our English Council of State, that professe Christianity and would offer worse measure to their fellow Countrey-men, and Pro∣testants, then Turks would use to Christians. God deliver all good honest minded men from such Machiavel-villains, but I hope better things that St. James his rule shall be remembred, shew me thy faith by thy workes, that I that have worked in the Vinyard of this Common-wealth all my time, so succesfully for the profit and honour of the Nation
from the year 1648. to 1659. now I have gotten the State this Treasure as I have fully proved it (both the money the State promised being eleven thousand pounds, and an honourable reward.) the honour and Justice of the Nation being so highly concerned to see mee Justly satisfied. To conclude, have you but patience till the next Term, and such of you as have commenced your suits go no further, put not your selfe and me to expence and trouble, till I get the Council of States Answer to this booke, I here promise you all, such of you that will have my person, next Terme willingly to submitt to your Executions, and if the Council of State will suffer me to be bu∣ried in a prison alive, for the money I expended to get the State two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds, and at that time ven∣tured my life in the businesse, such oppressions will stinke in the nostrills of all good and just men, but I hope better things, and trust the Council of State will be more carefull of the credit, and faith of the Nation. Your Bond-man for the States service, and would sain subscribe my self my own Freeman to do yon service. THOMAS VIOLET.
THE POSTCRIPT. The Wayes I humbly propound to the State to pay me this debt, are these, in which Emploiment the Common wealth will get twenty times more advantage then I, as appears, Viz. 1. I Have at this time three Bonds in my Custody, which were out of my possession twelve yeares in the Committee of Shropshires hands at Shrews∣bury, which bonds are in two thousand pounds for the payment of me one thousand pounds, and taken from my Sister Anno. 1643. who kept them for me, these bonds were due in 1644. I paid John Corbet Esquire a member of this present Parliament forty pound, to have these Bonds delivered to me by the Committee of Salop, which money I paid by command of the Council of State, as appeares in this book Fol. 27. 28. 29. I only humbly desire and pray for an Order, or Or∣dinance of Parliament to confirme the said Order of the Council of State, and that I be impowered by Order of Parliament to sue and to implead the said Bonds, as for∣merly I might have done, notwithstanding any Order, or Ordinance of Parliament to the Committee of Shropshire, or any other Committee touching or concerning these Bonds, in regard I have paid the Committee of Salop forty pounds for them as aforesaid.
And I shall thankfully allow and accept of these three Bonds for two thousand pounds in part of payment of the summe of eleven thousand pounds the Council of State promised me. Gentlemen, for your Comfort these Bonds are good Bonds, and the men Solvant that owe me the money, and the money is doubled at six in the hundred at this day, and I have men of fifteen hundred a yeare tyed for the payment of me of these Bonds at long running, though now they keep out of the way, they shall pay me. 2. Wheras I had an Office for Regulating gold and silver thread, as appeares in this Book, Fol. 110. 111. 112. and had I not bin disturbed in the due Execution of the said Office by severall Clamorous cheating Silkemen, Wyer∣drawers, and Refiners, who I have proved to the Par∣liament make it a common Trade to cozen the wearers of gold and silver Lace, as I can attest it under the hands of Mr. Alexander Jackson sworne assay Master of Gold∣smiths Hall, and other persons in a hundred parcells. The Refiners and Wyer drawers of gold and silver within this twenty yeares, have culled and melted down the heaviest coines of Shillings, Sixpences, halfe Crownes, and Plate of this Nation, to above the value of a million of Silver, to the great weakening of the Stock of currant Silver money, the great decay of Trade, and unspeakable losse to the Common-wealth. I have, and can produce to the Parliament a Certificate of the Committee of Trade dated the 16th of January 1657. upon many days examination of all these abuses, I have it
certified to the Parliament the severall daily cheats of Wi∣er-drawers put on the Nation, and the Committee for Trade recommended me Thomas Violet to the Parliament to be restored to my Office with such fees as I received for∣merly, and certifie the great mischeifes which is daily practised for want of this Office. And that I should be ordered to put in security in the Exchequer in such summes as the Parliament please to ap∣point me, to warrant all gold and silver Wyer that shall be assayd at the Office to be fine Silver, and not under sterling, and all gold and silver Thread to be justly and duly made, with a due proportion of Silke, and Thomas Violet to pay the damages to any person greiv'd or wrong'd, that buy gold or silver Thread, or Lace surveyd as afore∣said. And to prohibit all Refiners, and other persons the melting down the currant Silver coines, or Plate of the Nation, for any of these manufactures upon severe penal∣ties, the Committee recommend me to the Parliament, I should have the power as formerly to make searches, and deface all adulterate gold and silver Thread and Wyer, and the Committee Certifies this Regulation of the restoring me to my Office, would increase the stock of Silver in the Nation above thirty thousand pounds a yeare, the origi∣nal Order I have ready to produce. And if the Parliament by their Order impower me to Execute that Office again, and confirme me in it for two lifes, which cost me fifteen hundred pounds before I could get the grant under the great Seale from the late
King, (which money I paid to the Lord Treasurer Juck∣son, Lord Cottington, Secretary Cook, Mr Atturney General Banks,) if I have this Office againe, I will increase the stock of Treasure every yeare above seventy thousand pounds a year, whereas now as this manufacture is made, without a Rule, it wastes the stock of Treasure thirty thousand pounds a year, and this I will maintaine, prove, and demonstrate it to your Honours to be true, this manufacture being under no Rule and Government as it is at this day, is one of the back doors that hath brought such a scarsity and want of currant Silver money on the Nation, and had it ever come to Examination in Parliament as now I desire it may, I will prove it is more profitable to the Nation to keep money in peoples purses, then vainly to brush and lose thirty thousand pounds a year of men and womens cloaths, as is Certified by a Committee of Parliament it now doth. I will demonstrate this Nation had better have given at this day one hundred thousand pounds to me to have kept up this Office to a due Regulation, then have put down my Office, by the doing thereof they have had a million of money less in the stock of the Nation then they should have had, had my Office continued, if the Parliament please to impower me to Regulate this manufacture, and to receive the fees I took formerly, I humbly will accept of it for two thousand pounds so I may have it for two lises, in part of payment of the eleven thousand pounds which the State owes me. 3. I have for many years attended the Committee of the
Mint about Regulating their Mint, as is well knowne to many members of the Council of State what charge and time I spent in this service, I complained of this businesse eleven yeares ago, and for your further satisfaction I re∣commend you to Fol. 11. 12. 13. 14. in this book, there you will see the true Reasons set down how it comes a∣bout that no silver and gold is coyned in the Tower. And that the Parliament, I will Justifie, had been better to have given the two Doctors Gourdon, and St. John, forty thousand pounds for a Pention, then have imployed them in their Mint, that it is not in the power or skil of Doctors or Apothecaries ever to set the Mint at work as I have de∣monstrated: that had I not stayed two hundred seventy eight thousand pounds which was coyned by my prose∣cution, this sum was as much money as hath bin coined in some seven yeares in the Tower, since the Master-worker and Warden had that imploiment, I have humbly offered if the Parliament please to command me and pay mee for my paines, that I will make the Mint cor∣stantly go, and cause every year some hundred of thousands of pounds to be coined, to the honour of the Nation, and increase of the stock of the Nation. Provided I may have the place of Master-worker and Melter, with the usuall fees formerly allowed to them setled under the great Seale, and that I may be impowered by Orders and Warrants from the Council of State from time to time for to see the due execution of my place, for the inabling me to do this service. This businesse to effect is very troublesom and chargable.
And will be of mighty concernment to the State, for their service, as you will see in this booke, by filling the Nation with Treasure and money, the blood and sinews of Commcrce and Warr, what makes so generall a com∣plaint of want of Trade, but want of money, and people have not monies to pay the ordinary and necessary charges, and if the State do not look to settle this business suddenly, this mischeif for this many years I have fore∣told to the Parliament in Print, and I knew would sud∣denly come upon us. It is a certain Maxime, Not any private person, or a Com∣mon-wealth can ever be capable of effecting any great businesse that is not rich in monies, or cannot command great summes of money, either of his own, or upon his Credit. I pray read and consider what I have said concerning this businesse in this book, Fol 11. 12. 13 14. if the State im∣ploy me here in the Mint, I will remove all these ob∣structions, and set the Mint a working, and this imploy∣ment if I have it for my life, I will humbly accept of it at the value of two thousand pounds, in part of payment of my satisfaction of eleven thousand pounds, and by my industry and care will increase the States Stock every year some hundred of thousand of pounds of Silver, which now comes in, and is stollen out. I would never undertake to do this diffiult businesse, were I not assured there is none in the Nation can do it but my self, and till the State imploy me, this work will never be done effectually.
Three of you Gentlemen are great mints men and Gold smiths, and know the difficultie of this undertaking, and I dare affirme before you, none of you will trouble your selves to finde out the bottom of these difficult waies that must be used to do this service, not for ten times the profit I shall receive by this Emploiment. Therefore I humbly desire to have an act to injoy the place of Master-worker and Melter for my life, provided I do this service within three moneths after my grant, this mischeif is come to a gangrene, and the Council of State must make sharp and strict Orders in this businesse, or else this mischeif cannot be remedied, a great deal of care must be used to put these Laws in Execution, else there wil be a perpetual consumption of the Stock of the Nation in the Silver coines, as it is come already on the Gold coines, you shall not receive in a thousand pounds one twenty-shillings-peece in Gold, and in few years there wil be the like defect in the Silver, not so much as will main∣tain Commerce, and Trade, pay Rents and Taxes, nor to go to Market. The first Sluce-gate that must be stopped, is the for∣bidding the melting of gold and Silver currant coins of the Nation, for gold and silver thread it is true there is a Law against it, but who looks after the Execution, Execution is that that gives life to the Law. The like course must be taken against the Transporting gold & silver out of the Nation, it is true old Laws forbid it, but who makes it their businesse to discover the offenders Had the Act passed in the House which I prosecuted
against Transporting Gold and Silver, and I impowered and imployed as I humbly propounded ten years ago, this Nation had had at this day millions of Silver which is now Transported, to the great damage of the Nation. This Act hath bin twice read in the House, ten times Committed, Referred to the Committee of the Navies, Officers of the Mint, Officers of the Customes, all their Reports and Certificates certifie that if the Parliament will not passe this Act, and appoint able skilfull persons to make it their businesse to hinder the Transporting Gold and Silver, the stock of Gold and Silver in the Nation would be all Transported, and this Nation exposed to very great inconveniences by not preventing it, who can or could say more then these Certificates say. If the Parliament please to passe this Act, I will spend my time and paines, and in that service, take these Transporters in the nick of their action, and confiscate the monies, had I Warrants and did set my springes I would catch these Woodcocks, my experience would be of great advantage, for an old Dear stealer is the best keeper of the Park, and it is not unknown to some of you that almost thirty yeares ago I was questioned a∣bout Transporting Gold and Silver, I discovered a nest of Transporters of Gold, and the King ingaged me to do that service, I caused them to be fined twenty foure thousand one hundred pounds, in the year 1635. in the Starr Chamber, as appears by the Records, and made Alderman Gibbs, and Sir John Wollaston, glad to Petition and pay well to the late King for their Pardons, for
abuses done in their Trades, and this was the true ground of Gibbes, and Wollastones revenge against me. When in the yeer 1643. they maliciously and Knavish∣ly ingaged honourable Gentlemen to present me to the Parliament for a malignant, and to send me to the Tower, and sequester my Estate, to my damage at this day twenty thousand pounds, only to work their malicious ends up∣on me, when at that time they had Trappaned me, to catch me as a man catcheth a Partridg with their Lowbel, Mr. Theophilus Rily who decoyed me into this snare to undertake to bring up from Oxford the Letter from the Late King Charles, mentioned in this Book, Fol. 33. And then to aggravat it against me with that Violence to some honourable members of Parliament, that it had like to cost me my life, and I suffered almost four years impri∣sonment in the Tower, and had my estate sequestred to my damage of twenty thousand pounds as appeares in this Book, Fol. 38. I Petitioned the late Protector Richard for to give me and some others I nominated in trust for my use, the grant of making a com∣mon farthing, as appeares in this booke Fol. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122. the late Protector accordingly gives me &c. the grant of the same for 31. years in part of my reward for this service of staying the Silver, and orders the Solicitor Generall to attend the Parlia∣ment for their Approbation, who are desired to ordain and appoint such Rules, Prohibitions, and Penalties, for the effectuall, and better management of this service, the preventing of all former abuses, and restraining the importation and Counterfeit∣ing of any the said farthings from the parts beyond Sea, as they
shal think fit and necessary for the carrying on of this busines for the good of the Common wealth, and he reserves to the Common-wealth twelve pence out of every twenty two shillings. I shall humbly desire the Parliament, to give me the grant for the sole making of a Publique farthing for 31. yeares of the value and weight aforesaid, and I shall humbly and thankfully accept of this imployment as the value of five thousand pounds towards my debt of eleven thousand pounds, and if the Parliament please to have a farthing made lighter, yet as heavy againe as the common farthings, I shall make a common farthing to go currant in Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, and I will pay unto the maimed Solders five shillings upon every two and twenty shillings that is uttered in the Office, and accompt, truely upon Oath, this will be a great revenew to the maimedSolders, and I will be bound to accompt monthly to the Treasurers of the maimed Solders, which will be about three hundred pounds a moneth for some years. By these waies I shall both pay my self my eleven thousand pounds, and be serviceable to the Common-wealth above an hundred thousand pounds, in doing these services in the Mint, and for Regulating gold and silver Lace, and Wyer, and stopping the Transporting of gold and silver, no man in the Nation hath had the experience to do it but my self, and where I get one penny, the Common wealth in point of bonour and profit will get twenty, the issue of all I humbly leave to God, and submitt my selfe to his good Providence. And remain Gentlemen your Bond-man till the State free mee THOMAS VIOLET. 25. May 1659. FINIS.
