W1336 12539957 62951
THE WELCHMANS Protestation, Concerning the corruptions of these times. With her last Will and Testament, writ and pupplished with her own hand fifteen tayes after her own teath. With a Song her was never apide in awle her life, pecause her was Sheare her Country. Printed, 1641.
The Welchmans Protestation concerning the corruption of these times. FIrst her was vow, and protest, her was awle∣wayes live in te faith tat her ancient prede∣cessors was live in, and tey was called Pro∣testants. Item, hee was never apide to heare tat her was Teputie of Ireland, and her was never love trea∣sons, pecot her was always love her head a creat teale petter. Item, her was never love to pee papisticall Pis∣shit, nor never was love to pow to te Alter, bi S. Taffie, her was affraid a shiding, and peheading, or hanging. Item, her was never apide in all her life to pe Patentee, pecot her was awleways love her own eares, and hate te pillory. Item, her was hate to pe Shudge for divers rea∣sons. First, be causpopie her was very pittifull, and was never finde in her heart to hang te poore Rouges.
Item, tey say, Shustice was pe plind, and her was love her eyes extreamly. Item, her was not apide to te ship-moneys. And lastly, her was never apide to pe hanged her selfe, put like te Monkey py te middle. Item, her was never apide to pe papist or puri∣tan. Item, her was never apide to pe Arminian, pe∣cot her was like a creen stick, her was pow to much. Item, her was never love te Prownist, her was awlewayes call her prother, and her was porne a creat teal petter Shentleman ten her self. Item, her was never apide to company of te A∣damites, for if her go naked in te winter, pecot her was awlewayes take cold. Item, her was never affect te Family of love, pecot Cod was never plesse her, if her lie with her neighpours wife. Put her was ever telight to pe Shentleman of Wales, to ride on hunting, and follow te pawling Togs over te hils, over te tales, over te tich, over te pales, to hunt te nimple Hare, with te pugle horn py her side, and catch her if her can, and roast her for her supper, when her has cot her cood stomach in catching on her, tis was a creat teal petter ten peheading, or hanging, or putting her head in te pillory, and make her look like an Owle in te Ivypush, or scratching out her eies, or powing to Idols, or pe call'd prother when her was none of her Kinred, or catching cold with te Adamites, or tamning her own soul, for loving her Neighpours Wife, pecot tose tat
was ever telight in it, her was take it for Shinkin up Morgan, up Howell, up Will, up Raph, up Taffie, for py Saint Taffie, her was telight in peace apove awle tings. Te last Will and Testament of Thomas up Shin∣kin, up Morgan, up Howell, up Will, up Raph, up Taffie, Shentleman of Wales, which was writ and pup∣plished fifteen tayes after her own teath and puri∣all py her own hand. IN te name of te creat Cot Amen. To morrow after te Feast of Saint Taffie, in te fourteen, fifteen, twenty yeere of the Raine of Cadwallin, te pig, son and heire to creat Prute, te creat Prittaine, I Thomas up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell, up Will, up Raph, up Taffie, peing sick of po∣dy, put in mind and memory, Cod knows, was here make her last Will and Testament. First her was make her loving Wife Shillian her sole Executioner. Item, her was kive, her eldest son Shon, up Tho∣mas, up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell, up William, up Raph, up Taffie, a creat stone house tat stands in te pottome of te Mountaine, in te full face of te Sun. Item, her was kive her eldest servant Thomas up Morgan, up Shon, up Raph, up Taffie, pecause her was cood Shentleman, and was serve her, her creat Crandfather, foure yards of frise to make her mourning Shakt. Item, her was kive her daughter Shennie foure yards of pul-rush to make her cold ring.
Item, her was kive her eldest son Shon up Tho∣mas, up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell, up William, up Raph, up Taffie, because her was have some of her own fathers spirit, and valour, her two-edged pack sword. Item, her was most earnestly entreat her lo∣ving Wife Shillian, and sole Executioner, to pay awle her tepts her was not shuse put pay, if cot had spared her life her was pay avvle. Item, her was kive ten shillings for shunkets. Imprimis, fower creat sheeses cut out in caus∣popie. Item, fower pushells leeke roasted. And lastly, fower pushells of onyons to make awle her couzens and kinfolks crie. Item, her was kive ten shillings to te creat clearke of creat Saint Maries, tat her was ring te creat pell to kive creat Cod Almightie tat her was comming tat her was send Saint Peter to o∣pen her creat cate and let her in. Item, her was most earnestly entreat her loving cretiters to whom her was owe creat summs of moneys, tat her was take whole pound of creise in steed of pound of moneys. Item, her was love her overseers if her was ho∣st to her, and se her will executed, and her was in∣terceed for her, when her was in heaven with her creat Saint Taffie. And tus her pequeath her soule into te hands of te allmighty who was her maker, and redeemer, and her was in a creat teale of hope was prove at last her sanctifier, and her was pequeath her podie
to te cround to pe puried in te Church of creat Saint Maries; and her was awlwayes tesire tat her neighbours if tey were shentilemen to testifie with her tat her was tie in te protestantine fayth and set teyre hands to it. The hands of her neighbours. Shon up Harrie, up Shames, up Raph Howell, up Mor∣gan, up Taffie, up Raph, up Shinkin. A Song which her was never apide in awle her life pecause her was sheere her Countrey. Creat St. Taffie, and little St. Tavid, How well was receive te creen onyon▪ And every neeke Eat pushells of leek, Except was receive te Communion▪ Was puilt her a cappin was cover'd most prave, And was puilt at te foot of te mountain, When her was taste te crape Was scorne te drape, And was drink te fayr e water of te Fountain. Was tinke it much ftter If tat her was got her To eat te fat peefe a e mutton.
Put in stead of awl tese Her was eate tosted cheese, Vntill her was preake off her putton. Tilpury Campe was a creat while agoe, Taffie Taffie. Pecot her was tere with one tousand more, Couzin Taffie. Was creat teale of horse And a creat teale of folke Taffie, Taffie. Was a creat teale of Cunn Made a creat teale of smoke Couzin Taffie. Taffie was borne in te Chinke of a wll, Taffie, Taffie. Her Father was Cuckold Her Mother was tell, Couzin Taffie. FINIS.
