w2403 12445023 62205
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Saturday the Twenty third Day of November, 1695. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excel∣lent Majesty. 1695.
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT. My Lords and Gentlemen, IT is with great Satisfaction that I Meet you here this Day, being Assured of a Good Dis∣position in My Parliament, when I have had such full Proofs of the Affection of My Peo∣ple, by their Behaviour during My Absence, and at My Return. I was Engaged in the present War by the Advice of My First Parliament; who thought it Necessary for the Defence of Our Religi∣on, and for the Preservation of the Liberties of Europe. The Last Par∣liament, with great Cheerfulness, did Assist Me to Carry it on; and I cannot Doubt, but that your Concern for the Common Safety will Oblige you to be Unanimously Zealous in the Prosecution of it. And I am Glad, That the Advantages which We have had this Year, give Us a Reasonable Ground of Hoping for further Success hereafter. Upon this Occasion, I cannot but take Notice of the Courage and Bravery the English Troops have shewn this last Summer, which I may say, has answered their highest Character in any Ager: And it will not be denied, That without the Concurrence of the Valour and Power of England, it were impossible to put a Stop to the Ambition and Greatness of France. Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I Think it a great Misfortune, that from the Beginning of My Reign, I have been forced to ask so many and such large Aids of My People; and yet I am Confident you will agree with Me in Opinion,
That there will be at least as Great Supplies requisite for Carrying on the War by Sea and Land this Years, as was Granted in the last Ses∣sion; the rather because Our Enemies are Augmenting their Troops, and the Necessity of Increasing Our Shipping does plainly appear. The Fonds which have been Given, have proved very Deficient. The Condition of the Civil List is such, That it will not be possible for Me to Subsist, unless that Matter be taken into your Care. And Compassion Obliges Me to Mention the miserable Circum∣stances of the French Protestand, who Suffer for their Religion. And therefore, Gentlemen, I most earnestly Recommend to you, to Provide a Supply suitable to these several Occasions. I must likewise take Notice of a great Difficulty We lie under at this time, by Reason of the ill State of the Coin; the Redress of which, may perhaps prove a further Charge to the Nation: But this is a Matter of so general Concern, and of so very great Importance, That I have thought fit to leave it intirely to the Consideration of My Parliament. I did Recommend to the last Parliament, the Forming some Good Bill for the Incouragement and Increase of Seam. I hope you will not let this Session pass without doing somewhat in it, and that you will consider of such Laws as may be Proper for the Advancement of Trade, and will have a particular Regard to that of the East-Indies, lest it should be lost to the Nation. And while the War makes it ne∣cessary to have an Army Abroad, I could wish some Way might be thought of, to Raise the necessary Recruits, without giving Occasi∣on of Complaint. My Desire to Meet My People in a New Parliament, has made the Opening of this Session very late; which, I Hope, you will have such Regard to, as to make all possible Dispatch of the great Business before you, and will call to Mind, That by the long Continuance of the last Session, We did not only lose Advantages which We might have had at the Beginning of the Campaign, but gave the Enemy such an Op∣portunity, as might have proved very Fatal to Us. And I am the more Concerned to Press this, because of the great Preparations which the French make to be Early in the Field this Year. My Lords, I have had such Experience of your Good Affections; and I have such an entire Satisfaction in the Choice which My People have made of you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, that I Promise My Self a Happy Conclusion of this Session, unless you suffer your selves to be misled into Heats and Divisions; which being the only Hope Our Enemies have now left, I make no Doubt but you will entirely Dis∣appoint by your Prudence and Love to your Countrey. FINIS.
