W2570 17165695 106107
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a GENERAL FAST. WILLIAM R. WHereas for about a Year last past, a Wicked Rebellion hath beén Carried on and Maintained against Their Majesties in Their Kingdom of Ireland (which is known to be inseparably Annexed to the Imperial Crown of England) which Rebellion hath been Contrived, Incouraged, and chief∣ly Supported by the French King, Designing by that means to make an absolute Conquest of the said Kingdom, and hold it as a Province, or else to bring a total Ruine and Destruction upon the same; for which, and other Causes, Their Majesties have been Obliged to enter into a Iust and Necessary War against the said French King. And whereas His Majesty is Resolved, by the Assistance of God, Vi∣gorously to Prosecute the said War by Sea and Land, And so Effe∣ctually to Reduce that Kingdom, to its due Obedience, that Their Majesties Good Subjects there may not only be Rescued from the present Force and Violence, but Secured against all such Aggressions for the Future, and be Settled in a Firm and Lasting State of Peace, Safety, and Prosperity: For which purpose His Majesty hath determined to make a Royal Voyage and go thither in Person, putting His Trust in Almighty God (who hath by his marvellous Providence hitherto Preserved and Conducted His Majesty) That he will vouchsafe a special Blessing on this His righteous Vndertaking, and thereby Consummate the Deliverance of these Kingdoms. Their Majesties taking the Pre∣misses into Their most Serious Consideration, have thought fit to Appoint, and do by and with the Advice of Their Privy Council, hereby Appoint and Command a General and Publick Fast and Humiliation to be Observed throughout this Realm in most Devout and Solemn manner, for Supplicating Almighty God for Pardon of our Sins, and Imploring his Blessing and Protecti∣on in the Preservation of His Majesties Sacred Person, and Prosperity of his Arms in Ireland, and the Naval Forces, to be Religiously Kept and Observed on Wednesday the Twelfth day of March next, throughout Their Majesties Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and thenceforward to be Observed on the Third Wednesday in every Month successively, during the present War. And for the more Orderly Solemnizing of the said several Fast Days, Their Majesties have given directions to the Right Reverend the Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayers suitable to this Occasion, to be used in all Churches and Chappels, and other Places of Publick Worship; And have given Charge for the Dispersing thereof through their several Diocesses in the whole Kingdom. And Their Majesties do most Expresly Charge and Command that the said Fastings and Prayers be Soberly, Reverently, and Decently Per∣formed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and upon Pain of such Punishments as Their Majesties can Iustly Inflict upon all such as shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious a Work. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twentieth Day of February, 1689. In the Second Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1689.
