W3072 09459283 43177
Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honest Drunken Curr: With a Relation of the Frollicks of his Life, and Conversation AND HIS EPITAPH. With Permission. London, Printed by E. C. for C. Hussey, at the Bible in Iewen street. 1675.
Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honest Drunken Curr. HE's a Pickel'd Youth to be sure, for he always lyes steep'd in his own Liquor; of which like a Whale, he carries so much about him, that when ever he Disgorges, he may Swim away in his own Flood. Clap but a good Sucker into his Belly, and he makes an excellent Parish Pump: and if you add but a Pipe to his Muzle, he may pass for a Water En∣gine, and do good service in time of Fire; you need not fear Drawing him dry, so long as all the Ale-houses, and Taverns in Town, like little Rivulets, supply the decrease; He contains about as much as those in Churches; but is so uncooth a Trough, he's twice as hard to be Gauged: yet by frequent experience, he can guess his Measure to a Pint, specially if you ex∣cept
Leakage: His Veins are so thronged, and his Blood so tainted with Scurvey, Gout, and Dropsie, (and a smatch of the French-man to boot, which he got when he was Drunk, and does not know who to lay it too.) That he defies the intrusion of any other Distemper: wherefore he Stalks in as much State through a Pesti∣lence; as a well Arm'd Souldier through a shower of Bul∣lets, for his forementioned Diseases have taken such large Possession of his Body, that there's no room left for Infection. He has drunk himself into a Jelly, and is so moist, that if you squeese him, he drops like an Orange. His Body a perfect Still, which he Fuells with Bran∣dy, instead of Char-coal; being throughly heated, you may discern the sweaty Distilation tricle from his face, as from the Lid of a Limbick, and if any chance to drop on his Nose, you may hear it hiz as if it fell u∣pon heated Bricks. In fine though he always lives Joak∣ingly and Merry, he hates nothing more then a dry Jest. Thus having acquainted you with his Constitution, I shall only consider him in his Conversation, and Friendship, and so leave him to sleep out his nap. And first for his Conversation, to take him in the Morning (for who can find him all the Day after) he prevents his Pray'rs with a Pipe of Tobacco, and Smoaks at such a Rate as if he prfer'd Sacrifice to De∣votion. A Tinder-box is as necessary to him, as a green Bagg to an Atturney's Clark, with which he seems as ravish'd as Alexander with the Odisses, for he cannot sleep unless it lye under his Pillow. In that little night he makes, he cannot so properly said to sleep, as to chew the Cudd
often disturbs the repose of a Family, with Muttering a Repetition of his Oaths, and Healths when he awakes, he stares about with such wild Curiosity, as one would fancy Adam did immediately after his Creation; for he generally makes himself so Drunk over Night, drown∣ing his past actions in Liquor and Oblivion, that he scarcely knows the Morning from the Resurrection, and is hardly perswaded that ever he lived before. But after he is convine'd of the affirmative spends a∣bout a quarter of an Hour in examining the Bed-posts and Windows, before he discovers whether he be in his own Lodging: And afterward remains as doubtful how he got thither. Then Bed-staves, and Slip-shoo's go to Wrack, for clattering on the Bed-stead, like Boys at the Bear-Garden; he calls up the People as Country Wenches do Swine, by knocking; and after a Petition for a Cup of Settle-Brain, begs them to resolve his Quaerie: Whereupon they tell him the truth, which indeed is that either he came the old Porterly way, Crutch'd with a brace of Watch-men; or else the Modern and more Genteel way, viz. On Pick-pack, instead of a Sadan. Now although my Honest Drunken Curr be guilty of many Vices, which like Younger Brothers hang on this great one which has got possession: Yet (Give the De∣vil his aue) I think the World has Sully'd his Repu∣tation with divers Scandals of which he is no wise Guil∣ty: Wherefore because I only intend his Converti∣on not his Consumption; Like an honest Historian (since I Write his Life) I ought not to see him wrong'd, but rather to rescue him from those C on him
The first imputation therefore that they impose on him is that he is proud, And why forsooth? but because when he has a Dop in his Eye, he brags and vapours as if he were a better man than his Neighbours. A stout reason indeed? as if any man might not do as much that were either Light-headed, or in a Fevour; Nay, a Passion alone makes the wisest of us Bethlehems. But let us do as we would be done by, and take him when he is himself, (that is in a Morning,) and then I am sure he is as free from Pride, as a Quaker from good Minners or Ribbons: For would Custome admit, I am confident he would never go to the Ale-house Naked, than undergo the hard Pennance of Sobriety the while he dresses himself. Secondly, They call him an Idle fellow; a good fel∣low all the World knows he is, but as for Idleness, let me dye if I know any one more free from it than he; What would they know of him trow? he rises early, sits up late; and I dare Swear he grudges himself his very Sleep, because it keeps him from his Businesse: When he is at it, no man more expeditious than he, for as if his minutes, like his Estate, ran away too fast, you shall frequently see him with an Ale-Glass in one hand, and a Looking-Glass in the other, which beto∣kens both speed and frugality. The third and most fallacious Accusation is that they say, He's Prodigal, and Pisses his Estate against the Wall. But I am confident he enriches nor Perfumes the Walls no more than others; onely this I know he does, that whereas Usurers use to hide their Riches in Earth Pots, he puts his Estate in a Pewter one (which one would think were the safer Cabinet) so that it is not the Honest Drunken Cur, but the Impudent Rogues, Drawers, and Tapsters, that imbezle and make it away.
Much more might be said of him both in his Vindi∣cation, and in Commendation also: For he is one of the quietest Subjects his Majesty has, and most sub∣missive to Monarchyal Government: He would not be without a King, if it were for no other Reason than meerly Drinking his Health. He hates Coffee as Ma∣homatizm, and thinks it a Lesser sin to go to Bed Drunk, than to Drink it to make him Sober. He hates a Studious man as Caeser did a Lean one, and for the same Reason, for he is so confident he's hatching of Treason, that he could find in his Heart to impeach him at adventure. As for his Friends he never troubles his Head to pick and cull them, but takes them as superannuated Maids do Husbands, or Fish-women do Mackerel, as they come next to hand: For fixing himself in the next Ale-house or Tavern he comes at; at first he sits as sul∣lenly as a degraded Courtier, or an Insurer upon Advice of a Loss▪ And no less than a Quart of Purle-Royal, or Two Kicks in the Guts can remove his Morosity. Af∣ter he has digested either of them, perchance he'l vouch∣safe to bless you with a Smile, especially if you will purchase it at the expence of a Bawdy Song; to which you shall see him turn head, and listen as heedfully as a Lynnet to a Flaijolet, but infinitely more easie to be Taught. When you have done, tis twenty to one but he comes and hugs you; swearing you are the most accomplisht Gentleman that ever he met in his Life; and tho he ne∣ver saw you before, from that time you may date his Friendship: He makes Friends faster than Children do Babies; and like them too, he often forgets where he has left them.
His Reason like a bad Shop-keeper is seldom at home, or rather like a Country Gentleman, has left the Ma∣nour of his own Body; and is gone to dwell in strange Lodgings: So that 'tis no wonder, he's Hobgob∣lin'd by his fiery Nose to any Debauchery, or that Men call him Beast; since by giving Rains to his I Sensua∣lity, he makes so perfect a Swine of himself, that he Drinks till he can hardly Grunt. However, since the Church allows him Christian Burial, I'le Hopkins and Sternhold him with An Epitaph. Here Lyes Drunken Tom, VVhom Heav'n in mercy save, He stumbel'd o're his Death, And reel'd into his Grave.
FINIS.
