W3454 12268874 58163
THE ROMAN-CHVRCH'S DEVOTIONS VINDICATED From Doctour Stillingfleet's mis-representation. By O. N. a Catholick. Io. 3.8. Spiritus vbi vult spirat: & vocem ejus audis: Sed nescis vnde veniat, aut quò vadat: Sic & omnis, qui natus est de Spiritu. 1. Thess. 5.19. Spiritum nolite extinguere, Prophetias nolite spernere, omnia autem probate. M.DC.LXXII.
THere is nothing (Pious Reader) wherein a Christian can receiue a greater dam∣mage in order to Saluation,§. I▪ then to be any way misinformed, or prejudiced concerning Prayer: and too much pains cannot be taken in en∣deavouring to satisfy all doubts and scruples raised on this subject. I have therfore thought fit to enlarge myself in this ensuing discourse, not only in discussing punctually page by page that part of Doctour Stilling fleets late Book that handles this matter, but also in premising (for the Readers benefit) a more Generall Account of the Church's Doctrine and Practice herein; as being the most fundamen∣tall part of a Christians Duty, and wherein Man, whil'st here on earth, entertains a nearer conversation with Heaven; as also the instrument, by which he derives from thence all other Graces and Blessings, Spirituall or Temporall. And here I may first say this,§. II. in my entrance vpon this task; that there is no part of Re∣ligion, wherein the Roman Catholick Church might think herself more secure from blame and censure; and wherein her extraordinary care and prudence for the right Guidance of her children in this Holy exercise (as appears by the great store of writings vpon this sub∣ject) doth more deserue praise euen from her Adversaries; all Sects borrowing from Her, Rules and Patterns for Prayer and Meditation;
as the Catholick Books on this subject tran∣slated and rendred common among them do abundantly witness. For, from whom can they learn these so well, as from those, who most practise Prayer? and who are they, but those who also vse solitude and Retirement, and a sequestration of themselues from all unnecessary secular affaires, to attend altoge∣ther on this Holy exercice, who renounce all worldly wealth, and prevent the trouble of a conjugal life, of children, family, and the like, and so both the cares of this world, and the necessary causes thereof, that so they may calmely and quietly entertain a closer communication with God, and have their conversation in Heaven, whilst here on Earth: Or to vse the Apostles language, 1. Cor. 7. that so they may giue themselves to Fasting, and Prayer. ver. 5. may be without solicitude ver. 32. may take care only for the things of the Lord, how they may please the Lord. Ib. and that they may attend upon him without distraction ver. 35. Which they doing, I hope it may seem no wonder, if God also vse a greater familiarity towards them, delight to be with them; he and those of his Court; and shew them grea∣ter Kindnes, who love him more (or nothing but him:) and whom also he loves more: who is no mans debter in love; and who also loveth first, otherwise they could not love him at all; & magit amat, & ante. §. III.To begin then first (by the assistance and inspiration of the Holy Spirit, without which we can do nothing) with a more generall ex∣plication
of this matter, to render the follow∣ing Animaduersions on the Doctours book more intelligible. 1. HEre those supernatural, and extra∣ordinary  Graces and Favours that are vrgd against this Church as meer Fanaticism: Namely Visions, Revelations, Predi∣ctions of things to come, Knowledge of things done in Absence, Knowledge of other mens thoughts, science infused, Hea∣ring interiour Words spoken in the Soul, See S. Austin. De Civit. Dei. l. 16. c. 6. S. Gregor. in Ezech. Hom. 2.interiour apparitions of Saints, and Angels, and our Lord, (Such as happened Act. 22.16.8.9.7.23.9.10.3.26.10.3. to S. Paul, in the Temple; At Corinth; when he suffered shipwrak; to Ananias, to Philip, to Cornelius, and others) Extasies, Rapts, an extraordinary sense of the Divine presence in the most inte∣riour part of the Soul, or Spirit, suspension of the senses, and of the Discursive opera∣tions of the interiour Faculties, called by the Fathers Contemplatio; Transformatio; unio, Dei sensus, gustus, tactus; Amplexus; Osculum; in∣gressus in Divinam Caliginem; introductio in Dei cellaria, in cubiculum; raptus, mentis excessus; and the like: These, I say, and much more that might be named, and much more then can be very intelligibly expressed to the vnex∣perienced, are willingly confessed not un∣frequently to have hapned to Men of a more holy and innocent life, and Persons espe∣cially much addicted to Solitude, and Prayer, within the Communion of the Catholick Church in all Ages. The Ecclesiasticall Hi∣stories
are full of them, not only the Modern, but those of the more ancient and Primitive times. §. IV.Whereof he who doubts may read the re∣lation S Dionysius Areopage Epist. ad. Demophilū. makes of S.Car∣pus: The life of S. Antony, written by S. A∣thanasius, the reading of which was partly a cause of the conversion of S. Austin: Confess. l. 8. c. 6. the life of S. Paul the Hermite, Hilarion, Malchus, and others, written by S Hierom; to which may be added the strange relation he makes of what hapned to himself, in his Epistle to Eustochium: Epist. 22. The lives of the Syrian and Egy∣ptian Monks, and Hermites living in perpetual retired solitude, and Prayer, related by Theo∣doret, Historia Religiosa. Cassian ollationes and Palladius: Historia Lausiaca. The life of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, (and in it the famous vision he had of the Blessed Virgin, and S. Iohn the Evangelist,) The life of S. Theodorus, and S. Ephrem, written by S. Gregory Nyssen: The life of S. Ambrose by Paulinus; and what S. Austin, saith of him, in his Confessions l. 9. c. 7. and De Curâ pro mortuis cap. 17. as also of Iohn the Egyptian Monk Ibid. and de Civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 26. The life of S. Martin by Severus Sul∣pitius, who lived with him, and of a noble Roman become a Monastick: Of several Sts. and Martyrs by S. Gregory Turonensis: of S. Benedict by S. Gregory: of our English Saints by S. Bede; not long after the generall conversion of England, nor before his own times: Of S. Malachias by S Bernard, his intimate acquain∣tance: and again of S. Bernard, by some Abbots, his familiar Friends: of S. Francis by S. Bona∣venture,
who lived immediatly after his time. I descend no further to later times, because, possibly, they may have with Protestants lesse credit. These are the lives of such as were univer∣sally reputed Saints in the Church of God till the late Reformation;§. V. Written also by Saints, or Persons of an vnblemished credit; many of them Contemporary, or also acquaintance: and, so, who might better know the truth of what they writt. Now in these lives may be found frequent mention of Visions, Revela∣tions, Rapts, and the other forenamed extra∣ordinary Divine Graces and Favours: and all these stories very consonant one to another: Such as the latter times relate, and such as are now still pretended, Such do the former: and all much agreeing with those mentioned in the Holy Scripture; and this uniforme Ex∣perience of the operations of the Holy Spirit grounding an uniform Doctrine of the Mystical Divines. And the same matter of Sport or derision, this Authour finds in S. Gregory's story of S. Benedict, or in S Bonaventure's of S. Francis, the same he may in all the rest, if he wil take the pains to bring them also vpon the stage, and dares continue his play with such Holy things, exposed to the Atheistical, and Profane. He that will say, all these Re∣lations are feigned by the Historians (I say All; for if some of them only be true, it serves our purpose, by these to justify the like) against the Faith of Church History, and Tra∣dition, and the eminent Sanctity also of the
Relaters, may proceed, for any thing I know, a litle further; and say, that Christianity (de∣pending also on Tradition) is so; and he, who, granting them not forged, yet calls them En∣thusiasmes, or frauds, and delusions of the evil Spirit, must make the Holiest lives that have appeared in Gods Church to have bin the grea∣test impostures; and these deceits also to have bin seconded with the Gift of Prophecy, and Miracles; which, in like manner, occurr in the same stories; and these latter serve to jus∣tify the former. §. VI.Meanwhile, because Deus non facit taliter omni nationi, and mirabilia sua non manifestat illis, these are become a wonder to other Sects, who, from altogether wanting them, first disbelieve them; and, from this, proceed to despising them; and now at last, it seems, to reproaching them, (according to those Iude 10. Quaecunque quidem ignorant, blasphemant) and reducing them to Fanaticisme; as if, after themselues have bin so much molested with it, it were some consolation to them, that their Neighbours had a share, or, that, being deeply over-run with this yellow jaundise, they can now see, abroad, no other colour. But, the application they have made of this name, here, to the Catholicks is somwhat like an ill sort of Argument, that, by proving too much (that is, all Antiquity Fanatick too) proves nothing; Nay renders the impu∣ter of it a Fanatick; if a Private Spirit, op∣posing the Publick one of the Church of all Ages since the Apostles, may be called so.
But with whatever terms of reproach these Divine Favours are blasphemed by Strangers to them, it hath pleased his Divine Majesty in all times to honour his Church with them; and to convert many to the Christian Faith by them; and she must with all gratitude pro∣fess them; and particularly, that not without these Divine Inspirations, though also more principally upon the Evangelicall Counsels de∣livered by our Lord, and his Apostles, as also the precedent Examples of Scripture-Saints, all the Orders of Religion in any Age, that are erected in, and allowed by, the Church, have bin founded. A speciall Means also for obtaining such spi∣rituall and extraordinary Favours from God (the effects of which are admirable as to ad∣vancing a soul in all Christian Perfection and vertues,§. VII. whether respecting Gods service, our own, or our neighbours, good) is affimed to be (besides a watchfull guard for keeping the Conscience clean, as much as may be, not only from Mortall, but also venial sin) much frequent and continued Vocal, or Mental Prayer, much Solitude and Mortifications of our flesh, and Abstraction of our thoughts and affections from any creature, much Recol∣lection and withdrawing from abroad into our selves,Psal. 63.8. accedentes ad cor altum, and quaerentes regnum Dei intra nos;Luk. 17.21 much Meditation on such selected subjects, as may rather enflame our affections, then increase our Science; and when once we find these enkindled, the endeavouring a Quiescence, as much as we can
from former Discourse (these actions of the Brain, and Intellect, now hindring the Heart and Wil,) and the bringing ourselves rather to a simple Contemplation, to exercise acts of Love, adhere to, sigh after, and entertain the Divine Object thereof. And here, if his Di∣vine Majesty please to advance us any higher, to such Vnions, with him, as are not in our power, and wherein we receive rather, then act, and he operates in vs rather, then we our-selves, we embrace them with all humi∣lity, and gratitude; if otherwise we acquiesce in our best endeavours, and longing after him with patience; though enabled also to these only by his Grace. This our Spirituall and Mystical Masters teach vs; and this, after this way, which these men stile Fanaticisme, and Enthusiasme, We endeavour to procure a more strict acquaintance, and converse with God, and herein to follow the example of our Fore-fathers. §. VIII.IT is also freely confessed that many of those Supernatural Communications of his Divine Majesty to some of his choicest ser∣vants in Prayer are so sublime and high, as that they are described by them, not without great difficulty, and un usuall expressions (some of which this Author hath glean'd up, and put some-what vntowardly togeather, but so, as they best made for his purpose;) expressions not so wel vnderstood but only by Such as have experienced such favours; which also happen to be very few. Qui spiri∣tualis
est (saith S. Bernard in relating his own experience herein, of which more anon) In Can∣tica Serm. 73. non me despiciet: qui minus, non me intelliget. And, to Pope Eugenius:De Con∣sid. l. 5. c. 2. Queris, Quomodo? si Sanctus es, nosti; si non es, esto; & tuo experi∣mento Scies. And in scalâ Claustrali. C. 4. Inexperti¦talia non intellgunt, nisi ea expressius le∣gant in libro Experientiae, quos ipsa docet unctio.— Quod nec absndi potest, nec sermonibus aperiri, saith S. Gregory De Mo∣ral. 24. l. 5. c. of the same Grace. And S. Austin. De Mo∣ribus Ec∣cles. c. 31. Pulchritudinis ejus contemplatione beatissimi, quae, nisi Sancto∣rum intellectu, percipi non potest. Yet notwith∣standing this, the persons who have received such heavenly Caresses have bin induced, as Wel as they could, to declare them to others, (though with much reluctance of their hu∣mility) upon a triple account. 1. Either in∣duced to discover them in Confession, out of feare of some delusion in such extraordinary elevations (as is well known in the long triall of that great Saint of God, Teresa, whose praises are spred through the whole Church Catholick) so to be assisted with the Direction of their Superiors. Or. 2. (after they were confirmed, that these were from God by many most vnquestionable notes thereof) declaring these, and the noble effects of them for the great advancement in us of all Christian vertues, out of their great ardour of Charity, to excite many others to the like assiduity of Prayer, Solitude, Recollection, &c. by which means themselves attained them; yet so, as not, for this, to omitt any duty to
others, to which either Obedience or Charity obligeth them. Or. 3. publishing them also for the instruction of their Scholars, how they are to behave themselves with most profit and advantage, when they should hap∣pen to arrive to the receiving of the like; wherein at the first Novices are wont to be troubled with many fears, scruples, and jea∣lousies. Such extraordinary and Supernaturall Illuminations, Inspirations &c. we then must acknowledge not unfrequent in the Catholick Church. They occurr every where in the Ecclesiasticall Records of latter and former times; and tis too late now generally to cry them down. And these we find also ordinarily not conferred, save on such per∣sons, as are also registred there to have bin ve∣ry eminent for the Sanctity of their lives; and among other vertues much addicted to Prayer Solitude, and Contemplation; and lastly a many of them Such, as we see, before Protestancy was borne, set down in the Churches Ka∣lendar, for Saints; So that if these things must be stiled Fanaticisme, we find, that the holier the Persons, the greater Fanaticks. §. IX.3. WE earnestly contend, therefore, that all pretence whatsoever of such high, and Supernaturall elevations cannot be justly charged as Enthusiasme, or Fanati∣cisme; that is, as proceeding either from the suggestions of the evill, or of our own, Spirit, or also as feigned only, when indeed we have none such: Such a generall charge I say
cannot be made without much temerity, and I am afraid, without blaspheming the Holy Ghost, (a crime, we know, of what weight;) especially when such a Censure proceeds point blank against the judgment of the Church, to whom the publick discerning of Spirits is committed. For, thus, for example, S Paul, if his Apostle-ship did not priviledge him, must have bin declared clearly a Fanatick, when he saith, that the Gospel,Gal. 1.12. which others learnt from the instruction of the Apostles, he received from our Lord meerly by Revelation; and again Gal. 2.2. that he went vp to Ierusalem, at such a time, by Revelation, and when, in his speech to the Iews Act. 22. he pretended a vision he had as he was praying in the Tem∣ple, and elsewhere frequent and long Collo∣quies with our Lord (see Act. 22.17. &c. 26.15.16.17.— 2. Cor. 12.19.) and, when we are told so often of the Holy Spirit spea∣king to him, and others. Act. 10.19.20. Act. 16.6.7 9.20.22.23. Act. 8.19.21. Tim. 1.18. 4.14. (doubtless by some interiour voice, or other signification clearly discerned by them to be from God:) vvhen again he relates his Rapt, his aliena∣tion from his Senses; and, vncertain whe∣ther, from his Body; and his hearing ineffa∣ble words. And the strange joy and transport of mind he received from these things was so great and extraordinary, as that it seems it vvas necessary to be allayed and qualified with some counter griefs, I say how could he escape the imputation of a Fanatick, on these terms, but that he was an Apostle?
§. X.In the old Testament also the sons of the Pro∣phets, and other Saints must have incurred the same censure, in whom may be observed many Supernaturall and wonderfull opera∣tions of the same Holy Spirit, whereby they were put at certain times into suddain Exta∣sies, and Raptures, into strange, and unusvall actions, and agitations of their Bodyes (for which to avoid tediousness, I desire the curious Reader to view. 2. Sam. 6.14. Ps. 26.6.— 2. King. 4.35.- 2.16. compared with. Act. 8.39. and 1. Kings. 18.12.- Ezech. 3.12.14. 2. King. 9.11.— 1. Kings. 20.35.) so violent, that Saul (when in their society possessed with the same) is said to have stript of his clothes (that is, his vpper garments) and to have lien down all night vnclothed, being wearied with those strange motions. They in these Raptures not only fore-telling things to come. (2. King. 2.3.5.) but conceiving, and on a sudden (after an unusvall manner) dictating Psalms, Songs, Praises of God, or explication of some Mystery, or former Pro∣phesy, like those vnder the Gospel. 1. Cor. 14.6. See. 1. Sam. 18.10.- 1. King. 18.29.- 1. Chron. 25.3. compared with. 1. Cor. 11.5. And this Spirit then, as now, did more ordi∣narily thus inspire persons prepared by Stu∣dies, and exercises of Devotion in Schools, and Solitudes for this purpose. Amongst which means one was calming or charming, and abstracting the Mind by Musick 1. Sam. 10.5.— 16.16.— Psal. 43.4.— 2. King. 3.15. and we know, what vse, herein, the Holy
Prophet David made of his Harp. And, in these strange accidents, there wanted not those then, who esteemed, and called them no better then Madmen. 2. King. 9.11. But these Scoffers, then, were no Divines. And it is well, that these Saints are, now, secured from Such derision by being Scripture Saints. But then S. Austin, for example, having no such priviledge, I see not, but that he must be one of the Society of these new Fanaticks if it were but for his Tolle lege, Confess. 8. l. 12. c. that he heard in the Garden, as if some boys were singing it, vpon vvhich Fancy he left of the thoughts of a wife, and betook himself to a Retired, and Monastick life. Neither can his holy Mother Monica escape the censure of one of this Authors Hystoricall Gossips: of whom this her son testifies; See S. Austin Confess. l. 3. c. 11. l. 6. c. 1. l. 6. c. 13. That she had frequent Visions and Revelations, one of them concer∣ning his own becomming at length a Ca¦tholick: so that he obserued, that, vvhen God was pleased to effect it, she was not much moved vvith the news thereof, because be∣fore assured of it: Insomuch as that, vvhen S. Austin had a purpose of marrying he re∣quested her Prayers to God concerning it Vt ei per visum ostenderet aliquid de futuro ma∣trimonio. And, she having only some ima∣ginary ones, he tells how she slighted them. Dicebat enim (saith he) discernere se, nescio quo sapore, quem verbis explicare non poterat, quid interesset inter revelantem Te, & animam suam somniantem. To bear this Saint company I vvil begg §. XI.
leave to add, both for the Antiquity and particularity of it, vvhat Tertullian relates, of another pious vvoman Well known to him, in his book De Animâ. Est hodie (saith he) Soror apud nos Revelationum Charismata sortita, quas in Ecclesia inter Dominica Solen∣nia per Extasim in spiritu patitur, conversatur cum Angelis, aliquando etiam cum Domino; & videt, & audit Sacramenta, & quorun∣dam corda dignoscit, & medicinas desideranti∣bus submittit. Iam vero prout Scripturae legun∣tur, aut Psalmi canuntur, aut adlocutiones proferuntur, aut petitiones deleguntur, ita inde, Materiae Visionibus administrantur. Forte nescio quid de Anima diserueramus, cum ea soror in Spiritu esset. Post transacta Solennia dimissa plebe, quo usu solet nobis renunciare quae viderit, (nam & diligentissime disserun∣tur, ut etiam probentur) inter caetera, inquit, ostensa est mihi anima corporaliter, & Spiritus videbatur, sed non inanis & vacuae qualitatis imò quae etiam teneri repromitteret, tenera, & lucida, & aetherei coloris, & forma per omnia humana. (Where note that the Revelation of the Holy vvoman might be most true, and yet Tertullians collection from it very erro∣neous; that is, that souls vvere aeriall Bo∣dies, because that of some person deceased appeared to this sister like one.) This is a sub∣ject hath no end. And methinks Catholicks are not so ingenuously treated, in being forced, after the experience of so many ages, to produce such instances as these, to free in generall the extraordinary favours done to
reputed Saints from plain Fanaticisme. Again we contend also,§. XII. that all obscure language in Divine matters, and such things as are mysterious and difficult to be vnder∣stood, ought not therfore to be exposed to sport and Scorn, as savouring of Enthusiasm, or madnes; or, as affronting and taking away the vse of Reason (a thing these men much talk of, but never reasonably do this, against Church-authority.) For, such things they may be, as are above the ordinary comprehen∣sion of Reason, or most men's Experience; and the vnintelligibleness of them may lye in the sublimity of the matter, not in the ex∣pression. And it hath bin a long observation, that the plea of Reason hath bin the common practice of Sects, and is now of the Socinians: as Faith is the thing especially called for by the Church. If then the language of our My∣sticall Divines savours of Fanaticism, I see not how severall passages in the Scripture do not run the same risk; and may not be also questioned for it, if arraigned at the Barr of some men's Reason, had they not had speciall protection from the sacred Persons that penned them. Such are (to name some of them) S. Paul's not living,§. XIII. but Christ living in him; Not his acting,Gal. 2.20.4.19. 1. Cor. 15.10. 2. Cor. 4.16. Col. 3.3. Rom. 13.2. but grace With him. His being in travell with the Galatians, till Christ was formed in them: our inward, and out∣ward: our old, and our new Man, — We dead, and our life hid in Christ; Our being transformed in the renewing of our mind.
The new Man renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him.- Our being borne of God.- Being borne of the Spirit;Col. 3.10. 2. Cor. 3.18. Gal. 5.16.18. walking in, being led, by the Spi∣rit; Our being changed into the same image with Christ. Our being made partakers of the Divine Nature.- A peace of God in the mind that passeth all vnderstanding.2. Pet. 1.4. Phil 4.7. Eph. 3.17.18.19.20.- Attai∣ning a knowledge of the love of Christ that passeth knowledge, by our being rooted in charity, so as to be able to comprehend the breadth, length, depth, and height thereof; Filled with all the fulness of God according to the power that worketh in vs, above all that we, can desire or vnder∣stand: He that is joyned to the Lord is one Spirit:2. Cor. 4.18. 1. Cor. 6.16.17.- The Kingdome of God not com∣ming with observation from abroad, but within vs. If any man love me, my Father, and I wil come vnto him, and make our habitation with him.Jo. 14.23. Jo. 17.23. The Father in Christ, and Christ in vs, that we may be consum∣mate in one.1. Jo. 4.16.- That God is love: and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him (and this more, as the love is greater) — In the last dayes God's powring out his Spirit vpon all flesh; so that their sons, and daughters too shall Prophesy: their young men see visions,Act. 2.17▪ and their old men dream dreams. — The Apostles ordering . 1. Cor. 14.30. That when a Prophet is speaking in the publick congregation, if any thing happen to be revealed to another who standeth by, that the first should hold his peace: and biding them
ver. 26. for not ordering their Revelations discreetly— His praying for the Ephesians c. 1.17.18. That God Would giue them the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, for enlightening the eyes of their vnderstanding— 5. Phil. 13.15. presu∣ming, that God in good time would reveale also things to the imperfect, (surely by an illumination of their vnderstandings as be∣fore,) which the perfect already believed.— Davids Audiam quid in me loquatur Deus, — Praying with the Spirit, whil'st the vnderstan∣ding is vnfruitfull, (or vnedified▪) so, We not knowing what to pray for as we ought,1. Cor. 14.14. (that is according to Gods will) the Spirit that is Within vs helping our infirmities and requesting for vs with vnspeakable (or vnexplicable▪Rom. 8.26.) groanes:Rom. 8.26— The gift of the Holy Ghost inexpli∣cable 2. Cor. 9.15. Col. 2.5. Heb. 4.12. 2. Cor. 5.13. Psal. 67. Saint Paul reckoning Three parts of a Man; Body, Soule, and Spirit. His being present in Spirit, when absent in Body. The Word of Gods Word dividing Soul and spirit.— Sive mente excedimus, Deo; sive sobrij sumus, vobis. Benjamin adolescentulus in mentis excessu. what language is found here as well as in the My∣stick Divines for one of those men's humor to have made sport with, had it not bin Scripture? Mean while I do not deny but many of the ex∣pressions may be in some lower degree verified of every person, that is regenerate, and in the state of Grace, all such having an Vnion with God less or more by his Spirit and his extraor∣dinary Grace, importing only an higher degree thereof; yet much more properly and in their full sense, they seem only applicable to those:
who have attained to some Measure of Chri∣stian Perfection: and therfore Divines are not to be censured, that vnderstand these chiefly described in them, in whom they are most eminently fulfilled. To conclude, En∣thusiasme or Fanaticisme, is not the speaking things hard to be vnderstood (S. Peter saith, S. Paul did so;) nor yet the pretending high and mysterious effects, visions, Revelations, &c. for all these we believe may be, and are, often wrought in Gods Saints by the Holy Spirit, and his speciall presence in their Souls; and that, we say, in a much higher and more admirable way, then any of Satans infatuations can imitate, or ascend to. But Fanaticisme is a false pretence of these, or the like, when having no just ground to be credited. §. XIV.4. FOr the discerning of such Illusions, pro∣ceeding from Satan, from the true inspi∣rations of Gods Holy Spirit, we affirme, that many notes and observations there be, where∣by they may be known, if not certainly whe∣ther Divine as to their original, (where no spirit of Prophecy or miracles:) yet whether containing truth, and advancing vertue, as to the matter; and, whether any way noxious, and hurtfull, either to the person that receives them, or others. And this is abundantly suf∣ficient. Now for these notes of discerning them, I need referr the Reader to no other Book then to the Doctours Martyr Sancta Sophia, (though he was pleased, to take no notice of them See. Rom Idol. pa. 337.338. there) in the Preface from
§. 29. to §. 35. again, in the third Treatise, p. 268. from §. 9. to. §. 22. Where, after dire∣cting a strict observation to be made concer∣ning the Person, Preface §. 29.2. d. vol. p. 269. §. 11. Whether 1. viciously incli∣ned, 2. arrogant and proud; or, 3. curious; 4. or much addicted to melancholy, there are particularly cast off, and marked out for Sa∣tanicall Illusions, among others, these: All such pretended inspirations, or revelations, as doe inuite the person to say, or do, any thing contrary to the Catholick Faith, Obedience, Humility, peace, and Vnity, Honesty, Purity, and any other Divine vertue: but especially contrary to the Catholick Faith, or Obedience; for instāce as the attempting to make any new, and seditious reformations; as likewise, Ibid. p. 272. When the persons obstinately belieue these revelations to be of God after they have bin con∣demned by experienced Superiors, and Directors. All such, I say, are condemned for Satanicall Illusions; which cuts all the nerves, of all such pretended Revelations, as can any Way disturbe the Church'es Faith or Peace; and most of all, of those Enthusiasmes, and Fa∣natick frenzies, which have bin so common among Protestants; the chief vse that these persons make of pretending new divine in∣spirations being to take away the yoke of those former delivered in Scripture, which being so point blank opposite to that party, no less then new divine inspirations can serve their turne, to confront and fight against, them on an equall ground. Lastly,§. XV. in all these pretensions, where there
is any greater difficulty of discerning the Good and Divine from the bad and Satanicall, Spi∣rit, We have a Iudge to repair to, the Gover∣nours of the Church, The Spirits of the Prophets saith S. Paul, are subiect to the Prophets: And Quench not the Spirit. Despise not prophecying: (But) Prove all things. 1. Thess. 5.19.20.21. 1. Jo. 4▪ 1. and try the Spirits, saith S. John, whether they be of God. Now the last Tryer of them, in any con∣troversy arising, must be the Church accor∣ding to our Lords stating of this matter Math. 18.17. Dic Ecclesiae. And so the Catholick Church hath tried them in all ages (for we do not deny, but that, as Fanaticks and En∣thusiasts have more abounded among Sects, perhaps because they find more liberty, so, such do appeare sometimes within the body of the Catholick Church▪ the Devill being Gods Ape, and every where ambitiously and perversly imitating his Works;) and the Church doth still try them from time to time, as occasions offer themselves: and by her Sentence some are justified as Saints, and singular Favourits of God; others censured, condemned, and suppressed as Impostors, and Deceivers. §. XVI.Now if any sober Protestant, vpon this late writers bringing this subject on the stage, hath the curiosity to inform himself both what Supernaturall favours and extraordinary celestiall communications are received by some persons of great devotion in the Ca∣tholick Church; and what strictnes and caution the Church vseth in examining them,
I much recommend to him, for both these, the perusall of the life of S Teresa; where he may 1. observe the great diligence that Was vsed for severall years in the Triall of the Spirit of that most Holy Virgin; and as to this is desired to view in particular the 33. Observations made by a Confessor of her▪ in Approbation thereof. Last En∣gl. Edit. p. 323. and 2. where he may see (if Ecclesiasticall Authority have any Weight with him) those sublime favours she received in prayer, confirmed to be from God as it were by a generall attestation of them throughout the Christian World: even those who suspected and questioned them at first, afterwards magnifying them: her works being approved by the most eminent persons for learning & Sanctity that were in her Age, and translated into all moderne languages, for a more vniuersall Benefit: And, if in this contest about the truth of Visions, and Revela∣tions, &c. still continued in the Catholick Church, This Author will be concluded by the Common Reason of Christians, which he often appeals to, how can he condemn all those as Fanaticks whom the Common Reason of the Church, trying their Spirits by the ge∣nerall grounds and Principles of Christiany, hath for so many Ages approued, and received for Saints▪ or again, how condemn those Di∣vines (who, long before the birth of Protes∣tancy have Written on Mysticall Theology) as maintaining Enthusiasme, Whose works the Common Reason of the Church hath ap∣proved and esteemed most vsefull for the
advancing of Christian Perfection. The Church then is the Iudge for discer∣ning of Spirits,§. XVII. to which we do, and these persons in Common Reason ought to, sub∣mitt: but yet on such new Illuminations, or Revelations, can be grounded no Article of Faith, because that, by which she judgeth these, is her former Rule of Faith; and thus far she can only allow them, as they appeare to contain nothing contrary to it; which cer∣tainly, they would, if they should pretend any new Addition of Faith to it: Neither is the Church secured, that any, though repu∣ted Saints, are infallible in all that which they say; nor, that all is Divine, that they pretend to: Nor is there now, not only any contradictory, but any additionall new Reve∣lation of any part of the Catholick Faith to be expected,Eph. 2.20. S. Thom. q. 1. 1. Act. 8. ad 2. or admitted; after God the Fathers speaking, and declaring all his will, to the Church by his only son our Lord, and by his Apostles; Nor can we believe, since Miracles are the only thing that can confirme such Revelations, (I mean, of some Common Ar∣ticle to be added to the Christian's former Creed) for Divine, that these shall ever be wrought to such a purpose. §. XVIII. 5. THis, of the Church's discerning En∣thusiasmes and Satanicall Illusions from the Internall operations of the Holy Spirit, guided herein by the light of the Scriptures. But there are other influences and inspirations of the same Spirit, directing
vs also in actions in their owne nature in∣different, or of counsel, & on either side lawfull, and free from sin; some of which inspirations cannot be tried, or distinguished from Enthusiasme by any such way as the former; Which, because they are much spo∣ken of by the Mysticks, and are very neces∣sary for advancing Christians in the way of Perfection, it seems requisite, for the freeing these also from mistakes, to give the Reader here some account of them. 1.§. XIX. We must know then (as Sancta Sophia 1. vol. p. 57. &c. and others have discoursed more at large,) that there are two Spirits within vs; (that is all the Regenerate) the Holy Spirit, and that of Corrupt nature assisted with the Suggestions of the Devill, who took a kind of possession of vs, vpon Adams Fall: Eph. 2.2. That this last Spirit is never totally expell'd, or silenc'd in vs during this life:Gal. 5.17. but tempts vs still; and, That it's suggestions may appear many times like the motions of Gods Spirit; pretending good ends, the performing some duty to ourselves or our neighbour, our advancement in ver∣tue, and the like: That the effect of the first of these Spirits, Sanctifying Grace, received in our Regeneration or justification, is, in it's infusion, ordinarily but as a small seed, or spark,1. Jo. 3.9. capable of a dayly growth, and increase; and which,1. Pet. 1.23. with the cooperation of our free wil, and further aids, that are from time to time received from God,Matt. 13.31.33. works in vs at length a totall Reformation, and Christian Perfection; which so many among the rege∣nerate
as do attain, are said in a more speciall manner to be Spirituall Persons, and to have the Spirit of God: And in this sense the Apostle writes to the Corinthians— I Brethren could not speak vnto you as to Spiritual, but as to Carnal, and as to Babes in Christ. 1. Cor. 3.1. and so, ver. 3. For ye are yet Carnal, and Walk according to Man: that is, ye are Babes only in Christ, and so in some degree carnal, and walking ac∣cording to the naturall Man still, and not as yet entirely Spirituall. And frequent mention we find in the Scriptures of these severall de∣grees and growths in a regenerate condition (It being Gods pleasure, that the new Man, as the old, should grow by degrees, and not be made compleat in vs all at once:) Mention, I say, of some Babes and litle ones, and to be fed as yet only with Milk: Of strong Meat, and Wisdome, and higher Misteries, only to be delivered to, and Spoken amongst, the Perfect. See Heb. 5.12.13.2. Pet 3.18 Col. 2.19. 2. Cor. 4.16. Eph. 4.13. Col. 1.28. —4.12.— 1. Pet. 2.2.— 1. Cor. 3.1.2.— 2.6. Of Growing in grace and receiving in∣crease from God; Of the new Man being renewed day by day; Of arriving to a perfect Man vnto the measure of the stature (or age) of the fulness of Christ; Of the Apostles labouring to present every one perfect in Christ Iesus, and that they might stand perfect, and full in all the wil of God; and of this Perfection still containing in it higher and higher degrees; Not as if I had al∣ready attained, saith the Apostle Phil. 3.12. Though therfore by this Principle of a New life, and the infusion of the habitual Grace of Charity, We are already translated
from the former being of corrupt Nature to a Divine being of Supernaturall Grace; freed, at the first, from the former state of Mortall Sin, and from the Slavery, and Captivity, we suffered vnder it's dominion, yet hath not this Spirit as yet attained such a soveraigne Empire and Mastery over the importunate solicitations of Concupiscence, and the naturall inclinations of our Will and Affections, as that we do not still fall frequently into many lesser, and those called Venial, Sins; Or at least, as to actions, that are not sinful, but in their nature indifferent, or lawful, that we do not, for the most part, still prosecute those, that are more grateful, or advanta∣geous to our present carnal desires, and our sensual, or secular designes; Though such actions are no way expedient for vs, nor accep∣table to the Holy Spirit, in which now we live; nor do conduce to our growth in Grace, but are great hindrances thereof; and though these acts, contained indeed within the com∣pass of lawful, yet often expose vs to occasions of Sin. Now, so long as we stay here & ad∣vance no further, we appear but as infants, and Babes in Grace: It having not as yet obtained it's perfect Reigne in vs, either over our Concupiscence which carries vs still into frequent venial Sins: or, over our nature and will which carryes vs, in other matters lawful, to those satisfying our natural condition. But, when we are come to have potestatem volun∣tatis nostrae, as S. Paul expresseth it, 1. Cor. 7.37. come once to act seldom according to
, Concupiscence, to fall seldome into Venial sin) especially with advertency, and vnsurprised; and, the Holy Spirit to have a more absolute power over Sense, Reason, our own wil, Propriety, and Self-love, as to these things lawful, but not expedient; when come to S. Paul's omnia mihi licent, sed ego sub nul∣lius redigar potestate, and to his corpus in servi∣tem redigo,1. Cor. 9.27. 1. Cor. 6.12. and to act more constantly accor∣ding to the Spirit, moving now more perce∣ptibly in vs, and giving the laW to vs; when Grace is, as to these non expedients also pre∣dominant, and sole Mistress; ordering all things (without our reluctance, or also with our zeale,) to the greater love, praise, ho∣nour of God and the doing of all things in order to his wil, so far as it is made known to vs by this his Spirit, then are We arrived to a full growth to a compleat Man in Christ, to a state of Perfection, such as this life attains: but few Regenerate there are that do not, by their own disorders, dye in their Spiritual youth, before they come to such a mature age. As therfore, in our Regeneration, a Man is removed from the state of Sin into the state of Grace; so the Church desires, in that Which is called, from some high miste∣ries it speaks of, as to the supreme effects of this Grace, Mysticall Theology, to advance those, already in the state of Grace, to that of Perfection; and from the Spirit dwelling, to it more absolutely Reigning, in vs. which finds so many great rewards not only in the next, but this present life.
2. We must know therfore,§. XX. That to such end this Holy Spirit, received in our Regene∣ration, assisteth and worketh in vs, not only as to affording generally to all good Chri∣stians that seriously endeavour to save their Souls, such internall illuminations, and mo∣tions, as are sufficient to direct them for the resisting of any sinful temptation, or to per∣form any necessary act of vertue, in circum∣stances wherin they are obliged to it; but also, in affording vs light and ability in all indiffe∣rent actions, and occurrences (With which may be also joined all the Acts of Christian vertues, When no necessity obligeth vs to do any of them, and so When it is lawful for vs, Without Sin, to do, or omitt, them) whereby we are guided to make such a choice, as is more conformable to Gods Will; and, parti∣cular circumstances considered, may much more advance vs in the love of God, and Christian Perfection; and whereby we may avoid such other of them, as may be sugge∣sted, either by corrupt Nature, or the evil Spi∣rit, vnder pretence also of some good end, but to defeat a better. For the Holy Spirit ex∣cites vs, and assists vs, not only in doing dutyes of necessary obligation; or, in the avoiding what is prohibited, and performing What is comanded by God vnder penalty of sin; but in all these acts also, that may any way tend more to Gods glory, or to our greater perfe∣ction; Though these be such, as we may without sinning, chuse, or refuse. For, in this, I may say, that the Holy Spirit
in vs is like to Concupiscence in vs; the one continually exciting vs vnto that which is better, as the other to that which is worse. See the Apostles description of these two in∣mates Rom. 8.1. &c. and Gal. 5.16.17.18. where he saith. v. 17. that Spiritus concupiscit adversus carnem, & caro adversus Spiritum - and that Sibi invicem adversantur. And Ibid. v. 18. as also. Rom. 8.14. That those who are Gods children, or Regenerate, aguntur Spiritu, are acted by the Spirit:Jo. 16.13.- 14.26. Act. 6.9.10 1. Cor. 12.8.9.28. Rom. 12.6.7. Act. 4.29.31. Lu. 24.45. Act. 16.14. Eph. 1.18. It guides vs into truth- Brings things forgotten to our remembrance: Gives knowledge and arguments to one— vtterance and Eloquence, and the power to perswade, to another— To another Wisdome, or a good Iudgement— Prudence in Gouerning: in exe∣cuting anothers comands— To another cou∣rage, and boldnes— It opens mens vnderstandings and hearts, and renders them docile, and apt to believe. What is there, that is not done in vs by this Holy Spirit, when we are em∣ployed about any thing, that tends to the glorifying of God, the Father, or the Son. So is our regenerate life wholy managed by this Spirit, as the natural is by the Soul; and, if not obstructed, works in vs a continual growth in Grace, till we come to a perfect man in Christ 2. Pet. 3.18. Eph. 4.13. Therfore the Apostle exhorts his converts; that Gal. 5.25. as they live (their new life) in, or by, the Spirit, so they would walk in it (according to its directions:) And that they would mind or affect the things of the Spirit, (or the things, it minds them of:) Because  within them is death in the
end;Rom. 8.5.6. but the  within them is life and peace to them▪ Exhorts them also— Eph. 4.30. with no corrupt and fruitles com∣munication to contristate or grieve this Spirit.— Tim. 4.14. not to neglect it— 1. Cor. 15.10. That it should not be void (or idle) in them— 1. Thess. 5.19. not to quench it Eph. 5.18. To replenish themselves with it. And 2. Tim. 1.6. continually to revive it— Rom. 12.11. to be fervent in it. Without which the Apostle saith, we cannot think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3.5. and our Lord, Jo. 15.5. that We can do nothing. 3. These actions of the latter kind, we are now speaking of,§. XXI. that may be lawfully done, or omitted; the one, or the other performed, without any guilt of sin; are either such, as, by the Evangelical Councels, and the dictate of rectified Reason, are clearly discerned by vs, the one to be better, and more to lead to Christian Perfection, then the other; or such, Where we have some doubt, of these two actions, good or lawful, which is the better, or more expedient? In the former of these we may safely conclude; that, that which is ma∣nifest to vs to be the better as to our perfection is the motion in vs of the Holy Spirit; and that the doing it is the doing the wil of God in this matter; and that, so often as we reject, or neglect, this, so often we contristate the Spirit (that would thus conduct vs to perfe∣ction;) and refuse to do Gods will, when this is known to vs; Whose wil it ought always to be presumed to be, that we should do that, which is cleare to vs, all things considered,
to be best, for his glory, and our good, to be done; though such omission or neglect, amounts not to a sin, but to a failing so much in Perfection. And indeed the not vigilantly observing these Motions of the Spirit within vs, and the not hearkning to and obeying them when evident to be such, or also, the not preconsulting by prayer what it adviseth, but rather precipitating our action to prevent it, is the Reason of so many their no greater improvement in the Spirit, and that they are such strangers to it, and It to them; is a check to the further, and stronger operations of it in the Soul; (for who would offer Counsel, seldome, or never accepted, or asked?) abates the fervour, and solace, that there would be in prosecuting it's suggestions and leave vs guilty of much vnkindnes, and ingratitude. For, as S. Bernard. In Cant. Serm. 17. Cum hae Sancti Spiritus circa nos dispensatoriae quidem vi∣cissitudines vigilantissime non observantur, fi, vt nec absentem desideres, nec presentem glori∣fices. But in the latter Actions, wherein we have some cause of doubt, which is best, and yet wherein the making a good choice may be exceedingly beneficial to vs, (according to the variety of our temper and condition) to the better, ordering of our life and service of God, such illumination and Direction of the Holy Spirit, or also a cleare discerning thereof, is obtained especially by much Purity of con∣versation, and Abstraction from worldly things by frequent Recollection, and introversion, and
attendance on God, in the perfectest practice of Prayer, we can attain to. For God hath graciously declared to vs in the Scriptures:Jac. 5.17. That the effectual prayer of a righteous man (as that of Elias) auaileth much- that he heareth not sinners,Jo. 9.31. but if any one be a worshiper of him, and doth his wil,Matt. 21.22. him he heareth: - That all things whatsoever we shall ask in prayer (that is,Mar. 11.23 Such persons) not doubting, but believing, we shall receive them— that if we abide in Christ, and he in vs,Jo. 15.7. ask what we will, and it shall be done vnto vs (because indeed such ask by the Spirit of Christ,1. Jo. 3 22. who liveth in them, and so ask ac∣cording to Gods will.) — That if we keep his comandements,1. Jo. 5.14. and do what is pleasing in Gods sight,Rom. 8.26.27. whatever we ask we receive of him▪ That if we ask any thing according to his will he heareth vs (and grants our requests) that though we know not what we should desire, or pray for as we ought: (that is, as to temporal prosperity, or afflictions, or such like things of which S. Paul there speaks, what therin is best for Gods glory, or our own proficiency) yet the Holy Spirit within vs with vnutterable groans and great ardour intercedeth for vs according to Gods will;1. Cor. 2.10. &c. and that God knoweth its mind (though not expressed in Words; and gran∣teth it's requests) - that the same Spirit sear∣cheth the profound things of God (and what is his will) and revealeth them to vs; that natural Reason is not able to vnderstand them, but they many times seem foolishness to it: But that the things of the Spirit are discerned only by the Spirit: most of Which Texts seem to be
spoken not only of our petitioning God con∣cerning the necessary means of our or others Saluation; but more vniversally of all sorts of requests concerning the things of this life and any things that are in their nature indif∣ferent, and lawfull, and of his Spirit dire∣cting vs to ask and do in them what is his wil; and of his granting those to vs Which may be best for vs; wherein God heareth, and granteth the petitions of his Saints much sooner then of others. §. XXII.I say then, since God in the Scriptures hath declared these things, and made these promises, that he will not deny what we ask according to his will, we may rationally pre∣sume and be piously confident, that he will grant our request, when this is, only to know his will, that we may do that which is accor∣ding to it; and we may safely take that for his will, to Which, after such addresses, and other due preparations made, we shall find our selves more strongly inclined; and also take such inclination to proceed from the operation of Gods Spirit, either illumina∣ting somtimes our vnderstanding in disco∣uering to it some Reasons, not so well discer∣ned; or else disesteemed, and thought consi∣derable, before; Or somtimes more confir∣ming to vs the judgment, our own Reason made of the thing before: Or some times ef∣fecting a strong and suddenly iniected incli∣nation in the will, so swayed without any preceding Reasons, or discourse of the In∣tellect presented it: Or somtimes causing an
extraordinary tranquility, consolation, and satisfaction to accompany such our Election; (According to the Rule of Abbot Isaac in Cassian Collat. 9. c. 32.- Cum orantes nos nulla interpellaverit hesitatio, si obtinuisse nos in ipsa orationis effusio∣ne, quod poscimus, senserimus, non ambigamus preces nostras ad Deum efficacier penetrasse. where note; that the Devill, or any Crea∣ture, cannot work so immediatly and inti∣matly on our vnderstanding and will as Gods Spirit doth; but by the vse, of phantasms or Images; of the Spirits, humors, &c.) Or, where no such preponderation to any side is perceived in the Soul, then We may presume this to be his will, that, making vse of our best Reason, or others Advice, without any solicitude, we take either side. Now in the discerning of these Divine Il∣luminations and inspirations from Enthusias∣mes,§ XXIII. or the motions of the Good, from those of our own, or a Bad, Spirit in these matters, As any one hath attained ro a greater perfe∣ction in Prayer, and Mortification and Purity of life, they attain hereby a greater measure of Gods Spirit, and hence it's Illuminations and inspirings in them are also much greater, and stronger; and more intimately effective on the Soul, then any other motions, from whence soever they come, can be; and so also these become more evident to such, and many times are so clearly discerned by them, from the Supernatural impression, they make vpon the Soul as that it cannot resist, disbe∣lieve, or any way doubt of them, that they
are Supernatural and Divine. So, S. Austin Confess. l. 6. c. 13. relates of his Mother Monica, that she clearly knew such Supernatural actings in her from her own imaginations.— Dicebat enim, discernere se nescio quo sapore, quem ver∣bis explicare non poterat, quid interesset inter re∣velantem Te, & animam suam somniantem. And indeed, if such interiour Divine operations Were not somtimes certainly discernable, how could S. Paul be assured, when he intended to preach the Word in Asia, and again in Bi∣thynia, (a most charitable designe!) that the Spirit forbad it; and not rather the Enemy of the publishing of the Gospel? Act. 16.6.7.— or, That it was by Revelation, and not a fancy of his, that he ascended to Jerusalem? Gal. 2.2. Or, That it Was the Holy Spirit that testified, and not men's fears, that much affliction should happen to him there? Act. 20.23. How the Corinthians knew, when they had a Revelation,Cor. 14. that it was not a work of their own imagination? since all these things were transacted only interiourly in the Soul, and it was the Holy Spirit only, that in all these gave the evidence to itself. A certain Assu∣rance then, it cannot be denyed, that some at somtimes may have of Divine operations in them. But yet it is not affirmed here, that all persons, less advanced in Prayer, and Purity of life, or also the greatest Saints at all times, discern the operations of the Holy Spirit within them so clearly in this sort of actions, as not to be somtimes mistaken; and it is suf∣ficient, that persons piously disposed, and
frequent in Prayer, may have a rational pre∣sumption of it as hath been said: Neither is any more communicated vnto them, perhaps, for the better preserving of their Humility. And, that no absolute certitude is herein to be expected is a thing often confessed by Sancta Sophia. See 1. vol. p. 139. and p. 137. 4. But 4. in case such Divine inspirations be somtimes mistaken, yet can no dammage come thereby, I mean as to committing any Sin; 1. the subject of them we speak of here being matters in themselves indifferent, and on any side lawfull. See Sancta Sophia. 1. vol. p. 143.-2. No command of Superiours in these any way neglected. 3. no neglect, besides vsing Prayer, in practising any other means of making a secure choice, either in weighing reasons on all sides, or taking advice from others: Only the deuout Soul, in vsing these endeavours, yet relies not on them, but on the directions of Gods Holy Spirit, working continually in the Regenerate both by preve∣nient and subsequent Grace: makes no sud∣den resolutions, nor rushes hastily vpon any action; but diligently hearkens first to this internal Guide, what it may tell her is best; desiring faithfully, all naturall Passions and self-love layd aside, to correspond with all it's motions; the carefull observers of which with a pure intention of mind may be justly presumed seldome to Want them, though they do not so certainly know them; and mean while such persons, if not free always from mistakes, yet are secure, in this sort of actions
we speak of, from entertaining any sinful Enthusiasme; or such, as any other person (except by Divine Inspiration) can either censure,§. XXV. or discouer. 5. Having spoken thus much (from §. 3.) of the extraordinary and Supernaturall Gra∣ces and Favours, the Illuminations and In∣fluences of the Holy Spirit, that are commu∣nicated by God to persons of greater Sancti∣ty, and practice of Prayer, which do also more clearly and evidently guide them in all their actions; and of the discerning of these from other Enthusiasms and Illusions; In the last place I shall consider the Churches Dire∣ctions concerning Prayer and Devotion, the chief means of procuring all these Divine Graces; which Directions this our Author Roman Idol. c. 4. p. 325. censures to be such as if they were designed only to amuse and confound the minds of devout persons and to prepare them for the most gross Enthusias∣me, and extravagant illusions of fancy; whereas indeed there is no part of a Christian's duty, in which the Church, by those many Do∣ctors of hers, Mysticks, and others, who have chiefly employed their talent, and com∣municated their experience, on this Subject, hath taken more profitable pains, and des∣cended lower, even to the meanest capaci∣ties; nor where this displeased Author can find less ground for a quarrel. Infinite are the Books written on this Divine Art of Prayer; Wherein like a careful Mother, she trains vp her children, by certain degrees, from the lowest step thereof, which touches
the ground, to the highest, which reaches to heaven; knowing it to be the Foundation of all Goodnes; and the Attractive of all the Divine Benedictions, and Benefits. She then, first here, in preparation for Prayer, adviseth her Children to a serious en∣deavour to keep their conscience clear from Mortal sin (or also Venial, as much as hu∣mane frailty permits;) and to a care of avoi∣ding the occasions thereof, without which endeavour our devotions cannot be accepta∣ble to God; I mean, as to the receiving from him any great plenty of his Grace: And, again, requires, at such times of Prayer, a dismission of, and abstraction from all secu∣lar busines; Solitude, and a recollection of the mind and thoughts, and oblivion, so much as we can, of all creatures; and a re∣moving also of all hindrances, that may come from the objects of the exteriour senses, &c. These presupposed; She first begins to feed her little ones with milk, and as it were to chew their meat for them; giving them infi∣nite prescriptions, for all occasions, of se∣veral Formes of Vocal Prayer, where Novices begin; and Which the most perfect, also return to. From these Vocal,§. XXVI. she next leads them on to Mental, Prayer; where their devotions may enjoy more liberty, whatever way they are bent, without their former confinement to set Words, or Forms; and where the cessa∣tion from external action renders the inward more attent, and affective (as experience
shews;) and more freed from the distraction of the senses, and also from the wandring of the Thoughts; to which vocal Prayer gives more relaxation: Nor is it so easy to think, as to speak, one thing and mind another; but, for how long time the attention ceaseth, so long doth Mental Prayer; and we are either not distracted, or not praying. Here likewise she delivers them many vseful Sub∣jects of Meditation, chiefly these either tou∣ching our own misery; or the Misteries of our Saluation; or the Divine Perfections. The Negative benefit also of which Medita∣tions, confined to some certain Subject, at the first is very considerable▪ in preventing distraction of thoughts, and taking of the mind from it's usual amusements, and wings about external, worldly, vain, and super∣fluous things: The Books written in this kind are almost infinite, not vnfrequent in Protestants hands, and on each subject some brief Heads perscribed, whereon the Medi∣tants may enlarge their thoughts; Where also she directs the reading of some Pious Book, when there is much distraction of Thoughts, or sterility of Invention. And, in these Meditations, She trains them first more in those, of the knowledge of their natural con∣dition, of the Hainousness of Sin; of the Di∣vine Iustice; of the bitter Passion of our Lord in making Satisfaction for sin; of the Terrours of the Tria Novissima, 1.Death. 2. Iudgment, 3. Hell; and the like: to plant in them a due Fear of God, and advance all sorts of Mortifi∣cation
and a cleansing of themselves from the former habits of Sins. After this she practi∣seth them much in the Meditation of the Life of our Lord, and the Lives of his Saints, as constant Patterns for their Imitation, as to growth in vertue; lastly, of the Divine, Per∣fections, and also many Benefits to vs; those already received, and those promised; of the Graces and operations of the Holy Ghost within vs, and the abilities for doing good, and pleasing God, restored to Man by it, if attentively observed, and obeyed; by these to advance them in all Spiritual Grace, and Christian Perfection; and to enkindle in them an ardent Love of God. The acquisition of which Love, and not of knowledge is the Churcheschief design in all these Medita∣tions. See in Sancta Sophia (this Authors great Rock of offence) both the recommending this course of Meditation, especially for Be∣ginners; and directing the practice thereof. 3. §. 2. c. 2.— and § 4. c. 1. §. 6. By the practice of these Meditations,§. XXVII. and, amongst them, especially that of the Life and Passion of our Lord (whilst other Sects dare hardly look vpon a Crucifixe) she endeavours by litle and litle to kindle and enflame the affections of the devout Soul toward so dear a Lord, whom so many offences, and affronts of hers, which now cut her to the heart, could not alienate from her; and The Passions thus learn't, by much practice, to be more easily excited, begins to train vp such Proficients more in the School of Love; directing them,
by laying more aside, When thus well prepa∣red, their former arguings, and discoursings of the Brain (with the frequent stroaks of which they have already kindled this fire in the heart) how to exercise these affections now, in that Lesson of Louing God with all the heart,Luc. 10.27 and all the Soul, and all the mind, and all the strength; In a more simple & quiet intuition, & contemplation, advertency and admiration of the Divine Beauty, and Perfections; and in more fervent and amourous Colloquies with God; In praising, thanking, solacing her self with, him, whilst she, casts her eye vpon his infinite mercies past and promised; In many resolutions for the future to serve him better, and no more so to grieve and offend him; in offering all she hath, she can do, or suffer, to his service, and in putting herself in a posture of silence and attention, to hear what he may be pleased to speak to, and in her: speak to her, not only in guiding and admonishing in all necessary duty, but also in things indifferent, or also good, but not ne∣cessary, when severall of them fall vnder de∣liberation; In which she also desires to be instructed by him, that she may still chuse and doe, that which may better please him, and wherein his holy will may be more per∣fectly accomplished. §. XXVIIIWhich Acts of Love, when once, to a com∣petent degree, facilitated in vs, as they fill the Soul with great consolations, so they excee∣dingly help to advance it in all Christian du∣ties, and vertues. For Love will not be idle,
and works in now with much more fidelity and alacrity; as doing all things not out of fear, but affection; and not to obey, but please, her Beloved, and gain from him also a reciprocall love. And when a soul is arrived so farr, through the constant exercise and custome of Prayer, and other Mortifications necessary to it, that these acts of Love, and of the will, (of which there are many severall degrees surpassing one another) are rendred easy and frequent, and vpon every occasion speedily resumed, without any or much pre∣cedent meditation, Which acts before were difficult and rare: And when the Soul by rea∣son of the greater sweetnes she finds in this latter affective meditation, as I may call it, returnes not to the former intentive medita∣tion Without some reluctance, this is the first entrance into that which is stiled a state of Perfection, such as humane industry attains; namely wherin the will assisted with Grace excites itself to these Acts of Love and sim∣ple contemplation. Of which practice thus S. Bernard De inte∣riori Do∣mo c. 14.— I am fortasse ascendisti, jam ad cor¦tuum rediisti, & ibi stare didicisti: nec hoc suf∣ficiat tibi; Disce habitare, & mansionem facere; &, qualicunque mentis vagatione abstractus fue∣ris, illuc semper redire festina. Absque dubio per multum usum quandoque tibi vertetur in oblecta∣mentum in tantum vt absque vllâ laboris diffi∣cultate possis ihi assiduus esse; quin imo pena po∣tius tibi sit alibi quam ibi moram aliquam facere. Thus He; yet is the Soul not directed here to remain idle, stupid, or vnactive, but to re∣turne
to its wonted Meditations, and, if neither fitly disposed for these, to Vocall and set For∣mes of Prayer: or also to Reading, when the sweetnes of such contemplation ceaseth. §. XXIX.Devout Souls advanced hitherto, the Church forbeareth not to shew, and to ex∣hort, and provoke them to, yet much higher flights; and by their continued devotions to prosecute a further fruition of that object which hath no bounds. To this purpose she proceeds to declare to her children, for their encouragement, from persons experienced therein, the many rich rewards of Prayer; the Supernaturall Elevations that God is pleased to advance some Souls to, who have bin much practised in this holy Exercise, and the more free and familiar manifestations of himself that he makes to them in severall manners mentioned before;See §. 3. Wherin the Soul doth not now act so much, as, in a great quietnes, silence, and rest of its former na∣turall operations, is more immediatly moved and acted by a more speciall Presence of God in it, Who somtimes with the touches and influences of an extraordinary Grace doth illuminate, enflame, and ravish the Soul, and causeth in it an ineffable and transporting delight in contemplating what is shewed to it of the Divine Beauty, and Perfections; per∣ceiving in itself a most ardent Love, and this supernaturally infused; When also are com∣municated to it many times celestial Secrets, and Divine Mysteries, and Future events, by internal words, and Revelation. All which
things are received by it with a great tranquil∣lity, and attention, and cessation of the na∣turall vse of its Faculties Sensitive or intelle∣ctual: nor seems it in its own disposal whilst it hath these touches, but both doth and must see, and think, only what his Divine Majesty will have it; and this only so long as he pleaseth. Nor can any of these things by any art or industry of the Soul be attained or pro∣cured when she will, but all is Supernaturall, and as well aboue the operations of common Grace in vs, as of Reason. In which superna∣turall and extraordinary Divine Impressions vpon the Soul the experienced also observe two sorts of motions in it: either a very inti∣mate Retreat and Recollection of the Soul from exteriour objects as it were into some inte∣riour part of itself, removed from the thoughts or remembrance of Creatures or worldly things, (which is often joined with a retiring also of the vitall Spirits more or less from the outward parts of the Body, lest som∣times in such Recollection without sense, motion, or heat:) Alienatio mentis a sensibus Corporis S. Austin In Psal. 67. calls it, vt Spiritui quod demonstrandum est demonstretur. Such perhaps was that Extasy of S. Iohn. when he is said to be in the Spirit Apoca. 1.10. or, 2. An Eleva∣tion, Rapt, or Flight of the Soul as it were above it self; and as if it were to depart pre∣sently out of the Body, and the person to suffer a present dissolution Ablatio mentis, as S. Bernard expresseth it: Such seems that of S. Paul. 2. Cor. 12.
§. XXX.And in the expression of these supernatu∣rall Graces and influences it is, that the ex∣perienced, and the Mystick Divines labour so much. Touching these it is, that they vse such terms of a Supernaturall life, a Deiformity or Deification; of a sense, or fruition of Gods Presence, in the Fund, depth, or center, or in∣nermost part of the Soul, or, also in the Apex or supreme point of it; of Passive Vnions; Where is to be vnderstood not an exclusion of all acts whatever (for the souls knowing, receiving, assenting to such things cannot be withour some action of it; and that not only of the Will, but intellect.— Quod sentit affectus, intelligit Intellectus,) but an exclusion of any discursive and laborious acts, and any primacy moving of it self to action. Which terms if hard to be vnderstood, so are the matters, they would express; which have somthing of S. Paul's  in them and to be throughly apprehended only by the experienced. And for him that saith he vnderstands them not, me thinks S. Austins advice writing of a very difficult matter, the Trinity, 1. l. 3. c. is very seasonable— Ille, qui se ista non intelligere conqueritur, secum agat votis & studiis, ut proficiat; non cum Ecclesia agat quere∣lis, & convitiis, ut taceat. Especially conside∣ring, that these things are not handled by Catholick Divines as a part of the Churches Rules of Devotion, but as a reward of it; and as things only in Gods, not our, power. §. XXXI.Yet these rich Gifts of God, and pregusta∣tions of the state in the world to come, the
Church neglects not to recommend vnto her Children; and to signify the many noble ef∣fects, and powerfull influences, that such favours have upon those that receive them, as to the compleating them in all Christian Perfection; that is, in the perfect Love of God; all these Divine Inactions (if the Reader will pardon the word) tending still to a clearer manifestation of God to the Soul, and so to the wounding it more deeply with the loue and longing after him; and af∣ter the suffering, and doing any thing, with all alacrity, for him: and the Graces that are received disposing vs still to others higher, if the Soul correspond to them so as she ought- Si perseveravero (saith S. Bernard speaking of these favours) In Cant. Serm. 69. huic Dignattoni dignis (quod in me est) Affectibus & actibus respondere; & gra∣tia Dei apud me vacua non fuerit, etiam mansio∣nem apud me faciet Pater & Filim. She ne∣glects not to tell them also; that, though vpon no preparations, and predispositions in vs whatever such favours do necessarily follow; yet that without these, God doth not usually do them; that Active contempla∣tion is the ready way to Passive: and that, though in the higher degrees of them, they are but rare, and given to few, yet in some inferiour degree, they are communicated to many. And, how ever, that an Active Contem∣plation, and Fruition of God by love (spoken of before) and the great advancement in all Christian vertue we gain thereby (if we be admitted to no higher things, of which true
Humility always esteems it self vnworthy) is a sufficient recompence in this world, of any pains of ours in purging of our life, and close attendance on God in Solitude, and Prayer, that is vndertaken for it. Lastly, since such Christian Perfection chiefly consists in, and depends vpon, the exercise of the Affective part of the Soul; and not on high knowledge, or Speculation, therfore the Church recommends it as attainable by all Sexes, and conditions: and equally en∣courageth all in the prosecution of it— Non enim (as S. Gregory observes) In Ezech Hom. 17. Contemplationis Gratia Summis datur & minimis non datur; sed saepe hanc summi, saepe minimi: saepius remoti (id est, a curis mandanis,) aliquando eam con∣jugati percipiunt. §. XXXII.Of these Supernaturall and extraordinary Graces, and Caresses received from God, be∣fore I conclude this generall Discourse, I have thought fit here to sett down some pas∣sages I have met with in the Fathers, because some Reader perhaps may receive from their experiences benefit and encouragement for a more diligent practice of Prayer. And he who hath no further curiosity to informe himself herein, may, omitting them, passe on to. §. 40. Of these then thus speaks S. Austin. Confess. l. 10. c. 40. Lux es tu per∣manens, quam de omnibus consulebam, — & au∣diebam docentem, ac jubentem. Et sepe istud fa∣cio: Hoc me delectat, & ab onnibus actionibus necessitatis, quantum relaxari possum, ad istam voluptatem refugio. Et aliquando intromittis me
in affectum mulum invsitatum introrsus; ad nes∣cio qum dulcedinem, quae, si perficiatur in me, nescio quid erit, quod vita ista non eri. Sed reci∣do in haec aerumnosis ponderibus, & resorbe or so∣litis; & teneor, & multum fleo; sed multum teneor; Tantum consuetudinis sarcina degravat. Hic esse valeo, nec volo: illic volo, nec valeo; vtrobique miser. And this sweetnes it is that he seems so much to thirst and sigh after ha∣ving had some former tasts of it, when he breaks out into this Ejaculation. Confess. l. 8. c. 4.— Age Domine & Fac: excita & revoca nos: Accende & rape: flagra, dulce ce. jam ame∣mus & curramus. See also his extraordinary Illumination, or Revelation concerning Gods Incorrupti∣bility, and immutability (wherevpon he saith he forsook the Manichean Sect, and became a Catholick (which he mentions in his Dis∣putation with Fortunatus a Manichean: There S. Austin saith thus.— Illud ergo respondere possum, quod me Dominus nosse voluit, Deum ne∣cessitatem nullam pati posse, neque ex aliqua parte violari, atque corrumpi. Where his Adversary catching at it, and replying- Tu dixisti, quiae huc vsque tibi Deus revelavit, quod Incorruptibi∣lis sit, the Father only in the close of the Dis∣putation thus reflects on it- Ego novi non te habere quid dicas; & me, cum vos audissem in hac questione, nunquam invenisse quid dicerem; & inde fuisse admonitum divinitus, vt illum er∣rorem derelinquerem, & ad fidem Catholicam me converterem. And to this seems to relate what he saith: Confession: Lib. 7. cap.  — nesciens
vnde, & quomodo— and— hoc uno ictu &c. See also the frequent Recollections he mentions▪ Confess. l. 7. c. 10. entring as he saith (though not into the Fund, or Depth, of his Soul, yet) in intima sua; and his, there, seeing, quali∣cumque oculo animae suae, supra eundem oculum animae suae; supra mentem suam, lucem Dei in∣commutabilem: and herein God speaking to him, Sicut (saith he) auditur in corde. After which Interiour speech to him, he saith his former doubting was removed— Et non erat prorsus, vnde dubitarem. And see that devout Conference with his Dying Mother. Con∣fess. l. 9. c. 10. where he saith- Dum loquimur, & inhiamus illi (vitae aeternae,) attingimus eam modice cum toto ictu cordis, & suspiravimus, & reliquimus ibi religatas primitias Spiritus. And so, saith he (this sudden transport of mind passed over) remeavimus ad strepitum oris nostri. And afterwards he descants vpon the same Ra∣pture, or transport thus,- Dicebamus ergo: Sicut sileat tumultus carnis, sileant phantasiae terrae &c. & ipsa sibi anima sileat, & transeat se, non se cogitando, &c— Si loquatur ipse solus (Deus) non per ea, sed per seipsum, vt audiamus verbum ejus (non per linquam carnis &c,- Ipsum sine his audiamus, sicut nunc extendimus nos, & rapida cogitatione (speaking of the former ictus cordis) attingimus aeternam saptentiam super omnia ma∣nentem; si continuetur hoc, & subtrahantur aliae visiones longe imparis generis, & haec una rapiat & absorbeat, & recondat in interiora gaudia spe∣ctatorem suum; vt talis sit sempiterna vita quale fuit hoc momentum Intelligentiae cui suspirauimus;
nonne hoc est, Intra in gaudium Domini tui? & istud Quando! (Doth not this, much resem∣ble the derided Conting language of the My∣sticall Divines? Of the same contemplation the same Fa∣ther speaks in this manner in his book de Quantitate animae,§. XXXIII c. 33. written at Rome not long after his conversion: where he makes of the 7. degrees of the Souls ascent towards the discouery of Truth, or God, contempla∣tion the highest— Spiritus rectus (saith he,) quo fit, ut anima in veritate quaerenda deviare atque errare non possit, in ea non restauratur, nisi prius cor mundum fuerit; Hoc est, nisi priùs ipsa cogitatio ab omni cupiditate ac fece rerum morta∣lium sese cohibuerit & eliquaverit.Psal. 50.10 Iam verè in ipsa visione atque Contemplatione veritatis (id est Dei) (qui septimus atque vltimus animae gradus est, neque Iam gradus, sed quaedam mansio, quò illis gradibus pervenitur) quae sunt gaudia, quae perfruitio veri & summi Boni! cujus serenitatis at∣que aeternitatis afflatus! Quid ergo dicam? Dixe∣runt haec, quantum dicenda judicaverunt, magnae quaedam & incomparabiles animae, quas etiam vidisse, ac videre, ista credimus. Thus also he writes about the same time of the Egiptian Hermites spending their life in contempla∣tion De mori¦bus Eccl. c. 31. — Secretissimi penitus ab omni hominum conspectu, pane solo, qui eis per certa intervalla temporum affertur, & aqua contenti, desertissi∣mas terras in colunt; perfruentes colloquio Dei, cui puris mentibus inhaeserunt: & ejus pulchritudi∣nis contemplatione beatissimi, quae, nisi Sancto∣rum intellectu, percipi non potest; (not easily
aprehended by others.) Then thus apologi∣zeth for such a life— Nihil, inquam, de his loquar. Videntur enim nonnullis res humanas, plusquam oportet, deseruisse; non intelligentibus, quantum nobis eorum animus in orationibus prosit, & vita ad exemplum, quorum corpora videre non sinimur. Thus he. And, in this exercise of Contemplacion by those Hermites, we find also their Experience of Extasies, and Rapts. Abbot John in Cassian, Collat. 19. c. 4. describing this con∣templation, modestly relates of himself.— Pio Domini nostri munere (saith he) memini me in hujusmodi raptum esse frequenter excessum, ut obliviscerer me sarcina corporeae fragilitatis indu∣tum; mentemque meam ita omnes exteriores sen∣sus subitò respuisse & a cnctis materialibus rebus omni modis exulasse, ut neque oculi neque aures meae proprio fungerentur officio; & ita divinis meditationibus ac spiritalibus theoriis animus re∣plebatur, vt saepe ad vesperam cibum me percepisse nescirem, &c.— And ibid. c. 5 — Majoribus re∣moti secretis, frequentissime ad elestes illos rapie∣bamur excessus And elswhere Collat. 9. c. 31. Abbot Isaac reports of S. Antony the Hermit - Illum in ex∣cessu mentis frequenter orasse. And there recites this sentence of his, — Non esse perfctam ora∣tionem, in qua se monachus, vel hoc ipsum, quod orat, intelligi. §. XXXIV.Of the same Grace of Contemplation thus S. Gregory Moral. l. 23. c. 13 on that text Psal. 29.▪ Ego dixi in excessu mentis meae sublevatus quip∣pe (David saith the) vidit, quod se hic videre non posse, ad se relapsus ingemuit. Perfectam scili∣cet animam ista compunctio afficere familiariùs
solet, qua omnes imaginationes corporeas insolen∣ter sibi obviantes discutit, & cordis oculum figere in ipso radio incircumscriptae lucis intendit; vnde aliquando ad quandam inusitatam dulcedinem in∣terni saporis admittitur, ac raptim aliquo modo ardenti spiritu afflata renovatur; tantòque ma∣gis inhiat, quantò magis, quod amet, aegustat; atque hoc intra se appetit, quod sibi dulce sapere intrinsecus sentit.— Cui inherere conatur. Sed ab ejus fortitudine sua adhuc infirmitate repellitur: & quia ejus munditiae contemperari non valet, flere dulce habet, sibique, ad se cadenti, infirmi∣tatis suae lachrimas sternere. Neque enim mentis oculum potest in id, quod intra se raptim conspexe∣rit, figere: quia ipso vetustatis suae usu deorsum ire compellitur. Inter haec anhelat, aestuat, super se ire conatur; sed ad familiares tenebras suas victa fatigatione relabitur. Of the same Grace he speaks also Ibid. l. 24. c. 5.c. 33.26. on those words of Job— & videbit faciem ejus in jubilo-Iubilum dicitur, quando inef∣fabile gaudium mente concipitur; quod nec abs∣condi possit, nec sermonibus aperiri: & tamen quibusdam motibus proditur, quamvis nullis pro∣prietatibus exprimatur. Vnde David Propheta intuens electorum animas tantum gaudium mente concipere, quantum sermone non valent aperire, ait: Beatus populus qui scit jubilationem. Non enim ait qui loquitur, sed qui scit: quia sciri qui∣dem jubilatio intellectu potest, sed dicto exprimi non potest.— And, Tunc resplendente raptim cor∣ruscatione incircumscripti luminis illustratur. Quo utrumque conspectu in gaudio cujusdam seve∣ritatis absorbetur; & quasi post defectum vitae prae∣sentis,
vltra se rapta, in quadam novitate aliquo modo recreatur: Ibi mens, ex immenso fonte, in∣fusione superniroris aspergitur; ibi non se sufficere ad id, quo rapta est, contemplatur; & veritatem sentiendo, vide, quia, quanta est ipsa veritas, non videt, (the language of S. Dionisius Areo∣pagita) Cut veritati, tanto magis se longe existi∣mat, quantò magis appropinquat, quia nisi illam vtcunque conspiceret, nequaquam eam conspicere se non posse, sentiret. Adnisus ergo animi dum in illam intenditur, immensitatis ejus coruscante circumstantia reverberatur. Vnde & ad semet∣ipsam citius labitur; &, prospectis quasi quibus∣dam veritatis vestigiis, ad sua ima revocatur. Haec ipsa tamen, per contemplationem facta, non solide, & permanens visio, sed, vt, ita dixerim, quasi quaedam visionis imitatio Dei facies dicitur. Quia ergo, post laborum certamina, post tentatio∣num fluctus, saepe in excessu anima suspenditur, vt cognitionem Divinae Presentiae contempletur, quam tamen presentiam & sentire possit, & ex∣plere non possit, recte, post tot labores, de hoc ten∣tato homine dicitur; videbit faciem ejus in Iu∣bilo. §. XXXV.On the same thus S. Bernard. De Consid. l. 5. c. 2. after mentioning some lower de∣grees of Devotion— At omnium (saith he) maximus (ille,) qui, spreto ipso usu rerum & sensuum, quantum quidem humanae fragilitati fas est, non ascensoriis gradibus sed inopinatis ex∣cessibus, avolare interdum contemplando ad illa sublimia consuevit.- Ad hoc vltimum genus illos pertinere reor excessus Pauli: Excessus, non ascen∣sus; nam raptum potius fuisse, quam ascendisse,
ipse se perhibet;2. Cor. 5.13. Eph. 3.18. Inde est quod dicebut; Sive men∣te excedimus, Deo. And. Ib. c. 14. On that of the Apostle— vt comprehendamus cum omnibus Sanctis— Sancti igitur (saith he to Pope Euge∣nius) comprehendunt. Quaeris Quomodo? Si san∣ctus es, comprehendisti, & nosti. Si non es, esto; & tuo experimento scies. Then explaining the Longitude, Latitude, altitude, and profundity of this Divine love; of the severall degrees of Contemplation (saith he) Prima & maxima contemplatio est admiratio Majestatis (Dei▪) Haec requirit cor purgatum; vt a vitijs liberum, neque neratum penatis, facile ad superna levet, inter∣dum quoque, vel per aliquas moulas, stupore & extasi suspensum teneat, admirantem.Cant. 2.3. So in his 49. Sermon in Cantic. on that text, Intro∣duxit me Rex in cellam vinariam— Sed & Tu quoque (saith he) si collecto tuo Spiritu, mente sobria & vacuâ curis, orationis domum solus in∣troeas, &c. confido in Deo, qui dixit Petite & accipietis, quia perseveraveris pulsans, non exibis vacuus. Verùm, cum te nobis reddideris plenum gratia & charitate, nec poteris, Spiritu fervens, dissimulare munus acceptum &c. poteris & ipse veraciter protestari: Introduxit me Rex in cellam vinariam— nec omne donum, quamvis Spirituale, prodire dixerim de cella vinaria— Sed si quis oran∣do obtineat mente excedere in id Divini arcani; vnde mox redeat divino amore vehementissime flagrans, & estuans justitiae Zelo. nec non & in cunctis spiritualibus studijs & offictis pernimium fervens, ita vt possit dicere: concaluit cor meum intra me, & in meditationibus meis exardescit ignis— Is plane in cellam non in rito perhibebitur
vinariam introisse. Cum enim duo sint beatae con∣templationis excessus: in intellectu unus, & alter in assectu, unus in lumine, alter in fervore— pius sane assectus, & pectus amore calens & sancta devotionis infusio, etiam & vehementi Spiritus repletus Zelo, non plane alivnd quam e cellae vinaa reportatur. §. XXXVI.The same Father elswhere In Cant. Serm. 23. Cant. 1.4. in discoursing of Contemplation vpon the words Introduxit me Rex in cellaria sua speaks thus of himself after his Apology Iacttiae deputandum non esse quod in illorum pandebat profectus.— Est locus (saith he) vbi vere quiescens & quietus cernitur Deus;Serm. 67. locus sponsi; & qui mihi quidem (nam de aliis nesco) plane cubiculum sit, si quando in illum contigerit introduci: sed heu, rara hora, & paruae mora.— (and elswhere, Fortasse me hora quidem sed horae dimidium)▪ Dixi Beatos quorum remis∣sae sunt iniquitates. & quorum tecta sunt peccata, cum subitò tanta mihi quoque de me suborta fi∣ducia & infusa laetitia est, quantus certe — in lo∣co secundae visionis non processerat timor, ita vt mihi visus sum vnus ex illis beatus ee. O si du∣rasset! iterum, iterumque visita me Domine in salutari tuo &c. In hoc arcanum & in hoc San∣ctuarium Dei. Si quem forte vestrum aliqua hora sic rapi contigerit, vt minime avocet aut perturbet vel sensus egens, vel cura pungens, vel culpae mordens, vel ea certe, quae difficilius amoventur, irruentia imaginum corporearum phantasmata, poterit qui dein hic, cum ad nos redierit, gloriar & dicere. Introduxit me Rex in cubiculum suum.§. XXXVII. Again Serm. 74. reating of the vicissitudes of the
coming and departing of the Spouse on those words Cant. 2▪— Revertere dilecte mi, similis esto capreis &c. he modestly declares his own experience in these matters; and how in such heavenly visitations he was affected, after he had thus in his former Sermon Serm. 73. engaged his promise concerning it— Ego, quicquid illud est quod in me de hujusmodi experiri donatum est, co∣ram eloqui non verebor. Nam etsi vile forsitan, cum fuerit auditum, & despicabile videatur, non mea refert; quia qui spiritualis est non me despi∣cter, qui minùs, non me intelliget. Attamen si in alium istud Sermonem servavero, forte non deerunt, qui edificentur in ijs, quae exoraetus in∣terim, Dominus inspirabit, Sponsus Ecclesiae, Iesus Christus: In Srm. 74. then, he proceeds thus. Audite me tamen hominem, qui loqui trepidat, & tacere non potest. which it seems by the words following he spoke not without Tears— Nunc sustinete modicum quid insipientiae meae. Volo dice e (nam & hoc pactus sum) quomodo me∣cuin agitur in ejusmodi. Non expedit quidem, sed prodat sane, vt prosim.— Fateor & mihi adven∣tasse verbum▪ in insipientiâ dico, & pluries. Cum∣que saepius intraverit ad me, non sensi aliquoties cum intravit. Adesse sensi, affuisse recorder, in∣terdum & praesentire potui introitum ejus sentire nunquam; sed, ne exitum quidem. Nam vnde in animam meam venerit, quove abierit denuo eam dimittens: sed & quà vel introterit, vel exterit, etiam nunc ignorare me fateor: secundum illud▪ nescis,Joan. 3.8. vnde veniat aut quo vadat.— Quaeris igi∣tur, cum ita sin omnino investigabiles viae ejus, vnde adesse norim? (then going on he declares
the admirable effects of these visits.) Viuum & efficax est, moxque vt intùs venit, expergefe∣cit dormitantem animam meam; movit & mol∣livit; vulneravit cor meum.— Cepit quoque evel∣lere, & destruere, edificare & plantare, rigare arida, tenebrosa illuminare &c. ita vt benedice∣ret anima mea Domino, & omnia quae intra me sunt, nomini sancto ejus; Ita igitur intrans ad me aliquoties verbum Sponsus, nullis vnquam introi∣tum suum indicijs innotescere fecit, non voce, non specie, non incessu. Nullis denique suis motibus compertum est mihi, nullis meis sensibus illapsum penetralibus meis: tantum ex motu cordis, sicut prefatus sum, intellixi presentiam ejus, &c.— Haec omnia, ubi abscesserit verbum, perinde ac si illae bullienti substraxerit ignem, quodam illico languore torpentia & frigida jacere incipiunt: at∣que hoc mihi signum abscessionis ejus; tristis si necesse est anima mea donec iterum revertatur, so∣lito recallescat cor meum intra me, idque sit re∣versionis indicium. Tale sane experimentum de Verbo habens, quid mirum si & ego vsurpo vocem Sponsae, in revocando illud, cum se absentaverit.— Et hoc oro, vt non vacuum veniat; sed plenum gratiae & veritatis, more utique suo, sicut heri & nudius tertius. See the effects of this visit of the Spouse described much what in the same manner Serm. 69.— Si sensero aperiri mihi sensum vt intelligam Scripturas, aut sermonem sapientiae quasi ebullire ex intimis, aut infuso lumine desu∣per revelari mysteria, aut certe expandi mihi qua∣si quoddam largissimum caeli gremium, & vbe∣riores de sursum influere anim meditationum im∣bres,
non ambigo Sponsum adesse. Again; see such signe of his coming Serm. 31.— Ignis an∣te ipsum praecedet. Psal. 96.3.— Oportet namque ut Sancti Desiderii ardor praeveniat faciem ejus ad omnem animam, ad quam est ipse venturus.— Et tunc scit anima, quoniam juxta est Dominus, cum se senserit illo igne succensam, & dixerit cum Propheta; De excelso misit ignem in ossibus meis & erudivit me. Et illud, Concaluit cor meum intra me, & in meditatione mea exardes∣cit ignis. And see the attendance that ought to be given to it Serm. 17.— Quando veniat, vel quando vadat, id plane periculosissime ignora∣tur. Cum enim hae Sancti Spiritus circa nos dis∣pensatoriae quidem vicissitudines vigilantissime non observantur, fit, vt nec absentem desideres, nec presentem glorifices.— Vigilandum proinde, & vigilandum omni hora, quia nescimus qua hora Spiritus venturus sit, seu iterum abiturus: It, & redit Spiritus.— Et has alternare vices non cessat in his qui Spirituales sunt, vel quos potius spiri∣tuales proinde ipse creare intendit, visitans dili∣culo, & subito probans. And indeed it may be observed of the Apostles themselves, that they had extraordinary accesses, and excita∣tions of the Holy Ghost at certain times mo∣re, then at others: (As likewise the Prophets before them were also extraordinarily moved by the Spirit only at certain times;) As ap∣pears Act. 4.8. and 31. (much what like that Act. 2.2. the place shaken with the same Spi∣rit.) 7.55.— 13.9.— 17.16.— 18.5.25.— Lu. 1.41.67.— 2.27. See this Grace also copiously descri∣bed
in Scala Claustrali; And de vita solitaria ad Frares de Monte Dei, by S. Bernard, or who ever was the Author of them In Scala c. 4.5. His incantationibus (saith he) anima advocat sponsum; Dominus autem medium orationis cur∣sum interrumpens festinus ingerit se, & animae desideranti festinus occurrit, celestis rore dulcedi∣nis circumfusus, &c. Et sicut in quibusdam car∣nalibus officiis anima adeo vincitur carnaeli concu∣piscentia quod omnem vsum rationis amittit, & fit homo quasi totus carnalis; ita meritò in hat su∣perna contemplatione ita consumuntur & absor∣bentur carnales motus ab anima, vt in nullo caro Spiritui contradicat, & fiat homo quasi totus spi∣ritualis.— Then speaking of the Sighs, and Tears, dulciores super mel & favum, which in the great alterations, dilatings, and impulses of the Heart plentifully flow in such superna∣turall visits and the difficulty to express how in these the Soul is affected.- Sed quid (saith he) hujusmodi secreta colloquia proferimus in publicum? Cur ineffabiles & inerrabiles affe∣ctus verbis communibus conamur exprimere? in∣experti talia non intelligunt, nisi ea expressius le∣gant in libro experientiae, quos ipsa docet vnctio. And then again, laments the shortnes of their stay.— Quomodo remanet anima Spiritus sancti fer∣vore discedente.- Bonum erat nobis hic esse.- Sed jam dicit sponsus, dimitte me &c. Venit (O spon∣sa) ad consolationem; recedit ad cautelam, ne ma∣gnitudo consolationis extollat te.— Hanc autem gratiam cui vult, & quando vult sponsus tribuit. As he saith elswherec. 18. O quam jucundum senti∣tur, si non esset tam modicum, Raptum.
Again of the same things in his Tract.§. XXXVIII De Vita Solitaria ad Fratres de Monte Deip. 1045. he speaks in this manner— Dilecto Dei aliquando vicis∣sim lumen quoddam vultus Dei ostenditur sicut lumen, clausum in manibus paet, & latet, ad arbitrium tenentis: vt per hoc quod quasi in trans∣cursu, vel in puncto permittitur videré, inardes∣cat animus ad plenam possessionem luminis aeterni, & hereditatem plenae visionis Dei: cui vt innotes∣cat aliqua tenus id, quod ei deest, nonnunquam quasi pertrāsiens gratia perstringit sensum amantis & eripit ipsum sibi, & rapit in diem, qui est; a tumultu rerum ad gaudia silentia: & pro modulo suo ad momentum, ad punctum, id ipsum osten∣dens ei videndum sicuti est, interim etiam & ip∣sum efficit in idipsum, vt sit suo modo sicut illud est (Here we find the Mysticall language.) Vbi cum didicerit, quid intersit inter mundum & immundum, redditur sibi, & remittitur ad mundandum cor, ad visionem &c.— And before Col. 1043 —Intellectus verò cogitantis efficitur contem¦platio amantis; &, formans illud in quasdam spi∣ritualis vel divinae Suavitatis experientias, affi∣cit ex eis aciem cogitantis, illud verò efficitur gau∣dium fruentis, & tunc de Deo bene cogitatur se∣cundum humanum modum; si tamen cogitatio dicenda est, vbi nil cogat, nec cogitur, sed tantum modo in memoriam abundantiae suavitatis Dei exultatur, jubilatur &c.— Sed modus hic cogi∣tandi de Deo non est in arbitrio cogitantis, sed in gratia donantis; scilicet, cum Spiritus Sanctus, qui ubi violt spirat, quando vult & quomodo vult, & quibus vult, in hoc aspirat. Sed hominis est jugiter praeparare cor, voluntatem expediendo ab
affectionibus alienis. Thus that Holy Man high∣ly experienced in Spirituall matters. §. XXXIXMean while, as to our selves, and our highest endeavours, and ambitions in Prayer, I may say with Sancta Sophia Tract. 3. §. 4. c. 6. §. 3.- All our perfe∣ction consists in a state of love, and an entire con∣formity to the Divine Will. There are therfore in a Spirituall life no strange novelties, or Wonders pretended to (on our side▪) Divine love is all. As for the manner of exercising this in those nearer approaches that are made to this fountain of Beauty and light in Passive vnions, (that is, where God in vs seems the chief or only Agent.) We must (as it goes on there) content ourselves to heare those speak of it that have had some experience in it: and, if what they say be incomprehensible to vs, we ought not to wonder at it: For (as it follows §. 6.) the internall actua∣tions in the Souls of the Perfect. (that is, in these supernaturall divine communications) are so inexplicably subtile and pure, that experience it self doth not sufficiently enable them to give an intelligible account of them. These things ther∣fore Sancta Sophia confesseth hard to be vn∣derstood by the experienced, as well as its Ad∣versary. Neither could he justly pitch vpon these, as the chief, or only, Devotion taught in the Church of Rome, whenas it is there taught, that these are not at all in the power of our Devotions; but bestowed when, and to what persons, and for what duration God pleaseth. And, in them, as there is much that proclaims the honour of Gods Church, and of such Saints, So what is there that opposeth
the Reasonablenes of Christian Religion? For, this, I hope, is not Reasonable, that nothing in Religion may be above Reason; and somthings therin, that are less easy to be vnderstood, are therfore to be received with admiration rather, then scorne, If the Church speaks wisdome among the Perfect, may the im∣perfect blame her for this? And may they pre∣sently charge her with madness, as Festus did S. Paul, for speaking things they vnderstood not? If the immense Goodnes of God is plea∣sed to communicate such supernaturall fa∣vours and caresses, and consolations to those who have weaned themselves from all other Creatures for his love, the over joyed Soul cannot but speak of the things she sees of him, and hears from him, and declare his wondrous works, and endeavour also as much as she can to render her neighbours partakers of the same; And, if the Wise men, and Philosophers of this world shall call this Fanaticisme, and Canting, Frenzy, and fits of Melancholy &c. yet the Church will still pro∣claim these Honours done her by his Divine Majesty; and Wisdome will be justified of her Children. THis said in Generall, I address now my self more particularly to this Authors Discourse,§. XL. on this Subject in his 4. cha∣ter, §. 15. and 16 from Page 325. to p. 343. To which I have confined my self, because so much only treats of this Argument. And on
this part I shall only make some short Re∣marks, where it seems necessary; leaving the Reader, (for avoiding tediousness) to apply them to the Doctours words. Reply to page 3.5. This page contains an vnjust charge (as appeares, before §. 26. &c.) without proofs. So mysticall & vnintelligible a way &c. §. XLI.The Churches directions for Prayer are so plain, and intelligible as the practice of them hath advanced infinite Souls even of the wea∣ker and less learned Sexe to very great Perfe∣ction and Sanctity: The obscure expressions, which are culled here out of Catholick Books are in the context joyned with others, that, according to the quality of the matter, suffi∣ciently explain them. And the Reader is here dealt withall, as if in a Dictionary one should cancell or hide the language vnderstood; and then perswade vs, we can make no vse of such an vn-intelligible Book: To know the truth of which I wish any piously disposed Protestant, (vpon occasion of this contest,) would but read some of the Churches books of Devotion. I doubt not such would be so far from complaining of their obscurity, as to be rather much excited to practise their ex∣cellent lessons. §. XLII.Leaving the Scriptures &c. The Holy Scriptures do warrant▪ and secure the Chur∣ches common Doctrines and Rules of Devo∣tion; Neither can any of these be shewed dis∣sonant from, or contrary to them: provided, both be rightly vnderstood. Only I hope the
Church may be excused, for not shewing all the words perhaps she vseth in her writings of Devotion to be in Scripture; as well as the Nicene Fathers, for not shewing  there. Reply to page. 326. That bitter enemy of theirs called Reason &c. This Author is a great Common Reason Man;§. XLIII. and often appeals, and summons vs to the Barr of Reason; and would perswade, that the Religion of Catholicks is no Reasonable Religion. But it is noted (which is some pre∣judice to him and his party) that all Hereticks have always done the like. Nay it is also Clear, that they cannot do otherwise. For, since a cause must be defended either by Au∣thority or Reason, (for who will at once affront both these?) whilst these men do op∣pose the one, they are driven to pretend the other. To clear this matter, I suppose by Reason is not meant here meerly arguing, or reasoning: for this is, and must be▪ vsed equally on all sides, on all Subjects, either when wee dispute for, or against Reason. Here then must be mean't, the Naturall Prin∣ciples of Reason that Catholicks are enemies to. And, contrarily, Catholicks affirm, that neither they, nor their Religion maintains (though indeed many things above, yet) any thing contrary to, true Reason; or any true Principle thereof. For, omne verum omni vero consonat? But notwithstanding first they con∣tend, that many things in Religion may seem contrary to the best Arguments which we
have from seeming Reason, or from the see∣ming Principles thereof; and so, that seeming Reason (for, true, all things considered, never can do so) dictates one thing to vs, and Reli∣gion, or Divine Revelation, another: and, that here all seeming contrary Reason, I add, or also sense whatever, is to yield to an vn∣doubted Revelation: and the certainty of Such Revelation, only, is abundantly sufficient to proue the contrary to be no true Principle of Reason, nor true information of Sense. And nothing is more Reasonable then this; be∣cause Gods Revelation carries also the Divine Reason (if I may so say) or knowledge along with it; which is above man's. 2. Ca∣tholicks affirm, that, as many things in Re∣ligion are contrary to seeming Reason; so many go above or beyond the latitude, or capacity of Reason. In which though our Reason apprehends that these things are so, they are proposed to it; and apprehended also some Motives, why, in prudence, it may be∣lieve them to be so; yet from its own Princi∣ples it cannot comprehend, why, or how, they are so: Nor can discover any such things by its own light. Animalis homo non percipit, quae sunt Spiritus Dei; stultitia enim illi, & non potest intelligere, quia Spiritualiter examinan∣tur. 1. Cor. 2.1.—1.26.- or. 5, 7.10 6.- Non multi sapientes &c.— Per fidem am∣bulamus, & non per speciem;— In Captivitatem redigentes intellectum, in obsequium Christi. And S. Austin's- Christianus sum; Credo, quod nes∣cio, De Tri∣nitate. Serm. 1. are passages here worthy this Authors better consideration.
More liable to fall into the dotages &c.sec;. LXIV▪ Persons of a temper naturally more disposed to Reli∣gion are also, in a speciall manner disposed to Fear, Humility, and Obedience, and such as they are most inclined to, so if remaining in the Catholick Church, they are sufficiently secured in, following the conduct of their Spiritual Guides, from all miscarriages in Religion; from Superstion, Enthusiasme, &c. Mean while, to tell men that the devoutly inclined are apt to fall into Super∣stition, or Enthusiasme, what is it, but to deterre them from Devotion;1. Thess .19. and to quench the Spirit? Is in the vse of the greatest Reason &c. The conduct of Gods Spirit, is another thing then the vse of naturall Reason and Prudence. It consists well with it indeed; but not in it. And many times also our seemingly greatest Reason and Prudence guide vs in a way quite contrary to the Spirit. Therfore said the A∣postle- Fides nostra non est in sapientiâ hominum▪ sed in virtute.1. Cor. 2 9. 1. Cor. .5 (or if you will Spiritu) Dei And- Quod stultum est Dei sapientius est homini∣bus. The design of that Church, &c. Sectas non metuunt introducere,§. XLV. blasphemantes. I feare a severe account,2. Pet. 2  (without a Retraction of this) will one day be required for making here the Church Catholick, for so many ages before Luther, not only to have practised erro∣neously, but to have designed so wickedly, as to conspire against the true practise of Christia∣nity, as a thing found contrary to her interest▪
Of which Church those, who lived then said in their creed.-Credo vnam, Sanctam, Catholi∣cam, Ecclesiam. Reply to page 327. Keeping the Bible out of the hands, &c. The Holy Scriptures are not kept out of the hands of any such persons of what condition soever,To. p. 327. as their Spiritual Superiours and Confessors, who are acquainted with their Consciences, do conceive, may receive more benefit, then hurt by reading them. But these, mean while, (as sad experience shews,) are better with∣held from all such, who seem self-wise, dis∣obedient, not well-contented and resigned, in all matters difficult, and controverted there, to submit to the Churche's judg∣ment. Tedious and ceremonious way of externall De∣votion,§. XLVI. &c. Here wee hear, on the one side, that the Churches long and ceremonious external Devotions are as dull, and cold, as the earth it self: on the other, that her Mentall Prayer, Abstraction, Introversion &c. ends either in Enthusiasme,Luk. 7.31. or Madness.— Cantavit allis, & non saltant; lamentavit & non plorant; Be∣cause they are like froward children, out of love with Devotion; and never to be plea∣sed. By this tedious and ceremonious way of external Devotion as dull and cold as the earth it self, I conceive, is either meant the Chur∣ches Liturgy; for which we know, since the great complaints of it in Cromwels time, that there are many among Protestants that are no hearty Friends, and which the Re∣formation
indeed, to her great loss, hath much abridged; or he means the Formes of vocal Prayer that are often iterated, so to con∣tinue the Devotions of such persons, as can∣not read: Both of these most Prudently, and piously ordered. And, what humble person, would not extoll and reverence the Iudgment and Authority of the Church of so many Ages? They commend Abstractednes of life; mentall Prayer;§. XLVII. Passive vnion &c. Terms of Art, invented for expressing somthing compen∣diously and in one word, which before was expressed by Circumlocutions, and in many, & freely indulged in all other Arts and Sciences, I see no Reason, why they may not also be current in Mysticall Theology, or in this Divine Art of Prayer. To collect here together (that I may not in every page be troubled with them) all the hard or vnintelligible Termes here Complained of in the Roman Devotion, and which are said p. 372. must, either end in Enthusiasme, or Madness; and again▪ p. 335. that they must be left to be vnderstood by mad men, and practised, by fools) they are either Termes describing the Divine Favours recei∣ved in Prayer; or describing the exercise it self of Prayer, and Devotion. Of the first kind are these. Passive Vnions; Divine inactions; a Super essentiall Life of the Soul; Deiformity; Dei∣fication; the Fund, or Depth; the Apex, or Su∣preme point, of the Soul, or Spirit; Aspirations, and Elevations of the Superior Will; the Nothing∣ness of the Creature; God himself, nothing that,
or no such thing as, any Creature is; Divine in∣spirations, new Revelations. Of the latter these: Mental Prayer, Abstra∣ction of life; a state of introversion; Self Anni∣hilation; vnknowing our selves, vnknowing God; Removing Images of God, Images of the Creatures; an Active and a contemplative state of Prayer. These are the vnintelligible words that I could find in these pages; perhaps, if I have missed some, I may meet with them in passing along. Now it is strange, that this Author, who in the Book where he found these words must find also the explications of them, would not give the Reader, the one with the other. I shall run over them in the order they lye, and supply this defect of his; but very briefly, to any Ingenuous Reader, for most of them, it seems labour lost. §. XLVIII.Passive Vnions are sufficiently explai∣ned before §. 30.31. called Passive, See San∣cta Sophia 3. Treat. p. 243.266. not that, when herein a Soul contemplates God, she may not be said in some sort Active; but, Be∣cause, when God is pleased so graciously to commu∣nicate himself to the Soul, the Soul is taken out of her own disposall, and doth and must see and think only what God will have her, and this no longer then his good pleasure is such. Neither can any dis∣positions or preparations that the Soul can vse, as∣suredly procure it. Thus Sancta Sophia explains this word; And the Expression is secured by such like Scripture language— Qui Spiritu Dei aguntur— Not I live,Rom. 8.14 Gal. 2.20. Cor. 15.10. Matt. 10.20. but Christ in me,— Not I work, but the Grace of God which is with me,— Not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father,
that speaketh in you.Rom. 8.26 So the Spirit, that is in vs, said to intercede for vs with groanes vnutterable. So the Naturall actions of S. Pauls Soul seem wholy suspended, when it knew not so much, as whether it was in, or out of the Body. Hiero∣theus (saith S. Dionysius Areopag. De Di∣vin. nom∣m. c. 2.) was not only  but . All the Diuine in∣fluences admit degrees: and the Soul is said to be more Passive as the Holy Spirit is more operative: and so, in it's strongest and most extraordinary workings, the Soul is hindred at least from reflecting on it's own action, & seems to it self not to act at all: as in a great intention of the Mind, the actions of our senses, what we then see or hear, are not at all observed. Divine Inaction is, in plain En∣glish, the acting of God, or his Spirit in vs, which, in the perfect is more extraordinary, sensible, and manifest. A Superessentiall life of the Soul; Superes∣sentiall is a composit (as also many other words with  added to them) vsed much by Dionysius Areopag: or the Ancient Au∣thor of those works; signifying no more then Superlative; a life of the Soul much advan∣ced by Gods Spirit above it's naturall opera∣tions and apprehensions. Deiformity and Deification are words not of late only but Anciently vsed; signifying an vnion with God not in Essence, but by Grace; and this vnion still more intimate, as the Grace more ex∣traordinary: secured by like Scripture lan∣guage. For Deiforme— Renewed to the Image of our Creator- Changed into the Image of our Lord—
Transformed by the renewing of our Mind.Col. 3.10.—2. Cor 3.18. Rom. 12.2. Heb. 6.4.5. - 2. Pet. 1.4. - 1. Cor. 6.17. Eph. 3.19. For Deification, Partakers of the Divine Nature and of the Powers of the future World.— The Lord and we made one Spirit— Filled with all the fulness of God &c. And, if any of these may be com∣municated to the lowest ranke of Gods Saints, the less may the Mysticks be blamed for ap∣plying them to the highest, and most perfect. The reason of the Mysticks vsing sometimes the expression of the Depth, Fund (that is in plain English, the Bottom;) or Apex; the Su∣preme Point (or top,) of the Soul, or Spirit, (that is the innermost; or the highest, part of the Soul,) is mentioned before, §. 30. viz. a dou∣ble motion, observed by the experienced, in the Soul, in Gods communicating his more special Presence, and more extraordinary Graces to it, (as it is in Extasies, and Rapts, or inferiour Transports somwhat partaking thereof;) either one Inward, or one Vpward. We find in Scripture Ps. 64.7.—67.28. Eph. 3.18. Cor altum — and Exces∣sus mentis— and Heights, and Depths, of Love, answering those▪ and this Author may find in the Common Prayer Book: A sinner re∣penting from the bottom of his heart; and that is, of his Soul: and what more vsuall, then to say; a Man in passion (and this Holy Love is such) is transported above, beyond beside, himself? yet some Mystick's there are, who vse Fund, to express the lower and affective part of the Soul, and Apex Spiritus, to express the Superior, and Intellective. However the impropriety of a term may be excused, where the explication of it prevents mistakes.
Superior Intellect and Will are School-terms called so from the Supernaturalness, and su∣blimity of the object, to which some actions of these Faculties are directed. Nothingness of the Creature is an expression of it's extreme litlenes compared with God;§. XLIX. And, if he be all in all; and I am, be a name that none but himself can claim; this will carry it, that, in some sense they are nothing & that they are not; It is no hard matter, to shew the Apostle saying, that Man is nothing. If a man think himself somthing, when he is nothing. Gal. 6.3.- The planter and the waterer both nothing 1. Cor. 3.7. And, Things that are not- 1. Cor. 1.18. But the Mystick's nothing chiefly is; when we think them as nothing; & so, think no∣thing of them; as the greater Saints still do less. Again there is a nothingness that may be affirmed of God also, in respect of his being no∣thing that the Creature, or any thing that we know, is; and whose Being, as yet, is better apprehended by vs negatively, and by what he is not, removing all the natures and imper∣fections of Creatures from him; then positi∣vely, and by affirming what he is, of whom, nothing that man doth, or can, apprehend▪ hath the least Similitude. S. Dionysius is much in this; and so since him the Mysticks. And the summ is. 1. to instruct vs; That, for ob∣taining such an vnion with God, in a more special presence thereof to devout Souls in Prayer, we need not frame to our selves any curious Ideas of him who is incomprehensible; and that the less we labour with the Intellect
to do this, the better; and the less hindrance to Devotion; but rather we are to contem∣plate him by Faith, as the most beatifying object of our Love, and containing in him all Perfection; and to be contented with such a generall confused, obscure notion of him, as this life affoords. 2. and also to signify, that the nearer any one, in such high con∣templation, is admitted to a fuller sight of his Perfections and Beauty, the more still they are dazled, and darkned, with his light; and are less able to express, what they see: The more also a Creature becoms vile vnto them: and as his greatness more appears to any one, the more their Smalness or Nothingness: As at the farther distance, we are removed from any thing, the less still it shews to vs, & at last quite vanisheth. §. L.Divine Inspirations; or Illuminations and Infusions of the Holy Spirit, enlightening the vnderstanding with a right apprehension and judgment of things, and inspiring into the will holy desires, and such as are accep∣table to God, and conformable vnto his will, surely this Author will not deny. These are frequently petitioned for in the publick Prayers of the Church, Catholick, and Pro∣testant; I dare not spend long time in proving them, least I should incurr the censure below p. 338. Only I wonder how they came to be put here amongst non-intelligibles. Must nothing be ackowledged, and allowed, that Fanaticks pretend to? For new Reve∣lations see what hath bin said before §. 4. and
let the Scriptures be considered, that are cited §. 24.- If any thing be revealed to another, let the first hold his peace. And Every one of you hath a Revelation:1. Cor. 1.30. and . Eph. 1.17. &c. c. 3.16. &c. And the Apostle's praying for the Ephesians- That God would give vnto them the Spirit of wisdome and Revelation, for opening the eyes of their vnderstanding, and to comprehend the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of Christ &c.— To which Scriptures may be added the place of Saint Austin, when going to write of the Trinity, De Tri∣nit. c. . — Si quid autem aliter sapio; id quoque mihi ipsa revelabit, sive per occultas inspirationes, atque admonitiones, sive per manifesta eloquia sua, &c.— And so, Confess. lib. 11. c. 22. About the measuring of time— Exarsit (saith he) animus meus nosse istud implicatissi∣mum enigma. Noli claudere Domine Deus, noli claudere desiderio meo ista. If it be asked, what are, or may be, the Subjects of such new Re∣velations? I answer. All matters concerning either an Orthodox Faith, or an holy life; All the Precepts, and Counsells of Perfe∣ction, already delivered in the Gospell; but these extended and applied, to severall parti∣culars, wherin we cannot otherwise without such new light be so certainly guided, such new illustrations, and influences of the Holy Spirit often producing in vs a firmer assent, and a greater affection to them; Shewing Di∣vine Mysteries more clearly and profoundly; Pressing Christian Duties more efficaciously; Instructing vs in particular cases and circum∣stances, and with considering our present
disposition, or condition; Directing vs, of things indifferent, or also good, proposed, which is to be performed as the more perfect, more acceptable to God, beneficial to vs; Often acquainting and admonishing vs of our infirmities and temptations; Discove∣ring also Secrets; Events, and matters of Fact past, present, future; as they may hap∣pen to concern the benefit of ourselves, or others; lastly new Revelations of former Revelations, as some circumstantial applica∣tion of them is necessary. §. LI.Mentall Prayer, is praying with, or in the mind, with a liberty from set formes; Abstra∣ction of life, is only sequestring ourselves, as much as we can from wordly cares and busi∣nes, especially at the time of our Devotions. Introversion is nothing more then a Recolle∣ction of the mind, from all external objects, and acts, which distract it, into it self, there to spend all it's thoughts, and affections on God & pious Meditations. Convertimini ad cor Accedet homo ad cor altum,Psal. 85.9.▪64.7. Luk. 17.21 is Scripture-lan∣guage; and Regnum Dei intra vos, saith our Lord. And—Ipse nomen contemplationis suscipit, qui cor intùs habet, Saith S. Gregory In Ezech. Hom. 17. A state of introversion, is a strong and well-confirmed habit of it, when we have gotten a power ouer ourselves to do it without difficulty. Self annihilation is self deniall, self mortification; such was the A∣postle's, when he said- I am nothing 2. Cor. 12.11. I wish there were not more, deficient in the practice, than ignorant in the meaning,
of these. Vnknowing ourselves, vnknowing God; Removing the Images of the Creatures, and of God; 1. as much as we can, forgetting our selves, and other Creatures; and defacing the hurtfull phantasme, or Images we have of them in our minds (though I would not be here vnderstood to include amongst them, the Humanity of our ever Blessed Lord, which is the Chief nourishment, and support of all true Devotion) Defacing them, I say, first, and chiefly, as they relate to our Affections; in retaining no inordinate inclinations or adherence to them, or any of them: in neither solicitously seeking, nor willingly admitting when offered, consolations from them; (a sure way, but after some patience, to find consolations much greater in and from God.) Happiest he who ever thus most vnknows both them, and himself; and thus he becomes the better prepared for a more immediate, and intimate vnion, by Love, to his Creator; This our being wholy Mortified to the world and weaned from the Creature (and so from ourselves) as if it were not, is one of the chief Lessons that is taught in the Catholick Schoole of Devotion. And as God manifests to any Souls his Greatnes, so there more ap∣pears to them, the litleness or nothingness of the Creature. 2. Removing them, As they relate to our Meditations; in laying aside, as much as we can these workings of the Braine, after the Soul perceiues herself sufficiently excited by them to Acts of Love: for now, Such Meditations become hindrances, and
distractions to Contemplation, and then, when our Will is fixed on that supremely amiable object, the enioyment of which we seek by them: Which the Affective part of the Soul more quietly possesseth, as our imagination worketh and disturbeth it less; and when the Soul in respect of these Images, is at it were in the darke and sees least of them, I mean such Images, as the act of love, and contem∣plation, or affective meditation (rather in∣fused then acquired) do not necessarily in∣clude. Indeed the greatest disturbance we find in our prayers (and therfore it needs to be no wonder if the Mysticks speak so much of them) is from these Images of wordly things; so lively drawn and imprinted in our Fancy by our much trafficking with them, that the Soul at her devotions is frequently casting her eye aside, vpon them: And the greatest art of a christian is to deface these Images there, as much as he can, that he may keep his mind fixed on somthing much nobler, and better: and the way to obliterate them again is, to sequester ourselves, as much as necessity and duty permits, from negotiating with these wordly affaires, and cares, that ne∣cessarily stay them there. §. LII.Of removing these Images S. Dionysius speaks much: See the much noted place De Mystic, Theolog. c. 1. Tu vero Timothee Cha∣rissime, intentissima contuendis Spectaculis My∣sticis exercitatione, & sensus linguae, & intelle∣ctuales operationes; & sensibilia, & intelligibi∣lia omnia, &c. v illi jungaris, qui super omnem
substantiam omnem quae scientiam est. Libero enim solutoque a Te, & ab omnibus discessu, ad divi∣narum tenebrarum radium super-essentialem con∣tendes. And thus S. GregoryIn Ezech. Hom. 1.- Qui adhuc ex∣teriora immoderatiùs cogitant; quae sint de aeterno lumine rimae contemplationis, ignorant. Neque enim cum corporearum rerum imaginibus illa se infusio incorporea lucis capit: quia dum sola visi∣bilia cogitantur, lumen invisibile ad mentem non admittitur. And elswhere Moral. l. 24. c. 13. Quia per illas ima∣ginationes corporeas infra se lapsa est anima, sine illis supra se ire conatur (id est, in contemplatio∣ne:) & postquam per multa indecenter sparsa est, in vnum se colligere nititur; & si magna vi amo∣ris prevalet, esse vnum atque incorporeum con∣templetur. To the same purpose S. Austin, of contemplation- Si cui sileat tumultus carnis, si∣leant phantasiae terrae, Et ipsa sibi anima sileat, & transeat se, non se cogitando, &c. See before §. 33. And S. Bernard In Cant. Serm. 73. on Revertere dilecte mi: sponsa revocat; oblita totum quod non ille est se quoque ipsam.) The same that is said here of the Images of Creatures may be also of such grosse and vnrefined Images or Imaginations, borrowed from the creature, as are had of God; which the experienced find very different from, and diminutiue of, those discoveries and partici∣pations of him, to which he is pleased som∣times to admit them. An Active and a Contemplative state of Prayer is nothing else but the way of Meditation, the state of Beginners, and of Contemplation, the state of greater Pro∣ficients: the one more vsing the vnderstan∣ding,
other more the will and Affections: The one, the way to the other. §. LIII.And lastly, what comes all this Arabick and canting (as some Discouragers of Devo∣tion would make vs believe it) I say what comes it to? but that which is given account of before §. 26. &c. That by much purity of Conscience, and Solitude, so much as business permits, and frequent Mentall Prayer, and Abstracting of ourselves from earthly things, and by retiring into ourselves (where, & not abroad, is that Regnum Dei) from things without vs, by self mortification, vnknowing, and forgetting our selves, and all other crea∣tures, and their delights, we may attain, to a perfecter love of God, and a greater frui∣tion of him in this world to be united to, & made like, him; and to have his Image, de∣faced by the Fall to a very eminent degree, renewed in vs; and to become one Spirit with him; and hence also enabled to performe all Christian vertues that our state of life calls vs to, in a much more amorous, and Heroi∣call way. Thus as this Author leaves such terms and way of Devotion to be vnderstood by madmen, and practised by Fooles, so I hope I have shewed them easy to be vnderstood by the Sober, and necessary to be practised by the Devout. And so I proceed to attend the re∣mainder of his discourse with my Remarks.§. LIV. Came first into request in the Monastick Orders &c. Poverty or freedome from wordly wealth and cares; Celibacy, Solitude, obedience, si∣lence, which are the vows and Practises of a
Monastick life (much frequented in the Church ever since Constantines times, and the first secular liberty of Christianity.) are excel∣lent dispositions and preparations for Prayer and Contemplation, and our ascending to the highest degree of a Spirituall life. The men who solemnly divulged it,§. LV. were Rusbrochius &c. Both the Fathers See §. 33. &c. and Schoolmen were frequent on this Subiect of perfect Contemplation, before Rusbrochius. And among others these: S. Dionysius Areo∣page, Cassian, S. Gregory, S. Bernard, Hugo, and Richardus de Sancto Victore, S. Thomas, S. Bonaventure, &c. Some of them also wri∣ting Tracts vnder the name of Mysticall Theo∣logy, So that the writers on this subject are both more numerous, and more ancient, then he would make the world believe. Rusbro∣chius and Suso were persons eminent in San∣ctity, and Spiritual life, and writ their own Experiences. Ludovicus Blosius's works are deservedly much commended; and were highly esteemed, and much read by the pious Emperour Charles the Fifth; (though their Au∣thor modestly refused his preferments.) On whom also they seem in part to have wrought this good effect, that, laying down his Em∣pire, and Honours, he ended his dayes in Re∣tirement and Devotion. Reply to p. 328. Who after his many turnings &c.To. p. 328. §. LVI. There being so many Sects, and but one Church Ca∣tholick, makes a change of Religion in many persons a thing not to be reproached, but
highly commended. And what Illaudable Con∣stancy in Religion were this, that one born, must therefore dye, among Sectaryes? M. Cressy, educated in a Religion, and a Church that challenges no infallible Guidance of Souls and (as this writer saith) permits also, to all, liberty of opinion, made use of his pri∣viledge to change the one, and the other, as he thought fit: (as many others daily do, some running one way, some another:) till, after that Gods mercy had discovered to him the Canonical Church-Authority, which God hath established for ever for the Guidance of his Church, He, by an humble resignation of his judgment wholly into it's sacred con∣duct, became fixt, and at rest. Nor doth he take it for any dishonour to him to be listed together with S. Benedict, S. Francis &c. in the Roll of this Authors Fanaticks. Reply to p. 329. To. p. 329. §. LVII.That concerns others (though it be their Sal∣uation,) &c. This writer seemes no very charitable Glosser. After the words (a seque∣stration from all business that concerns others) in stead of, (though it be their Saluation:) he should have interposed (that is, such busines as is in things indifferent: and to which, by obedience or charity, they are no way obliged) for so M. Cressy and Sancta Sophia, often declare their mea∣ning, in this very Section, and frequently elswhere. What this pure Fund of the Spirit means, &c. For the hard terms which this Author picks vp here, and there in Sancta Sophia, and M.
Cressy, and others, stript of from the context that would make them more intelligible and current, I referr to the former explications. Blosius, by his Deiforme, Fund, which so few know by experience, means nothing else but the Image or Presence of God more perfectly im∣printed in the intimat essence of the Soul, (what if I had said, in the very center, or Bottome, of it?) by the extraordinary Graces of his Holy Spirit, which he calls there Regnum Dei intra nos; and he goes on thus in a sublime Description of it▪ Instit. Spiritua∣lis. c. 12. Ibi anima, quicquid est hu∣manum exuens, & quod est divinum induens, transformatur mutaturque in eum, sicut ferrum in igne positum formam ignis accipit, & trans∣mutatur in ignem. Manet tamen essentia animae sic Deificatae, quemadmodum ferrum ignitum non desinit esse ferrum. Igitur ipsa anima, que prius erat frigida, jam ardet; quae prius erat tenebrosa, jam lucet; quae prius erat dura, jam mollis est. But these mirabilia super nos are not to be found in the Rules of the Churches Devo∣tions but in the gracious Effects thereof. A way of knowing without thoughts &c.§. LVIII. These seeming contradictions which may be parellell'd with the like in Holy Scripture, and severall of them are borrowed from S. Dionysius, seem not vncapable of a good sense (though I do not find them thus put together in Blosius; and this Author is very good at making Anagrams of such discourses by displacing the parts of them as best fits his purpose.) For in such supernaturall commu∣nications, The Soul knows, or contemplates
without any thoughts, discursive; Sees in dark∣ness; or in the obscurity of Faith, not clearly. The Apostle expresseth it 1. Cor. 12.12. Vide∣mus per speculum, in aenigmate, and saith Heb. 11.1.- that Faith is an Evidence of things not seen. Vnderstands without Reason, that is, rea∣soning; Vnknows God, as to the notions had of him formerly, by her perceiving him now another thing; Is melted and brought to nothing; first mortified as to self love, interest &c. The Apostle was so, when he said, I am nothing, and the old man perisheth. 2. Cor. 12.11. 2. Cor. 4.16. And then lost, and Swallowed vp in God; He all in all 1. Cor. 15.28. and our life hid in him Col. 3.3. or It, his life, rather then ours, Gal 2.20. By which means all created being is put of, and that which is only Divine put on. Or, if you will, in the Apostl'es phrase, the old man and all his lusts and affe∣ctions to the Creature put of, and the new put on: And the Soul is changed into God; the word in Blosius is Deificata, a word anciently in vse; that is in Scripture, changed into his Image, or, filled with his fulness, or, made one Spirit with him: As Iron heated into the nature of fire. But cetera desunt; what follows is cut of; not serving this Authors turn: It fol∣lows in Blosius, after mutatur in ignem (which is here translated, into the nature of fire) as if he knew not into whose hands he might fall: manet tamen Essentia animae sic Deificatae, quemadmodum ferrum ignitum non desinit esse ferrum &c. as I have set down before? He only declaring it to be a change of Quality. Reply to page 330.
Consider the Directions in order to it,To. p. 330. §. LIX. &c. The summe of that, which is cited here out of Sancta Sophia's directions, for our attai∣ning such Vnion with God, is this. That there is a seeking of Such Vnion with God &c. either more with the acts of Meditation performed by the Vnderstanding; which is called an Active state of Prayer; or more by exercising the Acts of Love by the Will, It being only assisted and furnished with some common notions of the intellect, Of a gene∣rall knowledge of God his being the most perfect amiable and beatifying obiect, the most worthy of all praise, honour, adoration, love &c. Without the trouble of those many phantasmes, and images borrowed from the Creatures abroad, which the Intellect must make vse of in its subtile discourses, and which many times steal its thoughts away from the Meditation designed. Of these Acts of Love you may see great variety for patterns set down at the end of Sancta Sophia p. 26. &c. (Not that these two Meditations and As∣pirations, or that the Acts of the Intellect, and will are perfectly severed from one another; but only secundum magis & minus; the one vsed much more, then the other.) And this latter, is called a Contemplative state of Prayer. And the latter of these, the Contemplative way, or Affective Prayer, so much as it can be pro∣cured, in which the will resolutely pursues to do what it can; (and almost always it can do somthing,) as to adoring, praising, giving thanks, humiliation, resignation &c. upon
some Mystery of our Saluation simply presen∣ted vnto it. I say this affective way of prayer is recommended as the better and more advan∣tageous, 1. As enioying a greater internall Solitude and quiet from these various imagi∣nations, then such acute speculations, or dis∣cursive Prayer do admit. (Of which thus S. Bernard De inte∣riori Do∣mo. c. 70. Ad huius scientiae pleniudinem opus est potiùs intima compunctione, quàm profundâ investigatione; suspirijs▪ quàm argumentatione; lachrimis, quàm sententijs; Oratione quam le∣ctione). As better searching into, and discovering to vs, our defects, by intentions, self love, and other inordinate affections, in doing our duty, which duty our Love to God now more exactly purifies from them. 3 As more simple and plain, and less liable to, illusions, curious speculations, not vn often running into errours, and mistakes, and oc∣casioning also pride and self conceit. 4. As the practice of it is more easy to all sorts of People. Of this Affective way of Devotion thus speaks one much experienced in Spirituall matters Barbasō Amor, Di∣vin. oc∣cult. Se∣mitae part. 1. c. 16. Si scire cupias, quid tibi faciendum, vt tam prestans bonum [fruitionem divini amoris) consequaris, tribus verbis tibi declarabo. Exercita teipsum seriò & sedulò in Desiderio Divini amo∣ris per ferventissimas aspirationes▪ & alios actus voluntatis, assumens tibi, subjectum primi ac principalis tui Exercitii interioris, hunc ipsum Amorem In id saltem vnice connitendo, vt, ex veritate & toto corde tuo, Deo complaceas, cum∣que spiritum ad eum assidue habeas intentum & elevatum; A quibusque aliis sive affectionibus
sive occupationibus, non necessariis expeditus: A∣nimumque tuum interea accomodans, ad tot di∣versos casus & eventus vitae humanae familia∣res, tam intra cum Deo▪ quàm extra Te, fortiter excipiendos. Ecce tibi totum quod pettisti pauis verbis comprehensum. And eswhere Anatom. de l'Ame. part. 1. c. 16. It is not by force of Speculations that one ascends to God but by good affections; not by sublime Contempla¦tions vpon the Divine perfections but rather by an humble, Simple, and well resigned will, seeking, aspiring, and persevering, assisted with a pure and naked faith or simple consideration of the Divine Majesty, worthy of all love, praise, honour, reve∣rence. But if Gods Grace work not so effectually with a soule, at the first, in this affective way, nor any proficiency be observed therein, then ought the soul to repaire to a more vigorous excitation of it self by meditation and by administring to it self all those motives aed Reasons possible, conducing to the end it aimes at, a greater love of God. Reply to page 331. Men given to sublime speculation are not so capable,To. p. 331. §. LX. &c. From the Precedents an ob∣servation is made as by S Sophia so by many others; and decided, but not disproved, by this Author; That simple people, who are less nimble and subtile in their notions, and women, who are commonly stronger, and more tender in their Passions, by this way, which they can chiefly take, arrive many times to a greater degree of the Love of, and Vnion with, God, then persons of greater learning or witt, because, these are more apt to take the former way of speculation, and to
vse their brain more, then the heart. Abs∣condit saepientibus; Revelat parvulis. And here it seems the Churches purging pills, that is her directions, for Prayer, are not so harsh or ill to be taken, but that this Author saithp. 332. that women also easily swallow them without perceiving any bitternes in them. To. p. 332. §. LXI.Reply to page. 332. A most admirable way of contemplation with the will, &c. The applying of this word Contemplation to such an act of the Will, is be∣cause, this its act is not single, but accom∣panied with a simple intelligence, or appre∣hension, and sight of the Obiect, performed by the Intellect, though, without any, or at least much, discourse thereof: Both which Acts therefore Contemplation includes: though of these two, the action of the will is much more considerable. And hence is the que∣stion in the Schools: An contemplatio possit consistere in solo actu voluntatis? With all Di∣vine influxes into the Soul, both the intellect and will seem affected, though not equally: and the soul sees and tasts such celestiall de∣lights both at once. Neither are the Acts of the vnderstanding in Meditation to be concei∣ved abstractively from all operation of the will accompanying them: nor those of the will in Contemplation, or fruition, abstractively from any operation of the vnderstanding. The common vse, and not an Etymology, gives law to the sense, of words: Else what word almost may not one make sport with? - Vide∣te, quoniam suavis est Dominus: therefore as
well gustate, quoniam pulcher: This said, be∣sides what is explained before, I think I may securely pass on to the next Paragraph. p. 333. without a just charge of having left any Ro∣man Fanaticisme behind me. Reply to page 333.To. p. 333▪ §. LXII. N. 1. The steps he sets down &c. Of the steps, in Order to the highest State of Perfe∣ction, which this life arrives to, (mentioned in Sancta Sophia p. 32.) 1. the first is the way of Externall, and Imaginary Exercises of Prayer; that is, vsing the Discourse of the vnderstan∣ding▪ and Meditations, as also Vocall Prayer; then which step Sancta Sophia observes many goe no further, but end their days in it; that is, In such Meditations is taken vp the most part of their Devotions. 2. The second step is the Exercise of the will and Affections, which, after long practice, breaks forth into continual Aspirations and Elevations thereof. 3. The Third is Divine inaction, or the ex∣traordinary, and supernaturall, and more sensible operations of Gods Spirit in the Soul wherin God acteth more then she, and which are not in her power at all to procure sooner, or retain longer, then God pleaseth: of which much hath bin said before. 4. After which vsually,§. LXII▪ N. 2▪ in the intervals of these celestiall visits, do follow great Desola¦tions of Spirit, as the Experienced have des∣cribed them; partly arising from a sense of her loss, and an impatient longing after these favours, once tasted: and partly, out of a great
nauseating, and disrelish that she hath now of those entertainments of the Creature, from which she formerly received some content. Such we may imagine was that of the Prophet David, when he said- Heu mihi, quia incola∣tus meus prolongatus est, And- Concupiscit & de∣ficit anima mea, in atria Domini,— And after a Non movebor in aeternum (Psal. 29.) an Avertisti faciem tuam, & factus sum conturbatus. §. LXIV. N. 3.But not only this; but God also sometimes withdrawes even from his greatest Saints, & that for some long duration of time, any sen∣sible assistance at all of his Grace, leaving the Soul as it were in its pure naturalls and as if he were quite departed from it, in great Ari∣dity, obscurity, solitude, pressure and heavi∣nes, disgusted with al things she knows not why; performing still her Devotions and ac∣customed duties of Piety and the service of God as formerly, but without any sensible comfort in such performance; Meditation, Aspiration, Reading, very difficult, sterile, insipid, and seeming without fruit; only for∣bearing her consent to any sin, vanity, or sen∣suality, and not seeking any secular consola∣tions. Much discouraged also at such times many are, in imagining, that God hath so deserted them, for failings in their duty, or for something wherein they have offended his Divine Majesty, which doubles this anguish. Or, if not this, at least they imagine it to be caused by some great indisposition of Body (as it is granted sometimes partly it may) so as some begin therfore to dispense for a time
with the former exercises of their Devotion, and other pious employments. But notwith∣standing many times in these, the poor Soul is mistaken; and this strange deiection of Spirit, comes, without any such respects, meerly from the sole will of God, and is the ordinary course of his proceeding with those also, who are by his former Graces well grounded, and arrived to some degree of Per∣fection, and is sent only for their much grea∣ter advancement therin, and the rendring them more capable of higher favours; and therfore ought, as such, to be entertained with all equanimity, patience, resignation, and conformity to his Will. These Consolations, and Desolations, take as it were their certain turnes in them; as they do, in a lesser degree, in all the Regenerate; they have by course a Day, and a Night, an Ascent towards God, and a Descent, and de∣cadence into themselves; a vivification by and in him, and a Mortification in themselves; a Summer, wherin the branches shoot forth, and fruit comes to maturity, and a Winter when the root spreads more, and the Tree be∣comes more surely fixed. To all Gods Chil∣dren do these vicissitudes happen, but these in a higher degree to the further advanced in Perfection; and the greatest Favours are pre∣ceded with greater Desolations: and these or∣dinarily proportioned one to the other. And alwais necessary less or more are such purga∣tions and refinings of the Soul by these inte∣riour Crosses, because alwais somthing in
them is amiss, and as yet imperfect. Our na∣tural corruption is still producing somthing in vs to be amended; and some self will, and self love to be pared away by this sharp reme∣dy, whilst we are in this life. And the benefit of these Desolations, if rightly complied with, as well as of Divine Consolations is very great in many respects. §. LXV. N. 4.For herein it is, that the Soul comes most perfectly to know it self, and all other Crea∣tures; to see its own nothingness; and to be most perfectly purged, and cleansed from all self-love, and propriety: and herein it is most especially taught - non quiesceree in donis Dei, sed in Deo; - and Adorare Deum in Spiritu & Veritate; not, in Devotione: and Exercere se ad Deum in adversis, sicut in prosperis; the seeking gust, and suavity, and consolations even in spiritual things being one of its imperfections since these are not God himself. Herein it is, that the Soul is preserved amidst such Divine Favours, which are apt to inflate it, in a due and necessary Humility (Angelus Satanae cola∣phisans, ne magnitudo Revelationum extollat me. Saith the Apostle after his Rapt.) Herein its true love and adherence to God (Qui veniendo adjuvat; and then, derelinquendo probat: Donis firmat, and then Tribulationibus tentat; Saith S. Gregory Moral. l. 20. c. 19.) its perseverance and loyalty, are especially discerned, in keeping constant in the service of him, when deprived of all consolation in it; avoiding any application to the comforts of the Creature, when God hath thus as it were dismissed, and cast it of:
But resigning it self and loving its misery for his sake, and because it is his will that it should be so. An exercise wherein our Lord himself was pleased to be tried (that he might become a mercifull High Priest before God-and (experimentally,) that he might compas∣sionate our infirmities in the great Desola¦tion he vnderwent in the garden,Heb. 4.15-2.17. the night before his passion. Where caepit pavere & cae¦dere, saith the Evangelist,Matt. 26.37.38.- Mark. 14.33. and that sad expres¦sion came from him Tristis est anima mea vsqu ad mortem Tarry here, and watch with me Yet these Desolations also, in a Soul thus far ad∣vanced in Grace, are not void of a mixture of ioy and satisfaction, that it hath alwais in Gods will being performed in them; which will of God now in whatever happens is a constant consolation to it, and the Apostles precept of Semper gaudete is thus accomplis∣hed in such a Soul as well as his orate sine in∣termissione;1. Thess. 5.16.17. and goe together. For there can∣not want content, where the Mind hath its desire; nor doth such a Mind want this, that is vnanimous with the Divine Will: the want of which conformity, is only from the loving of Something that is against his Will. Wordly sorrows saith S. Gregory affligentes, cruciant; but these Spiritual reficiunt, dum affligunt. In the one is, In afflictione maeror, but in the other, In merore letitiaMoral. l. 23. c. 13.: Nay more true Sweetnes in these sorrows; then in the other's joys: And the abstaining in such a sharp triall from all sin against God, or seeking comfort from any thing besides him, or giving over her ac∣customed
exercises of piety, argues also then a close vnion of the Soul with God, though not so sensible; and that when it thinks it self farthest from him, it is in some sort the nearest to him. Lastly, by and vpon these Spiritual Desolations ordinarily it is, that the Soul af∣terward receives higher sensible visits, and ca∣resses from God, then any former were; for which the Soul seems best prepared by this her extreme poverty, and lowness; and then it is, if ever, the Soul receives them with more gratitude; and both highlier values them, and vilifies it self. And it is Gods or∣dinary way to exalt vs in proportion to our humility,Psal. 9.10. and to be Adjutor in tribulationibus, as in opportunitatibus, when also the Soul is more endeared vnto him by her sufferings. All this I have said, to shew that these Spiri∣tual Desolations (of which this Author p. 333. Ironically saith, Then, when one would least expect them, follow &c.) are a necessary part of the way to Perfection; and that the resi∣stance of such pressures when they come, or a non-compliance with them in shewing much irresignation & impatience, in seeking to relieve such spiritual desertions with some secular contents in relaxing former holy pra∣ctices and the like, disappoints the Soul of those following consolations, which are the proper reward of these sufferings, and disturbs Gods work in her, and good intentions toward her; and hinders her growth in ver∣tue, by her retaining still those imperfections, and that self-love, which these, rightly recei∣ved,
would have purged, and mortified. This of the fowrth step to Perfection, Desolation. 5. The fifth is a state more setled, constant, and tranquill, where neither these Desola∣tions are so frequent or necessary; nor those Celestial Visits so violent, or so short. A sad case &c.§. LXVI. Now wheras, vpon the first of these steps, this Author descants thus- A sad case to end our days as Christ and his Apo∣stles did; who vsed this low dispensation of praying to the last. But alas they never vnderstood these vnions with God in the Fund of the Spirit; they taught men a plain and intelligible way of ser∣ving God, and bid them looke for Perfection in an other world. Thus he; I ask, did our Lord and his Apostles end their days only, or chiefly, in the first Step here; that of Meditation, and Discursive, or Vocal, Prayer; and never ascend to the second Step, exercising more, therein, the Will, and Affections, in Aspirations, and Elevations of the Soul to Gods. What think we of the most exalted Disciple S. Iohn every where discoursing so much of Love? and of our dwelling, by Love, in God▪ and God in vs?1. Jo. 4.16. 1. Thess. 5.17. Luk. 21.36. Eph. 6.18. What of those Precepts- Pray without ceasing▪ watch and pray alwais And with all per∣severance therein? Are these to be vnderstood only of vocall and discursive prayer, the first step; or not rather of affective prayer, the se∣cond▪ (according to that- Qui semper desiderat semper orat:) which latter is also much easier to be continued. Again What think we of our Lords spending so long time in Prayer, often mentioned in the Gospells? - Rising vp
a great while before day. for this purpose; Mar. 1.5. Again, retiring into the wildernes, for a greater vacancy to it, Luk. 5.6. Before the day of the Election of his twelve Apostles, (the twelve Foundations of his Church,) ascending into a solitary mountain, and there spending the whole night in prayer; His as∣cending again into another mountain, before he tooke his last iourney to Ierusalem, for the accomplishing of his Passion, taking three of his Disciples with him; where all the night again was spent in Prayer: for it is said, he descended not from the hill till the next day: and that, there, the three Disciples were sur∣prised with sleep:Luk. 9.37.32. In which Prayer they saw his countenance changed, and an anticipated appearance of his glory, such as he shall have when he comes to judgment, 2. Pet. 1.16. Matt. 16.28. and an appa∣rition also of Moses and Elias; they by a su∣pernaturall illumination, knowing also who the persons were; and his disciple Peter in such an Extatick ioy, as that he cried out— Bonum est esse hic &c.Luk. 9.33. not knowing, saith the Evangelist, what he said. So, In our Lords being in Prayer presently after Iohns ba∣ptizing him, hapned the Vision of the Hea∣vens opened, the Holy Ghost descending vpon him in a bodily shape like a Dove, seene by the Baptist:Luk. 3.21.22. Luk. 9.35. and a voice from heaven speaking to him, as here- Thou art my beloued son: And then a Rapt of the same Spirit, that carried him into the desart: Where also we may ra∣tionally imagin his time to have bin wholy spent in Prayer and Devotion; and this in
such a degree, as to suspend and supersede the ordinary functions of nature as to eating and drinking; and in these his Prayers the Tempter to have assaulted him- What think we,Jo. 11.33.38. again, of our Lords Infremuit Spiritu once, and again, in his Prayer to his Father for the resurrection of Lazarus? of the ravishing ex∣pressions of his love, and tender affection, & aspirations after a perfect vnion of all his with Him, and his Father, in his prayer after his last supper, delivered Io. 17. c. from the 20. ver. to the end.Luk. 22.44 And lastly of his  in the garden; with few words, but much passion; being in an Agony, and swea∣ting blood and making frequent acts of Re∣signation, and conformity to the will of his Father. What think we again of S. Peters Extaticall prayer and his vision on Simon the Tanners house top Act. 10.9. and again S. Pauls in the Temple Act. 22.17. Whilst I prayed, I was in an extasie &c. Did our Lord and his Apostles, in the Devotions here men∣tioned, not ascend at all to that which the Mysticks make the second step to perfection, the aspirations and Elevations of the will and affections; but only stay on the first step? and did they vnderstand nothing of that the Mysticks call passive Vnions with God? Their Extasies & Raptures and their being in the Spirit, their  2. Cor. 12.4▪ and  Rom. 8.6. argue other wise. But then are Passive Vnions the obscure and unintelligible way of serving God,p. 14. that the Church teacheth in her Rules of Devotion; or, the end rather,
which her plain and intelligible way some∣times attains to? Lastly, is there not, in some sort a state of Perfection also in this world? 1. Cor. 2.6. Wee speak wisdome among the perfect. And Phil. 3.15. let vs, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. And Luk. 6.40. Every one that is perfect, shall be as his Master (that is in suffe∣rings like him.) The Author may do well to review this passage. §. LXVII.He describes the progresse towards this state, &c. These expressions of a graduall Re∣collection of the Faculties, the External, In∣ternal, Inferior, Superior, in a suspension and cessation of them from working on the Crea∣ture and its Images, and their being fixed on God in perfect Contemplation, are only men∣tioned (out of Harphius p. 575.509 and others) by San∣cta Sophia, 2. vol. p. 244. not justified: after which he con∣cludes only this: It is certain that by a frequent and constant exercise of Internal Prayer of the will joined with Mortification, the Soul comes to operate more, and more abstracted from sense, and more elevated above the cor∣poreal organs and Faculties. To. p. 334.Reply to page 334. §. LXVIII.The state of nothingness, &c. How the Creature and all its Glory, and among the rest the Soul also itself appears a meer Vacui∣ty, and emptines, and Nothing to a Soul filled with the love, and with a more special and perceptible sense of God within it: and How God himself also then more clearly appears No such thing as we do, or can, conceive of him by sensible imaginations; and is truelier
known negatively by vs, what he is not, then positively what he is, enough hath bin said already;§. 51. and 53. and more needs not; vnless I should observe here this Author's diligence in raking vp severall litle heterogeneous patches out of severall pages and chapters, and weaving them together as one piece, either cutting of the explications, or not giving them entire, to render all obscure, and so pertinent to his subiect, Fanaticism. A feeling of her not being &c.§. LXIX. Sancta Sophia 2. vol. p. 304. saith this: that the Soul so advanced in contemplation comes to a feeling indeed of her not being; and by consequence, of the not being of Crea∣tures; and that this is a reall truth. But then goes on Not as if the Soul, or other creatures either did cease according to their Naturall being; or as if a naturall Being were indeed no, real Being: but that the Soul truly ap∣prehends now, that they have no such Being of themselves, but all of God. Whenas for∣merly in her sinfully adhering to them and staying in them with love, she carried her self toward them as if she thought them to have a being and subsistence of, and in, them∣selves, and not of God, and that they might be loued in themselves, &c. And thus I sup∣pose the mist that was cast before the Readers eyes is dispelled. But the Author having re∣cited Sancta Sophia's words as far as (which is a reall truth,) here gives over and draws the curtain before his Reader, that he may see no further: and then goes on: A reall truth or else intollerable nonsense; and so, as after a
great victory, displays his colours till we come to his §. 15. concluding, that he leaves such stuf to be vnderstood by mad men, and practi∣sed by fooles. So Festus said S. Paul was mad, when he spake forth the words of truth, and so∣berness. To p. 335. §. LXX.Reply to p. 335. As this Author Saith Friar Bernard, &c. If what is said of Frier Bernard, and Masseus be true, which I am not obliged to iustify, of their making some vn-articulate groans or noise, or strange gestures and motions, in the fervour of their Devotions, so we read also of the Spirits groanes Rom. 8 6. And Da∣vids dancing;2. Sam. 6.14. 1 Sam. 19.24. Jer. 1.6. vulg. and Sauls stripping of his cloaths at Ramach, and lying naked for a day and a night; And Masseus his V. V V seems no more then the Prophet Ieremys. A.AA. Grief and Feare have their inarticulate notes, and extravagant Gesture, why not Ioy and Loue? Habent suas voces affectus, per quas, se etiam cum nolunt, produnt. Saith S. Bernardin Cant. Serm. 67. speaking of Contemplation. Proposed the not doing &c. Sancta So∣phias words 1. vol. p. 63. To. p. 336. §. 1. are— Generally and ordina∣rily speaking, when there is proposed the doing, or not doing, of any external work, and that both of them are in themselves lawfull (that is the doing or not doing them, Sancta Soph. 1. vol. p. 246. when we have no obligation to either by vertue of any external law) the Divine ins∣piration in Contemplative Souls moves to the not doing; because this is more sutable to their present state; and to that abstraction
of life which they profess: except when the doing may proue a more beneficiall mortifica∣tion to self-love. This Author gives it vs here thus- Generally, when there is proposed, the not doing or doing of an external work, and both of them are lawfull, the Divine Inspiration moves to the not doing: changing here Generally speaking, or most commonly; into Generally, when, or alwais when. Again omitting the limitation (in Contemplative Souls) and the (except) that follows, and Sancta Sophias Reason as for these Contemplatives, Having thus prepared this passage, and rendered it easie for a Con∣futation, he falls to battering down his own work; and goes on. A most excellent and A∣postolicall Doctrine &c. The doing things meerly for Edification,§. LXXI. &c. It is not strange, That one good work may be an impediment to another, as to some pre∣sent circumstances better or more necessary. As for example: A woork done meerly for Edification, may be an impediment to our Prayers, at a time when this latter duty is more necessary. As the Apostles had inspirations for external works, preaching &c. and for giving good example thereby, so doubtles at other times,Act. 10.9. they had, of forbearing these, and retiring rather to Prayer; and it is not to be believed, that they, who exhorted others to pray continually, omitted this duty themselves. Again; As they had holy Inspirations to ex∣ternal works, to preaching &c. so may ano∣ther have them to forbear preaching; and rather to be take himself to Solitude, Reading,
Meditation, as this is more necessary and be∣neficiall to himself, then his doing the former would be to others. Nor I hope was S. Iohn Baptist's busines in the desart, whose chief practice there must needs be Prayer; nor An∣na's in the Temple, who is said not to have de∣parted thence,Luk. 2.37. but served God there with prayers night and day, vnlawfull emploiments. And so it is, that an undiscreet zeal of doing good to others hinders many imperfect Souls from that charity, and robbs them of that time, which they owe much rather to themselves. Reply to p. 337. To. p. 337. §. LXXII.What becomes of all the precepts they have left vs, &c. The precepts the Apostles have left vs of doing good, of mutual edification, of constant busines besides the Commands for the outward duties of worship, are affirmed by none to be hindrances in the way to Perfection. Nay further; so much, in any of these, as the Apo∣stles have commanded, is necessary to Perfe∣ction. But will this Author say, that the Con∣templatives, or Sancta Sophia in their Rules oppose any of these, or other external duty whatever, in such time, and place, and other circumstances, as the Apostles have comman∣ded it? For, so often, the omission of it is not lawfull (they always suppose) but a sin. Or, 2. will he say because externall good works, outward duties of worship &c. are Apostoli∣call Precepts, therfore private prayer is none? Or 3. will he argue: when ever we can do any of these, therfore we may not at any such time better omit them, and do something
else? All these consequences are faulty. Af∣firmative Precepts oblige not all persons, not at all, times; and the Acts of them are in con∣silio, not Praecepto, except in some case of ne∣cessity; and then toties quoties, the Contem∣plative's Devotions, as they profess are to be laid aside. Internall liver to pretend &c.§. LXXIII. Sancta Sophia grants Spiritual Persons somtimes to have such Supernaturall Favours;1. vol. p. 65. yet would it not have such persons▪ easily to pretend them (least perhaps they may be mistaken, when indeed they have them not;) Nor so much as desire them, nay rather pray against them, least considering their own weakness, they should abuse them to vanity and pride: lastly nor to esteem, or execute any thing according to them, vnless approued by Supe∣riours. Obliged to resign their Iudgments,§. LXXIV. a. vol. p. 280. §. 37. &c. S. Sophia's words are— In such cases all Souls are not so absolutely obliged &c. Which Propo∣sition is brought in here by this Author, but the Cases left out: After which manner Ca∣tholick Casuists, and Schoolmen are very or∣dinarily vsed by Ptotestant Writers, and par∣ticularly by Doctor Tailor, whom this Author much follows. Now, the Cases are: 1. If the Souls be such as are eminently perfect, & not litle experienced, and such as have not as yet their senses well exercised in discerning Good and Evill;Heb. 5.16. 2. that there be great cer∣tainty, that the Internall Direction is from God. 3. and that it be in actions good or indif∣ferent,
and where is no question or Scrupule in such person of the lawfulness of either doing or omiting it: 4. that if a Superior shoud Command any thing contrary therto, he is to be obeyed, and no such interiour Illumina∣tion, or call obligeth in such case: S. So∣phia. 1. vol. p. 135.138. 5. that where no such contrary command, yet, if the matter be of considerable moment, the ex∣press approbation, or permission, of their Su∣periour is to be observed. 1. vol. p. 147. Let this Author fit these Cases to the Fanaticks: And then let the Fanaticks, in Gods name, take their Li∣berty. For it is not necessary, where no rea∣sonable cause of doubt, or fear of Sin, to consult; or, when consulting, to resign our judgment to others concerning any thing that happens to vs; provided, such allow it a thing good or indifferent. But we may not argue here; If somein some things have no cause, therfore none in anything can have any cause, of Scrupule, and of consulting & following anothers counsel. M. Cressy in his preface, &c. M Cressy in his Preface,§. LXXV. as also Sancta Sophia do at large shew the difference between the Inspira∣tions or Revelations allowed in the Church of Rome, and those of Fanaticks, in the places, and words cited before §. 15. Those of the Fanaticks being easily discernable to be false, and suggestions of the Evill Spirit, not by Prayer only, but by the Divine laws, these in∣spirings being pretended by them in things not indifferent, but directly contrary to these Laws: But the passages which this Author
here selects, (and omits the other that were to the purpose,) are concerning the motions of Gods Spirit in matters, or actions, & omis∣sions, agreed on to be in themselves indiffe∣rent, and lawfull, or also good. Within which bounds had the Fanatick Inspirations contai∣ned themselves, some mistakes perhaps there might have bin, but hurt none, either to the Church, State, their neighbours, or them∣selves, as to sinning. Nothing but the assistance of Divine Grace,§. LXXVI. To. p. 338. Nothing more is here meant by Di∣vine Inspirations, then the assistance or effi∣ciency of the Divine Grace, illuminating the vnderstanding with a right judgment, and in∣fusing into the Will right inclinations, and desires, (that is the most conformable to Gods will) as to our doing, or omitting such parti∣cular actions, as are dayly suggested to vs, we know not by what Spirit, and do fall vnder our Deliberation. Which Divine Inspira∣tions was it foolishness heretofore; or is it now, to justify, and confirm, against those who seem professed enemies of them, and stile them Fanaticism? The only meanes imaginable that can be proper, &c. The repairing to Prayer; in the best manner, we can make it, is a proper naturall, and most efficacious way to obtain a super∣naturall light (from Gods Spirit) to discern his will in all our actions; speaking of such as are indifferent, and such wherein neither we, nor any others, have any externall certain, Rule, all circumstances considered, whereby we may
be guided; as we have in all such other actions the lawfulness wich is doubted of; Which yet is not said, as if Prayer were the only means of our direction in these, so as to exclude the making use of, either our own Reason, or other mens Advice; as is said before. §. LXXVII.To make Enthusiasm necessary to distinguish, &c. Now this is not making Enthusiasme, but Prayer a meanes to obtain the illumina∣tions of Gods Spirit, to shew vs, in two things suggested to vs, which of them comes from It, or which is more conformable to Gods will, that so we may follow, and obey it; And what a Christian is he, that being doubtfull, espe∣cially in two affairs of much concernment, which to make choice of, doth not retire to his Prayers, desiring God to direct him in such a particular, and promising to do that which he shall be pleased, by any way, to signify to him to be more conformable to his Will, and more conducing to Christian Perfection (as certainly the one may be much more then the other, although both contained within the ge∣nerall bounds of Good, or indifferent?) And then what Illumination he prays for, why may not he also expect? Again who is there, much frequenting Prayer, that doth not perceive in them some illustrations, and influences en∣tring, and iniected as it were, into his mind without his own procurement, touching a more perfect knowledge of himself; or the immense Love of God to Mankind, or some acceptable service he may do to God or his neighbour; or secret reprehensions for some
Faults; or admonitions for the better ordering of his life; Spiritu (as our Lord Saith Io. 3.8.) Spirante ubi vult, and he not knowing whence such things come, or how they passe away; yet these things we are assured must be from Gods Spirit, because no good thought is from our∣selves. And why may not we imagine the same, (a due preparation being supposed) of the thoughts iniected in our doubtings, and requests, concerning actions left free, and vndetermined by the Divine declared will, what way in these we may rather take, the better to serve and please him. God forbid, that the name of Enthusiasme should deterr Christians from such a practice, or hearkning to this internall Language; Or (as M. Cressy expresses it in his Preface p. 19.) should render Prayer and by Prayer, the obtaining of Divine Grace, a suspicious exercise And I wish the Author would a little better weigh his words, and the mali∣gne influence they may have on others. We say then; Divine Inspirations are necessary (for Grace, as well furthers, as prevents, vs) to distinguish the motions of the Good and Bad Spirit in our minds in matters purely indif∣ferent (which may be proposed to vs, by either of these Spirits for a different end,) where we have no other extenal Rule to iudge these motions by, as we have in all internal suggestions concerning such other matters, as are either directly commanded or prohibi∣ted, by Gods Law. And it is by this latter way of discovery, and not the former, that M. Cressy shews the suggestions of Fanaticks to
be Satanicall. To try Illuminations by Inspirations, and so Inspirations by Illuminations,§. XXVIII. &c. This Au∣thor since Lauds Labyrinth dreams much of Circles. To me there appears no more of a Circle, or Identicall proof here, than in the proving of the Scripture by the Church, and the Church by the Motives of credibility. Or, than in the Protestants proving their Church Authority from the Scriptures; and Scriptures from Vniversall Tradition. The discerning of the motions of the Spirit, by other second motions of the same Spirit more manifest to vs,See before §. 15. To. p. 339. is no circular proof, or evidence, no more then this; when a friend vnknown, doth me a favour, and afterwards tells me, he did it, The things of the Spirit, saith the A∣postle, are discerned Spiritually (that is, Surely, by the Spirit) and,1. Co. 2.14. vers. 12. we have received the Spirit of God, that we might know the things that are given to vs of God; (that is, by his Spi∣rit) And the Gift of Discerning of Spirits (1. Cor. 12.10.) is a gift, or operation of the Spirit; and the Spirit, in bearing witness to our Spirits that we are the children of God,Rom. 8.16. or born again of the Spirit, bears witness of it self. New Revelations, and as great &c. New Divine Revelations are pretended by Fanaticks; As great, or greater, or frequenter, are pre∣tended by the Church; By the one truly; by the other falsly; the Divine laws being Iudge. But no new or strange Revelations are preten∣ded by, or in the Church: that is such as de∣liver any new thing contrary to or dissonant
from the Old: of which M Cressy there speaks; and the latter following words sufficiently explain the precedent; which this Author, after 2. pages discourse vpon new, is pleased to take notice of, p. 242. where he goes on— Yet M. Cressy saith, they are not seditious &c. Reply to p. 340.To. p. 340. To hearken to the Immediate impulses the Spirit of God, &c.§. LXXIX. Catholicks, as well as Fa∣naticks affirm; that men ought to hearken to the immediat Impulses (I suppose he means inspi∣rations) of the Spirit of God within them. And will not this Author say so too? But no Ca∣tholick pretends, that God acquaints him with his mind and will, in a way peculiar to himself; and not such, as is, or may be, common to all others, that are in the state of Grace. Who did not boast of so many Raptures &c. Rapts, and Visions in the Catholick Church are not to be distinguished from Fanaticism by the degree, or the number, of them, but the quality. As though the case were the very same,§. LXXX. &c. The Prophets and Apostles received truth by Re∣velation (saith Blosius) therefore others may. But he saith there also Denique Sacrae Scripturae Diuinis Revelationibus sunt plenae; Revelationibus made to others, I hope, besides Apostles, and Prophets, witness. 1. Cor. 14.26.30. and so he concludes▪ Dominus semper pouie, semper∣que poterie, operari quod vult in mundis anima∣bus: that he may bestow such Revelations on others still. New and strange Revelations made to four§. LXXXI.
Women Saints, &c. New Revelations and Visions taken in any sense, save as these op∣pose the Old ones, I mean the Scriptures, Blosius had no reason to disbelieue, since it is a promise vnder the Gospel Act. 2.17.▪ your sons & your daughters shall prophesy; your yong∣men shall see visions; and your old men shal dream dreams; and that this Spirit should be powred out not only on our Lords men servants, but also on his hand maidens; ver. 18. as, on the four daughters of Phillip the Deacon Act. 21.9. And we find Anna having Revelations, as well as Simeon. And what means this Au∣thor in these words- Melancholick women;Luk. 2. Hy∣stericall vapours &c? Are women more remote from the Graces of the Holy Spirit, then Men or, are not these to be equally honoured when they appear in that Sexe? As for the four women Saints, the particular Persons here named, the Sanctity of their Lives is recorded in Church History; their Festivals were cele∣brated in the Publick Liturgy through all the Western world before the appearance of Lu∣ther: their Revelations are pious and consonant to Scripture. §. LXXXII.We have before shewed how much they were approved, &c. The more ample this Au∣thor hath shewn such testimonies to be, the more, methinks he condemns his own cen∣sure, in his going against the Common Reason of the Church; and so, if this may argue any faulty presumption in him, he hath no cause to be angry with Blosius for praying for this Pardon.
Reply to p. 341.To. p. 341. §. LXXXIII. What means that saying in the Spirituall exercises, &c. I have an Edition of the Spirituall Exercises printed at vienna 1563▪ that is after S. Ignatius his death (and ther∣fore nothing added to them since;) and be∣fore 1574. wherein I can find no such pas∣sage. Nor is it (as this Author confesseth) to be found in the later Impressions. Is he not then hard put to it, to find fuell enough for enflaming the popular hate against Catho∣licks, that runs to such old Editions for it (and this only out of a report, not knowledge, that it is there) when the newer do not supply it; Nor yet will forgive nor forget their fault (Suppose one) when he finds, they have amended it? But now to consider the words, so happily discovered. The words are these— It is the great perfection of a Christian to keep himself indifferent to do what God shall reveal to him, and not to determine himself indifferent to do what he hath al∣ready revealed, and taught in the Gospell. Their sence must either be this; that S. Igna∣tius directs his Sons not to determine them∣selves to do what God hath already revea∣led, and taught in the Gospell, but to keep themselves indifferent to do the contrary, if revealed to them. Or els That they are not to determine themselves to do only what God hath al∣ready revealed, and taught in the Gospel. (that is as to the things commanded, and prohibited there;) but also to keep themselves indifferent (as to the things on either side lawful to be
done) to do that, which God shall reveal to them. that is, shall reveal to them, recom∣mending it to him in Prayer, by the internal illuminations and inspirations of his Holy Spirit to be, ad majorem Dei Gloriam, and more conformable to his will. Of which much hath bin said before §. 21. &c. Of these two senses the former is too gross and impious in conscience for S. Ignatius to prescribe to his whole Order in a book pretending Devotion, and so publick in the face of the whole Church; let this Glorious Saint be supposed as great an Hypocrire or Fanatick as this Au∣thor would make him. For what Fanatick will say so much? In the latter sense I see no harm vnless the word (reveale) displease; but then change it into God shall inspire them, and the Protestants common Prayer Book will iustify the language. §. LXXXIV.That is for new and strange Revelations too, &c. If Mother Iuliana's Revelations have many things new and strange, yet, if therein be nothing contrary to Faith or Good manners, nor words taken in a modern-improper sence will amount to Heresy, I hope this Author will not put her in the List of his Fanaticks, vnless he can make good the same of them; or, that he can prove her old English to be Fanaticism, but then let Chaucer also look to himself. Reply to page 342. To. p. 342. §. LXXXV.As though the persons were ever the less madd &c. I suppose this Author would have spoken with more reverence of Con∣fessors
(that is, Ecclesiasticall Superiours) than to make their Office the keeping of Mad∣men, had he remembred that the Church of England in her Liturgy recommends Confes∣sion; but, this, so litle practised, he might the easier forget it. Men chained can do no harm; as Fanaticks are in the Roman Church, thanks to their Holy keepers; and for the persons vnder such custody, their being sober, or mad, (for, either they may be) it is fit the Church should rather iudge of it then this Author; who here pronounceth that Madness, which these Confessors, and the Church take for Perfection. And so it is, that All persons being diligently watched by these keepers, those judged Fanaticks by the Church, all, sooner, or later, even all those with much pains col∣lected in this Book by this Author, that were truly Such, have bin crushed by her hither∣to; and have no present being: I wish it were so with the English Fanaticks. But whilst they do impose no such keepers over them, nor can iustly deny that liberty of iudgment to others, which they have taken to them∣selves, what hope is there of their suppression, or, what iust Laws, I mean Ecclesiasticall, can there be made for it? We are not to think that the Principles,§. LXXXVI. &c. For the seditious or rebellious facts of any Fanaticks in the Catholick Church diso∣beying, or breaking loose from their keepers, if any such can be proued by this Author, they are not iustified by the Church, or its Principles, and so he looseth his labour in
thinking to preiudice the Church by them, any more, than by proving some Adulterers, Homicides, Blasphemers to have bin in it. And within the memory of man the Church of England was not free from having such facts committed by some of her Body and Communion; yet, I suppose this Author will maintain, without her guilt. And here I take of my Pen wearied with following a person whose sense much fails his rage against the Catholick Church; and who hath much more of Raillery, then Rea∣son: Hoping these, short Animadversions may conduce some what, if not to the vndeceiving of himself (for I fear his defect lyes not there) yet of others, in a matter of the greatest con∣sequence, Devotion. FINIS.
