X19 12271439 58267
XENOPHON'S HISTORY OF THE Affairs of Greece, In SEVEN BOOKS: BEING A Continuation of the Peloponnesian War; from the Time where Thucydides ends, to the Battel at Mantinea. To which is prefixed an Abstract of Thucydi∣des, and a brief Account of the Land and Naval Forces of the Ancient Greeks. Translated from the Greek, By JOHN NEWMAN. LONDON, Printed by R. H. for William Freeman over against the Devil Tavern by Temple-Bar, in Fleet-Street, 1685.
To the Right Honourable George Lord Dartmouth, Master General of His Majesties Ordnance and Armories, Master of the Horse to His Royal High∣ness, and one of His Ma∣jesties most Honourable Pri∣vy Council. My Lord, THe Dependance I have on your Lordship's Mannor of Lewisham, where this first Essay of my Labours had its
Birth, made me presume to offer It to your Lordships Patronage; which however I scarcely should have ventured to do, being so lit∣tle known to your Lordship, as I am, if your Condescention, and Affa∣bility, did not make as great a part of your Character, as any other of those Heroick Qualities, of which it is composed. Indeed there is so near a Parallel betwixt your Lordship, and my Author, that I need not go farther for an Apology: For both of you, with all the advantages of Nature, Birth, and Education, entred early
upon high Trusts, & happily exe∣cuted them. Both great Lovers, and Asserters of Monarchy: For whilst Plato drew the Idaea of his Com∣mon-wealth, Xenophon compos'd the Model of a perfect Monarchy in his admirable Cyrus, which was in∣deed a dangerous undertaking for an Athenian, but cannot come up to the reputation of your Lordships Heroick Deportment in the House of Commons, when with undaunted Re∣solution, a manly sort of Eloquence, unanswerable Arguments, in short, with the same Spirit, with which you use to Fight, you maintained the cause of the Crown, and the Succes∣sion;
stem'd the Torrent of an impetu∣ous faction, slenderly seconded, yet unmoveable from your Princes Interests, in a Conjuncture when Loyalty was more Criminal than Trea∣son, and his Sacred Majesty in no less danger at Oxford, than his Fa∣ther of blessed Memory, when he was actually besieged there. Both of you great Promoters of Learning, and Favourers of learned men, and (which rarely happens) joyn'd with it an exquisite skill in Martial Affairs. Both of you concerned in and
successfully perform'd that part which is justly reckoned the most difficult Point of War; for as Xeno∣phon conducted the Grecian Army through the large Tracts of Asia, and made good their Retreat, so did your Lordship bring off the En∣glish from Africk, and as a good An∣gel delivered them, when they lay exposed as a cheap prey to the worst sort of Barbarians. An Action which considered in all its Circumstances, the difficulty of the Work, the violence of the Season, a vigilant, powerful, and im∣placable Enemy, watching all his ad∣vantages
to fall upon you, was not only of greater Consequence to the Nation; but an instance too of Conduct, not inferior to the o∣ther. Indeed it is a common Ob∣servation, that those very Per∣sons, who since endeavour to lessen that performance, when your Lordship with your accu∣stomed Obedience undertook the Expedition, gave it out for impos∣sible. Not to mention that by the way, as it were, You almost ruined
Sally, that troublesome Nest of Py∣rats, the greatest Infesters of the English Navigation. Nor to say any thing of the great Number of poor English Slaves which you most charitably redeemed, who every day they rise, are obliged to bless your Lordship for the Sight of their Native Countrey, and all the Com∣forts of their Lives. This History relates the Down∣fal of three Famous Common-wealths, and (one would think) were a sufficient Argument to convince
even our Republicans, that that same accursed Fruit, which could thrive no better in its own Native Soyl, would much less prosper transplan∣ted hither, and engrafted on one of the most Ancient Monarchies in the World. And as your Lordships Courage, and Conduct contributed very much to the reducing a Neighbouring Com∣mon-wealth to its just Bounds, (for the Dutch will never forget your Lordship, tho English men should) so was there no one more instru∣mental in crushing a rising Common∣wealth here at home: Your Lord∣ship
still broke, and prevented their Designs, put them clear out of the Road of 41, puzzled all their Ca∣bals, by securing the Magazines and Stores, which if you had not come in their way, they with great pro∣bability looked upon as their Own: So that those who at first could not comprehend the Reason of your Proceedings, upon the disco∣very of the late Horrid Conspiracy, cannot sufficiently admire, and ap∣plaud your Lordships Vigilance, and Conduct. Indeed as no Subject would have been worse treated if their Trea∣sonable
Designs had took effect, so are all sorts of People sensible of it to that degree, that scarcely any one is now reckoned truly affectio∣nate to the Service of your Two Royal Masters, who has not a Par∣ticular Esteem, and Honour for your Lordship. It is well for the Common In∣terest that you have not leasure to make out the Parallel, by writing an History, although your own Ex∣ploits would afford sufficient Matter for one. Your Lordships hours are employed about more necessa∣ry, and no less lasting Works than
my Authors. Not only the Pre∣sent Age, but late Posterity too, will be indebted to your Lordships in∣defatigable, and extensive Care, for their Peace, and Security, both at home, and abroad. There is one happy disparity be∣twixt You, and my Author, that, as he lived in the Dregs of a Com∣mon-wealth, so does your Lordship serve the Wisest, and Bravest Princes in the World; who are no less Renowned for their Firmness to their Friends, and Royal Bounty in Rewarding them; Then Athens will be Infamous to all Ages for
her Ingratitude to those who did her the greatest Service. That you may long live to do them More, and Greater Services, is now a Publick Wish; but in a more particular manner of Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, John Newman.
THE PREFACE. TRanslation having been so much in Vogue of late, and several Authors turn'd into English; I made some Attempt herein, though with small hopes of Success: But at last having mentioned my Design to that Learned Gentleman, and my honoured Friend, Sir Edward Sherborne, he was pleased to encourage my Endeavours, both with the Communica∣tion of his own Sentiments, and the free use of his Curious and Choice Collection of Books; for which I thought my self obli∣ged to return him this Publick Acknow∣ledgment; as also for the great Civilities, and continued Favours received from his hands. But amongst other Inducements I had to Translate this Piece of Xenophon: One was, to shew by the Examples of the Fa∣mous Commonwealths mentioned in this History; that there is not that liberty to be expected from these Forms of Govern∣ment, which our Republicans propos'd to themselves and Followers. For though the continual Cry of the Greeks was for Li∣berty, and against Oppression, yet they
procured no further Remedy by their Al∣terations, than those who shift their Bur∣den from Shoulder to Shoulder, but lessen not the Weight; and at most they did but change the Tyranny, but not enlarge their Liberty. The Lacedemonian so much ad∣mired Constitution, had its Defects, and those not small ones; and though it flou∣rished longer than any of the rest in Greece, yet it had doubless been em∣broiled in Seditions and civil Wars, like other States, had there not been one thing peculiar to that Government: which was the exact Discipline and Obedience, where∣in the Youth and Men were trained up; being esteemed Sons of the Publick, and not of private Persons: which the Ro∣mans partly imitated, by giving the Fa∣ther power over his Son all his life-time, or till he was thrice sold, and manumit∣ted: and to this did Dionysius Halicar∣nassensis ascribe the Greatness of the Ro∣man Empire. But for the proof of my Assertion, I shall give a brief account of the Athenian, Lacedemonian, and Roman Common∣wealths, the last being framed after the Lacedemonian Model; and shew from these Instances, that the Changes of Go∣vernment, and noise for Liberty, were
the Occasion of all their Miseries. To begin with the Lacedemonian; an indifferent Observator may at first sight discover, from whence our Republicans have taken their Measures: and that the same Approaches have been made on our Monarchy as were on the Lacedemonian; and without doubt they had carried on their Designs as far, had they not been timely discovered, and happily prevented. The Lacedemonian Kings were at first absolute, and continued so till two Kings sat on the Throne at once, their Power be∣ing no more diminished hereby, than when there were Consorts in the Roman Em∣pire, or now that there are two Czars in Moscovy. At length some of the Kings straining their Power (there being no Government but what may be abused, whilst Men are subject to Passions, and Things to Change.) Lycurgus one of the Royal blood contrived a new Model, joyning the No∣bles with the Kings in the Government; and made several Laws in favour of the People, taking with him the Nobility to the Oracle at Delphos, to enquire what Apollo thought of them: who confirmed his Laws, and so the observance of them became a Point of Conscience. Thus the Nobility first Invaded the Royal Prero∣gative:
about 130 years after, Theo∣pompus an easie King, thinking to entail the Kingdom more firmly on his Posterity, Instituted the Ephori; who being farther to temper, and allay the Power of the King, did so far encroach in time, that he became their Slave; and they made him little more than a private man; ha∣ving power to Mulct, Imprison, Banish, and put him to death; nay, to alter the Suc∣cession, when they thought good. They had also the Priviledge to sit, when the King came into their presence, thinking it not proper to pay him Respect, whom they had under their Correction. The Ephori could make War and Peace; the Ephori could put any to Death, without form of Justice: they were Treasurers, they kept the King poor, and their Power became at last ex∣orbitant and tyrannical. In the next place I come to speak of the Athenian Commonwealth; the Athenians lived under a Monarchy, till that good King Codrus, who sacrificed himself for his Country; and thereby gained so great a Veneration from the people, that they thought none worthy to succeed him, but changed the Kingly Government into a Republick administred by perpetual Ar∣chons, who were afterwards created for Ten
years, and at last for One. Xenophon the Author of this History was an Athenian, and being a Person of so great Learning and Ingenuity, he pro∣bably related nothing to the disadvan∣tage of his Country: yet in his Treatise of the Athenian Commonwealth, he finds several faults with it. First, That the People had too great a Power, and carried all by Violence and Tumult; and that it fared better in that Government with Rogues, than Honest-men: Besides the several Changes it suffered during the Transactions of this History, sufficiently evince its weakness, and imprudent Consti∣tution. Their Reformer Solon settled his Laws by making himself Popular, and by introducing a , a kind of Jubile, being like the Novae tabulae at Rome, which was a forgiving all Debtors what they owed? Though he valued not the great Injustice and Oppression offer'd to the Cre∣ditors, by depriving them of their Estates at the same time, that he gave this In∣dulgence to the poorer sort. Their Ostra∣cisme was a severe and unjust Law, by which they banished the bravest men, that had by their gallant Actions won the Love and Veneration of the People: And though this Popularity was not by their
seeking, but a necessary Consequence of their Noble Exploits; yet they must be packed out of the way for Ten years, and ruined: So great a Crime it was to deserve well of their Country! This opened a Door to Re∣venge and other pretences; for when any Faction had a mind to rid themselves of a Great Man, they had nothing to do but possess the people with a jealousie of his Po∣pularity, for which he was banished, and their business done. Indeed some were Generous, and over-looked their Pievish∣ness: but on the contrary, others, as Al∣cibiades resented it, who may truly be said to be the first that contrived the ruine of his Country. In these Commonwealths for want of a Supream Head, the Ambitious thought they had as good a Title to the Govern∣ment as others; and by this means they were divided into Factions; the stronger always taking it for granted that they were in the right, and thereupon banished the weaker; who fled for protection to the Neighbouring Republicks, where they being set on by revenge, plotted and contrived to embroyl their Country in a War. The kind Reception the Fugitives found a∣mongst the Athenians (who were in this the Dutch of Greece) made them not
scruple to commit any Crimes, seeing they could find such easie shelter from Justice and the Law. The Romans after the expulsion of their Kings, framed their Commonwealth ac∣cording to the Lacedemonian Model, creating two Consuls; and for the same reasons that the Lacedemonians did two Kings. But the People considering that they had no power, and the Senate all, be∣came seditious: Nor would they be satis∣fied till they in imitation of the Spartan Ephori had created Tribunes; whose per∣sons were so Sacred, that if any did but speak derogatory from them, they had power to put him to Death without a Try∣al. Nor were any the Authors of Sedition, Tumults, Murthers, and Civil Discord, more than the Tribunes, who were the Pro∣tectors of the People. 'Twas these that ruined the Commonwealth, which they pre∣tended to defend. The Authority of the Emperors that were absolute Lords of Rome, was made up of the Tribunes and Consul's Power: One may therefore con∣clude from hence, that there is not that liberty to be found in these Republicks, which some have imagined, and that the Subjects in them were meer Slaves, the Ephori being Tyrants amongst the
Lacedemonians, the People amongst the Athenians, and the Tribunes amongst the Romans. For what greater Power can there be, than to inflict Punishment of Death without Form of Justice? Estate follows Life; and what can't they do in Religion, who are absolute Masters of the other two? Liberty is desired by all; of which we by our wise Constitution have a greater share than any Nation either has, or we could expect from a Change. And because our own Examples affect us most, we may look back to the late Civil Wars, which were begun and fomented for the Cause of Religion and Liberty; yet both destroyed: the unhappy Nation suffering well nigh as many Alterations of Govern∣ment, as it did Years of War and Confu∣sion: The Troubles also drew along with them, Rebellion, Schism, Faction, A∣theism, and a Train of Vices; whose dire effects we still see in the General Corrup∣tion of Manners and Tendency of the Fa∣ctious to the Old Game. Nor could our Differences be composed, till the Rightful Heir was recalled, and the Ancient Go∣vernment together with our Liberty re∣stored: which we enjoy under our Gracious Prince, rather unthankfully repining, than justly prizing it.
A brief Account of the Land and Na∣val Forces of the Ancient Greeks. I Thought it might be necessary for the better understanding of this Hi∣story, to give some Account of the Land and Naval Forces of the Greeks; yet not to make a set Discourse about it, but only to speak of the Militia, as it was in the time of the Peloponnesian War: this Art continually altering and improving as well in former Times, as in this present Age. It will be necessary also to Treat sepa∣rately of the Lacedemonian Discipline, because it was distinct from that of the rest of the Greeks; and then speak of those Particulars, wherein the Athenians and others varied from it. The Lacedemonians were the most va∣liant People of all the Greeks; and tho' their Numbers were but small, yet they were so well experienced, that they very rarely mist of Success, fighting with an assurance of Victory. Their Life was continually employ'd in Action, and such Provision was made by the Laws of
their Country, that not only the Men, but the Women also were used to Robust Exercises, and the Parents inured to hard∣ship, that the Children might be rendred strong, and able to undergo the Fatigue of War. The Youth were divided into two Parties, and exercifed Mock-battels, en∣countring wheresoever they met, yet were they under such exact Discipline, that if any came by, and offered to part them, and they refused to obey, they were immediately carried before the Pae∣donomus, a Magistrate that took cogni∣zance of those Crimes, and severely pu∣nish'd them, for being so far transported with Passion, as not to pay due Obedience to the Laws. By this their Discipline they became hardy and resolute, fighting with that obstinacy, that they would rather die, than yield: But farther to habituate them to this Virtue of Martial Patience, they were once a year cruelly whipt at the Altar of Diana Orthia, which though it were rather a Punishment than an Exer∣cise, yet they bore it with an Invincible Courage. In this manner they were Train'd up till they came to thirty years of age; for
before none were suffered to go into the Campagn, unless it were upon a very great necessity. Thus having spent so many years in the Speculation of War, they be∣came so strong and vigorous in the pra∣ctice thereof, that they lasted forty years fit for Service, none having a Mission till he was seventy years of age. Their Infantry consisted of Targetiers, Light-arm'd, and Heavy-arm'd men; the Light-arm'd men were placed in the Wings, being commanded out in the Fore∣lone-hope, and used in Skirmishes, be∣cause they were not loaden with Ar∣mour. Their Arms were Arrows, Darts, Staves, and Stones, which they threw, or slung; taking any extemporary Wea∣pon that came in their way. The Scho∣liast of Thucydides, says, they did not close, but fought at some distance, advancing, and retiring as they saw occasion for ei∣ther. The Targetiers were a middle sort, be∣tween the Light and Heavy-arm'd men, having a Target or lesser Shield, and a Sword: They were nimble and expedi∣tious, and very useful for pursuing; the Lacedemonian Regiment near Corinth be∣ing cut off by Iphicrates's Targetiers. The Heavy-arm'd men were raised out
of the beter sort, the other two being for the most part Mercenaries and Half-slaves: Their Arms were a Shield of Brass, a Pike and a Scymitar; their bu∣siness was to repulse the Enemy, and to maintain their ground, because the For∣tune of the Day depended on them; for if they were Defeated the Army was to∣tally Routed: And in these indeed did the chief Strength of the Lacedemonians consist. When they put the Enemy to flight, the Horse light-arm'd men, and Targetiers pursued, though it was a Maxime amongst them, Not to be too eager, but to make their Enemies a Bridge of Gold, lest Desperation should make them fight and vanquish their Pursuers. Our Author also blames Agesilaus for meeting the Enemy in their flight, whereas he ought to have rather given them way, and followed the Pursuit. As for their Horse, the Lacedemoni∣ans had a Body of three hundred that fought near the King, like the Roman Celeres: But they were very deficient in this part of their Militia, those they had were arm'd with Spears, and Charged full Cariere; some of them carried Bows, and were called Hippotoxotae. They were furnished with the main Body of their
Horse from the Thebans; and being at War with them, they were deprived of those Auxiliaries: So that Epaminondas the Theban General, knowing the Lace∣demonians were weak in Cavalry, char∣ged them at the Battels of Leuctra and Mantinea, with his own and the Thessa∣lian Troops, whereby he gave them those two memorable Overthrows. The Lacedemonian Forces consisted both of their own Subjects, called , and their Allies. Of the first there were four sorts: The Spartans which were the Inhabitants of the City, and en∣joyed more Priviledges than the rest; the , or the Lacedemonians which dwelt in the Country; the Half-slaves who had merited Freedom by their Valour: The Lacedemonians thinking it of dangerous Consequence to cut them absolutely off of all hopes, lest the desperateness of their Fortune might provoke them to rise up in Arms against the Government, and sub∣vert it: the last were the Slaves, the Can∣didates for Liberty, whom they trained, because the Wars made such a consump∣tion of People, and raised Emulation in them, that they might advance them∣selves thereby to their Freedom. The Confederates made up the Gross of their
Army, for their own Numbers were but small, which they concealed either out of a Maxime of their own, or that the Enemies by knowing how few they were, might not despise them: Yet this incon∣siderable Number, were men of such ex∣traordinary Valour, that Agis being askt, How many strong the Lacedemonians were? made answer, Enough to fight any Army whatsoever. However one may conclude from the Forces they had at Leuctra, that they were not very nume∣rous; because though but Four hundred Spartans out of Seven hundred, and a thousand Lacedemonians were slain, yet this Loss was so great, that they were forc'd to take in all under seventy years of age to recruit their Army; and their Men were so exhausted, that they had scarce enough wherewith to supply the necessary Offices of Government. The Spartans and Lacedemonians were called , or Regiments, being opposed to the , or Allies: In each  were Four  in every  8 , in every  Sixteen , which last contained two and thirty men, ac∣cording to the Scholiast of Thucydides, so that a  consisted of Five hundred and twelve. Xenophon and the Scholiast of
Thucydides differ in their Computations, for in these things no certain Number can be assign'd; and so the Roman Le∣gion, as our Regiment was more or less, having no determinate Number. Each  had its , or Colonel, un∣der whom was the , or Lieute∣nant Colonel. The Phalanx at this time was not taken for any certain Number, but sometimes for a Battalion, or some∣times for the whole body of Foot. The eldest Polemarch was Lieutenant General of the Army, and after Cleombrotus was slain in the Battel of Leuctra, Dino the Polemarch commanded in Chief. Besides these there were three hundred Horse, and six hundred Sciritae, which were a a chosen Band, that were placed in the left Wing. The whole Army was Conducted by one of their Kings, who had an absolute and uncontrollable Power, till Agis was so unfortunate as to make an hasty Trea∣ty, and then they assign'd him a Coun∣cil of War, without whose joynt Consent he could not act: Or else by a General who had the Title of Harmostes, which was given also to the Governour of a Town. If the King was a Minor, then the , or Protector, commanded for
him. Before an Expedition was underta∣ken, the King performed some preparato∣ry Sacrifices, called , and took the Field near Harvest, that being the most likely-time to draw the Enemy out of their Fortresses to a Battel, because they would come forth to defend their Corn: If they did not, the Lacedemoni∣ans did not sit down before their Gari∣sons; it being forbidden them by their Laws to besiege Towns, because any kind of men by the benefit of a Wall might resist the most couragious, and a valiant Man might be destroyed by an impo∣tent Woman. The Lacedemonians therefore being less expert in Seiges than any other of the Greeks, they would not suffer any of their Neighbours to Fortifie, but ei∣ther pull'd down their Walls by force, or oblig'd them thereto by Treaty. Though they had a fair pretence that no strong Holds should be built, lest the Persian if he Invaded Greece any more, should pos∣sess himself thereof, and gain firm footing in their Country. I don't find that the Ancient Greeks had any formal ways of besieging Towns, further than the raising a Wall about the Place they beleagur'd, whereby they cut off Provisions and Suc∣cors
from the Besieged. Their Engines were but ordinary, and rather invented occasionally than used commonly. By the account we have of the famous Siege of Plataeae, we may Collect what their Methods were in others: It was at first Invested by the Peloponesians and The∣bans; but the former marched home, and left the Siege to the management of the Thebans, who built two Walls of Brick sixteen Foot wide, like the Lines of Con∣travallation and Circumvallation, be∣tween which they posted themselves: After that they raised a Cavallier, or high Mount to over-look the Town. On the contrary, the Besiged erected a wood∣en Wall upon the other of Stone, to in∣tercept the Enemies Prospect into the City, and ran up another of Brick for a Retrenchment, if the outermost should be taken. Whilst the Thebans raised their Cavallier, the Besieged carried a Mine to it, and took away the Earth as fast as the Besiegers brought it, and thereby hin∣dred the advance of the Work. They had also another Device in the Attacking of Towns, which was to carry a great deal of Combustible matter near the Walls, that they set on fire, and for∣cing the Enemy from their Posts with
the Flames, they entred by the benefit thereof, and so carried it on to the Hou∣ses: The Besieged did not make frequent Sallies, for if they had, four hundred and eighty Men could not have defended Plataeoe the space of two years. Towns were taken three ways,  by Assault, by Surrender, when the Garrison and In∣habitants deliver'd up the Place before the Enemy sat down before it: to this latter is opposed , when the E∣nemy made Works, and took the Place by Siege. When the Armies were in the Field, they threw up a Trench, and planted Pal∣lizado's upon it, to secure themselves from the Surprize of an Enemy. The Generals drew up their Battel in the form of a Wedge, and in an Oblong Figure, which sometimes was with the longest side to the Front, and other-whiles the longest side in depth; they drew up sometimes in one, and sometimes in another, accord∣ing as they thought it most for their ad∣vantage. When the Battalions were made deep, or form'd into a Wedge; the De∣sign was to break through the Enemies Battel and to rout them: Though these Forms had their Inconveniences; the first especially, because they being many in
File, and few in Front, the Enemies that Out-winged them, might Flank them, and fall in at those Intervals which were made by the eager and unequal pressing forward of the foremost Ranks, and ruine their Body. Neither would it hold in pa∣rity of Reason, that because a Wedge of Iron would rive a Block, that therefore one of men should pierce a Battalion. The Thebans at the Battel of Leuctra were few in Front, and fifty deep, sup∣posing if they made so strong an Impres∣sion on those about the Lacedemonian King as to Rout them, that they should Defeat the rest with ease; and according∣ly it hapned. The Heavy-arm'd men were Marshalled so as to receive the Light-arm'd men and Targetiers within them; (the ancients Heavy-arm'd men being like our Pike-men) whereby they who had the rising-ground, obtain'd a considerable advantage over those that were drawn up in a Plain: Which Thra∣sybulus took notice of to his Souldiers, when he encouraged them to fight a∣gainst the Thirty Tyrants; telling them that the Enemy stood on a Level, and none but those who were in the Front could make use of their Darts and Lan∣ces; whilst they standing on an Hill,
could employ all hands, and bring every one to fight. Before the Battel began, an Hymn was sung to animate the Souldiers, and the like after by those who had obtained the Victory. Most of the Greeks when they engaged set up a shout, and ran with a full Cry upon the Enemy, but the Lacedemonians differ'd from them in this, for they had Pipers disposed up and down in convenient Stations, who were to play when the Army moved, that the Souldiers might pace according to the Modulation of the Pipes. And whereas the fury and noise affected by others was to beget Courage in them, and hurry them on against the Enemy; the Lace∣demonians advanced, and struck a terrour into their Antagonists, with their Resolu∣tion and Gravity. The greatest disgrace amongst them was to lose their Shields, such being branded with the Name of  Nor was it less reproachful to fly, as may be gathered from the Epi∣gram about an Heroick Woman, who meeting her Son running out of the Field, killed him with this Elogy; that she could forget the Affection of a Mo∣ther, whilst he forgot the Duty of a La∣cedemonian. Their Education and Disci∣pline
made them so terrible, that none cared to engage with them, they being Men positively resolv'd to Conquer, or to die. When a Victory was obtain'd, the Conquerors went to the place where the Battel began, sang an Hymn, and e∣rected a Trophy as a Monument of their Success, and delivered the Slain upon Truce; for the Greeks were very careful to bestow burial upon their Dead, not only out of Decency, but a superstitious Conceit, that the Souls of the Dead were not at rest till the Bodies were interr'd. In order to the making of Peace, there was , a cessation of Arms, till such time as they treated of a Truce or Peace, though generally a Truce or temporary Peace was made; as that of Euboea for thirty years; a second between the Pelo∣ponnesians and Athenians for fifty years; and another for an hundred: The Forms of their Peace were engraven on Pillars, as the Roman Treaties were in the Capi∣tol; and if any Party violated them, the breach hereof was under-written. The Athenian Militia differed from the Spartan: The Athenians being Lords of the Sea, and possest of many Islands, were able to bring a far more numerous Army into the Field than the Lacedemo∣nians,
or any one Estate of Greece. Peri∣cles exciting his Country-men to pursue the War vigorously against the Pelopon∣nesians, tells them that they had thirteen thousand Heavy-arm'd men, besides six∣teen thousand more disperst up and down in the Garisons and Frontiers; to which if we add the proportion of Light-arm'd men and Targetiers, they will make up a very powerful Army. The Forces of the Athenians were called , as those of the Spartans , and oppo∣sed to the Auxiliaries: They were rai∣sed according to the Tribes which were ten in number; for amongst the Hebrews and Romans, the Division by Tribes was accommodated to the Military as well as Civil Government. The , fre∣quently mentioned in this History, were the Captains of the Heavy-arm'd men. They had also a standing Body of Horse, not exceeding a thousand, to which were assigned forty Talents, or seven thousand five hundred pound Sterling for their-year∣ly maintenance. The Cavalry were com∣manded by two Hipparchs or Colonels, who had ten Phylarchs or Captains sub∣ordinate to them; because these were raised by the Tribes as the Heavy-arm'd men.
As for the Naval Forces, the Atheni∣ans excell'd at Sea, as the Lacedemonians did at Land: for Themistocles having o∣verthrown the Persian Fleet in the great Sea-fight at Salamis, encouraged his Country-men to apply themselves to Na∣val Affairs. They followed his Counsels, and in the space of fifty years, partly by their own Industry, and partly by the natural advantage of their Situation, ob∣tain'd the Sovereignty of the Sea. During the time of this War, the Greeks made use of Gallies, which were Ships of considerable Force. The first Gally was built at Corinth, the Greeks having small Vessels before, called from the number of their Oars; as , from thirty, , from fifty Oars. The Gallies now used in the Mediterranean are vastly different from those of the Ancients, and several Learned Men who have written on this Subject; as Bayfius, Jos. Scaliger, in his Animadversions on Eusebius; Stew∣echius in his Notes on Vegetius, Scheffe∣rus, and Palmerius have varied very much in their Opinions. Palmerius brings the Authority of an ancient Author, Printed with Aelian, to prove that Ships terminated in , as , are denominated
from the number of their Oars, and those that end in , as , a Gally, from the several Banks and Distinctions of Rowers, setting one above another in height. Yet we must not understand it so, as that the Rowers sat in distinct Decks, because Ptolemy Philopator's Ship that had forty Banks of Oars, had but forty eight Cubits, or seventy two Feet in height from the water; so that if these had sat in distinct Decks, the men must have been Pygmies, each Deck not having two feet in height. Neither were the Rowers placed above one another in a Perpendicular; for then as great diffi∣culty will remain still. If therefore we suppose the Banks to have been placed obliquely, and to have rose gradually like Stairs, and allow each Bank one Foot, and ¼ Ptolemie's Ship of forty Banks, and seventy two Feet, will require but fifty Feet, and there will remain twenty two for other uses. The Rowers in a Gally were distin∣guished by three Names, the Lowermost were called Thalamaces, and had the shortest Oars, the middle-most Zygitae, and the uppermost Thranitae, who had larger Oars than the other two, and re∣ceived more pay, as the Scholiast of Thu∣cydides
to the sixth Book observes. The Lacedemonians wholly neglected the Sea, being prohibited by their Laws to learn the Customs and Manners of o∣ther Nations; lest Foreigners by their Commerce should Import as well their Vices as Merchandizes. Nor did they set out a Fleet till they were made sensible of the advantage the Enemies had, and the Damage they themselves sustained for the want of one. The Sea-service amongst the Greeks was esteem'd of lesser Dignity than the Land, and the Sea-men were lookt upon as a contemptible sort of men: Nay, the Athenians themselves gave the Command of Ships to land Captains, only taking care to procure them Masters, which were expert Sea-men. The Ships were mann'd with several sorts of men; as Rowers, Sea-men, who Navigated the Ships, and handed the Sails; Epibatae, or Souldi∣ers for Sea-service, and Heavy-arm'd men, which last were employ'd at Sea, because they seldom fighting at a distance, grapled, and made a standing Fight of it, as at Land. I have not met any where with the number of Men, their Ships carried; though I suppose (if we except the Rowers) they had fewer in propor∣tion
than those in our time, because their Men did not fight between the Decks. The Sea-men's Pay varied according to the Times and Exigencies of State; Thucydides says, They had a Drachma, or Seven Pence Half-penny a Day; but we find in the First Book of this History, that Lysander moved Cyrus to encrease the Seamens Pay, and raise it from Three Oboli to a Drachma, which contained six; shewing that the Seamen would come into the Lacedemonian Service, and desert the Athenian; because they always resort thither where most Pay is to be had. At last, Lysander prevailed with Cyrus to raise the Pay to Four Oboli, which was Five Pence English. The Athenians had not always one Admiral, but sometimes more; as when Alcibiades went out, they had Three, and when he was put out of Commission, there were Ten chosen. On the contra∣ry, the Lacedemonians had one Admiral, called Navarchus, who had under him a Vice-Admiral, called Epistoleus, that Commanded in absence of the other. When the Admirals design'd to En∣gage, they left their Main-Masts and Sails ashore, because they were an hindrance to them in time of Fight, especially when
they rowed against the Wind. The man∣ner of their Engaging was to brush off the Enemies Oars, whereby the Ship was disabled, and to give each other the shock: whereupon the Prows of the Ships were fortified with strong pieces of Tim∣ber and Brass; they always striving to strike a Ship on her side, that being the weakest part of her, and he that was at∣tacked, endeavoured to receive the stroak on his Prow, or decline it. There were three Figures that the Fleets usually drew up in, which they did upon several accounts, according as they saw it most advantagious. There was the , or Half-Moon; in this they pla∣ced the strongest Ships in both the Horns: If the Ships were nimble, they drew up  in a Line, or Series, that they might surround the Enemy; sometimes in a close Body, and that was when they were bad Sailers: because by this Figure they could sustain the shock of the nim∣ble Ships, that they might not break through them. Other-whiles they rang'd their Ships in a mixt Form; some in a Body, and some in a Line or single Or∣der, called . After a Victory was obtain'd, they erected a Trophy in some convenient
place on the Continent, and the , or Stems, (though Schefferus will have them to be Jacks and Colours) were ta∣ken by the Victors, and born in Tri∣umph. ☞ Note that the Stater mentioned in the Fift Book, ought rather in proportion to be understood of the Silver Coin, which Scaliger values at Four Drachma's, or 2 s. 6 d. Sterling, than of the Golden Coin, which W. Snellius prizes at 25 Drach∣ma's, or 15 s. 7 d. ob.
THE CONTENTS. AN Abstract of the Peloponesian War out of Thucydides. Page 1. Xenophon's History of the Affairs of Greece. LIB. I. A Fight between the Lacedemonians and Athenians, in which Mindarus the La∣cedemonian Admiral is slain. Hermo∣crates, and the Syracusian Admirals are banished by the People. Alcibiades re∣turns from Exile, and is made Genera∣lissimo. He leaves the Fleet under the Command of Antiochus his Captain, who in his Absence engages with Lysander, and is beaten, which ruined Alcibiades. The great Sea-Fight near Arginusae wherein the Lacedemonians were van∣quished, and Callicratidas their Admi∣ral slain. The Athenian Admirals are tried for not taking up their men in
the Fight, unjustly condemned, and put to Death. p: 31. LIB. II. Eteonicus prevents the Conspiracy of his Soldiers. Lysander surprises the Athe∣nian Fleet at Aegospotamos. Athens besieged, and taken by Lysander. The Thirty Tyrants set up. Thrasybulus expels them. p. 81. LIB. III. The Heroick Mania succeeds her Hus∣band in his Province, and is barbarously murdered by Zenis, her Son in Law. A∣gis dies, and Agesilaus succeeds him. Cinado's Plot. Agesilaus's Expedition into Asia. The War breaks out between the Thebans and Lacedemonians. Ly∣sander is slain before the Walls of Ha∣liartus. p. 133. LIB. IV. The Marriage Treaty between Cotys King of Paphlagonia, and Spithridates's Daughter. The Thebans are vanquisht by the Lacedemonians in a Sea-Fight at Cnidus. The Battel at Chaeronea. The Massacre at Corinth. Corinth sur∣prized
by the Argives, and recovered by Praxitas. The Walls of Athens rebuilt by Conon. Antalcidas is sent to Teri∣bazus the Persian to negotiate a Peace. The Lacedemonians defeated by Iphi∣crates, and Anaxibius their General slain. p. 189. LIB. V. Teleutias a Famous General. Antalcidas returns from Persia with Articles of Peace, and a Peace is made. Mantinea taken, and the Citizens obliged to live in Villages. The Citadel of Thebes be∣trayed to the Lacedemonians, and re∣covered. Teleutias slain at Olynthus, Agesipolis dies. The Lacedemonians Power declines. The Thebans draw the Athenians into the War against the La∣cedemonians. Sphodrias impeached for beginning the War, and acquitted. p. 261. LIB. VI. Jason made Captain General of Thessaly. Mnasippus the Lacedemonian Ad∣miral ruined by his Avarice. Iphicrates a Famous General of the Athenians. The States of Greece Assemble about making a Peace. A Peace is made and
broken. The Battel at Leuctra wherein the Lacedemonians are overthrown by the Thebans. Jason is murdered in the height of his Glory. The Lacedemoni∣ans beg Assistance of the Athenians a∣gainst the Thebans. p. 327. LIB. VII. A Treaty betwixt the Lacedemonians and the Athenians. The Rise of the Arca∣dians under Lycomedes. The Thebans projecting to enslave Greece, send Pelo∣pidas to treat with the King of Persia. The signal Fidelity of the Phliasians to the Lacedemonians. Euphron the Ty∣rant of Sicyon assassinated. The Battel at Mantinea, wherein Epaminondas was slain. p. 389.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE Peloponnesian War, OUT OF THUCYDIDES. LIB. I. THE Greeks having vanquisht the formidable Armies of Da∣rius and Xerxes, became the most renowned People in the World. And from that time the Lacedemonians, and Athenians encreasing their Power, and Forces, the rest of the lesser States sided with the one, or other of them, according as their Inclinations or Interests led them. But the Lacedemonians employing their
Arms at Land, engaged those they sub∣dued, only to conform their Government to the Spartan Model, not exacting any Tri∣bute from them. On the contrary, the Athenians by the Encouragement of The∣mistocles having set out a Fleet, reduced with it the Islands of the Aegean Sea, improv'd their Commerce, and obliged their Allys to pay certain Impositions, and Taxes; whereby they became exceeding Wealthy, and Powerful. The growth of the Athenians imposed a necessity on the Lacedemonians of making War: The pretence of which was Epidam∣nus a Colony of the Corcyreans: Who growing first Rich, and then Factious, ba∣nished several of their Citizens. The Exiles joyning with the Barbarians brought the Epidamnians so low, that they were ne∣cessitated to send for Succour to Corcy∣ra their Mother-City. But, the Corcy∣reans rejecting their request, they dis∣patcht Messengers to the Oracle to inquire, Whether they might not surrender to the Corinthians as their Founders: Because Phalius that setled the Colony was a Co∣rinthian. The Oracle answered them, They might, accordingly they profered their Submission to them, and they readily accepted it, out
of hatred to the Corcyreans; who were a Corinthian Colony, but had cast off their Founders, and in the publick Solemnities did not according to the Custom of Colo∣nies make use of a Corinthian Arch-Priest, but becoming by their Wealth, and Naval Forces equal to the most powerful States of Greece, despised them. Thereupon the Corcyreans going with a Fleet against Epidamnus blockt it up, and beat the Corinthians, that came to the relief of the place, and took it the same day. The Summer following, the Corinthians resolving to revenge their former disgrace, made very great Preparations, obliging the Corcyreans to enter into a League de∣fensive with the Athenians, that the lat∣ter might not break theirs with the Pe∣loponnesians: Yet the Athenians foresaw, that they should be engag'd in a War with the Lacedemonians, because the former would not let such an important place as Corcyra, that had so considerable a Naval Force, and lay so convenient for Transpor∣ting an Army into Italy, and Sicily, be an Accession to the Corinthians: Therefore the Corinthians put to Sea with a Fleet of 150 Sail, and overthrew the Corcyreans in an Engagement, soon after breaking
with the Athenians for assisting the Cor∣cyreans. The Athenians suspecting there would be a Rupture, that they might be before-hand with them, Commanded the Potideans their Tributaries, and a Colony of the Corinthians, to demolish their Walls towards Pallene, to give Hostages, to expel their Magistrates sent by the Corinthi∣ans, and not to receive them for the Future. When the Potideans could get no abatement of these Terms propos'd by the Athenians, they went with the Corinthian Ambassa∣dors to Lacedemon, and obtain'd an assu∣rance, that in Case the Athenians made War upon the Potideans, the Lacedemo∣nians would enter Attica with an Army. The Potideans having strengthned them∣selves with the Alliances of their Neigh∣bours revolted; whereupon the Athenians went with an Army, and besieged them. The noise of this Siege brought the Co∣rinthian Ambassadors, and several others to Lacedemon with Complaints against the Athenians. After a full hearing of the Case the Lacedemonians induced by the apprehensions they had of the Athenians Power, who had already subdued a great part of Greece, declared, that the Athe∣nians were the Aggressors. The Lacede∣monians also to make the War appear more
specious on their side, sent Ambassadors to expostulate with the Athenians, to require them to raise the Siege of Potidea; and permit Aegina to be governed by its own Laws: Especially to revoke the Decree prohibiting the Megareans the Free∣dom of the Athenian Ports, and Markets. Whilst these things were debating in the Council, Pericles an eloquent Person, and the greatest Man in Athens of his time, opposed their Demands: Shewing that these were no sufficient grounds for a War, and that if they yeilded in this, the Lace∣demonians would impose more upon them: That the Confederates had many different Interests, that their Counsels were divided, and came not to any sudden resolve. On the contrary, that the Athe∣nians had a considerable Fleet, wherewith they could make frequent Descents, and give the Enemy a powerful Diversion. And because their Strength consisted chiefly in Islands, having only Attica that lay open to the Depredations of the Enemy, they could not sustain so great losses by Land, as the Confederates. Therefore this Answer should be return'd them, That they would permit the Megareans the Freedom of their Ports, and Markets: Provided the Lacedemonians would grant the Athenians,
and their Allys (who were Aliens in Spar∣ta) the Priviledges of their own Subjects. That they would restore the Cities to their Liberty, if they did enjoy the said Liberty, before the League was made. Provided also, that the Lacedemonians would do the like to the Cities under their Juris∣diction, and not oblige them to conform to the Model of their Government: And that they desired to adjust these Diffe∣rences by Treaty, as being unwilling to be∣gin a War, but ready to defend themselves against one. LIB. II. The Peloponnesian War began the fif∣teenth of the thirty year Truce made af∣ter the taking of Euboea,The Pelo∣ponnesian War be∣gan the Lxxxvii Olymp. when Py∣thodorus was Archon, who con∣tinued on∣ly for two Months in his Office, and then about the 11 of June Euthyde∣mus suc∣ceeded him occasioned by the Thebans, who were let into Plataea by some Conspirators: But the Townsmen be∣ing more inclined to the Interest of the Athenians, and coming to themselves, set upon the Thebans, who being not able to defend what they had taken were over∣powred, and put to the Sword. The Athe∣nians placed a Garrison in the Town, and thus the League being broken, both sides made Alliances, and Preparations to carry on the War. Afterwards, when the Pe∣loponnesians
sent an Army into Attica un∣der the leading of Archidamus, with whom Pericles had contracted by hospitality a Friendship; lest the other might spare his Lands, either out of respect, or to render him suspected, he assembled the People, and acquainted them, that if the Enemy forbore his Estate, be would bestow it on the Publick. He also commanded the Peo∣ple to abandon the Country, and retire into the Garrisons, and places of Security: There being no Preparation made against the Lacedemonians; it caused great discontent, for that they being used to the fresh Air, were now forced to crowd up in Towns; whilst the Lacedemonians inva∣ded Attica, the Athenians having a Fleet of an 150 Sail, and considering the Island Aegina lay convenient for them, drove out the Inhabitants thereof; and made seve∣ral Descents on Peloponnesus, and other places. This Winter were solemnized the Funerals of the first slain in the War, and Pericles made the Oration in praise of them. This year a terrible Plague having travelled over most part of the World ar∣riv'd at Athens,Second year and third of the Olymp-Apollodorus Archon. which seized the Atheni∣ans both at home, and abroad, but did not enter Peloponnesus: Tho the apprehensions
thereof, made the Army return sooner out of the Athenian Territories, than other∣wise they had intended. The People being consumed with Sword, Depredations, and Pestilence, clamored against Pericles, as being the only cause of their Calamities. Thereupon he assembling them together, heartned them up to prosecute the War vigorously, and not be discouraged; ad∣vising them to apply themselves wholly to their Sea-Affairs, and not to despond. Pericles at length died two years and six Months after the first breaking out of the War. In the latter end of Summer Ari∣staeus the Corinthian, and some Lacede∣monians, intending a Voyage into Persia, to procure Money from the King thereof to∣wards carrying on of the War; went by the way to Sitalces King of Thrace, solliciting him to break with the Athenians, and march with his Army to the relief of Potidea. But the Athenian Ambassadors prevailing with the King to deliver them up, they sent them from thence to Athens, and there threw them into deep Pits without any form of Justice: In return to the Lacedemonians that had given the like Treatment, to some Athenian Mer∣chants taken off of Peloponnesus. This Winter Potidea was surrendred upon good
Conditions, after the Siege of it had stood the Athenians in 2000. Talents.375000 l. The Peloponnesians invested Plataea,III. Year of the War Epaminon∣das Archon. which made a brave defence: Where∣upon the Lacedemomans, leaving the Boeo∣tians to maintain the Works, and carry on the Siege, finished their Campagne. Du∣ring this Siege the Athenians made War with the Chalcideans, and Bottiaeans: But they being relieved from Olynthus, and other places, fought the Athenians, and over-came them, compelling them to retire with their broken Forces to Potidea, and from thence home to Athens. Before the Fleets were laid up, Brasidas, and the other Peloponnesian Admirals resolved to make an Attempt upon the Piraeus, which was not well Guarded, because the Atheni∣ans were Lords of the Sea, and appre∣hended no Danger on that side. In order to their Design, they went over Land to Megara, and launch'd some Ships at Ni∣saea the Port Town thereof, yet ventured not on the Piraeus, because they thought that too desperate a Design; but fell upon the three Guardships that lay at Budorum in Salamis over against Megara, and burning them, plundred Salamis, and put the Peo∣ple of Athens into a great Consternation: Who discovered the Beacons on fire. In
the beginning of this Winter Sitalces King of Thrace, made War against Perdiccas King of Macedon with an Army of 150000 men, wasting his Country; and caused the People to fly into the Mountains, striking a Terror into all the neighbouring Nations. Which occasioned the Enemies of the A∣thenians to say, That they had called in such a Confederate, as was likely to be∣come their Master. Phormio the Athe∣nian Admiral returned Victorious with his spoils to Athens. LIB. III. About Harvest time the Peloponne∣sians invaded Attica,IV. Year Olymp. Lxxxviii Diotimus Archon. and having destroy∣ed the Corn, returned home again. Soon after this Incursion Lesbos revolted, and the Athenians being informed, that the People would be assembled at a Feast kept by the Lesbians, in Honour of Apollo Ma∣lois, where they easily might be surprised; fitted out 40 Sail of Ships. But the Les∣bians having Intelligence thereof prepared to receive them; and sent to Lacedemon for speedy relief. The Lacedemonians directed them to Olympia, where the Peo∣ple of Greece were met to celebrate the Games, and there to desire their Assistance
against the Athenians. The Allies admit∣ted the Lesbians into the League. This Summer the Athenians set out the greatest Fleet they ever had at Sea, consisting of 250 Sail. The Souldiers and Seaman's pay was a Drachma a day,7 d. ob. which great ex∣pence exhausted the publick Treasure. The Plataeans having been besieged all this while, and in extreme want, above 200 of them prepared Ladders, proportioning their length by the number, and breadth of the Bricks in the Enemies wall, and pas∣sing their Works by favour of a stormy Night escaped to Athens. Early in the Spring the Peloponnesians fell into Attica,V. Year Euclides Archon. and destroyed every thing that had escaped them in former Incursions. At the same time Alcidas went with a Fleet to relieve Mitylene in Lesbos, which was distressed for want of Provisions; but did not arrive time enough. At last the Lesbians desponding of Succours: Sa∣laethus who had hitherto kept the People disarmed, now gave them Arms with an intent to Sally out upon the Enemy, but the People turned Tail, threatning, that unless they who had Corn would bring it out, and divide it, they would make their Composi∣tion, and deliver up the place to the E∣nemy. The chief Men seeing they could
not resist the Will of the Rabble, and fear∣ing that they themselves should be excluded: Did by an universal Consent treat with Paches the Athenian General, and sur∣rendred upon Discretion. The Authors of the revolt expecting a rude Treatment from the Athenians fled to the Altars; from whence they were taken by force, and sent to Tenedos, where they were kept till they could be conveyed to Athens. After∣wards when they were arrived there, Sa∣laethus the Lacedemonian Governor, and the rest were put to death. A Decree was also made, and sent to Mitylene to do Justice on the rest of the Conspirators, and to make Slaves of the Women, and Children. Which Cruelty, after the Orders were gone, the Athenians repented of; and prevented the Execution of it by sen∣ding thither a Countermand. Yet they put above 1000 to Death, that were the Heads of the Conspiracy, and demolish∣ed the Walls of Mitylene. About this time the Plataeans wanting Provisions, and worn out with a long Siege, were forced to surrender to the Lacedemonians: Who instigated by the Thebans, cruelly put them to Death, and razed the City. The Peloponnesian Fleet going to relieve Les∣bos arrived too late, and in their return
hearing of a Sedition, betwixt the chief Men, and Commons at Corcyra sailed thither hoping to make themselves Masters of it. But tho they beat the Corcyrean, and Athenian Navy, yet they durst not attempt the City, because the People had the better, who committed horrible Out∣rages, and encouraged several other places in Greece, by their Example to be Sedi∣tious; whilst the Peoples Patriots called in the Athenians; and the chief Men, the Lacedemonians. In the beginning of Win∣ter the Athenians sent a Fleet to Sicily, under Charoeades, to assist the Leontini a∣gainst the Syracusians, and the Doric Towns in League with the Lacedemonians. At this time the Plague broke out again at Athens, and consumed such multitudes of People, and Soldiers, that nothing through∣out the War was so grievous. Demosthenes invaded the Aetolians at first with good Success,VII. Eu∣thydemus Archon. but afterwards was vanquisht, and lost the Flower of the A∣thenian Army. The Athenians expiated Delos by Command of the Oracle, and car∣ried all the Tombs out of the Island, or∣dering that for the Future none should dye, nor any Women be brought to Bed there, but be transported into the Isle Rhe∣nea. Demosthenes joyning the Acarnani∣ans,
had better Success against the Ambra∣ciots, and overthrew them near Olpae. This Victory brought him again into Favour, having lost himself before. Ʋpon which there followed a Peace betwixt the Acar∣nanians, and Ambraciots. LIB. IV. The Athenian Fleet going to Sicily,VII: Stra∣tocles Ar∣chon. were ordered in their way to observe how Affairs stood at Corcyra, and by the ad∣vice of Demosthenes surprised Pylus in Messene. The Lacedemonians came to recover the place, and Landed in Spha∣cteria, an Island that lay before Pylus: In∣tending to block up the Channels, so that no Ships could enter to the relief of those in Pylus. The Athenians at first repul∣sed them, and after the arrival of their Fleet from Zacynthus, beat them: Obli∣ging the Lacedemonians to deliver sixty Ships, till the return of their Ambassa∣dors from Athens, who went thither to treat of a Peace, and then to be re-deli∣vered. But Cleon a Popular man made such exhorbitant Demands, that the Lacedemonians rejected them, and retur∣ned. This Cleon, Fool-hardily engaged to take Sphacteria, and had the good For∣tune
to perform his rash Enterprise. Tho this was accounted as strange, and un∣expected an Accident, as any hap'ned du∣ring the War; because the Lacedemoni∣ans were so well secured in this Island, that they thought none could Force them. From Pylus the Athenian Fleet went to Corcy∣ra, and joyning with them in the City, compelled the Seditious, that had retired to the Hill Isto, and from thence infested the Country, to surrender, and to remain Prisoners till such time as Orders came from Athens about them. But in Case any one of them offered to make his escape, then all were to lose the benefit of the Treaty. The other Corcyreans fearing the Atheni∣ans would not do Justice on them, secretly invited some to fly: And thus the Conditi∣ons being broken they were all delivered up to the Corcyreans, by whom some of them wer cruelly put to Death, and the rest had a very miserable end. Nicias with his Fleet takes the Island Cythera, a place of great importance,VIII. Olymp. Lysarchus Archon. and guarded by the Lacedemonians. The Ca∣marinaeans, and Geloans made Truce, and the other Sicilian States invited by this, send their Deputies to treat for a General Peace, which was promoted by Hermocra∣tes the Syracusian. Who shewed the A∣thenians
lay only to watch an Opportunity to master them all, when they were suffi∣ciently weakened, and proved this to be their Design; for that they had banished two Admirals, and fined a third, because they did not oppose the Treaty of Peace. The Magareans deliberating a∣bout recalling their Exiles, some resolved rather then they would admit that, to de∣liver up the City to the Athenians, who accordingly came, but were frustrated of their Design, yet they invested Nisaea the port Town to Megara, and took it. Bra∣sidas hast'ned to the relief of Megara, which kept it self Neuter, till either the Lacedemonians, or Athenians got the bet∣ter, but when the latter durst not fight they surrendred to the Lacedemonians as Conquerors. After this Brasidas being in∣vited into Thrace by Perdiccas, took his way through Thessaly, and was in Danger to have disputed his Passage for marching through the Territories of those Princes without their leave first obtained. In Thrace several Towns came over to the Lacedemonians upon the Promise of Li∣berty, and being govern'd by their own Laws. The Athenians fortifying Delium, which was sacred to Apollo, contrary to the Custom of Greece, were beaten by the
Boeotians, who attempted the recovery of it, and sat down before the place. At length Delium was taken by a new devised Engine, made of a vast great Yard of a Ship, bored through, and plated over with Iron at one end: To which was fixed a pot filled with Sulphur, and other Combu∣stible matter. Then it being applyed to a part of the Wall where dry Vines were, the Besiegers blew with an huge pair of Bellows through the bore of the Yard, and made such a Fire that none was able to keep upon the Wall, or withstand it, and there the Enemy entred the Town. Brasidas took several places in Thrace, and put new Life into the Affairs of the Lacedemonians, rendring the Athenians Contemptible thereby, as if they had not force enough wherewith to oppose them. Truce was made between the Lacede∣monians, and Athenians for a year,IX. Amyntas Archon. yet Scione, and Mende revolted to Brasidas after the making thereof. Which so Ir∣ritated the Athenians, that they neglect∣ing the War in all other places, applyed themselves wholly to reduce these two: They took Mende and Besieg'd Scione. Perdiccas disgusted at Brasidas, made a League with the Athenians.
LIB. V. Cleon Sailing with the Athenian Fleet to Thrace took Torone;X. Alcaeus Archon. and coming be∣fore Amphipolis, which Brasidas defended, he was not able to carry the place, but de∣camped. The Lacedemonians Sallied out, and falling upon them in their Retreat, routed them. In this Shirmish both Ge∣nerals were slain; Brasidas was carried in∣to the City, and Honorably buried; Anni∣versary Games were also performed to him, as to an Hero. After the fall of Cleon, and Brasidas, that so stifly opposed the making of Peace, the Lacedemonians recoved again; and the extraordinary Suc∣cess of the Athenians, being ballanced by the two defeats at Delium, and Amphi∣polis, both Parties inclined to an Ac∣commodation. And accordingly a Peace was concluded at the end of Winter, which dissatisfied several of the Lacedemonian Allies. Soon after the Peace,XI. Ariston Ar∣chon. the Lacedemoni∣ans, and Athenians made a League offen∣sive, and defensive for fifty years: But it was kept only for six years, and ten Months. Yet the War might truly be said to conti∣nue for all this League, because neither
Party performed what they agreed to; the League being broke both in the Mantinean, and Epidaurian Wars. About this time the Truce for thirty years between the La∣cedemonians, and Argives expired. There∣upon the Corinthians, and discontented Confederates joyned with the Argives, ap∣prehending the two powerful Republicks had combined to enslave the rest of Greece. The Lacedemonians longing to have Py∣lus restored, had it intimated by the Athenians, that provided the Boeotians would restore Panactum to them, the La∣cedemonians should be re-possessed of Py∣lus. Yet the Boeotians refused to part with Panactum unless the Lacedemonians would make a private League with them, which they did, tho they knew it was con∣trary to that they had made with the A∣thenians; wherein it was provided that no Treaty should be made without the joynt Consent of them both. The Boeotians having demolished Pa∣nactum the last Winter,XII. Olymp. XC. Aristophy∣lus Archon. the Athenians resented it extremely ill, thinking they did it by the Instigation of the Lacede∣monians. And therefore meeting with a favourable Conjuncture, they made an Alli∣ance with the Argives, and other Confe∣derates.
A War broke out betwixt the Epidauri∣ans,XIII. Archias Archon. and Argives, because the former refused to send a Victim to Apollo Pythius, whose Temple belonged chiefly to the Care of the Argives. The Argives assisted by the Athenians, made several Incursions into Epidaurus under the Con∣duct of Alcibiades. The Lacedemonians being Confederated with the Epidaurians,XIV. Antiphon Archon. went with a great Army against Argos, and empounded the Argives: when the Battles were ready to joyn, two of their Generals came to Agis, and parlied. At last a Truce was made for four Months, and Agis march'd off with his Army to the Grief of the Souldiers, that had a Prospect of so fair an Advan∣tage, and so great a Spoil. Afterwards the Athenians came with considerable Re∣cruits, and perswaded the Argives to break the Truce, telling them 'twas not good, be∣cause it was made without the Privity of the other Confederates. Ʋpon that they besieged Orchomenus in Arcadia, and took it. From thence they went to Tegea, which was relieved by the Lacedemoni∣ans, a Battle was fought, the Argives beaten, and a Peace concluded betwixt these two Republicks.XV. Euphemus Archon. The Argives breaking with the Lace∣demonians
made a League with the Athe∣nians, and for fear of the former built Long Walls from their City to the Sea, that they might receive the Assistance of the Athenians on that side. But whilst they were building, the Lacedemonians came with an Army, and razed them. The Athenians resolving the Melians should acknowledge their Sovereignty as the rest of the Islanders did:XVII. Olymp. XCI. Aristomne∣stus Archon. Went with a Fleet against Melos. At the coming of a second Army they took the place, put all the men to the Sword, and carried the Women, and Children Captives. LIB. VI. The Athenians sent a Fleet to Sicily in∣vited thither by the Egestaeans, that made War upon the Selinuntians; which latter were aided by the Syracusians, en∣gaging in this Enterprise with so much Precipitation, and hast, that they ne'r examined how great an Island it was, not imagining that it required as great Forces to subdue it, as Peloponnesus. This year the Athenians Equipped a Fleet of sixty Sail for Sicily under the Admirals Alcibiades, Nicias,XVII. Chabrias Archon. and Lama∣chus, whilst these Preparations were ma∣king,
the Images of Mercury were defa∣ced; and a Reward proposed to any that would discover the Authors. At length some informed, that Alcibiades had spoiled several Statues. Thereupon his Enemies concluded, he must needs have done the other, inferring it from his free and loose way of Living. Alcibiades profered to take his Tryal upon it, but it was thought fit to let him go the Sicilian Voyage, and if there appeared any Matters against him, to call him to an account afterwards. The whole Fleet met at Corcyra, and thence parted for Sicily, where some time after their arrival, they surprised Catana. The Athenians called Alcibiades home to An∣swer his Charge, for Prophaning the My∣steries, and defacing the Images; where∣upon he took Shipping, pretending to Sail for Athens, but going ashore at Thurij, he gave them the slip, and went to Pelopon∣nesus. The Athenians, and Syracusians engaged, but the latter are overcome, and the Athenians wintered at Naxus. Alci∣biades coming to Lacedemon in Company of the Sicilian Ambassadors, animated the Lacedemonians against the Athenians: Who thereupon resolve to assist the Syracu∣sians, and send them Supplies under the Command of Gylippus.
The Athenians besiege Syracuse,XVIII. Pisander Archon. Lamachus is slain, and the sole Command of the Army devolved to Nicias. Gylip∣pus hastens to the relief of Syracuse, but by reason of the small Force he had, is contemned by Nicias, who took no Care to secure himself against the Attempts of an Enemy. The Athenians by aiding the Ar∣gives openly break their League with the Lacedemonians, LIB. VII. Gylippus arrives at Himera first, and there having made Alliances with several Communities of the Sicilians, went from thence to Syracuse, and coming thither be∣fore the Athenians had finished their double Wall about the Town, Lands, and Encamps with his Army. The Syracusians cut off part of the Athenian's Works with a Coun∣ter-Wall. By the advice of Alcibiades,XIX. Cleocritus Archon. the Lace∣demonians entred Attica this Campagne, and fortified Decelea: Which was a place of great importance, being distant from A∣thens about 120 Furlongs and not much more from Boeotia: It could be seen to A∣thens, and lay very conveniently for ma∣king Incursions. The Syracusians, and
Athenians had an Engagement within their great Haven, wherein the former were beaten, but in a second Engagement the Athenians were overcome. After the Plemmyrium was taken, which Command∣ed the Port, no Provisions could be car∣ried in thither without fighting. Demo∣sthenes, and Eurymedon being sent with a new Army; resolved forthwith upon their arrival to attack Syracuse, which Nicias neglecting to attempt at his first coming, witnered at Naxus, and so came after∣wards to be despised. The Athenians by Night Attack'd a part of the City called Epipolae: And after a confused, and du∣bious Shirmish, were repulsed by the Syra∣cusians. In this Fight many of the same side through mistake, because it was in the Night, became so earnestly engaged, that they could hardly be parted. After the Fight Demosthenes advised to march away. But Nicias fearing the Athenians at home would not rise up from before the place without their Order: Supposing his own Army was in a better Condition, than the Syracusian, this being now exhausted by the War, and depending chiefly on Mercenaries, who would desert when pay failed. At last he decamped when the Moon was Eclipsed, and by the Priest's directions superstitiously staid twenty seven days.
In the mean time Gylippus coming with Recruits from most Parts of Sicily strange∣ly raised the Expectations of the Syracu∣sians: who thereupon engaging the Atheni∣ans in the great Haven, beat them, and blockt up the mouth of the Port, which was eight forlongs over, with their Ships a∣stern one another. The Athenians tried their Fortune again, to see if they could break through the Syracusian Fleet, but were beaten a second time, after a very ter∣rible, and desperate Fight; which deje∣cted the Seamen so much, that they could not be perswaded to go on board again, though the Athenians had more Ships fit for Service than the Enemy, but resolved to march away by Land. Hermocrates suspecting the Enemie's Design, proposed the sending of Forces to take all the difficult Passes, and cut off their Retreat. But the Soldiers for joy of the Victory, and because Hercules his Feast was kept at that time, were so taken up with drinking, and other Di∣versions, that they could by no means be prevailed with to persue the Victory. Thereupon Hermocrates sent some to the Athenian Camp, who pretended to be their Friends, and that they came out of kind∣ness to inform them; that the Syracusians
had possessed themselves of the Passes, and intended to cut off their retreat. The Athenians giving credit to them, did not Decamp till three days after: When Gy∣lippus had really done so; In the Retreat Demosthenes with his part of the Army sur∣rendred upon conditions; but Nicias yielded himself a Prisoner to Gylippus: who had a desire to have saved him, yet being over∣come by the importunity of the Army was forced to kill him. The Athenians were put into the Quar∣ries being miserably treated, and those that survived their hard usage were sold for Slaves. Thus ended the Sicilian War. LIB. VIII. The Athenians were unwilling at first to give credit to this great Defeat, but at last being convinced of the truth, became enraged at their Prophets and Priests; who by a Religious Pretext had betrayed them into a vain hope of conquering Sicily. Hereupon the Lacedemonians, and the Confederates exerted their utmost power in carrying on the War. And on the contrary the Athenians would not submit to their misfortune, but resolved to support their Allies, and equip a Fleet. Yet many of the Athenians Confederates revolted from
them; and the other Greeks, that had hi∣therto stood Neuter, now longed to come into the War, thinking to make a short cut of it. A League was concluded between the King of Persia, and the Lacedemonians.XX. year of the War: Olymp. Xcii. Cal∣lias Ar∣chon. The Athenians chased twenty Peloponne∣sian Ships into the Pireus, and blockt them up, but the latter forcing their passage took four of the Athenians. The Athenians made a Descent near Panormus in the Countrey of the Milesians; where they had a Fight in which Chalcideus was slain. This Action rendred Alcibiades suspected to the Lacedemonians: so that they sent Astyochus private Orders to dispatch him. But he made his escape to Tissaphernes, and there did the Peloponnesians all the ill Offices he possibly could, perswading him to retrench the Sea-men's pay; and put off those that came to demand Money with this Answer, That they had no reason to expect any from Tissaphernes, because what he did was for their preservation, and that they might as well maintain them∣selves now as they had done before, whilst they sided with the Athenians. He advised him also to spin out the War, and let neither side grow too power∣ful, lest one got the Command of all; where∣by the King his Master would want some
body to keep the Conquerors under. This Alcibiades did to procure himself to be recalled from Banishment, knowing the favour and respect he had from Tissapher∣nes would much promote it. When some came from Samos to have a Conference with him; he told them if he was recalled, he would procure them an Alliance with the King of Persia. Provided also they would reform the Government, and put it into the hands of the Nobles, and such as the King could trust, because the Demo∣cracy was administred by ill men. Phrynichus opposed the recalling Alci∣biades, fearing, if he returned, that he would be his Enemy, and sent to Astyo∣chus the Lacedemonian General, that Al∣cibiades was treating with Tissaphernes to bring him over to the Athenian Interest. These Letters were conveyed to Alcibiades, which being returned to Samos, brought Phrynichus into extreme danger. But he to prevent it, dispatched other Letters to Astyochus, informing him, that he himself would betray the whole Army to him, dis∣covering how it might be surprized, and that Samos was not walled. Astyochus sent Alcibiades these Letters likewise, which Phrynichus understanding resolv'd to prevent this danger too, and ac∣quainted
the Army, that he was assured the Lacedemonians would attack them, and therefore he would have them fortifie Samos with all Expedition. These Letters came afterwards to the Camp, but Phrynichus so wrought with the Army, that no credit was given to Alcibi∣ades, supposing he had only guessed at things by foresight. At length there came De∣puties from the Samians, and informed the Athenians, how great an Ascendant Alci∣biades had over Tissaphernes, and that if he was recalled, he was capable of doing them Service, whereupon Pisander prevail∣ed that himself and ten more should be sent to treat with Tissaphernes,Xxi. Year of the War. Theopom∣pus. Archon. and Alcibiades. Pisander returned to Athens, where he and Theramenes the Son of Agnon, changed the Democracy into a Government of 400 men. Thrasybulus proposing to the Army at Samos, that Alcibiades should be recal∣led, they both restored, and gave him his pardon. Whereupon he went and condu∣cted him to Samos, and soon after his arri∣val he was chosen General. He being ad∣vanced to this new Preferment, went to show himself to Tissaphernes, and to let him know that he was now in a condition either to serve, or incommodate him. Af∣ter Alcibiades returned home, the Pelopon∣nesians
began to suspect Tissaphernes, and talk hard of him. About that time a Mutiny hapned in the Lacedemonian Army, proceeding to such a degree, that the Soldiers had like to have killed Astyochus their General. Soon after Mindarus succeeded Astyochus in his Command. Hegesandridas came a∣bout that time from Megara with the Pe∣loponnesian Fleet, intending to make some attempt upon the Athenians, whilst they were in Tumult and Confusion. The Athe∣nians fearing he would fall upon Euboea, on which they chiefly depended, sent out Thymochares with a Fleet, who was be∣trayed by the Eretrians, and beaten, upon which the loss of Euboea followed. When they heard this, they set out another Fleet, and deposing the 400 chose 5000 into the Government. After this change the Athe∣nians came to themselves, and put things into order. Pisander and all the 400 re∣tired to Decelea, except Aristarchus who went to Oenoe, and betrayed it to the Boe∣otians. Towards the end of Summer Thra∣sylus, and Thrasybulus the Athenian Ad∣mirals engaged with Mindarus, and over∣came him, which was welcome News to them at Athens, who before dreaded the Pelo∣ponnesians, and never expected such good Success again.
XENOPHON'S History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. I. THE CONTENTS. A Fight between the Lacedemonians and Athenians, in which Mindarus the La∣cedemonian Admiral is slain. Hermo∣crates and the Syracusian Admirals are banished by the People. Alcibiades returns from Exile, and is made Gene∣ralissimo: He leaves his Fleet under the Command of Antiochus his Captain; who in his Absence engages with Lysan∣der, and is beaten; which ruined Alci∣biades.
The great Sea-fight near Ar∣ginusae, wherein the Lacedemonians were vanquished, and Callicratidas their Admiral slain. The Athenian Admi∣rals are tried for not taking up their men in the Fight, unjustly condemned, and put to death. NOT many Days after this Thymochares coming with a small Fleet from Athens, forth∣with the Lacedemonians, and Athenians had another Engagement; wherein the former commanded by He∣gesandridas obtained the Victory. A little while after in the beginning of Win∣ter, Dorieus the Son of Diagoras came up the Hellespont by break of day, with four∣teen Sail from Rhodes: which when the Athenian day-scout discovered, he made his Sign to the Admirals, and they bore up to him with twenty Sail; upon that Dorieus fled, and having, to come out of a Haven or streight into Sea∣room. Virgil uses aperitur for a Sea∣term, Aen. 111. v. 275. doubled Cape Rhoeteum haled up his Gallies ashore: When the Athenians came up close to him, he fought them both from on board his Ships, and from the Shore, till they not having effected any thing, stood off to the rest of their Fleet at Ma∣dytus.
Mindarus seeing the Fight, as he was sa∣crificing at Ilium to Minerva, ran with great diligence to the Sea-shore, and launching his Gallies set sail to joyn Do∣rieus. The Athenians bore up with him near Abydus, and engaged him by the Shore from Morning till Night. Whilst the Fight continued dubious, Alcibiades came in with eighteen Sail, upon which the Peloponnesians fled to Abydus, whi∣ther Pharnabazus came to their Assist∣ance, and entring the Sea on Horseback, as far as he was able, fought, and encou∣raged his Horse and Foot to do the like. The Peloponnesians joyned their Ships to∣gether, and drawing up in a Body fought from off the Shore. At last the Atheni∣ans departed with thirty empty Ships they had taken from the Enemy, and those of their own they had formerly lost, and carried them to Sestos. From thence all but forty sailed for several Parts without the Hellespont to collect Tri∣bute; and Thrasylus one of the Athenians went to Athens to carry the News, and to demand Supplies of Men and Ships. After this Tissaphernes arrived at the Hellespont, whither Alcibiades came with one Gally, to bring him Gifts and Presents; but Tissaphernes seized him,
and clapt him up at Sardes, telling him, that he had Orders from the King to make War upon the Athenians.The Greeks called the Persian Monarch  by way of Excel∣lence. Thirty days after, he, and Mantitheus, that had been taken Prisoner in Caria, having procured themselves good Horses made their escape by Night to Clazome∣nae. In the mean while the Athenians having intelligence at Sestos, that Min∣darus was coming to fall upon them with sixty Sail, fled to Cardia. At the same time also Alcibiades went thither with five Gallies, and a Brigandine from Clazo∣menae; and hearing that the Peloponnesian Fleet was sailed from Abydus to Cyzicus, he ordered his Ships to sail about to Se∣stos, and went thither himself by Land. After the Fleet arrived, when he was just going out to engage, Theramenes came in with twenty Sail from Macedone, and at the same time Thrasybulus with twenty more from Thasus both having been col∣lecting tribute.The Anci∣ents being they used to Stem one ano∣thers Ships had no occasion for their Main-sails in time of Fight; But made use of their Oars only: So that they left these Sails ashore when they went to engage, keeping only the lesser Sails for any extraordinary occasion, Schefferus de Mil. Nav. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. Alcibiades commanded them to take off their Main-sails and fol∣low him, going himself to Parium, where the whole Fleet being joyned consisted of eighty six Ships, and setting sail the
Night following, he arrived the day after about Noon at Proeconnesus. There they heard that Mindarus, and Pharnabazus with his Land-forces were at Cyzicus; whereupon they staid a day in that place: The day following Alcibia∣des called a Council of War, and encou∣raged his men, telling them, that an absolute necessity obliged them to fight the Enemies Fleet by Sea, their Army by Land, and to attack their fortified Places: For (says he) we have no mony, with which the Enemy is plentifully sup∣plied from the King of Persia. The day before, when the Ships were brought in∣to Harbour, and he had gotten all the small Vessels about him, he made Procla∣mation, lest the Enemy should be inform∣ed what number of Ships he had, that whoever was taken crossing to the other side, should be put to death. After the Council of War, he prepared for an En∣gagement, and set sail to Cyzicus in foul weather. As he approacht near the place, it cleared up, and the Sun breaking out, he discovered sixty of Mindarus his Ships exercising at a great distance from the Port, to which he had now cut off their Retreat. The Peloponnesians seeing the Athenian Gallies were far more nume∣rous
than before, and near the Port, made to Land, and having run their Ships in, fought the Enemy as they came to at∣tack them. In the mean while Alcibia∣des sailing about with twenty Ships, landed; which Mindarus seeing, landed too, and fought till he was slain. Upon this his men fled, and the Athenians car∣ried off all the Enemy's Ships to Proecon∣nesus, except those of Syracuse, which the Syracusians themselves had burnt. The day after the Athenians sailed from thence to Cyzicus: which being deserted by the Peloponnesians, and Pharnabazus, the People of Cyzicus received the Athenians into their City. Here Alcibiades staid twenty days, and having procured a good Sum from the Cyzicenians, without farther harm done to the City, sailed to Prae∣connesus, thence to Perinthus, and Selym∣bria. The Perinthians received his Ar∣my into the City, but the Selymbrians gave money, and kept them out. From thence he went to Chrysopolis in the Neighbourhood of Chalcedon, and forti∣fied it, erecting a Toll-house there to take Tenths of the Ships, that came from Pon∣tus. Here he left a Guard of thirty Ships, under two Admirals Theramenes, and Eu∣bulus: who were to secure the Town, and
Ships that came from Pontus; and to do the Enemy what mischief they could. The other Admirals went for the Hel∣lespont. Hippocrates Mindarus his Vice-Admi∣ral sent Letters to Lacedemon which were intercepted, and carried to Athens: The Contents were, All is Gone; Min∣darus is lost; Our Men want Provisions; What to do we cannot tell. Pharnabazus cheared up the Army of the Lacedemo∣nians, and Syracusians, giving every one a Coat and two Months pay; and telling them, that since the men were safe, they should not be disheartned for the loss of a little Wood, which the King His Master's Country had good store of. Besides he armed the Sea-men, and set them to guard the Coast of his Province; then calling the Governours of the Cities, and Sea-Captains together, he gave them money, and ordered them to build as many Gal∣lies at Antandrus, as they had lost, and bid them fetch Timber from Mount Ida. Whilst the Ships were building, the Sy∣racusians helpt the Antandrians to finish part of their Wall, behaving themselves better therein, than any of the Garison; for which reason the Syracusians have Priviledges, and Fredom at Antandrus.
Pharnabasus having setled his Affairs in this manner, went immediately with Suc∣cours to Chalcedon. About this time News came to the Sy∣racusian Admirals,XXII. Year of the  that they were banisht by the Populacy. Upon which they eaed their Soldiers together, and Her∣mcrates made a Speech in the Name of the rest deploring their hard Fortune, and protesting they were banisht contrary to all Law, and Justice. Advising them, that as they had heretofore, so they would for the future, upon all occasions, obey their Commanders, and that they would chuse new Officers till the arrival of those, that were nominated in their stead. The Souldiers especially the Captains of Gal∣lies, Masters, and Sea-men cried out that they should continue in their Commands. On the other hand the Admirals told them they ought not to mutiny against the Government: But if any impeacht the said Admirals, then ye may (said they) recount and reckon up the Sea-fights ye have won, the Ships ye have taken your selves, and how often with o∣thers under our Conduct, ye have been victorious; we having had for our own Conduct and your Courage the most ho∣nourable place in Battel both at Sea and
Land. No body laid any thing to their charge, and they at the entreaty of the Soldiers continued in their Command till the arrival of those that were chosen in their stead; who were Demarchus the Son of Pidocus, Mysco the Son of Menecrates, and Potamis the Son of Gnosias. When most of the Captains of the Gallies had sworn to repeal their Banishment, as soon as they themselves returned to Syracuse, they commended, and dismissed them; giving them leave to go whither they would: Yet they had a private Confe∣rence with Hermocrates, whom they highly admired for his Diligence, Courage, and Affability. For every Morning and Evening, he assembled in his Cabin such as he knew to be the ablest men amongst the Captains of Gallies, Masters, and Sea-men; and there communicated to them, whatsoever he intended to say or do; In∣structing, and bidding them give present advice upon some matters, and deliberate upon others. By this Hermocrates got great credit at the Council of War, ha∣ving the reputation of the best Orator, and ablest Councellor. The same Her∣mocrates, when he accused Tissaphernes at Lacedemon, was believed upon his own credit, though Astyochus came in as a
joynt witness, and got money of Phar∣nabazus, when he went to him, before he askt it; with which he provided Men, and Ships for his return to Syracuse. In the mean while the Successors of the Syracusian Admirals arrived at Mile∣tus, and took the Command both of the Fleet, and Army. Near the same time a Sedition hapning at Thasus, the Lacede∣monian Party with their Governour Eteo∣nicus a Lacedemonian was driven out; and Pasippidas a Lacedemonian being ac∣cused for compassing it by Tissaphernes his help, was banisht Sparta. Cratesippi∣das was sent to the Fleet, which Passipi∣das had got together from the Allies, and took the Command of it at Chius. It hapned, that whilst Thrasylus was at A∣thens, Agis came out of Decelea to fo∣rage, and advanc't as far as the very Walls of the place: Whereupon Thrasy∣lus marching out with the Athenians, and all the Forreigners that were in the City, drew up in Battalia beside the Lyceum,A School in which Aristotle taught. and resolved to sight him, if he advanc't any farther. When Agis saw that, he retreated hastily, and lost some of his Rear, that were cut off by the Light-arm'd men. This Action made the Athenians more
favourable to Thrasylus in the Affair he came about; insomuch that they de∣creed he should raise a thousand Heavy armed men, a hundred Horse, and set out fifty Gallies. Agis discovering from De∣celea a Fleet of Corn Ships. The Port Town to Athens joyned to the City by two long walls. running up the † Piraeus, cried it was in vain for him to spend so much time in blocking up the Athenians by Land, unless their Provisi∣ons were cut off, that came by Sea: so that it would be the best way to send Clearchus the Son of Ram∣phius the, One that took care of Strangers and Em∣bassadors to provide them reception, hereby contracting an intimacy with those they entertain'd, and so becoming the sitter Persons for Em∣bassadors. Pollux. Publick Host of the Byzantines, to Chalce∣don, and Byzantium. This advice being opproved of, he parted with fifteen Sail fitted out by the Megare∣ans, and other Confede∣rates, that were Ships fit∣ter for, are oppo∣sed to , that are used for Men of War; the other being made to trans∣port Soldiers in, and to be Tenders to the Fleet. Burthen than Ser∣vice. Three of which were destroyed in the Helles∣pont by the nine Atheni∣an Guard-Ships that con∣tinually observed what Ships passed that way; the rest fled to Sestos, and got safe from thence to Byzantium.XXIII. Year of the War. Diocles Ar∣chon. Thus the year ended wherein the Car∣thaginians under Hannibal their General
invaded Sicily with an Army of an hun∣dred thousand men, and took in three Months time Selinus and Himera, two Cities that were Greek Colonies. The Year followingWhich was the 93 Olympiad, in which Evagoras the Elean was Victor with the Chariot added by Alemaeon, Eubotas the Cyrenean won the foot Race, Evarchip∣pus was E∣phorus of Sparta, and Euctemon Archon of Athens, vid. the end of the seventh Book. the Athenians fortified Thoricus, and Thrasylus taking the Ships that were ordered him, armed five thou∣sand Sea-men with Targets, that they might serve for Targetiers, as he saw oc∣casion; and parted for Samos the begin∣ning of Summer, where having stayd three days, he sailed from thence to Py∣gela. Here he destroyed the Countrey, and made an attempt upon the Town. Where some from Miletus coming to as∣sist the Pygeleans, persued the Straglers of the Athenian Light-armed men: but the Targetiers, and two Companies of Heavy-armed men succouring their Light-arm∣ed, killed most of the Milesians, and taking about two hundred Shields ere∣cted a Trophy. The day after they sail∣ed to Notium, and there having made preparations for their Voyage went to Colophon, the People whereof came over to them, and the same Night they fell in∣to Lydia, when the Corn was ripe, burn∣ing several Villages, and got many Slaves, and a very great Booty. Stages the Per∣sian being in those Parts, and assisted by
a Body of Horse took one of their men Prisoner, and killed seven more; the A∣thenians in the mean while being stragled from their Camp, and every one intent upon his own Spoyl. Afterwards Thra∣sylus marcht off with his men to the Sea∣side, and made shew as if he would sail to Ephesus; but Tissaphernes suspecting his Design drew a strong Body of men to∣gether, and sent away the Horse, com∣manding them all to go to Ephesus, and protect the Goddess Diana. The 17 Day after this Incursion Thra∣sylus sailed to Ephesus, and landed his Heavy-armed men at Coressus; but the Horse, Targetiers, Sea-men, and all the rest of his Forces he landed at the Marsh on the other side of the Town, and advanc't by break of day with his Army in two Bo∣dies. On the other hand the People of Ephesus, the Auxiliaries commanded by Tissaphernes, the Syracusians from on board the first twenty Ships, those also from on board the other five that lately arrived with the Admirals Eucles the Son of Hippo, and Heraclides the Son of Aristogenes, and the two Selinuntians, u∣niting all their Forces against the Enemy, set first upon the Heavy-armed men at Coressus. Where having killed about an
hundred, they routed and persued the rest to the Sea-side, and afterwards turned upon those that were posted at the Marsh. Here also the Athenians fled, and near three hundred of them were destroyed, for which the Ephesians erected a Tro∣phy at each place, and gave Rewards both from the Publick, and from private hands to several Syracusians, and Selinun∣tians that had behaved themselves with bravery, as also Immunities from Taxes for ever to any of their Countrey that would live amongst them, and gave the Selinuntians freedom of their City, in consideration that they had lost their Countrey. The Athenians made Truce to fetch off their slain, and sailed to No∣tium where they buried them; and so went to Lesbos, and the Hellespont. As they were going into Port at Mithymna in Lesbos, they discovered twenty five Sail of Syracusians passing by from Ephe∣sus, and bearing up to them they took four, men and all, and chased the rest to Ephesus. Thrasylus sent all the Priso∣ners to Athens, but ston'd Alcibiades the Athenian, Cousin to his Namesake, and Companion in Exile. From thence he sailed to the rest of the Fleet at Sestos,
and there transported the whole Army to Lampsacus. Now the Winter was coming on, wherein the Syracusian Prisoners that were kept in the Piraean Quarries digging through the Rock, and making their es∣cape by Night, got some to Decelea, and the rest to Megara. When Alcibia∣des made a General Muster of his Forces at Lampsacus, the old Soldiers who had ne'r been beaten, refused to be marshalled with Thrasylus his men, for that these had been foyled. Yet all had their Winter Quarters together, and having fortified Lampsacus they made an attempt upon Abydus: to the Relief of which Pharna∣bazus came with a strong Body of Horse but was beaten, and put to flight. Alci∣biades persued him with his Horse, and an hundred and ten Heavy-armed men commanded by Menander, till the Night parted them. After this Fight the Soldi∣ers became good Friends with Thrasylus his men, and embraced them. This Winter they made several Incur∣sions up into the Continent, and wasted the King of Persia his Country. About the same time, the Lacedemonians dismist upon safe Conduct those Slaves that had deserted at Malea, and fled to Coryphasi∣um
Much about that time also the A∣chaeans betrayed the Colony of Heraclea Trachinia, when they stood in Battle a∣gainst the Oeteans their common Ene∣mies, so that near seven hundred were killed, amongst which was Labotes of Lacedemon the Governour. Thus ended the Year in which the Medes rebelled a∣gainst Darius King of the Persians, and returned not long after to their Allegi∣ance again.XXIV. Olymp. Xcii. Eu∣ctemon Ar∣chon. The Year following the Temple of Minerva at Phocaea was consumed by, was the Go∣vernour of a place, and a Ge∣neral that was sent upon an expediti∣on. And an Officer like the Dictator Cragius. Prester Plin. 2. l. 50. c. Lightning in a most violent Storm. After the Winter was past, and 22 years of the War elapst: the Athenians early in the Spring sailed with their whole Fleet to Praeconnesus, and going from thence to Chalcedon and Byzantium, they besieged the former. The Chalcedonians, when they received Intelligence that the Athenians were coming upon them, de∣posited their Goods in the hands of the Thracian Bithynians their Neighbours. But Alcibiades, took a Body of Heavy-armed men and Horse, ordering the Ships to coast along, and marching to the Bi∣thynians demanded the Chalcedonians Goods, threatning to treat them as Ene∣mies, unless they were delivered, and de∣liver them they did;
Afterwards Alcibiades having made a League with them, and carried his Booty to the Camp, he employed his whole Ar∣my, and encompast Chalcedon with a Wall from Sea to Sea, and made a Boom cross the River. There Hippocrates the Go∣vernour a Lacedemonian drew his Forces out of the Town to engage the Atheni∣ans, and they faced him. In the mean while Pharnabazus came with his Infan∣try, and a strong Party of Horse, from without the Works to relieve the besieged. Hippocrates and Thrasylus each of them engaged with their Heavy-armed men a considerable time, till Alcibiades came to his relief with his Heavy-armed men, and Horse. Hippocrates was killed, and his men fled back into the Town. At the same time Pharnabazus having not been able to joyn him by reason of the strait Pass over the River, and the Works that were just by, retired to his Camp near Hercules his Temple in the Countrey of the Chalcedonians. A while after Alcibiades going to the Hellespont, and Chersonese to raise money;An Attic Talent is 6000 Drachma's Pollux. i.e. 187 l. 10 s. Sterling, the Total 3750 l. the other Generals made this Stipulation with Pharnabazus about Chalcedon. That he should give the Athenians twenty Ta∣lents, and conduct their Ambassadors to
the King his Master. Thereupon they swore to each other that the Chalcedoni∣ans should pay the Athenians the usual Tribute, and what was due beside; on the contrary that the Athenians should not make War upon the Chalcedonians, till the Ambassadors from the King of Persia should arrive. Alcibiades was not present at the Ratification of the Treaty, but sat down before Selymbria; which he took, and marcht to Byzantium with the whole Strength of the Chersonites, Thraci∣an Soldiers, and above three hundred Horse. Pharnabazus tarr yedat Chalcedon in expectation of Alcibiades from By∣zantium, because he would have him take the Oath; but when he came not thi∣ther, Pharnabazus refused to be sworn, un∣less Alcibiades was sworn too. Alcibi∣ades took the Oath afterwards at Chryso∣polis, before Metrobates, and Arnapes, Pharnabazus his Deputies. Pharnabazus not only took the Oath for the Peace be∣fore Euryptolemus, and Diotimus, Alcibi∣ades his Commissioners at Chalcedon; but made likewise a private Agreement there between himself, and Alcibiades. Afrer this Pharnabazus departed imme∣diately, and ordered the Ambassadors that were going to the King of Persia to meet
him at Cyzicus.Theogenes, Euryptole∣mus, Man∣titheus. There were of the A∣thenians Dorotheus, and Philodocus, and with these Cleostratus and Pyrrholochus the Argives. There went of the Lacede∣monians, Pasippidas, and others; besides these there went Hermocrates who was lately banish't Syracuse, and his Brother Proxenus. In the mean time, whilst Pharnabazus conducted the Ambassadors, the Athenians besieged Byzantium, and after they had built a Wall round the place, they made some light Skirmishes, and advanced up to the Walls of the City. There were in By∣zantium Clearchus the Governour a Lace∣demonian with some of the Neighbour∣hood, a small Party of Half-Slaves,, those that were made free like the Liber∣tinus Miles in Suet. the Megareans commanded by Elixus their Countryman, and the Baeotians by Cyra∣tadas. The Athenians not being able to effect any thing by force, perswaded some of the Byzantines to betray the City. Clearchus the Governour not suspecting a∣ny would attempt it, put things in the best order he could, and leaving Cyrata∣das and Elixus to command, went over the Water to Pharnabazus to receive pay for his Soldiers, and to get together the Ships in the Hellespont, with the Guard Ships Pasippidas had lest, those at Antan∣drus,
as also them that Hegesandridas, Mindarus his Vice-Admiral had on the Coast of Thrace, and to build more; that he might infest the Athenian Allies with this Fleet, and so divert the Army from Byzantium. When Clearchus had set sail, Cydo, A∣risto, Anaxcrates and Lycurgus, that were to betray Byzantium having all things in a readiness opened the Thracian Gate in the Night, and let in Alcibiades with his Army. Anaxilaus also was one of these Traytors, and was after tryed for this Treason at Lacedemon, but acquitted, for that he was a Byzantine, and not a Lacedemonian; and it appeared, he did not so much betray the Town, as preserve the lives of those in it. For when he saw the Women and Children ready to starve, because Clearchus had given what Corn there was in the City to the Lacedemoni∣an Soldiers: he pleaded that he received in the Enemies for this reason, and not for love of their money, or out of hatred to the Lacedemonians. Elixus and Cyra∣tadas who knew nothing of the matter, came with their whole strength to the Market-place, but the Enemy having pos∣sest themselves of all the Posts, and they being not able to make any resistance,
yielded themselves Prisoners, and were sent to Athens, where Cyratadas stole pri∣vately away in the Crowd that was go∣ing ashore at the Piraeus, and got safe to Decelea. In the mean while Pharnabazus,XXV. Year An∣tigenes Ar∣chon. and the Ambassadors that wintered at Gordi∣um in Phrygia, heard what had past at Byzantium; and as they were going to the King of Persia in the beginning of Spring they met Boeotius and his Col∣leagues, the Lacedemonian Ambassadors, in company of some other Envoys on their way from Asia. These reported that the Lacedemonians had obtained all their Demands of the King, that Cyrus had Orders to assist them, and was to be Governor of all the Maritine Provinces; and that he had brought Letters under the Broad Seal to the People of Asia Minor,. to this Effect. I send Cyrus, to be Cara∣nus of those Forces that Rendevous at Castolus; Caranus is Generalissimo. The Athenian Ambassadors when they heard this, and had seen Cyrus, were very earnest to go to the King, or else return home. But Cyrns commanded Pharnabazus to deliver them up to him; at least not to let them go home, being unwilling the Athenians should understand what had
passed. Pharnabazus detained the Am∣bassadors, and that he might not be blam∣ed, he sometimes gave out that he would conduct them to the King, and other whiles that he would send them home. At three years end he entreated Cyrus to permit them to depart, telling him, he had obliged himself by Oath to convoy them as far as the Sea, if he could not bring them to the King. At last they sent them to Ariobarzanes, and comman∣ded him to conduct them, who convoy∣ed them as far as Cius in Misia, from whence they sailed to the Athenian Fleet. Alcibiades having a desire to return home, went immediately with the Army to Samos, and taking twenty Ships from thence, set sail for the Golf of Ceramicus in Caria;18750 l. where he raised an hundred Talents and returned to Samos again. Thrasybulus went with thirty Sail to Thrace, and, amongst other Places that had revolted from the Athenians, took in Thasus, which was reduced to a miserable condition by War, Sedition, and Famine. Thrasylus set sail with the rest of the Fleet for Athens; before whose Arrival they had nominated for Admirals, Alci∣biades that was in Exile, Thrasybulus who
was abroad, and for a third, Conon,Alcibiades returns from Ba∣nishment. one of those that were at home. In the mean while Alcibiades went from Samos with the money, and twenty Sail of Ships to Parus. From whence he stood directly to Gytheum to make disco∣very of the thirty Gallies, which he heard the Lacedemonians were fitting out there, and to learn, whether he should be recalled home, and how the Government stood affected towards him. When he understood they were well inclined, ha∣ving chosen him General, and sent for his Friends in private; he returned up the Piraeus the day the Plynteria were kept,A Feast in honour of Minerva. wherein the Orna∣ments were taken off the I∣mage, and the Image covered, esteemed an unfor∣tunate day, Plut. in Alcib, the like Feast was at Argos Callim. and Minerva's Image covered, which some presaged would prove unfortunate both to his Country, and himself. For no Athenian dares undertake any thing of moment that day. When he arrived, all the People flock'd out of the Piraeus, and City to the Ships, admiring and longing to see Alcibiades, crying, He was the bravest man of their Country, that he only was declared to have been unjustly banished, being cir∣cumvented by those that were of less A∣bilities and Eloquence than himself, and that served themselves of the Govern∣ment. That he always promoted the
good of the Commonwealth, not only with the Publick Stock, but his private Fortune. That having been impeached for prophaning the Holy Mysteries, he desired to come immediately to his Trial, yet his Enemies, though his Request seemed just, put it off till another time, and when he was absent, banished him. In the mean while, he being compelled to a servile compliance, and forced to ca∣ress his greatest Enemies, was continual∣ly in danger of his Life; and though he saw the miscarriages of State, yet was rendred uncapable by his Exile of serving his dearest Friends, and Countrymen. Such a man as he (said they) needed no Innovations, nor change of Government, but that he could prefer himself by the favour of the People, before any of his years, and not come short of those that were older; and appear the same man to his Enemies, that he was before. These when they had gotten any power, ruined the best of men, and though none but themselves were left in the Government, yet they were respected by the People for no other reason, but because they wanted better to employ. On the contrary, others said, that he was the sole cause of their former evils,
and that none but he durst attempt such things, as could endanger the Govern∣ment. Alcibiades did not land immedi∣ately upon his Arrival, for fear of his E∣nemies, but getting upon Deck, looked if any of his Friends were there, and when he saw Euryptolemus the Son of Pisianax his Cousin with divers of his Relations, and Friends, he landed, and went up into the City accompanied with those that were ready to have prevented any Af∣front, that might be offered. He made his Defence before the Senate and Assem∣bly; that he had not profaned the Holy Mysteries, but was tradured, with more to the same purpose. The Assembly suffering none to con∣tradict him, declared him Generalissimo of all their Forces, as one that could maintain the former Grandeur of his Countrey. Then he drew out the whole Army, and celebrated the Eleusinian My∣steries upon the account of the War at Land, which the Athenians for fear of the Enemy performed at Sea. After this he made a levy of fifteen hundred Heavy-armed men, an hundred and fifty Horse, and equip't an hundred Sail of Ships. The third Month after his return he went against Andros which had revolted
from the Athenians. There were joyn∣ed with him Adimantus,Son of Leucorophi∣des. and Aristocra∣tes, Generals at Land. Alcibiades put∣ting his men ashore at Gaurium a place in Andros, routed the Andrians when they came with their Succors, and shut the besieged up in the Town, having slain others besides the Lacedemonians that were there. Whereupon he erected a Trophy, and staying several days in that place he went to Samos, and made that the Seat of the War.. The Lacedemonians, Cratesippidas his Commission being expired, sent Lysander Admiral, who arriving at Rhodes, and taking with him the Fleet from thence sailed to Cos and Miletus, and next to E∣phesus, where he lay with seventy Sail till Cyrus came to Sardes. Upon his arrival, he went with the Lacedemonian Ambassadors to Cyrus, and complained of Tissaphernes, desiring him that he would apply himself vigorously to the War. Cyrus told them he had received such Orders from his Father, and that he was fully resolved to execute them. He farther acquainted them, that he had brought five hundred Talents with him,93750 lib. and if that were not enough, he would make use of his own mony which his Fa∣ther
had given him; and if all this was not sufficient he would make mony of the Throne he sat on,, to stamp mo∣ney. which was all Silver and Gold. They liked this very well, and advised him to give every Sea-man an Attic7 d. ob. English, for it was exchanged for the Ro∣man Dena∣rius, and the Latins turn the sums of Drachma's into De∣niers. Drachma a piece for their pay, shewing that if they had so much, the Athenian Sailers would desert the Ser∣vice, and so his expences would be the less. He told them what they said was well, but that he could not go contrary to the King's Orders, and that by the Treaty the Lacedemonians were to re∣ceive thirtyA Mina contains 100 Drach∣ma's, Pol∣lux, that is 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. Tot. 93 l. 15 s. Mina's a Month for every Ship they kept out. Lysander made no reply at that time, but after Supper when Cyrus drank to him, and asked him in what he could ob∣lige him most, he made answer; if you'll raise every Sea-man's pay anIs five farthings, or the sixth part of a Drach∣ma, Pollux. Obolus; which was accordingly done, and from that time their pay was four Oboli, whereas before it was but three. He also paid them their Arrears, and gave them a Months pay Advance, which made the Sea-men far more couragious. The A∣thenians were quite disheartned when they heard this; and sent Ambassadors through Tissaphernes his means to Cyrus, but he would not receive them though
desired by Tissaphernes: who told him that Alcibiades his Advice to him was to take care that none of the Greeks should grow powerful, but be kept weakned by their Divisions. Lysander having setled Affairs thus in the Fleet, and haled up his ninety Gallies ashore in the Port of Ephesus, lay still refitting them, and re∣freshing his men. Alcibiades hearing Thrasybulus was gone without the Hellespont to fortifie Phocaea,Alcibiades falls into Disgrace. went after him, and left the Fleet under the Command of Antiochus his Captain, charging him not to come near Lysander. Yet Antiochus went himself and another Ship from Notium to the Port of Ephesus, and sailed close under the very Stems of Lysander's Ships. Ly∣sander at first Launched a few Ships to give him chase, but after the Athenians came in with a stronger Squadron to re∣lieve Antiochus, he drew up the whole Fleet in good order, and bore up to the Enemy.Lysander's Victory. Then the Athenians lanch't the rest of their Gallies at Notium, and coming up as fast as every one of them could get Sea-room, they engaged forth∣with; the Lacedemonians fought in good order, the Athenians with a scattered Fleet, until they had lost fifteen Sail, and
then they fled. Most of the men esca∣ped, except some few that were taken Prisoners. Lysander took the Ships along with him, and having erected a Trophy, sailed to Ephesus. The Athenians went to Samos; to which place Alcibiades coming afterwards, went with his whole Fleet from thence to the Port of Ephesus, and drew up before the mouth of it, to see if any would come out to en∣gage. But when Lysander refused to come out, because he was much inferiour to the other in number of Ships, he sail∣ed to Samos. A while after the Lacedemonians took Delphinium and Eion. When the News of the Fight was brought to Athens; the Athenians were very much incens'd against Alcibiades, supposing he had lost the Fleet through carelessness, and ill Con∣duct., Conon, Diomedon, Leo, Peri∣cles, Erasi∣nides, Ari∣stocrates, Archestra∣tus, Proto∣machus, Thrasylus, Aristoge∣nes. And therefore they chose ten new Admirals. Alcibiades having gotten the ill will of the Fleet took one Gally, and went to his Fort in the Chersonese. After this Conon went by the Decree of the A∣thenians with the twenty Sail he had brought from Andros, to the Fleet at Sa∣mos; to which place Phanosthenes was sent with four Gallies in his stead. He in his way thither light upon two Thuri∣an
Gallies, and took them men and all. The Athenians bound all the Prisoners ex∣cept their Commander Dorieus, whom they out of pity dismist ransom-free: He then lived at Thurii, but was a Rhodian, and had been banish't Rhodes, as he was also from Athens, where he and his Rela∣tions were condemned to death. Conon arriving at Samos, and finding the Fleet in a very ill condition, made it up seventy Sail instead of the former that consisted of above an hundred. He also took a∣long with him the other Admirals, and putting to Sea, made several Descents, and harassed the Enemie's Countrey.XXVI. Year be∣gins Olymp. Xciii. Cal∣lias Archon. Thus the Year ended in which the Carthaginians invaded Sicily with an hundred and twenty Gallies and a Land-Army of an hundred and twenty thou∣sand men, and though they lost a Battle, yet they took Agrigentum by Famine af∣ter a Siege of seven Months. The year following,Gloss. Where∣in the Moon was eclipsed in the Eve∣ning, the old Tem∣ple of Minerva at Athens was burnt, Pi∣tyas was Ephorus, and Callias Ar∣chon. being the twen∣ty sixth Year of the War, the Lacedemo∣nians sent Callicratidas to succeed Lysan∣der in the Fleet, whose time was now ex∣pired. When Lysander resigned the Fleet he told Callicratidas, that his Victo∣ry had made him Lord of the Sea, and that as such he delivered up the Fleet.
Callicratidas replied, He would acknow∣ledge him Lord of the Sea, if he would coast along from Ephesus to the left of Samos (where the Athenian Fleet lay) and resign it at Miletus. But Lysander made answer, That he would not meddle whilst another Commanded. Callicratidas, besides the Ships he had from Lysander, reinforc't his Fleet with 50 Sail more from Chius, Rhodes, and the other Allies; and having got together his whole Fleet consisting of an hundred and forty Sail, he made preparation to meet the Enemy. But when he found that Lysander's Friends mutined against him, not only obeying unwillingly, but giving out in the Confederate Cities, that the Lacedemonians committed a great Er∣ror in changing their Admirals, and sent such as were unfit for Command, no Sea∣men, that knew not how to manage men, unskilful in Sea-Affairs, and unknown to the Sailers, whereby their Affairs were in danger to be damnified;Callicrati∣das his Speech to the Muti∣nous Sol∣diers. Callicratidas called the Lacedemonians that were there together, and spoke to them after this manner. I could have been content to have staid at home. Nor do I care whether Lysander, or any man else be esteemed a better Seaman than my self.
I was sent by the Government to com∣mand the Fleet, and my only business is to execute their Orders to the utmost of my Power. And seeing 'tis my earnest desire to serve my Country, I crave your best Advice about these Af∣fairs (which you understand as well as my self) to know of you whether I must stay or return home, and relate what condition things are in here. None durst gainsay, but acknowledge that the Government must be obeyed, and his Orders observed. After that he went to Cyrus, and demanded pay for his men, who bid him wait two days. Callicrati∣das took this delay very hainously, being enraged to run so often after him to Court; crying, The Greeks were very miserable in flattering the Barbarians for money; adding, That if ever he returned home a∣live, he would use his utmost endeavour to beget a good understanding between the Athenians and Lacedemonians. Soon after he went to Miletus, and dispatch't some Ships from thence to Lacedemon for money; where having assembled the Milesians,Callicrati∣das his Speech to the Milesi∣ans. he spoke thus to them. I (Gentlemen of Miletus) must of ne∣cessity obey the Orders I have received from the States my Masters; and my
request to you is, That you would per∣sue the War with all the application ima∣ginable; for you live amongst the Bar∣barians, and have suffered very much from them already. You ought to set a good Example to the Allies, and use your ut∣most Endeavours, and speediest Dili∣gence to infest the Enemy, till the re∣turn of those from Lacedemon which I have sent thither for Money. For Lysander has refunded the money which was here, to Cyrus; as if it had been superfluous, and is gone his way. When I went to Cyrus, he put me off, and could not be spoke with. Nor could I endure to dance attendance after him. In the mean time if we have any good success,. I engage to make you a suitable return. Let us shew the Barbarians, that we by the favour of Heaven, can revenge our selves on our Enemies, without having their Forces in admira∣tion. After he had made an end, seve∣ral rose up, and especially those that were informed against for opposing his Designs, who out of fear proposed a way to raise money, and there offered some on their private Accounts; with which, and with the Contributions he had raised in Chius, he paid every Seaman five Drachmas,3 s. 1 d. ob. and
went to Methymna in Lesbos, that was then in the Enemie's hands. The Me∣thymneans because the Garrison were Athe∣nians, and the Principal men of the Athe∣nian Faction, would not surrender: whereupon he attackt the Town, and took it by Storm. The Soldiers had the plunder, but Callicratidas brought all the Slaves into the Market-place; and when the Confederates cried, The Methymneans should also be sold for Slaves, He said, No Greek, if he could help it, should be made a Slave, whilst he was General. The day after he dismist the Freemen, so that only the Garrison of the Atheni∣ans, and the Slaves, were sold. He threat∣ned Conon that he would make him leave, a Say∣ing of a Spanish Ambassa∣dor goes about to this pur∣pose, That the East Indies were the King his Master's Mistress, which he would communi∣cate to o∣ther Nati∣ons, but the West Indies his Wife which he would re∣serve to himself. whoring the Sea; and seeing him stand out to Sea by break of day, he gave him chase, and cut him off of Samos, that he might not run in there. Conon retreated in some good Sailers, having put the best Rowers that he had chose out of several Crews on board a few Ships, and ran into Mitylene with Leo and Erasinides two of the ten Admirals. Callicratidas follow∣ed him into the same Port with an hundred and seventy Sail. Conon being prevented by the Citizens from putting into Harbour, was forced to engage at the
Mouth of the Haven where he lost thirty Sail, yet the Men got ashore; the other forty Ships he haled up under the Fort. Callicratidas went into the Harbour, and having blockt him up, so that he could not sail out, he sent by Land for the whole strength of Methymna, and trans∣ported other Forces from Chius. At that time there came a Supply of Money from Cyrus. Conon being blockt up by Sea and Land, and not able to get in any Provisions, there being a great many men in the Town, and no Assistance from the Athenians who had not received any Intelligence of what had passed; launcht two of the best Sailers he had, and fitted them out before day, picking the ablest Rowers out of the whole Fleet, which he put on board a Brigandine, and covered them with the, were partly for Desence, and part∣ly for Blinds, Schif. de Milit. Nav. lib. 2. cap. 5. Wastcloaths. Thus they passed on the day. In the Evening when it was dark, he took out his men again that the Enemy might not discover his Design. On the fist day having gotten sufficient Provisions aboard, they sailed out of Port at Noon-day when the Guard-Ships were careless, and taking their rest. The one shap't her course for the Helle∣spont, the other stood out to Sea. They
that belonged to the Guardships happ'ning then to be at Dinner ashore, came running with a confused noise, cut their Cables, got on board, and as fast as every one of them could get out to Sea, they gave chase to her that stood out to Sea, and coming up with her by Sun-set, engaged, took her, and all her men, and towed her to the Fleet. She that went to the Hel∣lespont escap't and carried News of the blockade to Athens. Diomedon coming to relieve Conon when he was blockt up, put into Mity∣lene Chanel with twelve Sail. Callicra∣tidas took ten of them by surprise, Dio∣medon only escaping with his own and another. When the Athenians heard of the Blockade, and what had passed, they decreed that an hundred and ten Sail should be sent to relieve the Besieged, put∣ting aboard all Freemen and Slaves that were of age for Service, and fitted out the hundred and ten in thirty days, and ha∣ving shipt several Horse on board them they set sail. They went in the first place to Samos, from whence they had ten Samians, and got above thirty more from the rest of the Confederates, having pressed all for the Service. The like was done to those Ships that were abroad.
They were in all above an hundred and fifty Sail. As soon as Callicratidas heard that the Succors were arrived at Samos, he left fifty Ships there under the Com∣mand of Eteonicus, and put to Sea with an hundred and twenty, dining at Cape Malea in Lesbos over against Mitylene. The same day the Athenians supped at Arginusae, which is over against that part of Lesbos, where Cape Malea is opposite to Mitylene. At Night Callicratidas dis∣covered the Fires, and some reporting that they belonged to the Athenians, he weighed at midnight to go and surprise them; but a great Storm of Rain and Thunder prevented his Design. After it ceased he sailed by break of day towards Arginusae. The Athenians met him out at Sea on the left in this order.The Sea-fight at Arginusae. Aristo∣crates led the right wing with fifteen Sail, and next him was Diomedon with fifteen more. Pericles was placed in the Rear of Aristocrates, and Erasinides a Stern of Diomedon's Squadron. Next to Diome∣don were the Samians with ten Ships in rank under the Command of Hippeus their Countreyman, next to these were ten Captains of the Heavy-armed men in Rank, and three Admirals with the Con∣federates in the Rear of these. Protoma∣chus
had the right Wing with fifteen Sail; next him lay Thrasylus with fifteen more. Lysias lay in the Rear of Protomachus with the like number, and Aristogenes in the Rear of Thrasylus. They drew up in this Figure, that the Enemy might not charge through them, because their Ships were worse Sailers than the others. The Lacedemonian's Ships being nimble, and fit∣ted either to charge through the Enemie's Fleet, or to surround it, were drawn up all in a Line. Callicratidas had the Van. Here Hermo, and Megareus Callicrati∣das his Pilot told him, he would do well to retreat, because the Athenian Gallies were much more superiour in number. Callicratidas told them again, that Spar∣ta would be ne'r the worse inhabited, though he were slain, and that it was dis∣honourable to fly. Then they had a long Engagement, at first in good order, after∣wards in consusion. But when Callicra∣tidas charged into the Enemie's Fleet with his own Ship, and falling over board could ne'r be seen more, and Protomachus in the right Wing had beaten the Ene∣mie's left, the Peloponnesians run most of them to Phocaea, and some to Chios. The Athenians returned to Arginusae. There were twenty five Sail of the Athenians
lost, men and all, except a few that got ashore. Of the Peloponnesians; nine La∣cedemonians out of ten, and sixty of the other Confederates. The Admirals thought it convenient to send Theramenes and Thrasybulus that fitted out Gallies, was one that the Law obliged to set out a Gally at his own expence, which is mentioned in the se∣cond Book of this Hi∣story, and called by Demosthenes . For Theramenes could not be a Cap∣tain of a man of War, be∣ing he is called in two places of this Book, , or Admi∣ral. at their own expence, and some of the Captains of Heavy-armed men, to go to the Ships that were disabled, & sinking, and take up their men; the rest to go and fall upon Eteonicus who blockt up Mitylene. But they were hindred by a violent Wind, and Storm from executing their Design. So they erected a Trophy and staid there all Night. In the mean time there came to Eteonicus an Advice-Boat with News of the Sea-fight. He sent her away and commanded them on board her to sail out of Harbour, with∣out haling any Ship, and forthwith to re∣turn to the Fleet with Garlands, Cry∣ing, Callicratidas had obtained a Victory at Sea, and that all the Athenian Fleet was destroyed. They obeyed their Or∣ders, and after they returned, he sacrifi∣ced for theJust like our Bon∣fires. good News, commanding the men to Sup, the Merchants to ship their Goods privately, and to go along with the Fleet in all hast (for the Wind served) to Chius. The Camp he burnt,
and sent the Foot to Methymna. After the Enemy departed, Conon had a fair Gale, and launching his Ships, he met the Athenians that had parted a lit∣tle before from Arginusae, and gave them an account of Eteonicus. The Athenians sailed to Mitylene, and so forward to Chi∣us, from whence they departed with∣out any Action. The Government of Athens put all the Admirals out of Com∣mission except Conon; to whom they joyned Adimantus, and for a third Philo∣cles. Protomachus and Aristogenes two of the Admirals that engaged, did not re∣turn to Athens. The other sixPericles, Diomedon, Lysias, A∣ristocrates, Thrasilus, and Erasi∣uides. went thither. Archedemus the Governour of Decelea, and the greatest man in Athens at that time, plotted secretly against Erasinides; and accused him in Court for appropria∣ting to himself the Publick money which came from the Hellespont, and for some∣thing about his Command; whereupon the Court thought fit to commit Erasini∣des. When the Admirals gave a Relation of the Sea-fight and Violence of the Storm in the Senate-house, Timocrates moved that the rest of them might be put in I∣rons, and delivered up to the People; ac∣cordingly the Senate ordered them to be
taken into Custody. Soon after there was an Assembly, wherein several Persons but chiefly Theramenes, accused the Admi∣rals, who declared, they deserved to be call'd to an Account for not taking up the Ship∣wrackt men, and proved by the Evidence of a Letter sent from the Admirals to the Senate and People, that they made no other pretence for not doing it, than that of the Storm. After this each of the Admirals made a short Defence (for they were not suffered to plead according to Law) and gave a Relation of the whole Action. That they persued the Enemy, and that they gave Orders about taking up the men to those that fitted out Gallies at their own charge, and to Theramenes and Thrasibulus who had formerly been Admirals, and to Persons of the like Quality. That they knew of none to be accountable for not taking them up, except those that were commanded to 't. Neither (said they) will we falsly lay the blame on them, tho they have impeacht us, for it was the Violence of the Storm that hindred the men from being taken up. Moreover they proved what they said by the Depositions of the Masters, and o∣thers that were in the Fleet, and gave the
People such satisfaction, that several pri∣vate men stood up, and offered to bail them. But 'twas thought fit to adjourn the matter in hand till the next Assembly (for then it was so dark that they could not see their hands) that the Senate ha∣ving prepared matters before, should make their report how they would have the Prisoners tried. The FeastA Feast wherein the Pa∣rents brought their Chil∣dren to be enrolled in the Tribes, Castell. Syntag. Apaturia came soon after, wherein the Parents and Children assemble; at which Therame∣nes his Friends put several People in Mourning, and shaved them close; that they might come into Court as the Rela∣tions of those that were drowned, and prevailed with Callixenus to impeach the Admirals in the Senate. Upon this an Assembly was called, in which the Se∣nate made their Report, and Callixenus read it. Whereas the Accusations, and Defences of the Admirals were heard last Court. Let all the Athenians give their Suffrages by their Tribes. Let there be set two Ʋrns in every Tribe. Let the Cryer make Proclamation in every Tribe; and whosoever is of Opinion that the Ad∣mirals are guilty of not taking up the Vi∣ctors at Sea, let him put his Suffrage in∣to the first Ʋrn, and whosoever is of the
contrary opinion, into the last. If they be found guilty let them be delivered to theXI men were like Sheriffs to take care of the Prisoners, to see them try∣ed, and to do Justice on them. XI men and put to death. Let their Estates be confiscated, and the tenth part of them consecrated to Minerva. There came one into Court that said he was saved on a Meal-tub, and deposed that the drowning men charged him if he escaped with life to inform the People, that the Admirals refused to take those up that had fought with so much bra∣very for their Countrey. Euryptole∣mus, and some others accused Callixenus for bringing in a Bill, that was contrary to Law; but the Rabble cried out 'twas an insufferable thing to abridge the Peo∣ple of their absolute Power. Hereupon, when Lyciscus told them, that unless they forbore to meddle with the Jurisdiction of the Court, they should be proceeded against, as the Admirals were. Again the Rabble made such a Tumult, that they were forc't to let fall their Accusati∣on. But when the Judges declared, that they would suffer no Suffrage to be given contrary to Law: Callixenus went up in∣to the Desk, and impeacht him for that. Then the Multidude cried, That they who would not assent, should be accused. Here∣upon all the Judges out of fear said they
would submit;The fa∣mous So∣crates. except Socrates the Son of Sophroniscus, who declared that he would do nothing contrary to Law. Euryptolemus went up after Callixenus, and spoke in Defence of the Admirals af∣ter this manner.Euryptole∣mus his O∣ration. I am come up here (my Lords) partly to accuse, partly to defend my Friend Diomedon, and Pericles my Relation, & Kinsman, partly also to offer, what I conceive will be for the general good of my Countrey. I blame them for perswading their Colleagues to write to the Senate and People: That they had ordered Theramenes and Thrasybulus with forty seven sail of Ships to take up the Ship-wrackt men, who ne'r ob∣served their Orders; Whereby the mis∣carriage of a few has involved all in a common guilt, and they for their late humanity are brought in danger of their lives, by the secret Practises of these and some others. Which yet they need not apprehend, provided you will do them Right and Justice. For thus you shall be well informed of the Truth, and have no cause to repent of your Proceedings; nor find that you have committed the two grand Offences both against the Gods, and your own selves. I offer such things to your considerati∣on,
on, wherein neither I nor any else can impose upon you; and if you find them guilty, you may inflict what pu∣nishment you please either on them each severally, or on all joyntly. On∣ly allow them one day, if not longer, to make their defence in, that you may not give more credit to others than your selves. You (my Lords) know all that Canonus his Law is very severe, which says, the Prisoner for Treason a∣gainst the State shall plead in Irons, and if convict thereof, he shall be put to death, and flung into the Bara∣thrum, his estate shall be confiscated, and a tenth part thereof shall be consecra∣ted to Minerva. I move that the Ad∣mirals may be tried upon this Statute, and begin first if you please with my Cousin Pericles. For I should be a∣shamed to value him above my Coun∣trey. Or if you had rather, let them be tried upon the Statute against sacri∣legious Persons, and Traytors; which says, that if any Person shall commit Treason against the Government, or shall steal any holy things, and upon a legal trial be convict of the same, That he shall have noThere was a Law that no Traytor should be buried publickly, Thucy. 2. lib. burial in Attica, and his Estate shall be confiscated. Let them
be prosecuted upon which you please of these two, and divide the day into three parts: the first, for you to meet, and them to be impleaded in, the next for them to make their Defence in, and the last to vote whether they be guilty, or not guilty. Thus (my Lords) the Delinquents shall be severely punisht, the Innocent acquitted, and not destroy∣ed without any form of Justice. So shall you proceed according to Law, and your Oath; and do not conspire with the Lacedemonians by condemning those men without an Hearing, and contrary to Justice, who have come off victorious∣ly, and taken seventy Sail of Ships. What are you afraid of that you make so much hast? Is it lest you should not have power to acquit or condemn any, without you had proceeded in an extrajudicial way? Like Callixenus, who moved that all the Admirals might be tried by one Suffrage. But if you condemn any innocent Person to death, whereof you may afterwards repent: consider what a lamentable thing, and of what ill consequence it will be to take away the lives of men without Forms of Justice. 'Tis very hard, when you allowed Aristarchus (who first endea∣voured
to subvert the Government, and after that betrayed Oenoe to the The∣bans your Enemies) what day he desi∣red to make his Defence in, and all things else according to Law; to deny the Admirals the same, who have van∣quisht your Enemies, and fully answered your Expectations. Far be it from you (my Lords) to violate those Laws, the Observation of which has made you so great. Proceed ye now to those things that seem most to affect the Admirals. Af∣ter they had beaten the Enemy at Sea, and made to land, Diomedon advised that the Fleet should draw up in a, in a Line or Series, Sch. Thucyd. ad 2. lib. de Phorm. Classe. line to go and take up the Wrecks, and men. Erasinides his Advice was that the whole Fleet should go directly to attack the Enemy at Mitylene. Thra∣sylus said both might be done, if they left some Ships there, and pursued with the rest. 'Twas resolved that the eight Admirals should each of them send three Ships out of their respective Di∣visions, viz. ten Captains of the Heavy∣armed men, ten Samians, and three Ad∣mirals. These made up forty seven Sail, and were four to every Ship that was lost, there being twelve in all. A∣mongst
which were Theramenes and Thrasybulus who fitted out Gallies at their own charge, that impeacht the Admirals in the last Assembly; with the rest of the Fleet they went in pur∣suit of the Enemy. Which of these things have they not well, and fully discharged. 'Tis reasonable then that those only should be accountable for Miscarriages in the Fight, who were to engage; and they only questioned for not taking the men up, that had Orders so to do, but observed them not: So much I can say for both, that the Storm hindred them from executing the Ad∣miral's Commands. This can be proved by those that were saved by accident, amongst whom is one of our Admirals, that escaped out of a Ship which sunk; and though he wanted help himself, yet he is now condemned by the same Suffrage with those that obeyed not their Orders. But far be it from you (my Lords) to deal with them for their Victory and good Fortune, as if they had been vanquisht, and unsuccessful. Don't mistake that fatal necessity, and call it Treason in them, which was want of Power; for the Storm disabled them from per∣forming
what they were commanded. 'Twill be greater Justice to honour them with Garlands, than to follow the advice of ill men, and put them to death. When Euriptolemus had made an end, he brought in a Bill, that each of the Prisoners should be tried severally, ac∣cording to the Statute of Canonus: but the Resolve of the Senate was, that they should be all tried by one Suf∣frage; when they put it to the Vote at first it was carried for Euryptolemus his Opinion, but Menecles entring his Pro∣testation, and it being voted again, the Resolve of the Senate was ratified. Upon this eight of the Admirals that engaged were condemned; whereof six that were at home suffered. Not long after the Athenians repented of what they had done, and decreed that those who had abused the People, should be proceeded against, and give bail to stand their Trial; and that Callixenus should be one of these. Four others were like∣wise charged, and delivered up by their Bail. But afterwards they made their escape before Trial in the Riot, wherin Cleophon was killed; and Callixenus be∣ing generally hated was starved to death,
in his  Return with the rest from the Piraeus to the City.
XENOPHON'S History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. II. THE CONTENTS. Eteonicus prevents the Conspiracy of his Soldiers. Lysander surprizes the A∣thenian Fleet at Aegospotamos. A∣thens besieged, and taken by Lysander. The thirty Tyrants set up. Thrasybu∣lus expels them. THe Soldiers that were with Eteoni∣cus in Chius, lived all Summer time upon the ripe Fruits; and wrought in the Countrey for Wages. But when
Winter came, and they had no Provisi∣ons, but were naked and barefoot: they met together and deliberated about sei∣zing Chius. Those that liked the De∣sign, determined to wear a Reed, that they might discern how strong their Par∣ty was. Eteonicus when he heard of the Conspiracy was at a stand, not knowing how to comport himself in this Affair, because there was so great a number ofLike our Green Ribband men. Reedmen. For it seemed dangerous to call them openly to an Account, lest turning Enemies, aad taking up Arms, they should possess themselves of the Ci∣ty, and when they had prevailed, put all things in confusion. Besides he considered that it would be an horrid thing to destroy so many of the Confederates, that he should thereby in∣cur the Obloquy of the rest of the Greeks, and render the Army disaffected to the Service. Whereupon taking along with him fifteen men armed with Daggers, he walkt through the Town, and meeting with a man that had sore eyes coming out of a Surgeon's Shop, he killed him. A disturbance hap'ning upon't, and some asking for what the man was killed: Ete∣onicus commanded them to inform them, that it was for wearing a Reed. Where∣upon
as soon as the Order was given out, all that wore Reeds threw them away; every one that heard it, searing he should not convey them away soon enough. Afterwards Eteonicus assembled the Chians, and commanded them to raise money, that the Sea-men might receive their Wages, and be kept from engaging in any new Conspiracy. When they had made a Contribution, he commanded his men on board, and going on board every Ship himself, encouraged and heartned them up, dissembling the loss the Lacede∣monians had sustained at Arginusae, and gave them a Months pay a man. A while after the Chians, and the rest of the Confederates assembled at Ephe∣sus, and consulted about sending Ambassa∣dors to Lacedemon, to give an account of the present Juncture of Affairs, and to desire that Lysander might be Admiral; who had gained great reputation amongst the Consederates the last time he was Ad∣miral, by the Victory he obtained in the Sea-fight at Notium. Accordingly there were Ambassadors dispatcht, and Messen∣gers from Cyrus in company with them, upon the same Errand. The Lacedemo∣nians granted, that Lysander should be
Vice-Admiral, but appointed Aracus Ad∣miral, for their Law does not allow that the same Person should have that Com∣mand twice. The Fleet was delivered up to Lysander at the end of the twenty sixth Year of the War. The same Year Cyrus killed Antoboesaces and Mitraeus the Sons of Darius his Sister, Daughter to Xerxes, who was Father to Darius, for keeping their hands within their sleeve, when they met him; which respect the Persians pay to their King only. The sleeve reaches somewhat below the hand,Like the Custom of being led in to the Grand Seignior. so that nobody can do any mischief, whiles he keeps his hand within it. Hie∣ramenes and his Wife represented to Da∣rius, how horrid a thing it would be to connive at so great an Insolency. There∣upon the King feigned himself sick, and dispatcht Messengers for Cyrus to come up to him. The next Year Lysander came to E∣phesus,XXVII. Year of the Pelop. War, Alex∣ius Archon. When Ar∣chylas was Ephorus, and Alexi∣us Archon at Athens. and sent for Eteonicus with the Fleet from Chius, getting the rest toge∣ther from all Parts. He not only refitted these Ships, but built more at Antan∣drus, and went to demand money of Cyrus: who told him, that he had dis∣burst all he had from the King with a great deal more, and shew'd him what eve∣ry
Admiral had received, notwithstanding he gave him some. Lysander taking the mony appointed Captains of Gallies, and pay'd the Sea-men their Wages. In like manner the Athenian Admirals equipped their Fleet at Samos. About this time, Cy∣rus, upon the arrival of a Messenger from his Father, sent for Lysander, telling him, that his Father was sick, and that he had commanded him to come to him, though he was marcht at that time to Thamneria in Media not far from the Cadusii that were Borderers, and had made a defection, being gone thither to reduce them. When Lysander came, Cyrus would not yield, that he should fight the Athenians by Sea, unless he were much Superiour to them in Shipping, Telling him more∣over that the King, and he, had money enough, to equip a powerful Fleet for such a Design. Afterwards he consigned him the Tribute of the Cities, that be∣longed to himself, and what money could be spared besides, professing withal the kindness he had for the Lacedemonians, but in particular for Lysander, and so went up to his Father. When Cyrus had delivered him all his Concerns, and was entred on his Journey towards his sick Father, that had sent for him: Lysander
paid off the Army and set sail to Cerami∣cus a Bay in Caria. There he attackt a Town in League with the Athenians cal∣led Cedraeae: and the day after taking it by Storm, made Slaves of the Inhabitants, who were half Barbarians, and from thence he parted for Rhodes. The Athenians setting out of Samos, harrassed the King of Persia's Countrey, going also against Chius, and Ephesus: and when they had chosen Menander, Tydeus, and Cephisodotus, besides those Admirals that were already in Commissi∣on, they made preparations to meet the Enemy. In the mean while Lysander sailed from Rhodes along the Coast of Io∣nia to the Hellespont, to observe what Ships came that way, and to go against those Cities that had revolted. The Atheni∣ans stood more out to Sea towards Chius, because Asia was an Enemies Countrey. Lysander parted from Abydus to Lampsa∣cus, which was in league with the Athe∣nians. When the Abydenians, and some o∣ther Forces under the Command of Tho∣rax the Lacedemonian, came to him by Land; they attackt the Town, and took it by Storm, and the Soldiers had the plunder of it, being very rich and well stored with Corn and other Provisions; but Lysander
dismist all the Freemen. The Athenians followed him directly, and put into Har∣bour at Eleus in the Chersonese, with an hundred and eighty Sail of Ships: whilst they were at Dinner News was brought them of the loss of Lampsacus. Upon which they parted immediately for Sestos, where they took in some Provisions, and went from thence to Aegospotamos, over against Lampsacus, which is about fifteen Furlongs from the hellespont, and there they Supped. The same Night towards Morning Ly∣sander made a Sign to the Soldiers to re∣fresh themselves, and come on board. Then having made all necessary prepara∣tions for an Engagement; and causing the, they are made of old Cables, we use them in our men of War to shelter the men from the Shot. Barricadoes to be set up, he comman∣ded them to observe their posture, and that none should move out of their Line. As soon as the Sun was up, the Athenians ranged their Fleet in order before the Port, and faced the Enemy with a resolu∣tion to engage. But when Lysander came not out to them, and the day was far spent, they sailed back again to Aego∣spotamos. Upon which Lysander ordered out the nimblest Ships to follow the A∣thenians, to observe how they behaved themselves, when they went ashore, and
then to come back, and give him an Ac∣count: nor did he permit any of his men to go ashore till these Ships returned. This he did for four days together, du∣ring which time the Athenians continu∣ally bore up to him. Alcibiades when he viewed from his Castle the Athenians lying by the Shore, near no Town, fetch∣ing their Provisions from Sestos, that was fifteen Furlongs from the Fleet; but the Enemy in Port, and near a Town, from whence they were furnisht with all necessaries; went and informed them that they had but bad riding, and advised them to go to Sestos, where they might have the accommodation both of an Har∣bour, and a Town. When you are there (said he) you may fight the Enemy, when you think fit your selves. The Admi∣rals (especially Tydeus and Menander) bid him go about his business, for now they commanded, and not he; so he went his way. On the fifth day that the Athe∣nians had thus constantly bore up with Lysander, he commanded those he had or∣dered to observe their Fleet, that when they discovered the Enemy gone ashore, and stragled on the Chersonese (which they contemning Lysander for not com∣ing out to engage them, did every day
more and more, fetching their Provisions a great way off) they should return back to him, and hale up a Shield when they were half Seas over. They obeyed his Command. Then Lysander having taken Thorax with the Land-Army on board, made a Sign to set Sail with all expedition. As soon as Conon saw the Enemy bear∣ing up with him, he made a Sign for his men to come on board, and succour him with all possible diligence; but the men were so stragled, that some Ships had not above two Rowers, some one, some none at all. Only Conon's with seven more and the Paralus being manned stood out to Sea;Lysander surprises the Athe∣nian Fleet. but all the rest Lysander took on ground. The Athenians ashore got together in a Body, and threw themselves into the Garrisons. Conon seeing the Athenians totally defeated, fled with nine Sail, and stood for Abarnis, a Cape of Lampsacus; and taking from thence the Main-sails of Lysander's Ships, he went himself with eight Sail to Evagoras in Cyprus, but the Paralus parted for Athens with the News of what had passed. Ly∣sander carried to Lampsacus the Ships, Prisoners, and the rest of the Spoil, to∣gether
with Philocles and Adimantus two Admirals that were his Prisoners. The day that the Action hapned he dispatcht Theopompus the Meletian a Pirate to La∣cedemon with an account of the Fight; who arrived there in three days. After this Lysander called the Confederates to∣gether, and bid them Consult what was to be done with the Prisoners. There were a great many Accusations brought against the Athenians, for their former villainous Actions; for having determi∣ned to cut off every Prisoner's right hand, if they had gotten the Victory at Sea: and for throwing down a Precipice the men they had taken on board two Gallies, the one a Corinthian, the other an Andrian; being set on by the cruel advice of Philo∣cles. Several other things also were al∣leged, and 'twas resolved that all the Pri∣soners who were Athenians should be put to death, except Adimantus; because he only at the Council of War opposed the cutting off of hands, which was the reason that some accused him for betray∣ing their Fleet. Lysander asking Philo∣cles that threw the Andrians and Corin∣thians down the Precipice, what he de∣served for being the Inventor of such in∣humanity against the Greeks, hackt him in pieces.
When he had setled Affairs at Lampsa∣cus, he went to Byzantium and Chalcedon, where being received by the Townsmen within their Walls, he sent away the A∣thenian Garrison with Passes. At that time those that betrayed Byzantium to Alcibiades, fled to Pontus, and from thence to Athens, where they were natu∣ralized. Lysander, when he saw any Soldiers of the Athenian Garrisons, or a∣ny Athenian besides, sent them all to A∣thens, giving Passes to those that sailed thither, and to no place else, concluding that the greater the Multitudes were that flockt to the City and Piraeus, the sooner they would want Provisions. Therefore leaving Sthenelaus the Lacedemonian to be Governour of Byzantium and Chal∣cedon, he went to Lampsacus, and refitted his Fleet. When theA Ship for Sacred and Pub∣lick uses, there were four o∣thers, viz. Antigonis, Ptolemais, Ammonis, and Deli∣as, or Sa∣laminia, Castel. Syn∣tag. Paralus arrived at Athens in the Night, upon the first report of the Calamity, the sad News was conveyed by a continual Lamentation from the Piraeus; up the Long Walls, on to the Ci∣ty, one informing another: So that No∣body slept that Night, not only bewailing those that were slain, but their own con∣dition a great deal more; reflecting, how they had treated the Melians a Colony of
the Lacedemonians, after they had be∣sieged, and taken them, as also the Histi∣aeans,Scione∣ans, Torone∣ans, Aegi∣neans. and several other Greeks. The day following they called a Council, and decreed, That all the Ports except one should be choaked up, the Walls cleared, Guards set, and all things provided for the City to hold out a Siege. And thus whiles the Athenians were employed about these Affairs, Ly∣sander came from the Hellespont to Lesbos with two hundred Sail of Ships, and settled the Government at Mity∣lene, as he had done at other Towns, and sent Eteonicus to the Coast of Thrace with ten Gallies, to reduce all the To∣wns there to the Obedience of the La∣cedemonians. After the Sea-fight, the rest of Greece deserted the Athenians, except the Samians, who had murde∣red the Chief men, and possest them∣selves of the Government. Lysander sent to acquaint Agis, and those of Decelea, and Lacedemon, that he was coming with two hundred Sail of Ships. Whereupon the whole Multitude of the Lacedemonians and Peloponnesians, except the Argives, went out to receive him by order of Pausanias the other King. When they were all assembled, he
marcht with them, and encamped near the City of Athens in the School called Academia. Then Lysander going to Ae∣gina, and getting as many of the People together as he could, restored them to their Countrey, as he also did the Meli∣ans, and others that had been banish't. After that he wasted Salamis, and came to an Anchor in the Piraeus with an hundred and fifty Sail, hindring any Ships from coming into Port. The A∣thenians blockt up by Sea and Land; knew not what measures to take, being destitute of a Fleet, of Friends, and Pro∣visions; thinking it was now come to their turn to suffer the ills they had infli∣cted on the People of other Towns, which was not by way of revenge, but insolen∣cy, and for no other cause, but that they had joyned with the Lacedemonians. Thereupon they advanced those that had been disgraced, and so held out the Siege, and though many were starved to death, yet no mention was made of capitula∣ting. At last their Provision being quite spent, they sent Ambassadors to Agis, to desire an Alliance with the Lacedemoni∣ans, to reserve themselves theLong∣walls joyn∣ed the Port and the City, which Me∣gara, Ar∣gos, and o∣ther Cities had. Long∣walls, and Piraeus, and to make Peace upon these Conditions. He ordered the Am∣bassadors
to go to Lacedemon, because he had no Power to conclude a Peace, and they informing the Athenians thereof, were dispatcht thither, and went to Sellasia near Laconia. When the Ephori understood their Message to be the same, that it was to Agis, they commanded them to depart immediately, and think of fairer Propo∣sals, if they really stood in need of a Peace. The Ambassadors returned home, and when they reported the News to the People there fell a Consternation on all; for they thought of nothing less, but that the Survivers should be made Slaves, and that whilst other Ambassadors were passing to and fro, the rest of them would be star∣ved. As for pulling down of the Walls, there was none would propose it. Be∣cause Archestratus was committed for mentioning in the Senate, that it would be expedient to make a Peace with the Lacedemonians upon their own demands. Which were, that the Long-walls should be demolished on both sides for ten fur∣longs; a Decree also was made forbid∣ding any to move it hereafter. In this Juncture, Theramenes declared in the Assembly, that if they would send him to Lysander, he would discover whe∣ther
the Lacedemonians, by insisting on the demolishing of the Walls, designed to make them all Slaves, or only to ob∣lige them to keep the Peace the better. After he was dispatcht, he stay'd with Lysander above three Months, expecting when the Athenians (now their Provisi∣ons failing) would comply with any con∣ditions. Four Months after he returned, and reported in the Assembly that Lysan∣der had detained him till that time, and now advised him to go to Lacedemon, because it was not in his power to grant their demands, but the Ephori's. Upon that he was chosen one of the ten Pleni∣potentiaries to Lacedemon. Lysander sent Aristotle an Athenian Exile thither in Company of some Lacedemonians to in∣form them that he had made Theramenes this Answer, That the Power of War and Peace was vested in the Ephori. When Theramenes and the other Ambassadors arrived at Sellasia, 'twas demanded what Powers they had. They declared they had full instructions to treat of Peace. Then the Ephori ordered them to be introduced, and at their coming called an Assembly wherein the Corinthians and Thebans chiefly, with several other Greeks, oppo∣sed the making Peace with the Athenians,
and urged their total Extirpation. The Lacedemonians replied they would not destroy a Greek City, that had done so great Service to Greece in the most cri∣tical times; but made Peace with them on these Conditions; That the Long∣walls and Piraeus should be demolished, that they should deliver up all their Ships but twelve, that they should restore their Exiles, that they should make a League Offensive and Defensive with the Lacede∣monians, and serve them in all their Ex∣peditions, both by Sea and Land. The∣ramenes and his Collegues brought these Articles of Peace to Athens; and when they came into Town a great Multitude flockt about them, fearing they returned without effect, though their necessity could admit of no delay, by reason abun∣dance of People perisht with Famine. The day following the Ambassadors declared upon what terms the Lacedemonians would make Peace. Theramenes spoke the first, and advised them to comply with the Lacedemonians, and demolish the Long∣walls. Whilst it was debated, the major part approved it, and it was resolved that the Peace should be accepted. After that Lysander came up the Piraeus, the Exiles returned and the Walls were demolished
with great eagerness, the Musick playing the while, and all imagined that the Li∣berty of Greece might be dated from that day. Thus ended the Year, about the middle of which Dionysius the Son of Hermocrates usurpt at Syracuse: the Sy∣racusians having a little before vanquisht the Carthaginians in a Battel; which lat∣ter took Agrigentum distrest by Famine, and quitted by the Sicilians. The next was the Olympick Year.XCIV. Olymp. Pythodorus Archon sive Anarchia. The Oligarchy hap'ned after this manner:In which Crocinas the Thessalian wont he foot∣race Eudicus was Epho∣rus of Sparta, and Py∣thodorus Archon of A∣thens; whom the Athe∣nians don't reckon, but call this Year the Anar∣chy. the People determined to chuse Thirty men, that were to make Laws, and administer the Govern∣ment by them. Those that were chosen were thesePoliarches, Critias, Me∣lobius, Hippolochus, Eu∣clides, Hiero, Mnesilo∣chus, Chremo, Therame∣nes, Aresias, Diocles, Phae∣dria, Choerelaus, Anaetius, Piso, Sophocles, Eratos∣thenes, Charicles, Onoma∣cles, Theognis, Ae chines, Theogenes, Cleomedes, E∣rasistratus, Phido, Dra∣contides, Eumathes, Ari∣stoteles, Hippomachus, Mnesithides.. Ly∣sander having setled Affairs in this manner, parted for Sa∣mos. Agis drawing the Land-Army out of Decelea, disban∣ded, and sent them home. A∣bout this time, when the Sun was Eclipst, Lycophron the Pheraean aspiring to the Do∣minion of all Thessaly, over∣came the Larisseans, and other Thessalians that opposed his Designs in a set Battle, and
made a great Slaughter. At that time al∣so Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse being overthrown by the Carthaginians lost Ge∣la, and Camarina. Soon after the Leontini that liv'd at Syracuse revolting from Dyo∣nisius, and the Syracusians returned to their own City, and immediately the Syracusians sent the Horse under the Command of Di∣onysius as far as Catana in pursuit of them. The Samians being closely blockt up by Lysander, went then first to consult of a Surrender, when he was going to give the Assault, and agreed upon these Conditions, That every Freeman should depart with a single Coat, but that they should deliver every thing else, and so they marcht out. Lysander restored the Town, and all that was in it, to the old Inhabitants, appointing ten Magi∣strates to be Governours, and sent home all the Confederates Ships to their respe∣ctive Cities. After that he sailed with his Spartans to Lacedemon, and carried with him theScheffer calls them Colours and not Stems. Antients of the taken Ships, all the Gallies out of the Piraeus ex∣cept twelve, the Crowns that were pre∣sented him upon his own particular ac∣count by the Cities,88125 l. 470 Talents of Silver, that remained of the Tribute which Cyrus had consigned him for the
War, and whatever Spoils he had taken beside. All these he delivered to the Lace∣demonians at the end of Summer,When the War end∣ed also. In which there were counted these Epho∣ri: First, Aenesias, in whose time the War began, which was the fifteenth of the thirty years truce made after the Conquest of Eu∣boea. To him succeeded Brasidas, Isanor, Sostratidas, Exarchus, Age∣sistratus, Angenidas, Onomacles, Xeuxippus, Pityas, Plistolas, Clinoma∣chus, Ilarchus, Leo, Chaerilas, Patesiadas, Cleosthenes, Lycarius, Eperatus, Onomantius, Alexippidas, Misgolaidas, Isias, Aracus, Evarchippus, Panta∣cles, Pityas, Archytas, Eudicus. In whose time Lysander atchieved the forementioned Exploits, and returned home. in the twenty eighth Year and sixt Month of the War. The Thirty were nominated immedi∣ately upon demolishing the Long-walls and Piraeus, being chosen to make Laws for the New Government, which they still deferr'd either to collect or publish, appointing a Senate and Magistracy af∣ter their own humour. At first they seized, and put to death all those that they knew lived upon Evidencing in time of the Democracy,. and such as were trou∣blesome to honest and good men. The Senate condemned these with some satis∣faction, and every one that knew himself to be clear of these Crimes was not in the least concerned at it. Afterwards they consulted how they might set up an Arbi∣trary Government, and dispatcht Aeschi∣nes and Aristotle to Lacedemon, to pre∣vail
with Lysander, that he would use his Interest to procure them a Guard, till such time as they had cleared the City of ill affected Persons, and setled the Govern∣ments, promising to maintain them at their own charge. He consented and sent them a Garrison, under the Com∣mand of Callibius the Governour. When they received them they paid Callibius all the respect imaginable, that so he might approve of all their Proceedings. When Lysander had procured them a Guard, they no longer took up Rogues, and pitiful Fellows, but such also, as they thought would not bear their Oppression, or that would endeavour to obviate their Designs, and those that were likely to head the Multitude. Formerly Critias and Theramenes main∣tained a strict correspondency and friend∣ship; but when the first (having been banisht by the People) began to thirst af∣ter blood; Theramenes opposed him, de∣claring it was not fit, that any should be put to death, for being esteemed by the People, provided they had never injured men of worth and honesty. For you and I (said he) were wont both by our Words and Actions to ingratiate with the People. But Critias (though he was ve∣ry
intimate with Theramenes, till this time) did now discover himself to be of a contrary Opinion, saying, Those that contended for a Superiority over others, must of necessity remove such, as were the greatest Obstacles in their way. If you therefore think (said he) because we are not one, but Thirty, that for this reason we ought to be less sollicitous for the preservation of this Model, than a Single Person would be for a Monarchy,, not always in a bad sense. you are a Fool. When several were arbi∣trarily put to death; many were obser∣ved to meet together, discoursing and wondering what kind of Government they were likely to have: Theramenes told them that unless they took a more competent number into their Society, the Aristocracy could not stand. Thereupon Critias and the rest of the Thirty, being jealous of Theramenes, lest he should become popular; chose three thousand to participate of the Govern∣ment. Then Theramenes declared he thought they committed an absurdity; for whereas they designed at first to admit only the best men to the Administration of Affairs, they had now chosen three thou∣sand, as if the whole number must needs be men of Worth and Integrity, and
none beside; or as if no ill men could be amongst them. I see (said he) ye act two things which are inconsistent; for ye set up an Arbitrary Government, and that Arbitrary Government is not able to defend it self against the Power of the Subject. Thus he. The rest of the Thirty mustering the three thousand in the Market, and those that were not of that number in another place, they commanded them to arm themselves. In the mean while, they went away, and sent the Garrison with those Citizens that were of their Party to disarm all but the three thou∣sand; who, taking away their Arms, car∣ried them into the Citadel, and laid them up in the Temple there. After this, they, as if they had obtain∣ed a Licence of doing what they listed, put some to death out of malice, and o∣thers for their money; resolving to seize all the Aliens,Our Sheriffs lock up the Houses of a Per∣son com∣mitted for Treason, and secure the Goods till the tri∣al be over, when they are to be restored to the Owner if cleared, else to the King, vide Salm. de Ufuris. to seal up their Goods, and to murder them, that they might procure money thereby to pay their Garrison. They also encouraged Thera∣menes to seize what Forreigner he pleased; but he replied, That he thought it base for them which profest themselves the best of men, to act worse than Sycophants.
For these if they can screw money out of any, let them live; but we take away the lives of the Innocent, and their mo∣ney too. And will not then these Acti∣ons of ours, appear worse than any of theirs? They suspecting Theramenes would be an Obstacle in their way, and obviate their Arbitrary Proceedings, conspired a∣gainst him: the Senators also traduced him privately amongst themselves, as one that would subvert the Government. They therefore calling a Senate com∣manded some Soldiers, whom they thought the most desperate to be ready with dag∣gers under their Arms; and when Thera∣menes came amongst them, Critias stood up and spake.Critias's Oration. If any (my Lords) think we have put too many to death for the short∣ness of the time, let that man consider, that these things always happen, where altera∣tions of Government are made. Our City is the most populous of any in Greece, and has for a long time been. pampered with Liberty: So that we, who have changed the Government to an Aristocracy, must expect a great many Enemies. We there∣fore considering what a Grievance Demo∣cracy is to us all; and knowing though the Nobility will remain faithful, that the People will never be reconciled to the
Lacedemonians, to whom we owe our Pre∣servation, have with their Consent con∣stituted this New Model. And we employ our utmost endeavour to take those off, that we find make opposition against it; but if any of our own Order attempt to alter the Constitution, 'tis much more equitable that that man should suffer. We have observed that this Therame∣nes, makes it his business to contrive our ruine, which you will find to be true, if you take notice, that none discourses more freely against the times than he; and that none makes stronger opposition, when we consult about taking off any Popular man, than he. If these had been his Sentiments at first, we could not in reason have repu∣ted him an ill man, but a prosest Enemy. He promoted the League, and Alliance between us, and the Lacedemonians. He dissolved the Democracy. He instigated us chiefly to do justice on those Criminals, that came first before us. And now since we are all become odious to the People; he will no longer approve of our Proceed∣ings, thereby to secure himself, and render us obnoxious for what is past. He there∣fore ought in Justice to be punisht, not on∣ly as an Enemy, but as a Traytor against us. Treason is by so much a greater mis∣chief
than War, by how much 'tis more difficult to avoid a secret practise, than a barefaced Design. And 'tis yet more execrable, because an Enemy makes Peace, and keeps his Faith; but we can ne'r be reconciled to him, that we once find a Traytor; and can never trust him for the future. I will now remind you of his former Actions, that you may understand they are habitual, and that he has. Treason in his nature. He, though he was at first the People's Creature, as his Father Hagno had been, yet appeared the most forward of any, in transferring the Democracy to theThe Go∣vernment of Athens. four hundred, and was the leading man amongst them. But afterwards when he discovered a Conspiracy to be forming a∣gainst the Aristocracy, he headed the Peo∣ple against it. Whereupon he was nick∣named the Buskin; for as that fits either Foot, so he accommodated himself to both Parties. That man (Theramenes) is not fit to live, that shews his Craft in drawing his Friends into Plots, and then leaves them in the lurch, when he finds any oppo∣sition: but he that is like the Seamen, who labour hard in a Storm, and beat it out till they come into fair weather. For otherwise how can they arrive at their de∣sired
Port, if when they meet with any difficulty, they bend their course a dif∣ferent way? All changes of Government are atten∣ded with blood: and you (Theramenes) by your inconstancy have caused several of the Aristocracy to be destroyed by the Peo∣ple; and many of the Democracy to be cut off by the Nobles. This is he, whom the Admirals ordered to take up the sink∣ing men, in the Sea-fight near Lesbos, but though he did not take them up, yet he to save himself, prosecuted the Admirals, and caused them to be put to death. Why should we spare such a man, that only pur∣sues his own Interest without regard ei∣ther of honesty or friendship? Nay ra∣ther let us beware of his inconstancy, since we know it, and be before hand with him, that he may not serve us, as he has all his Friends. We therefore impeach him as a Conspirator and Traytor against his Coun∣trey. Be pleased also to consider, that we do nothing contrary to Law or Justice. The Lacedemonians Constitution is esteem∣ed the best in the World: yet if any of the Ephori should not comply with his Col∣legues, but oppose their Proceedings, and speak ill of the Government: Don't you think that the rest of them, and all the
States would not sentence him to undergo the utmost rigor of the Law. If you therefore have any regard to your own preservation, don't ye spare this man, but spare your selves, for if he escapes the Sword of Justice, he'll raise the Faction to a great height: And on the contrary if he be taken off, he will defeat their hopes, both at home, and abroad. When Critias had ended his Speech, he sat down; and then Theramenes standing up, spoke as following.Theramenes his Speech. And I (my Lords) will answer in the beginning of my Defence, what was last objected. He says, that I prosecuted the Generals, and caused them to be put to death. Whereas I did not set on foot the Accusations a∣gainst them: but they declared that they gave me Orders to take up those unfortu∣nate men in the Sea-fight near Lesbos. To which I made my defence, that it was not possible to bear up to them, for the violence of the Storm, much less to take them up; and this the People thought a reasonable defence. The Admirals seemed to accuse themselves; for they declared that when they could have saved the men, they stood off, and let them perish. I don't wonder that Critias objects this against me contra∣ry to Law, who was not present at the Acti∣on,
but with Prometheus in Thessaly, forming a Democracy, and arming the, a peculiar name a∣mongst the Thessa∣lians for Slaves, as  was a∣mongst the Lacede∣monians. Slaves against their Masters. Nor may that ever be acted here what he did in that Place! I agree with him so far; that if any endeavour to depose you from the Govern∣ment, & support the Conspirators; that man in justice ought to suffer the utmost rigor of the Law. And you will best de∣termine, who does these things, if you re∣flect on the former, and the present Acti∣ons of us both. Whilst you were nomina∣ting a Senate, chusing Magistrates, and punishing the Evidencers,. we were all of one mind. But since (I see) men of Worth and Honesty taken up; I have changed my Opinion. I knew if we took off Leo the Salaminian, who both appeared, and was a good man, and no ways obnoxious to the Law, that men of the like Probity would become apprehensive of us, and when pos∣sest with a fear, would set themselves a∣gainst the Government. I apprehended that if you committed Nicias Son of Niceratus a wealthy man, who neither himself, nor his Father, ever favoured a Democracy, that you would thereby contract the Odium of their Par∣ty. Moreover, when I saw you put Anti∣pho
to death, who furnisht out two Gallies in time of War, that were good Sailors: I conceived you would create a jealousie in those that were ready to serve their Coun∣try. When it was declared lawful for every one of us to seize any Forreigner, and take his Estate, I opposed it: for twas evident, that if these had been destroyed, all Forreig∣ners would have been Enemies to our Coun∣try. I contradicted the disarming of the Peo∣ple, not thinking it our Interest to weaken the City thereby: for I thought the Lacede∣monians did not intend when they pre∣served us, that we should be disabled and rendered uncapable of doing them any Ser∣vice. Because if this had been their aim, they might have prest us a little longer with want of Provisions, and left never a man alive. Nor did I approve of hiring of a Guard, when we might have employed our own People, till such time as we the Ma∣gistrates had reduc'd the  Subjects under our Obedience. For when I saw there was a great Number of Malecontents in the City, and many Exiles abroad: I would have had neither Anytus, nor Alci∣biades, nor Thrasybulus banisht, knowing the People would be reinforc't when they got such experienced Leaders; and that enough would joyn with any, that would but head them.
Can you in Justice therefore call him a Friend, or Traytor, that deals thus plain∣ly with you? Those (Critias) don't rein∣force the Enemy, that prevent the Malice of some, and by their advice procure the Alliance of others: but they rather that extort money by violence, and put the in∣nocent to death: These (Critias) are such as create a great many Enemies, and be∣tray not only their Friends, but themselves also, for sordid gain. Now if I can't con∣vince you of the truth of what I speak any other way, then consider, whether in your Opinion Thrasybulus, Anytus, and the other Exiles had rather those things, which I have mentioned, should be done here, or what these men do? I believe they think they have Friends in all Places; yet if those of the Chiefest Quality were faithful to us, they would not dare to set a foot upon Athenian Ground. As to what he objected concerning my unconstancy, as though I would comply with every Change. I desire you would observe, that the Peo∣ple themselves did vote the Government of four hundred, being informed that the La∣cedemonians would trust any Model, ra∣ther than a Democracy. But when they would remit nothing of their rigor, and the Generals, Aristotle, Melanthius, and Ari∣starchus
openly fortified a place with a Bulwark, intending to receive the Enemy into it, and so to have mastered the City for themselves, and Party: This I disco∣vered and prevented. Do they call this betraying the Government? He calls me Buskin, as though I had accommodated my self to both Parties; Pray! What do you call him that can please neither? For you (Critias) were most inveterate against the People in time of the Democracy; and you were the stiffest Opposer of the Nobles un∣der the Aristocracy. I (Critias) am a declared Enemy to those, who won't allow that the Democracy can e'r be well esta∣blisht except Slaves, and such like, be made Members of it for a single groat, and would sell it as cheap as they bought it. I am also an eternal Enemy to those who are of a Belief that the Aristocracy can't be well setled, unless the Government be reduced under the Tyranny of a few. I concluded formerly that the other Model was the best, because there were those that would have ventured Life and Limb in defence of it: I am still (and unconstant as he calls me) of the same Opinion. If you (Critias) can say that I have endeavoured to remove men of Probity from the Go∣vernment, either by joyning the Popular,
or Tyrannical Faction, speak out; and if you can convict me, that either I have at∣tempted it now, or at any other time; I'll acknowledge that I deserve the worst of punishments. When he had made an end, the Senate murmured in favor of him, But Critias knowing that he would come off, if he permitted the Senate to pass their Suffrage on him, and thinking, that there would be no living for himself, went and discourst it with the Thirty, and going out, placed the Guard with their Daggers openly before the Bar of the Court. And then coming in again, said.Critias's Speech. He, Noble Snators, performs the Office of a good Patrone, that will not suf∣fer his Clients to be circumvented, if he can help it; and I'll discharge my self like such an one. They that stand here say, they will not permit us, to let that man escape, who openly endeavours to sub∣vert the Aristocracy. The new Laws say, that none of the three Thousand shall be put to death, without your Suffrage, and that the Thirty have power to condemn any that are not of that number: Therefore (said he) I with your General Consent strike this Theramenes out of the Cata∣logue; and we all pass the Sentence of Death upon him. Theramenes hearing this,
flew to the Altar, and spake.Theramenes Speech. I humbly beg of you (my Lords) to grant me this most equitable Request, that Critias mayn't have power to strike me, or any of you out of the Catalogue, as he shall please; but that all of us may be tried by the Law which was made concerning those in the Catalogue. And though I know the Altar can't protect me, yet I'll declare the In∣justice of these men to the World, and their Impiety to Heaven. I wonder that you being men of Probity, won't defend the Common Cause, when you know 'tis as easie a matter to strike out any of your Names, as it is mine. Upon this the Thirty men's Cryer commanded the Ele∣ven men to sieze Theramenes, who com∣ing with their Officers headed by Saty∣rus an importunate, and brazen faced Fellow: Critias said to them, we deli∣ver up this man Theramenes condemned according to Law. Ye Eleven men take him, carry him to the place of Executi∣on, and do your Office. At that word Satyrus, and the Officers haled him from the Altar. Theramenes (as 'tis usual in those Cases) implored both Gods and men to behold these their Actions. But the Senate were husht, seeing such Fel∣lows as Satyrus at the Bar, and the place
before the Court full of Guards, whom they knew to be armed with Daggers. When Theramenes was carried through the Market-place, he declared his Suffe∣rings with a loud Voice; and one saying of his goes about still, how Satyrus threatned him, that if he held not his bawling, he should smart for't. Shall I not suffer then (replied he) if I hold my Tongue? At length being compelled to die by drinking Juice of Hemlock, he, as the report goes, dasht the rest on the Ground, adding, Here's an Health to honest Critias. And though I know these sayings of his are not worth relating, yet this deserves admiration, that he at the very point of death, neither lost his in∣nate Prudence, nor Facetiousness. Thus died Theramenes. The Thirty thinking they might act now as they pleased,2. Year of Olymp. Euclides Archon. without Controul, forbad all that were not in the Catalogue to come within the City;3. Of the Olymp. Mi∣cion Ar∣chon. removing them from their Estates, that so they and their Creatures might take possession of them: and when they fled to the Pirae∣us, the Thirty forced them from thence in great Numbers, so that Megara, and Thebes were filled with them. Soon after Thrasybulus marcht out of
Thebes with near seventy men, and sur∣prised Phyla a strong Place.4. O'ymp-Exaenutus Archon. The Thirty and the three thousand went out of the City with the Horse, on a very fair day to relieve it. Upon their arrival some of the most daring Soldiers attackt the Place, where. meeting with nothing but blows, they marcht off. The Thirty intended to besiege them, and hoped to carry the Place by cutting off all their Provisions, but there fell abundance of Snow in the Night, so that next day they return∣ed to Athens. well beaten with Snow, and with the loss of a great many. Drud∣ges, that were intercepted by those of Phyla. Yet apprehending that the Gari∣son would plunder the Countrey, unless there were Guards to repress them, they sent the greatest part of the Lacede moni∣ans, and two Troops of Horse to the Fron∣tiers about fifteen Furlongs from Phyla, where they encamped in a woody place, and kept Guard. Thrasybulus having by this time got to∣gether about seven hundred men at Phy∣la, went out with them by Night, and making an halt about three or four Fur∣longs from the Enemie's Quarters, lay still. At break of day, when the Enemy had left their Arms, being gone about
their occasions, and the Grooms made a noise with carrying their Horses: Thrasybulus's men took up their Arms, and fell furiously upon them, taking some, routing the rest, and pursuing them six or seven Furlongs together. There were slain of the Heavy-armed men above an hundred and twenty; of the Horse Nicostratus surnamed the Fair, and two whom they surprised in their Beds. In their return they erected a Trophy, and getting all the Arms, and Baggage to∣gether, they retired with their Booty to Phyla. The Horse came out of Athens to their relief; But not one of the Ene∣my appearing, they staid till the Relati∣ons of the slain had taken them up, and then returned to the City again. From this time, the Thirty not thinking their Government secure, designed to seize upon Eleusis, that it might serve them for a Place of Retreat, if occasion were. Hereupon Critias, and the Thirty marcht into Eleusis; where the Horse mustered the Citizens (pretending they would know how many they were, and how strong a Garrison, the Place would re∣quire) and ordered a List of their Names to be taken. He that was mustered went out at a little Gate leading to the Sea∣side;
where by the Shore they had post∣ed Troopers and Serjeants, that bound every man as he came forth. When they were all taken, the Thirty ordered Lysi∣machus Colonel of the Horse to carry and deliver them up to the Eleven men. The next day they called the Heavy-armed men that were of theThe 3000. Catalogue, and the rest of the Horse into the Odeum. Where Critias stood up, and spoke. We (said he) have constituted this Govern∣ment as much for your Interest, as our own, and you must therefore as well partake of the Dangers as share in the Honors. The Eleusinians we have got together, you must put to death, that all of us may be under the same circumstances both of Hope and Fear. Then pointing to a cer∣tain place, he commanded them to pass their Suffrages in itAs by holding up of the hand: for some∣times they put Stones into an Urn that nobody could be discovered for what he voted. So that this last is opposed to the for∣mer. openly. In the mean while the Laconian Guards were armed, and took up half theThe Mu∣sick room. Odeum. These Proceedings pleased only such as cared for their own Interest. Soon after Thrasybulus having got a Body of near one thousand men at Phyla, came by Night to the Piraeus. When the Thirty heard of it, they came to the Relief of their own Party, with the Laconian Guards, the Horse and Heavy-armed men;
and marcht in the Highway that leads to the Piraeus. Those of Phyla hindred them at first from advancing, but the Place appearing to be of a large Circuit, and to require a great Garison, whereas they as yet were but a small Party, they retired in a close Body to the Munichia: then those of the City went into the Horse-Market marshalling their men, so as to cover the way that leads to the Temple of Diana Munichia, and the Bendideum, being no less than fifty Deep, and in this Order they advanced. They of Phyla drew up in the Road against them, but were not above Ten Heavy-armed men in depth: in the Rear of these were placed the Targetiers and the Light-armed Darters, supported by a good Body of Slingers that had resorted thither. In the mean time Thrasybulus laying down his Shield, and command∣ing his men to do the like, stood in the midst of his Squadron with his other Arms,Thralybu∣lus's Speech. and made this Speech. I will partly inform you (Dear Countreymen) and partly remind you, that the Enemy which charge us in the right are those that you routed five days agone; and that they in the Rear of the left are the Thirty Ty∣rants that have unjustly banisht us, turned
us out of our Habitations, and proscribed our dearest Friends. Now they are come into this Place, which we always wished, and they themselves ne'r expected. Here we face them with our Swords in our hands: the Gods also appear openly in our Defence, because we were taken from our Tables, from out of our Beds, and from off the Market-place; some of us had commit∣ted no Offence, and others that were abroad, were banisht. The Gods when it served our advantage, declared themselves for us, and sent on a suddain a Storm in Calm∣weather; and by their assistance though the Enemy were a Multitude, and we but an handful, yet we fought them, and erected a Trophy. Now their Providence has brought us into a Place, where the Enemy are obliged to march up Hill, so that they cannot shoot, nor dart their Javelins over their formost Ranks. On the contrary we can reach them with our Pikes, our Jave∣lins and Stones, that we throw down the Hill, and wound a great many of them; though it was believed that we, especially our first Rank, must have engaged them up∣on even Ground. Now therefore if you, as becomes your selves, will couragiously dart your Javelins, you cannot miss, for the Road is covered with them; and if they
stand upon their Guard, they must always skulk under their Shields, so that we as it were engaging with Blindmen, shall at our pleasure wound them, fly upon them, and rout them. But (Dear Countreymen and Fellow-Soldiers) every man of you must acquit himself, as if he were sensible that he alone should be the cause of the Victory. A Victory, that (by the favour of Heaven) shall restore our Countrey, Habitations, Liberty, Preferments, Wives, and Chil∣dren to those that have them. Happy are those amongst us that shall live to see this Victory, to behold the most joyful day that ever was. Happy! the man that falls, for none how wealthy soever can ob∣tain so glorious a Monument. As soon as it is time. I'll begin the Paean, and when we invoke Mars, let us go with a joynt Re∣solution to revenge on our Enemies the In∣solencies we have suffered from them. Having ended his Speech he faced about to the Enemy, but moved not forward, because the Priest had charged them not to fall on, before one of their men were either killed or wounded. When this happens, I'll lead you on (said the Priest) and you shall obtain the Victory, though per∣haps I shall be slain. Nor was he mista∣ken, for as soon as the Army had taken
up their Shields, he as it were hurried on by a certain fatality, flew out one of the formost; where charging the Enemy he was killed, and afterwards buried by the Ferry over the Cephissus. The rest got the Victory, and pursued the Enemy down the Hill to the plain Ground. There were slain of the Thirty Critias and Hippomachus, of the Ten Com∣manders in the Piraeus Charmides the Son of Glauco, and about seventy others. They stirpped none of their Countrey∣men, but took away their Arms only, and aftewards restored their Bodies upon truce. Then several drawing near toge∣ther, began a Parly, and Silence being made, Cleocritus Cryer of the Mystae,Mystae those that were Ini∣tiated the first year, they af∣terwards being call∣ed , Sui∣das. Cleocritus's Speech. having a strong voice, made this Speech to them. Why (Dear Countreymen) do you banish us? Why do you thirst after our Blood? we never did injure you, we have all frequented the same Magnificent Temples, the Sumptuous Feasts, and Splen∣did Sacrifices: We have performed the same Exercises, we have had our Educati∣on together, we have served under the same Generals, and we have exposed our selves to many dangers with you, both by Sea and Land, for our common Preserva∣tion and Liberty. We beseech you by the
Gods of your Fathers and Mothers, by your Friends, Kindred, and Relations (by some of which we are all allied to one ano∣ther) to revere Heaven, and have regard to man. Forbear any longer to persecute your Countreymen, and don't submit to those Villains, the Thirty Tyrants, who for their private gain have murdered almost more in eight Months time, than the Pelo∣ponnesian War has consumed in ten Years space. When we might have lived peace∣ably together, they raised amongst us, a most shameful, cruel, and detestable War, hateful both to Gods and men. And assure your selves, not only you, but we also shall lament those we have lately slain. After he had ended his Speech, the Magistrates having heard what he said, retired with their men into the City. Next Day the Thirty appeared much dejected, and sat alone in Council; the three thousand al∣so wheresoever they were posted fell at variance. Those that had been the most violent men and apprehended they should be brought into trouble, declared they ought to persist, and not comply with those in the Piraeus. But as many as knew themselves to be Innocent became more considerative, shewing that their troubles might be composed; that they
were not obliged to obey the Thirty, nor suffer their Countrey to be ruined. In conclusion it was decreed that the Thirty should be removed from the Go∣vernment, and others chosen. Accord∣ingly there were Ten Elected, one out of each Tribe; Upon this the Thirty reti∣red to Eleusis. The Ten with the Colonels of Horse had care of the City, which was in great disorder, every one being jealous one of another. The Cavalry lay all Night with their Horses and Shields in the Ode∣um; and in the Evening, having a suspi∣cion of all, they went the Rounds with their Bucklers. In the Morning they mounted, expecting to be attackt by those in the Piraeus, where there was abundance of men of all sorts, making themselves Arms of Wood and Osiers, and whiting them over. Before ten days were at an end they of the Piraeus gave their Faith to all that would joyn them, as also equal Privi∣leges to Aliens: whereupon several Heavy and Light armed men with about seventy Horse came over to them: from the Pi∣raeus they made Excursions to get Wood and Fruit, but quartered every Night there. Of those in the City none went out armed except the Horse, who some∣times
meeting with the Forragers of the Piraeus, did their Battalion some mischief. Another time they met with some Young men, who did not belong to the City, but were going to fetch some Ne∣cessaries from their Estates; these Lysi∣machus Colonel of the Horse, put to the Sword, though they begged hard for their lives; which some of his Cavalry resented very ill. In return, the Horse of the Piraeus took Callistratus, one of the Tribe of Leontis in the Country, and killed him, being so much animated that they made their Excursions up to the ve∣ry Walls of the City. There was at that time an Ingenier in Athens (if this be worth relating) who apprehending that the Enemy were bring∣ing their Engines to the Course, by the way that leads from the Lyceum, ordered huge Stones of a Load weight to be car∣ried in Draughts, and thrown down in se∣veral places in the Course,Where they run races. which was ac∣cordingly done, and each Stone created the Enemy a great deal of Trouble. Then the Thirty and those of the Catalogue in the City sent Ambassadors from Eleu∣sis to Lacedemon, desiring Succors because the People had revolted from the Lacede∣monians. Lysander supposing it would be
no great difficulty to reduce those in the Piraeus, if they were blockt up by Sea and Land, and their Provisions cut off, procured an hundred Talents to be lent them, himself to go General,18750 l. Sterling. and his Bro∣ther Libys Admiral. Then setting forward towards Eleusis, he raised a strong Body of Peloponnesian Heavy-armed men; whilst the Admiral took care that no Provisions could be car∣ried in by Sea; whereby those in the Pi∣raeus were soon distressed. On the con∣trary those in the City were much ani∣mated at the presence of Lysander. Whilst Affairs stood thus, Pausanias the King en∣vying Lysander, for that he by those Ex∣ploits would both become famous, and render himself Lord of Athens, perswaded three of the Ephori to draw out the Gar∣rison. All the Confederates, except the Boeotians and Corinthians, concurred with him; which last declared that they could not salve their Oath by making War a∣gainst the Athenians, who had acted no∣thing contrary to the League. Which they did out of a Belief that the Lacede∣monians would reduce the Athenians Countrey into the Form of a Province. Pausanias had his Camp on the Right in a Place called Halipedum, and Lysan∣der
with the Mercenaries on the left. Pausanias sent a Message to those in the Piraeus, commanding them to depart to their respective homes, but they regarded him not. So he made an attack to stop the Lacedemonians Mouths, lest he should seem to favour the Enemy. After the Assault he drew off without having effe∣cted any thing; and taking with him two Battalions of Lacedemonians, with three Troops of Athenian Horse, he marcht to Port Cophus to view where he might open his Trenches against the Piraeus, with the greatest conveniency. As he retired, some fell upon his Rear, and cre∣ated him some trouble which provoked him to that degree, that he commanded his Horse to charge with full speed, as also those that were ten years past man's estate to second them, and follow∣ed with the rest himself. They killed about thirty Light-armed men, and re∣ceived the rest into the Theater in the Pi∣raeus, whereall the Targetiers and Heavy-armed men were arming themselves; whereupon the Light-armed men instant∣ly sallied out, darting their Javelins, throwing, shooting, and slinging. The Lacedemonians having several of their men wounded, and being prest hard re∣treated
gently; upon that the Enemy followed them the closer: There were killed Chaero and Thibrachus both Colo∣nels, with Leucrates that had won theHe was placed be∣fore the King in battel. Prize in the Olympick Games, and others of the Lacedemonians, that were buried before the Gates in the Ceramicus. When Thrasybulus and the other Heavy-armed men observed this, they went with Succors, and drew up immediately before the rest eight deep. Pausanias being prest hard, and retreating about four or five Furlongs to a certain Hill, command∣ed the Lacedemonians, and Allies to march up to him. There he marshalled his Battalion a great depth, and charged the Athenians, who closed with him; some of which were afterwards driven into the Clay by Halae, the rest put to flight, and about an hundred and fifty of them slain. Pausanias erected a Trophy, and marched off. Notwithstanding all this he was not so much irritated against the Athenians, but that he sent a private Message for them to dispatch Ambassa∣dors to him, and the Ephori that were there, informing them what they should say. They did as Pausanias directed, who raised Divisions amongst the People in the City, and ordered them to come to him
and the Ephori in a Body, and declare that there was no ground for making a War against those in the Piraeus, that both Parties ought to come to an Accom∣modation, and enter into an Alliance with the Lacedemonians. Nauclidas the Ephorus was well plea∣sed to hear this; he and another being there at that time according to the cu∣stom that obliges two of the Ephori to attend the King in his Expeditions: who both were more inclined to favor Pausa∣nias, than Lysander. Whereupon they sent Deputies very willingly from the Piraeus with Conditions of Peace, as also Cephisophon and Melitus, who went out of the City upon their own private ac∣count. When they were dispatcht thi∣ther, several others went from the Body of the City to acquaint the Lacedemoni∣ans that they surrendred themselves and City upon discretion, and that they thought it reasonable, if those of the Pi∣raeus declared themselves to be Allies of the Lacedemonians, that they also ought to deliver up the Piraeus, and Munichia. After they had their Audience, the Epho∣ri, and the, the As∣sembly of all the La∣cedemoni∣ans oppo∣sed to the , which consisted of the Ma∣gistrares, and deli∣berated a∣bout mat∣ters of less conse∣quence, Craglas. General Assembly dispatcht fifteen men to Athens, that they and Pausanias should joyntly make Peace with
the Athenians upon the fairest terms they could. A Peace was made upon these Condi∣tions, that the Athenians should agree to∣gether, and that every man should return to his former Station, only the Thirty, the Eleven, and the Ten, that Command∣ed in the Piraeus, were to be excepted; and if any in the City apprehended them∣selves to be obnoxious, they might re∣move to Eleusis. Pausanias having transacted these Affairs, drew off his Army. Those in the Piraeus marcht up with their Arms to the Arsenal, and sacrificed to Minerva. After the Commanders retur∣ned from thence, Thrasybulus made this Speech to them.Thrasibu∣lus's Speech. My Advice to you (Dear Countreymen that staid in the Ci∣ty) is; that you would learn to know your selves, and that you'll be able best to do, if you would recollect, what reason you have ei∣ther to have so great a conceit of your selves, or to usurp over us. 'Tis not because you are honester than we, for the People of meaner Fortunes than your selves, have at no time injured you for money, though you that are of such plentiful Estates, have done several sordid things, for base Gain. Since therefore you have no pretence to Honesty, see if you have any reason to be
proud of your Valour. And how can we make a better estimate of that than from the late Action betwixt us. Perhaps! because you are supported by Garisons, Men, Money, and the Alliance of the Pelopo∣nesians, you'll pretend to a greater share of Prudence than we: Nevertheless you have been over-reacht by them, that were destitute of all these Helps. Do you think you may value your selves upon your de∣pendance on the Lacedemonians? How can you do that? for they have delivered you up to the People you opprest, and are gone their way. was a kind of a pair of Stocks that they tied the Neck and Hands of Malefa∣ctors. lib. 3. Hellen. Like those that muzzle biting Dogs, and then leave them to the mercy of those they have mischieved. nei∣ther do I (Dear Countreymen) require you to violate your Oath in the least; but I perswade you rather amongst your other Virtues, to show how religiously you can keep it, and what men of Integrity you are. Having said this, and more to the same purpose. He told them that they need∣ed not be in that confusion they were, provided they would be governed by their Ancient Laws; and so dismissed the Assembly. Accordingly they chose Ma∣gistrates to administer the Government. A little after understanding that those of
Eleusis were bringing in a Foreign Pow∣er, they went against them with their whole Strength, and taking their Com∣manders that came to treat, cut them in pieces. They sent also the Friends and Relations of the rest to them, and per∣swaded them to an Accommodation: Then the People swearing to forget all former Injuries, kept their Oath, and still live peaceably together.
XENOPHON's History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. III. THE CONTENTS. The Heroick Mania succeeds her Hus∣band in his Province, and is barbarously murdered by Zenis, her Son in Law. Agis dies, and Agesilaus succeeds him. Cinado's Plot. Agesilau's Expedition into Asia. The War breaks out between the Thebans and Lacedemonians. Ly∣sander is slain before the Walls of Hali∣artus. THus ended the Sedition at Athens. Soon after Cyrus sent Messengers to Lacedemon, requiring that Republick
to make him a suitable Return for the Ser∣vice he had done them in the Athenian War. The Ephori thinking it a reasonable request, sent their Admiral Samius Orders to assist him if there were occasion, who willingly complied with Cyrus, in all his Commands; for sailing about with his own, and Cyrus's Fleet to Cilicia, he gave Syennesis the Governour thereof such diversion, that he could make no opposi∣tion by Land, whilst Cyrus marcht a∣gainst the King of Persia.Cyrus undertook his expe∣dition in the fourth year of the 94 O∣lymp. when Exaenetus was Archon Diod. Sic. Olymp. 95. Laches Ar∣chon. But after what manner Cyrus got an Army toge∣ther, and made an Expedition against his Brother, how the Fight hapned, how he was slain, and how the Greeks got safe to the Sea-side, Themistogenes the Syracusian, has written. After this Tissaphernes being highly esteemed, by the King, for his Service in the War against his Brother, and being made Governour both of the Provinces he ruled before, as also those that Cyrus had; he forthwith required all the Ionic Cities to yield him Obedience. But they being desirous to maintain their Liberty, and fearing Tissaphernes, because they had chosen Cyrus (while living) to be their Governour in his stead, did not re∣ceive him within their Cities, but sent
Ambassadors to Lucedemon, desiring, that they, being Protectors of all Greece, would extend their care to the Greeks in Asia too, that their Country might not be destroyed, and that their Liberty might be preserved. Hereupon the Lacedomonians sent Thimbro General, ordering him about one thousand of the Half-Slaves, and four thousand other Peloponesians, desiring of the Athenians three hundred Horse, be∣sides these Forces, and undertook to pay them himself. They sent him three hundred of those, that served under the Thirty Tyrants, supposing it would be no loss to the People, to have them sent abroad, and knockt on the head. When they arrived in Asia, he drew some Forces out of the Greek Garisons in the Conti∣nent: for all the Cities obeyed,Leun. . because a Lacedemonian Commanded. Thimbro with these Forces observed the Enemies Horse, but did not take the Field with his Army, being contented only to preserve the Countrey, where he was, from Depre∣dations. But after those that went in the Expedition with Cyrus, returned safe home, and joyned him; he marcht into the Field against Tissaphernes, and took upon sur∣render Pergamus, Teuthrania, and Hali∣sarnia,
the Province of Eurysthenes, and Procles descended of Demaratus the La∣cedemonian,He was ba∣nisht Spar∣ta and followed Xerxes in his Expe∣dition in∣to Greece. Diod. Sic. Lib. XI. on whom the King of Persia had conferred this Government, as a Re∣ward for his Service against Greece. Also Gorgio and Gongylus two Brothers, came over to him; whereof the one held Gam∣brium and Palaegambrium, the other My∣rina and Grynium; which Towns the King gave to Gongylus, because he was the only man amongst the Eretrians, that was banisht for adhering to the Persian Interest. Thimbro took some weak Places by Assault, and setting down before Larissa, which is called Aegyptia, he besieged it, because it would not surrender. But be∣ing not able to master the place any other way, he carried a Mine to cut off a Well, designing thereby to deprive them of Water. The Besieged making frequent Sallies, and throwing Wood and Stones into the Trench: he made an Engine of Wood, and mounted it upon the Wall. This also the Larissoeans, sallying out by Night, burnt. Thereupon the Ephori thinking he did them no Service, sent him Orders to rise from before Larissa, and march with his Army into Caria. When he was at Ephesus in order to his
Voyage thither, there came Dercyllidas, who had the reputation of being a skilful Engenier, being thereupon Surnamed Si∣syphus, and took upon him the Command of the Army. Thimbro returned home, and being accused by the Confederates for suffering his Forces to pillage the Al∣lies, was fined and banished. Dercyllidas after he had taken Com∣mand of the Army, perceiving that there was no good understanding between Tis∣saphernes and Pharnabazus, had a Confe∣rence with the former, and entred Pharna∣bazus's Province, chusing rather to make War with one, than both. Besides Dercylli∣das was formerly disgusted with Pharnaba∣zus; for, being Governour of Abydus, when Lysander was Admiral, Pharnabazus com∣plained of him, and thereupon he was confined to stand with a Shield (which the Valiant Lacedemonians esteem a dis∣grace, because 'tis a punishment for de∣serting their Order in Battel) so that for this Cause also, he went with more satis∣faction against him. He in a short while so far surpassed Thimbro in Conduct, that he marcht through the Confederates Count∣rey to Aeolis the Government of Pharnaba∣zus, without any Injury done to the Allies. The Aeolis belonged to Pharnabazus's
Province which Zenis the Dardanian held under him with the Title of Satra∣pas, for term of Life. When he died, and Pharnabazus was designing to confer the Government on another; Mania, Zenis his Wife a Dardanian, went to him with her Troops, and Money, which she carri∣ed to present Pharnabazus withal, as also to oblige his Misses, and other Favourits. When she was admitted to his Presence, she addrest her self to him after this manner. My Husband (Pharnabazus) was your Ally, and paid his Tribute so punctually, that you both praised, and ho∣noured him. And if I can serve you as well, why will you prefer any other to the Government? If I do not give you satis∣faction, it will still remain in your Power to take the Province from me, and confer it on another. When Pharnabazus heard her say so, he determined that she should be Governess of the Province. Afterwards being settled in her Go∣vernment, she paid the Tribute as exactly as her Husband; and when ever she went to wait upon Pharnabazus, she al∣ways carried him Presents; and when he came into her Province, she gave him a most Magnificent Reception, and more to his satisfaction, than any of the other
Deputy Governors. Nor did she only defend those Towns which she at first took under her Charge; but, the Mari∣tine Towns, Larissa, Amaxitus, and Colo∣nae, which would not yield her Obedience, she reduced. When the Mercenary Greeks attackt the Places, she her self beheld them from her Chariot, and whoever deserved her Commendation, she liberally rewarded: whereby she made her Mer∣cenaries very brave men. She also at∣tended Pharnabazus in his Expeditions against the Mysians, and Pisidians; who at that time infested the King of Persia's Territories. Insomuch that Pharnabazus had a great Veneration for her, and some∣times admitted her to his Councils. But when she was somewhat past forty years of Age, Midias, her Daughter's Hus∣band, being egged on by the Speeches of some, who suggested to him that 'twas a dishonour for him to lead a private life, and live under the Domination of a Woman; observing that she had a watch∣ful eye upon others, as Supreme Magi∣strates commonly have; but reposed confidence in him, and treated him with that familiarity that a Mother does her Son in Law, went into her Chamber (as 'tis reported) and strangled her. He killed
also her Son about seventeen years Old, a very comely Personage. When he had perpetrated this Villany, he siezed upon Scepsis and Gergis, two strong Towns, where the greatest part of Mania's Treasure was. The Garisons in the other Towns would not receive him, but kept the Places for Pharnabazus. Soon after Midias requesting that he might have the Province on the same Conditions Mania enjoyed it. Pharna∣bazus returned him this Answer, that he should keep his Presents till he came him∣self to fetch them, and him too. Adding, he wisht not to live, without revenging Mania's Death. In this Juncture comes Dercyllidas, and forthwith in the same day Larissa, Ha∣axitus, and Colonae Maritine Towns, surrendred themselves to him. He sent Messengers also to the Aeolian Cities, re∣quiring them to resume their Liberty, to receive him within their Walls, and to make an Alliance. The Neandrians, Ili∣ans, and Cocylites complied with his De∣mands, because the Greek Garisons in them had misbehaved themselves after Mania's Death. But the Governour of Cebren a very strong Place, hoping Phar∣nabazus, if he defended it, would prefer
him, did not receive Dercyllidas. He en∣raged hereat, prepared to assault the Place; but being unsuccessful in the first days Sacrifice, he repeated it the following, and when he had no better Success in that nei∣ther, he sacrificed again the third, and so continued on to the fourth; being extream∣ly troubled, because he hastned to make himself Master of all the Aeolis, before Pharnabazus could arrive with Supplies. Athenadus a certain Sicyonian Captain, ima∣gining Dercyllidas trifled away his time, and that he himself was able to cut off the Cebrenians Water, fell on with his own Company, and attempted to stop up a Fountain; but they of the Town, sally∣ing out, wounded him, killed two, threw their Darts, and Javelins, and repulsed them. Whiles Dercyllidas was grieving there at, supposing the Soldiers would make their Attacks with less Vigor; there came some Heralds out of the Town from the Greeks, declaring they did not approve of their Governors Proceedings, and that they would rather serve the Greeks than the Barbarians; and as they were con∣ferring about these things, one came from the Governour to acquaint them, that he would confirm what the first proposed.
Thereupon Dercyllidas after he had suc∣cessfully sacrificed, ordered his men im∣mediately the same day to their Arms, and marcht up to the Gates, the Greeks set them open, and received him; where he placed a Garison, and went directly to Scepsis, and Gergis. Midias being in continual apprehension of Pharnabazus, and fearing the Townsmen, sent to ac∣quaint Dercyllidas, that if he would give Hostages, he would come to a Parly. Dercyllidas sent him one out of each of the Confederate Cities, bidding him take as many as he pleased, and whom he would: he took ten of them, and went out to parly. When he came to discourse Dercyllidas, he askt him upon what Terms he might make an Alliance. He told him on con∣dition, that he restored the Citizens their Liberty, and permitted them to be go∣verned by their own Laws. When he had given him this Answer, he marcht on towards Scepsis. Midias being sen∣sible it was not possible for him by force to prevent his Design without the Citi∣zens Consent, permitted him to enter the Town. Dercyllidas having sacrificed to Minerva in the Citadel of Scepsis, thrust out Midias's Garrison, and delivered up
the Town to the Citizens, exhorting them to live under such a Government as became Greeks, and Freemen. After∣wards when he left the Town, and set forward towards Gergis, several of the Scepsians attended him out of Honour, and Respect for the Service he had done them. Midias also following in the Re∣tinue, desired that Gergis might be put in∣to his Possession: Dercyllidas told him that he should have Justice done him; and having said so, marcht up to the Gates with Midias, the Army following two in Rank in a peaceable manner. The Garison discovering Midias in his Company from the lofty Turrets, for∣bore darting. But Dercyllidas saying to Midias, command the Gates to be opened, and conduct me to the Temple, that I may sacrifice there to Minerva. Midias was very loath to cause the Gates to be opened, but yielded to it at last, fearing he should be instantly siezed. As soon as he entred the Town in company of Mi∣dias, he went to the Citadel, and having posted his Soldiers upon the Walls, he with the rest sacrificed to Minerva. Af∣ter the Sacrifice he commanded Midias's Guards to stand to their Arms, in the Front of his Army, for being Midias
was not any longer in danger, they should now serve under him: Whereupon Mi∣dias not knowing how to behave him∣self, said to Dercyllidas; I am going to make some reception for you. No re∣plied Dercyllidas, it would look ill, for me to receive an Entertainment from you,Because they that sacrificed, feasted their Friends. now I have sacrificed, seeing I ought rather to entertain you. Stay therefore with me, and whiles Supper is making ready, we will adjust the Differences be∣twixt us. When they were sat, Dercyllidas exa∣mined him after this manner. Midias (said he) did your Father leave you Heir of your Family? Yes, said he. Then says Dercyllidas, what Manors, what Arable, what Pasture have you? Whiles he was setting down an account of them, the Scepsians that were present, said; Sir, he imposes on you. Don't ye (said Dercyllidas) be too particular.. At length when he had given an Inventory of his Patrimonial Estate. Tell me, said Dercyllidas, who did Mania belong to? All cried to Pharnabazus. Is not there∣fore (said he) her Estate Pharnabazus his? Yes, said they. Then it is ours (said he) since we have obtained the Victory, for Pharnabazus is our Enemy. Therefore
(said he) let somebody show us where Mania's and Pharnabazus's Treasure is: upon that some conducted him to Ma∣nia's House, which Midias had seized, and he himself followed thither: after he had entred the House, he called for the Trea∣surers, and commanded his Officers to sieze them; denouncing, that if they were taken stealing of Mania's Goods, they should be instantly put to death. After they had shown all, and he had taken a view of them, he locked and sealed them up, appointing a Guard over them. At his going out he spoke to the Captains and Commanders, whom he found at the door, we (said he) have procured very near a Years pay for eight thousand men, and if we get any thing else, that also shall be yours. This he acquainted them with, knowing when they heard it, that they would be in much better Discipline, and more obser∣vant of their Duty. When Midias askt him, saying, Where must I dwell? Der∣cyllidas made answer, in Scepsis, where 'tis most fitting for you, it being your own Countrey, and Father's House. Dercyllidas having dispatcht these Af∣fairs, and taken nine Cities in eight days; consulted, how he might not be trouble∣some
to the Allies, as Thimbro was, by wintring in a Friend's Countrey, and how Pharnabazus might not in defiance of him infest the Greek Towns with his Horse. Thereupon he sent to him, and demanded whether he would have Peace or War. Pharnabazus confidering that Aeolis lay as a Bulwark against Phrygia, his own Province, accepted a Truce; and when it was concluded, Dercyllidas went to Bithynica Thracia, where he had his Winter Quarters, which Pharnabazus was not much concerned at, because the Bithynians had several times made War upon him. Here Dercyllidas ravaged, and spoiled the Countrey with great se∣curity, and procured plenty of Provisions. Afterwards when some Auxiliaries sent by Seuthes, being about two hundred Odrysian Horse, and three hundred Tar∣getiers, arrived from the other side of the Water, they encamped, and fortified themselves about twenty Furlongs from the Greeks, and demanded of Dercyllidas a Guard of Heavy-armed men for their Camp; and going out to forage, took a great many Slaves, and much Spoil. Their Camp being now full of Prisoners, and the Bithynians having Intelligence how many of the Greeks went out, and what
number of them staid behind to de∣fend it, assembled a strong Body of their Forces together, both Targetiers, and Horse, and about day fell upon their Heavy-armed men, being near two hun∣dred. As they advanced they threw their Lances, and darted their Javelins; when the Greeks saw themselves wound∣ed, and killed, not being able to do any thing, for that they were shut up within a Rampart of a man's height, they broke it down, and sallied out upon them. But the Bithynians being Targetiers, retreated wherever they were charged, and easily avoided the Heavy-armed Greeks; then they galled them on all sides with their Darts, and laid in every effort several of them dead on the Ground. At last they were cooped up, as it were in a Pen, and cut all in pieces, except fifteen that escaped to the Greeks Camp, who as soon as they perceived the Enemie's Design, escaped immediately in the Skirmish, undiscove∣ted by the Bithynians. The Bithynians having performed this Action expeditiously, and killed several of those Odrysian Thracians, that guard∣ed the Tents, recovered all their Priso∣ners, and departed. So that the Greeks having Intelligence, and coming with
Succours, found nothing in the Camp but the naked Carkasses. The Odrysians af∣ter they returned, buried their dead, drinking good store of Wine over them, and celebrated Horse-races; and at last joyning the Grecian Army, they harassed and burned Bithynia. In the beginning of the Spring,Aristocra∣tes Archon. Der∣cyllidas left the Bithynians, and marcht to Lampsacus: whilst he was here, there came to him Aracus Navates, and Anti∣sthenes sent by the Magistrates at home; who amongst other things were to inspect how Affairs stood in Asia, and to acquaint Dercyllidas, that he was to continue in his Command the following Year, that the E∣phori commanded them to call the Soldi∣ers together, and inform them, that they blamed them for their former Actions, but in that they had done no Injuries of late, they commended them, and to let them know, that for the future, if they did any Mischief, it would not be endured; but if they carried themselves justly to the Allies, they should be praised. After they had assembled the Soldiers together, and spoke thus to them, the General of Cyrus's Troops made Answer, We (My Lords) are the same men now, that we were last year, but our General is
another sort of a Person than the former was; from which you may easily apprehend the reason, why we don't offend now, as we did before. The Commissioners from home being received in the same Tent with Dercyllidas, one of Aracus's Retinue, informed them, that they left the Depu∣ties from the Chersonites at Lacedemon; who reported that the Chersonese could not be manured, for that they were plun∣dered and spoyled by the Thracians, un∣less a Wall were built from Sea to Sea; and then they might not only have a large and fertile Countrey for themselves, but for as many of the Lacedemonians as would, to plant. Declaring they won∣dred some Lacedemonians had not been sent by the Republick already with For∣ces to effect it. Dercyllidas hearing this, did not discover his own Opinion, but dismissed them from Ephesus to go and visit the Greek Towns, being pleased, for that they would find them in a peaceable and flourishing Condition. So the Com∣missioners departed, and Dercyllidas knowing he was continued in Command, sent again to Pharnabazus, and demanded of him, whether he would have Peace as he had the former Winter, or War. Phar∣nabazus chose Truce; so Dercyllidas
leaving the Confederate Towns in the Neighbourhood in Peace, passed the Hel∣lespont with his Army into Europe; marching through that part of Thrace which was in Amity with them, where he was entertained by Seuthes, and arri∣ved at the Chersonese. When he under∣stood that there were eleven or twelve Towns in it, and that it was a very fruit∣ful and rich Countrey, but reported to be infested by the Thracians, he surveyed it, and finding the Istmus to be thirty seven Furlongs over, he without any more delay, sacrificed, and walled it in, dividing the space amongst the Soldiers into several Parts, and promised Rewards to them that finished theirs first, and to the rest according to the proportion of their merit. So the Wall that he began in the Spring, he finished before Autumn, and inclosed within it eleven Cities, seve∣ral Ports, abundance of good arable Land, a great quantity of which was sowed, as also large and rich Pastures, stored with all sorts of Cattel. After he had performed this, he re∣passed into Asia, and visited the Towns there, which he found were all in a good condition, save only that the Exiles of Chi∣os, had siezed upon Atarna, a strong Place,
and made Excursions thence, supporting themselves by ravaging, and destroying Ionia. He hearing that there was store of Provision in the place, sat down before it, and besieged it, forcing the Townsmen within eight Months to surrender. He constituted Draco the Pellenian, Gover∣nour of the Place, and having stored it plentifully with all sorts of Provisions, that he might have a Place of Reception whenever he came thither,. he marcht to Ephesus; which is three days Journey distant from Sardes. Till this time, Tissaphernes, and Dercyl∣lidas, as also the Greeks, and Barbarians in those Parts were at Peace; but after there went Ambassadors from the Greek Towns to Lacedemon, and reported that Tissa∣phernes had power, if he would, to re∣store the Greek Cities their own Laws, and that he would soon be obliged to grant them their Liberty, if they did but harass the Province of Caria,. his Resi∣dence: The Ephori being informed here∣of, sent Dercyllidas Orders to fall into Caria with the Army, and Pharax the Admiral to coast along with the Fleet. They both observed their Orders. It hapned about this time, that Pharnabazus came to Tissaphernes, partly because the
latter was chosen Generalissimo, and partly to assure him of his readiness to make a joint War with him, as also to assist him in dri∣ving the Greeks out of the King's Territo∣ries. Otherwise he envied Tissaphernes his Command of General, and resented it very ill, for that he had been deprived of the Province of Aeolis. After he had heard his Proposals, Tissaphernes-said to him, First pass with me into Caria, and then we will advise about these things; when they arrived there, it was thought conve∣nient to place strong Garisons in the wall∣ed Towns, and then to return into Ionia. As soon as Dercyllidas heard they had repassed the Maeander, he informed Pha∣rax, that he feared Tissaphernes, and Pharnabazus would over-run, and ravage the Countrey, which was defenseless, whereupon he passed the Maeander too. The Greeks marched with their Troops in no good Order, because the E∣nemy had entred the Countrey about Ephesus before them; where on a sud∣dain they discovered the Lacedemonians from the opposite Watch-Towers on the Monuments. On the other hand the Greeks sent some up into the Monuments and Towers, which they were possessed of, and espyed the Enemy drawn up
in Battalia, in the way they were to march, being the Carians with their white Bucklers, and the Persians that were there, together with all the Greek Troops that both of them had, and a vast Body of Horse, Tissaphernes having the right Wing, and Pharnabazus the left. When Dercyllidas perceived this, he or∣dered the Commanders of the Heavy-armed men, and Captains, instantly to draw up eight deep, and place the Targe∣tiers and Horse in both Wings, whilst he in the mean time sacrificed. The Peloponne∣sians made a stand, and prepared for a Charge, but the Prienians, Achilleans, Islanders, and those of the Ionian Towns threw down their Arms in the Corn (which was thick in the Vale of Maeander) and those that stood their Ground, made shew as if they would not long maintain it. The report was, that Pharnabazus ad∣vised to come to a Battel, but Tissapher∣nes recollecting after what manner Cyrus his Army had received him, and imagi∣ning all Greeks were like those, refused to engage, and sent to Dercyllidas, ac∣quainting him that he would come, and have a Conference with him. Dercylli∣das taking the goodliest Persons both of his Horse and Foot, went forth to the
Deputies, and thus accosted them. I had indeed prepared for Battel, as you see, yet since Tissaphernes desires a Parly, I won't oppose it; though if there be a Conference, there must be Pledges and Ho∣stages exchanged on both sides. When this was agreed upon, the Armies marcht off: the Barbarians to Tralles in Phry∣gia; and the Greeks to Leucophrys, where there is a Temple of Diana, held in great Veneration, and a Pool above a Furlong, in Circumference somewhat Sandy, being fed with a Spring, whose Water is both potable, and warm: And this was that days Transaction. The day following they came to the Place appointed, and there determined to understand from each other, upon what Terms they should make a Peace. Der∣cyllidas proposed, that the King of Persia should restore the Greek Towns to their Liberty. On the contrary Tissaphernes insisted to have the Greek Army drawn out of the King's Territories, and the La∣cedemoian Governours out of the Greek Towns. At this Conference they made a Truce till such time as Dercyllidas had sent the Proposals to Lacedemon, and Tissa∣phernes to the King. Whilst Dercyllidas was setling Affairs in
Asia, the Lacedemonians being formerly prvooked by the Eleans, the Ephori and whole Assembly resolved to humble them, because they had made an Alliance with the Athenians, Argives, and Mantineans, and drove them from the Horse-races andThey were five, leaping, running, Quoits, fighting at Whorle-bats and Wrestling. P. Fab. A∣gon. Gymnick Games, pretending the Lacede∣monians were condemned in a Fine to them; nor yet being satisfied with this, had whiptThucyd. lib. 5. Lichas an ancient man, and thrown him out of the Foot-race, because he had delivered the Chariot to the Thebans, and attempted to crown them with Garlands, after they had been declared Victors by the Cryers, and because they had opposed Agis in making of Vows for the Success of the War, though he went by the direction of the Oracle to sacrifice to Jupiter, and obliged him to depart without sacrificing; affirming it was against an ancient Cu∣stom for Greeks to consult Oracles, when they made War against Greeks. Thereupon they sent Ambassadors to Elis, and declared that the Lacedemonian Magistrates thought it equitable, that they should restore the adjacent Cities to their Liberty. The Eleans made Answer,War with the Eleans. That they should not comply with them herein, for that they had acquired those Towns by the Sword; upon that the
Ephori ordered an Army to be raised, which Agis commanded, and fell with it into the Eleans Territory by the way of Achaia near Larissa. When the Army had newly entred the Enemie's Countrey, and were destroying it, there hapned an Earthquake; which Agis imagining to be from Heaven, marched out of their Territories, and disbanded his Army. Hereby the Eleans were animated, and sent Ambassadors to those Cities they un∣derstood were disaffected to the Lacede∣monians. When this Year was elaps'd,Ithycles Archon. the Ephori ordered Agis to be sent with another Ar∣my against Elis, the Athenians too with the rest of the Confederates except the Baeotians, and Corinthians joyned him. After Agis had entred the Elean's Coun∣trey through Aulon, the Lepreans forth∣with revolted from them, and joyned him; and a while after the Macistians, as also their Neighbours the Epitalians. When he had passed the River Alpheus, the Letrians, Amphidolians, and Marga∣neans came over to him; then he went to Olympia, and sacrificed to Jupiter Olym∣pius, nor did any presume to hinder him. After he had sacrificed, he marched to the City Olympia destroying, and burning
the Countrey, and carried off abundance of Cattel, and Prisoners. Insomuch that several of the Arcadians, and Achaeans hearing of it, went voluntarily into the Army, and partook of the Spoil, this Campagne being like an Harvest to Pe∣loponesus. When he came to the City he destroyed the Suburbs, and the School which was a fair Structure. As for the City, it being unwalled, 'twas thought he rather would not, than that he could not, take it. The Countrey being thus laid wast, and the Army in the Neighbour∣hood of Cyllene: Xenias his Complices, according to the Proverb,Spoken Hyperbo∣lically of those that expect more than ordinary advantage, Erasm. Ad∣ag. Chil. 2. Cent. 10. measuring their Father's Money by the Bushel, intended by their own Power to deliver up their Countrey to the Lacedemonians, and rush∣ing out of an House with their Swords, made a Slaughter, killing one amongst the rest that was like Thrasydaeus, the Peoples Patron; and thought they had killed Thrasidaeus indeed, so that the Peo∣ple, being in a great Consternation, re∣mained quiet. The Murderers imagi∣ning they had done their Business, went with their Complices to the Market-place with their Arms. But Thrasydaeus was fast asleep in a certain Place, where he had got drunk; and when the People per∣ceived
he was not killed, they thronged about the House, where he was, and swarmed about him like Bees about their King. Thrasydaeus heading the People, fought, and prevailed: upon which the Murderers fled to the Lacedemonians. After this Agis repassing the Alpheus, left a Garison of Elean Exiles in Epitalium, near the River, and constituting Lysippus Go∣vernour thereof, disbanded his Army, and returned home. The remaining part of Summer, and the Winter follow∣ing the Eleans Countrey was harassed, and destroyed by Lysippus, and his Garison. The next Summer Thrasidaeus sent to Lacedemon,Lysiades Archon. acquainting them that he would dismantle the City, and would quit Cyllene, Phrixa, Epitalium, Letrini, Amphidoli with Margana, and besides these Acrorii, and Lasion, which the Ar∣cadians laid claim to. As for Epeus a Town that was situate between Heraea, and Macistus, the Eleans demanded that for themselves; alledging they had bought it, and the Countrey about it, of those that were then possest of it,5625 l. for thirty Talents, and had paid the Money. But the Lacedemonians judging it was no more their right for buying it by force, than if they had wrested it from those
that were weaker than themselves, com∣pelled them to quit this Place also. Yet they did not abridge them of the Super∣intendency of Jupiter Olympius his Tem∣ple, though anciently it belonged not to them: Concluding the Countrey-men that would become Competitors for it, were not worthy to have the inspection thereof. These Conditions being accep∣ted, a Peace was made, as also a League Offensive, and Defensive between the E∣leans and Lacedemonians, which put an end to the War. After this Agis went to offer theThe Victors offered the tenth part of their Spoyl to Apollo, Dio∣nys. Halic. lib. 1. Tenths at Delphi, and being old, fell sick in his Return at Heraea, from whence he was carried whilst he was yet living to Lacedemon, where he soon after dyed, and had Honors above the proportion of a man, done to him at his Funeral.Three days after the Death of the King the Market - place was strewed with Chaff, and nothing sold. He∣rac. Pont. de Polit. Some days being passed according to Custom, the time came that they were to chuse a King. Leotychydes, who pretend∣ed to be the Son,Agesilaus and Leotychi∣des Competitors for the Kingdom of Lacedemon. and Agesi∣laus the Brother of Agis were Competitors for the Crown. Leotychides saying to Agesi∣laus
that by Law the King's Son, and not the King's Brother succeeds, unless he has no Son, and then his Brother shall inhe∣rit the Kingdom: I therefore (replied Agesilaus) must be King. How so (said Leotychides) whilst I am alive? Because (says Agesilaus) he that you called Father, ne'r owned you for his Son, and your Mother that can tell a great deal better than he, affirms the same. Besides, Nep∣tune convinces you of Imposture, who publickly drove your Father out of his Bed-Chamber with an Earthquake. The time also which is the surest Evidence, confirms this. For you were born the tenth Month after the God appeared, and scared your Father out of the Bed-Chamber. This was alledged. But Diopithes a man skilful in Oracles,Plutarch in Ages. and a Favourer of Leotychides his Cause, declared there was an Oracle from Apollo, that admonished them to have a care of a lame Kingdom. Lysander in defence of Agesilaus replied, he thought the Ora∣cle did not bid them beware of one that should stumble, and so be lame, but rather of a Successor that was not of the blood Royal: for the Government would be altogether lame when not administred by one of Hercules his Posterity.
When the States had heard both sides, they chose Agesilaus King; and before he had enjoyed the Crown a Year, as he offered one of the accustomed Sacrifices in the behalf of the Commonwealth, the Priest told him that the Gods intimated a most horrid Conspiracy; when he of∣fered the second time, the Sacrifice ap∣peared with more direful Tokens, but the third time he offered, the Priest cried, O Agesilaus! the Signs seem to me as if we were in the midst of our Enemies. Then they sacrificed to the Gods, Saviours,Cinado's Plot. and Averters of Evils, and having with much difficulty procured auspicious Signs, made an end. Within five days after they had made an end of sacrificing, a certain Person discovered a Conspiracy to the Ephori, and that Cinadon was the Head of it: this Cinadon was a young man, of un∣daunted Resolution, but not one of those that were capable of Dignity., those that were ca∣pable of Prefer∣ment and bearing Offices, Crag. de R. L. When the Ephori asked the Discove∣rer how the Plot should be put in Execu∣tion, he told him that Cinadon took him to the farthest part of the Market-place, and bid him tell how many Spartans there were in it. I (said he) told the King, the Ephori, the Senators, and about
forty more, and then said I to Cinado, Why did you bid me count them? He replied, These were to be accounted Ene∣mies, and all the rest Friends. Besides (said he) amongst the Spartans that are in the Farms, there will be in each, one Enemy the Master, but several Friends. Then the Ephori asking him, how ma∣ny were privy to the Plot, he replied, that he was informed by Cinado, that not many credible Persons knew of it, yet those that did, were such as could be trusted, but that it was to be communi∣cated to all,. to the Slaves, Half-Slaves, and them that were not yet capable of Dig∣nity, and to those that lived in the Neigh∣bourhood of Sparta; for wherever there was mention made of the Spartans a∣mongst these, there was none able to conceal his hatred against them, but that he could with pleasure eat them up alive. Again they asked him how they were to be furnished with Arms, he informed them, that Cinado told him, those of us that have been trained have Arms alrea∣dy. As for the Rabble, he took me to a Smith's Shop, and there shewing me a great many Daggers, Swords, Spits, Axes, Adses, Reaping Hooks, said, all these might serve for Arms, and that the
Instruments of Husbandmen, as also those that carved Wood and Stone, and the Tools of the Artisans might be employ∣ed for Weapons, especially against naked men. Afterwards being askt, when it was to be put in Execution, he made answer, that he was ordered to stay at home. The Ephori hearing this, and giving credit to his Information, were astonished: nor did they call the less Assembly,This is opposed to the great As∣sembly, called , and is suppo∣sed to consist on∣ly of the Spartans, Crag. but the Se∣nators getting together from several Parts, resolved to send Cinado, and some other young men to Aulon, pretending to give him Orders to fetch some of the Aulonites, and Slaves, whose Names were set down in a Letter, and to bring along with them from thence a very beautiful Woman, which was likely to raise the Affections as well of the Old, as younger sort amongst the Lacedemonians. Cinado had served the Ephori in the like Capacity before, so they gave him a, there were two Sticks of an equal bigness, one that the States, and the other that the General had; They wreathed a piece of Leather about the Stick, and wrote thwart the Wreaths, so that if it fell into the Enemies hands, yet they could not read it, because they wanted a Stick wherewith to fit it, for the Parts of the Letters would not meet exactly together, A. Gel∣lius. 17. Lib. 9. Chap. private Letter containing the Names of those that were to be taken; and asking
what men he should take along with him, the Ephori commanded him to go to the Eldest Hippagreta,There were three of these, they com∣manded Body of chosen Heavy-armed men, Crag. and order him to send along with him six or seven young men, of any that hapned to be there, taking care that the Hippagreta should have no∣tice whom to send, and that those who were sent should understand they were to seize Cinado, telling him they had pro∣vided three Carts, that they might not bring those they took on foot, concealing as far as it was possible, that all were to be employed about him only. They did not apprehend him in the City, for that they knew not the depth of the Plot, and designed first to learn of Cinado who were his Confederates, before the Con∣spirators understood it was discovered, that they might not fly. They that were to apprehend him in∣tended to detain him with them, and when they had drawn out of him the Names of the other Conspirators, they were to set them down, and send an Ac∣count thereof to the Ephori, with all speed imaginable. The Ephori took such great care, that they sent a Regiment of Horse with those that were going to Au∣lon. As soon as Cinado was taken, a Trooper came with the Names of those he
had set down, and immediatly they ap∣prehended Tisamenus the Priest, and the principal men amongst the Conspirators. When Cinado was brought back and tri∣ed, he confessed all, and discovered his Complices; so at last they askt him why he did engage himself in such a Design, he told them that he might be no worse a man, than any Lacedemonian of them all. At length they fastned him, and his Confe∣derates Neck and Hands in the Stocks, whipping them through the Town, and goaring them in the Flesh; thus they were put to death. Soon after Herodas a Syracusian, who lived with a Master of a Ship in Phaeni∣cia, observing several Phaenician Gallies arrived at other Parts, some a fitting there, and more a building, understood there was a Fleet of 300 Sail to be set out, and going on Board the first Ship, which went for Greece, brought news to the La∣cedemonians, that the King of Persia and Tissaphernes were equipping such a Fleet, though for what Design he was not able to inform them. The Lacedemonians were startled at this News, and assembled the Confederates to consult what mea∣sures they ought to take: Lysander suppo∣sing the Greeks would be much stronger
at Sea, and considering how the Army that marcht with Cyrus came off, per∣swaded Agesilaus to engage, that in case they should raise him an Army of thirty Spartans, two thousand Half-Slaves, and six thousand of the Confederates, to un∣dertake an Expedition into Asia. Besides, he intended to accompany Agesilaus him∣self, that they both might restore the Decemvirates, which he had established in the Cities, and the Ephori supprest; and to reinstate them in their Liberty. Agesilaus offered his Service, and the La∣cedemonians granted his Demands, with six Months Provisions. So having offered the necessary Sacri∣fices, and particularly for a successful Voyage, he departed, and dispatched Mes∣sengers to all the Confederate Towns, re∣quiring them to send their respective Quota's of men, and repair to the Rende∣vous; intending himself to sacrifice at Aulis,There were XI of them, Thucyd. Lib. 4. where Agamemnon when he set Sail for Troy, had sacrificed. But the States of Baeotia having Intelligence of his Design, sent a Party of Horse and forbad him to sacrifice any more, throw∣ing the Sacrifices they light on, off the Altar. Agesilaus called the Gods to witness, and going on Board his Gally in
a heat, set Sail, arriving at Geraestus, where he got together what Forces he possibly could, and went with his Fleet to Ephe∣sus. When he came thither, Tissapher∣nes sent first to know of him, what Busi∣ness he had there. Agesilaus, answered him, That his Business was to set the Asia∣tick Towns at Liberty, as we (says he) have done already to those with us in Greece. Tissaphernes made answer, If you (Age∣silaus) will grant a Cessation of Arms, till I can send to the King of Persia, I believe you may effect your Business, and so re∣turn home again. I would agree to't (re∣plied Agesilaus) but that I think you'l impose upon me. You may assure your self (said Tissaphernes) that if you per∣form your part, we shall make no attempt upon your Countrey during the Cessati∣on. When they had agreed upon these Conditions, Tissaphernes swore to He∣rippidas, Dercyllidas, Megialius that were deputed to him, that he would make a Peace without any Fraud, and they again swore to Tissaphernes for Agesilaus, that if the latter performed his part, the Peace should remain firm on their side. But Tissa∣phernes soon violated his Oath, for instead of making Peace, he sent to the King of Persia for more Forces; yet Agesilaus though
he understood his Design, kept the Truce. Whilst Agesilaus lay still at Ephesus, the Governments of the Towns being in Confusion, because there neither were De∣mocracies, as under the Athenians, nor Decemvirates, as in Lysander's time: All the Cities addrest themselves to Lysander being one they knew, and intreated him to negotiate their Business with Agesilaus; which drew a great Attendance always after him, so that Agesilaus appeared like a private man, and Lysander like a King; which Agesilaus declared afterwards made him uneasie. The rest of the XXX. Com∣missioners moved with Envy, forbore not to tell Agesilaus,. that Lysander viola∣ted the Laws, and lookt bigger than a King; so that when Lysander introdu∣ced any to Agesilaus, all whom he under∣stood to be in favour with him, he dismist without their Business done. When Lysander saw all things went contrary to his desires, and perceived how matters were, he would not suffer the People to run after him for the future, telling those plainly that begged his As∣sistance, that if he should appear in their cause, it would fare the worse. He re∣sented his disgrace very ill, and going to the King, said to him, Agesilaus! Is it one of
your Arts to lessen your Friends? Yes, said he, if they be such as would appear greater than my self, and I should be a∣shamed on the other hand, if I under∣stood not how to honour them, that augment my Glory. Lysander replied, Perhaps (your Majesty) is in the right, and has discharged your part better than I; Yet my request is, that I mayn't be disgraced by the loss of my Interest with you, and being I am so unpleasing an Ob∣ject in your sight, that you would send me some whither, where I may be ser∣viceable to you. Upon this Agesilaus was pleased to hearken to him, and sent him to the Hel∣lespont, where finding that Spithridates a Persian, was in disgrace with Pharna∣bazus; he discoursed, and perswaded him with his Children, and the Estate he had, together with two hundred Horse, to come over to the Lacedemonians. So leaving the rest behind at Cyzicus, he brought Spithridates and his Son to Age∣silaus; who when he understood it, was well pleased therewith, and presently in∣quired of him about Pharnabazus his Province and Government. After that Tissaphernes elated with the Opinion of the Army, that was coming
down to him from the King, threatned Agesilaus to declare War against him, un∣less he withdrew his Forces out of Asia. The Lacedemonians, and Confederates, who were there present, appeared very much concerned at it, imagining the For∣ces Agesilaus had then with him, were much inferiour to the preparations of the King of Persia; but Agesilaus with a pleasant Countenance, bid the Ambassa∣dors tell Tissaphernes, that he was very much obliged to him, because by his Per∣jury he had made the Gods Enemies to himself, and Friends to the Greeks. Im∣mediately he commanded his men to pre∣pare for an Expedition, ordering the Towns, that he was obliged to pass through in his march to Caria, to lay in Provisions, and sent Orders to the Ionians, Aeolians, and those who lived upon the Hellespont to send their Forces to the Rendevous at Ephesus. Tissaphernes part∣ly because Agesilaus wanted Cavalry, and partly because Caria was impassable for Horse, supposing also he was provoked by his Fraud, concluded for certain he would fall into Caria, the Place of his Residence. Whereupon he drew all his Foot thither, and marcht about with his Horse into the Plains of Maeander, imagi∣ning
he could trample the Greeks under foot with his Cavalry, before they reach∣ed those Countries, that were impassable for Horse. But Agesilaus instead of go∣ing into Caria, turned a clear contrary way, marching into Phrygia, and falling unexpectedly upon them took the Towns which were in his way, together with a very great Spoyl. All this while his march was without any opposition, but when he came near Dascyllium, the Vant-Curriers ascended up an Hill to see if they could discover any thing before them; when by chance a like number of Pharnabazus his Horse, sent by him under the Command of Ra∣thines and Bancaeus his Bastard Brother marcht up the same Hill; and discover∣ing one another at four hundred foot di∣stance from each other;Plethrum is the sixth part of a Furlong, Herod. or an hun∣dred foot, Suid. at first they halt∣ed. The Greeks were drawn up four deep like a Phalanx, the Barbarians not above twelve in Front, though a great many deep. These gave the Onset, and when they came to handy-blows, as many of them as hit the Enemy, broke their Lan∣ces, but the Persians having theirs made of Cornel Tree, killed instantly twelve men, and two Horses. So the Greeks were routed, though when Agesilaus came to
relieve them with his Heavy-armed men, the Barbarians lost one man, and retreat∣ed. The next day after the Fight be∣tween the Horse, Agesilaus sacrificed to see whether he might advance farther up into their Countrey,The Liver is dumpt together, and all of a mass in diseased Cattle, which was an ill O∣men in sa∣crificing. but the Liver want∣ed Lobes, upon sight of which he turned back, and marched down to the Sea∣coast; and finding he could not maintain his Ground in the Champion Countrey, without he had a sufficient Body of Horse, he resolved to make such Provision, that he might not be obliged to he always upon the defensive side. Therefore he ordered that the wealthiest men in all the adjacent Cities should keep Horses, and declared whoever furnisht out Horse and Arms with an approved man, should be excused from serving himself, which was effected with that Expedition, as if one willingly went to search out another to be knockt on the head for him. In the beginning of Spring,96 Olymp. Phormio Archon. he assem∣bled all his Forces at Ephesus, intending to exercise them, and proposed Rewards to those Ranks of the Heavy-armed men that had the ablest Bodies, and to the Ca∣valry that rode the great Horse best, proposing also Rewards to those Targe∣tiers, and Archers that performed their
Duty exceeding well. Upon this, one might see all the Schools full of men ex∣ercising, the Tilt-yards of Horse-men running, the Darters and Archers train∣ing, which made Ephesus, where those things were done, a Place worth the see∣ing: the Market was full of Horses and Arms exposed to sale; the Brasiers, Car∣penters, Smiths, Shomakers, and Painters, were all employed about making of Arms, so that the City seemed to be the Shop of War. This added courage to every one, when they saw Agesilaus, and the Soldi∣ers return from the Schools with their Garlands, and dedicate them to Minerva. For why may not there be entertained great Hopes of good Success, were men are Religious, Martial, and Loyal? Agesilaus thinking the Contempt of an Enemy would beget a resolution to fight, commanded the Cryers to bring out those Barbarians naked to sale, that were taken by the Foragers; the Soldiers see∣ing them have white skins, because they seldom exposed their Bodies naked, being effeminate, and tender, and always coacht about; thought a War with such People would be no more than if they were to fight with a Company of Women. At this time, a year being almost elapsed since
Agesilaus first began his expedition: The XXX. Commissioners, whereof Ly∣sander was one, sailed home again, and Herippidas with the rest of the Succes∣sors arrived. Agesilaus appointed Xeno∣cles, and another of their Body to be Ge∣nerals of Horse, giving Scythes the Com∣mand of the Heavy-armed Half-Slaves; Herippidas he made General of those Soldiers that served under Cyrus, and Mygdo of the Troops furnisht out by the Cities; declaring to them that he would march directly, and take his shortest cut into the heart of the Enemies Countrey: That therefore they should prepare their Bodies, and resolve to fight. Tissaphernes thinking he spread this report, designing to deceive him again, and that now he would in good earnest fall into Caria, passed with his Foot thi∣ther, as he had done before, and posted his Horse in the Plains of Meander. Age∣silaus did not deceive him, and according as he had given out, he fell into the Neighbourhood of Sardes, and marching three day through the deserted Countrey of the Enemies, got store of Provisions for his Army. The fourth day the Enemies Horse appearing, Agesilaus commanded the Camp-Master General to pass the Pa∣ctolus,
and mark out a Camp. Then the Persians observing some of the Greeks that followed the Camp to stragle for pillage, killed several of them. Which Agesilaus perceiving, commanded the Horse to go, and relieve them, but the Persians seeing Succours come, drew up in a close Body, and faced them with all their Troops. Agesilaus understanding that the Enemies Foot were not yet come up, thought it was a fit opportunity to fight if he could; thereupon he sacrificed, and forthwith leading his Phalanx against the Enemies Horse that confronted him, he commanded out all those that were ten years past man's Estate, to charge with full speed, the Targetiers to follow on running, after which he commanded the Horse to fall on, making as if he would second them with the whole Ar∣my. The Persians received the Horse, but afterwards a terrible face of things appearing, they gave Ground, and imme∣diately some of them fell into the River, others fled, and the Greeks pressing them hard, took their Camp, the Targetiers, as it is usual, falling to the Spoil. Agesilaus encompast as well those things that be∣longed to Friends, as Enemies, with his Army, and took abundance of Riches
which amounted to above seventy Ta∣lents,13125 l. besides some Camels which he af∣terwards sent into Greece. At the time of this fight Tissaphernes hapned to be at Sardes which occasioned the Persians to say, that they were be∣trayed by him; and the King supposing Tissaphernes was the cause of these mis∣carriages, sent Tithraustes to take off his Head, which he executed, and dispatcht Ambassadors to Agesilaus with these In∣structions. Agesilaus the Authour of all your Troubles, and ours too, is brought to Justice, the King of Persia requires you to march home with your Army, and the Asiatick Cities shall be restored to their Liberty, they paying him the accusto∣med Tribute. Agesilaus made answer, That he could act nothing without Or∣ders from the Magistrates at home. Then said Tithraustes, seeing I have taken off your Enemy, do you retreat into Pharna∣bazus his Government, till you hear far∣ther from home. Agesilaus replied, give me then Provisions for my Army, till I arrive thither: So Tithraustes gave him thirty Talents,5625 l. which he took, and marcht with his Army into Phrygia, the Govern∣ment of Pharnabazus; and being in the Plain beyond Cyma there came to him a
Messenger from the Magistrates at home, with a Commission to be Generalissimo both at Sea and Land, as also to nominate whom he would for Admiral, which the Lacedemonians did for this reason, because if one commanded all, the Forces would be united, whereby both the Land Army, and the Fleet would be strengthened by their mutual Assistance wherever there was occasion. As soon as Agesilaus received this Commission, he in the first place ordered the Islands, and Maritine Towns to E∣quip as many Gallies as they thought fit. There were an hundred and twenty sail of Ships new built, part of which the Towns had promised, and the rest some private Persons out of respect to him had furnished. He appointed Admiral Pisan∣der his Wive's Brother, an ambitious, and daring man, yet unfit to discharge so weighty an Employment; who parting from the Camp, went to take care of the Naval Affairs; and Agesilaus according∣ly as he had designed passed into Phrygia. Tithraustes seeming to apprehend that A∣gesilaus contemned the Forces of the King of Persia, and had no thoughts in the least of drawing his Troops out of Asia, but rather entertained great hopes of
ruining the King, and not knowing what measures to take sent Timocrates the Rho∣dian into Greece, giving him as much Gold as amounted to about fifty Talents of Silver,9375 l. instructing him to use his en∣deavours, and taking good security to distribute it amongst the leading men of the Cities, on Condition that they would make War upon the Lacedemonians. He went into Greece, and at Thebes gave some of the Money to Androclides, Ismenias, and Galaxidorus; at Corinth to Timolaus and Polyanthes; at Argos to Cyclo and his Party; the Athenians though they had no share of the Gold, yet were eager for War, thinking the Command in Chief belonged to them. They that received the Money, talkt against the Lacedemoni∣ans in their respective Cities, and rendring them odious to the People, stirred up the most considerable Commonwealths to consederate against them. But the Chief of the Thebans knowing the Lacedemonians would not break the League made with the Allies,War be∣tween the Lacedemo∣nians and Thebans. unless some others were the Aggressors; perswaded the Locri Opuntii to pay Tribute out of a Country that was in dispute betwixt the Thebans, and Phocaeans; imagining if such a thing were done, the Phocaeans
would fall into Locris. Nor were they mistaken, for the Phocaeans made an in∣road into Locris, and took a great Spoyl; thereupon Androclides, and his Party prevailed with the Thebans to assist the Locrians, as though the Enemy had not invaded a Countrey which was in Con∣troversie, but confessed on all Hands to be in Amity with them. On the other hand the Thebans fell into Phocis, and de∣stroyed it; upon which the Phocaeans sent Ambassadors to Lacedaemon, desiring As∣sistance from them, making it appear that they did not begin the War, but only re∣venged their Injuries. The Lacedemonians willingly embraced this opportunity of employing their Arms against the The∣bans, provoked by them before, for siez∣ing Apollo's Tenths at Decelea; and for not seconding the Lacedemonians in their attempt upon the Piraeus, complaining of them also for disswading the Corinthi∣ans from joyning with them; calling also to mind their denying Agesilaus to sacri∣fice at Aulis, and their throwing his Sa∣crifice off the Altar: And for that they did not assist Agesilaus in his Expedition into Asia. Thereupon they thought they had a fair opportunity to undertake a War against them, and repress their inso∣lency.
For their Affairs succeeded well in Asia, Agesilaus having carried all be∣fore him; nor was there any War in Greece, that could give them a diversion on that side. This being the sence of the Lacedemo∣nian Republick, the Ephori ordered a Le∣vy to be made, and sent Lysander to the Phocaeans with Orders to bring their For∣ces, as also for the rest to assemble at Ha∣liartus;Oeteans, He∣racleans, Melians, and Aeni∣ans. where Pausanias who was to Command in Chief, had appointed the Troops of the Lacedemonians and other Peloponesians to Rendevous at a set day. Lysander not only observed his Orders, but brought over the Orchomenians also from the Thebans. Pausanias, after he had obtained a successful Sacrifice for his Voyage, remained at Tegea, and sent the Officers of the Mercenaries before, being in expectation of the Troops from the Adjacent Places. When the Thebans re∣ceived Intelligence that the Lacedemoni∣ans were entred their Countrey, they sent Ambassadors to Athens with this Message:The Ora∣tion of the Theban Ambassa∣does at A∣thens. Ye complained of us (My Lords of Athens) for passing a severe Sentence against you towards the end of the Pelopo∣nesian War, but this your Complaint was groundless. For it was not the Decree of
our Government; but one Particular man, who hapned to be in the Assembly of the Confederates, that made mention of it. When the Lacedemonians invited us to joyn with them in the attempt against the Pireus, the whole Community ordered, that no assistance should be given them. And since we have highly provoked the Lacedemonians hereby, we think it reaso∣nable that you should succour our City, especially as many of you as were then in Athens ought in Equity to serve against them; for they changed your Government into an Oligarchy, and when they came with considerable Forces under a pretence to as∣sist, they brought an Odium upon you, and then delivered you up to the People: So that you had been ruined for all them, had not the Populacy saved you. We are all sensible that you would resume your for∣mer Sovereignty, and what way can this in probability better be effected, than by as∣sisting them whom they have oppressed? Ben't concerned at the Multitudes of their People, but rather be the more couragious, considering that when you your selves had a larger Dominion, your Enemies were the most numerous; who concealed their Ha∣tred as long as they wanted an opportunity to revolt. But when the Lacedemonians
got the upper hand, they declared their Sentiments concerning you; and now if both of us bend our Forces against them, you may be assured that several other States will discover themselves. And you will find my Words to be true, if you please to consider well on't. For who is there left that favors them? not the Argives, for they have always been their Adversa∣ries. The Eleans also whom they have lately deprived of several Cities, and a large Territory, are become their Enemies. What shall I say of the Corinthians, the Arcadians, and Achaeans, who though they were courted into the War against you by the Lacedemonians, yet bore their share in the Toiles, Dangers, and Expences of it. And when they had accomplisht their Designs, what Power, what Honors, or what Riches did they impart to them? Nay they thought their Slaves, though there were Freemen enough amongst the Allies, fit Persons to be preferred to Governments, and when they became successful they de∣clared themselves Lords of their Confe∣derates. Those they brought off from your side they have plainly cullied, and have re∣turned them, instead of Liberty, a double Servitude. For the Governours, and the Decemvirates Lysander constituted, exer∣cise
in every Place a Tyranny. The King of Persia, who contributed so much to their Conquest of us fares no better, than if he had assisted us against them. If you there∣fore will head those that have been mani∣festly oppressed, you will in probability be∣come more powerful than ever: When ye commanded, ye were only Generals at Sea, but now ye are Leaders of us, and the Peloponesians, with those you had formerly, as also the King himself that has so migh∣ty a Power. You your selves are sensible that we did the Lacedemonians good Ser∣vice, and we in probability shall now follow you more vigorously, than we did them for∣merly. For we come not to serve the Is∣landers, Syracusians, or others, as we did before, but to revenge our own Injuries. Neither are you ignorant, that this their exorbitant Power can be with less difficul∣ty ruined, than that Dominion of yours. You with your Fleet forced Obedience from your Subjects, but they though few, domi∣neer over those that are Superiour to them in number, and as well appointed as themselves. This (My Lords of Athens) we have to add, that you are sensible we invite you to Advantages of greater Con∣cern to your Country, than to our own. When the Oration was ended, several
of the Athenians approved of it, and 'twas resolved by all, that the Thebans should be succoured. Thrasybulus there∣fore put it to the Vote, and declared, That though the Piroeus was unwalled, yet they would at their own peril, make them a return greater than the kindness they had received. We therefore (said he) will assist you against them in case they attack you, because ye did not joyn with them against us. The Thebans returned home, and prepared to put them∣selves in a Posture of Defence, and the Athenians made preparations to succor them. Nor were the Lacedemonians be∣hind-hand with them; for Pausanias their King came down upon Boeotia with an Army of Lacedemonians, and Pelopo∣nesians, but the Corinthians did not joyn them. Lysander having the Command of the Forces from Phocis, Orchomenus, and the Adjacent Places, arrived at Hali∣artus before Pausanias; where as soon as he came, he lay not still in expectation of the Army from Lacedemon, but ad∣vanced with those Troops he had to the Walls of Haliartus; perswading them first to relinquish the Interest of the The∣bans, and to resume their Liberty. But the Thebans that were in the Garison op∣posed
his Designs: whereupon he at∣tacked the Town, which the other The∣bans, came full speed with their Horse, and Heavy-armed men to relieve. But whether they surprized Lysander, or whe∣ther he had Intelligence of their march, and expected them in hopes of a Vi∣ctory is uncertain; though this is cer∣tain, that the fight was under the Walls of Haliartus, and he erected a Trophy before the Gates thereof.Lysander slain. Afterwards Lysander being killed, some of his men fled to an Hill, whom the Thebans eager∣ly pursued, and ascended up to the top of it, where being drawn into a narrow, and difficult pass, the Heavy-amed men faced about; when two or three of the for∣most fell, the Lacedemonians rouled Stones down the Precipice upon the rest, pres∣sing them with so great courage that the Thebans were beat from the Ascent, and above two hundred of them slain. This Day the Thebans were dejected supposing their own loss to be as great as that the Enemy had received. But the day after finding that the Phocaeans, and the rest of the Confederates had retreated homewards in the Night, they valued themselves the more upon this Action. Yet when Pausanias apppeared with his
Army from Lacedemon, they thought themselves in great danger again, and the report went that there was a profound Silence and Consternation in their Camp. Next day when the Athenians came, and joyned them, Pausanias could neither move with his Troops, nor fight; at which the Thebans were the more ani∣mated. Then Pausanias calling his Co∣lonels, and Captains together, consulted whether he should fight, or make truce to fetch off Lysander, with the others that were killed. At length Pausanias and the Commanders considering that Ly∣sander was slain, his Army beaten and routed; that the Corinthians had not joyned them; and that the Allies did them no Service: besides that the Enemy was strong in Horse, and they but weak, the Bodies lay under the Walls, so that if they had been stronger, yet by reason of those from the Turrets, it would be no easie matter to bring off the slain; they thought it best upon all these Reasons, to make a Truce, and fetch them off. But the Thebans refused to deliver them on any Condition whatsoever, except it were, that the Lacedemonians should march out of their Countrey, who gladly accepted it, and taking their dead retired out of
Boeotia. After this Action, the Lacede∣monians went away much dejected, but the Thebans insulting fell upon those that stragled in the Villages, and pursued them to the Roads. Thus ended the Expedition of the La∣cedemonians; and Pausanias when he came home, was tried for his Life; being accused for coming later to Lysander at Haliartus, than he ought to have done, having agreed to meet him by a certain day; and for that he had made Truce to fetch off the killed, and had not attempt∣ed it by fighting; as also for that he dis∣missed the Athenians taken in the Pirae∣us: besides all this he did not make his Appearance, and therefore was condem∣ned to lose his Life. But he made his Escape to Tegea, where he sickned, and died of a Distemper. And this was the State of Affairs in Greece at that time.
XENOPHON'S History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. IV. THE CONTENTS. The Marriage Treaty between Cotys King of Paphlagonia, and Spithridates's Daughter. The Thebans are vanquisht by the Lacedemonians. The Atheni∣ans beat the Lacedemonians in a Sea∣fight at Cnidus. The Battel at Chae∣ronea. The Massacre at Corinth. Co∣rinth surprized by the Argives, and recovered by Praxitas. The Walls of Athens rebuilt by Conon. Antalcidas is sent to Teribazus the Persian to ne∣gotiate
a Peace. The Lacedemonians defeated by Iphicrates, and Anaxibius their General slain. AFterwards early in the Autumn Agesilaus entring Phrygia, the Government of Pharnabazus, burn∣ed, and destroyed the Countrey, taking in some Cities by Force, and others by Surrender. But Spithridates telling him, That, if he would go with him into Pa∣phlagonia, he would bring him to an interview with the King thereof, and make him an Ally: Agesilaus was very forward to go, having a great desire a long time before to bring over this Nati∣on from the Obedience of the King of Persia. After Agesilaus arrived in Pa∣phlagonia, Cotys came to him, and made an Alliance; for though he was sent for by the King of Persia, he went not too him, but by the perswasion of Spithrida∣tes left a thousand Horse, and two thou∣sand Targetiers with Agesilaus; who re∣turning his thanks to Spithridates for them, said, Tell me, Spithridates, won't you bestow your Daughter on Cotys? That I would, replied he, more willingly a great deal than Cotys King of so large a Coun∣trey, and so mighty a People, would
marry a poor Exiles Daughter. Thus much only was mentioned at that time about a Match; but afterwards Cotys being upon his departure came to take his leave of Agesilaus; who orde∣ring Spithridates to withdraw, said to Cotys in the presence of the XXX Com∣missioners; Pray tell me, Cotys, of what kind of Family is Spithridates descended? Of one, replied he, that is no ways inferi∣our to any in Persia. Have you seen, said Agesilaus, what an handsome Son he has? What then, says Cotys? Yes, I have, for last Night I supped with him. They say, replies Agesilaus, that he has a Daugh∣ter more beautiful than he. Before God, says Cotys, she is a Beauty. Then, re∣plied Agesilaus, Since you are become one of our Friends, by my consent you shall marry her: for first she is extraordinary hand∣some, the most welcome Quality in a Wife, and then descended of a most Illustrious Father, and one of so considerable Power, that being affronted by Pharnabazus, he has revenged himself, in the manner you see, and chased him out of his Province. You may be assured therefore, said he, that as he is able to revenge himself on an Ene∣my, so he can oblige a Friend; and consider with your self that if such a thing should
be, you will not only contract an Affinity with him, but with me also, and the rest of the Lacedemonians, and we, as you well know, are the leading People of all Greece. What Nuptial Solemnity therefore can be more Pompous than yours? What Bride was ever attended by so many Horse, Tar∣getiers, and Heavy-armed men, as shall conduct yours to your Court? Then Cotys asking him, said, Agesilaus! Does Spithri∣dates approve of what you say? By Hea∣ven, replied he, Cotys! I speak not by his Order, for though the pleasure of revenging my self on an Enemy be very sweet, yet I am much more pleased when I can find out any thing that can be serviceable to a Friend. Then, said Cotys, why don't you ask his Consent? Go you therefore Herip∣pidas, and the rest, says Agesilaus, and inform him of these Proposals, and use all the best Arguments you can to perswade him; so they went and acquainted him: And whilst they staid, Agesilaus said, Shall we, Cotys! send for Spithridates hither, for I believe he will be sooner prevailed upon by you, than by all together? Soon after Agesilaus sent for Spithri∣dates, and the rest, and when they drew near, Herippidas said, Agesilaus! Not to trouble you with the whole Relation of the
Matter, Spithridates, says he, will submit wholly to your pleasure. Then 'tis my pleasure, says Agesilaus, that you Spi∣thridates bestow your Daughter on Cotys, and that you Cotys accept her, and I wish you much joy. Yet we cannot send you her by Land before the Spring. Faith, saith Cotys, but you may presently have her conveyed if you please by Sea. In Conclusion, the Marri∣age-Treaty being ratified, Cotys was dismis∣sed. Immediately Agesilaus knowing him to be in hast, fitted out a Gally, giving Or∣ders to Callias the Lacedemonian to con∣vey the Lady; and went himself to Dascyl∣lium the Court of Pharnabazus, which had a great many, and large Villages about it, furnished with all necessaries for life, as also Wild Beasts, some in Parks, and others in Forrests, exceeding delightful, being encompassed by a River stored with all sorts of Fish, and abundance of Fowls for those that loved the Game. There he took up his Winter Quarters, and partly in that Place, and partly by Depredations in the Countrey got Provi∣sions for his Army; but as the Soldiers never having been foyled before, con∣temned the Enemy, and were not upon their Guard when they foraged, Pharna∣bazus with two Scythed Chariots, and
four hundred Horse, met them stragling in the Plains. As soon as the Greeks discovered him advancing towards them, about seven hundred of them drew up in a Body. Pharnabazus without any more ado placed the Chariots in the Front, and following himself with the Horse in the Rear, commanded them to drive upon the Enemy. The Chariots falling in, and breaking their Body, the Horse forth∣with killed and took Prisoners an hundred men; and the rest fled to Agesilaus, who was not far off with the Heavy-armed men. Three or four days after Spithri∣dates discovered Pharnabazus's Camp at Caue, a large Village about an hundred and sixty Furlongs from thence, and im∣mediately informed Herippidas of it; who ever longing to perform some brave Exploit, desired of Agesilaus two thou∣sand Heavy-armed men, as many Targe∣tiers, Spithridates's Horse, the Paphla∣gonians, and what Greek Horse he could prevail with besides. When he had ob∣tained a Promise of them, he sacrificed, and having been successful therein, in the Evening he left off, and commanded the Soldiers when they had supped, to make their appearance before the Camp. It be∣gan to grow dark, and not half the number
of each Party came out; yet that he might not be laughed at by his Fellow Commissioners if he desisted, he went with the Forces he had, and attacking Pharnabazus's Camp by break of day, he killed a great many of the Out-guards that were Mysians, and put the rest to flight, taking the Camp, and in it abun∣dance of Cups, together with Pharnaba∣zus's Furniture, as also a great deal of Baggage, and several Draught-Horses. Pharnabazus fearing if he staid in any one Place, he should be Empounded and besieged, wandred up and down the Countrey like the Nomades,People of Scythia, who have no certain Habitati∣on. carefully concealing his Encampments. Whilst Spithridates and the Paphlagonians were carrying off their Spoyl, Herippidas pri∣vately set on the Commanders of the Heavy-armed men, and Captains to de∣prive Spithridates, and the Paphlagoni∣ans of their share, that so he might have the more Captives for the Slave-Mer∣chants. This Injury they resented, and like men affronted, and disgraced, depart∣ed in the Night with Bag and Baggage to Ariaeus at Sardes: confiding in him, for that he as well as they had revolted from the King, and made War against him. No∣thing in this Expedition affected Agesilaus
more than that Spithridates, Megabyzus and the Paphlagonians quitted the Service. There was one Apollophanes a Cyziceni∣an, who had been formerly a Guest to Pharnabazus, and being at that time en∣tertained by Agesilaus, informed him that he thought he could bring Pharnabazus, and him to an Enterview in order to treat of Peace. Agesilaus hearing this, gave Apol∣lophanes safe conduct; and he brought Phar∣nabazus to the Place appointed; where Age∣silaus and the XXX Commissioners were sat down in the Grass expecting Pharnaba∣zus; who came thither in very rich Attire. And when the Servants were spreading Carpets for him, on which the effeminate Persians soat themselves: he seeing the mean Accommodation Agesilaus had, was asha∣med to indulge himself, and sat down on the Ground just as he was. As soon as they had saluted one another, Pharnabazus first reached out his right hand, and after∣wards Agesilaus did the same to him: When this was done, Pharnabazus as be∣ing the Elder,Pharnaba∣zus's Speech. began to speak. Agesilaus, and ye Gentlemen of Lacedemon that are present! I was your Friend and Ally, whilst you made War against the Atheni∣ans, for I reinforced your Navy with Sup∣plies of Money; on the Shore I fought on
Horseback, and pursued the Enemy into the Sea. Neither could you ever charge me as you did Tissaphernes, with under-hand dealing either in Word or Deed; and though I have carried my self thus to you, yet you have treated me in such a manner, as not to leave me a Meals-meat in my own Province, unless like a Dog, I should eat of your Scraps. Those fair Buildings, and Parks planted with Trees, and stored with Dear, which my Father left me, and were my Divertisement, are now all either burnt or destroyed by you. If I therefore know not what is Justice, and Equity, do you inform me, whether this be the way by which men who have a due sence of Honour ex∣press their Gratitude. The XXX Com∣missioners being very much ashamed at this Speech, remained silent, and after some pause, Agesilaus began.Agesilaus's Speech. I suppose (Pharnabazus) you know that in the Gre∣cian Republicks, men contract Alliances of Hospitality one with another, and that when their respective Countries Quarrel, they declare themselves Enemies, as well against the Persons they entertain, as their Countries, and sometimes happen to kill them too. Now we are necessitated, being we are at War with your King, to look upon every thing of his, as belonging to an
Enemy; though we desire nothing more than to renew our Friendship with you. And indeed if your coming over to us would only make you change your Masters, and take on you our Yoke instead of the King of Persia's, I should not have given you this advice; but now by the Alliance with us you shall not be obliged to prostrate your self before any, nor ac∣knowledge a Superior, but live, and enjoy your own. For Liberty in my opinion is of equal value to all the Riches in the World; nor do I advise you, to purchase your freedom by the loss of your Greatness, but by the advantage of our Alliance, to enlarge (not the Kings) but your own Do∣minions, by sabduing others in your own condition, and making them your own Sub∣jects: Thus if you become both free and wealthy, what will you then want to com∣pleat your Happiness. Pharnabazus re∣plied, I will tell you plainly what I'll do; So you ought, said Agesilaus; If then, says he, the King sends another Governour, and commands me to obey him, I'll make an Alliance with you; but if he gives me the Supreme Command (for this is some∣thing which seems to be worthy ones Ambition) assure your selves I'll make a vigorous War upon you. Agesilaus hear∣ing
this, took him by the hand, and said to him: I wish (Gallant Prince) since you are a Person of so great Generosity, that we might enjoy your Friendship; yet be satisfied in this one thing, that I will draw my Army out of your Province with all Ex∣pedition, and hereafter if the War con∣tinue, as long as there is any else to fall upon, we will forbear you and yours. The Conference ending, Pharnabazus mounted, and rode away, but his Son by his Wife Parapita, an handsome Youth, staying behind a while, ran to Agesilaus, and said to him, I contract an Alliance of Hospitality with you: I accept it, replies Agesilaus: Remember it then, said the Young man, and forthwith gave Agesilaus a neat Dart that he had. Agesilaus ac∣cepted it, and pulling the curious Trap∣pings off of Idoeus the Painter's Horse presented the Youth with them; who after that nimbly mounted his Steed, and followed his Father. But when his Bro∣ther in Pharnabazus's absence had seized the Province, and banished him, Agesi∣laus took not only particular care of him; but procured also for the Youth's sake, that the Son of Evalces the Athenian, whom he had a love for, though he
were theThere were three sorts of Champi∣ons, the Boys, Youths, and men, who were to be ap∣proved by the Judges called Hel∣lenodicae, before they could be admit∣ted to ex∣ercise, and by favour the Son of Evalces passed for a Boy, though a size bigger, Pet. Fab. Agon. Lib. 111. C. 9. biggest of the Youths, might be admitted into the Foot-race at the Olympick Games. He also according to his Promise retired out of Pharnabazus's Province; and the Spring just now ap∣proaching he arrived in the Plains of Thebes, and encamped by the Temple of Diana Asturina: where beside the Forces he had with him, he got together a very powerful Army from all Parts, and prepa∣red to march up into the Countrey as far as it was possible, supposing that he should dispossess the King of Persia of all the Provinces he left behind him. As Agesilaus designed thus with himself,Diophantus Archon. the Lacedemonians discovering that for certain Money had been sent into Greece, and that the most considerable Cities had confederated to make War upon them, and apprehending their Republick was in danger, and that they were obliged to provide for a New War: they according∣ly did, and sent Epicydidas to Agesilaus, who after he arrived, related how Affairs stood, and that the State had sent Orders for him to come to the assistance of his Countrey. Agesilaus hearing this was
extraordinarily concerned, considering what Honours, and Hopes he should thereby be deprived of. However he called the Confederates together, and communicated to them the State's Or∣ders, declaring that he was necessitated to go to the assistance of his Countrey. If things succeed well with us, assure your selves, said he, that I will not forget you, but return, and do whatever you shall require. When they heard this, they shed abundance of Tears, and resolved with an Universal Consent to accompa∣ny Agesilaus, and succour Lacedemon; and if they met with Success to bring him back again into Asia. Whilst they were preparing for the Expedition, Age∣silaus left Euxenus General with an Army of 400 men to preserve the Towns they were possest of, and intended to carry with him a considerable Body of the stoutest men, finding that several of the Soldiers were more inclined to stay there, than to go and fight against the Greeks. He proposed Prizes to those Cities that furnished the best Soldiers; and to those Captains of the Mercenaries, who came into the Service with a Company of the best appointed either of Heavy-armed men, Archers, or Targetiers. To the
Captains of Horse he declared that who∣soever brought a Troop the best horsed, and armed, should have also a Reward; telling them he would determine this matter in the Chersonese, after he was passed out of Asia into Europe, and that they should be sure to chuse select men for this Expedition. The Prizes were generally Arms for the Heavy-armed men, and Horse, neatly made; and some Crowns of Gold; so that all of them amounted to no less than the value of four Talents;750 l. and though he had been at such Expences, yet he provided Arms for his Soldiers. Afterwards when he had passed the Hellespont, there were chosen Umpires, of the Lacedemonians, Menascus, Herip∣pidas, and Orsippus; of the Confederates one out of every City. As soon as this Arbitration was over, Agesilaus marched with his Army the same Way that Xerxes did, when he invaded Greece. About this time the Ephori raised Forces; and the States, because Agesipolis was a Minor, gave the Command of the Army to Aristodemus the Protector, and one of the Royal Family. After the Lacedemo∣nians had taken the Field, the Enemy assembled together, and consulted how
they might manage the War to the best advantage.Timolaus his Speech. Then said Timolaus the Co∣rinthian: Gentlemen, Methinks the Af∣fairs of the Lacedemonians are like Ri∣vers, which being not large near their Springs, may be easily forded over, but while they continue their course farther, the accession of other Waters makes their Stream more rapid. Just so are the La∣cedemonians, for at the Place they set forth they are only themselves; but in their Progress, they having joyned other Cities, become more numerous, and are hardly to be grapled with. I find too, says he, that those who would destroy Wasps, if they hunt them after they get out of their holes, are stung by Swarms of them; but if they set fire to them in their Nests, then they destroy them, and suffer no harm at all themselves. Therefore upon these conside∣rations, I think it best to give them battel at Lacedemon, or if that cannot be, yet as near to the Place as is possible. This Pro∣posal seeming reasonable, they made a Decree accordingly; and whilst they de∣bated about the Command in Chief, they agreed how many they should draw up in Front, lest they should make their Battalions too deep, and thereby let the Enemy encompass them. The Lacede∣monians
together with the Tegeans, and Mantineans marched out by the Sea side, and arrived about the same time at Sicyon, that the Corinthians and their Confede∣rates did at Nemea. Hereupon the latter made an Impression upon the Lacedemo∣nians near Epiecaea; and at first the Ene∣mies Light-armed men darting, and throwing from an Eminence, did great Execution upon them; but the Lacede∣monians marching down by the Sea side, and taking the way through the Plain, destroyed, and burnt the Countrey. The Enemy went out and encamped by a Brook that ran before their Camp; & the Lacede∣monians advancing within less than ten fur∣longs off them, encamped also, and lay still. I will now give an Account how strong both Armies were: there were drawn to∣gether about six thousand of the Lace∣demonian Heavy-armed men, of the Ele∣ans, Triphylians, Acrorians, and Lasioneans near 3000; of Sicyonians 1500, of Epi∣daurians, Traezenians, Hermioneans and Halieans no less than 3000; besides these there were six hundred Lacedemonian Horse, supported by three hundred Cre∣tan Archers. Of the Marganean, Ledri∣nian, Amphidolian Slingers, no less than four hundred. The Phliasians were not
in the Army, but pretended there was a Truce. These were the Forces of the Lacedemonians. The Enemies Army con∣sisted in six thousand Athenian Heavy-armed men, and as the report went, se∣ven thousand Argives. The Boeotians, the Orchomenians being not there, were but about 5000. the Corinthians three thousand, and out of all Euboea three thousand more. These were their Heavy-armed men. The Boeotian Horse, the Orchomenians being not there were about eight hundred, the Athenian near six hun∣dred, of the Chalcideans that came out of Euboea an hundred, of the Locri Opuntij fifty. The Light-armed men together with the Corinthians exceeded this number, being joyned by the Locri Ozolae, the Me∣lieans, and Acarnanians. These were the Forces on both sides. The Boeotians, whilst they had the left Wing, were not urgent for a Battel, but when the Athenians were drawn up a∣gainst the Lacedemonians, and they oppo∣sed to the Achaeans in the right, they im∣mediately cried out, the Sacrifice was au∣spicious, and ordered to make ready for a Battle. Here at first they took no care to draw up sixteen in Front, but made their Battalion altogether deep, nor did
they move to the right, that they might thereby outwing the Enemy. The A∣thenians followed, that they might not be disordered, although they understood that they were in danger of being sur∣rounded. Hitherto the Lacedemonians did not discover that the Enemy advan∣ced, because the Place thereabouts was woody; but after they had begun to sing the Paean, they then perceived them in∣stantly, and commanded all to prepare for fighting, and being drawn up in the order, the Officers of the Mercenaries had marshalled each Battalion; they were commanded to follow their Leader. The Lacedemonians advanced towards the right of the Enemy, and did so far out∣wing them, that the Lacedemonians con∣fronted six of the Athenian Regiments, and the Tegeans four. Now both Armies being less than a Furlong distant from each other, the La∣cedemonians according to custom sacrifi∣ced a Goat to Minerva Agrotera, and ad∣vanced toward the Enemy, wheeling a∣bout to surround them with the part of their Wing that out-reached theirs. When the Battels were joyned, all the Lacede∣monian Confederates were foyled by the Enemy; except the Pellenians that fought
the Thespieans, who behaved themselves so well, that several were slain on both sides. The Lacedemonians beat as many of the Athenians as fell to their share, and surrounded them with their extended Wing, cutting off a great many, and marched on in good order, as if they had suffered nothing; and passed by four of the Athenian Regiments before they gave over the pursuit. Nor did they lose any men except those in the Charge against the Tegeans; but in their return they fell upon the Argives, and as the foremost Colonel was going to attack them, one, they say, cried out to let the foremost of the Enemy pass, which being done ac∣cordingly, they galled their Flank, and killed a great many men that fled by them. After that, they received the Co∣rinthians coming back from pursuing, and cut in pieces abundance of them. Upon this the routed fled first to the Ga∣risons, but afterwards by the Example of the Corinthians, betook themselves to their former Camp; thereupon the Lace∣demonians returned to the Place where the Battel begun, and erected a Trophy. This is the account of that Fight. In the mean while Agesilaus hastned with Succours out of Asia, and whilst he
was at Amphipolis; Dercyllidas brought him the News of a Victory the Lacede∣monians had obtained with the loss of considerable numbers on the Enemies side, and but eight Lacedemonians, though several of their Confederates were killed. Then Agesilaus said to him, Dercyllidas? would it not be convenient that the Cities which have sent their Forces to joyn ours should have Intelligence of it with all speed? Dercyllidas made answer that they would be the more encouraged if they heard on't. Therefore since you are here, said Agesilaus, you might make a fit Messenger. Dercyllidas hearkned willing∣ly to this, for he loved travelling, and said to Agesilaus, I'll go if you'll command me. Then I command you, replied he, and moreover I would have you tell them, that if things succeed well here, I'll be with them again according to my Promise, Dercyllidas was now departed from the Hellespont, and Agesilaus marched through Macedon, and came into Thessaly, where the Larisseans, Cranonians, Scotusaeans, and Pharsalians being in League with the Boeotians, together with all the Thessali∣ans, except the Exiles, pursued him, and cut off some of his Rear. He marched with his Army in a Square, placing one half
of his Cavalry in the Front, and the o∣ther in the Rear, but the Thessalians at∣tacking his Rear, and hindering his March, he sent all the Horse to the Front, except his own Guards. As soon as they con∣fronted each other, the Thessalians not thinking fit with their Horse to engage the Heavy-armed men, faced about, and retreated gently: Agesilaus's Horse pur∣sued them unadvisedly, and he finding both them and the Enemy in disorder, sent his own Guards, being very stout men, and ordered them to command the rest to pursue with all speed imaginable, and not give them opportunity of facing about. The Thessalians seeing the Lace∣demonians coming upon them contrary to their expectation, some of them fled, some turned upon the Enemy, and others that attempted the like were flanked by the Horse, and taken. Polymachus the Pharsalian that commanded the Horse faced about, and fighting with those he had with him, was slain. Thereupon the Thessalians falling into a confused Flight, some were killed, and others taken, nor did they make an halt, till they had re∣covered the Mountain Narthacium. Then Agesilaus erected a Trophy between Pras and Narthacium, and rested there, being
much pleased with the Action, in that he had beat those Cavalry that gloried in their Horsemanship, with such Horse as he himself had raised. Next day passing the Achaean Moun∣tains of Pthia he marched through a Friends Countrey, till he came to the frontiers of Boeotia, and as he was en∣tring the Enemies Countrey, the Sun ap∣peared like a Crescent; News came too that the Lacedemonians were beaten at Sea, and that their Admiral Pisander was killed. There was a Relation of the En∣gagement how it was; that both the Fleets engaged about Cnidus, that Phar∣nabazus the Admiral was there with the Phaenicians, and Conon with the Grecian Navy lay in the Front; and that when Pisander had drawn up against Conon, it appeared he had fewer Ships in his whole Navy, than he only in the Grecian Fleet. The Confederates that were in the Rear ran immediately; but Pisander engaging the Enemy with a stemmed Gally, was forced aground, and the rest that were driven ashore left their Ships, getting as well as they could into Cnidus, only Pi∣sander fought on board his own Ship, till he was slain. Agesilaus was exceedingly troubled at
first when he heard it, yet recollecting that as the News of good Success is a marvellous encouragement to an Army; so if things fall out ill, it is not necessary to let them know it; he soon after chan∣ged his Mind, and reported to the Soldi∣ers how Pisander was killed, but had got the Victory; and after he had related it, he offered some Bullocks for the good News, and sent part of the Sacrifice to se∣veral Persons. So that a light skirmish happening, Agesilaus's men beat the Ene∣my, upon the Fame of this Sea-Victory that he gave out the Lacedemonians had won. There were opposed to Agesilaus, the Boeotians, Athenians, Argives, Corinthi∣ans, Aenians, Euboeans, and both the Lo∣cri: Agesilaus had with him a Regiment of Lacedemonians that came from Corinth, and half of another from Orchomenus, ha∣ving beside these the Half Slaves from Lacedemon, and the Mercenaries that He∣rippidas commanded; as also those that he joyned in his march from the Greek Ci∣ties in Asia and Europe; there he was joyned by the Orchomenians, and Phocean Heavy-armed men. Agesilaus was strong∣er in Targetiers, but the Horse were e∣qual, and these were the Forces of both Armies.
I will give a Relation of the Fight, be∣ing such an one as has not happened in our time.The Battel at Chero∣nea. The Armies met on the Plains near Coronea, Agesilaus's Forces marching from the Cephisus, and the Thebans from Helicon. Agesilaus led the Van himself, the Orchomenians being in the Rear of all: the Thebans had the Van of their Army, and the Argives the Rear. Just as they engaged there was a profound Silence in both Armies, and when they were with∣in a Furlongs distance, the Thebans set up a shout, and gave a furious charge, after∣wards at the distance of three hundred feet, the Mercenaries of Agesilaus's Batta∣lion that Herippidas commanded, ran upon the Enemy; and together with them the Ionians, Aeolians, and Helle∣spontians; these were all those that ran together, and by that time they came within a Pikes length, they routed those that confronted them. Nor did the Ar∣gives stand Agesilaus's men, but fled to Helicon: here when some of the Merce∣naries were already setting a Garland up∣on Agesilaus's head, advice came that the Thebans had beaten the Orchomenians, and made their way to the Baggage: thereupon he moved with his Battalion, and marched towards them. The The∣bans
seeing their Companions fled, and desirous to make their escape to them, got together in a Body, and retired with diligence. Now without all Controversie we may allow Agesilaus to be a man of great courage, though here he took not the safest course; for he might have let those that retreated, have passed him, and in the pursuit have cut off their Rear; though he did not so, but faced the Thebans, and fell upon their Front. So they engaged, and clashing their Bucklers together, fought, slew, and were slain; at last some of the Thebans escaped to Helicon, and several in their Retreat were killed. Afterwards when Agesilaus having got∣ten the Victory, was brought wounded to his Battalion, some of the Horse went and told him that there were about eighty of the Enemy, with their Arms in the Temple of Minerva Itonia, and demand∣ed what should be done with them. He, though he had received several Wounds, did not forget the Priviledges of Sanctua∣ry, but commanded to let them go whi∣ther they would, and suffered none to injure them. Then (because it was late) they supped, and reposed themselves, and in the Morning he commanded Gylis a
Colonel to draw up the Army, to erect a Trophy to crown all with Garlands in Honour of the Goddess; the Pipers were also ordered to play, which was done ac∣cordingly. The Thebans sent Heralds to desire a Truce that they might fetch off their slain, which was granted. Agesilaus went to offer the tenth of the Spoil to Apollo at Delphos,18750 lib. which was not less than an hundred Talents. Gylis the Colonel marcht with the Army into Phocis, and there fell into Lo∣cris; the day after the Soldiers plunde∣red the Villages, and took away both Goods, and Provisions, but towards the Evening as the Lacedemonians retreated, the Locri pursued and galled them with their Lances and Javelins. The Lacede∣monians facing about and following them, killed some, and after that they fell no more upon their Rear, but shot at them from the Eminencies. The Lacedemoni∣ans tried to drive them through the Pre∣cipices, but as it grew dark, they by the reason of the difficult Pass, were killed in their Retreat, some because they could not see before them, and others perished by the Shot. There Gylis and some of his Seconds fell,Veget. calls these Ad∣sites. with eighteen Soldiers in all; some being knocked on the head
with Stones, and others dying of their Wounds; so that if several that were at Supper in the Camp had not succoured them, they had all been in danger to be cut off. After the Soldiers were sent home to their several Cities,Eubulides Archon. Agesilaus returned to Lacedemon by Sea: At the same time the War was carried on by the Confederates who made Excursions from Corinth,Argives, Boeotians, Athenians. a∣gainst the Lacedemonians, and their Al∣lies who made Sicyon the Seat of the War. The Corinthians seeing their Coun∣trey destroyed, their Subjects consumed by the War, and exposed to the Violence of the Enemy, when the rest of the Con∣federates were free from Depredations and enjoyed their own Estates; the Genera∣lity, especially the Principal men desiring Peace conferred together, and disposed one another thereto. But when those of the Confederates, who had received mo∣ney from the King, and were the greatest Promoters of the War, considered, that the City would go near to take part with the Lacedemonians, if they took not off those who were inclined to Peace, they resolved upon a Massacre. And at the first they engaged in a most horrid and bloody Design; for whereas none though
condemned to die, are executed in the Feast Euclea,There was a Temple in honour of Diana Euclea in Boeotia, and another in Attica, and I suppose the Feast here might be called from thence, vide Paus. yet they fixt upon the last day thereof for this Slaughter, because they thought that then they should catch most in the Market-place. So when the Conspirators had notice whom to kill, they drew their Swords, and cut some in pieces as they stood talking together, o∣thers as they were sitting, some in the Play-house, and the Judge upon the Bench. As soon as the Design was known, some of the Principal men fled immedi∣ately to the Images in the Market-place, and others to the Altars, but both the Murderers, and those who set them on being eminently wicked, and void of all sense of humanity, butchered them in the Holy Places: Insomuch that some good men, who were not to be massacred, were exceedingly afflicted to behold such bar∣barous Villainies. Several of the Old men being at that time in the Market-place were killed; but the Young men (Pasi∣melus having some suspicion of it, re∣mained in the Artillery Ground) till the Cry was heard, when some escaping the Slaughter came thither, and running from thence into the Tower, they repul∣sed the Argives with the rest that attack∣ed them.
Whilst they were consulting what to do, the Capital of a Pillar fell down, though there was neither Earthquake, nor Wind stirring, and when they sacrificed the Entrails were such, that the Priests signified, it would be their safest way to depart out of the Place. So they at first like men going into Exile forsook their Countrey Corinth; but when their Friends, Relations, and some of the Magistrates came to them, entreating, and promising them upon their Oaths that they should live at home in security, several returned back again. Yet when they saw them play the Tyrants, and that their Country was ruined, being called Argos instead of Co∣rinth, their Boundaries pulled down, and themselves forced to be made Denizons of the former, which they had no occasion to be, and of less Power in their own Countrey, than Foreigners: Some of them thinking this kind of Life not to be born, endeavoured to reduce Corinth to such a condition as it had been formerly in, and by restoring it to its Liberty, and wholesome Laws, to purge it from Mur∣derers; which if they were able to effect, they should be called the Saviours of it, and if they could not, yet they having aimed at the noblest and greatest of De∣signs
shall obtain a glorious Death. Whereupon two men only Pasimelus and Alcimenes attempted it, and passed a Brook to meet Praxitas a Lacedemonian Colonel, who at that time was with his Regiment in Garison at Sicyon: they ac∣quainted him that they could let him in∣to the Town the way that leads to the Lechaeum. Praxitas knowing them for∣merly to be trusty men, gave credit to what they said, and procuring the Regi∣ment which was marching out of Sicyon to continue there, contrived how he might convey himself into the Town. The men by their own diligence had the good fortune to keep those Gates where the Trophy was erected. Praxitas com∣ing thither with his Regiment, as also the Sicyonians, and Corinthian Fugitives, and being near the Walls feared to enter, but determined to send in a trusty Fellow to see how Affairs stood within the City. The two men Pasimelus and Alcimenes shewed them all things so much to the their satisfaction, that he which went in with them reported that every thing was without fraud according to the account the men had given. Soon after Praxitas entred the City, and when he saw his Par∣ty, after they were drawn up, to be weak
by reason of the distance of the Walls one from another, the Soldiers made a Palisa∣do, and a Trench, such an one as they could, till their Confederates came with Succours, for they had behind them in the Porta Garison of Boeotians. The next day after the Night that they entred the City, there was no Skirmish; the day follow∣ing, the Argives coming with their whole Power against them, found the Lacedemo∣nians in the right, the Sicyonians and an hundred and fifty Corinthian Exiles next them. The Enemy confronted them at the Eastern Part of the Wall, next to which were Philocrates and his Mercena∣ries, just by them the Argives, and the Townsmen of Corinth in the left. The Argives being confident of their Num∣bers charged the Enemy, and beat the Si∣cyonians, ruined their Palisado, and pur∣sued them to the Sea, where they killed several of them. Pasimachus Colonel of the Horse, though he had but a small Party, when he saw the Sicyonians hard prest; yet he commanded his men to tie their Horses to the Trees, and take Si∣cyonian Bucklers, and afterwards getting a Body of men together, fell upon the Argives.
The latter seeing theThe Greeks had the first Letter of their re∣spective Countries upon their Bucklers, as the Ar∣gives A. the Sicyo∣nians S. Sigma's on their Bucklers supposed they had been Sicyoni∣ans, and therefore did not fear them in the least. Then Pasimachus is reported to have said, In good Faith! these Sigma's will deceive you, and giving the charge he fought with an handful against great Numbers, till both himself, and those about him were killed. The Corinthian Exiles beat those that they engaged with, and gained the upper Ground, whereupon they advanced to the Wall of the Town. The Lacedemonians being possessed of the Palisado on the left, when they percei∣ved the Sicyonians were beaten, came out to their Relief. But when the Argives saw them in the Rear, they turned their backs, and fled confusedly out of their Works; and those likewise in the Rear of the right were flanked, and cut in pieces by them; but they who were by the Wall, run back to the Town in great disorder, yet meeting with the Exiles, and percei∣ving them to be Enemies, they gave back again, where some mounting the Walls leaped down and perished, others being close pursued to the Ladders were woun∣ded and killed. Several were trodden to death by the Crowd, so that the Lacede∣monians had choice of men to slay. At
that time Providence put such an opportu∣nity into their hands as they themselves durst not have prayed for. For who would not esteem it Providence that an handful of men should destroy a Multitude, being struck with a Panick fear, amazed, exposed, none of them offering to turn again, and all contributing something or other to their own destruction? In a little compass of time a great many were slain, so that as usually one sees heaps of Corn, Wood, or Stones, here you might see heaps of Carkasses. Some of the Baeotian Gari∣son were killed in the Port, others upon the Walls, and some upon the covering of the Docks. Soon after the Corinthians and Argives made a Truce, and fetcht off their slain. When the Lacedemonian Confederates came with Succors, Praxitas got his men together, and resolved to throw down the Wall, that the Army might enter at the Breach, and marching with his Forces the way that leads to Megara, he attacked Sidus, and took that and Crommyo, in which Towns he left Garisons, and in his Return fortified Epiecaea, because, it being near an Allie's Countrey, might serve the Confederates for a Place of Defence. Af∣ter that he disbanded the Army, and
went to Lacedemon. From this time no considerable Expeditions were underta∣ken, only the Cities sent recruits to Corinth and Sicyon to defend those Places; but both sides having a great many Mercena∣ries they carried on the War very vigo∣rously with these. At the same time Iphicrates going to make an attempt upon Phlius, with his small Forces made Excursions, but those of the Town being not careful to relieve their men, he killed so many of them, that the Phliasians who before would not receive the Lacedemonians into their City, fearing they would restore those Exiles that pretended to be banished for adhe∣ring to their Interest, were now so fright∣ed at these Athenians who were at Co∣rinth, that they sent to the Lacedemonians, and put the Town and Citadel under their Protection. However though the Lacedemonians had a regard to the Ex∣iles, yet they made no mention of recal∣ling them home, as long as they were possest of Phlius. But quitted the Place as soon as the People began to come to themselves, and restored them their Laws, and Government in the same condition they found them. Iphicrates Soldiers making frequent In∣cursions
into Arcadia, harassed it, and at∣tacked their fortified Places, for the Arcadi∣an heavy-armed men durst never look them in the face without their walls; such a terror were these Targetiers to them. And these Targetiers did so dread the Lacedemoni∣an Heavy-armed men that they would not come within reach of their Lances. For once the Lacedemonians took and killed several of them in a Pursuit; and the Lacedemonians who before despised those Targetiers, did now much more contemn their own Confederates, because once when the Mantineans came to re∣lieve their own men, and attacked the Targetiers, the latter threw their Javelins at them from off the Wall that reaches towards Lechaeum, and making them give back, pursued, and slew several of them. So that the Lacedemonians jeared their Confederates for being as much a∣fraid of the Targetiers, as Children are of Bugbears. The Lacedemonians and Corinthian Exiles marching out of the Lechaeum invested the City of Corinth. On the contrary, the Athenians dreading the Power of the Lacedemonians, and fearing they would come upon them with their whole Forces by the Long-walls which Praxitas had demolished, thought
it necessary to rebuild part of them. In order thereto they came with abundance of Masons and Carpenters, and within a few days time completely rebuilt that part of the Wall which looked towards Sicyon, and the West, but that toward the East they finished more at leisure. In the mean while the Lacedemonians observing that the Argives lived at home in Plenty,Demostra∣tus Archon. and were mightily taken with the War, undertook an Expedition against them. Agesilaus led the Army, who burnt their Countrey, and passing directly from thence to Corinth by the way of Tegea, took the Walls which the Athenians had rebuilt. At the same time his Brother Te∣leutias attended him by Sea with twelve Gallies. So that their Mother might de∣servedly esteem her self the most happy Woman living: for that the same day she beheld the successful Arms of one of her Sons against the Enemies Towns, and Ca∣stels at Land, and of the others against their Fleets and Shipyards at Sea. Age∣silaus having atchieved this, disbanded the Confederates, and led his own Forces home. Afterwards the Lacedemonians learn∣ing from the Exiles of Corinth how Af∣fairs stood there,Olymp. 97. Philocles Archon. that they had all their
Cattle in the City, which they kept in the Piraeum, whereby a great many sub∣sisted; made another Expedition against Corinth under the Conduct of Agesilaus. He marched first to the Isthmus the same Month wherein the Games were celebra∣ted: there the Argives were sacificing to Neptune, as though Argos, and Corinth had been both the same, but when they heard of Agesilaus's coming, they left their Sa∣crifices, and Preparations they had made for Feasting, and retired in confusion to the City, the way that leads to Cenchreae. Agesilaus, though they were in view, did not pursue them, but abode in the Tem∣ple, and offered to Neptune, remaining there till the Corinthian Exiles had sacri∣ficed and celebrated the Games. After his Departure the Argives re∣newed the Isthmian Sports, so that this year every Prize was twice won, and the Champions were twice declared Victors. The fourth day Agesilaus led his Army to the Piraeum, but when he saw it was defended by a strong Garison, he march∣ed back again to the City after Dinner, making as if it were to be surrendred to him: whereupon the Corinthians fearing it might be delivered up to him indeed, sent for Iphicrates, and the greatest part
of the Targetiers. But Agesilaus, when he discovered that they were passed by in the Night, marcht back again by break of day towards the Piraeum, and took his way by the Bath, commanding the Regiment to possess themselves of the top of an Hill. This Night he encamped himself by the Bath, but the Regiment abode on the Hill; and at that time he was famed for a slight, though seasona∣ble, invention: for none of those who carried Provisions to the Regiment having conveyed fire to them, though it was cold by reason of the Rain and Hail in the Evening, and for that being Summer time they had only their Linnen Cloaths on, and lay on the top of a very high Hill, he sent them ten men with fire in Pots, as they were benummed with cold, in the dark, and without Stomacks. These men scrambled up the Hill some how or other, and having good store of Wood, made great fires, whereupon the Soldiers anointed themselves, and several of them fell to eating afresh. That Night they discovered the Temple of Neptune on fire, but who fired it none can tell. When those in the Town saw the Pi∣raeum was taken, they no longer made any defence, but Men, Women, Slaves, and
Freemen retired with most of the Cattle to Juno's Temple. Agesilaus marched with the Army along the Shore, whilst the Regiment came down the Hill at the same time, and took Oenoe a strong Place, and all the Booty in it. The same day, the Soldiers got abundance of Provisi∣ons out of those Places, and they that fled into Juno's Temple came out and surrendred upon Discretion. All the Murderers he ordered to be delivered up to the Exiles, and the rest to be sold for Slaves; soon after a great number of Pri∣soners came out of the Temple. Several Ambassadors came to Agesilaus, and a∣mongst the rest, some from the Boeotians, to know upon what Terms they might obtain a Peace, but he very superciliously did not vouchsafe them so much as a look, though introduced by Pharax, who had formerly been their Publick Host, but sat in a round Building near a Lake, view∣ing the number of Prisoners, as they were brought out of the Temple. These the Lacedemonians attended and guarded with their Pikes, being mightily gazed on. For usually the Fortunate and Victorious attract the Eyes of all Spectators. Whilst Agesilaus sat seemingly trans∣ported, one came riding up to him with
his Horse in a Foam, and when several ask∣ed him what News, he gave no Answer to any one, but approached near Agesilaus, and springing from his Horse, related with a sad countenance the disaster that befel the Regiment in the Lechaeum. When Agesilaus heard it, he instantly flew from his Seat, and took his Lance, command∣ing the Cryer to call the Colonels and Captains, and Commanders of the Mer∣cenaries; and after they were assembled he ordered the rest, to eat any thing they could get, for they had not yet dined, and follow him with all speed. He himself though he had not dined, marched on before, with Damasias's men, being follow∣ed by the Guards with Diligence. By that time he had passed the Bath, and reached the Plain of Lechaeum, there came three Horsemen riding up to him with the News, that the Bodies of the slain were recovered; which when he heard, he commanded the Army to halt, and resting a while, marched on to Juno's Temple. Next day the Slaves were sold, and the Boeotian Ambassadors being call∣ed, were asked what they came for, they made no mention of Peace, but only told Agesilaus, that with his leave, they would go speak with their own Countreymen
in the City, he smiled and said to them, I know you are not so much desirous to see them, as to observe the considerable Success your Allies have had. Stay therefore says he, and I'll conduct you thither, and you shall have a true Infor∣mation of the Matter. He was as good as his word too, for the day following he sacrificed, and advanced with his Army to the City, and though he did not throw down theA Tro∣phy was a Stone with an Inscri∣ption of the Victo∣ry obtain∣ed, as , it was dedi∣cated, and therefore might not be pulled down, Causah. ad. Athen. Trophy, yet he cut down all the Trees, and broke them in pieces, showing thereby that none durst come out against him. After that he encamped by the Lechaeum, and did not conduct the Theban Ambassadors into the City, but sent them home by Sea to Creusis. There was great Lamentation made in the Lacedemonian Army, they being un∣accustomed to such Misfortunes as these; yet those whose Relations were killed upon the Spot, were gay and merry after their private losses, as though they had been Victorious. The Disaster that befel the Lacedemo∣nians, was after this manner. The A∣mycleans always resort to celebrate the
Hymns in theA Feast kept three days with great La∣mentati∣on, where∣in they eat no Bread but Sweet∣meats, A∣then. Lib. 4. Hyacinthian Feast, whe∣ther they be in the Campagne, or abroad any where else. And because Agesilaus had left all the Amycleans in the Garison at Lechaeum, the Colonel who comman∣ded in the Place, ordered the Confederates to defend it, whilst he with the Regiment of Heavy-armed men and Horse, convey∣ed the Amycleans by the Walls of Corinth. When they came within twenty or thirty furlongs of Sicyon, the Colonel of Heavy-armed men, which were about six hundred, returned to the Lechaeum, and command∣ed the Colonel of Horse to conduct the Amycleans with his Regiment as far as they desired, and then to march back a∣gain. Though they knew there were a great many Targetiers, and Heavy-armed men in Corinth, yet they despised them because of their former Success, supposing none durst offer to meddle with them. ButSon of Hipponicus. Callias General of the Athenian Heavy-armed men, and Iphicrates who commanded the Targetiers, discovering from Corinth that they were a small Par∣ty, and not flankt with Targetiers, or Horse, thought they might securely set upon them with their own Targetiers. For if the Enemy marcht on, they would gall them with their Lances, and cut
them in pieces; or if the Lacedemonians offered to pursue, the nimble Targetiers could easily decline the Heavy-armed men. They resolved upon this, and sal∣lied out. Callias placed the Heavy-arm∣ed men not far from the City, and Iphi∣crates took the Targetiers, with whom he charged the Regiment. When the Lacedemonians were galled with the Lan∣ces, some of them being wounded, and others slain, they ordered their Squires to carry off the killed to Lechaeum. And to speak the truth, these only escaped of the whole Regiment. Hereupon the Colonel commanded those who were ten years past man's e∣state to repulse the said Targetiers, but being Heavy-armed men, they could not come so near as to reach them with their Lances, because the Athenian General had commanded the Targetiers to retreat before the Heavy-armed men closed with them, but the latter pursuing them ea∣gerly in several small Parties, Iphicrates's Targetiers darted their Javelins, and o∣thers ran by galling their Flanks, so that nine or ten were killed in the fist Onset. After this they attacked the Lacedemo∣nians more boldly, and when they began to press them hard, the Colonel com∣manded
those that were fifteen years a∣bove man's estate to pursue the Enemy, and in this pursuit they lost more men than in the former. And now the bra∣vest of their men were killed; yet a Bo∣dy of Horse coming in to their Relief, they pursued again, and unadvisedly fol∣lowed the Targetiers as they retreated, not only till they had killed some, but till they came even with the Front of those that were formost in the pursuit, and so faced about again. When they had suffered alike the se∣cond time, their Numbers continually de∣creased, and they began to droop, but the Enemy grew more bold by these success∣ful Attempts. At length being in sus∣pence what to do, they retired to a little Hill about two furlongs from the Sea, and about sixteen or seventeen from the Lechaeum; which when the Garison there discovered, they got on board some Ves∣sels, and coasted along the Shore, till they came to the Place. The Lacedemonians being now reduced to a greater strait, be∣cause they had suffered extreamly, and lost a great many men, were not able to make any longer Defence, but when they saw the Heavy-armed men come upon them, they fell to slight, some throwing
themselves into the Sea, and a few es∣caping with the Horse into the Lechaeum. In all the Skirmishes and Pursuit there were about two hundred and fifty flain. This is the Account of that Action. Soon after Agesilaus taking with him the Regiment which was defeated, left ano∣ther instead of it in the Lechaeum, and in his march home, entred the Towns very late, and set forth as soon as he could; for he marcht out of Orchomenus very early, and passed by Mantinea before it was light; so unwilling were the Soldiers to be seen by the Mantineans, thinking they would rejoyce at their Calamitie! After this, Iphicrates was yet more successful, for tho Praxitas had taken Sidus and Crom∣myo, and placed Garisons in them; and Agesilaus had possessed himself of the Piroeum, and fortified Oenoe, yet he re∣took all these Places except the Lechaeum, which was defended by a Garison of the Lacedemonians, and their Confederates. The Exiles of Corinth, because of the Regiments Defeat, went no longer by Land from Sicyon, but by Sea, and in∣fested those in the City, as well as sustain∣ed some mischief from them. Soon af∣ter the Achaeans being possessed of Caly∣don, a Town formerly belonging to the
Aetolians, and naturalizing the Calydoni∣ans, were obliged to maintain a Garison therein, because it was blockt up by the Acarnanians, being joyned by a Body of Athenians, and Boeotians, with whom they were in League. The Achaeans be∣ing in distress, sent Ambassadors to Lace∣demon to complain that they had not Ju∣stice done them. My Lords,The Achae∣an's Speech. we joyn with you, and serve you in your Wars according to your Sum∣mons, but when we were blockt up by the Acarnanians, and their Allies, we were the least of your care. If Affairs go thus, it will be impossible for us longer to subsist; so that either we must let fall the War in Peloponnesus, and pass into our own Coun∣trey to make opposition against the Acarna∣nians, and their Confederates, or else ac∣cept such a Peace as they will please to give us. This they said,Nicoteles Archon. intimating that they would break their League with the Lace∣demonians, unless they sent them Succors. Upon this Speech, the Ephori and Coun∣cil resolved that it was necessary to assist the Achaeans against the Acarnanians, and thereupon they sent out Agesilaus with two Regiments, and a Party of the Confede∣rates, with whom the Achaeans joyned
their whole Force. As soon as Agesilaus began his Campagne, the Acarnanian Countreymen retired into the Garisons, and drove their Cattel a great way into the Countrey, that they might not be surprized by the Enemy. A while after when he arrived in the frontiers, he dis∣patched one to the Community of the Acarnanians at Stratus, to let them know, that if they did not quit their League with the Boeotians, and Athenians, and accept the Alliance of the Lacedemonians, he would immediately ravage their Countrey, and lay all wast before him. They regarded not his Message, and he Made good his Word. For he fell presently to destroy∣ing the Countrey, but did not advance above ten or twelve furlongs a day, so that the Acarnanians concluding them∣selves to be secure from the slow Progress of the Army, drew their Cattel down the Mountains, and sowed most of their Ground. At length Agesilaus supposing they were grown over confident, sacrificed the fifteenth or sixteenth day after he entred their Territory, and before Night march∣ed an hundred and sixty Furlongs to a certain Lake, where most of their Cattel were, and took abundance of Oxen, and
Horses, with several sorts of other Beasts, as also a great many Captives. All which Booty, he staid, and sold the next day. In the mean while several of the Acarnanian Targetiers came up and made use of their Javelins, and Slings, but A∣gesilaus being encamped on an Hill, sustained no dammage, only the Soldi∣ers, as they were providing Supper were forced to march down into the Plain. At Night when the Acarnanians drew off, and set their Centinels, the Army repo∣sed themselves. Next day Agesilaus de∣camped, but the Pass out of the Meadows and Plain, being strait, by reason of the Mountains which surrounded the Lake, the Acarnanians possessed themselves of the Hills, and put the Enemy to a great deal of trouble with their Lances and Javelins from the Eminencies, and de∣scending from thence gave them such a diversion, that they were not able to march any farther. Nor did the Heavy-armed men and Horse which were drawn out of the Body of the Army with de∣sign to pursue, do them any harm, be∣cause they retired to their fastnesses. Agesilaus considering it would be a dif∣ficult matter for his men, who had been in such hard Service, to force this Pass,
resolved to pursue those that charged in the left, being a strong Party, that had pressed hard upon them, because this Hill was easier for the Heavy-armed men and Horse to pass. Whilst he was sacrificing the Acarnanians put them hard to 't with their Lances, and Javelins, and advancing very near, wounded several of them. But when he commanded his men to pursue, the heavy-armed men who were fifteen years past man's estate ran upon them, the Horse moved, and he himself followed with the rest. Immediately the Acarnanians who came down the hill, and made some light Skirmishes with the Enemy, soon turned their backs, and were cut in pieces in their retreat to the ascent thereof. The Acar∣nanian Heavy-armed men were posted on the top of the Hill, and continued there with a strong Party of Targetiers, who amongst others threw their Lances, wherewith they galled the Cavalry, and killed some of their Horses. Yet when they were just going to close with the Lacedemonian Heavy-armed men, they fell to flight and about three hundred of them were killed, for which Action Age∣silaus erected a Trophy, and after that went ravaging and destroying the Coun∣trey.
The Acarnanians thinking he had done them no Service at all, because he had not taken in any place either by Surren∣der, or Siege, intreated him that if he would condescend to nothing else, yet that he would stay only so long as to hin∣der the Enemie's Seed time. He told them they made a very unreasonable demand. For (said he) I shall march hither again the next Summer, and the more they sow, the more desirous will they be of Peace. This, he said, and made such a march by Land through Aetolia, as neither a small nor a great Army could have done with∣out the leave of the Aetolians, but they let him pass at that time, hoping to re∣cover Naupactus by his Assistance. At last he took his way by Rhium, and re∣turned home, because the Athenians had put to Sea with their Fleet from Oeniadae, and stopt his passage from Calydon into Peloponnesus.Demostra∣tus Archon. After Winter was past, Agesilaus ac∣cording to his Promise got an Army to∣gether early in the Spring to make an expedition against the Acarnanians; but they having intelligence hereof, and sup∣posing that they being Inhabitants of an Inland Countrey, should be blockt up by those that destroyed their Corn, in the
same manner, as if they were besieged in Towns, sent Ambassadors to Lacedemon to make Peace with the Achaeans, and an Alliance with the Lacedemonians. And this is the Account of the Acarnanian Affairs. About this time the Lacedemonians de∣signing to make an Expedition against the Athenians and Boeotians, resolved to send an Army against Argos, not thinking it safe to leave behind them so po∣tent a City as that in their Neighbour∣hood, and at War with them. Agesipolis understanding he was to command the Forces, procured an auspicious Sacrifice for his Voyage, and went to Jupiter's Ora∣cleat Olympia, to enquire whether he might in Justice refuse the Peace offered by the Argives, or not, being they made no Proposals at any seasonable time, but de∣vised shifts to divert the War just when the Lacedemonians were ready to enter their Territories. The Oracle answered, He might lawfully refuse a Peace, which was not offered at a fit time. From thence he went to Apollo at Delphos to know whether he was of the same Opinion with his Father concerning the Peace, 'twas answered, he was. Whereupon A∣gesipolis drew his Army out of Phlius,
(for there the Forces were assembled till he went to both Oracles) and entred the Enemie's Countrey by the way of Ne∣mea. When the Argives found they could not prevent the War, they as their way was, sent two Heralds crowned with Garlands to make overtures of Peace. Agesipolis, an∣swered them, that the Gods did not think the Peace was fairly offered, nor did he accept it, but fell on, which caused a ter∣rour, and put those of the City and Countrey into a Consternation. The first day he dined in the Countrey of Ar∣gos, and when the usual Sacrifices were offered, after Supper there happ'ned an Earthquake. The Lacedemonians having began their March from home, sung all of them an Hymn to Neptune, supposing they should return back again, because Agis when formerly there hap'ned one in Elis had done the like. To which Agesipolis replied, that if the Earth∣quake had hap'ned before he had entred the Countrey, he should have apprehend∣ed as if the God had opposed his De∣sign, but since it was after, he thought he gave him encouragement to proceed. So the next day he sacrificed to Nep∣tune, and marched a little way into the
Enemies Countrey. And because Agesi∣laus had lately made an Expedition against Argos, Agesipolis inquired of the Soldiers how near he advanced to the Walls of the City, and how far into the Countrey, striving Champion like to outdo him in every thing. For one time when he was shot at from the Turrets, he repassed the Ditch that encompassed the Walls; at ano∣ther, when most of the Argives were gone to make an Inroad into Laconia, he advan∣ced so near the Gates, that those who guarded them shut out the Baeotian Horse that would have put themselves in; fear∣ing the Lacedemonians would have en∣tred at the same time with them. So that the Horse were forced to lie as close under the Walls, and the Works, as Bats: and if some Cretans had not made an Excursion towards Nauplia, several of the men and Horses had been destroyed by the Arrows. Soon after when he en∣camped at Erctae, there fell a Thunder∣bolt into the Camp, which struck some, and astonisht others, so that they died. And when he was designing to fortifie a small Castle at the Pass over Coelossa, the Sacrifice wanted Lobes, upon which he marched away with his Army, and disbanded it, having very much incom∣moded
the Argives by so surprising an Invasion. After this manner was the War mana∣ged by Land; I will now relate what passed about the same time at Sea, and the Maritine Towns, and take notice of those things only which are worth re∣mark, and omit the rest. When Pharna∣bazus and Conon had vanquisht the Lace∣demonians at Sea, they went about first to the Isles, and Maritine Towns, and drove out the Lacedemonian Governours, putting them in hopes, that they would not build Citadels in them, but restore them to their Liberty. They, who heard this, were pleased and approved of what was done, sending Presents very readily to Pharnabazus; for Conon had acquaint∣ed him, that if he took these Measures, he would oblige all the Cities, but if he once went about to enslave them, every particular Place was able to create him trouble, and it was to be feared, that if the Greeks apprehended any such Design, they would make an Association. Ac∣cordingly Pharnabazus was governed by Conon in this, and went to Ephesus, where he left forty Gallies with Conon, ordering him to meet at Sestus, and went to his Government by Land. For Der∣cyllidas
his old Enemy who was at Aby∣dus at the time of the Sea-fight, did not abandon the Place, as other Governors did theirs, but kept it still in the Obedi∣ence of the Lacedemonians, and calling the Abydenians together, made this Speech to them. As you, Gentlemen,Dercylli∣das's Speech to the Abyde∣nians. have been formerly Friends to our State, so now it lies in your power to do us a signal piece of Ser∣vice. It is no marvel if Friends conti∣nue faithful in prosperity, but those who remain firm to us, when we are in distress, ought to be had in perpetual remembrance. Yet our condition is not so bad, as totally to be ruined by the loss of one Sea-fight. For formerly when the Athenians Lorded it over the Sea, we were still in so good a condition as to deserve well of our Friends, and to revenge our selves of our Enemies. This Example of your fidelity will be the more illustrious, because at this time our Friends together with our Fortune have deserted us. If any apprehend that we shall here be blockt up both by Sea and Land, let him consider, that there is yet no Grecian Fleet at Sea, neither will the Greeks endure that the Barbarians should e'r meddle with the Sovereignty thereof. From whence it follows, that if they de∣fend
themselves, they also must assist you. When they heard this, they very rea∣dily complied, and gave a kind reception to the Governors that were present, and sent for those who were absent. At this time several men fit for Service resorted to Abydus; and Dercyllidas passed over to Sestos, a Town opposite to it, being not above eight Furlongs distant, and got together those, to whom the Lacede∣monians had given Lands in the Cherso∣nese, and the Governours which were ex∣pelled the Towns in Europe. These he entertained in the Service, and told them that they ought not to be disheartned, but rather consider that in Asia it self, which time out of mind had been in the King's possession, Temnos and Aegia which were no very considerable Towns, and o∣ther Places too lived under a Govern∣ment of their own, and paid no Subjecti∣on to the Persian. But what stronger Town, said he, can ye possess your selves of than Sestus? What place is more difficult to be besieged than it? For he that intends to take it, must attack it both by Sea and Land. With this Speech he abated their Fear. When Pharnabazus found Abydus and Sestos in this condition he threatned
the Townsmen with a War, unless they would expel the Lacedemonians; but they regarded him not, and so he gave Conon Orders to scour the Seas, and went himself to ravage the Abydenian's Coun∣trey. Yet not being able this way to bring them to a Submission, he went home, and left Conon to dispose of the Cities on the Hellespont, so that by next Spring they might get as great a Fleet together as was possible. For Pharnaba∣zus being incensed against the Lacedemo∣nians for the Injuries he had suffered from their hands, employed his utmost endea∣vors to invade their Territories, and re∣venge himself on them. The Winter was spent in these Prepa∣rations.Antineter Archon. Early in the Spring Pharnaba∣zus fitted out a good Fleet, and hired Mer∣cenaries, sailing with Conon through the Isles to Melus, and went from thence to Lacedemon. His first Arrival was at Phe∣rae, where he destroyed the Countrey, and made Descents into several other Places on the Sea-coast, incommodating the Enemy as much as he could. But being in some apprehension, that there were no Ports upon the Coasts, and that Succors might come, or that he might want Provisions, he soon returned, and
setting sail put into Port at Phaenicus in Cithera. Here the Garison fearing that they should be besieged and taken, aban∣doned the Town. These he let go with a Pass to Laconia, and having repaired the Cytherian's Walls left a Garison in the Place under the Command of the Governour Nicophebus an Athenian. When he had performed this he went to the Isthmus of Corinth, and encouraged the Confederates to make a vigorous War, and approve themselves faithful to the King. After that he left them all the Money he had, and sailed to his own Countrey. But Conon told him, that if he would give him the Command of the Fleet, he would maintain it out of the Islands, and return to Athens, where by the help of his Countreymen he would rebuild the Long-walls, and the Wall a∣bout the Piraeus, knowing that nothing could mortifie the Lacedemonians more. Moreover, said he, you will oblige the Athenians hereby, Pharnabazus, and re∣venge your self on the Lacedemonians by rendring that, wherein they have so much laboured, ineffectual. When Pharnabazus heard his Propo∣sals he sent him very readily to Athens, and gave him Money wherewith to re∣pair
the Walls. Accordingly Conon went thither, and disbursing what was neces∣sary, rebuilt a great part of the Wall by the help of his own Sea-men, together with the Carpenters and Masons which he hired. Another part, the Athenians, Boeotians, and others built at their own Charge. The Corinthians fitting out a Fleet with the money Pharnabazus left them, made Agathinus their Admiral, and became Lords of the Sea-coast of Achaia, and the Bay Lechaeum: On the other hand the Lacedemonians set out a Fleet against them, and made Polemarchus their Admiral, but, he being slain in an En∣gagement, and his Vice-Admiral dying of his Wounds, Herippidas took the Com∣mand thereof. Moreover Proaenus the Corinthian succeeded Agathinus in his Command, and parted from Rhium, of which the Lacedemonians soon after pos∣sessed themselves. A while after Teleu∣tias went to succeed Herippidas in the Fleet, and recovered the Command of the Bay. In the mean while the Lacedemonians receiving Intelligence that Conon had re∣built the Walls of Athens, and maintain∣ed the Fleet with the King's Money, that so he might reduce several of the Islands
and Maritine Towns to the Obedience of the Athenians, thought with them∣selves, that if they acquainted Teribazus the King's General with these things, they should either make him their Ally, or prevail with him to withdraw his Con∣tributions from Conon's Fleet. They there∣fore determined to send Antalcidas, and ordered him to give Teribazus an Ac∣count of the State of Affairs, and to nego∣tiate a Peace between the Republick and the King. But on the contrary, the Athe∣nians scenting his Design sent their Am∣bassadors,Conon, Her∣mogenes, Din, Cal∣listhenes, Callimedon. desiring the Confederates to joyn theirs, and accordingly some went from the Boeotians, Corinthians, and Ar∣gives. When they came to Teribazus, Antalcidas acquainted him that his Mes∣sage was to desire a Peace of the King for the Republick, and such an one too, as the King himself would gladly have. For the Lacedemonians would not contend with the King about the Greek Cities in Asia, but be satisfied, if the Isles and the other Cities only might enjoy their own Laws. And why then, said he, since our Design is such, do the rest of the Greeks, or the King make War upon us? or to what end does he wast his Treasure? For the Athenians cannot make War against the
King, without our Conduct, nor we, if the Cities be restored to their Liberty. Teribazus was hugely taken with An∣talcidas's Proposals, though the opposite Party thought they were but mere talk: for the Athenians were afraid to consent that the Cities, and Islands should enjoy their own Laws, lest they should lose Lemnos, Imbrus, and Scirus, the Thebans, lest they should be obliged to restore the Cities of Baeotia to their Liberty; the Argives al∣so, lest they should forgo Corinth, which they earnestly desired to retain; yet at last this Treaty came to nothing, and the Ambassadors departed home. Teribazus though he thought it not safe for him to joyn with the Lacedemonians, except he had the Kings Orders for it; neverthe∣less gave Antalcidas Money underhand, for the Lacedemonians to fit out a Fleet with, that so they, and their Allies might be the more disposed to a Peace. More∣over he kept Conon Prisoner for the Inju∣ries he had done the King, believing the report that the Lacedemonians gave of him. After that he went up to acquaint the King with what the Lacedemonians said, and that he had seized Conon as an Offen∣der, and to know how he should govern
himself in these Affairs. When he came to Court, the King sent Struthas to take care of the Fleet, one firmly addicted to the Interest of the Athenians, and their Allies, not forgetting what the King's Provinces had suffered by Agesilaus. But when the Lacedemonians saw he was ill affected towards them, and favoured the Athenians, they sent Thimbro to manage the War against him, who passed into A∣sia,Ephesus, Priene, Leu∣eophrys, A∣chilleum- and marching with his Forces from the Towns situate in the Plains of Mae∣ander, he harassed and destroyed the King's Countrey. A while after Struthas ob∣serving that Thimbro always went out in disorder, and contemned his Enemy, sent a Party of Horse into the Plains, com∣manding them to make an Excursion, and drive before them what Booty they could light on. At that time Thimbro was at Dinner in Thersander's Tent, who was not only a good Piper, but a Preten∣der to Robustness, having been brought up in the Spartan Discipline. Struthas observing that the formost were but a small Party, and charged in disorder, ap∣peared with a strong Body of Horse in excellent order, and at the first Onset killed Thimbro and Thersander. After these fell they put the rest to flight, and
cut in pieces a great many in the Pursuit: Some escaped to the Towns of the Con∣federates, but the greater part perished for want of timely assistance. For Thim∣bro at that time, as at several others, went to relieve his men, without acquainting the main Body of his Forces therewith: and thus Affairs stood in Asia. At that time the Rhodians, who were banished by the Populacy, came to Lace∣demon, and declared how dishonourable it would be to let the Athenians subdue Rhodes, and get such an Accession of Strength. Hereupon the Lacedemonians considering, if the People prevailed that Rhodes would fall into the hands of the Athenians, but if the Principal men, into theirs, fitted out eight Sail under the Command of Ecdicus, and sent Diphri∣das on Board them, with order to pass in∣to Asia, and keep those Cities faithful which had received Thimbro, to recruit the Forces which were left, and to make War with them upon Struthas. Diphri∣das observed his Orders, and amongst his other Successes took Tigranes, and his Wife the Daughter of Struthas in their Journey to Sardes; on whom he set so high a Ransome, that with it he raised Money enough to pay his Army. He
was had in as great esteem by the Soul∣diers as Thimbro, being one who had the Government of himself, and accomplisht whatsoever he undertook. When Ecdi∣cus arrived at Cnidus, and understood that the people were Masters both at Sea and Land, and that they had a Fleet as strong again as his, he lay still: But the Lacedemonians hearing that he had too small a force to assist their Allies with, ordered Teleutias to sail about to him with twelve Ships, that he lay with in the Bay of Achaia and the Lechaeum, to discharge Ecdicus, to protect all those who would come in to their Alliance, and to do the Enemy what mischief he could. After Te∣leutias came to Samos, he took some Ships from thence, and sailed to Cnidus; Ecdi∣cus went home: but Teleutias went to Rhodes with a Fleet of seven and twenty Sail, and in his way thither met with Phi∣locrates, Son of Ephialtes, going with ten Gallies from Athens to Cyprus, to the as∣sistance of Evagoras, and took them eve∣ry one. Here an accident hapned which thwart∣ed both their Designs; for the Athenians being in league with the King, assisted Eva∣goras his Enemy; and though the Lacede∣monians were at war with the King, yet
Teleutias destroyed those that went to fight against him. Afterwards Teleutias returned to Cni∣dus, and sold the Prizes, from whence he went to Rhodes, and succoured the Lace∣demonian party. Upon this the Athenians fearing the Lacedemonians might recover the Soveraignty of the Sea, sent out Thra∣sybulus the Styrensian with forty Sail of Ships, who put to Sea, but went not to the relief of Rhodes; supposing it would be no easie matter for him to infest the Lacedemonian Allies, who had the Gari∣sons to protect them by land, and Teleu∣tias ready with his Fleet at Sea: Nor could the Allies be subdued, because they had Garisons were stronger, and had been victorious. Thereupon he sailed to the Hellespont, and meeting with no Enemy, thought he could do some signal piece of Service; for being at first inform'd that there was a Rupture between Amadocus King of the Odrysians and Seuthes, Lord of the Seacoast of Thrace, he made them Friends, and received them into the Al∣liance, concluding if these were at amity, that the Greek Cities in Thrace would adhere more firmly to the Athenian in∣terest. Having setled Affairs in so good a con∣dition,
and being in amity with the Asi∣atic Cities, by reason of the League be∣tween the King and the Athenians, he went to Byzantium, and sold the Customs of those Ships which came from the Pon∣tus, and changed the Government of the Byzantines from an Aristocracy to a De∣mocracy, so that the Byzantines were not at all concern'd to see such numbers of A∣thenians in their City. When he had performed this, and made an Alliance with the Chalcedonians, he sailed out of the Hellespont, and finding all the Towns in Lesbos, except Mitylene, take part with the Lacedemonians, he attackt no place till he had first taken four hundred men out of his Fleet at Mitylene, and form'd them and the Exiles who had fled thither into a body, and joyn'd them with the stoutest men of the Mitylenians: He gave every one of them hopes; To the Mitylenians, that if he mastered the rest of Lesbos, they should command the whole: To the Exiles, that if they assisted him in the recovery of the parti∣cular Towns, they would be in a capacity of being restored to their own Countries again: To the Seamen, that if they could bring Lesbos into the Alliance of the A∣thenians, they should greatly enrich them∣selves thereby.
When he had thus encouraged the men, he drew them up, and marched with them to Mithymna: But Therimachus Gover∣nour of the place for the Lacedemonians, understanding Thrasybulus was coming against him, took the Seamen from on board his Ships, together with the Me∣thymnean and Mitylenian Exiles, and met him at the Frontiers where they had an Engagement, in which Therimachus was killed, and a great many slain in the pur∣suit. After this he took some Cities by composition, but foraged the Country about those which held out, and raised pay for his Souldiers out of the Spoyls: From thence he hastened to Rhodes, to levy a strong body of men there, and when he had raised Contribution at seve∣ral places, he went to Aspendus, and sailed up the River Eurymedon with his Fleet. He had formerly received money from the Aspendians, and now the Country∣men being injured by the Souldiers, they in a rage fell upon the Athenians by night, and killed Thrasybulus in his Tent, who ended his days in this manner, having had the reputation of being a good man. The Athenians chose Argyrius to succeed him in the Fleet.
The Lacedemonians receiving intelli∣gence that the Athenians had sold the Customs of the Pontic Ships at Byzantium, that they were possest of Chalcedon, and that the other Cities on the Hellespont were in a good condition, because Phar∣nabazus was their Ally; thought it was high time to look about them: And altho' they could object nothing against Der∣cyllidas, yet Anaxibius by favour of the Ephori procured himself to go Governour of Abydus, and undertook, if they would give him a Fleet and pay off his men, to make War with the Athenians, after such a rate as should change the face of things in the Hellespont. Hereupon they gave him three Gallies, and Pay for a thousand Mercenaries, and dispatched him away: When he arrived he raised more Forces, and wrested some of the Eolic Towns from Pharnabazus, and whilst he was gone against Abydus with his own Army and the Forces of the other Cities, Anaxi∣bius on the contrary fell upon them, and laid wast their Territories: Afterwards he fitted out three Ships more at Abydus, besides those he had, and when he took any Ships that belonged either to the A∣thenians, or their Confederates, he car∣ried them in thither.
When the Athenians received intelli∣gence hereof, they feared he would undo all that Thrasybulus had done before in the Hellespont; whereupon they sent out Iphicrates against him with eight Sail, and 1200 Targetiers, being most of those he commanded at Corinth. For the Ar∣gives having possest themselves of Corinth, declared they had no occasion for them, because Iphicrates had put some to death, who favoured their interest; whereupon he return'd home, and lived privately. When he arrived at the Chersonese, he and Anaxibius sent out Foragers on both sides, and with them they carried on the War one with another. A while after Iphicrates hearing that Anaxibius was gone to Antandrus with the Mercenaries, Lacedemonians, and 200 Abydenian hea∣vy-arm'd men, and understanding that Antandrus had surrendred to him, he gues∣sed that he would put in a Garison there, and return with the Abydenians: Where∣upon he passed over in the Night at a place which was freest from the discovery of the Abydenians, and when he had pos∣sessed himself of the Hills, he placed an Ambush: He commanded also the Gal∣lies which transported him to cruise off the shoar by break of day, that they
might seem to be going to collect Tribute. Nor was he mistaken, for though Anaxi∣bius had not an auspicious Sacrifice, yet he departed from Antandrus, and despised the Ceremonies, partly because he march∣ed through a Friends Country, and to a City of the Confederates, partly because he understood by those he met, that I∣phicrates was sailed back to Praeconne∣sus, and therefore marched more care∣lesly. Iphicrates did not rise out of the Am∣buscade whilst Anaxibius's Army was on even ground, but after the Abydenians, which were in the Van, had entred the Plain by Cremastes, where there were Gold Mines, the rest of the Army went down the Hill, being followed by Anaxi∣bius and the Lacedemonians: And then Iphicrates rising up, gave a furious charge upon Anaxibius, who when he saw that there was no hopes of escaping, and that his Army was extended in length and in a strait place, that they could not come up the ascent of the Hill to his assistance, be∣ing already past it, and that all were in a Consternation by reason of the Ambus∣cade; he said to those who were near him, Gentlemen, Here I must die, but do ye consult your own safety before you en∣gage
with the Enemy. And when he had said so, he took a Shield from his Squire, and fought till he died upon the Spot: HisHe was called , or , and bred up under some great man who was to be an exam∣ple of ver∣tue to him. So was Lysander under Agesilaus. Plut. & Ʋbbo Em. Page also who staid with him, and the 12 Lacedemonian Governours which followed him out of the Town, fell toge∣ther with him; the rest were slain in the pursuit, of the others near 200 were kil∣led; and of the Abydenian heavy-arm'd men 50: Iphicrates having performed these Exploits, return'd to the Chersonese.
XENOPHON'S History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. V. THE CONTENTS. Teleutias a famous General. Antalcidas returns from Persia with Articles of Peace, and a Peace is made. Mantinea ta∣ken, and the Citizens obliged to live in Villages. The Citadel of Thebes betray∣ed to the Lacedemonians, and recover∣ed. Teleutias slain at Olynthus. Age∣sipolis dies. The Lacedemonians Power declines. The Thebans draw the Athe∣nians into the War against the Lacede∣monians. Sphodrias impeached for be∣ginning the War, and acquitted.
THis was the state of Affairs betwixt the Athenians and Lacedemonians in the Hellespont: The people of Aegina formerly had Commerce, with the Athenians till the War broke out; and then Eteonicus coming thither with the consent of the Ephori, gave Commis∣sions to any that would, to make Depre∣dations in Attica. The Athenians being in a manner besieged by the Aegineans, sent a body of heavy-armed men into Aegina, under the Command of Pamphi∣lus, and blockt them up with a Wall by Land, and ten Gallies by Sea. Upon the rumour of this Siege, Teleu∣tias who was gone to collect Tribute in some of the Islands, came to relieve the Aegineans,98. Olymp. Pyrrhio Archon. and chased away the Athenian Fleet, though Pamphilus still defended his Wall. About the same time the Lacedemoni∣ans sent Hierax to be Admiral, who took upon him the Command of the Fleet; and Teleutias parted homewards, having discharged himself with admirable Success in that Imployment: For as he was embar∣king in order to his return home; he re∣ceived the Complements of the whole Army, one putting a Garland upon his
head, and another a Wreath: They too, who came not time enough, but after he was gone on board, threw their Garlands into the Sea, and wished him a prosperous Voyage. I confess, I have related nothing here that is very observable concerning his Li∣berality, Enterprises, or Stratagems, tho' in my opinion the Endearments whereby he gained so much upon the affections of his Souldiers deserved to be considered: For this noble quality challenges a more honour∣able mention, than either the wealth he was possest of, or the Dangers he engag'd in. Hierax having left twelve Gallies, and Gorgopas his Vice-Admiral Governour of Aegina, sailed with the rest of the Fleet to Rhodes. From this time the Atheni∣ans in their own Works lookt more like the Besieged, than those in the Town; whereupon a good Fleet was order'd to be fitted out, and to fetch off their Army the fifth Month of the Siege: after which they were again infested by Gorgopas, and the Privatiers. Against these they set out thirteen Sail under the Command of Eu∣nomus: Whilst Hierax was at Rhodes, the Lacedemonians sent Antalcidas to com∣mand at Sea, thinking thereby they should highly oblige Teribazus. Antalcidas when
he arrived at Aegina, took Gorgopas's Fleet with him, and sailed to Ephesus; sending Gorgopas back again to the former place with ten Sail, and gave the Com∣mand of the rest to Nicolochus his Vice-Admiral, who went from thence with Succors to the Abydenians, and directing his Course to Tenedos, destroyed the Country, and having raised Contribution sailed to Abydus. The Athenian Generals from Samothra∣cia, Thasus, and the adjacent places, came together to relieve the Tenedians; but being certified that Nicolochus was gone to Abydus, they set out of the Chersonese with two and thirty Sail of Ships, and blockt him up with his Fleet of five and twenty. In the mean while Gorgopas parted from Ephesus, and meeting with Eunomus, the former whereof ran into Aegina, a little before Sun-set, and put his men ashoar, ordering them to sup. Eunomus having made a short stay there, set sail. The night coming on he went a-head of the Fleet, and as the custom is, hung out his Lights, that the Ships a-stern might not mistake their way: Thereupon Gorgopas put his men on board immediately, and followed the Lights at a distance, that he might not
be discovered, nor give notice to the Ene∣my the Pilots also used a noise made with Stones, and the strokes of the Oars, instead of the Voice. Whilst Eunomus lay with his Fleet under the shoar near Cape Zoster in Attica; Gorgopas com∣manded the Trumpets to sound, and an Attack to be made: At this time some of Eunomus's men were newly gone a∣shoar, some putting into Harbour, and others still out at Sea: The Fight was by Moon-light, and in it Gorgopas took four Sail, which he lasht fast to his own Ships, and towed them to Aegina; the rest of the Athenian Fleet run into the Piraeus. About this time Chabrias went to Cy∣prus to the assistance of Evagoras, with ten Sail, and eight hundred Targetiers; besides which he took some more Ships and Heavy-arm'd men from Athens, and making a descent in the Night upon Ae∣gina, placed his Targetiers in Ambuscade in an hollow beyond the Temple of Her∣cules: At Day-break the Athenian Heavy-arm'd men led by Demaenetus, came ac∣cording to agreement, and marched up about sixteen Furlongs beyond the Tem∣ple to theA place called from its three Towers. Tripyrgia. Gorgopas having Intelligence hereof, came with the Aegi∣neans, Sea-men, and the eight Spartan
Commissioners, to fight the Enemy; and commanded Proclamation to be made, That those Seamen who were Freemen, should come to his assistance; whereupon several getting such Arms as they could light on, joyn'd him: After the Van had passed the Ambush, Chabrias's men rose up on a sudden, darting their Lances and throwing their Javelins: By this time the heavy-armed men from on board the Ships were come up, but the advanc'd Guard of the Enemy being not in a close body, were soon cut in pieces, and amongst them Gorgopas and the Lacedemonians: when these fell, the rest fled, and a hun∣dred and fifty Aegineans were slain; of the Mercenaries, Foreigners and Seamen, that stragled, there were no less than two hundred killed. From that time the Athenians had an undisturbed Navigation as in time of Peace, for the Seamen would not obey Eteonicus, nor enter the Enemies Coun∣try, though he pressed them, because they were not payd. Thereupon the Lace∣demonians sent Teleutias again to com∣mand their Fleet, at whose coming the Seamen were transported with joy; when he called them together, he made this Speech to them.
I am come hither (Fellow Souldiers) without money,Teleutias's Speech to his Soul∣diers. yet by the favour of Hea∣ven, and your diligence, I'le endeavour to procure you plenty of all Necessaries: For assure your selves, that whilst you are un∣der my command, your welfare is as dear to me as my own life. Perhaps you all won∣der at me, for saying, that I had rather you should be provided with Necessaries, than my self: I take Heaven to witness, that I had rather want Bread my self two days, than that you should want it one. My door was formerly open to every one that asked any thing of me, and so it shall be for the future. When you are better stored with Provisions, you shall then see me live more plentifully. If you see me endure cold, heat, and watching: assure your selves, that you must do so too. Nor do I command you these things, as if I delighted to punish you, but that you may make an advantage of them: Take for your example our Republick which is in so flourishing a condition, yet arrived not to this felicity by sloth, but by a volun∣tary engagement in the fatigue and dangers of War, when ever occasion served. To my knowledge you have heretofore been gallant men, but now strive to approve your selves yet braver, that we may contentedly better re∣lish together the Advantages arising from
our labours: For what can be greater sa∣tisfaction, than not to be obliged to fawn on any Greek or Barbarian for Pay; but to be able of our selves to procure Necessa∣ries, from whence they may be most honour∣ably obtained? For certainly large Con∣tributions from the Enemy in time of War, not only supply you with Provisions, but gain you Reputation throughout the World. When he had ended his Speech, the whole Army with a loud Acclamation bid him command them any Service whatsoever, and they would obey: After he had Sacrificed, he spoke to them a∣gain. Come (fellow Souldiers) take the Sup∣per you intended, and one Days Provisions; then go on board forthwith, that we may bend our course whither Heaven directs, and arrive opportunely. As soon as they were assembled he put them on board, and at Night sailed to the Port of Athens, sometimes refreshing the Rowers, and ordering them to repose themselves; other-whiles inspecting them. If any one thinks he did imprudently in attempting a strong Fleet with twelve Ships, let him first consider his Reasons: He thought the Athenians were careless of their Fleet, because it lay in Harbour,
and bacause Gorgopas was slain; and tho' there were Guard-Ships, yet he supposed it less hazardous to attack twenty at A∣thens, than ten elsewhere: For he knew that the Seamen lay on board the Ships which were abroad, but that the Captains lay in their own houses in Athens, and the Seamen were disperst up and down. Upon these reasons he set Sail, and when he came within five or six Furlongs of the Port, he lay still, and refreshed a∣while: By break of Day he stood into the Port with the rest of the Fleet, and then he gave Orders to the Ships, that they should neither destroy, nor sink any of the. The Merchant-men were round built, and the Men of War of a longish form. Sch. Thucyd. ad lib. 2. Merchant-men, but lash those fast that were loaden, and tow them out, to disable any Gallies they saw upon the Guard, to board the biggest Vessels, and to take all the men they could: Accord∣ingly some leaping into the Digma, seized the Merchants, and Masters of Ships, and haled them on board. Whilst Teleutias was employed about this Action,A place where the Samples of Goods were shewn. those in Athens hearing of it, came running out to see what was the occasion of the Alarm; those out of the Town hastned, some to get Arms, and others with the News to the City. All the Athenians, both heavy-armed men
and Horse came with Succours, as if the Piraeus had been taken. In the mean while Teleutias sent his Ships to Aegina, and commanded three or four Gallies to be carried thither with them, whilst he with the rest coasted along Attica, and when he was got clear of the Port, he took a great many Fisher-boats & Passage-boats full of men, as they came from the Islands. Then coming to Sunium, he took se∣veral Barges loaden with Corn, and others with Merchandise: After this he went to Aegina, and selling the Prizes, he gave every Seaman a Months Pay advance, whereby he kept the Ships well manned, and the men wholly at his devotion. Af∣ter that he cruised about, and took a great many Prizes. About this time Antalcidas return'd out of Asia with Teribazus, having prevailed with the King to joyn the Lacedemonians, if the Athenians and their Confederates would not accept the Peace which he pro∣posed: But when he heard that Nicolo∣chus was blockt up at Abydus by Iphicra∣tes and Diotimus, he went thither by Land, and from thence put to Sea with the Fleet at Night, spreading a Report as if the Chalcedonians had sent for him, and entring the Harbour at Percope, lay still
there.Demaene∣tus, Diony∣sius, Leon∣tichus, Phanias. The Athenian Admirals having Intelligence of his design, gave him Chase to Praeconnesus; but Antalcidas after they had passed by him, hearing that Polyxe∣nus was coming with twenty Sail from the Syracusians and Italians, returned back again to Abydus to joyn him. About the same time Thrasybulus Co∣lyttensis set sail with eight Ships from Thrace, intending to joyn the rest of the Athenian Fleet: but the Scout making his sign to Antalcidas, that eight Gallies were coming that way; he caused twelve of the best Sailers to be manned out, com∣manding them if they had not their Com∣plement to take men out of the rest of the Fleet, and to lie in wait for them as secretly as they could: when they were passed by, he gave them chase: As soon as the Athenians saw them, they run; but the Enemies Ships sailing well, soon fetcht upon them being dull ones. Whereupon Antalcidas commanded the Van of his Fleet not to attack the sternmost Ships, but to chase those a-head: When they were taken, and the sternmost saw those a-head were seized, they desponded, and were mastered by the Rear of Antalcidas's Fleet; and thus all were taken: But after Antalcidas had joyned the twenty Sail
from Syracuse, and some others from that part of Ionia, which was in the Province of Teribazus, and more from the Govern∣ment of Ariobarzanes, with whom he had contracted an Alliance of Hospitality, (it being about the time that the King of Per∣sia sent for Pharnabazus, and gave him his Daughter in marriage;) he had a Fleet of above eighty sail, wherewith he Lord∣ed it over the Sea, prohibiting the Pontic Ships from sailing to Athens, whither they were bound, and. obliged them to go into the Ports of the Confederates. The Athenians seeing the Enemy had a powerful Fleet, that the King had joyn'd the Lacedemonians, and the Capers of Ae∣gina blocked them up, feared they should be subdued as they were before,Theodotus Archon. and there∣fore they earnestly desired a Peace. In like manner, the Lacedemonians keeping one Regiment in Garrison at Lechaeum, and another at Orchomenus, to defend the Cities that were faithful from being de∣stroyed, as also to prevent those they sus∣pected from revolting, and having a pow∣erful Diversion at Corinth, grew sick of the War. The Argives likewise understanding that an Army was to be sent against them, and knowing that their former Pretexts would fail them, became inclinable to a
Peace. Whereupon Teribazus summoned those that would comply with the Propo∣sals of Peace sent by the King: when they came together and were assembed, Teri∣bazus shew'd them the Kings Seal, and read the Instrument, which run thus: Artaxerxes King of Persia is of opinion, that he has a just Title to the Asiatic Towns;The Arti∣cles of Peace brought by Antalcidas from the King of Persia. as also to the Islands Clazomenae and Cy∣prus; That the rest of the Greek Cities both greater and lesser ought to be free, except Lemnos, Imbros, and Scirus, which anciently belonged to the Athenians,It was afterwards annext to the main Land. Strab. and are still to remain in their possession; who∣ever will not accept of these Conditions, I and the Allies will make War upon them with all our Forces both by Sea and Land. The Ambassadors made their Report here∣of to their respective Communities, and at length all obliged themselves by Oath to confirm the Peace; Only the Thebans would ratifie it in the Name of the rest of the Baeotians: but Agesilaus refused to ac∣cept their Oath, unless they would swear according to the Tenour of the Kings Letters; which was, that the lesser as well as greater Cities should be set free. The Theban Ambassadors replyed, The Letters were not directed to them: Go then (said Agesilaus) and consult your
Masters about it; and tell them moreover, that if they will not accept these Propo∣sals, they shall be excluded the League. After their departure, Agesilaus out of hatred to the Thebans, lost no time, but moved the Ephori against them, and im∣mediately Sacrificed; when having signs of a prosperous Expedition, he marcht to Tegea, and from thence sent the Horse to the neighbouring places; as also the Com∣manders of the Mercenaries to hasten their Conjunction of the Army: But before he moved from Tegea, the Thebans arrived, and signified that they would restore the Cities to their Liberties. Whereupon the Lacedemonians returned home, and the Thebans were obliged to make Peace, al∣lowing the Baeotian Towns their own Laws: Nevertheless the Corinthians did not dismiss their Garison of Argives; up∣on which Agesilaus threatned the one, that if they did not discharge the Argives, and the others, that if they did not quit Corinth, he would treat them as Enemies. Both being frighted herewith, the Armies departed the Town, and the City of Co∣rinth was restored to its liberty. The Mur∣derers and those that were conscious to themselves that they were concerned in the Massacre, departed, and the rest of the
Citizens very willingly received those formerly banished. Hereupon the re∣spective Communities swore to observe the Articles of Peace sent by the King; and the Land together with the Naval Forces were disbanded. This was the first Peace, that was made between the Lacedemonians, Athenians, and their Allies since the Walls of Athens were demolished. And though the La∣cedemonians did in a manner ballance the power of the Enemies during the War, yet they gained themselves a great deal of Reputation from that called the Antal∣cidean Peace, which the King of Persia Proposed. For they being Guarrantees of it, restored the Cities to their Liberty, made Corinth their Ally, and, as they for∣merly desired, freed the Boeotian Towns from the Jurisdiction of the Thebans. Besides they obliged the Argives to quit their Pretensions to Corinth, and decreed to send an Army against them, unless they abandoned the Place. When Affairs succeeded thus according to their desires;Mystichides Archon. they resolved to revenge themselves on those Allies, who, during the War, had inclined more to the Inte∣rest of the Enemy than theirs; and for the future to make such Provision, as that
it should not lie in their power to prove false. First, therefore they sent to the Mantineans, commanding them to demo∣lish their Walls, and telling them that unless they did, they could not believe but that they favoured their Enemies; adding they had Intelligence, that they sent the Argives Provisions, who were at War with them, and that at other times they would not joyn them, but pre∣tended a Truce, and when they did, they did them but ill Service. Moreover they perceived, that they envied their Success, and were much pleased at any misfortune that befel them. Besides theThis Truce was made the XIV year of the Pe∣lopon. War, Thucyd. Lib. V. Dexitheus Archon. XXX years Truce made after the Battel of Mantinea expired this Year. The Argives refused to demolish their Walls, and thereupon an Army was sent against them. Agesilaus requested the States to excuse him this Expedition, affirming that the Mantineans had done his Father very good Service in the Mes∣senian War. Hereupon Agesipolis led the Army, though his Father Pausanias had a good understanding with the Chief men of Mantinea. He entred the Coun∣trey and burnt it, but yet when the Man∣tineans did not demolish their Walls for all this, he drew a Line of Circumvalla∣tion
about the Town, carrying on the Works with one half of the Army, and defending those that were employed a∣bout them with the other. After the Lines were finished, he encompassed the Town about with a Wall, without any loss: but when he understood, that it was well stored with Provisions, the for∣mer having been a plentiful Year, think∣ing 'twould be an hard case to wear out the Army, and Allies with a long Expe∣dition, he dammed up a large River that ran through the Town, and stopping its course, raised it above the Foundations of the Walls, and Houses: Whereupon the lowermost Bricks being moistned, yield∣ed under the uppermost, and the Wall cracking leaned; upon that the Mantine∣ans propped it up with Wood, and made a Work to prevent the Tower from fall∣ing. But when they saw they were over∣powred by the Water, fearing the Wall would drop down quite round, whereby they should easily fall into the Enemie's hands, they consented to demolish it. But the Lacedemonians would hearken to no Terms, unless they would consent to live in Villages. The Mantineans see∣ing themselves necessitated yielded to their Conditions. They that favoured
the Argives, and Chief men apprehended, they should suffer death, but Pausanias prevailed with his Son Agesipolis for sixty of them to depart the Town with safe Conduct. The Lacedemonians stood on both sides from the Gates with their Pikes to view them as they marcht out, and though they hated the Mantineans, yet the Private Soldiers forbore them with much more moderation, than the Officers of the Mantineans would have done; which I have mentioned as a testimony of great Obedience to their Commanders. From this time the Walls were pulled down, and Mantinea divided into four Parts, being inhabited as in former times. The People were troubled at first, be∣cause they were obliged to pull down their Houses, and build others anew. Yet they became well satisfied with the change, being nearer their Estates, which lay just by the Villages, being governed by an Aristocracy, and delivered from the op∣pressing Demagogues; so that when the Lacedemonians sent an Officer to each Village to raise men, they came into the Service with more readiness, than when they were governed by a Democracy. These were the Transactions at Mantinea. By which others may learn not to draw
Rivers through the Walls of their Ci∣ties. The Phliasian Exiles observing that the Lacedemonians took an Account of all the Allies bevaviour towards them in the War,Olymp. 99. Diotrephes Archon. and supposing they had now a fair opportunity in their hands, went to La∣cedemon, and represented, that whilst they enjoyed their Countrey, their City both received the Lacedemonians, and follow∣ed them in all their Expeditions. But af∣ter they were expulst, the rest would serve the Lacedemonians in no capacity, they of all men being excluded their City: When the Ephori heard this, they thought it a matter worthy their consideration, and sent a Message to the Community of the Phliasians to let them know that the Exiles were well affected to the Repub∣lick of the Lacedemonians, and that they were unjustly banished; as also to desire that they might be restored with their Consent and not by Force. This put the Phliasians in a fear, lest some in the Town should let in the Lacedemonians if they appeared before it with an Army. More∣over apprehending that there were seve∣ral of the Exile's Relations in the Town, with others that favoured their Party; and (as in most Republicks) some young
men disposed to a change, and for recall∣ing the banished men; they decreed that the Exiles should be readmitted, and such of their Goods restored, as were not sold, and those that were should be made good out of the Publick Treasury; and if any Controversie should arise amongst them, it should be decided by Law. Thus the Affair about the Phliasian Exiles was ad∣justed at that time. Soon after there came Ambassadors to Lacedemon from Acanthus, and Apollonia, which were the greatest Cities near Olyn∣thus. When the Ephori understood their Errand, they introduced them to the As∣sembly, and Confederates, where Cligenes the Acanthian made this Speech. I suppose (My Lords of Lacedemon,Clygenes's Speech. and you the Allies) that there is now a grow∣ing Mischief in Greece, of which you have not yet taken notice. Most of you know that Olynthus is the greatest City in Thrace, the Inhabitants whereof have drawn some Towns into their Alliance, up∣on Terms to enjoy the same Laws, and live in the same Community. They have united some of the more considerable Cities, and attempted to wrest the Macedonian Towns from the Allegiance of Amyntas their King: Ʋpon the coming in of the Neigh∣bouring
Places, they soon proceeded to those more remote, and bigger: Amongst several other Cities we left them possest of Pella, which is far the greatest of any in Macedon. Since, we understand that A∣myntas abandons his Towns, and may be said to be only not dispossest of all his Coun∣trey. The Olynthians sent, to us, and the A∣pollonians, a threatning Message, how that if we joyned them not, they would turn their Arms upon us. We desire (My Lords) to enjoy our own Laws, and live under our own Government; but if none will assist us, we must of necessity associate. They have no less than eight hundred Heavy-armed men, of Targetiers a greater number, and if we joyn with them, they will make above a thousand Horse. Besides, we left the Athenian, and Boeotian Ambassadors there, and we heard that the Olynthians had decreed to send theirs, to treat of a League Offensive, and Defensive with these Confe∣derate Cities: if therefore the Athenians, and Thebans gain such an Accession of Strength, beware they prove not too many for you. Moreover, seeing they are posses∣sed of Potidaea on the Isthmus of Pallene, it's certain that those Towns which are within it, will fall into their hands. The Consternation those Cities are in may be a
sufficient Demonstration thereof; who though they bear an inveterate hatred to the Olynthians, yet durst not send their Ambassadors with us to represent the State of their Affairs. Again, consider with your selves, how can you in probabi∣lity prevent all Boeotia, from Associating; when you regard not the Conjunction of a greater force, that gathers strength so fast both by Sea, and Land. What can hinder them? they have Timber enough in their own Countrey for Shipping. They can't want Money, for they have Customs from their Ports and Towns of Mart, their Plenty also makes them Populous. Besides all this, the Thracians who are their Neighbours, and not under a Kingly Go∣vernment, do now caress them. And if they be subdued by them, this also will be a formidable addition to their Power; and if all these Designs succeed, the Gold Mines at Pangaeus must of necessity follow. I'll mention nothing now, but what is the common talk of the Town. What need I tell you of their haughty Minds? their Spirit, and Ambition, who can express? Perhaps God and Nature have so contri∣ved man, that as our Fortune, so our as∣piring Humor should also rise. We (My Lords) have faithfully represented to you
the State of Affairs, and now 'tis your part to consider whether they be worthy your regard or not. This I must not for∣get to tell you too, that their Power in∣deed is great, yet it is not so formidable as you need fear to grapple with. The Towns which were forct into the Confede∣racy, when they see a Power on foot will soon fly off again. But if once they be linkt together with inter-marriages, and Commerce (which they have made a Law to encourage) and shall apprehend how ad∣vantagious it is to follow the Victor (as the Arcadians, who whilst they sided with you, both saved themselves, and plunde∣red others) perhaps it will be no easie mat∣ter to dissolve their Ʋnion. After this Speech,Phanostra∣tus Archon. the Lacedemonians gave the Confederates leave to speak, ex∣horting every one of them to offer what they thought would be most adviseable in this Conjuncture for the Peloponnesians, and Allies. Thereupon several proposed a War, especially those that would ingra∣tiate with the Lacedemonians: so it was resolved to send to the respective Cities a list of ten thousand men to be raised. 'Twas debated too, that those Towns, which would contribute Money instead of men might;6 d. ¼. provided they paid three Ae∣ginean
Oboli for each man, and that if any set out Horse, each Trooper should have the pay of four Heavy-armed men. More∣over if any of the Towns declined the Service, it should be lawful for the Lace∣demonians to mulct them one Stater a day for every man.15 s. 7 d. ob. After they had thus resolved, the A∣canthians rose up again; and shewed that these were good Decrees, yet could not be quickly put in Execution. Declaring it would be better whilst these Levies were making, that a General, and what Forces could be raised on a suddain in Lacede∣mon, and other Places should march forth∣with; for hereby those Cities which were not yet associated would remain firm, and such as were forced into the Alliance, would be colder in their Assistance. This be∣ing agreed on, the Lacedemonians sent out about two thousand of the Half-Slaves, Neighbouring People,A Band of chosen men which fought by the King, Diod. Sic. ib. XV. and Sciritae. Euda∣midas, when he began his march, entrea∣ted the Ephori, that his Brother Phoebi∣das should assemble the Forces he had raised, but left behind, and follow him. When he arrived in Thrace, he sent Garisons to those Towns which desired them, and took Potidaea one of the As∣sociated Towns upon surrender. This
place he made the Seat of War, and ma∣naged it as well as could be expected from the small force he had. In the mean while Phaebidas assembling the Forces that Eu∣damidas left behind, marched with them; and when he arrived at Thebes, he en∣camped without the City by the Artil∣lery ground. At that time Ismenias and Leontiades being chief. There were two of them. Magistrates, there were Divisions among the people, they bearing one another a mutual ha∣tred, and being the leading men of their Factions; Ismenias out of spight to the Lacedemonians, would not go near Phae∣bidas; on the other hand, Leontiades ca∣ressed him, and becoming familiar, dis∣courst him thus: This very day, Phoebidas, it lies in your power to do your Country a signal piece of Service; for if you will follow me with your Heavy-armed men, I will bring you into the Citadel; and when this is done, as∣sure your self Thebes will be wholly at the Devotion of the Lacedemonians, and us your Friends: You see it has been decreed, that no Theban should follow you to the Olynthian Wars; but if you will joyn with us in this Design, we will send a strong Sup∣ply of Heavy-armed men and Horse, that you may hereby re-inforce your Brother
with a very considerable body of men; and whilst he is reducing Olynthus, you way possess your selves of Thebes, which is far the greater City. When Phaebidas heard this, he was hugely transported, for he loved the per∣formance of a noble Enterprize more than life it self, though he never had the Re∣putation of a prudent and thinking man. After it was concluded on, Leontiades bid him march forward, as though he was preparing for his Voyage; and when it is time, said he, I will come and Conduct you my self. The Senate was sitting at that time in the Porch of the Market∣place, because the Women kept the Feast of Ceres in the Citadel, and the Streets were thin (it being Summer-time, and the heat of the day) when Leontiades rode after Phaebidas, and calling him back, led him directly to the Citadel, where having posted Phaebidas and his men, he deliver∣ed him the Keys of the Gates, advising him to let none enter without his Order. From thence he went strait to the Senate, and being come thither, spake thus: My Lords, Be not disheartned, though the Lacedemonians are possest of the Cita∣del; for they declare they come not to any in an hostile manner, but such as love ho∣stility.
I seize this Ismenias for levying of War pursuant to the Law, which autho∣rizes the chief Magistrate to apprehend any person suspected of Treason: Ye Captains, and those under your Command, rise, take him and commit him to safe Custody. They that were privy to the Design drawing near, obey'd, and laid hold on Is∣menias, the others that knew nothing of the matter, and were Enemies to Leonti∣ades's Faction, immediately left the Town, fearing they should be put to death, the rest having retired home before. Af∣ter they understood that Ismenias was committed to the Tower, those that were of his and Androclides's Faction, being about four hundred, fled to Athens. Upon this they chose another chief Magistrate instead of Ismenias. Leontiades went im∣mediately to Lacedemon, where he found the Ephori, and people much offended at Phaebidas for having acted without Orders. In whose defence Agesilaus plead∣ed, that if he had done any thing in pre∣judice of the State, he ought to be punish∣ed; but if good Service, he by their anci∣ent Laws might do such things without Commission: You ought therefore, said he, to consider, whether, what he has done be for your Interest, or not. When
Leontiades came to the General Assem∣bly, he made this Speech. My Lords of Lacedemon,Leonti∣des's Speech. You your selves confess, that the Thebans were disposed to a War before these Transactions; you perceivod too, that they always favoured your Enemies and hated your Friends: They would not assist you against the people in the Piraeus that made so fierce opposi∣tion against you; yet they made War upon the Phoceans, only because they were well affected towards you: Nay when they un∣derstood that you employed your Arms a∣gainst the Olynthians, they made an Al∣liance with them, and you continually ex∣pected to hear that they had reduced Boe∣otia. Now since Affairs stand thus, you need not have any apprehensions of the The∣bans; one short private Letter will be suf∣ficient to render every thing there agree∣able to your desires, Provided you will as cordially espouse our Interest as we do yours. When the Lacedemonians heard this, they decreed that as the Citadel had been surprized, so it should be kept; and that Ismenias should be brought to his Tryal. Soon after they sent three Judges of the Lacedemonians, and of the Confederates one from each City both small and great.
The Judges being sat, Ismenias was in∣dicted for holding Correspondence with the Barbarians, and for contracting a Friendship with the Persian, which was out of no good design to Greece; and for sharing of the Money sent by the King, and for being together with Androclides the chief Fomenter of all the Troubles in Greece. To all this he pleaded, yet could not clear himself from being thought an Enterprizer of great Designs, and those not very good ones; so he was condemn∣ed and executed. Hereupon Leontiades's Party being possessed of the City, were more observant of the Lacedemonians, than was expected from them. After this the Lacedemonians pursued the War against the Olynthians more vi∣gorously, and sent Teleutias General, is∣suing out Orders for the raising an Army of ten thousand men, and directed their Letters to the Confederate Towns, com∣manding them to follow Teleutias in the Expedition pursuant to the Decree of the Allies. Wherefore amongst others that freely offered their Service to him, (be∣ing a person no ways ungrateful to those that serv'd under him) the City of The∣bes sent him, being the Brother of Agesi∣laus both Heavy-arm'd men and Horse.
He made no extraordinary hast, but took all possible care that the Army might do their Friends no harm in their march; and to raise as great Forces as he possibly could, he also dispatched a Message be∣fore to Amyntas, requiring him to hire some Mercenaries, and distribute money amongst the Kings his Neighbours, if so be he had any thoughts of recovering his Kingdom. Besides he sent to Derdas Prince of Elimea, to let him know that the O∣lynthians had already subdued the greater Monarchy, which was that of Macedone; nor would they forbear a lesser, unless their Insolence were checkt. When he had dispatcht these Affairs, and drawn a very powerful Army toge∣ther, he marched to the Frontiers of the Consederates, and arriving at Potidaea, made a general Muster, and entred the Enemies Country. But when he advan∣ced towards Olynthus, he neither burned nor destroyed any thing, supposing if he took any such course, it would hinder him both in his March and Retreat; yet it would do well to cut down the Trees when he retired from the Walls of the City, and thereby divert the Enemy from falling on his Rear. As soon as he came within less than ten Furlongs of the City,
he halted, leading the left Wing himself; the other Body of the Confederates being placed in the right: For so it hapned, that he marched towards the Gate, at which the Enemy went out. The Lace∣demonian, and Theban Horse together with the Macedonians, he placed in the right, keeping Derdas with his four hun∣dred Horse near him: partly because he admired these Troops, and partly to shew respect to Derdas, thereby to oblige him the more to the Service. Afterwards the Enemy sallying out of the Town, drew up under the Walls, and marshalling their Horse in a close Body, charged the Lacedemonians and Baeoti∣ans, and beating Polycharmus General of the Lacedemonian Cavalry of his Horse, gave him a great many wounds as he lay on the ground, and killed some others. At last the Horse in the right were rout∣ed, and they flying the Foot that were next them gave ground, so that the whole Army was in danger of being de∣feated, had not Derdas advanced with his Horse to the Gates of the City, and Teleutias seconded him with his Troops in good order: which when the Olynthi∣an Cavalry perceived, they faced about, and retreated with great diligence, sear∣ing they should be cut off from the Gates.
Derdas killed a great many of their Horse as they passed by him, but the Infantry being near the Walls, retired back into the Town without much loss. Teleutias having obtained this Advan∣tage, erected a Trophy, cut down the Trees, and retreated, disbanding the Ma∣cedonian Troops, and those of Derdas at the end of the Campagn. Nevertheless the Olynthians making several Incursions into the Territories of the Lacedemonian Confederates, ravaged the Country, and killed the Inhabitants. Early in the Spring near six hundred of the Olynthian Horse over-ran the Coun∣try about Apollonia at Mid-day,Menader Archon. and fo∣raged in small Parties. The same day Derdas arrived with his Cavalry, and Dined there. When he saw the Inroad he lay still, having the Horses in readi∣ness and their Riders armed: But the O∣lynthians advancing to the Suburbs and Gates of the Town in contempt of him; he went out against them with a body of men: As soon as they discovered him, they sell to flight, and he having put them once to the rout, gave not over pursuing and slaying for ninety Furlongs together, and followed them up to the Walls of Olynthus. 'Twas reported, that Derdas killed eighty of their Cavalry in this
Action; and from this time the Enemy kept themselves within their Walls, til∣ling but little ground. Some time after Teleutias moved to the Walls of Olynthus, destroying every Tree, and all the ground that was tilled. On the contrary, the Olynthian Horse go∣ing out and marching gently, passed the River that ran by the Town, and advan∣ced slowly towards the Enemy. Teleutias seeing them, was provoked by their bold∣ness, and ordered Tlemonidas, who com∣manded the Targetiers, instantly to charge them with sull speed: When the Olynthi∣ans discovered them running before the rest of the Army, they faced about, and making a gentle Retreat repassed the Ri∣ver. The Lacedemonians followed them very boldly, and as they retreated, the others pursued, and passed the River, after them. The Olynthian Horse think∣ing they could master those that were already come over, saced about, and charged them, killing Tlemonides, with above a hundred more: When Teleutias saw it, he was enraged, and taking up his Arms again, he instantly drew out the Heavy-arm'd men, and commanded the Targetiers and Horse to pursue with∣out any intermission. Hereby it hapned,
that as several indiscreetly followed the Enemy too near the Wall, they came short home; for they being shot at from the Turrets, were forced to retire in disorder, and defend themselves from the Arrows. The Olynthians being supported with a body of Targetiers charged with their Horse; and at length the Heavy-arm'd men run out, and attacked the disordered Troops of the Enemy. In this Skirmish, Teleutias died fighting; which when those near him saw, they gave ground; nor did the rest stand any longer, but were totally routed; some flying to Spartolus, others to Acanthus, some to Apollonia, and most of them to Potidaea. Thus as they fled several ways dispersedly; so the Enemy pursuing them in small bodies, killed abundance, and those too the slower of that great Army. From these Accidents men may learn this general Instruction; Not to correct Servants in their passion: for sometimes they have suffered more themselves in their Commotions, than what they have inflicted upon others. And to attack an Enemy rather in a rage, than upon mature deliberation, is the most unpardonable fault in the World. Passion is inconsiderate, but Reason is no less circumspect to secure it self, than to annoy an Enemy.
When the Lacedemonians received News of this Disaster,Demophilus Archon. they resolved to send a considerable Force to take down the Pride of the Victors, and not to make a fruitless Expedition as the former was. They made a Decree, and sent King Age∣sipolis to be their General, with thirty Com∣missioners, as they had done before to A∣gesilaus, when he marcht into Asia. Many of the Neighbouring people who were valiant men, went Voluntiers, and several of the Mercenaries that were bred in the Service, as also the Natural Sons of the Spartans that were comely men,, so , for studi∣ous men. è Proem. ad Ex. de leg. Hist. Byz. and had been educated in the Spartan Discipline; several Voluntiers too went out of the Confederate Towns; amongst which were some Thessalian Horse, who had a desire to signalize themselves before A∣gesipolis: Amyntas and Derdas likewise pursued the War now more vigorously than formerly: At that time Agesipolis having got his Army together marched to Olynthus. In the mean while the Phliasian Re∣publick having been commended by A∣gesipolis for contributing so largely, and readily to the carrying on of the War; and supposing, that whilst he was abroad, Agesilaus would not come against them;
nor that both Kings would leave Sparta at the same time; treated the recalled Exiles very rudely, and contrary to all justice: For the banished men prayed that their Cases might be heard at an indiffe∣rent Tribunal: but they compelled the Exiles to try them in their own City, and though they pleaded that no justice could be expected there, where the same were Judges and Parties too; yet for all this they had no hearing. After that the recalled Exiles being ac∣companied with several others from home, went to Lacedemon, and accused their Republick; alledging that many of their Citizens had not justice done them. The Phliasian Government provoked by this, fined all those that went thither without a Deputation from the City: and they who were fined remained there, fearing to return home; and declared that things were arbitrarily carried on by those who banished them, and expulsed the Lacede∣monians; that they had bought up the Exiles Goods, and forcibly detain'd them, having procured that they should be fi∣ned for coming to Lacedemon, that so none for the future should dare to go thither and discover what was done in the City. The Ephori plainly apprehending by
this, that the Phliasians would grow in∣solent,Olymp. 100. Pytheus Archon. decreed to send an Army against them; and Agesilaus was glad of this op∣portunity. For Podanemus and his relatious the guests of his Father Archidamus, were some of the Recalled, as also was Procles,Son of Hipponicus. the Guest of Agesilaus. As soon as the Preparatory Ceremonies for the Expedi∣tion were over, he made no delay, but began his march: several Ambassadors met him, and brought him Money, that he might not enter their Countries; to whom he gave this answer, That he in∣tended to oppress none in this his Expe∣dition, but to relieve the oppressed. At last they submitted to his Terms, and en∣treated him not to enter their Territories. He replied, That he could not give Cre∣dit to their words, because they had broke their Faith before; therefore they ought now to convince him by their Deeds: Being asked what these should be? He told them, If you'l do that, which if you had done before, all this trouble might have been prevented; that was to deliver up their Citadel; which when they refused, he marched into their Coun∣try, and forthwith invested their City: Yet because the Lacedemonians talkt that above five thousand men would be ren∣dred
disaffected to their Republick for the sake of a few; (the Phliasians ha∣ving openly discoursed it in the Camp to make it the more be taken notice of) Agesilaus obviated their Design. For when any of the Relations, and Friends of the Exiles came out of the Town, he ad∣vised his men to carry them to the Pub∣lickPrivate Banquets were for∣bidden by Lycurgus, thereby to prevent luxury, e∣very one that came to this publick place brought his own Commons with him. eating places, and to supply as many as would exercise with sufficient Necessaries, commanding them to fur∣nish all with Arms, and not scruple to take up money upon credit for this. They obey'd his Orders, and set out above a thousand able men extraordinary well dis∣ciplined and appointed, that at last the Lacedemonians confessed they wanted such Auxiliaries. Whilst Agesilaus was taken up about this Action, Agesipolis came directly out of Macedone, and appeared with his Army before the Walls of Olynthus, but meeting with no Opposition, he rava∣ged all the Country about it, and falling upon their confederate Cities, burnt all the Corn, and took Torone by storm.Agesipolis dies. Being thus employed in the height of Summer, he was seized with a Calen∣ture; and having seen Bacchus's Temple at Aphytos, he longed for the shady Grove, as also the Crystal, and cool waters there;
whither he was carried alive, and died the Seven-night after he was first taken ill, without the Consecrated. ground. He was Embalmed in Honey, and from thence carried home, where he had the Funeral Solemnities of a Spartan King. When Age∣silaus heard it, he was not pleased (as one would imagine) with the removal of a Rival, but shed tears for the loss of his Conversation: Because both the Kings, when they are at home, have the same Apartment together; and Agesipolis was able to entertain him with Discourses pleasing to young men; as of Dogs, Horses, and Love Intrigues, having a secret aw and Reverence for him, as being the more experienc'd man. In his stead the Lacedemonians sent Po∣lybiades to go General against the Olyn∣thians.Nicon Ar∣chon. Agesilaus had spent more time al∣ready in the Siege of Phlius, than it was said to be Victualled for: But so great difference there is betwixt Regulation, and the Gut, that the Phliasians decreeing to come to half their former Allowance, and putting that Decree in execution, they held out twice as long again, as 'twas thought they could have done: And such an Ascendant has Daringness over poor spi∣rited men, that one Delphio a gallant sort
of man, taking only a Guard of three hun∣dred, prevented those that were inclined to a Peace, from making one, and com∣mitted them he was suspicious of to safe Custody, obliging the people to Du∣ty, and kept them firm in their obedience, by going the Rounds. Several times he sal∣lied with his Guards, and beat the Ene∣my from their Posts on the Lines; till at length they could find no Provision in the Town, though they searched for it; and then they desired Agesilaus to give their Ambassadours Pass-ports for Lacedemon, acquainting him withal that the City had decreed to furrender to the Lacede∣monian Magistrates upon discretion. A∣gesilaus being offended because they had passed him by, sent to his Friends at home, & procured the affair of Phlius to be whol∣ly remitted to him: Yet he gave safe Con∣duct to the Deputies, and pressed those in the Town harder than before, so that none could get out, except Delphio, and a Slave that had taken a great many Arms from the Besiegers, who made their e∣scape by Night. When the Orders came from Lacedemon, how that the Republick referred the whole to Agesilaus to deter∣mine according to his own discretion, he made this Determination: That fifty of
the recalled Exiles, and as many of the other Citizens should be chosen to decide who ought to be pardoned, and who put to death, to make Laws by which they should govern; and till these things were setled, he left a Garison with six Months Pay. After this, he disbanded the Confe∣derates, and marched with his own Troops home: And thus the Phliasian War was concluded in a Year and eight Months. About this time Polybiades obliged the Olynthians to send to Lacedemon for Peace, they being reduced to great extremity by Famine, for that they could neither get in Provisions by Land, nor import them by Sea. Thither their Plenipotentiaries went, and made a Peace upon these Articles; That they should come into the Alliance; that they should make a League Offensive, and Defensive, and serve the Lacedemoni∣ans in all their Wars: after the Articles were signed, they returned home. The Lacedemonians seeing their Af∣fairs in so flourishing Condition, thought their Empire was well and firmly esta∣blished on all sides; for the Thebans, and the rest of the Boeotians were wholly re∣duced, the Corinthians made their faithful Allies, the Argives humbled, and put by
their old Pretences; the Athenians de∣serted by all, and the disaffected Confede∣rates mulcted. Many other Examples might be brought both from the Greeks and Barbarians,The Lace∣demonian Empire declines. to prove that the Gods are not unmindful of wickedness and injustice; yet I shall only make use of this Passage that falls within the compass of my History. The Lacedemonians who had sworn to leave the States to be governed by their own Laws, yet reserving to themselves the Citadel of Thebes, were punished by those only whom they had injured, ha∣ving till this time kept the Reputation of Invincible: So that seven only of the Exiles were enough to ruine those that delivered up the Citadel to the Lacedemo∣nians, intending thereby to enslave the City, that they themselves might Lord it over the rest: I will relate the particulars how it hapned. There was one Phyllidas Secretary to Archias his Colleagues,Nausinicus Archon. the chief Magi∣strate, a man thought capable to manage Business of the highest Concern; who coming to Athens about some Occasions, fell into company with Mello an old Ac∣quaintance of his, and one of the Exiles there; and enquiring how Archias the chief Magistrate and Philip behaved them∣selves
in their tyranny, he found him more dissatisfied with Affairs at home than himself. Whereupon they made a mutual Engagement, and agreed how all things should be managed: Upon this Mello taking seven of the fittest men a∣mongst the Exiles without any Arms but their Swords, went with them into the Country near Thebes, and tarrying a day in a lonesom place, came to the Gates of the City at Night, pretending that they returned out of the Fields from their work: They were let into the Town, and lodged that Night and the day fol∣lowing at one Charon's house. In the mean while Phyllidas procured the chief Magi∣strates all things necessary for the solem∣nizing the Feast of Venus at the laying down of their Office, promising accord∣ing to a former Engagement, to procure them Women of the greatest Quality, and the most celebrated Beauties in Thebes. They being such kind of Blades, ex∣pected to divert themselves very plea∣santly that Night: After Supper, when Phyllidas had warm'd them pretty well with Wine, they ordered him to bring in the Misses; accordingly he went out, and fetched in Mello, and his Compani∣ons,
dressing three of the mlike Ladies, and the rest like their Women, and carried them into the Treasury. Then he went in, and acquainted Archias and his Com∣pany, that the women refused to enter, whilst any of their Attendants remained in the Room: Thereupon they com∣manded all instantly to withdraw; Phyl∣lidas gave them Wine, and conveyed them into one of the Officers houses. Then he introduced the Misses, and placed them each by their Gallants; the fign being, that as soon as they were seated, and they began to ruffle them, they should stab them. Some report they were killed after this manner; others report, that Mello and his Complices coming in where they were at a Feast, dispatched them. After this, Phyllidas taking three of his Companions, went to Leontiades's house, and knockt at the Door, saying, he had a Message to him from the chief Magi∣strate. Leontiades was laid down after Supper to repose himself, and his Wife sate by him Spinning: he supposing Phyl∣lidas to be an honest man, bid him and his Company come in; they entring, kil∣led him, frighted her, and commanding her to be silent, ordered the Doors to be shut, threatning if they found them open,
to kill every one in the house. When Phyllidas had done this, he took two of the men and went to the Prison, telling the Goaler that he brought one from the chief Magistrate to be taken into Custo∣dy. As soon as he opened the Doors, they killed him immediately, and turning all the Prisoners loose, gave them the Arms they took out of the Portico, and leading them up to the Ampheum, they com∣manded them to stand. Soon after they made Proclamation by a Cryer, That all the Horse and heavy-armed men should appear in Arms, because the Tyrants were slain; but the Citizens giving no credit to it that Night, remained quiet; yet be∣ing certified of it in the Morning, the heavy-arm'd men and Horse came out with their Arms immediately. The Exiles that return'd from banish∣ment sent the Horse to the two Athenian Generals on the Frontiers,The Cita∣del of The∣bes retaken who under∣stood the business they came for. The Governour in the Citadel hearing of the Proclamation made the Night before, sent immediately to Plataeae, and Thespiae for assistance: but the Theban Horse recei∣ving Intelligence that the Plataeans were upon their march, went out to meet them, and killed twenty. After this action, when
they returned to Thebes, and the Atheni∣ans arrived from the Frontiers, they at∣tacked the Citadel. They in the Place knowing themselves to be weak, and see∣ing the courage of the Assailants, there being Proclamation made of great Re∣wards for those that mounted the Wall first, were terrified, and offered to quit the Place, if they might depart with their Arms upon safe Conduct. The Thebans willingly granted them their Conditions, and confirming the Articles by Oath, they let them go; yet they killed such of their Enemies as they found amongst them, though the Athenians who came in to the Assistance of the Conspirators from the Frontiers concealed some: nay, the Thebans took even the children of such as had any, and cruelly put them to death. The Lacedemonians having Intelli∣gence of this, put the Governour that surrendred the Citadel to death, for not holding out till Succors came, and decreed to send an Army against the The∣bans. But Agesilaus pleading that he was forty years above man's Estate, proved that as others of that Age were not obliged to go to any Forreign War, so there was the same Law for a King, and by this he excused himself from the Ser∣vice.
Yet this was not the reason why he staid at home, but because he knew very well, that if he undertook that Ex∣pedition, the People would say, he had in∣volved the State in a War, that he might give the Tyrants assistance. So he let them take their own measures. The Ephori upon Advice of those that were banished after the Massacre at Thebes, sent out Cleombrotus in a very sharp Win∣ter, that being the first time he was General. He took his march by the way of Plataeae, because Chabrius kept the Pass by Elen∣therae with the Athenian Targetiers. These Targetiers advancing before the rest, met with those that were let out of Prison, on a Hill, being about an hundred and fifty, and cut them all in pieces, except some few that might escape by chance. From that Place Cleombrotus passed on to Pla∣taeae, a Town at this time in Amity with the Lacedemonians. Afterwards he mar∣ched to Thespiae, and moving from thence to Cynocephalae, a Town belonging to the Thebans, he encamped there, where he stayd sixteen days, and then returned back to Thespiae, leaving Sphodrias there with the third part of the Confederates, and gave him what Money he had brought with him from home, ordering
him to raise some Mercenaries. Whilst Sphodrias was about this, Cleom∣brotus returned home with his Forces the way that leads through Creusis, being uncertain whether they should have War or Peace with the Thebans, yet though he led his Army through their Country, he departed without doing much Mischief. In his Retreat there hap'ned an unlucky Wind, which some divined did prognosti∣cate that which was to come. For a∣mongst several other effects of its vio∣lence, at that time when Cleombrotus marched with the Army out of Creusis, over the Mountains that reach to the Sea, it bore several Asses with their Packs down the precipice, and carried many Arms into the Sea: so that several being not able to march with their Arms, left them up and down on the top of the Mountains, inverting their Shields, and fillng them with Stones. That Night they supped on what they could get at Aegosthena, a Town in the Countrey of Megara. The Day following they went, and setched their Arms: and Cleombro∣tus disbanded them, all departing home. The Athenians taking into considerati∣on,Callias Archon. that the Lacedemonians had a Formi∣dable Power, that they had passed by At∣tica
to attack Thebes, and that the Co∣rinthian War was ended; tried two of those Captains, which conspired with Millo against Leontiades Party, one where∣of they executed, and the other they ba∣nished, because he fled from Justice. The Thebans also fearing lest they should be left alone in the War against the Lacede∣monians, found out this contrivance. They (as 'tis thought) corrupted Spodrias Go∣vernour of Thespiae to enter Attica, and engage the Athenians in a War with the Lacedemonians. He hearkned to them, and undertook to surprize the Piraeus, which was yet without Gates. In order thereto, he refreshed his men, and march∣ed out of Thespiae very early, giving out that he would reach the Piraeus by Day, though it was Day when he arrived at Thria: so that he could not conceal his Design from being discovered. There∣fore in his return he drove away the Cat∣tle, and plundered the Houses. Some that met him came flying by Night to the City, and informed the Athenians that a great Army was entred their Coun∣trey; whereupon the Heavy-armed men and Horse that were upon the Guard, armed. At that time theEtymo∣cles, Aristo∣lochus, Ocel∣lus. Lacedemonian Ambassadors at Athens were entertained
by Callias their Publick Host, but when this News came, the Athenians seized them, and committed them to safe Custo∣dy, suspecting them to be concerned in this Conspiracy. The Ambassadors being amazed at it, made their Defence, saying, they would ne'r have been such Fools, if they had known the Piraeus was to have been seized, as to have remained in the City under their Power, nor with a Pub∣lick Host, where they might so easily be found out, adding that it would appear the Lacedemonians themselves knew no∣thing of it, and that they would soon hear that the Republick would punish Sphodrias. Thus they having purged themselves, were discharged. The Ephori recalling Sphodrias, im∣peached him of High Treason, and he being frighted, made no appearance, yet was acquitted. Many thought these Proceedings of the Lacedemonians were unjust. The reason hereof was this; Sphodrias had a Son named Cleonymus, newly come to man's Estate, being the most beautiful and renowned of his E∣quals, whom Archidamus Agesilaus's Son intirely loved. Cleombrotus's Friends be∣ing very intimate with Sphodrias, were in∣clined to acquit him, but because he had
committed so hainous a crime, they feared as well Agesilaus and his Party, as those that were indifferent. A while after Sphodri∣as said to Cleonymus, Son you may save your Father's Life, by intreating Archidamus to prevail with his Father, to be favourable to me in my Trial. He hearing him say so, put on confidence, and going to Ar∣chidamus begged of him to bring his Fa∣ther off. Archidamus seeing Cleonymus weep, wept too, and after he had heard his Petition, said to him, you know Cleo∣nymus, I am not able to look my Father in the face, but when I would carry any thing in the City, I make use rather of any than him. Yet since you command me, assure your self, I'll use my utmost en∣deavour to serve you herein. After that Archidamus went home from the Publick Eating-place, and reposed himself; in the Morning as soon as he was up, he took care to observe his Fa∣ther's walking abroad, and when he saw him go forth, if there were any of the Spartans by, he let them discourse with his Father, and if there were any Stran∣gers or Servants that desired to make their Addresses, he gave way for them too. At length as Agesilaus was returning home from the Eurotas,The River on which Sparta stands. Archidamus went away, and came not near his Father, and
the next day he did so again. Agesilaus suspecting for what he went after him so, askt him no Questions, but let him go his way. In the mean time Archidamus, you may be sure, had a great desire to see Cleonymus, but to go to him before he had discoursed his Father, he could not. Then Sphodrias's Friends seeing Archidamus did not come to his House, so often as he was wont, were at their Wits end, lest Agesi∣laus should have given him a rebuff. At last Archidamus ventured to go, and thus accosted him. Father! Cleonymus desired of me to beg of you, that you would save his Fathers Life, and I make it my request that it may be granted. Agesilaus answe∣red him, I forgive you, but I don't see how I shall get my own pardon from the Re∣publick, for not condemning one that has taken Bribes to the prejudice of his Countrey. At that time he replied nothing again, being convinced by the Justice of what his Father said, but went his way. Yet afterwards, whether he took notice of it by his own motion, or that it was hinted to him by some body else, he went to him, and said Father! I know that if Sphodrias had not offen∣ded, you would have acquitted him for Innocencie's sake, and if he has, pardon him for mine. Agesilaus made him this
Answer, if it be consistent with my Ho∣nor, it shall be so; which when he heard, he went away with small hopes. About that time one of Sphodrias's Friends discoursing with Etymocles, said, I believe all you that are of Agesilaus's Party will be for putting Sphodrias to death. Etymocles replied, why should we not follow Agesilaus's Opinion, seeing he tells every one he discourses about it, that it is impossible to bring him off. Yet it would be hard for him to be put to death in the Flower of his Age, who has behaved himself so well, when a Child, a Youth, and a Man grown: for Sparta wants such Soldiers. He hearing this, told it Cleonymus, who being pleased there∣with went directly to Archidamus, saying, Now, I know you have a respect for me, and I would have you rest satisfied, that my endeavours shall be, so as your love mayn't be misplaced. Nor was he de∣ceived in him, for he behaved himself ho∣nourably in his Countrey, as long as he lived, and fought at Leuctra under Gene∣ral Dino, before the King, where char∣ging in the formost of the Battel he fell in the midst of the Enemy, greatly afflicting Archidamus. Nor was he, according to his Promise, a Dishonour, but a Credit to him.
After this manner Sphodrias got off: whereupon the Athenians that favoured the Interest of the Boeotian Faction, pos∣sessed the People, that the Lacedemonians were so far from punishing Sphodrias, that they commended him for plotting against Athens. Upon that the Athenians imme∣diately after, made Gates to the Piraeus, built Ships, and vigorously assisted the Boeotians. The Lacedemonians decreed that an Army should be sent against the Thebans, and desired Agesilaus to take the Command of it, esteeming him one of better Conduct than Cleombrotus. He told them, that he would comply with the pleasure of the State, what ever it was; and so prepared for his march. But when he understood that it would be no easie matter to enter the Thebans Coun∣trey, unless he was first possest of Cithae∣ron, and being advertised that the Cleto∣rians were at War with the Orchomenians, and had entertained Mercenary Troops in their Service, he treated with them to lend him those Forces, in case he had oc∣casion for them. After he had obtained an auspicious Sacrifice for his Expedition, he sent, before he arrived with his Army at Tegea, to the General of the Mercena∣ries, that served under the Cletorians, and
gave them a Months pay, commanding them to go, and possess themselves of Cithaeron, and ordered the Orchomenians to forbear Hostilities, threatning also, that if any City should make War during the time of this Expedition, he would persuant to the Decree of the Confede∣rates, fall immediately upon them. After he had passed Cithaeron, he arri∣ved at Thespiae; and parting from thence with his Army, he marched into the The∣bans Countrey, and finding the Plain and best Parts of it entrenched, and forti∣fied with Palisadoes, he encamped in se∣veral Places, and after Dinner sent out Parties to burn, and destroy the Coun∣trey, that lay before his Works. For wheresoever Agesilaus marched, the Ene∣my appeared upon the Defensive Part within their Trenches. But when he re∣turned to his Camp, the Theban Horse lying under a Covert, sallied out of the Avenews, about the time the Targetiers were getting their Supper ready, and preparing for it, the Horse being partly mounted and dismounted. They charged, and killed Cleo and Epilytidas, two Spar∣tan Horsemen, as also Eudicus one of the Neighbourhood of Sparta, with some of the Athenian Exiles that had not yet
mounted. But when Agesilaus faced a∣bout, and came to their Assistance with the Heavy-armed men and Horse, sup∣ported by those that were ten years above man's estate, and charged them full speed: The Theban Horse shew themselves to be meer Slugs,. 'Twas a note of Luxury and Sot∣tishness to sleep after Dinner. Athen. standing their Ground only till the Cavalry advanced, and threw their Lances, but reached them not; for as soon as they did, they gave back, and lost twelve of their men. Agesilaus understanding that the Ene∣my used to appear in the Field after it was Noon, sacrificed by break of Day, and marching with diligence, entred their Trenches through a Place, that was not well guarded, wasting and destroying all to the Gates of Thebes. After this Acti∣on he retired to Thespiae, and walled the Town, appointing Phoebidas Governour of the Place; and marching back again to Megara, disbanded the Auxiliaries, and returned home with his Spartans. From that time Phoebidas sent out Foragers to ruin, and destroy the Countrey about Thebes, who wasted it with their conti∣nual Depredations. On the contrary the Thebans to be even with them, fell with all their Forces into the Thespians Countrey; but whilst they were there,
Phoebidas observed them, and obliged them to keep together in a close Body. So that the Thebans being weary of their invasion, hastened their Retreat out of the Countrey: the Muletiers also threw away the Corn they carried, and drave their Mules home, so great a Consterna∣tion was the Army in! Then Phoebidas taking the Targetiers along with him, commanded the Heavy-armed men to follow, and pressed the Enemy very hard, hoping to give them a total Defeat. For he led on very boldly, encouraging his men to set seriously to their Work, and the Thespian Heavy-armed men to follow. The Theban Cavalry getting together in a Body, retired to a Forest that could not be passed through, and there they turned upon the Enemy, because there was no way to retreat. Whereupon the formost of the Lacedemonian Targetiers being few in number, and struck with a terror, fell to flight: Which the Theban Horse seeing, they were encouraged to fall upon those that fled, and soon after Phoebidas with two or three more, that fought by him were slain: Whereupon all the Mercenaries fled. When they came in their pursuit to the Heavy-armed men of the Thespians, these who before dis∣dained to yield to the Thebans, turned their
backs, though pursued by none, because it was late in the Evening, and though but few of them were slain, yet they stopped not, till they had a Wall between them, and their Enemy. By this Action the Theban Affairs re∣covered new Life again; so that they made War upon the Thespians, and other Neighbouring Cities, causing the People to remove from these Places to Thebes, there being in those Towns the same Go∣vernment, as in that City, by which the Friends of the Lacedemonians were weak∣ned there. After Phaebidas was slain, the Lacedemonians sent a Colonel with a Re∣giment by Sea, to put into the Garison at Thespiae. In the Spring the Lacedemonians sent an Army against Thebes,Olymp. 101. Chariander Archon. and intreated Agesilaus to command it. He took the same Measures in this Expedition, as in the other, sending before he had an au∣spicious Sacrifice to the Colonel at Thes∣piae, to possess himself of the Pass over Cithaeron, and keep it till he himself ar∣rived thither. When Agesilaus passed this Hill, and came to Plataeae, he made as if he would first march to Thespiae, sending thi∣ther, and ordering Provisions to be got ready, and the Deputies to expect him there. The Day following Agesilaus sa∣crificed
by break of Day, and reaching Erythroe performed two days march in one, and passed the Trench at Scolum, before the Thebans came from the Guard of that Post, where he entred at first. Having performed this, he destroyed the Thebans Countrey, as far as that of Tana∣gra (which hitherto was defended by Hy∣patadorus, and his men the Lacedemonian Allies) and retreated to the left of the Town. The Thebans coming upon him, drew up in Batallia at a Place called the Old Woman's Breast, having secured their Rear with a Ditch and Palisado, suppo∣sing they might easily hazard a Battle there, because the Place was very narrow, and not easily accessible. Agesilaus seeing this, did not attack them, but marched a contrary way towards Thebes: the The∣bans being in pain for their City, because it was naked, left the place where they were drawn up, and hastned thither with diligence, by the way that leads to Pot∣niae, that being the securest. This was esteemed a neat Stratagem; for Agesilaus by retiring a good distance from the Enemy, obliged them also to retreat full speed: besides the Colonels flanked them with some Regiments as they passed by. On the other hand the
Thebans darted their Javelins from the Hill; so that Alipetus one of the Colo∣nels was killed therewith. Yet the The∣bans were beaten from this Hill, and the Sciritae ascending with a Party of Horse, cut off some of their Rear as they passed by towards Thebes. When the Thebans were advanced near the Walls, they faced about, which the Sciritae seeing, retired with diligence, and though not one of them was lost, yet the Thebans erected a Trophy, because the Enemy retreated from the Place to which they had first ascended. The Season being advanced, Agesilaus parted thence, and encamped in a Place where he discovered the Enemy first drawn up, and the next Day decamped, marching the way that leads to Thespiae. The Mercenary Targetiers of the The∣bans following them very boldly, called to Chabrias to keep up close; the Olyn∣thian Horse also, who according to a Trea∣ty served under the Thebans, facing about, pursued them to the rise of an Hill, and killed a great many, for the Hill being easie to be rode up, the Horse made the Foot Prisoners on the Ascent. After∣wards when Agesilaus came to Thespiae, and found the People divided, the Lace∣demonian
Faction giving out, that they would put their Adversaries to death, one of which was Meno, he would not permit it, but composed the Differences, and made them sware mutually to be Friends. From thence he returned over Cithoeron, the way that goes to Megara, and there having disbanded the Auxilia∣ries, marched home with the Troops of his own Countreymen. The Thebans being hard pressed with scarcity of Provisions at this time, be∣cause they had reaped no Corn for two years together, manned two Gallies, and sent ten Talents to be expended in Corn at Pagasae.1875 l. But whilst they were buying of their Corn, Alcetas the Lacedemonian, Governour of Oreum fitted out three Gal∣lies, taking particular care that his De∣sign might not be discovered. After it was shipped off, Alcetas took that, and the Gallies, and the men, being no less than three hundred, and put them into the Citadel where he himself quartered. They say then that Alcetas had a mar∣vellous handsome Boy of Oreum to wait upon him, whose Company he went down from the Citadel to enjoy. The Priso∣ners observing this his carelessness, seized the Citadel, upon which the Town re∣volted,
and the Thebans imported plenty of Corn. In the beginning of the Spring follow∣ing,Hippoda∣mus Ar∣chon. Agesilaus was confined to his Bed, for when he marcht with his Army out of the Thebans Countrey to Megara, as he was going out of Venus's Temple in∣to the Senate-house; he broke a Vein somewhere or other in his Body, and the Blood flowed out from thence into the sound Leg, then the calf swelling, and the pains growing intollerable, a Syracu∣sian Doctor opened a Vein by the Ankle. Yet the blood ran Day and Night con∣tinually, and did not stop, do what they could, till he swounded, and then it stanched. From hence he was carried to Lacedemon, where he lay sick the rest of the Summer, and the Winter follow∣ing. Early in the Spring the Lacedemonians sent out another Army,Socratides Archon. and gave the Command thereof to Cleombrotus, who marched with his Forces to Cithaeron: the Targetiers went before to possess them∣selves of the Places that lay above the Road; but a Party of Athenians, and Thebans having taken the Hill before them, they let them ascend, and having gotten them within their power, rose up,
pursued, and killed near forty of them. After this Action Cleombrotus thinking it impossible to pass into the Thebans Coun∣trey marched back again with his Army, and disbanded them. At that time the Confederates being assembled at Lacedemon, muttered that they were consumed by the War, through the negligence of their Generals, that they could man out a much stronger Fleet, than the Athenians, and could starve their City, that they could trans∣port an Army in this Fleet into the Countrey of Thebes, either at Phocis, or Creusis. Hereupon they fitted out sixty Sail, and made Pollis Admiral. Nor were they mistaken in their Measures; for the Athenians were blocked up, and their Corn Fleet being at Geraestus, could not return from thence, because the La∣cedemonian Fleet lay off of Aegina, Ceos, and Andros. The Athenians conside∣ring their own exigencies fitted out a Fleet, and engaged with Pollis under the Conduct of Chabrias, beat him at Sea, and so the Corn was brought into Athens. Soon after the Athenians making Prepa∣rations to Transport an Army into Boeo∣tia, the Thebans entreated them to send another into Peloponnesus, supposing if
this were done, the Lacedemonians would not be able at the same time to defend their own Countrey, and their Confede∣rates, as also to send a sufficient force a∣gainst them. The Athenians provoked by what Spho∣drias had done, equipped a Fleet of sixty Sail with great diligence, and chose Ti∣motheus their Admiral. But, the Enemy having neither entred the Thebans Coun∣trey, nor Cleombrotus began his march, nor Timotheus sailed round Peloponnesus with his Fleet; the Thebans vigorously attacked the Neighbouring Towns, and retook them. In the mean while, Timo∣theus sailed about Peloponnesus, and took Corcyra, but did not enslave the People, nor banish any, nor change their Laws; whereby he endeared himself to all the adjacent Towns. On the other hand, the Lacedemonians set out a Fleet against them, appointing Nicholochus their Admi∣ral, a very daring sort of man; who com∣ing in view of Timotheus's Fleet, without any more delay, though six of the Am∣bracians had not joyned him, engaged the other sixty six with fifty five of his own, and was beaten. Thereupon Timo∣theus erected a Trophy at Aelyzia. Af∣terwards, when Timotheus's Gallies were
haled up a shore, and refitting, Nicolochus having joyned the six Ambracians, sailed to Aelyzia where he lay, and erected a Tro∣phy in the Neighbouring Isles, because he came not out. Timotheus refitting those Ships he had, and equipping more in Corcyra, made up above seventy Sail, becoming thereby far stronger at Sea; and sent to Athens for mony having oc∣casion for large Summs wherewith to maintain so numerous a Fleet.
XENOPHON'S History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. VI. THE CONTENTS. Jason made Captain General of Thessaly. Mnasippus the Lacedemonian Admiral ruined by his Avarice. Iphicrates a Famous General of the Athenians. The States of Greece assemble about making a Peace. A Peace is made and broken. The Battle of Leuctra wherein the La∣cedemonians are overthrown by the Thebans. Jason is murdered in the height of his Glory. The Lacedemo∣nians beg Assistance of the Athenians against the Thebans.
THE Affairs of the Athenians, and Lacedemonians stood thus. The Thebans having subdued the Towns of Boeotia, carried the War into Phocis: whereupon the Phoceans sent Ambassadors to Lacedemon to let them know, that if they were not succoured, they must necessarily fall into the hands of the Thebans. Upon this Message they sent Cleombrotus their King with four Re∣giments, and a Detachment of the Con∣federates into Phocis. Much about this time, Polydamas the Pharsalian came out of Thessaly to Lacedemon, being esteemed in the other Parts thereof, a Person of Honour and Integrity, and in his own City was reputed one of that Probity, that the Pharsalians in time of Sedition committed the Citadel to his care, orde∣ring him to receive the Revenues assign∣ed by Law to be expended on theThe Sa∣crifices were at the charge of the Publick for the most part, and Teo∣dosius per∣swades se∣veral Hea∣thens to turn Chri∣stians be∣cause of the costli∣ness of their Reli∣gion, Suid. in voce. . Sa∣crifices, and other Publick Affairs. Out of that Money he kept the Citadel, and gave up his Accounts every Year, both of that, and his other Trust, making use of his own Money, when he had none of the Publick, and reimbursing himself out of the Revenue, when there was Money in Bank. Moreover he was in other re∣spects
according to the Thessalian Mode a Lover of Hospitality and Magnificence. When he arrived at Lacedemon he made this Oration before the Senate. 'Tis but reasonable (My Lords of La∣cedemon) seeing I and all my Ancestors have been your Publick Hosts and Bene∣factors,Polyda∣mas's Ora∣tion. that I should make my Applications to you in my Straits; and, when any thing opposes your Interest in Thessaly, that I should inform you thereof. I make no question but you have heard of Jason, a man of great Fame, and one that can bring a considerable Army into the Field. He made a Truce, and coming to me, spake after this manner. Polydamas! I have already reduced the most powerful Cities of Thessaly; and those I have conquered though assisted by your Arms. Let this therefore be a convincing Argument to you; that I can possess my self of your City Pharsalus maugre all the opposition you can make. You know that I have six thousand Mercenaries, which in all proba∣bility no City can withstand, and I can draw as great a Body out of the Garisons. On the other hand the Forces of the Cities are such as are superannuated, or not yet grown up, being raw, and undisciplined men: but I entertain none in my Ser∣vice,
that can't endure the hardships of War as well as my self. I'll give you a very true Account how Affairs stand. This Jason is of a robust Body, and inde∣fatigable Industry; he exercises his Soldi∣ers every day, training them in the Ar∣tillery Ground, and in his Marches, and those Mercenaries he finds effeminate, he cashiers. But such as he sees behave themselves in time of Action with Brave∣ry, and Resolution, he honours with the pay of two, three, nay sometimes four men, together with other Rewards, as the Cure of their Distempers, and decent Burial. So that all Mercenaries, who serve under him, know, that their valour procures them an honourable, and plentiful Livelihood. He informed me further, though I was not ignorant of it before, that the Maraci, Dolopes, and Alcetas the Governour of Epirus were already subdued. What then need I fear, said he, but that I may think my self able to master you with ease? But perhaps some that don't know me will say, why do you delay? why don't you immedi∣ately makeWar against the Pharsalians? my reason is, because I think it far better to engage them by a fair compliance than open force; for if I use constraint, you will on the one hand make it your Business to
create me what trouble you can, and I on the other to diminish your Power as far as I am able, But if you will be perswa∣ded to joyn me, we shall be a mighty rein∣forcement to each other. I understand Polydamas, that the eyes of all your Countrey are sixt upon you, and if you will bring over the People to my Interest, I in∣gage to make you the greatest man, next my self, throughout all Greece. Yet hear what those Affairs are, that I'll give you the administration of next under my self, and credit me no farther, than your rea∣son will give you leave. 'Tis apparent, that with the Accession of Pharsalus, and those Towns you are possessed of, I could with ease be made Captain General of the Thessalians; and if Thessaly were under such a Commander, we could raise six thou∣sand Horse, and above ten thousand Heavy-armed men; whose Stature and Magnani∣mity whilst I consider, I think if they were well disciplined, they would be the bravest men throughout the World. For Thessaly being a large Countrey, all the Nations round about it, would be reduced, if once a Captain General was constituted. Most of our Neighbours are expert in throwing the Lance, so that in probability they may be too strong for us in Targeties: yet the Boeotians, and the rest who are engaged in
the War against the Lacedemonians, are my Allies; and will all follow me, if I would but deliver them from the Spartan Yoke. I am sensible too, that the Atheni∣ans are very zealous to make an Alliance with us; but I have no design to joyn them, because I think 'tis easier to obtain the So∣vereignty of the Sea, than the Empire of the Land. Yet I would have you consider (said he) whether I speak reason or no. For we, being possest of Macedon, from whence the Athenians have their Timber, shall be able to build a stronger Fleet than they: whether can they equip a Fleet soon∣est, or we, who have so great a number of lusty Slaves? Who are better able to maintain Seamen, we that have such plen∣ty of Corn, as to export, or they who have not sufficient for themselves unless they buy? Perhaps too, we have more plen∣ty of Money, being we depend not on little tributary Islands, but receive our Taxes from the Nations on the Continent. When Thessaly is under a Captain General all the adjacent Countries shall pay us Tribute; the King of Persia too who is the richest man on Earth, does not raise his Tribute on the Isles, but Main-land, and might be redu∣ced with less difficulty than Greece, for all the men there (one excepted) have more mind to be Slaves, than to be Soldiers. I
know too what kind of Forces they were who marcht with Cyrus, and Agesilaus, that brought the King of Persia to the last extremity. Ʋpon this his Discourse, I told him he spoke several things that de∣served to be seriously considered. But, said I, I don't understand why we should quit the Lacedemonian Interest, seeing we can lay nothing to their charge. Then he com∣mended me, adding, that since I was a Per∣son of that Honour, he was the more desi∣rous to make an Alliance with me, and gave me liberty to come and acquaint your how Affairs stood, and that he is resolved to fall upon us Pharsalians, if we don't sub∣mit our selves to him. He bid me there∣fore demand assistance of you, and, says he, if you can prevail with them to send a sufficient force against me, I shall then take what advantage the Fortune of War puts into my hands. But if you think they will not supply you with an Army strong enough, you will not escape the cen∣sure of your Countreymen, who have so great a veneration for you, and amongst whom you bear the greatest sway. This is my Errand to you, and I have related both what I saw my self, and heard from him. I suppose, My Lords, that if you send such Forces as I and the rest of Thes∣saly
shall think sufficient to make war a∣gainst Jason; that the other Cities will revolt: For all are jealous of the growth of this mans power;-and if you think your Half-slaves, undisciplin'd men, and a Ge∣neral of no Conduct will serve; I advise you rather to be quiet: For assure your selves, you have a mighty power, and pru∣dent Leader for to struggle with; Who ei∣ther by Stratagem, Surprize, or Force, rarely misses of his Enterprize. The Day and Night are all one to him, and when Ex∣pedition is required, he can Eat and March at the same time; thinking 'tis then only time to Repose, when he is arrived whither he intended, and has accomplished what he designed. He has also inured his Soul∣diers to the same hardship, understanding how to gratifie the desires of his men, when they have adventured hard, and to suit his Rewards to their Fancies: So that those who serve under him, have learnt the result of their Toils to be certain Recrea∣tion and pleasure. And this advantage he has, that never any man was more abstemious from bodily pleasures, being never diverted by them from dispatching his business: 'Tis your concern therefore to consider of these things, and to let me know both what you can, and what you intend to do.
Thus he spake; the Lacedemonians de∣ferred their Answer, and taking into con∣sideration the next day, and the day fol∣lowing how many Regiments they had abroad, and how many Gallies to fight the Athenians with; as also what Forces they had to carry on the War against the Borderers, return'd him this Answer; That at present they were not in a condition to send him sufficient Succours, but ex∣horted him to go home, and put his own Affairs, and those of the City in the best posture he could: He commended the plain dealing of the Republick, and de∣parted. Afterwards he went to Jason, and en∣treated him not to oblige him to deliver up the City of Pharsalus, but permit him to keep it for them that had committed it to his care, and gave his Children for Hostages, promising to bring over the City by a free Consent, and make him Captain-General: Whereupon immedi∣ately Hostages being exchanged, the Pharsalians obtained Peace, and Jason by an universal consent, was declared Cap∣tain General of the Thessalians. After he was chosen, he appointed what Quotas of Horse and heavy-armed men, each City should furnish, having above eight thou∣sand
Horse together with the Confede∣rates; of heavy-armed men, no less than twenty thousand, and Targetiers enough to fight any Army whatsoever. It would be too tedious a piece of work to reckon up, what a number of considerabe Cities were subject to him: He ordered all the Neighbouring-people to pay the same Tribute they did in Scopas's time, and thus things stood on that side. Now I leave Jason's Affairs, and return to the place, where I made my Digres∣sion. The Lacedemonians and Confede∣rates assembling in Phocis, the Thebans retired into their own Territories, and guarded the Passes. The Athenians see∣ing the Thebans, though raised by them, contribute no Ship-money; that they themselves were fleeced with Taxes, suf∣fered Depredations from the Aegineans, and maintained Garisons, were very de∣sirous to bring the War to a conclusion, and sent Ambassadors to Lacedemon, in or∣der to make a Peace. Immediately two of the Ambassadors setting sail from thence by order of the Republick, commanded Yimotheus to return home with the Fleet, because peace was made. In his return he carried the Exiles of Zacynthus, and put them a-shore in their own Country:
Thereupon the Zacynthians sent to Lace∣demon, and acquainted them with the In∣juries they had suffered from Timotheus; the Lacedemonians supposing the Atheni∣ans had broken the Peace by this action, fitted out another Fleet forthwith, getting together sixty Sail,From Lacedemon, Corinth, Leucas, Ambracia, Elis, Za∣cynthus, Achaia, Epidaurus, Troezen, Hermione, and the Halieans. and appointed Mna∣sippus Admiral, giving him Commission amongst other things, to make an At∣tempt upon Corcyra, and to guard the Seas. They sent also to Dionysius, to let him know that it was his Concern not to suf∣fer Corcyra to remain in the hands of the Athenians. Mnasippus having assembled his Fleet, went against Corcyra with fif∣teen hundred Mercenaries, besides those from Lacedemon. There he making a Descent, took the Island, and burnt the Country which was neatly Cultivated and Planted, having stately Houses and Wine-Cellars in several places: Insomuch, they report the Souldiers grew so dainty, that they would drink none butThis Li∣quor so much pri∣zed by the Ancients, was made of new Wine, and a mixture of Sea-wa∣ter: their Wines al∣so were perfumed with Vio∣lers, Roses, and other fragrant Flowers. Athen. lib. 1. Aromatick-Wine. A great many Prisoners and Cattel were also taken in the Country: After that Mnasippus encamped on a Hill five Furlongs distant from the City in the Front of the Island, that so he might cut off any Forces which entred the Island on
that side: On the other he lay with the Fleet, supposing he could discover any Ships that were going thither, and pre∣vent them from landing. Moreover, he rode in the Port, and blockt up the City when he was not hindred by storms. The Corcyreans seeing they could get nothing out of the Country, because it was pos∣sessed by the Enemy, and that nothing could be imported by Sea, being over∣powred there, became greatly distressed; and sent to desire Succours of the Atheni∣ans, acquainting them that the taking Cor∣cyra would be both a great loss to them, and an accession of strength to the Ene∣my: For no City furnished more Money or Ships than theirs, excepting Athens; Besides Corcyra lay commodiously for the Bay of Corinth, and the places that belonged to it; as also opportunely for the infesting Laconia, but most advanta∣giously for the opposite Continent, and the Passage out of Sicily into Pelopon∣nesus. The Athenians hearing this, and think∣ing it a matter of very great Importance, sent Stesicles Commander in Chief, with about six hundred Targetiers, requesting Alcetas to transport them: Accordingly he landed them at a certain place in the
Island by Night, and so they got into the City. Besides, they equipped sixty Sail of Ships, and appointed Timotheus Admiral, who went to the Islands, & endeavoured to make up their Complement there, because he could not fit them out at Athens; accounting it a matter of no small mo∣ment to go with Precipitation against a Fleet that was already united. The Athenians concluding he trifled and wasted the time of Action, forgave him not, but put him out of Commission, and chose I∣phicrates in his room; who in a very small time fitted out a Fleet with great diligence, obliging those that were bound to set out Gallies to equip them, taking the Paralus and Salaminia, which in a more special manner attended the Service of the Pub∣lick; and what Ships soever he met with on the Coast of Attica, telling them that if things succeeded well in Corcyra, he would send several back again, and got together a Fleet of about seventy Sail. In the mean while, the Corcyreans were so distressed with Famine, that Mna∣sippus by reason of the numbers of De∣serters, declared by Proclamation, That all such should be sold for Slaves: Never∣theless when some deserted for all that, he whipt them, and sent them back again.
On the contrary, the Besieged would not receive their Slaves into the Town, so that they died without the Walls. When Mnasippus saw this, he thought he was Cock-sure of the Town, and began to Treat the Mercenaries after a new man∣ner, abridging some of their whole Pay, and was two Months in Arrears to those which he paid. Nor did he this for want of Money, as was reported; for it being a Sea-Expedition, several Cities had sent Money in lieu of Men. In the mean while, the Besieged discovering from the Towers the Watches not so carefully kept as before, and the Souldiers stragling up and down the Country, sallied out, took some, and killed others. Mnasippus having notice hereof, not only arm'd himself, but went out with his heavy-arm'd men to their Relief, ordering the Commanders and Captains to lead out their Mercenaries, and when some of them made answer, It was not easie for him to contain the Souldiers in their Duty, who had not sup∣plied them with Necessaries, he struck one with his Truncheon, and another with the Javelin of his Lance: And thus they marched out shrewdly against their hu∣mour, hating their General; a thing no ways expedient in time of Action. After
he had drawn them up in Battalia, he routed those that were posted by the Gates, and pursued them, but they get∣ting near the Walls, and facing about, threw their Javelins, and darted their Lances from off the Monuments: At the same time, more sallied out at the other Gates, and fell pell-mell upon his Rear. The men being marshalled Eight in Front, and apprehending that part of the Battali∣on to be weak, endeavoured to face about: but as they began to retreat, the Enemy attacked them, as if they had actually fled, so that they could face no more; and then those next the Rear were routed. By this time Mnasippus was not able to succor them that were pressed, because the Enemy lay hard upon him in the Front, and hose about him grew still fewer and fewer. At last the Enemy gave a furious Charge, and attacked Mnasippus his Squadron, being already reduced to a small number, which the heavy-arm'd men seeing, came on, and killing Mnasip∣pus, pursued with all their Forces, and had taken the Camp, and Trench, but that discovering the Sutiers Servants, and Slaves, they took them to be men effective, and retired. The Corcyreans erected a Trophy, and
restored the Dead upon Truce. Hereupon they in the Town gathered strength, and the Besiegers were wholly disheartned, there being news that Iphicrates was as good as arrived, and the Corcyreans were Equipping their Fleet; Upon that, Hy∣permenes, Mnasippus his Vice-Admiral, fitted out all the Ships that were there, and sailing about to the Camp, put the Slaves and Money on board all the small Vessels, and sent them away, defending the Camp himself with the Seamen, and other Souldiers that had escaped the Battel; who having very great Apprehensions lest they should be surprized by the Athe∣nians, went on board the Gallies in con∣fusion, and setting Sail, arrived safe at Leucas, leaving behind them a great quantity of Corn and Wine, with a con∣siderable number of Slaves and sick men. When Iphicrates set Sail, he immediately made ready for an engagement, leaving his main Sails as though he were going to fight, & made little use of his small Vessels though it was a fair Gale, but kept on his course with rowing, whereby he exercised the mens bodies more, and made the Ships Sail better: For several times in those places, where the Fleet were to Dine or Sup, he stood out to Sea, and then tacking,
lay with the Stems of the Gallies towards the Shore, commanding them when the sign was given, to strive who should land first, because they that did, were by way of Reward served first with Water, or any thing else they wanted, and had the pre∣eminence of dining first. On the contrary, it was a great pu∣nishment for the Tardy to be deprived of all those Advantages, and be obliged to come on board when the sign was made; for those that got first ashore did every thing at their leisure, but those that came last, did all in an hurry. When Iphicrates dined in the Enemies Country, he set Centinels, as the custom is at Land, and haled up his Masts, setting the men to spy from them; so that they looking from an Eminence, saw a great deal further than they could upon a Level. When he had Supped and Reposed, he made no Fires in the Camp, but made Lights before it, that the Enemy might not approach undiscovered: Oftentimes when he supped in a Calm, he put to Sea, and if it were a Gale, the Seamen rested, and the Fleet kept on their course; if they were obliged to row, he refreshed them by turns; and in their course by Day, he sometimes drew up the Fleet in a Line,
and other whiles in a Body: So that they supposing as they sailed, that they went into a Sea possessed by the Enemies, had all things in readiness for an Engagement. And because Iphicrates did only that which was just necessary, he prevented Supplies from being brought to the Ene∣my, and performed his Voyage with great expedition. He was at Sphagea a Town in Laconia when Mnasippus was slain; from thence he went into the Country of Elis, and passing the Mouth of Alpheus, put into Port about a place called Icthys; next day he sailed from thence to Ce∣phallenia, continuing his course in that order, so as to have all things ready for an Engagement, if occasion served. For being he had heard nothing about Mnasippus from any that was an Eye Witness, he suspected this report might be spread pur∣posely to catch him, and therefore he was upon his Guard: but afterwards arriving at Cephallenia, and being certified of the truth there, he refreshed his Army. I confess that Discipline and Exercise is to be used, when there is a prospect of an Engagement: but this I commend in Iphi∣crates, that being to go where he immedi∣ately expected a Sea Fight, he so contrived, that his men should understand what be∣longed
to one, and yet all this Discipline did not retard his course. After he had taken in the Towns in Cephallenia, he went to Corcy∣ra, and there having Intelligence of the ten Gallies, which Dionysius sent to the Assistance of the Lacedemonians, he went himself to view in what part of the Country they might be discovered when they arrived, and at what place from the Town, they who were to give the sign of their Arrival might be discerned: there he set Scouts, and appointed what sign they should make upon the Enemies Ar∣rival, and coming into Port. In the mean while, he gave Orders to twenty Captains of Gallies, who were to attend him upon Summons made, and told them before∣hand, that if they did not, thy must thank themselves for what followed. It was worth while to have seen what hast they made upon the discovery of the Enemies Arrival, and the Proclamation made, there being none of them but got aboard with all imaginable diligence. Iphicrates went from thence to the place where the Ene∣mies Gallies lay, and found that the men were all gone ashore: Only Mnasippus the Rhodian advised the rest not to abide there; and shipping his men, departed;
and though he met Iphicrates's Fleet, yet he made his escape; but the Syracusian Ships were taken men and all. Iphicrates took off the Jacks of those Ships, and towed them into the Port of Corcyra, and set a certain Ransom on every man, except Anippus the Admiral; whom he kept either to get a good Sum out of, or else for a Mar∣ket; but he for grief, laid violent hands on himself: The rest Iphicrates discharged, having taken the Corcyreans security for payment of their Ransoms. His own Sea∣men he maintained, by employing them in Husbandry for the Corcyreans, and transported the Targetiers, and Heavy∣ar'd men into Acarnania, to assist the Confederate Towns where ever there was occasion. After that he made War upon the Thyreans a valiant People, being pos∣sessed of a strong Town: Then he joyned the Corcyrcan Fleet, and making ninety Sail, went first to Cephallenia to raise Contribution, which some paid freely, and some by constraint. In the next place, he went and rava∣ged the Lacedemonians Country, and took in the Towns in those parts, either by surrender, or if they were obstinate, by force. Of all Iphicrates's Voyages, this in my opinion deserves not the least praise:
I also approve of his taking Callistratus the Orator along with him, though no very agreeable man for such an Employ∣ment, and Chabrias who had the Reputa∣tion of being a great General. For if he thought them wise men, and so took them for his Counsellors, this was pru∣dently done: Or if he thought them to be Enemies, yet he had such confidence in himself, as to be taken doing no ill thing either through cowardize or negligence: This in my opinion was done like a man that was both brave and bold. And these were the Exploits of Iphicrates. The Athenians seeing the Plataeans their Allies driven out of Boeotia already,Olym. 102. Alcisthenes Archon. the Thespieans flying to them for Succors, and begging of them not to see them dispossessed of their Country, did not at all like these Proceedings of the Thebans, yet they thought they could not in honour make War upon them; nor did they think it agreeable to their Interest. But when they saw them employ their Arms against the Phoceans their ancient Allies, and Raze the Cities which had been faithful to them in the Persian War, and were still in Amity with them: they would be no longer concerned with their Affairs. Here∣upon the Athenians decreeing to make
Peace, sent Ambassadors first to the The∣bans, exhorting them, if they thought fit, to go for Peace to Lacedemon; and ac∣cordingly they dispatched Ambassadors thither.There being a∣mongst those that were chosen, Callias, Son of Hipponicns, Autocles Son of Strombichi∣des, Demo∣stratus, Son of Aristo∣pho, Aristo∣cles Cephi∣sodotus, Melanopus, and Lycan∣thus. When they came to the General Assembly of the Lacedemonians and Allies, Callistratus the Orator was there also, who had promised Iphicrates, if he would send him, either to procure Money for the Fleet, or to make Peace; and from that time he had been at Athens Nego∣tiating a Peace. They being introduced before the States Callias theHe that carried a Torch in Procession in the Feast of Ceres. Callias's Speech. Torch-bearer the Chief of the Embassy, who was a sort of a man that had a great Conceit of him∣self, and loved that others should have so too, began after this manner. Not only I (my Lords of Lacedemon) have been your Publick Host, but my Father and Grandfather have transmitted this Hereditary Friendship down to their Poste∣rity: I will inform you how the State stands affected to our Family; In time of War they choose us Generals, and when they desire Peace, they make us their Ambassa∣dors. I my self came hither twice before about concluding the War; and in both my Embassies I made Peace between the two Nations. Now I come a third time, and hope to obtain an Accommodation upon more
reasonable Terms: For I observe we are both of a mind, both having alike resented the Razing of Thespiae and Plataeae: Is it not reason then, that those who are of the same Interest, should be rather Friends, than Enemies? Certainly no wise men will engage in a War upon small Differences: now if we be of the same mind, it will be no wonder if a Peace ensue thereupon. In justice we ought not to make War with one another, being Triptolemus our Progenitor is reported first to have brought Corn into Peloponnesus, and to have initiated Her∣cules your Founder, together with Castor and Pollux your Country-men, the first of any Strangers, into the secret Mysteries of Ceres and Proserpine: How then can you in justice come and destroy their Corn, from whom you at first received your Seed? And ought not we to wish them all Necessa∣ries in great abundance, on whom we for∣merly bestowed them. If it be decreed by Heaven, that Wars must be amongst men, we ought to begin them as slowly as may be; and when begun, to bring them to as speedy a conclusion as we can. After him began Autocles, one that was esteemed a very subtile Orator. Though I know very well,Autocles's Speech. my Lords of Lacedemon, what I am going to say will not
be very grateful to you; yet in my opinion, they that would make a lasting Peace, should first declare to each other, the causes of the War: You always pretended, that the Cities should enjoy their own Laws, yet you your selves are the greatest Opposers of their Liberty. This is the very first Article of all your Treaties; That your Confederates should serve you in all your Wars: but how is this consistent with their Liberty? being you declare any to be enemies without Com∣municating it, and then lead your Allies against them; so that those you are pleased to call Free, are necessitated to bear Arms against the best of their Friends: Besides, you Constitute Governours by Ten men in one place, and by Thirty in another, not regarding whether these Magistrates Go∣vern according to Law, so they be but able to contain those Cities in Obedience to you by force; whereby you seem to be more taken with a tyrannical, than mode∣rate Government. When the King proposed that the Cities should enjoy their own Laws, you pretended that the Thebans acted contrary to the Kings Letters, for not permitting each City to be governed by its own Magistrates and Laws: but you when you were once possessed of the Citadel would not so much as suffer the Thebans
themselves to enjoy their own Priviledges. They who would make Peace must not ex∣pect reasonable Terms from others, when they stick at nothing whereby to aggrandize themselves. He put them all to silence, and those who had suffered by the Lacedemo∣nians heard him with great satisfaction. After him, Callistratus spake:Callistra∣tus's Speech. I can't deny, my Lords of Lacedemon, but that there have been miscarriages on both sides, yet my meaning is not, that we must ne're be reconciled to those who have once offended us: I never yet could see any man without his failing; Men I find grow wiser sometimes by their miscarriages, especially if they have smarted for them, as we both have done. I observe that some things which were unjustly carried on, have thwarted your Designs; such was the sur∣prizal of the Citadel in Thebes: For when you made it your whole business to restore the Cities their own Laws, as soon as ever the Thebans were unjustly treated, all the rest sided with them: So that I hope you will learn from hence, that Ambition very rarely turns to a good account; and that for the future you will carry it with Moderation in your Alliances to others: They that would oppose the Treaty, mali∣ciously report, as if we were not desirous
of Peace, but afraid lest Antalcidas should return from the King with Money. Consider with your selves how idely these men talk; for the King required in his Letters, That all the Cities in Greece should be free, and if we both say, and do according to the te∣nour of them, what need we fear the King? Does any one think that he had rather be at a vast Expence to make others great, than to have what he has a mind to done without Expence? But admit it be so; why then came we hither? You may easily apprehend with a little Consideration, that Necessity brought us not, if you do but call to mind what has been lately done either at Sea or Land: What then can be the reason? For certain some of the Confederates do that which is neither for our Interest nor yours. We have ingeniously declared to you our Sentiments, in return for your having been a means of preserving us. Now if I must speak of the Advantage to be ex∣pected from a War, some Cities will side with ours, and some with yours; and in every one, some there will be who will fa∣vour the Athenians, and others that will take part with the Lacedemonians: If therefore both Nations were at Amity, whom could we have any apprehensions of? If ye are our Friends, who can incommode
us by Land? and if we stand by you, who can molest you by Sea? We all know, that Wars often break out, and are again com∣posed: and though we don't now, yet in time we may long for Peace. Why then don't we come to an Accommodation as soon as we can, but still delay the time, till we be overcome by the multitude of our Affli∣ctions, and some incurable Evil does arise? I do not approve of those who having often bore away the Prize, and gain'd Reputation thereby, grow so in love with Combating, as not to forbear till they are beaten, and then give over exercising. Nor do I like your Dice-players, who if they win one Game, will double the Stake; for I see many of them quite broke, whom we ought so far to take example from, lest we be re∣duced to such a Game, so as either to win or lose all. Let us therefore be Friends one with another, whilst we are in a good and prosperous condition: so we by our mutual assistance shall become more consider∣able in Greece, than we have been any ages heretofore. All of them were thought to have dis∣courst very well, and the Lacedemonians decreed that a Peace should be accepted on these Terms: That they the Lacede∣monians should recal all their Governours
out of the Cities, and disband their Ar∣mies both at Sea and Land; that the Cities should enjoy their own Laws; and if any should act contrary hereto, that whosoever would might assist the injured Cities, but if any would not, they should not be obliged thereto by Oath. The Lacedemonians swore to these Articles for themselves and their Allies; as did the Athenians and their Confederates, in the name of their respective Cities. Amongst the rest that swore to the Articles, the Thebans entred their Names, and the day following when their Ambassadors came to desire that it might be inserted; The Boeotians had ratisied the Peace instead of the Thebans. Agesilaus made answer, He would not alter any thing of what they had Sworn and Recorded at first; and that if they would not stand to the Treaty, they should be blotted out if they pleased. So the rest having made Peace, the Controversie remained only about the Thebans; and it was the opinion of the Athenians themselves, that 'twas to be feared the Thebans would, as it was ge∣nerally discourst, be, the cu∣stom be∣ing, that when a Nation was bea∣ten, the Tenths of their spoils were offered to Apollo. Harpoc. irrecoverably lost: upon which they went away quite dis∣heartned. After this, the Athenians drew their
Garisons out of all the Cities, and called home Iphicrates with the Fleet, obliging him to restore all he had taken since the conclusion of the Peace at Lacedemon. In like manner,Phrasicli∣des Ar∣chon. the Lacedemonians did the same to the Cities they were possest of. When Cleombrotus who commanded the Army in Phocis, consulted the Magistrates at home, how he should govern himself; Prothous said, That in his opinion the Army ought to be Disbanded pursuant to the Treaty, and notice to be given to the Cities for every one to contribute what they thought fit to the Temple of Apollo, and if any opposed their Liberty, then to exhort such of the Confederates as would defend the common Interest, to declare War against them; adding, he thought the Gods in this case would be very favourable to their Cause, and the Cities succour the Injured. The Council hearing him say so, thought he talkt idlely; for in all probability they were possest, and sent Orders to Cleombrotus, not to Disband his Army, but to march directly against the Thebans, unless they would let the Cities enjoy their own Laws: For Cleombrotus hearing that Peace was made, sent to the Ephori for Orders, and they gave him these Instructions.
Therefore when he understood that they were so far from restoring the Cities their Laws, and Disbanding their Forces, that they took the Field against him; he marched with his Army into Baeotia, yet did not enter from out of Phocis at a nar∣row Pass which was guarded by the Thebans, where they expected he would, but passed over the Mountains unexpect∣edly by the way of Thisbe, and arriving at Creusis, took twelve Theban Gallies together with the Town. When he had performed this Exploit, he marched up from the Sea-coast, and Encamped at Leuctra, which is in the Territory of Thespiae. The Thebans had their Camp over against them at a small distance on a Hill, having joyned none of the Allies except the Baeotians. There Cleombrotus's Friends came to him, & said, Cleombrotus! If you suffer the Thebans to go off without fighting, you'l go nigh to lose your Head; for it will not be for∣gotten, how you did not burn the The∣ban's Country when you were at Cynoce∣phale, and that in another Campagn you were repulsed from the Pass over the Ci∣theron, which Agesilaus always gained. Therefore, if either you regard your Ho∣nour, or care for living in your own
Country, you must engage them. This was his Friends Advice. But his Enemies cried, Now he will discover whether he, as 'tis reported, has any real respect for the Thebans or no. When Cleombrotus heard this, he was egg'd on to fight. On the other hand, the Theban Captains considered, that if they gave him not Battel, the adjacent Towns would revolt, that they should be besieged; and that if the people of Thebes wanted Provisions, the City would go near to rise up against them. Moreover several of those who had been banished before, concluded it was better to die upon the Spot, than to be banished a second time: Besides an Oracle went about, that the Lacedemonians should be overthrown near theThese were the Daughters of Leuctrus and Sceda∣sus, whom the Lace∣demonian Ambassa∣dors ravi∣shed; and they cal∣ling to Heaven for Venge∣ance, kil∣led them∣selves. Diod. Sic. l. 15. Graves of those Virgins, who it was said, made away themselves, because they had been forced by some Lacedemonians; and this put life into them. The Thebans adorn∣ed the Monuments of the Virgins before the Fight. News also was brought from the City, that all the Temples opened of their own accord; and that the Priestesses said, that the Gods Prognosticated a Vi∣ctory. They reported also, that the Arms in Hercules's Temple disappeared, as if Hercules himself had been gone out to
Battel: Yet some say, that these were only the Devices of the Generals. In the Battel every thing thwarted the Lacede∣monians; but Fortune disposed all things well for the Thebans; After Dinner Cle∣ombrotus held the last Council of War before the Battel, and because they had drank pretty well at Dinner, 'twas said the Wine did give them a Whet. When both Sides were armed,The Battel at Leuctra. and it was certain that there would be a Battel, the Sutlers, Drudges, and such as had no mind to fight, left the Baeotian Army at first: but Hiero's Mercenaries and the Phocean Targetiers, as also the Phliasian and Heraclean Horse fetching a compass fell upon them as they retired, and drove them back, pursuing them to the Camp, and thereby made the Boeotian Army far more numerous and stronger than it was before. There was a Plain between both Armies, and in it the Lacedemonians pla∣ced their Horse before the Battel: On the contrary the Thebans confronted them with theirs, which by reason of the War with the Orchomenians & Thespieans, were well experienced: but the Lacedemonian Cavalry never were in a worse condition; for the richest men set out Horses, so that when an Army was to be levied, the man
took the Horse and such Arms as were given him, and went immediately into the Service thus appointed: they too that served on Horse-back were men of weak bodies, and without any sense of honour at all. These were the Cavalry on both sides: 'Tis reported, that the con∣tains: 2 men, and 4 Officers▪ which be∣ing drawn up 3 in rank, made 12 in File. Scol. Thu∣cid. lib. 5. Divisions of the Lacedemonian Phalanx were Marshalled three in Front, whereby they were Twelve deep. On the contrary, the Thebans were drawn up Fifty deep, concluding if they beat those about the King, they should easily defeat the rest. When Cleombrotus began to move to∣wards the Enemy, before the rest of the Army perceived that he advanced, the Horse were engaged and soon routed, who falling foul in their flight upon the Hea∣vy-armed men, were attacked by the Theban Troops: Nevertheless one may conclude from this plain Argument, that Cleombrotus had the better at first; for if they that fought before him had not had the advantage at that time, they could not have taken him up and carried him off alive. But after General Dino, and Sphodrias one of the Council of War, and his Son Cleonymus were slain; the Horse,. Crag. Lieutenant Colonels, and others that were pressed by the multitudes gave back.
Thereupon, when their left wing saw their right disordered, they retreated: Never∣theless tho' many were slain, yet the Van∣quished repassed the Trench which was before the Camp, and stood to their Arms in the place from whence they first moved; for their Camp was not on a Level, but rather on a rising Ground. Some of the Lacedemonians thinking this Defeat was not to be endured, declared they ought not to suffer the Enemy to erect a Trophy, and that they were ob∣liged not to fetch off their. Slain upon Truce, but by force of Arms: Yet when the great Officers saw that near a thou∣sand Lacedemonians were slain, and four hundred out of seven hundred Spartans killed, and that the Confederates had no mind to fight; some of them being not much concerned for their loss, they called the fittest men together, and consulted what measures to take. It was the general opinion at last, to fetch off the killed up∣on Truce; and accordingly they sent an Herald about it: so the Thebans restored their Dead, and erected a Trophy. When the news of this Defeat was brought to Lacedemon, the Ephori were troubled at it, as they had reason to be; yet it being the last day of theMen and women exercised naked and exposed their bo∣dies to the wea∣ther, to make them hardy. Plut. in Lyeg. Feast,
wherein the Children exercised naked, and the mens Chorus being in the Pit, they did not bid them withdraw, but make an end of their Exercise: and then gave an account of the Names of those that were slain, to their Relations, charge∣ing the Women not to make any howl∣ing, but to conceal their loss patiently. The next Day one might see those whose Relations were slain, walking abroad gay and merry; but a few of those appeared whose Friends were said to have escaped, and those too dejected, and sneaking up and down. Soon after the Ephori decreed to raise an Army out of the remaining Regiments, and take in men to seventy years of age; for they had sent some of the same age out of the Regiments which were abroad, they that were sixty five years old being gone into the Phocean War before this Fight, and those that were left at home to bear the Publick Offices, were ordered to go into the Ser∣vice. Agesilaus was not yet recovered of his Indisposition; whereupon his Son Archidamus was made General, whom the Tegeans willingly followed to the Wars; for Stasippus Faction, which sided with the Lacedemonians, were still in be∣ing, and carried all before them. The
Mantineans out of the Villages also being under an Aristocratical Government, joyned them. Besides these, the Co∣rinthians, Sicyonians, Phliasians, and Acheans, went readily into the Service, and other Cities sent their Forces. More∣over, the Lacedemonians and Corinthians fitted out some Gallies, and desired the Sicyonians to do the like, intending to transport their Army on board them: Hereupon Archidamus sacrificed for an Expedition. The Thebans immediately after the Fight,Dysnicetus Archon. sent a Messenger Crowned with a Garland to Athens, to relate the great∣ness of the Victory, and to desire that they would joyn with them against the Lacedemonians, declaring they might now revenge themselves on them for all their former Injuries: At that time the Senate was sitting in the Citadel, but when they heard the News, any one might see that they were extreamly troubled at it, for they neither sent the Herald any Presents, nor made any mention of Assistance, and so he departed from thence. The Thebans sent also an Express to Jason their Ally, desiring him to send them Succours, con∣sidering with themselves what was likely to be the issue of these things. He imme∣diately
set out a Fleet, pretending to assist them by Sea; and taking the Mercena∣ries with his own Guards, though the Phoceans had made War upon him with∣out declaring, yet he passed by Land into Baeotia, appearing in several places sooner than there was any News of his March, proceeding a great way in his Voyage before all his Forces could be assembled; shewing thereby, That things of great Im∣portance are effected easier by Diligence than Force. When he arrived in Baeotia, the The∣bans signified to him, that they had then an opportunity of falling upon the Lace∣demonians, and that whilst he attacked them with his Mercenaries from an Emi∣nence, they would set upon them in the Front. But he diverted them from this their Design, advising them not to aim still at greater things, since they had perform∣ed so brave an Exploit already, lest they should be deprived of the advantage of the Victory they had lately obtain'd. Don't you know (says he) that when you were re∣duced to extremities, you then became vi∣ctorious, and therefore you should consider, that if the Lacedemonians be once made weary of their lives, they too will grow desperate, and fight it out to the last man.
God also is sometimes pleased to humble the Mighty, and exalt the Mean. With these Words he disswaded the Thebans from putting all to the hazard. On the other hand he shewed the La∣cedemonians the difference between a rou∣ted, and Vctorious Army; but if you (says he) would have this Defeat forgot∣ten, I advise you to be quiet, till you have recovered, and raised a greater Pow∣er, and then set upon the Thebans, who are now invincible. You understand (says he) that there are at this time some of your Confederates, who discourse of treating with the Enemy, therefore do you endeavour by all means to make a Truce, which I the more desire out of a Design to preserve you, both in respect of the Alliance between my Father and you, and for that I my self am your Pub∣lick Host. This he spoke, though per∣haps rather with intention to divide them, that so both might stand in need of his assistance. The Lacedemonians hearing him say so, desired him to negotiate a Truce; and when News came that it was concluded, the Generals commanded all to prepare themselves, and after they had supped, to decamp in the Night, that by break of Day, they might be march∣ing
up Cithaeron. When they had supped, the Generals commanded them to march before they slept, and immediately when it was dark, they took the way of Creusis, chusing rather to pass undiscovered, than rely upon the Truce. But they marcht on very heavily (for being it was Night, they departed in fear, and the way was bad) and came to Aegosthena in the Ter∣ritory of Megara. There they met Ar∣chidamus's Army, who stayed till all the Confederates were come up, and then marched with his Forces as far as Corinth; where he dismist the Auxiliaries, and marcht with the Spartans home. Jason returning through Phocis took the Suburbs of Hyampolis, destroyed the Countrey, and killed a great many, but passed through the rest thereof without any Action at all. When he came to He∣raclea, he took the Town, not that he feared any would fall into his Countrey, though that Pass were open; but consi∣dered rather, if any should possess them∣selves of Heraclea, which stood in a strait place, they might keep him out, if he should entertain a Design of invading Greece. After he returned back into Thessaly be became a very great man, both because he was made General by a
Law of the Thessalians, and for that he maintained a great many Mercenaries, both Foot and Horse that were experien∣ced men, and excellent Soldiers; being yet greater, by reason of the strong Al∣liance he had already, & because still more desired it; but the greatest of all the men in his time, for that no one Enemy was a Match for him. When the Pythian Games drew near he gave out an Order amongst the Cities to feed Oxen, Sheep, Goats, and Hogs, and to provide them for the Sacrifice. 'Tis said that he taxed every City, tho' mode∣rately, no less than one thousand Oxen, & ten thousand other Cattle, proclaiming a Crown of Gold for a Prize to that City, which fed the fattest Ox for the Sacrifice of Apollo; and sent Orders to the Thessali∣ans to prepare themselves for the Cam∣pagn, against the Pythian Games; having thoughts, as the report went, to be Presi∣dent himself of the Solemnity and Prizes. But what he thought to do with the Sa∣cred Money is not yet known; for it being reported that when the Delphians consulted what they should do, if Jason offered to seize it; the God answered, that he could take care of that himself. This man that was so great, and enter∣tained
such vast Designs, whilst he was mustering and exercising the Pheraean Horse, being sat down and giving an an∣swer to some that had business with him, was killed and cut in pieces by seven young men that came to him, pretend∣ing some Differences among themselves; the Guards came briskly to his Assistance, and one of the Ruffians being yet stab∣bing him was wounded with a Lance and killed; another mounting his Horse was left behind, and after he had received se∣veral Wounds, died also; the rest got up∣on Horses they had laid and escaped; be∣ing honourably received in the Greek Towns wheresoever they came. By which 'tis apparent the Greeks were in great fear lest he should have played the Tyrant with them. After his Death Polydorus and Poly∣phron Brothers, were made Generalissimo's; but in their Journey to Larissa, Polydorus whilst he was sleeping in the Night, was killed by his Brother Polyphron, as 'tis thought; for his Death was suddain and without any apparent Causes. Polyphron governed one Year, converting his Gene∣ralship into a Tyranny; putting Polyda∣mus and eight more of the Principal Ci∣tizens to death at Pharsalus, and banish∣ed
seveal out of Larissa. Soon after this he was killed himself by Alexander, who revenged Polydorus's death, and put an end to that Tyranny. This Alexander taking upon him the Administration of Government became troublesome both to the Thessalians and Thebans; an Enemy to the Athenians, a Rogue at Land, and a Pirate at Sea. He having plaid such pranks was murdered by the instigation of his Wife, and assistance of her Bro∣thers; she having told them that Alex∣ander had a Design against them, and hid them in her House a whole Day. At Night having laid him to sleep drunk, she light a Candle, and brought out his Sword; but finding that her Brothers delayed to make their attempt upon him, she told them if they would not do the Work she would awake him. When they entered she pulled to the door, and bar∣red it till her Husband was dispatched. Some say this hatred against her Hus∣band was, because when he had impriso∣ned his Page a beautiful Youth, and she interceeded for his release, he brought him out, and cut his Throat; others, for that having no Children by her, he had sent to Thebes, and engaged himself to Jason's Wife. These are the reports
that go about concerning his Wife's con∣spiracy. Tisiphonus the eldest Brother held the Government from the time of the Conspiracy till the writing of this Book. And now having related the Affairs of Thessaly that were in Jason's time, and from his death till the Government of Tisiphonus, I return from my Digressi∣on. Afterwards Archidamus who was go∣ing with Recruits to Leuctra, returned home with the Army. The Athenians con∣sidering that the Peloponnesians thought they were stil obliged to serve the Lace∣demonians in the Wars, and that the La∣cedemonians were now in the same con∣dition they had formerly reduced the Athenians to; sent about to all the Cities that would come into the League propo∣sed by the King. When they met toge∣ther, they made a Decree that those who were to come into the Treaty should take this Oath. I will maintain the Peace prescribed by the King, as also the Decrees of the Athenians, and their Allies. If any one shall make War against any of these Cities that have sworn to this Peace, I will oppose them with my utmost Power. All the rest were very well satisfied with the Oath; only the Eleans objected, that
the Cities of the Marganeans, Scylluntians, and Triphylians might not be free; be∣cause these were their Towns. But the A∣thenians and the rest decreeing that pursu∣ant to the King's Letters, both the lesser and greater Cities should be free; they depu∣ted some to go and swear the Chief Ma∣gistrates in every City. And all took the Oath except the Eleans. Then the Mantineans as being absolutely free, meet∣ing together, decreed to make Mantinea one Town, and to wall it; but the Lace∣demonians thinking it an hard case that this should be done without their Con∣sent, sent Agesilaus thither, who was said to have a kind of Fatherly care over them. When he arrived the Chiefmen told him they would not assemble the People for him: but bid him tell them his Business. He promised them if they would forbear fortifying at present, he would procure that the Wall should be built with little charge, and with the approbation of the Lacedemonians. But being told they could not possibly desist because it was de∣creed by the Community, Agesilaus went way in an heat, though he thought a War would not be declared against them, by reason the Peace was made for Liberty. Some of the Arcadian Cities sent men to
the Mantineans to assist them in carrying on the Wall, and the Eleans contributed three Talents of Silver towards the Charge of it.563. l. 10 s. Thus stood Affairs with the Man∣tineans. The Tegeans of Callibius's and Proxe∣nus's Party consulted about assembling all the People of Arcadia, and that what∣ever was carried at the Convention of the States, should be Law unto all the Towns; but Stasippus's Faction endeavoured that the Ancient Laws might be continued both in City and Country; yet being overpowred in the Theaters, and con∣cluding that if the People met, they should far out-do them in Numbers, took Arms; which Stasippus's Faction seeing, they armed too, nor were they inferiour to them in Numbers. They fell to it, and killed Proxenus, with some others, the rest they put to flight, but did not pursue them, Stasippus being a man who desired not to shed the Blood of his Countreymen. Callibius and his men re∣tiring to the Walls and Gates of Manti∣nea, when they saw the Enemy made no farther attempt upon them, got together in a Body and remained quiet, having sent before-hand to the Mantineans for Re∣lief.
In the mean while they treated with Stasippus about a Reconciliation; but as soon as the Mantineans appeared to be on their March, some got upon the Wall, and perceiving them coming to their Assistance with all speed, cried out to them that they should make hast, and opened the Gates for them. Stasippus's Faction having notice of what had passed, sallied out of the Gate that leads to Pa∣lantium, and getting into Diana's Temple before the Pursuers over-took them, shut themselves in, and lay still. But the E∣nemy pursuing them, and getting on the top of the Temple, uncovered the Roof, and pelted those in the Temple with Tiles. They seeing themselves in this extremity, desired the others to desist, and they would come forth; but the E∣nemy having gotten them into their Clutches, bound them, and putting them into a Cart, carried them away to Tegea; where they passed Sentence on them, and the Mantineans, and put them all to death. Upon this the Tegeans of Sta∣sippus's Faction being about eight hun∣dred fled to Lacedemon. After this the Lacedemonians pursuant to the Peace,Lsistratus Archon. resolved forthwith to revenge both those that were killed, and them that
were banished, by making War against the Mantineans, for that they contrary to the Treaty had invaded the Tegeans in an Hostile manner. Thereupon the Ephori decreed an Army to be raised, and gave the Command of it to Agesilaus. At this time the rest of the Arcadians were assembled at Asea; but the Orcho∣menians refusing to incorporate with them, out of hatred to the Mantineans, and re∣ceiving the Mercenaries raised at Corinth, and commanded by Polytropus; the Man∣tineans remained at home to observe them. The Heraeans and Lepreans assisted the Lacedemonians this Campagn against the Maintineans. Agesilaus Assoon as he had an auspicious Sacrifice for his Expedition, passed directly into Arcadia, and surprised Eutaea, a Town in the Confines; where though he had found the Old men, Wo∣men, and Children at home in their Hou∣ses (those that were able to bear Arms being gone to the Arcadian Army) never∣theless he did no harm to the Town, but permitted their People to enjoy their Ha∣bitations, obliging the Soldiers to pay for what they had; and if any thing was taken from the Townsmen by force, when he came into the Town he searcht it out, and restored it them again. More∣over
whilst he staid there in expectation of Polytropus's Mercenaries, he built up as much of the Wall as was necessary. About this time the Mantineans ma∣king War upon the Orchomenians, the former retreated from their Walls with great difficulty and lost some men; yet when they retired to Elymia, and the Or∣chomenian Heavy-armed men pursued no further, Polytropus's Troops charged them very boldly. Thereupon the Mantineans considering that if they did not repulse them, many of their own men would be destroyed by the Enemie's Darts, faced about, and charged their Pursuers. In this Skirmish Polytropus was slain, and many more had been killed in the flight, if the Phliasian Horse had not wheeled a∣bout, and stopt their further pursuit by attacking the Mantineans Rear. After this Exploit the Mantineans re∣turned home. Agesilaus hearing of it, and concluding that the Orchomenian Mercenaries would not joyn them, ad∣vanced in this manner; The first day he supped in the Territory (of Tegea) and the day after passing into that of Manti∣nea, he encamped under the Hills that are to the Westward of the City. There he burnt the Countrey, and destroyed the
Fields. The Arcadians that were assem∣bled at Asea, got into Tegea by Night; and next Day Agesilaus encamped with∣in twenty Furlongs of Mantinea. The Arcadians coming with a strong Body of Heavy-armed men from Tegea, and ha∣ving reached the Hills betwixt Mantinea and that Place, they were very earnest to joyn the Mantineans, because the Argives had not sent all their Forces thither. Some there were who perswaded Agesi∣laus to fall upon them separately; but he fearing that whilst he attacked them, the Mantineans out of the Town would fall upon his Flank and Rear, concluded it would be best to let them joyn, and then if they would fight, they should have a fair and open Field. By this time the Arcadians were uni∣ted, and Agesilaus as he was sacrificing before the Camp by day-break, discovered the Targetiers from Orchomenus, together with the Phliasian Horse, who marched in the Night by Mantinea: whereupon Agesilaus was obliged to return to his Arms, and the rest to run to their Ranks. In the Evening he encamped undiscove∣red in a Vally surrounded by the Moun∣tains on the back of the Mantinean Ter∣ritory. Next day as he was sacrificing at
the Head of the Army, he discovered the Mantineans assembled on the top of those Hills that overlookt his Rear, upon which he resolved to draw his men out of the Valley, but fearing if he marcht from thence, that the Enemy would fall upon his Rear, he lay still, and commanded those in the Rear to face about, to direct their Arms towards the Enemy, and to move to the right towards their Leader. By this means he both drew his Troops out of the strait Pass, and re-inforc'd his Battalion, which when he had doubled, he marcht into the Plain in that Order and there extended it nine or ten deep. The Mantineans came out no more, because the Eleans their Confederates had perswaded them not to fight till the The∣bans had joyned them,187. l. being assured of their coming, for that they had borrowed ten Talents of them for this expedition. The Arcadians when they heard this kept themselves within the Walls of Mantinea. Agesilaus though he had a great desire to march away with the Army, it being in the midst of Winter, yet he stay'd three days in the Neighbourhood of Mantinea, that he might not be thought to hasten his departure for fear of the Enemy. On the fourth day he refreshed his Army
early, and began his march, making shew as if he would encamp in the Place where he did when he first set out from Eutaea. But when none of the Arcadians appear∣ed, he, though very much belated, march∣ed with diligence to Eutaea, intending to depart with the Heavy-armed men be∣fore the Enemies fires were discovered, that none might say he fled, whereby he seemed to have allayed the consterna∣tion his Countreymen were in before, because though he had entered Arcadia, and burned it, yet none would undertake to fight him. As soon as he arrived in Laconia he sent home his Spartans, and dismissed the Neighbouring Troops to go to their respective Cities. The Arcadians receiving Intelligence, that Agesilaus was marcht out of their Countrey, and had disbanded his Army, got together in a strong Body, & fell up∣on the Heraeans, for refusing to incorpo∣rate with them, for invading Arcadia with the Lacedemonians, for firing their Houses, and cutting down the Trees in their Incursions. But when there came News that the Thebans were coming to relieve Mantinea, they left Heraea and joyned them: after the Armies were united, the Thebans thinking all was well,
because they had succoured their Allies, and no Enemy appeared in the Countrey, prepared for their departure. The Ar∣cadians, Argives, and Eleans persuaded the Thebans to march directly into Laconia, making ostentation of their Numbers, and magnifying their Army, for all the Boeotians were very well disciplined, and elated with their Victory at Leuctra. There followed them in this Expedition their Subjects the Phoceans,Acarnani∣ans, Hera∣cleans, and Melieans. and Forces out of all the Cities of Euboea, both the Locri, and Horse, and Targetiers out of Thessaly. They therefore well informing the Thebans of the Desolation which was in Laconia, entreated them, that they would not by any means march away before they had made an Incursion into that Countrey. The Thebans indeed gave them the hearing, but considered on the other hand, that Laconia was very diffi∣cult to be invaded, thinking there might be Guards set to defend those Places which were most easie to be passed. For Ischolaus was at Ius in the Territory of Sciris with a Garrison of four hundred stout men, consisting partly of half Slaves, and partly of the Exiles of Tegea. There was another Garrison too near Leuctra be∣yond Maleatis.
Moreover the Thebans considered that the Lacedemonians would soon unite, and that they would fight no where better than upon their own Ground. Upon all these Confiderations they were not very forward to march to Lacedemon; but afterwards when some came from Caryae, and reported the Countrey was in no po∣sture of Defence, proffering to guide the Army, and offering themselves to be cut in pieces if they imposed upon them; There came also several of the Nigh∣bourhood to invite and to inform them, that if they did but appear in the Coun∣trey, they would revolt, and added, that the Neighbours were lately summoned by the Spartans, but would not assist them. The Thebans hearing all these Reports, and from several hands, were over-perswaded, and fell into Laconia about Caryae, as did the Arcadians near Ius in the Territory of Sciris. Though if Ischolaus had but gone before, and secured the difficult Passes, 'twas said, none could have entered on that side; but he designing to joyn those of Ius, tarried for them at that Village, where the Arcadians came upon them in great Numbers; and here Ischo∣laus's men facing about, and charging the Enemy, got the better. But at last
when those on the Houses threw their Lances, and darted their Javelins both at the Rear and Flank, Ischolaus and all the rest fell, except any might escape undi∣stinguished. The Arcadians having performed this Exploit, marcht towards Caryoe to the Thebans, who having heard of their Suc∣cess, came down into the Enemies Coun∣trey the more boldly, and immediately destroyed and burnt Sellasia. When they came into the Champion Countrey they encamped in a Grove of Apollo's, but made no attempt the day following to pass over the Bridge into the City, because they found that the Enemies heavy-arm'd men were in the Temple of Minerva Alea, but left the Eurotas on the right, and marcht on plundering, destroying and burning the Houses which were rich∣ly furnisht. The Women in the City, having never seen the face of an Enemy before could not endure so much as to be∣hold the smoke. The men though their fewness appeared, being posted in several Places, nevertheless defended the City though it had no Walls. The Magistrates thought it convenient to proclaim to the Slaves, that if they would form themselves into Companies, and come into the Ser∣vice,
as many as did should have Security to be free. 'Tis said, there were above six thousand listed in an instant, so that when they were armed, and made so great and appearance they struck a terrour into the Spartans themselves. But when the Mercenaries from Orchomenus staid there, and the Phliasians, Corinthians, Epidaurians, and Pellenians, with some Forces from othe Cities came to their assistance, they then less dreaded those new raised men. The Theban Army advancing towards Amyclae, passed the Eurotas there, and forthwith they cut down as many Trees as they could where they encamped, and placing them before their Camp guarded it therewith. The Arcadians took diffe∣rent measures, for they left their Arms, and went to plundering. Three or four days after, all the Theban and Elean Horse, together with the Phoceans, Thessalians, and Locrians came to the. Place, and the Temple ofGeao∣chus. Neptune, which the Lacede∣monian Horse confronted, though they were but a contemptible Number; and having placed an Ambuscade of three hundred men in the Temple of the Tyn∣daridae, they sallied out at the same time that the Horse advanced. The Enemy
never stood them, but gave Ground which several of the Foot seeing gave ground too. After the Lacedemonians had given over the pursuit, the Thebans halted and en∣camped again; but it being thought somewhat too dangerous an Adventure to attempt the City a second time, the Army decamped, and marched towards Helos, and Gytheum. The Cities which had no Walls they burnt, and attacked Gythe∣um, where the Lacedemonians had a Yard for building of Ships, three days together. Some of the Neighbourhood, who served the Thebans, fell upon the Lacedemonians. The Athenians hearing of these Passa∣ges, and being very sollicitous what mea∣sures to take concerning the Lacedemoni∣an Affairs, called an Assembly by order of the Senate, at which the Lacedemonians, and the rest of their remaining Friends were present.Aratus, O∣cyllus, Pha∣rax, Etymo∣cles, Olon∣thens. The Lacedemonians spoke all of them much to the same purpose, putting the Athenians in mind, that both States had assisted each other in the most Critical times with happy Success, and shew how they drave the XXX Tyrants out of Athens, and that on the contrary the Athenians had readily assisted them, when the Messenians besieged them; ad∣ding the good Success when both acted
joyntly, and commemorating how they with their united Forces had driven the Barbarian out of Greece, reminding them also that the Athenians were chosen Ge∣nerals at sea,The Athe∣nians were entrusted with a Fond of Money raised by the Greeks to carry on a War against the Persian. Thucid. lib. 1. and Trustees for the publick mony by the advice of the Lacedemonians, and on the other hand the Lacedemoni∣ans by the directions of the Athenians with Universal consent were chosen Gene∣rals at Land. One of the Ambassadors made a Speech to this purpose. If both the States, My Lords of Athens, joyn together, there is hopes that the Thebans, as was formerly discoursed, may be totally ruined. The Athenians gave not much heed to what he said, but such a kind of muttering as this ran through the Assembly, how that they said so now, though when they were in prosperity, they were our bitter Adver∣saries. Yet the most material Argument the Lacedemonians were thought to urge, was, That when the Lacedemonians had subdued the Athenians, and the Thebans would have razed the City, the former hindred them from putting their Design in Execution. So the general Discourse was, that they should have Succors pursu∣ant to the Treaty. For the Arcadians, and their Confederates did not make War
upon the Lacedemonians for any Injury they had done, but because they assisted the Tegeans against whom the Mantine∣ans had employed their Arms contrary to the Treaty. Upon these Debates a Clamour ran through the Assembly, some saying that the Mantineans did well in assisting Proxenus's Party who were mur∣dered by Stasippus's Faction, and others that they had broke the Treaty by ma∣king of War against the Tegeans. Whiles the Assembly were debating the Matter, Cliteles the Corinthian rose up and spoke. Perhaps,Cliteles's Speech. My Lords of Athens, it may be a Question who were the Aggressors: Yet can any one lay to our charge, that we since the Conclusion of the Peace, have at∣tempted any Place, made any Depredati∣ons, or ravaged any Countrey? Though the Thebans have invaded ours, and cut down the Trees, fired our Houses, plundered our Goods, and drave away our Cattle. How then can you satisfie your Oath, if you do not succour us, being we are so manifest∣ly injured, and the Ratification of the Treaty was by your procurement. The A∣thenians heard him with Applause, he having offered what was equitable and just. After him Patrocles the Phliasian rose up and spake.
I suppose, My Lords of Athens,Patrocles's Speech. 'tis manifest to all, that when the Thebans have ruined the Lacedemonians, in the next place they will attack you; for they are sensible that you are the only obstacle, which hinder them from becoming Lords of all Greece. Seeing therefore Affairs stand thus, you will in my opinion do your selves as much Service as the Lacedemo∣nians, by making War upon them. For I imagine it will be much more troublesome to have the Thebans who border upon you, and are ill affected, to be Lords of Greece, than to have your Enemies at a farther distance. And you will defend your selves with more advantage, now whilst there remain some Allies, than if they be ruined, and you alone be forced to fight it out with the Thebans. If any fear that the La∣cedemonians, if they escape this time will create you trouble hereafter, consider that we need not apprehend the growth of those we have deserved well of, but those we have injured. Moreover you should take this into consideration, that States as well as private Persons ought to make Friends, when in a flourishing condition, that if they be reduced to a strait, they may expect as∣sistance from those they have obliged. Provi∣dence has at this time put a signal oppor∣tunity
into your hands, and if you will suc∣cor the Lacedemonians in this their di∣stress, you will for ever make them your most faithful Friends. Nor will you have a few witnesses of your Benefaction, the Confederates and Enemies, nay the whole World shall be eye-witnesses hereof, the Gods themselves who have in prospect all things past, present and to come, shall be Spectators of it from Heaven. Nothing of this shall be forgotten, for if the Lace∣demonians prove ungrateful to you, who will assist them at any time hereafter? though in Charity we ought to hope the best of them, and that they won't be disingenuous. For there is no People have had greater Principles of Honour than they, nor more carefully shun'd the appear∣ance of baseness. Besides, consider if ever any danger from the Barbarian shall threa∣ten our Countrey, whom can you confide in more, or would rather chuse for your Se∣conds, than those who being posted at the Thermopylae, chose rather to die upon the Spot than live, and let the Barbarian en∣ter Greece? Ought not we therefore in Justice to do them all the good Offices we can, who have acquitted themselves with us with so much bravery, and in all proba∣bility will do the like for the future? Nor
would you loose your labour in shewing them respect upon the Allies account, for assure your selves, that these who continue their faithful Friends in distress, will in honour render you the like piece of Service in their Name. If these States of ours that would engage in this danger, seem inconsi∣derable, yet by the conjunction of yours, they will make up a Formidable Power. Heretofore, My Lords of Athens, I had your City in admiration, when I heard all who were either injured or had any appre∣hensions of their Enemies fled hither for refuge, and obtained the relief they sought. Now I hear no longer, but am present and see, that the Lacedemonians, the most fa∣mous Nation in the World, and their faith∣ful Allies are come hither to implore your Assistance. I my self see the Lace∣demonians, who formerly could not be pre∣vailed upon by the Thebans utterly to destroy you, now begging of you not to suf∣fer the Lacedemonians to be destroyed, who preserved you. 'Tis to the Honour of your Ancestors, that they would not permit those Argives to lie unburied, who perished at the Citadel of Thebes, it will be much more to your Fame, not to let the Lacedemonians yet living either to be op∣pressed, or destroyed. This was honourably
done by you, when you curbed the Insolence of Euristheus to preserve Hercules's Po∣sterity; but is it not more honourable to save not only the Princes, but the whole Republick? and this most honourable of all, if when the Lacedemonians preserved you by a word of their mouth, for you in return to expose your Lives in their De∣fence? If it be matter of so great joy for us only to speak in the behalf of such Gal∣lant men, it will be thought a generous part in you, to assist them with your Arms, and since you have been several times Allies and Enemies, to remember rather the good Offices than the Injuries received from them; whereby you will make a re∣turn, not only in their Name, but in the Name of all Greece, to those who have ac∣quitted themselves with so much Gallantry in it's Defence. The Athenians deliberating upon the Matter, would not endure to hear the opposite Party, but resolved that the La∣cedemonians should be assisted with their whole Force, and chose Iphicrates their General, who having a lucky Sacrifice, commanded his men to sup in the Aca∣demy, whither several arrived before him. Soon after he began his March, and the whole Army followed as going
upon some glorious Expedition. But when he came to Corinth, he remain∣ed there some Days; for which de∣lay the Army blamed him, yet when he began to march again, the Army followed him with that alacrity, that they would readily have attacked Argos it self, if he had led them against it: In the mean while the Arcadians, Argives, Eleans, and several of the Enemies, who were Borderers left the Service, going about ravaging and spoyling what ever they could light on. The Thebans, and the rest were for returning home, because they saw their Army wasted, and their Provisions grow daily scarcer, some being spent, others taken from them, some squandred away, and others burnt. Be∣sides it was Winter, and all desired to re∣turn back to their own Countrey. So Iphicrates marcht with the Athenians out of Corinth at the same time they left Laconia. I find no fault with his Conduct in other Expeditions; but I observe all he did in this, was either done to no purpose, or with no advantage. For when he undertook to defend Oneum, and cut off the Retreat of the Boeotians, he left the most important Pass at Cenchreae unguard∣ed;
and sent all the Athenian and Co∣rinthian Horse upon the Scout to disco∣ver whether the Thebans had passed the Oneum, though a great many could see no more than a few, and a small Party if they were obliged to retreat, could retire with more security than a great Body. Is it not therefore a great piece of Im∣prudence to send out a Party, which is weaker than the Forces of the Enemy? For being the Horse were many, they covered a great deal of Ground; and when they were obliged to retire, they fell up∣on several rough Places, so that no less than twenty of them perisht, and the Thebans marched away at their Liberty.
XENOPHON'S History OF THE Affairs of Greece. LIB. VII. THE CONTENTS. A Treaty betwixt the Lacedemonians and the Athenians. The Rise of the Arca∣dians under Lycomedes. The Thebans projecting to enslave Greece, send Pelo∣pidas to treat with the King of Persia. The signal Fidelity of the Phliasians to the Lacedemonians. Euphron the Ty∣rant of Sicyon assassinated. The Battel at Mantinea wherein Epaminondas was slain.
THe Year following,Olymp. 103. Niusigenes Archon. the Plenipo∣tentiaries of the Lacedemonians and Confederates came to A∣thens, to treat of an Alliance between the Lacedemonians and the Athenians. And several as well of the Allies, as Athenians, declaring it ought to be made upon equal and like Terms, Procles the Phliasian made this Speech: My Lords of Athens; since you have thought fit to make the Lacedemonians your Friends, you ought, in my opinion, to consider how this Alliance may be made lasting. If therefore we make a League that may be advantageous to both sides, such an one, in all probability will be long∣est kept. There only remains the point about the Command in Chief to be settled; in other matters we are almost agreed. The States have already resolved, that you should command by Sea, and the Lace∣demonians by Land. Which Partition seems to me, not to have been the contri∣vance of human wit, but the Result of the Divine Wisdom, and the disposition of Providence. For first of all ye have a place exceedingly well contriv'd by nature for it, and many Towns lie near your City that depend upon the Commerce at Sea, all
which are of less power than yours. You have Ports too, without which your Naval Forces would be of no use, and many Gal∣lies: 'Tis a Maxim also of your State to maintain a powerful Fleet. Moreover, the Trades which belong to Shipping are all pe∣culiar to you, who far excel other Nations in the Art of Navigation. Most of you subsist by the Sea; so that at the same time you follow your own private occasions, and gain experience in the Maritine Discipline. Nor can any set out so numerous a Fleet of Gallies as you, which is of no small moment towards the obtaining the Com∣mand in Chief. For all desire to join with them that are most powerful, and Heaven has conferr'd that Happiness on you: for tho you have had so many, and so great Engagements at Sea, yet you have seldom miscarried, but commonly been victorious; so that there can hardly be any Enter∣prise in which the Allies will refuse to engage with you. Consider then that this is a matter of the greatest moment and consequence to you; for tho the Lacedemo∣nians have made war upon you so many years, and possess'd themselves of your Country, yet they never endanger'd your Ruine, till Heaven gave them the Sove∣reignty of the Sea; and then they soon
brought you under subjection. 'Tis plain therefore your preservation depends wholly on the Sea; and since you are so fitted for it by nature, how can you in honor suffer the Lacedemonians to command there? For first they acknowledge themselves less experienced in Naval Affairs than you are; and besides, the dangers that they run in Sea-fights are not equal to yours; for they adventure only the loss of their Men on board their Gallies; but you fight for your Wives, your Children, and your whole Country. This is the state of your Affairs; and that of the Lacedemonians, is as follows. First, they inhabit an in-land Country; and therefore, tho they be shut out from Sea, they can subsist well enough on the Land. For this reason they are trained up imme∣diately from their Child-hood in the Land∣service; and by their exact Dis∣cipline, which is very material, become as powerful at Land as you at Sea. Moreover, they they can as soon draw out a potent Army, as you can equip a Fleet; which in all pro∣bability will be a strong inducement to the Confederates to join with them. Again, as Heaven has given them success by Land, so it has to you at Sea; for of the many Battels they have fought, they have been
victorious in most, and miscarried but in few. You may understand then by their Atchievments, that the care of the Land∣service is no less necessary for them, than that of Sea for you. For tho you have made war with them at Sea these several years, and beat them several times, yet you did nothing considerable towards the subduing them, till once they were van∣quish'd by Land, and then their Wives, their Children, and all their Country were in danger. Would it not then be an hard case for them to resign up their command at Land to others, who are capable of dis∣charging it so well themselves? I there∣fore have declared my self to be of the opi∣nion of the Senate, as judging it most ad∣vantageous for both sides; and may all your Counsels be crowned with success, whilest you consult the common interest of us all. Thus he. His Oration was highly commended both by the Athenians, and all the Lacedemonians there present. Then Cephisodotus rising up, came forth into the midst of the Assembly, and spoke, My Lords of Athens, Don't you per∣ceive your selves to be imposed upon? and if you will please to hear me, I'll soon
make it appear in what manner. You for∣footh shall command at Sea, and the Lace∣demonians your Confederates will perhaps find Captains of Gallies, and Soldiers that are Lacedemonians: but the Seamen shall be either Slaves or Hirelings; and these are the men that you must command. But when they shall summon you to joyn with them in any Expedition by Land, you must send them Horse and heavy-arm'd men: so that they shall command you your selves; but you only their Slaves, and such kind of pitiful Fellows. Answer me then, said he, you Timocrates of Lacedemon, did you not affirm but just now, that you came to treat with us upon equal terms? I did so, said Timocrates. Is there any thing then, said Cephisodotus, more equal than that we should command in our turns both at Sea and Land: and if there be any advantage in the command at Sea, that ye should participate of it, as well as we of that at Land? The Athenians hearing this, were per∣swaded to alter their opinion, and de∣creed, that each side should command five days alternately. Afterwards when they and their Confederates made War against Corinth, 'twas thought conveni∣ent to guard the Mount Oneum with their
joint Forces; so that when the Thebans and their Allies march'd thither, they posted themselves in several parts of the Mount, and the Lacedemonians with the Pellenians, in those places which were ea∣siest to be assaulted. When the Thebans came within thirty Furlongs of the Ene∣my, they encamped on the Plain, and computing what time they should spend in their March from their first setting out, they advanced towards the Lacedemoni∣ans by twilight. Nor were they mista∣ken in their time; for they fell upon them and the Pellenians just as the Night-Watch ended, and every one was raising himself out of his Bed. There the The∣bans being provided, fell upon those that were not; those in order, upon the dis∣ordered. As soon as those that escaped the Action retired to the adjacent Hill, the Lacedemonian Collonel might have taken what heavy-arm'd Men, and Tar∣getiers of the Confederates he would, and by their assistance have possess'd himself of the place; for Provisions might easily have been conveyed from Cenchreoe thi∣ther; but he neglected this opprtunity. For whilst the Thebans were in suspence whether they should march down the way to Sicyon, or retreat back again,
the Colonel made Truce, though most people thought 'twas more for the The∣ban's advantage than his own: after this he marched off with his Army. The Thebans march'd severally down the Hill, and having joyned their Con∣federates, immediately attacked Sicycon and Pellene: Afterwards they entred E∣pidaurus, burnt all the Country, and marched back greatly scorning and con∣temning their Enemy; and when they approach'd near Corinth, they run full speed up to the Gates that look towards Phlius, with an intention to break in, if they found them open; but some of the Light-arm'd men sally∣ing out of the Town, met their Body not above four hundred foot from the Walls, and mounting upon the Monu∣ments, and Eminent Places, killed a great many of the foremost of them with their Spears and Lances, routing and pursuing them about three or four Furlongs. After the Action, the Corinthians dragging the dead bodies nearer the Walls, restored them upon Truce, and erected a Trophy: Upon this the Lacedemonian Allies took heart again. About this time there arrived Auxiliaries from Dionysius to the Lacedemonians, with
above twenty Gallies that brought on board about fifty Celtic and Iberian horse. Next day the Thebans and their Confede∣rates entred the Country in an Hostile manner, covering the Plain as far as the Sea and the Hills near the City, and de∣stroyed all before them. The Athenian and Corinthian Cavalry, when they disco∣vered the strength, and numbers of the Enemy, did not come very near them: Yet Dionysius's Horse though a few in number advanced in small Parties, and threw their Lances, but the Enemy falling upon them, they retreated, and then ad∣vancing again, darted their Lances as be∣fore: But when any Charged them as they were lighting off their Horses, and rested themselves, they nimbly mounted again and retreated: And when they were pursued any distance from the main Body, they attacked their Pursuers, and did great execution upon them with their Lances, compelling the whole Army both to Advance and Retreat, according to their Motions. The Thebans returned home not many days after, and so did the whole Army. Dionysius's Troops made an attempt upon Sicyon, and beat the Sicyonians in a fair Field, killing about seventy, and took the Fort Deras by
Storm. These were the first Auxiliaries sent by Dionysius; who after they had performed these Exploits, sailed home to Syracuse. The Thebans and those that had Re∣volted from the Lacedemonians, did every thing till this time by general consent, and the Thebans wholly managed the War: But there arose one Lycomedes a Mantinean, in Birth inferiour to none, Wealthy and Ambitious; who puff'd up the Arcadians with high Conceits, telling them, That Peloponnesus was only their Country, and they its first Inhabitants: That they were the most numerous Nation of the Greeks, and men of very able bodies; al∣ledging this as a Proof of their Prowess, that when there was occasion for Auxilia∣ries, none were preferred before them. Moreover that the Lacedemonians never attacked Athens without the Arcadians; nor had the Thebans come now against Lacedemon, had they not been supported by them. Wherefore if you are wise, says he, no longer follow others Command, for before when you served the Lacedemonians, you advanced them, and if you still incon∣siderately engage with the Thebans, and don't seek to command in your turns, you will perhaps find them Lacedemonians too.
The Arcadians hearing this, became elated, and treated Lycomedes with ex∣traordinary Respect, esteeming him the only man amongst them:. Insomuch that they chose such to be Officers as he no∣minated, whereby the Arcadians became very great: For when the Argives entred Epidaurus, & their Retreat was cut off by Chabrias's Mercenaries, the Athenians and Corinthians; the Arcadians opened them a Passage, and brought them off, though they suffered as well by the difficulty of the Passes as the opposition of the Enemy. They also attempted Asina in Laconia, and mastering the Garison, destroyed the Suburbs thereof, and killed Peranor a Spartan Colonel: When ever they had a design to march, neither Night nor Storm, nor length of way, nor unpassable Moun∣tains hindred them; so that they esteem∣ed themselves at this time the hardiest Souldiers in the World. For these Reasons the Thebans began to envy, and to be colder in their kind∣ness towards them: But the Eleans demanding back of the Arcadians those Towns that the Lacedemonians took from them, observed that they not only slight∣ed what they said, but magnified the Tri∣phylians, and the others that revolted
from them, because they pretended them∣selves to be Arcadians: and hereupon the Eleans also began to be ill affected to them. Thus the Allies entertaining an high opinion of themselves, Philiscus the Abydenian came with a great Sum of Mo∣ney from Ariobarzanes, and summoned the Thebans their Allies, and the Lacede∣monians to Delphos about a Peace. When they came there, they did not communi∣cate their Business to Apollo, but debated it amongst themselves. At last, when the Thebans would not yield, that Messene should remain in the hands of the Lacede∣monians, Philiscus raised a great Body of Mercenaries to assist them. Whilst these things were in agitation,Polyzelus Archon. there arrived a second Supply from Dio∣nysius: The Athenians declaring it ex∣pedient that they should fall into Thessaly against the Thebans, the Lacedemonians would have had them landed in Laconia, and this latter Opinion was approved by the Council of War: Afterwards Diony∣sius's Auxiliaries sailed round to Lacede∣mon, and Archidamus taking the Field with them and his Spartans, storm'd Ca∣ryae, and put the Garison to the Sword. From thence he went directly to Parrha∣sia a Town in Arcadia, and destroyed the
Country about it. But when the Arcadi∣ans and Argives came with Succors, he Retreated and Encamped upon the Hills, that overlookt Midea: Whilst he was there, Cissidas the General of Dionysius's Forces declared, that the time limited for his stay was expired, and so departed home by the way of Sparta: But the Messenians cutting off his Retreat at a narrow Pass, he sent to Archidamus, and demanded Relief, who accordingly succoured him. When they came to the turning that goes to Euctresii, the Arca∣dians and Argives entred Laconia, de∣signing to cut off his Retreat home∣ward; but Archidamus drawing up in a Level at the meeting of the Roads that lead to Euctresii and Midea, came as they say, to the head of his Troops, and thus encouraged them. Dear Country-men! Let us be brave,Archida∣mus's Speech to his Soul∣diers. and look forward, that we may deliver our Country to Posterity in such a condition as we receiv'd it from our Ancestors: Nor let us any longer be a Reproach to the pre∣sent Age, since in former times we have been the most Renown'd of all the Greeks. 'Tis reported, that when he had ended his Speech, it thundred, and an auspicious Lightning shone about him in a clear Sky.
There hapned also to be on the right Wing a Grove, and an Image of Hercules, from whom he was said to be descended. Hereby there was raised such Courage and Alacrity in the Army, that the Com∣manders found some difficulty to restrain the Souldiers from pushing forward. Ar∣chidamus immediately leading them on, a small Party of the Enemy received them at push of Pike, some whereof were slain, the rest fled, many of them being kill'd by the Horse, and several by the Celtes. When the Fight was over, he erected a Trophy, and dispatch'd Demoteles the Herald home with the News of a great Victory, how that not one of the Lace∣monians fell, but that the Enemy lost a great many: When News hereof came to Sparta, they say, that Agesilaus first wept, and then the Senate and Ephori. So com∣mon are Tears both to Joy and Grief. The Thebans and Eleans growing weary of the Arcadians Arrogance were not less pleas'd at this their ill Success, than the Lacedemonians. The Thebans continually studying how they might become Lords of Greece, thought if they sent to the King of Persia, they might by his assistance compass their
Design. Whereupon under pretence that Euthycles the Lacedemonian was with the King, they exhorted the Confederates to send an Embassie, and accordingly Pelopi∣das went from the Thebans, Antiochus the Champion from the Arcadians, Archi∣damus from the Eleans, and in company of these — the Argive. On the other hand, the Athenians perceiving their De∣sign, sent Timagoras and Leo: After they came to Persia, Pelopidas ingratiated him∣self with the King more then all of them; for he had to alledge, that of all the Greeks, the Thebans only assisted the Persians at the Battel of Plataeae, and that they made War upon the King at no time after; and that the Lacedemonians had employed their Arms against them, because they would not joyn with Agesilaus against the King, nor suffer him to Sacrifice to Diana at Aulis, where Agamemnon Sacri∣ficed before his Voyage to Asia Minor, when he took Troy: It also contributed much to the Honour of Pelopidas, that the Thebans had won the Battel at Leuctra, and ravaged Laconia: He added also, that the Argives and Arcadians were de∣feated, because the Thebans had not assist∣ed them. Timagoras the Athenian con∣firmed all that he said, and next to
him had the greatest respect. Pelopidas being asked by the King what Articles he demanded; replyed, That Messene should be restored to its Liberty by the Lacedemonians; that the Athenians should lay up their Fleet, and if they did not comply herewith, that War should be de∣clar'd against them; and if any Town refused the Service, that the same should be first attacked. These Articles being drawn, and read to the Ambassadors; Leo said in the Kings hearing, Before God, 'tis high time to seek another Friend in stead of the King: The King being inform'd by the Secre∣tary what the Athenian said, brought out the Instrument again; adding, that if the Athenians knew any thing more equita∣ble, they should come and signifie it. After the Ambassadors return'd each to their home, the Athenians put Tima∣goras to death, being accused by Leo for not making use of the same lodgings with him, and for holding Correspondence chiefly with Pelopidas. Of the other Ambassadors, Archidamus the Elean ex∣tolled the King, for preferring the Ele∣ans before the Arcadians: But Antiochus, because the Arcadians Credit was low, refused the Presents, and reported to theThe States of Arcadia.
Ten thousand, that the King had store of Bakers, Cooks, Butlers and Porters; but for men to fight against Greece, tho' he had search'd for such, he could find none: Besides, said he, the abundance of Money was only for Ostentation sake, and thatAn allu∣sion to the Golden Plane-tree presented to Darius by Atys. Herod. in Pol. Noble Plane-tree of Gold could not with its shadow shelter so much as a Grashopper. After the Thebans had summoned all the Towns to come and hear the Kings Articles, the Persian that brought them shewed the Kings Seal, and read the Con∣tents. The Thebans commanded those that intended to make an Alliance with the King and them, to ratifie it by Oath. The Deputies of the Cities made an∣swer, That they were not sent to swear, but hear, desiring leave of them, that if any Oath was required, they might first consult their Principals. When Lycome∣des the Arcadian alledged, That they ought not to meet at Thebes, but where the Seat of the War was: The Thebans were concern'd hereat, & gave out that he went about to break the League, because he would not sit in the Council; but departed, and drew all the Ambassadors of Arcadia after him: The rest resusing the Oath, the Thebans sent Ambassadors
to every City, and exhorted them to swear to the Kings Instrument, thinking every City would be fearful of incurring both theirs and the Kings displeasure: But they coming first to Corinth, met with opposition there; the Corinthians telling them that they had no occasion to swear to a League with the King, and several other Cities followed their Ex∣ample. Thus the Project of the Thebans and Pelopidas about an Universal Empire came to nothing. But again, when Epaminondas designed to subdue the Achaeans, and thereby ren∣der the Arcadians and their Allies more pliant; he resolved to march into Achaia; and in order thereunto, perswaded Pisias General of the Argives, to go and possess himself of the Oneum before-hand. Pisias understanding that the place was not carefully guarded by Naucles the Com∣mander of the Lacedemonian Mercenaries, and Timomachus the Athenian; and ha∣ving seven Days Provision, he with two thousand Heavy-armed men, took an Hill near Cenchreae by Night. In the mean while, the Thebans and Allies under the Command of Epaminondas, passed the Oneum, and entred Achaia: The principal men joyned him; and he used his Au∣thority
so far, that they were neither ba∣nished, nor the Government changed; but he took an Engagement from them to be faithful to the Thebans, and to serve them in their Wars. Upon this he re∣turned home; yet the Arcadians and contrary Faction having accused him for having ordered the Government after the Lacedemonian Model; the Thebans thought fit to send Governors to the Cities of Achaia: who after their Arrival, with the help of the People displaced the No∣bility, and constituted a Democracy. The Banished men being many, and ma∣king a strong Party, went speedily to the respective Cities, and possessed themselves thereof: and after they returned home, they stood Neuters no longer, but readily joyned with the Lacedemonians. The Arcadiaus what on the one side by the Lacedemonians, and what on the other side by the Achaeans, were reduced to great straits. Till this time Sicyon was govern'd by the Achaean Laws: Hereupon Euphron having the greatest Interest with the La∣cedemonians of any of his Country-men, and being desirous to have the same with their Enemies, he acquainted the Argives and Arcadians, that if the chief men at
Sicyon were really possest of the Govern∣ment, the City would soon side with the Lacedemonians again; but if a Demo∣cracy be set up, you know for certain, said he, that it will remain at your De∣votion. If therefore you will stand by me, I will assemble the People, and will engage to keep the City firm to your Al∣liance. This I did before, said he, being offended at the Arrogance of the Lacede∣monians as well as you; and desirous to free my self from slavery. This taking with the Arcadians and Argives, they went to him, and he presently assembled the People before them in the Market∣place, Declaring, That the Government should be established upon equal Terms. After the people came together, he bid them choose whom they pleased for Ge∣nerals: They chose Euphron, Hippoda∣mus, Cleander, Acrisius, and Lysander. Upon this he gave the Command of the Mercenaries to his Son Adeas, and displa∣ced Lisimenes who had it before. Soon after, Euphron by his Favours obliged several of the Mercenaries to be faithful to him, and hired more, sparing neither the Publick Treasure, nor the Consecrated Money: He banished those who inclin'd to the Lacedemonians, and
seized their Estates, murdering some of his Colleagues privately, and banishing others; whereby he got all into his pow∣er, and became a profest Tyrant: And that the Confederates might connive at him, he either brib'd them with money, or readily assisted them with the Mer∣cenary Troops, when ever they made War; and thus all things went accord∣ing to his mind. The Argives fortified Tricranum beyond the Temple of Juno, in the Territory of Phlius, and the Sicy∣onians Thyamia in their Frontiers: where∣by the Phliasians were distressed, and wanted Necessaries, yet they still per∣sisted in their League with the Lacedemo∣nians. Now whereas all Writers take notice of what great Cities do, I think the many and glorious Actions of this small one are as worthy observation. When the Lacedemonians were at the greatest height, the Phliasians were their Allies, and though they were overthrown in the Battel of Leuctra, several of their Country-men revolting, the Slaves fal∣ling off, most of the Confederates desert∣ing, and in a manner all Greece making War upon them, yet the Phliasians con∣tinued faithful: And though they were
engaged in a War with the Argives and Arcadians, the most Potent of the Pelo∣ponesians, nevertheless they assisted them; and though it fell to their lot to come the last of all theCorinthi∣ans, Epi∣daurians, Traezenians, Hermione∣ans, Halie∣nians, Sicy∣onians, and Pellenians. Confederates to Pra∣siae, yet they never forsook the Lacede∣monians: Nay, when the General of the Mercenaries left them, and departed with those who marched on before, they would not turn back again; but (the Enemy be∣ing at Amyclae) procured a Commander at Prasiae, and got as well as they could to Sparta; for which the Lacedemonians amongst other honours they did them, made them a Present of an Ox for a welcom. After the Enemy retired out of Laco∣nia, the Argives being offended at the Phliasians for their good Service to the Lacedemonians, fell into the Territory of Phlius with all their Forces, and ravaged the Country: yet for all that the Phlia∣sians would not desist. But when the Argives destroyed all before them, the Phliasian horse being but 60, came upon them and following them close, attacked and defeated their Horse, with the Com∣panies that were placed in the Rear to secure their Retreat: And though they killed but a few, yet they erected a Tro∣phy
in view of the Argives, and more they could not have done, had they slain them all. Again, when the Lacedemoni∣ans and their Confederates kept Oneum, the Thebans came with intent to pass it; and as the Eleans and Arcadians were marching through Nemea to joyn them, the Phliasian Exiles came and brought News, that if they would but appear be∣fore Phlius, they might take it: When this was agreed on, the Exiles, and about six hundred others came by Night, and lay with their Ladders under the Wall, then the Watchmen discoveing the Ap∣proach of the Enemy from the Tricra∣num, the Townsmen took the Alarm: In the mean while, those who were to be∣tray the place, made a sign to them that lay under the Wall, to mount their Lad∣ders, which they did, and seized the Arms that the Guards had left, and fell upon the Warders, who were ten in num∣ber, for one out of every 5 was appointed to ward; one whereof they killed as he lay asleep, and another as he fled to the Temple of Juno. The rest seeing this, leaped confusedly off the Walls into the City, and the Assailants made them∣selves Masters of the Citadel without any opposition. Upon the noise that was
made, the Citizens came with Relief, and then the Enemy at first went out of the Citadel, and fought before the Gates that lead to the City; but afterwards being encompassed by the Citizens, they re∣tired back again to the Citadel, and the Heavy-arm'd men falling upon them, immediately cleared the middle of the place. The Enemy remounting the Walls, darted their Javelins, and galled those below, but they on the ground defended themselves, and fought at the foot of the Ladders. Afterwards the Townsmen re∣covering several of the Turrets, had a ve∣ry hot Engagement with the Enemy, who being pressed hard with the Courage and Valour of the Citizens, were penn'd up in a little room. In the mean while, the Arcadians and Argives invested the City, and threw down the highest part of the Citadel Wall. Some of the Townsmen who were in the Tower darted at the Enemy upon the Wall, others at those who were scaling without, and the rest at those who were possest of the Turrets; and getting Fire out of the Huts carried Wisps of Hay that was cut in the Citadel, and set fire to the Enemy in the Turrets: Where∣upon some of them leapt down for fear,
and those on the Walls were wounded and thrown down by the Townsmen. After the Enemy began to give ground, they immediately quitted the Cittadel, and forthwith the horse marcht out after them; when the Enemy discovered them, they retired, and left their Ladders, and their Dead behind them, together with some that were maimed, but yet alive. There were slain of the Enemy which fought within the Citadel, and were in∣tercepted without the Walls, no less than eighty. There you might see the men Congratulating one another, the Women bringing them drink, & all shedding tears together for their great Deliverance; at last every one present wept for joy. The Year after the Argives and Ar∣cadians attacked Phlius with their whole Forces.. Cephisodo∣rus. Ar∣chon. The reason why they lay so hard upon the Phliasians, was partly because they were provoked by them, and partly because they lay betwixt them both, and thereby were continually in hopes of re∣ducing them by want of Provisions. The Horse, and the chosen men of the Phlia∣sians supported by the Athenians, first attacked the Cavalry at the pass of a Ri∣ver, and defeated them, compelling them to retire the rest of the day into the Moun∣tains;
as it were, taking care that they might not trample down their Friends Corn in the Valleys. Again the Go∣vernour of Sicyon made another Attempt upon Phlius, drawing out the Thebans he had in Garison, together with the Sicy∣onians and Pellenians, for they then as∣sisted the Thebans, whom Euphron joyned with two thousand of his Mercenaries: The rest marched down by the Tricra∣num to Juno's Temple, making as if they would destroy all the Country before them. The Sicyonians and Pellenians were posted by the Corinthian Gate on the top of an Hill, that the Phliasians might not surround them, and gain an Eminence which lay beyond Juno's Tem∣ple. When the Phliasians perceived that the Enemy would fall into the Plain, the Horse and chosen men made opposition and hindred them from entring it; so that most part of the Day was spent in Skirmishing, Euphron's men pursuing the Enemy as far as the Horse could pass, and the Townsmen as far as Juno's Tem∣ple. When the Enemy thought it was time to march off, they went round to the Tricranum, because the Valley be∣fore the Wall hindred them from passing the direct way to the Pellenians, but the
Phliasians pursuing them a little way as far as to the rising Ground, they faced about, and marched on by the Wall to∣wards the Pellenians, and their Associ∣ates. The Theban Governour being in∣form'd of the Phliasians diligence, did his utmost endeavour to give the Pelleni∣ans timely assistance, but the Phliasian Horse prevented him, and fell upon the Pellenians, who at first received them, and made them retreat; but the latter joyning the Foot that were come up, charged them again, and closed. Soon after the Enemy gave ground, and some of the Sicyonians fell together with a great many brave men of the Pellenians. For this Action the Phliasians erected a noble Trophy, and according to the custom sang an Hymn. In the mean while the Theban General and Euphron beheld this Skirmish from several places, as if they had intended to have seen a sight. Afterwards the Enemy returned home to Sicyon, and the Towns∣men to the City. The Phliasians beha∣ved themselves incomparably well in this Action, and tho they were reduced to great want, yet they discharged a Pelle∣nian, who had been their publick Host, without ransom. Who would not allow
men, who perform'd such Exploits as these, to be both brave and couragious: for 'tis known to the whole world, that they ad∣hered to their Friends with invincible resolution. When they were deprived of their Corn, they lived partly upon Forage, and partly by what they bought at Corinth, going to Market through many dangers, getting Money with great difficulty, hardly procuring any to furnish them, and scarcely hiring it upon the security of their labouring Beasts. At last being in extreme want, they prevailed with Chares to send them a Convoy to Phlius, and after he arrived, they desired him to con∣duct the useless people to Pellene, which he did, and left them there. Then they bought provisions, and loading as many Beasts as they could get, departed by night, and tho they knew that the Enemy way∣laid them, yet thinking it would be more grievous to starve, than fight, they pro∣ceeded on their way with Chares, and meeting the Enemy, encouraged one ano∣ther, and presently fell to work,. calling upon him for assistance. Having obtain'd the Victory, they beat the Enemy out of the Road, and at last arrived safe with their Convoy. The next day they slept late,
because they had watched that night. At last, when Chares rose, the Horse and principal Men of the City came to him, and said, Chares, You may do an excellent piece of Service today; for the Sicyonians are fortifying a place in the Frontiers, having with them a great many Masons, but not many Soldiers. Wherefore our Horse, with the body of chosen Men will go before; and if you will follow with your Mercenaries, it may be you will find the work done to your hand, or if you do but ap∣pear, perhaps the Enemy will run as they did at Pellene. But if any thing seem difficult, do you consult the Gods by Sacrifice; for we are of opinion, that they had rather you should undertake this Enterprise than we. Assure your self, Chares, that if you effect it, you will not only defeat the Ene∣my, but preserve a City that is in amity with you. Besides you shall be the most honourable person in your Country, and most Renown'd of all, whether Allies or Ene∣mies. Chares embracing their proposal, sa∣crificed and immediately the Phliasian Horse put on their Breast-plates, and bri∣dled their Horses, the heavy-arm'd Men providing all things necessary for the Foot. When they had arm'd themselves,
and were gone to the place where he sa∣crificed, he, and the Priest met them, and told them, that the Sacrifice was auspici∣ous, Only stay a while, said they, till we march out with you. Orders were imme∣diately given, and the Mercenaries went with full speed, as it were by a divine im∣pulse; and when Chares began to march, the Phliasian Horse and Foot went on be∣fore; at the first marching nimbly, then. jogging on faster; at last the Horse and Foot advancing, gave a furious charge in the best order they were able, and were seconded by Chares with diligence. This was a little before Sun-set, when they surprised some of the Enemy upon the Wall, others washing, some getting ready their provisions, others kneading their Dough, and some making their Beds. When they saw the violence of the At∣tack, they were soon terrified and fled, abandoning all their provisions to those valiant men, who supped on them, and carried the Remainder home. Then sa∣crificing for their good Fortune, and singing an Hymn, they set their Watches and reposed themselves. The Corinthians receiving the News about Thyamia, by night summoned all their Carriages, and loading them with Provisions, sent
them very courteously to Phlius, whi∣ther they went every day after till the Wall was finished. This is the relation of the Phliasians, how they persisted in their fidelity to their Friends, and beha∣ved themselves with Bravery in the War, and remained firm to their alliance, altho reduced to extreme want. Much about this time, Aeneas the Stymphalian, General of the Arcadians, thinking the Transactions at Sicyon were not to be endured, went up into the Cit∣tadel with his Army, and assembled the principal Men of the Sicyonians, recalling those who were banished without a pub∣lick Decree. Euphron fearing this, fled to the Port of Sicyon, and sent for Pasi∣melus from Corinth, by which means he delivered up the Port to the Lacedemoni∣ans, and again embraced their Alliance, professing he had ever been faithful to them: for when it was put to a vote whether they should break with the Lacedemonians or no, he with a few more declar'd against it. Afterwards designing to call them, that betrayed him, to an account, he constituted a Democracy: And now, says he, I have banished all those that have betraid you; and if it had lain in my power, I had brought over the
City to you, but the Port which I was possess'd of, I have delivered up. Many heard him what he said, tho how many believ'd him is not certain. But since I have begun with Euphron's Designs, I will go through with them. The principal Men and People of Sicyon being divided, Euphron return'd in∣to his own Country, bringing with him some Mercenaries from Athens, by whose assistance he possess'd himself of the Town, but the Theban Governor had the Cittadel. Euphron knowing it was im∣possible to maintain the City, whilst the Theban held the Cittadel, raised money, and going to Thebes, perswaded the The∣bans to banish the principal Men, and de∣liver up the Town again. But those who had been banished by him, knowing his intent, and scenting his journey and design, went to Thebes to prevent him, where, fearing he might effect what he came for, because they saw him familiar with the Magistrates, they ventured the danger, and cut his Throat in the Citta∣del, at the time the Magistrates and Se∣nate were sitting. The Magistrates brought the Men that committed the Fact before the Senate, and spoke thus, We, Fellow-Citizens, indict these Men
who have kill'd Euphron for Murder.The Mur∣derers of Euphron indicted. We find that sober Men never commit any unjust or villainous Act, and when Rogues do, they endeavour to hide it. But these have so far transcended all Men in bold∣ness and villany, that without autho∣rity they have murdered a man in the face of you the Magistrates, who have the power of Life and Death; if these there∣fore suffer not the utmost severity of the Law, who will dare to come hereafter to this City? And what will become of this place, if every man may kill those that come hither, before they declare what business they come about. We prosecute these as the most impious and lawless Fellows, who have in an high nature acted in con∣tempt of the Government. Now ye have heard the Case, inflict on them what pu∣nishment you think they deserve. Thus said the Magistrates, the Ruf∣fians denied all that they were concerned in the Murder, except one, who confess'd it, and began to make his Defence in this manner. My Lords of Thebes,The Ruffi∣ans De∣fence. That man dares not offer any contempt to you, who knows that ye have power to use him as ye please. I'll now declare upon what Grounds I kill'd this man. Ye may assure your selves, the
first reason was, because I thought it law∣ful; another is that I might bring you to a right understanding of the case. I found when Archias and Hypates perpetrated the same villanies that Euphron did, ye never staid for the formality of a Trial, but did justice on them the first opportunity: for you grant, that they who are sacrilegious persons, notorious Traitors and Ʋsurpers have already received the sentence of death from all mankind. And certainly Euphron was guilty of all these Crimes; for he left the Temples naked, which he found adorn'd with Offerings of Gold and Silver. Who was a more profess'd Traitor than Euphron? For being a great Friend to the Lacedemonians, he preferr'd your interest before theirs; and then having engaged himself to you, forsook your inter∣est again, and delivered up the Port to your Enemies. And was not he a notorious Tyrant, in that he both freed the Slaves, and naturalized them, killing, banishing and confiscating the Estates, not only of the innocent, but whomsoever he listed, and amongst these Men of the chiefest Qua∣lity. Beside being recalled from exile, by the favour of the Athenians your invete∣rate Enemies, he took Arms against your Governor, and since he was not able to
drive him out of the Cittadel, he has scrap'd up money, and is come hither. If he had appear'd openly in Arms against you, ye would have return'd me thanks for killing him; now when he has brought mo∣ny to corrupt you, and so to procure him∣self to be made supreme of his Country, how can I in Justice be put to death, for inflicting on him his deserved punishment? They that are oppressed by violence suffer indeed, yet cannot be thought unjust; but those who are basely corrupted with Bribes, both suffer and fall into disgrace too. If therefore he were my Enemy, and your Friend, I confess I have then done ill in killing him amongst you: But how came he that betray'd you to be more my Enemy than yours? Perhaps some will say he came hither of his own accord; therefore if any had killed him without your City he had been commended. But now he is come to add more mischief to his former, you can't deny but that he was justly put to death. How can he, that maintains, He was unjustly killed, make it appear, that Traitors, Renegades, or Tyrants are com∣prehended in the publick Leagues amongst the Greeks. Moreover, I desire you would call to mind a Decree made by you, wherein you give leave to seize
Exiles, and take them out of the confe∣derate Cities: Now can any one say, that that Exile is unjustly killed, who re∣turns home without the general Decree of the Allies? My Lords, I affirm, that if you put me to death, you revenge the blood of him who was your most inveterate Enemy. But if you find I have done according to Law, you will not only do justice to your selves, but all your Allies. The Thebans hearing this, decreed, that Euphron had suffered condign punish∣ment. But his Fellow-Citizens having an high opinion of him, carried him to Sicyon, and buried him in the Market∣place, adoring him as their Founder. For all people would have their Benefactors esteem∣ed good men. Hitherto I have spoken of Euphron, and now return from my Di∣gression. Whilst the Phliasians were fortifying Thyamia, and Chares was there, the Exiles surprised Oropus, to which place when the Athenians had drawn their whole Forces, and sent for Chares, they being assisted by the Arcadians, retook the Port of Sicyon. None of the Confe∣derates aided the Athenians, but marched away, and deposited Oropus in the hands of the Thebans, till the Controversie was
decided. But when Lycomedes under∣stood the Athenians complained of the Confederates, that these created them a great deal of trouble, and yet no body assisted them; he perswaded the ten thousand to treat with the Athenians a∣bout an Alliance. At first the Athenians, being in League with the Lacedemonians, some of them thought it hard to confe∣derate with their Enemies, yet conclu∣ding it would be as advantageous to the Lacedemonians as themselves, for the Arcadians to be deprived of the Thebans assistance, they at last accepted the League. Lycomedes having dispatch'd this Affair, parted from Athens, and died after a strange manner: for there being several Ships, he chose one which he liked best, and agreeing to be set on shore where he pleased, he fell by chance into the hands of the Exiles, and so was killed. The League was thus concluded, but Demotion making a Speech to the peo∣ple of Athens, declared, That in his opi∣nion it was judiciously made, yet that they ought to order the Generals to se∣cure Corinth. The Corinthians hearing this, immediately sent sufficient Guards of their own to every place where the
Athenians were in Garrison, and com∣manded them to depart, because they had no occasion for them. Accordingly they complied. Afterwards when the Athenians flocked out of the Forts into the City, the Corinthians made Procla∣mation, That if any of them had receiv∣ed any injury, the Law was open, and they should have Justice done them. Whilst Affairs stood thus, Chares arrived with his Fleet at Cenchreae, and under∣standing what had passed, told them, that hearing of a Design against the City, he was come to assist them, they gave him their thanks, yet did not receive his Fleet into their Harbour, but ordered him to de∣part. In like manner, having paid off the heavy-arm'd Men, they dismiss'd them. Thus Corinth was clear'd of the Athenians, who were obliged by the Treaty to assist the Arcadians with a Body of Horse, in case their Country was invaded: but not to enter Laconia there∣with. The Corinthians considering it would be difficult to secure themselves, being they were already pressed at Land, and had the Athenians for a new Enemy, who alone were too great a Match, resolved to raise Mercenary Horse and Foot, and com∣mand
them themselves, whereby they might not only secure their own City, but act offensively against their Enemies. Besides they sent to Thebes to know whe∣ther they might have a peace; the Thebans gave them encouragement, yet they chose first to consult their Allies about it, being willing to make peace with those that desired it, and to let those who pre∣ferred War, to have a War. The The∣bans giving their consent, the Corinthians went to Lacedemon, and there delivered themselves after this manner: My Lords of Lacedemon,The Corin∣thians Speech to the Lacede∣monians. We your Allies are come hither, requiring you, that if you have any prospect of success by con∣tinuing the War, to inform us thereof: but if your Affairs be reduced to extremi∣ty, it will be for your Interest as well as ours to make a Peace. There is no Na∣tion in the World that we had rather be secure with, than with yours. But if you think War can be advantageous to you, we desire you to give us the liberty of making peace for our selves. If we be preserv'd we may at a seasonable time as∣sist you; but if we be now ruined, we can never be serviceable to you hereafter. The Lacedemonians hearing this, ad∣vised the Corinthians to make peace, and
permitted the other Allies that were not disposed to carry on the War, to sit still, declaring, as for themselves, they would hold out, and submit to Providence. But to part with Messene, which they had re∣ceived from their Ancestors, they would yield to never. Thereupon the Corinthi∣ans went to Thebes for Peace. The The∣bans required them to make a League offensive and defensive: to which the Corinthians made answer, That such a League was not a Peace, but an Exchange of the War; however, if they thought good, they were willing to make one upon equal Terms. The Thebans admi∣ring them, because they would not be ungrateful to their Benefactors, tho they were exposed to danger, granted them, the Phliasians, and the rest that came with them a Peace upon condition, that every one should possess their own, and on these terms it was ratified. The Phliasians im∣mediately upon conclusion of the Treaty quitted Thyamia; but the Argives, tho they had sworn to the Peace, being not able to procure the same Freedom for the Phliasian Exiles in Tricranum, as in their own City, possess'd themselves of Thyamia, and placed a Garrison there, alledging the Territory belong'd to them,
tho a little before they had destroyed it in an hostile manner, and when the Phlia∣sians demanded Justice, they denyed it them. Much about this time,Chion Ar∣chon. Dionysius the elder died, and his Son sent twelve Gal∣lies, commanded by Timocrates, to aid the Lacedemonians; who, after he arri∣ved, assisted them in the taking of Sella∣sia, and then returned home again. Not long after, the Eleans took Lasio, which formerly belonged to them, but at that time it was under the jurisdiction of the Arcadians. The Arcadians neglect∣ed it not, but immediately assembled their Forces together, and took the Field, against whom the Eleans came out first with four hundred Men, and then with three hundred more encamping all the day in a Plain. In the night the Arcadi∣ans march'd up to the top of an Hill that over-looked the Eleans, and came down upon them by break of day. The Ele∣ans seeing, that they were stronger, and march'd from the higher Ground, were yet ashamed for some time to decamp; but the Arcadians attacking them at last, they scarce came to handy-blows before they fled, and lost a great many Men and Arms in their Retreat, through the strait Passes.
After this Action, the Arcadians at∣tacked the Towns of the Acrorians, and having taken all but Thraustus, passed on to Olympia; where making a Trench a∣bout Saturn's Temple, they put in a Garrison there, and possess'd themselves of Mount Olympus. Then they took Marga∣na upon surrender. The Eleans were wholly dejected at this success of their Enemies. The Arcadians also came up to the very City, and advanced as far as the Market-place, where the Elean Horse, and some others beside encoun∣tring them beat them them out, and ha∣ving killed some of them erected a Tro∣phy. Sometime before this, there were Divisions at Elis, for the Faction of Cha∣ropus, Thrasonidas and Argeus brought in a Democracy, and that of Stalcas, Hip∣pias and Stratolas an Oligarchy. But the Arcadians having a great power, and inclining to those who were for a Demo∣cracy, Charopus's Party thereby became bolder, agreeing with the Arcadians to assist them, and surprise the Cittadel. The Horse and the three hundred Foot observing them, march'd up thither, and beat them out, so that Argeus and Cha∣ropus with about four hundred more were banished. Not long after being
supported by a Body of Arcadians, they took Pylus, to which place there had been a Concourse of People from the City, as being wealthy, and having so powerful assistance from the Arcadians; who afterwards entered the Eleans Coun∣try, being perswaded by the Exiles, that the City would yield to them. But the Achaeans being at that time in League with the Eleans, protected them, so that the Arcadiaus only harrassed their Coun∣try, and retired. As soon as they were march'd out of the Territory of Elis, being inform'd, that some Pellenians were in the City, they took a long March in the Night, and possessed themselves of Olurus, a Town that belonged to the Pellenians, because they were in League with the La∣cedemonians. After the Pellenians heard the News of Olurus, they fetched a long compass, and returned to their own City. Afterwards, tho they were but a small Party, yet they attacked the Arcadi∣ans, and all the people in Olurus; nor did they desist till they had taken it. Again the Arcadians attempted Elis in another Voyage; and whilst they encamped be∣tween Cyllene and the City, the Eleans attacked them; but the Arcadians re∣ceiving
their first Charge, repulsed them. Whereupon Andromachus the Governor of the Eleans, who perswaded them to fight, kill'd himself, the rest retired into the Town, and Soclidas the Spartan be∣ing in this Fight was slain, for the La∣cedemonians were at this time in League with the Eleans. When the Eleans were hard pressed at home, they sent an Am∣bassador, and desired the Lacedemonians to fall upon the Arcadians, thinking the best way to divert them would be to at∣tack them on both sides. Thereupon Archidamus marched out with the Lace∣demonians, and taking Cromnus, left there a Garrison of three Companies out of twelve, and so returned home. The Arcadians being assembled about the Expedition against Elis, marched with their Forces, and securing themselves with a double Trench, besieged Cromnus. The Lacedemonians being much con∣cerned, that their People should be be∣sieged, sent out another Army under the Leading of Archidamus, who went and destroyed all Arcadia and Sciris, endea∣vouring, if it were possible, to raise the Siege; yet the Arcadians stirred not from the place, nor took any notice of them. Then Archidamus viewing an Hill a∣long
which the Arcadians had drawn their outermost Trench, thought he could take it, and that if he were possessed thereof, the place would be too hot for the Besiegers. When he had fetched a compass about it with his Forces, the foremost of his light-arm'd Men discover∣ed theA chosen Band of Men a∣mongst the Arca∣dians. Epariti without the Works, and set upon them, the Horse endeavou∣ring to break in with them. The Arca∣dians received them in good order, and maintain'd their Ground. Then the rest attached them, yet they would not give back, but set up a loud shout, and pressed forward upon the Enemy. Archidamus relieved his Men, and turned towards the Road that leads to Cromnus, having drawn them up two deep; but as soon as he began to move, his Men were drawn up in File, because they marched in the Road. The Arcadians with their close Body made a. Target-defense, upon which the Lacedemonians were not able to maintain their Charge. Archidamus being soon wounded through the Thigh, Polyaenidas, and Chilo, that had married Archidamus's Sister, and those who fought in the Front, were slain; and in all there were thirty killed. Whereupon the La∣cedemonians retired out of the Road, and
marched into the open Field, drawing up in a close body; nevertheless, the Ar∣cadians remained in their first order, be∣ing inferior in numbers, but superior in courage; for they fell upon those that retreated, and cut several of them in pieces. On the contrary, the Lacede∣monians seeing Archidamus wounded, and hearing the names of the valiant Men that were slain, being some of the bravest they had, were much disheart∣ned. At length they came near one ano∣ther, and one of the old men cried out, Sirs, why should we fight? Why don't we make a Truce?! They willingly heark∣ened to this, and came to Terms of A∣greement. So the Lacedemonians took their dead, and marched off, and the Arcadians returning to the place where they first began the Battel, erected a Trophy. Whiles the Arcadians invested Crom∣nus, the Eleans marching to Pylus, met with the Pylians that had been repulsed at Thalamae. Thereupon the Elean Horse making use of the opportunity as soon as they saw them, advanced forwards, and immediately charged them, killing some, whilst the rest retired to an Hill; but afterwards the Foot coming up,
they defeated those on the Hill, killing and taking near two hundred. They sold the Mercenaries for Slaves, and put the Exiles to the sword. After this, none assisting the Pylians, they took Pylus, and recovered Margana. A while after the Lacedemonians coming by night to Cromnus, gained the Trench, and im∣mediately fetched off their besieged through theLege  Palmer. Argives Quarter. For as many as were near, and nick'd the. time, got out, but those that the Arcadians prevented by their speed, being driven back, were taken, and divided amongst the Victors: one share whereof fell to the Argives, another to the Thebans, a third to the Arcadians, and the last to the Messenians. There were taken in all, of the Spartans and their Neighbors, a∣bove an hundred. After the Arcadians had finished the Siege of Cromnus, they turned their Arms upon the Eleans, and reinforced the Garrison at Olympia. More∣over the Olympick Year coming on, they made preparations to keep the Games with the Pisans, who pretended to be Presidents of Jupiter's Temple. The Month being come,Olymp. 104. Tmocrates Archon. in which the Olympick Games are celebrated, and the day of Solemnity at hand; the Eleans
made open preparations, and invited the Achoeans, marching the way that goes to Olympia. The Arcadians think∣ing they would never come up with them, they ordered the Solemnity be∣ing assisted by the Pisans. The Horse-Races were already over, and the Foot-Races that belonged to the Five Games: The Wrestlers did not play in the Course, but between it and the Altar. When the Eleans came to the Temple of Jupi∣ter, the Arcadians went not far to meet them, but drew up in Battalia near the River Cladaus, which runs by Alte, and falls into the Alpheus. The Arcadians were assisted by two thousand Argive heavy-arm'd Men, and about four hun∣dred Athenians. The Eleans drew up by the River, and having sacrified, immedi∣ately advanced; and altho neither the Arcadians, Argives, Acheans, nor Athe∣nians thought them Soldiers before that time; yet then they led the Van, as be∣ing the bravest Men of all the Confede∣rates. They first attacked the Arcadians, and immediately routed them: then re∣ceiving the Argives that seconded them, defeated them too, and pursued them to the place between the Senate-House and Vesta's Temple, to which the Theatre
joyns, fighting still, and driving them towards the Altar: but being shot at both from the Porticoes, Senate-House, and great Temple, at length they engaged on the plain ground, and there several with Stratolas, a Captain of three hun∣dred, were slain, and after this Action they retired into their Camp. The Ar∣cadians and their Auxiliaries so dreaded the following day, that they plucked down their Tents in the night, and in∣trenched themselves. The next day the Eleans approaching, and finding the Wall very strong, and that several were got on the tops of the Temples, returned to Elis, Having approv'd themselves as brave Men as Heaven with its inspired valour could in one day make them: for man can∣not in a long space of time make Cowards valorous. The States of Arcadia made use of the consecrated Money, and paid the Epariti therewith; but the Mantineans first of all declared they would not meddle with it, and then raising their Quota due to the Epariti from them, sent it to the States; but these alledging, that the Community of the Arcadians was ruined by the Man∣tineans, summoned the Magistrates to appear before the Ten Thousand. But
the Mantineans refusing to obey, they passed sentence on them, and sent the Epariti to bring the Criminals before them, yet they would not receive them, but shut their Gates against them. About this time some of the Ten Thousand themselves, declared, that they ought not to convert the consecrated Money to their own use, lest they should thereby entail a Curse upon their Posterity. There∣upon the whole Assembly resolv'd not to convert this consecrated Money to their own uses. Upon this those Epariti which could not subsist without pay de∣serted, and those Arcadians that could, exhorted one another to succeed in their places, that so the Epariti might be in their power, and not they in the power of the Epariti. The principal men that had. fingered the Sacred Money, considering they should be in danger of losing their Heads, if they were called to an account, sent to the Thebans to let them know, that if they did not succour them, it was to be feared, that the Arcadians would side with the Lacedemonians. Accordingly the Thebans made preparations to assist them. On the contrary, those who were inclined most to the Interest of Pelopone∣sus,
perswaded the Community of the Arcadians to send Ambassadors, and ac∣quaint the Thebans, that they should not enter Arcadia with their Army, till they had farther invitation. Nor did they de∣clare themselves thus to the Thebans on∣ly, but concluded themselves upon very good Reasons, that they had no obligation to make a War, knowing that they had no Title to be Presidents of Jupiter's Temple, but that they should do a great∣er piece of Justice, and which would be more pleasing to the God, by restoring the Presidentship to the Eleans. The Eleans approving of it, both sides thought fit to conclude a Peace, and according∣ly one was concluded. When all, as well the Tegeans, as the Theban that com∣manded three hundred Boeotian heavy-arm'd Men at Tegea, had taken the Oaths, some of the Arcadians that re∣mained at Tegea feasted, and were mer∣ry, offering Sacrifices, and singing Hymns, as tho the Peace had been alrea∣dy Ratified. The Thebans and chief of the Arcadians, as also the Baeotians, that were afraid lest they should be call'd to an account about the consecrated Mo∣ney, and the Epariti that were under the same Circumstances, causing the
Gates of Tegea to be shut, sent Officers to those that were making merry, and seized the Principal Persons amongst them. For every one being desirous of Peace, there was a great Concourse of People from all the Cities of Arcadia, whereby there must needs be a great many taken, insomuch that the Prison and Town-House were filled with them. Several were committed to Custody, some leap'd down the Walls, and others were let out at the Gates; (for no body was incens'd a∣gainst any one, except those that thought they should be put to death) which put the Theban Commander, and his Com∣plices to their Wits-ends, because they had seized very few of the Mantineans, whom chiefly they design'd to take, for their City being near most of them e∣scaped home. When it was day, and the Mantineans heard how Affairs went, they sent immediately to all the Arcadian Towns, summoning them to appear in Arms, and to be upon their Guard, as they were. At the same time they sent to Tegea, and demanded the Mantine∣ans they had seiz'd; Adding, that no Arcadian ought to be imprisoned or put to death without a tryal. And some there were who blam'd them for these Pro∣ceedings,
because the Mantineans had en∣gag'd to produce any before the Commu∣nity of the Arcadians that should be Im∣peached. The Theban Commander hear∣ing this, could not tell how to govern himself, but discharged all the Prisoners; and the Day following, calling together as many Arcadians as would assemble, ex∣cused himself before them, saying, he was mistaken; and told them, that he heard that the Lacedemonians were in the Fron∣tiers with their Army, and that some of the Arcadians were ready to betray Te∣gea to them: which when they heard, they let him go, though they knew that he imposed upon them. The Arcadians sent Ambassadors to Thebes to Impeach this Commander of Treason; and then they report, that Epaminondas who was at that time their General, should say; That he did much better in seizing the Arcadians, than in discharging them: For, said he, Why may not he accuse you of Treason, when we for your sakes made War, and you without our Consent have concluded a Peace? Assure your selves, said he, we will employ our Arms against Arcadia, and make a joynt War with our Confe∣derates. When this was reported to the
Community of the Arcadians, and the Account hereof spread through every Ci∣ty, the rest of the Arcadians, andMantine∣ans, Eleans, Achaeans. those that were concern'd for Peloponefus ga∣thered from hence, that the Thebans did endeavour to weaken the Peloponesians what they could, that so they might en∣slave them with the more ease: For, said they, Why would they have us both in∣volv'd in a War, unless it was to weaken one another, that so both of us may stand in need of their assistance? Why do they make Preparations for a Campagn, tho' we have told them that we have no oc∣casion at this time for them? Is it not manifest that they design us mischief? Thereupon they sent to Athens for as∣sistance, and dispatch'd the Epariti on an Embassie to the Lacedemonians, re∣quiring them to joyn Forces, and preserve Peloponnesus from slavery. Then they determined the matter about the Com∣mand in Chief, how that each Republick should command in their own Territories. Whilst these things were in agitation,Chariclides Archon. Epaminondas took the Field with all the Boeotians, Eubaeans, and several Thessa∣lians he had from Alexander, and from his Enemies: The Phoceans did not joyn them, alledging they had agreed to as∣sist
the Thebans if any invaded them; but it was not in the Articles to make a War Offensive. Epaminondas considered that they had the Argives, Messenians, and the Arcadians in Peloponnesus, which sided with them: the Tegeans also, Me∣galapolitans, Aseans, Palanteans, and some other small Towns that lay a∣mongst these which were compelled to follow them: He marched out with great diligence, and arriving at Nemea, made an halt there, hoping to intercept the Athenians that were passing that way; thinking this would be of great moment to confirm the Confederates, and to put the Enemy into a Consternation; and in short, every thing would be advantage∣ous to him that incommoded the Athe∣nians. Whilst he remained there, all the Peloponnesians that had confederated to∣gether, assembled at Mantinea: But as soon as Epaminondas understood that the Athenians had changed their resolution of marching by Land, and made Prepa∣rations by Sea, to pass with their Army through Lacedemon to the relief of the Arcadians, he decamped from Nemea, and arrived at Tegea. I cannot say that this Expedition of his was much successful, though I find
nothing of Conduct or Courage want∣ing in him: First I cannot but com∣mend him for encamping within the Walls of Tegea, as having there a securer Post; than if he had been without, and being more private from the Enemies understanding his Designs: Besides, if he had occasion for any necessaries, they might be easier procured in the City: and the Enemy encamping without the Town might be discovered if they did any thing well, or committed any mi∣stake: And because he thought himself stronger than the Enemy, as often as he saw them attempt the taking any advan∣tageous Posts, he went not out to attack them. But wen he found never a Town would surrender to him, and that the Season advanced, he thought he must perform some remarkable Exploit, or else expect some great Disgrace instead of his former Glory. Therefore being Advertised that the Enemy was strongly encamped near Mantinea, and had sent for Agesilaus and all the Lacedemonians, being informed also that Agesilaus was already marcht as far as Pellene; he Supped, and giving Orders to the Army, moved directly to∣wards Sparta: And if a certain Cretan
by a special Providence had not informed Agesilaus that the Army was upon their march, Epaminondas had surprized the City like a Nest of young Ones, wholly defenceless: But Agesilaus having first Intelligence of it, reached the City be∣fore the Enemy, and posted his Spar∣tans, who though but an handfull, defended the Place. For all their Horse, their Mercenary Troops, and three Com∣panies out of Ten were march'd on be∣fore into Arcadia. After Epaminondas was come to Sparta, he did not enter the Town where the Enemy might have en∣gaged him in the Plain, or where they might have thrown their Darts from off the Houses, or where a small number could have done as much service as a greater; but took a Place of which he thought he could make advantage, and so went down, not up into the City. But what hapned there afterwards may be partly ascribed to Providence; or else it may be said, that no Power can resist the Desperate. For though Archidamus had not an hundred men, he not only passed over the River, where in probability he might have been hindred, but marched up a rising Ground to the Enemy; and there those Souldiers that breathed Fire,
that had beaten the Lacedemonians that were in every respect stronger than they, and on higher Ground, could not sustain the Charge of Archidamus's Men, but gave ground, and the foremost of Epa∣minondas's Men were slain. The Lacede∣monians being transported with the Vi∣ctory, and pursuing the Enemy too far, came off with some loss: For as it seems, Providence had circumscribed the bounds of the Victory how far it should extend. Archidamus erected a Trophy in the Place where he had routed the Enemy, and deliver'd their Dead upon Truce. Epaminondas considering that the Ar∣cadians were coming to the relief of La∣cedemon, would not fight them and the Lacedemonians together; especially these having been lately successful, and his own Men foiled. Wherefore marching back again with all speed to Tegea, and refresh∣ing his Heavy-arm'd men, he sent his Horse to Mantinea, desiring them to hold out bravely; telling them that probably all the Mantineans and their Cattel were without the Walls, it being the time that they housed their Corn; accordingly they went: In the mean while the Athe∣nian Horse marching from Eleusis, Sup∣ped at the Isthmus, and passing by Cleone,
arrived at Mantinea, and took up their Quarters in the City. The mantineans being certified that the Enemies Cavalry were coming thither, desired the Athe∣nian Horse to assist them if 'twere possi∣ble: for all their Cattel were abroad, as also their Workmen; a great many Chil∣dren, and old Men that were free. The Athenians hearing this, went out to their Assistance, before either they or their Horses had eaten. Here who can enough admire the Va∣lour of these Horses, who though they saw the Enemy were far stronger, and tho they themselves had had a Disaster at Co∣rinth, they yet never call'd it to mind, or that they were to fight with the Theban and Thessalian Horse, which were counted the best in the World: But ashamed to come thither without doing the Confederates any Service; as soon as ever they came in view of the Enemy, desirous to main∣tain the Glory of their Ancestors, they engaged them, and by this Encounter saved all that the Mantineans had abroad; yet they lost some brave men, and slew also some such of the Enemy: For there was none on either side that had so short a Weapon, but that he could reach his Enemy therewith: At last they carried
off their Friends that were slain, and re∣stored the Enemy theirs upon Truce. Here Epaminondas considering, that within a few days he should be obliged to depart, because the time set for the Expedition was elapsed; and that if he should leave them exposed, whom he came to assist, then they would be besie∣ged by the Enemy, and himself should lose all his former Glory: (because he, and a strong body of Heavy-arm'd men had been beaten at Lacedemon by a few, foil∣ed at Mantinea in a Skirmish with the Horse; and that his Voyage into Pelopon∣nesus had given occasion to the Lacede∣monians, Arcadians, Achaeans, Eleans, and Athenians, to enter into a Confederacy) thought it was not possible for him to retreat without fighting; considering too, that if he conquer'd he should re∣move all these Difficulties, and that if he were killed, it would be thought a Noble Death, by having attempted to leave his Country, the Soveraignty of Peloponnesus. Nor is it any great won∣der to me that he should entertain these Designs, for these are the thoughts of men that are Lovers of Glory: But this is a greater wonder, that he so inur'd his Souldiers to refuse no kind of Toyl
either by Day or Night, to decline no Danger, and to obey his Commands though they wanted Provisions. For at last, when he gave out orders to his Army to prepare themselves for Battel, the Horse readily at his Command white∣ned their Head-pieces, and some of the Arcadian Heavy-arm'd men form'd them∣selves into Companies, and carried Clubs after the manner of the Thebans: Lastly, all whetted their Spears and Swords, and scoured their Bucklers. It is worth while to observe what he did after he had got them in this good Order. At first, as is usual, he drew up in Bat∣talia,The Battel at Manti∣nea. and then signified that Prepara∣tions should be made for a Battel: after he had drawn up as he best liked, he did not take the shortest Cut to the Enemy, but led to the Hills that lay on the West of Tegea, and opposite to the place where he was: So that he made the Enemy be∣lieve he would not fight that Day. But after he came to the Mountains, and had extended his Army in Front, he made a halt under the Hills, as though he was about to Encamp; and by this abated the prepared Fury of the Enemy to fight, and made them negligent of the order of Battel they had drawn up
in: But bringing the Companies that were placed in File to the Front,. and making a strong Wedge about himself, he commanded them to take up their Arms again and led them on. When the E∣nemy saw them advance contrary to their expectation, no one stood still, but some ran to their Ranks, others pre∣pared themselves in Battalia; some bridled their Horses, and put on their Armour, and seemed rather to be made a Carnage of, than to make one. On the other hand, Epaminondas led on his Ar∣my, being like the opposite Stem of a Galley, concluding that where-ever he made an Impression, there he should ru∣ine their whole Body: For he had pre∣pared to charge with the Flower of his Forces, leaving the Weaker part a good way off; considering that if this were beaten, it would put the rest into a Con∣sternation, and add Resolution to the E∣nemies. The Enemy had drawn up their Horse in depth like a Battalion of Heavy-arm'd men, not having flank'd them with Foot. on the contrary, Epaminondas made a firm Wedge of his Horse, and placed Foot by them, thinking that after he had broke through the Enemies Horse, he
should beat all the rest of their Army: For 'tis very hard to find any that will abide by't, when they see their Fellow-Souldiers run. Now that the Athenians, on the left might not relieve those next them, he posted some Horse and Heavy-arm'd men on the opposite Hills, put∣ting them in fear, that if they went to the relief of their men, these would fall on their Rear: Nor did he sail of his De∣sign; for fighting in this order, he beat that Part he charged, and put the whole Army to flight: But after he fell himself, the others knew not how to use the Victo∣ry; for when the Battalion that charged them fled, the Heavy-arm'd men killed no body, nor advanced from the place where the Fight began. In like manner when the Enemies Horse sled, the The∣bans did not pursue them, nor their Hea∣vy-arm'd men, but as if they had been beaten, got disorderly away through the flying Enemy: The Foot and the Tar∣getiers by agreement moved together with the Horse to the left, as if they had been Victorious, where most of them were cut in pieces by the Athenians. This Action hapned contrary to the expectation of all men; for most part of Greece being got together, and drawn
up in Battalia, every one believed that if there were a Fight, the Victors would rule, and the Vanquisht obey: But Pro∣vidence so ordered it, that both sides as Victors set up Trophies, and neither side hindred the other from erecting them: both as Conquerors delivered the Slain upon Truce, and both as Conquered re∣ceived them upon Truce. And though both pretended to the Victory, yet nei∣ther the one nor the other enlarg'd their Territories, or encreased their Power; but after the Fight there arose greater Confusion and Troubles in Greece, than ever were at any time before. Thus far have I deduc'd my History, and perhaps that which follows may be done by some other hand.
An Advertisement. THE Chronology of this History being obscure, it will be necessa∣ry to offer something towards the clearing of it. Our Author continues the History of the Peloponnesian War, which Thucydides began, and brought down as far as the end of Summer, in the Twenty first Year of the War, to the Second Battel at Mantinea, containing the Space of Forty eight Years. Didorus Siculus affirms in his XIII. Book, that Xenophon was the Continuator of Thu∣cydides; but mistakes in asserting that Thucydides wrote to the Twenty second Year of the War; because the latter in the close of his VIII. Book, says, That the Twenty first Year would not be Compleated, till the Winter that suc∣ceeded the Summer, where he breaks off his History, was elapsed. Some learned men allow Xenophon to be the Continuator of Thucydides, but yet they would have the History of
some Years wanting; concluding it both from the abrupt beginning, which has no Introduction as the rest of his Works, and from the Account by Olympiades and Archons. 'Tis very probable the first may be so far true, that something may be defective, though not whole Years; but the Argument they fetch from the Olympiades and Archons to prove it, is insuf∣ficient, because that Account was not so early in use as these Authors, as has been formerly observ'd by a learned Gentle∣man; and therefore I have set them in the Margin as being a Gloss, and inserted into the Text. Moreover the constant Notation of Time throughout Thucydi∣des and Xenophon, is by Summer and Winter, and 'tis by accident that either of them make any mention of Olympick Years, and when they do, 'tis not in re∣lation to the Annals of the History, but to some dependance the History has on them. But further to prove that Xenophon was the Continuator of Thucydides: I shall alledge a Law of the Lacedemonians, that barred the same person from being twice Admiral, which is mentioned both in the second Book of this History, and by Plutarch in the Life of Lysander, on
this occasion. The Lacedemonians being vanquisht by the Athenians in the Sea Fight at Arginusae, their Affairs were reduced to a very ill Condition: yet the Confederates resolving to repair their for∣mer Losses, Requested the Lacedemonians to send them Lysander to Command their Fleet; having the experience of his Conduct in the Fight at Notium; wherein he overthrew the Athenians; The Lacedemonians answered them, that by their Law none might be twice Ad∣miral; thereupon they gave Aracus the Command of the Fleet, choosing Lysan∣der to go in Quality of his Vice-Admi∣ral. Moreover the Admirals continued but a year in their Office: For we find in the first Book of this History, that as soon as Lysander's year was elaps'd, the Lacedemonians sent Callicratidas to suc∣ceed him. Furthermore Thucydides in his last Book witnesses, that Mindarus succeeded Astyochus in the Command of the Fleet, and Xenophon in the first Book of his History, implies that he was Admiral; because he mentions Hegesandridas as his Vice-Admiral. Therefore, since none could be twice Admiral by the Lacedemonian Law, and
none could bear that Office longer than a year: And being Thucydides in the end of the eighth Book, and Xenophon in the be∣ginning of this History, affirm, that Minda∣rus was Admiral; it follows that the one ends, and the other begins in the same year. In the next place it is to be considered, that there are two Opinions concerning the duration of the War. Thucydides in his Fifth Book, says, That it lasted Twenty seven years, and ended when the Walls of the Pireus were demolish∣ed; but Xenophon says, Twenty eight and an half, acounting till the time that Lysander return'd home in Triumph: Yet there was but half a year betwixt the Demolishing of the Walls, and Ly∣sander's Triumph; so that there is the difference of a year between both Ac∣counts. To this I answer, that as there are two ends of this War, so there are as many beginnings: For Thucydides accounts from the time of Action, and Xenophon from the Declaration of the War, which was when the Ambassadors of the Allies assembled at Lacedemon, to Confederate against the Athenians: and the like Sup∣putation Thucydides makes in his Second Book; where he says, That Pericles died
two years and an half after the War be∣gan; which must be understood in Xe∣nophon's sense and not in his own. Having thus proved that Xenophon is the Continuator of Thucydides, and that there is no defect of any year; I proceed to set out the Six years and an half of the Peloponnesian War, that this Author writes of: the end of the Twen∣ty first year, and beginning of the Twen∣ty second are not distinguished: Where∣upon I have followed Diodorus Siculus herein, and placed the Death of Minda∣rus in the end of the Twenty first year, and began the Twenty second with the Banishment of the Syracusian Captains; the other five years are expresly distin∣guished. The rest of the Chronology is very ob∣scure, which amongst other things makes me think that Xenophon did not finish this Piece, because the Notation of Time is frequently omitted, and in many pla∣ces the Sequel of an Action not continu∣ed, but interrupted with some new rela∣tion. I have in order to the clearing of it, made four Periods; the first to the Fight at Cnidus, the second to the An∣talcidean Peace, the third to the Battel at Leuctra, and the fourth to that at
Mantinea. And because the Marks of Time are wanting in Xenophon, I have fitted them to the Annals of Diodorus Siculus, and where the years are not di∣stinguished, I have supplied them out of the latter. There is but one Notation of Time in the latter part of the History, which oc∣curs in the Fifth Book, concerning the Mantinean War, that broke out at the Expiration of the Thirty years Truce made after the first Battel at Mantinea, which was fought in the Fourteenth year of the Peloponnesian War, and the third of the Ninety third Olympiad; so that accounting from that time to the third of the Ninety eighth Olympiad, when this War began, there are Two and thirty Years; and reck'ning exclusively, that is, neither the year when the Truce was made, nor the Year when the War be∣gan, and there will remain Thirty, the Number sought. Addenda. I thought it convenient to add these various Lections out of Palmerius, which came into my hands since this Transla∣tion was in the Press.
Page 84. lin. 9. lege Artaxerxes. Page 124. lin. 4. pro  lege . For these Exoneans were a Tribe in Atti∣ca, and had no concern with the Exiles in the Piraeus; so that Lysimachus did very unjustly in killing them: whereas if they had belong'd to the Exiles, they had been Enemies, and so no injustice in him to have slain them. Page 152 lin. 22 Lege . For Dercyllidas entred the Country about Ephesus with his own Troops in no good order, be∣cause he arrived there before the Enemy, and knowing nothing of their March, was not upon his guard. FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by W. Freeman, by Temple-Bar in Fleetstreet. THE Penitent pardoned: Or a Dis∣course of the Nature of Sin, and Efficacy of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son: By J. Goodman, D. D. One of His Majesties Chaplains in Ordinary; the Second Edition in Quarto. Holy Devotions, with Directions to Pray. Also a brief Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer, Creed, Ten Command∣ments, Seven Penitential Psalms, and the Seven Psalms of Thanksgiving: Together with a Litany: By the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelet Andrews, late Bishop of Winchester; the Seventh Edi∣tion. Daily Exercise for a Christian: Or a Manual of Private Devotions, consisting of Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings, as well for every Day in the Week, as upon particular Occasions: Composed by a Per∣son of Exemplary Piety, for his own use. Twelves, price 1 s. The manner of the Israelites in three Parts. 1. Of the Patriarchs. 2. Of the Is∣raelites, after their coming out of Egypt, until the Captivity of Babylon. 3. Of the Jews, after their Return from the Capti∣vity,
until the Preaching of the Gospel: Written Originally in French, by the In∣genious Mr. Fliere Tutor to the Count de Vendosme, faithfully Translated, 12o. Scarron's Novels; viz. The Fruitless Precaution. The Hypocrites. The Innocent Adultery. The Judge in his own Cause. The Rival Brothers. The Invisible Mi∣stress. The Chastisement of Avarice: and the Ʋnexpected Choice, Octavo. The Means to preserve Peace in Mar∣riage; being an Ingenious Treatise. Writ∣ten (Originally in French) by the Au∣thor of the Rules of Civility. Necessary for all Persons that enter into a Wedded State. Sheppard's President of Presidents: Or one General President for Common As∣surances by Deeds; wherein there is an Extract of all the general Learning and Forms of Presidents now extant. Out of which you may be fitted for most Purposes and Cases; and be able to find the Faults of any Conveyances, and so judge of your Right and Title to your Lands and Goods: here being the Effect and Quintescence of all Books of this kind. Of singular Use and Profit to all men. The third Edition, Octavo. The Clerks Mannual, Or an Exact Col∣lection of the most approved Forms of
Declarations, &c. Octavo. The Grand Expedient for suppressing Popery examined: Or the Project of Ex∣clusion proved to be contrary to Reason and Religion: By J. Clipsham Preben∣dary of Chichester. To the Excluders. Are your Minds set upon Righteousness, O ye Congre∣gation, and do you judge the thing that is right, O ye Sons of Men? Psalm 58.1. In Octavo, New. Price 2 s. 6 d. An Infallible way to Contentment in the midst of Publick or Personal Calami∣ties: Together with the Christians Cou∣rage and Encouragement against Evil Ti∣dings, and the Fear of Death, Twelves, Price 1 s. 6 d. FINIS.
