f52a 12010944 52413
THE Present State OF CAROLINA WITH Advice to the Setlers. By R. F. LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in Grace-Church-Street, 1682.
THE Present State OF CAROLINA, &c. CAROLINA is part of the Main in Ameri∣ca, and so much celebrated by Mounsier Laudonere, that he entitles it Florida, be∣cause of her florid, and fragrant fields, im∣bellish't with flowers, that perfume the air: whose sweet scituations, by reason of most delicious and pleasant meadows (and flourishing savana's) adorns the Continent; and whose benevolent brest sends daily supplies to the planter, and hourly relief to the poor and necessitous native: whose spacious arms (s if circulating the Ocean) proclaims her shores sanctuary to distressed Marriners; and a generous protection to deplora∣ble Seamen, that solicit refreshment from her replenish't Har∣bours, which extend themselves southward to the River St.
Matheo, in twenty nine degrees, odd minutes; so dilates to Luck Island, near Roanoak on the promontories of Virginia, in thir∣ty six degrees north latitude (now called Albemarle) a large and spacious settlement, consisting of some two or three thousand inhabitants; upon a fertil Soil, and a rapid River, whose Bar by reason its so streight and shallow, a Vessel of considerable port and burden is deny'd admittance into the bowel of the Collony. But the late and flourishing settlement lies yet more sou∣therly, in and about thirty two degrees, odd minutes; pa∣rallel with Jerusalem in Palestine: and equals the height of Bermudos, upon the naigable Rivers of Cooper, and Ashly, formerly known by the names of Wando, and Kiawah. And there is a Bar also, tho undeservedly calumniated by prejudi∣cate persons, who would if possible unhinge the settlement when because to emulate and envy their Neighbours pros∣perity. But to clear that Objection, this Bar has several Channels, and the deepest at low water is eighteen foot; and the shallowest about eleaven, and twelve foot; which is depth enough for any navigating Vessel of three or four hun∣dred tun; since at high water the tide swells to six and eight foot perpendicular. This is that famous CAROLINA, which his Majesty the King of Great Brittain has united to his Emperial Crown; & by his Royal Grant established it a Province; and has dignifi∣ed it a Principality: which by consent amongst the Lords i transferr'd to the eldest Proprieor. But the Propri∣etors are eight in number, and their Names and Titles as followeth. Lord Chancellor Clarendon, Lord Duke Albemarle,
Earl of Craven, Lord Anthony Ashley Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord John Berkly, Sr George Carteret, Sr William Berkly, and Sr John Colleton Knight and Baronet. These are the Lords Pro∣prietors, whose Laws and Government (because to proceed in my description) is suspended till farther Opportunity pre∣sents to usher them in. So that now to describe the present strength of the southern settlement of the flourishing Carolina (by modest computation) we calculate their Artillery to fourteen, or fifteen hundred re∣solute, and gallant fighting men; under excellent conduct, and discipline; as well arm'd as most men, & as well as any Colo∣ny provided with Amunition. Their Women also are health∣ful, and fruitful; and their Children generally beautiful, and strong. Nor have we hitherto considered the Negro Slaves, whose labour proclaims the Setlers plenty; and whose ser∣vice doubles their security, if provided a Foreigner should attempt to invade them. Moreover it enervates the femi∣nine Native, if at any time he conspires against the Inhabi∣tant, who can never be insensible of the natural antipathy the Native, and the Negro has one against another; which the rather confirms the Setlers security. Moreover, the Heavens shine upon this famous Country the soveraign Ray of health; and has blest it with a serene Air, and a lofty Skie, that defends it from noxious Infection; nor is there any known Distemper incident to the inhabitant whereby to terrify, and affright him; who for the most part lives by the law of plenty, extended to the utmost limits of sanity: This blessing one would think was encouragement enough; when if barely to contemplate the consideration
of health. But Heaven, that alwaies attends our mortal feli∣city, directs to stars more propicious; pointing out to us the beaten path of the Patriarchs, and led on by a glorious view of the Apostles, makes shine the blazing torch of the Gospel; whereby to promote the unity and harmony of piety in Reli∣gion, that Vertue may grow up into divine practice, and the purity of every pious profession blossom, and flourish to the utmost ends of the settlement in Carolina. Now for as much as the motives of health and riches are inducements strong enough to summons people from the ends of the earth; who so ridiculous to repute them vain and unprofitable Arguments to encourage the people of Europe, since from divers Inland Towns (and various Ports of England) several Natives, and Forreigners have directed their course by prosperous Stars to the florid, and flourish∣ing Fields in Carolina. So in America (to my own observation) several Families have transported themselves from the ports of Barbados; but what from the rest of the Caribes, I know not: yet am credibly inform'd (and from very good hands) that divers are gone, and going from thence: as also from New-Pro∣vidence, Bermudos, New-York, New-Jersey, New-England, Long-Island, De-la-ware, Maryland, and Virginia; but great num∣bers from Scotland, and several from the borders of Ireland: besides divers good Ships, with some eminent Families that are lately gone off from the Kingdom of England; of whom we have an accompt of their safe arrival in Carolina, blest with a prosperous Passage. But the hopeful progress of this flourishing Country invights some Northern Americans to
emulate such sacred sanctuary as without sacrilidge is tole∣rated to people of tender Conscience. Moreover, its a salubrous Air to the sick, and diseased; and a generous re∣trivement to necessitous, and abject Families; as also the assu∣rance of such as study to be rich. Engins strong enough one would think to induce mankind to hope the prosperity of this famous Settlement. But the settlement of Albemarle (otherwise called Roan∣oak) presents first to our view; and is the oldest, and re∣motest northern County in the fair Province of Carolina; scituated about thirty five degrees, and odd minutes north la∣titude: from whose replenished Meadows (as also from the more southern inhabitants) as good Beef, and Pork is saved, and sent off to Barbados, and other the Caribe Islands; as art and industry can husband. Now Ashley County is yet more southward, and lies scitu∣ated thirty two degrees, forty five minutes; where the Setlers and Inhabitants toil not in summer to accommodate themselves with winter's provision: because hitherto they have considered it useless, and altogether unnecessary for the Planter to employ his hands, and strength, where Nature so li∣berally stocks them with Herbage: & the winter, because so softened with a moderate Air, represents it much of the cast and temperament with our March in England; and that's as much as to consider it the relique only of a milde, and short winter; or rather the surprizal of an approaching spring, that breathes forth to iniciate the summer: which if barely to contemplate, reanimates the vital sences; and solidly to possess, refreshes both Native and Inhabitant. And here it
is that their Ships are built, and drest up by Bermudian hands, the most approved Marriners; and a general error if not the best navigating Ships in America. And now by way of Advice; the first thing requisit and necessary for the setler to embrace, is to fall Timber, and to clear the Ground (which is reasonably undertaken, as by an Advertisement in the last Paragraph) as some already have done, and planted Potatos, the Cassaida Root, Yams, Ed∣dies, Carrots, Cabbidges, Onyons, Turnips, Parsnips, Shelots, (but they grow naturally there) Colleflowers, Artichokes, Musk-Melons, and Water-Melons; besides Wormwood, Nep, Scurvy-grass, Rue, Meadsweet, Trefoil, Cinquefoil, Ele∣campane (Annis, Cububs, and Cardamome Seeds) Radishes, and Horse-Radishes; Mellelot, Angellica, Arch-Angel, Rose∣mary, Thime, Lettice, Spinage, Sweetmarjarum, Sommer & Wintersavory, Endive, Succory, Hopps, Water Cresses, Cena, & China Root, with other Druggs, & Saxafrage, Sassafras, and Sassaperrilla: besides divers other Vegetables without num∣ber: & Licoris beyond dispute must of necessity thrive admi∣rably well there; for in many places its a moist bottom, and an open ground, because lying so near the Springs, and in a gravelly soil, little or nothing differing from Worshop in Not∣tinghamshire; where they dig up the best Licoris in England. Moreover, all sorts of English Grane, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Peas, Beans, Oates, Lentills, Fitches, and Indian Corn, with other European and American Roots, and Plants; which Carolina beyond dispute with small industry will produce as large, and as good as the World has. For you are to consi∣der, what by Art, and the Law of Necessity we compel to
grow in a cold climate; nature of her self protrudes, and thrusts forth there; because of the sovereign warmth from this generous latitude. Nor is the heat at any time so pre∣dominant whereby to suffocate the air with intemperance, because destinated under the temperate Zone, which par∣takes neither of the Extreams of the one, or the other; and which also invights every thing to vegetate with admirable success. The next thing worthy our consideration, is their plenti∣ful Eating; because having their accomodation very cheap within themselves; where Beef two years since was sold at twelve shillings a hundred, and Pork at the rate of sixteen: so that Cattel (you may read) begins to be plentiful, and Hoggs of a prodigious encrease. There is a Gentleman, one Mr. Andrew Percival, the now present Agent to the Earl of Shaftsbury (I know the Gentleman very well) who by his own industry (Providence guiding) has raised and advan∣ced from One Hundred Head of Cattel, to more than One Thousand, in less than seven years; and most of those Cattel very fair, and large-headed Beasts, now grazing up and down in beautiful Savana's; little or nothing inferiour to our En∣glish Meadows. Yet besides Mr. Percival, there are several other industrous Setlers, and Planters, that prosper very well; though not having by much so large, and so consider∣able a stock to begin with. Moreover, there are Barrows (which by reason of the superabundant plenty of Mast, and Roots in those parts) that some have weighed three, and four hundred weight a∣piece; and such had the Lady Yeomans, as I am credibly in∣formed
who had Four Hundred Hoggs in a Herd, and Five Hundred Turkies in a drove; besides Dunghil Fouls too numerous to relate without suspition. And which Plantation of hers, consisting of one thousand five hundred Acres, was by the industry of one Mr. James Moore (an English Gentle∣man) cleared from Charge in some three years time; and with the natural produce of the Country only: which am∣plifies the great fertility of the soil, that together with the encrease of Beef, and Pork, which if well saved, and sent off to other Parts (as some has already been sent to Barba∣dos) must of necessity bring in considerable Profit. So that now since the arrival of Captain Dunbar (dis∣patch't from England with Passengers in the Richmond Frigot) the Vineroons and Inhabitants there busie themselves very much about planting of Vineyards, to make Wine; and dressing of Oliveyards, to get Oyl. But some go upon Cotten, and other some propound to go upon Silk, because having the Mulberry Tree in every angle of the Province: and upon Tobacco, some already have made their attempts, with admirable success; for upon due examination, its little or nothing inferiour to Virina. Hempseed, and Flax also has been sowed, and yields admirable produce; which great∣ly encourages the Manufacture for Linnen, as also for Sail∣cloth and Cordidge. Upon Honey some have strong inclinations, when be∣cause having such variety of Flowers (and Blossoms) that invights to accommodate the Laborous Bee; where, as by experience, they become so prolifick, as frequently to swarm four times in a year; and such was the encrease from one
single Hive, brought over from Bermudos (tho Half of them were lost at Sea) that within less than two full years, Captain Morris Matthews (an industrous Gentleman, who mannages Lievtenant Collonel James Colleton's Plantation) had a pro∣duce of more than Ten Hives; besides a Presentation made to the Governour and others. Now some are thinking to intangle themselves with the consideration of Rape, and Linseed for Oyl: but the In∣dian-Natives get a sweet Oyl out of the Hickery Nutt, which is much of the nature of our English Walnutt; but not so racy, nor the Kernel so plump, and pleasant; and this Oyl they sell for Beads and Trifles of little or no value: which Oyl may be much more improved, and substituted in lieu of Oyl Olives. So that staple Commodities of Carolina will be Wine, Oyl, Silk, Hides, Wool, Tallow, Honey, Bees-wax, Tobacco, Hemp, Flax, Linning and Wolling Cloth; Pitch, Tar, Cordidge, and Masts for Shipping: besides an additional Manufacture is that of the Camlet Gote, intended thither by the Right Honourable the Earl of SHAFTSBVRY, as a new Encouragement to animate the people to In∣dustry. Here are very tall, large, and strait Timber-Trees (the World has not better) and such is the Ash; the White, the Red, and the Live Oak: but the Cyprus Tree grows to an amazing bigness; as also the Walnutt, and Hickery or American Wal∣nutt, already exprest. Here also are stately and tall Cedars, both White, and Red, that cover the Earth. And the Pine, with the Asp, and Poplar, that grow to an incredible mag∣nitude: besides several other Timber Trees, that I cannot at
present remember. There is also the Birch, the Beech, the Willow, the Sallow, the Alder, the Elm, the Sicamore, the Mulberry, and the Figg Tree; but they grow every where: and the Ma∣ligatoon, & Peach is common, without Cultivation; yet no bet∣ter Stone Fruit is observed in Europe, than what naturally grows wild in America. Vines also spread themselves to ina∣mour the Trees in every Wood: and Strawberries strew themselves in every Field. But Violets, I had almost forgot them, because the Inhabitants depress them, by treading them under foot; yet they, with various other Flowers, perfume the Air. And Roses, they sprout up so plentifully in every Plantation, that the Planters themselves are think∣ing therewith to make Fences. And where all other Roots and Fruit Trees thrive to a Miracle; as the Orange Tree, Lemon Trees, and China Orange Trees, Quince Trees, Cherry Trees, Ap∣ple Trees, Pear Trees, and Prickle Pears, that bear twice a year. Then there's the Almond, lately sent over to plant; and Ta∣merinds, Eldern, Goosberries, Curran Trees, Rassberries, Pome-Citrons, Pome-Granats; and some say Plantins, and Bonano's. Certainly this Climate is destinated to solace the Native A∣merican, and with the Blessings of Heaven to refresh the solicitous European. But it may be some will expect a Collection or Breviary of those Indian Kings on the Main of America; meaning such Nations as are most Considerable (and border upon the En∣glish Settlements) which I shall readily impart unto them, as far as my Observation and Information directs to: but the Extent of the Province of Carolina, from Luck Island north∣ward, to St. Matheo southward, is Seven or Eight Degrees:
and in that space there are many small Nations remote from the Settlements, of which no account hitherto hath reached us. However, I'le first begin with Albemarle River, that lies in Roanoak, and is the extream Northern Settlement in Carolina; upon which head of the River the Tuscarories dwell; and he's a Sagamore, or great Emperor of many Kings. But towards May River (and St Matheo) were the Westoe's, a po∣tent and war-like people, whose Kings are called Paracousa's, and Warawanses: but the Native Indians inhabiting in & near to the present Settlements have only Cockawases, and are an effeminate people, and inconsiderable as to number. A Person of Honour that has travelled amongst them, musters them up but to seven, or eight Nations; and of several & diffe∣rent Languages; supine, and of a soft Nature; yet of good natural Parts, when to consider their salvage Education, and the little advantages they have of Conversation: a broken uncultired, and unpolish't People in Government; and such as formerly were chased from the Mountains, and compelled to seek sanctuary in solitary Places; nor does any Nation amongst them exceed Fifty Bowmen, as by the following Account. The Santeahs, which inhabit northward upon the rapid River Santee; they muster but thirty Bowmen. And the Itawans upon Cooper River, formerly known by the Name of Wando; they consist but of twenty Bowmen. Next to them are the Kiawahs, that dwell upon the skirts of Ashley River; they reckon themselves but forty Bowmen. More southward to them are the Stonoes, upon the River Stonoh, adjoyning to Edisto; which muster but sixteen Bowmen.
And those upon Edisto to southward, they seldom or never exceed ten Bowmen. But the Cusso's to the southward of them, and planted upon Ishepoo (now called Colleton River) are the greatest Nation hereabout: yet they report of them∣selves to be, but not to exceed fifty Bowmen. Then there's the Helena's, and they are a Nation yet more souther∣ly, that border upon the Banks of the Navigable River, St Helena; under conduct of a Warrawansaw. And these War∣riers by computation are but thirty Bowmen, and no more. (In all) Two Hundred and Fourteen Bowmen; and perad∣venture to live One Hundred Miles distant from North, to South; nor do they converse, nor well understand the Lan∣guage of one another. Nor dwell they in Towns, but in straggling Plantations; often removing for the better con∣veniency of Hunting, for that's their general Exercise, and a great part of their Maintenance; and which also so propagates their Health, that some of them live to see their Third, and Fourth; nay their Fifth Generation. Yet it's improbable they should ever grow numerous, because the Women destoy their Bellies with the decoction of a certain Bituminous Root, that naturally and plenti∣fully grows every where amongst them; which Root occa∣sions Stirility. And this ancient Custom, because practised from Generation to Generation, is so rivited into the faith of their Females; that neither Art, nor Argument can pre∣vail upon them to relinquish this Barbarity of destroying their Bellies, till arriving at the Age of twenty seven (or thereabouts) and then they fancy to themselves that their Children (at such years) will grow most active, vigorous,
and valient; when their best Advance is but preferment to Bowmen. So that to me this seems an odd Practice; but who shall reclame it, except otherwise heaven it self reduce them. Yet I'me convinc'd this Relation is true from the cer∣tainty of a worthy and honourable Person, that assured me such are their Principles (and their Native Discipline) and because conveighed from the Loins of Posterity, its recei∣ved as an Oracle amongst them; by which you may guess they are somewhat Superstitious, without Idolatry: but that's remitted to the Reader to contemplate at leasure. The Winter here in this southern Latitude is moderate, and short, and never exceeds one fifth of the year; and much of the temperature with our March in England; but never burdned with those Distracting Blustring Easterly Winds, that beat back the Spring, and disappoint the La∣borious Husbandman. For the Setlers in South Carolina, viz. upon Ashley, & Cooper Rivers. &c they keep forth their Cattel all the year about, without occupying any hands to store up Winter's Provision, as those in New-England, and New-York do: but New-Jersey, and Pennsilvania must expose themselves to Expence, Trouble, and Labour under a Chargeable Toil to get in their Winter's Fodder; which if to neglect by timely industry, their Stock, and Cattel must of necessity starve. By which you may collect from the sweet, and temperate Scituations of Carolina, that her Inhabitants (as its certainly true) usually feed upon good and wholsom Fat Beef, in the months of November, December, and January. &c Nor do they slaughter it from the Crib, or Stall; because when only to drive it from the flourishing Savana's, where the Ox, and the Cow are all the year grazing.
This I should think (with other Advantages) were enough to compensate the modest Care, and Industry of the Setlers; besides the natural propensity of Love the Natives have, as if their Souls liv'd only in the bosom of the English by natural instinct, because when to prostrate both themselves and services to fish, and hunt their Game for a Trifle; to fall Timber, to plant Corn, and to gather in their Crop: as also to pilot, and conveigh them from one Settlement to another. So that in many respects, the simple poverty of these indigent Natives ought by the Law of Kinde (and Hu∣manity) to be sweetned, and incouraged; if because when to consider their moral Civility, and innate Simplicity; which I hope the English Inhabitants in this fortunate sou∣thern Latitude will consider, & mingle with so much Discre∣tion, and Moderation of Piety, as not to contrive them Hy∣pocrites; fatal to the Practice of New-England, because when designing to convert them to Christianity. Here in these parts you may expect to meet with abun∣dance of Navigable Rivers; but of their Soundings I shall particularize more in my next: as also of their Rivulets, whose christaline streams are clear, and transparent. But their im∣bellished Meadows, sertil, and flourishing Savana's, are guarded with pleasant and solitary Woods: besides delicious Fields, and Pastures that direct to Admiration. Which to numerate, as also to frame a Catalogue of the various Fa∣milies of Fish, and their store; whose prodigious increase here to insert, I cannot. However, some of them are Shad, Sturgeon, and Salmon; omitting Whale, which are numerous in these Seas; so is the Seel or Selk, the Bottle-Nose, and the
Porpus; besides many other unctous Fish: but the Shark to Ad∣miration, wants Courage here, as indeed all other Ravenous Creatures do; for if they see but the Face of an Infant, they immediately fly. Another Classis are Drum, Porgee, Bass, Boneto, Dolphin, Albechore, Sheepsheads, Oldwives, Catfish, Ca∣valle, Herin, and Mullets the largest in AMERICA. Trout also they have of two foot long, besides the Pike, the Eel, and the Pearch; with several other fresh water Fish omitted (without consent) in this Catalogue. And their Shell-fish are Crabs, better than those in England; but Lobsters they have none that I hear of. However, Cokles, and Mussles they have; and Banks, nay Mountains of Oysters (and some with Pearl) that seem to barocade the Cricks. Besides pro∣digious Prawns, and Shrimps in the brackish, & salt Waters, but Crawfish in the freshes; which are various Entertainments, both to the Native, and fortunate Planter. But their Amphibions are Turtle, Bever, Otters, Manitee, Alegators, &c. And their Fleshes are Beeves, Veals, Porks, Stagg, and Fal∣lo Deer, Raccoons, Apossoms, Muttons, Lamb, Kid, Hare, Rabitt, &c. But Ravenous Creatures are Wolves, Foxes, Bears, Panthers, Tygres: And their Venomous Creature is the Rattlesnake. Then there's Wild Fowl to Admiration; as Signets, Swants, & Wild Turkies of incredible weight; besides teems of Geese, and of several sorts. There is Pheasant also, Cranes, and Heronshaws; the Woodcock, and Teal, with Snite, Jud, Poot, Morefowl, Curlue, and Covies of Partridges; be∣sides Plover great store, green, and grey: There also are Turtle Doves, Feldivers, Sea Larks, Sande Levericks, Widgins,
and Pidgeons numberless; besides the Mockbird, with diver∣sity and variety of Singing Birds, and other feathered Fowl, that I cannot accompt for. Moreover, they have plenty of Dunghil Fowl, as the Cock, and Hen; the Goose, the Turkey, the Muscovy and English Duck, & Drake. Where also the Savana's are crowded with Deer, and large and stately Herds of Cattel patrole the Meadows, as Sheep the pleasant Pastures; and where every Field is replenish't with Corn, as are the Gardens in Asia, and Europe enriched with choice Stone Fruits; but Almonds, Nectarines, Aprecot-Trees, Malagatoons, and the Mus∣slin Plumb (the richest Stone Fruit in England) With divers other Trees, as the Bone Critton gon, and the Burgamy Pear; besides Pippin Trees, Pearmains, Golden Russitins, Harvey, Lady-finger, and Red-streak, with various other Fruit Trees, now sent over by the Honourable Sr Peter Colleton Bar. one of the Lords Proprietors. And several Fruit Trees, Flowers, and Roots, by divers other able Gentlemen, and Merchants, that have already laid a Foundation in this southern latitude of CAROLINA. Which I perswade my self will in a very few years, for Agriculture, and Tillidge, vye with the Glory of the whole World. Moreover, this beautiful Aurora, or the Rising Sun of A∣merica (known only by the Name of Carolina) is already courted by almost every Country: where note, it begins to depopulate some American Settlements, by reason of those En∣couridgments propounded to all such as studiously solicit fre∣quenting her florid Fields. For in the first place, there's no Im∣position of an Oath. Then in the next place, there's Toleration, and Liberty for people of Tender Conscience; besides Fifty
Acres (but it formerly was One Hundred Acres) of Free Land, pointed at by the Constitutions; but that Inconveni∣ency is taken away, because it hindred Community, and So∣ciety; and made the Setlers swell with great Plantations, when Unity and Popularity are the Nerve that combines preservation. And Naturalization also is confirmed to eve∣ry Individual and single Person of any Kingdom, or Nation whatsoever (Male or Female) that transports him or her self from any part of Europe; whereby they stand in an e∣qual Capacity with the King of England's Subjects, and en∣joy the English Priviledges in the aforesaid Province of Caro∣lina; paying only the yearly acknowledgment of One Pen∣ny an Acre, as a Quit-Rent to the Lords Proprietors; com∣mencing in the year One Thousand Six Hundred and Nine∣ty; and not before. Now to such other necessitous persons, as stand in no capaci∣ty capable to discharge their own Passage; yet is there Fifty Acres allotted unto them, notwithstanding they come over as Servants; and their Provision and Accommodation the Disposition and Charge of another: which proportion of Fifty Acres is ratified unto them after the expiration of the time contracted, and covenanted for by Indenture, or other∣wise. But in case there be no Indenture, nor any visible Contract; then in such case that Servant usually serves Four years, according to a Law of that Country, made practica∣ble in all his Majesties remote Governments, and Settlements in America. And this Encouredgement ensues; that during the Service of such Servant, be it Male, or Female; he or she shall also be
accommodated as the rest of the free people are, with de∣cent, and convenient Clothing; and with all other things requisit, and necessary. And further to strengthen the Ob∣ligation, when their Contract expires; the Master, or the Mistriss to whom such Servant has served his time honestly (and Conscientiously) is by the Custom of the Country to have Twelve Bushels of Indian Corn, and a Firelock to en∣able him whereby to live, and defend himself, and the Coun∣try; as also to lay a Foundation for his future Maintenance: the like accommodation has every Woman-servant; save only the Fire Arms excepted. Moreover, in their time of servitude; here is no hard Imposition put upon them, when Satturdy in the Afternoon is allowed them for Recreation (for Decency) and Repair of Apparel. And the Negro Slaves also have a share of Li∣berty to keep themselves, their Houses, and their Plantati∣ons sweet, and clean; because the Lord's Day ought not to be prophaned, nor is any Person whatever privilidged to violate the Sabboth. These are sovereign Rules, and whol∣some Presidents, that direct towards a Religious Reforma∣tion; and if I mistake not, becomes the Duty of every Chri∣stian; whose good Example of Piety and Virtue, will put a Spurr to others more remiss; and encouridge all such as seek their own future Welfare, in propagating the present Well-being of the Settlement and Setlers in Carolina. But Europe nor the World has better Beeves, nor Sheep than what feed and graze in the Province of Carolina. Nor has any part on the Main of America greater variety of Fish, and Fowl (besides Fruits, Plants, Roots, and Druggs) so
that nothing is wanting to compleat it happy. But lest per∣adventure this Relation seem tedious to any, as its possible it may to some, more especially to praevaricating Judg∣ments (envious in Opinion) that would even subvert if pos∣sible the Fundamentals themselves, and asperse the Country, by insinuating their Malice into the Mouthes of Opposers; which would inevitably render the Colonies there but mean, and contemptible; and the truth of my Relation that also would they bring into suspicion, whereby the Reader might suspect the whole: for that end I thought requisit to remon∣strate the particulars as above exprest, to avoid all subtil Tricks, and Evasions of such as might otherwise insence the plane; and ignorant Country-man, by telling him, That to re∣linquish his Native Climate, would expose him to more Misery abroad, than Poverty and Penury would have made him Comfortless at home. And now I proceed to tell you, that the most useful peo∣ple adapted and fitted to carry on the Settlement, are Me∣chanicks, and Artificers of all sorts; as Gunsmiths, Lock∣smiths, Blacksmiths, Whitesmiths, Farriers, Sadlers, Sai∣lers, Tanners, Felmongers, Glovers, Shoemakers, Tai∣lors, Nailors, Joyners, Coopers, Carpenters, Sawyers (but no Lawyers) Brickmakers, Bricklayers, Potters, Hempdres∣sers, Husbandmen; and all such as are skilful in Cattel, and Agriculture: besides Florests, Simplers, Druggists, Distil∣lers, Bever, Castor, and Feltmakers. Of another rank are Vineroons; Gardners, Silkmakers, Throsters, Darymaids, Weavers, Spinsters, Knitters, Sempsters, good Houswives, &c. These are the People that may enrich themselves, and build up Estates in a short time, whereby to make their Lives, and Posterity happy; and by God's Permission, for
ought I know; live long enough to enjoy them. For the Lords Proprietors (of whose Laws and Govern∣ment I'le only touch upon) have thought it so much their own Interest, and Preservation to make the people of Ca∣rolina as easie as possible can be consistant with any Govern∣ment; and have parted with so much of their Rites, and Powers (which his Majesty by his Patent Royal has con∣ferred upon them) that should it so happen they could for∣get their own Interest; yet is it out of their Power (mean∣ning the Proprietors) to do the meanest Setler any wrong. For the principal Power is lodged in an Assembly; and this Assembly is called the Grand Council, and Parliament; in which the Power of the Proprietor is so cautiously ballan∣ced by the Nobility, and Commons elected into the same (by themselves) that it would be more than difficult even in the executive part of the Government for the People thereby to receive any Detriment. Nor is there any Court of Justice in Carolina but what has its proper Judges by themselves elected, and sitting there to dispence them Justice; in which every state and condition of the people finds redress. So that other Nations may seem to envy such Blessings, as not only to be tryed by their Peers, in point of Fact; but also in point of Law: though not intirely, yet in a sufficient number to engage the Court to a Tendemess of the state, and condition so tryed. And where as formerly by the Concessions, the major part of the Jury had the proper right of bringing in their Verdict; its now agreed upon, that all Juries chosen shall be grounded upon the same Basis with our English Laws; and are the same vertually in point of Justice, save only the Juries in England are empan∣nell'd
by the County Sheriff, his Deputy, or the Clerk of the Court: but those in Carolina are chosen by Lot out of the Fre∣holders, which beyond dispute is the most equal, and im∣partial way that wise men could have thought of. All these, and other Rites (which are many more) guarded by the primitive unalterable Constitutions of the Country, to which every new Setler subscribes at his first arrival, if provided he approve thereof; and which by direction of one of the Fundamentals is publickly, and so∣lemnly to be read at the opening of every Parliament; to fix them steadfastly in the Hearts, and Minds of all the Mem∣bers, that they may do nothing in dimunition; nor contrive any Alteration of those Fundamentals, which before they approved of: to which purpose they are also numbred, that at least there may be none added, nor any embezled. So that the Parliament consisting of the Proprietors; & No∣bility; who are either Landgraves, or Casica's, made by colla∣tion of a certain number of privilidg'd Lands under Grant from the Lords Proprietors; having an Heriditary Right of Cession in Parliament, as also the Representatives of the Commons elected have, that are sent to sit in Parliament. These therefore have it fully and amply in their own Brests (or any one state thereof) to hinder and prevent any thing new, or unsafe, which shall be offered to be put upon them. And the Parliament thus qualified, and constituted out of the precedent Dignities, and Commons aforesaid; have Power to enervate bad Practices, and encouridge good Laws; to study and contemplate the Promotion and
growth of the Manufacture of the Country; to reform Ill manners, to stifle Vice, and suppress the Barbarity of ill Cu∣stoms: to prohibit practice of Pleading for Reward; that neither directly, nor indirectly any Councel shall be retain∣ed by Fee, nor flattered by the hope of a Gratuity; lest per∣adventure Law Suits be made chargeable, and vexatious; or a false Gloss imposed upon the Text, whereby to pervert a good Cause by privious and foreign Interpretation; or insinuate a bad one, by prepostrous and delatory Interroga∣tions. These are some of the soveraign Privilidges of Carolina, whose Grandees to illustrate, I shall only superscribe the Lords Proprietors first; then the successive Dignities, those of the Land-Graves; after them the Casica's, or Baronies; which with the praecedent Dignities are the Hereditary No∣bility of Carolina, and are of the Council, and Parliaments; and are Delegates, Majestrates, and publick Ministers of State. These are the peculiar Dignities that stand in the pro∣spect of CAROLINA, whose Estates are all intail'd up∣on Hiers Male; but for want of such, upon Hiers Female; and when to consider they are destitute of both; then in such case its established upon Heirs general. But presupposing there be no general Hier, then such Estate devolves to the Lords Proprietors; and the reason is, because these Dignities from the greater to the lesser are in a Capacity to be made Proprietors themselves: for when a Lord Proprietor dyes without Issue, or as it may happen without a general Hier; then in such case out of the inferiour Dignities, a Lord Proprie∣tor
(by the Fundamental Constitutions) is alwayes elected. But Fortune (some will object) made not all men of one pitch' nor has she rank't every man in one station; nor prescribes she to every man a Co-equality in degree answerable to the praecedent Qua∣lifications; what then, because we are not all Lords, must we there∣fore be denyed the benefit of the Concessions. No surely, any man may better inform himself, if when to consult the KINGS Royal Grant to the Lords Proprietors; which ex∣plains to every Subject an inherent Propriety, and Birth-right intail'd upon him; to which the Fundamental Con∣stitutions agree: and where its well enough explain'd with∣out Fraud, and Ambiguity; that the Electors, and Setlers in Carolina, are by vertue of his Majesty's Royal Grant made capable according to the Tenour, and Soccage of East-Greenwich in Kent; which enables them thereby to give, be∣queath, alien, intitle, or dispose of all, or any part of Lands, Goods, Chattels, and Heriditaments; when, and where, and to whom they please. Another Branch of the Government is, that a general Liberty for people of tender Conscience be alwayes tolera∣ted without exception, or limitation. And the rather to strengthen the nerve of this Toleration, the Lords Proprie∣tors have confirm'd it in their Fundamentals: and where fur∣ther Provision is also made, That no man Compel another to his Worship: nor gives it encouragement that any man double his own Faith whereby to digest the Formalities of a foreign Profession. Where note, all Civil and Religious Rites are granted without prohibition to all People, Nations, and Languages whatever professing Piety, Vertue, and the Christian Reli∣gion;
to own One God (or Supream Being) the Maker of Heaven, and Earth; and that Jesus Christ, the ever-living Son of God, is the divine Saviour of Mankind, and the World. So that as the Fundamentals have cautiously provi∣ded for a Pious, & Christian Profession; they have also made provision that no Professor give another Interruption; so that they have ballanced their Clemency as equally as they could, whereby to dispence to all alike. And where the Form (out of an implicit Faith) it zea∣lously adorated, presupposing it Life; whereby the Venera∣tor consolates himself by the Contemplation of so dark a Vision; yet so great is the Charity, and Law of the Conces∣sions in such case, that the Peaceable Professor of this diffe∣rent Perswasion, may use it as an Argument to defend his Confession; so that when to satisfie himself with his own Ap∣probation, it matters not though probably indispencible with another man's Opinion. And to these Privilidges of a pious Profession, the Con∣cessions themselves are Arguments, and Inducements strong enough to encourage the modest, and sober Professor, whose Faith if it stand firm on the Basis of Scripture; or if fra∣med by the Principles of moral Precepts; the good presidents of such as practise Self-denyal; the Oracles and Inspiration of the holy men of God; as the Apostles, the Patriarchs, and the Prophets, whose sublime Speculation surmounted the glittering Orbs, to the beautiful seraphick society of Angels, where the Divinest dwells; who also dwells in the Hearts of Believers, to dismember and break down the Monarchy of Sin: which glorious Victory gives us Triumph over Death, and leads Captivity captive. These are sacred Pri∣vilidges,
and the Warfare of the Saints; and ought to be the Contest of every pious Professor, who has freedom to pro∣fess as granted by the Concessions; but withal, that he in∣terrupt not another at the time of Devotion, as he himself would not be interrupted; which if any does, he lies liable to Reproof, and the Penalties already laid down in the Con∣cessions. And this I admonish by way of Advice; that whosoever premeditates transportation to Carolina: that he or she if in the City (or the Suburbs) address him or her self to the Carolina Coffe-house, in Birchin-lane, London; there they may be entertained, or advised by some worthy and intelligeable Gentlemen, that will point out to them the illustrous Path to this salubrious Settlement: where the Rivers, and Ri∣vulets, together with pleasant Pastures, and shady Savana's, most generously refresh the Setlers. And besides the com∣fortable issues of Health, they may also expect from thence Prolongation of Life (as by observation upon the Na∣tive) because when to consider the florid temperament of this southern latitude, destinated to sanity, by reason of an equality of Heart, and Cold so contempered together; that neither predominates. And what if it be objected I have published a Description of a Country whereof hitherto I have only inspected by Relation, with∣out occular Proof. Yet so great is my Credit, and Reputati∣on for those worthy Gentlemen that ushred it to me, as my faith confirms me that Jerusalem's in Palestine. Where note, I recommend this Relation as the lively Emblem (and Cha∣racter) as well as I can draw it of the now inhabited, and flourishing Carolina, the most hopeful Settlment the King of
England has in America: which short Prospect may some∣what lessen the Glory of so famous a Country, that may write it self inferiour to none on the Continent; if when to consider her minority, and the small contingent Charge wherewith to lay a Foundation. Advice to Carolina. Gentlemen; THE fundamental Being, and Well-being of all good and wholsom Government, depends meerly upon the Providence of God; to which when subjoyned the Piety of the Magistrate, it admits of a double Duty; to God first, then to the Magistrate, under whose Government we pro∣pound, and expect peaceably to live, and enjoy the Bles∣sing of Liberty; which Liberty consists in the propriety of what God in his Wisdom intails upon Posterity, and intitles the inherent Birthright of every man born into the World; which hereafter I shall endeavour to explain, and the ra∣ther because none amongst you shall pretend to that impli∣cit Plea of Ignorance. Give me leave therefore to advice you to consider the Footsteps of Age, that invades our prestine flourishing Youth, whereby we cannot with vigour (and agillity of Body) perform that in act, and power; which in Youth we accom∣plish't almost as soon as projected. But those Defects are supplied by sober, and moderate advice of Councel; and
the Scriptures tell us, that in the multitude of Counsel there is safety; yet not that I think my self worthy to advice you, though peradventure the Characters of Age have superscribed a le∣gible date; and time if I mistake not has superanuated this mortal Fabrick, whereby what I intended to have told you by word of Mouth, constrains me now to commit that to paper; lest retention of the one part, deprive you the op∣portunity of the other. Inasmuch therefore as every single Subject is, or ought to be a Ruler, or Governour over his own Domesticks; more properly such is he that stands in a publick Capacity; and such is the Majestrate, who by the Law of Religion, and Justice is bound in principles of Honour, and Conscience to sacrifice his Estate, and if need require his Life too, for the good of his Country: for that end, we ought to con∣sider those proper and adequate mediums that intitle us to these supereminent Privilidges, which as English men we claim: and then to ruminate and contemplate such pious Means, and Endeavours by the Law of Vertue, and Chri∣stianity, as are most requisit, whereby to accomplish them. On the other hand, omitting to challenge them, they by little and little will dwindle away, so in process of time seem less; and at last become totally obliterated, that the future Generations will not know them to be. No man therefore in my Opinion is born only to gratifie himself, but is made in one capacity or other instrumental to serve the Country wherein he inhabits. The Piety whereof if seriously to consider, as a gnomen directs the Pa∣tient to its proper Agent. And since Ends, and Beginnings have a like fate, and period. The appropriated ends there∣fore
and the beginings of our Blessings spring properly and spontaneously from pious indications; which assigns it a Duty to our divine Creator. Then to express our Loy∣alty without Hypocrisie to our Soveraign Lord the KING, as also our Fidelity to the Lords Proprietors; when because to in∣tail upon us (and Posterity) the flourishing Fruits of an Inhe∣ritance in Carolina; which we may as naturally and proper∣ly expect, as the ends of the Creation predestinates Life the glorious Prospect, and surveigh of the Creature. And Gentlemen, since so great and sacred are the Ends of Government, & the Priviledges of Parliaments as sacred, where∣in every Member, and Delegate thereof is permitted to speak, and freely to speak without hesitancy what he in himself shall hononrably think in reference to the good, and well fare of his Country whereof he himself is a Member. I exhort you therefore as English men to challenge to your selves this Native Privilidge, and the rather because when to consi∣der your loyal Qualifications to such inherent Rites, which all English men in Carolina naturally have, and are freely born there to; or if otherwise, they arive from foreign Ports, and not those of Great Brittain, yet they equally stand in the pro∣spect of this Blessing, though modestly to think themselves in the remotest capacity. And this royal Privilidge naturally springs from a Prero∣gative Grant of our gracious Prince, as in the Patent; and not only to the English-born in England, but such others also as fall in with the Concessions of Carolina. For you are to con∣sider that in his Majesty's Charter or Royal Grant to the Lords Proprietors, the King there makes no distinction betwixt those his native Subjects born in England; and those others implanted and born in America. And as there can be no inter
Regnum in Kingship, so the Lords Proprietors have provided in the Fundamentals, and upon serious consideration the Coun∣cil and Parliament have resolved, That no man be disinherited his Birthright, except his Offence exceed the limit of a Pardon. And because this Privilidge shines from the Prince himself, the more it confirms and rengthens the Obligation; except to disloyal, and superlative ingrates and others, whose perfidy detects their fidelity, and would nourish themselves with In∣famy; were not such deprived the natural encouridgment of the Country. Now peradventure some such Antichristian Runagado's of Religion and Loyalty, tacitly recide conceal'd amongst you; meaning Pretenders to Sanctity who shelter, and hide themselves under the Government, till opportunity presents to display their more infamous Lives. Such Loyalty hangs meerly on the Slit of a Pen, and the best of their Religion stands on the Tip of their Tongues. These men therefore when discovered, its not amiss I think that all such Hereticks of the Weal Publick be expun∣ged all vertuous Society. So that if when discountenanced by the Majestrate, and the well-meaning Planter; their Hy∣pocrisie will make but a slender progress, and get as small growth in the Colonys of Carolina, as the boasting Roman thought to gain Honour from the Senators of Rome, when to magnifie his own illustrous Extraction; and decry Cicero's, because to spring from the shrubs of a Cottage. Now its true, every thing must have a begining; and Carolina though but now in the blossom, yet she may live to bring forth more Cicero's, than boasting Thraso's; and in time grow up to such compleat maturity, that her Prosperity will be emulated by those on the Continent.
Where note Gentlemen, you are to consider, that as the King's Royal Grant gave Birth to Carolina; so it gives Power to the Lords Proprietors to make what sutable provision they themselves think fit whereby to conduct, & improve the Pro∣vince. Which rightly to interpret; the Lords Proprietors have already given demonstration of the good endeavours in setling the Colonys there; which appropriates a double obli∣gation, if the people wise enough to improve it; and I hope they will, otherwise they forfeit their Gratitude to their Prince; and their Reputation if any to the generous intenti∣on of the Lords Proprietors. And Gentlemen, as the Lords Proprietors have unanimously corresponded to settle this Province of Carolina; so by the Constitutions they do promise the Planters to establish such good, and wholsom Laws amongst them; whereby the Go∣vernment, as the People, may be blest. Which if answered by the Careful Industry of the Planter; the issue may alike prove profitable: and the rather if they propose to proceed upon Wines, Oyles, Smyrna Cotten, Rice, and Indego; as al∣ready begun upon. And as Silk, Almonds, Dates, Currans, Ra∣sins, Sena, Jessemy, and Rubarb are intended. But the Pro∣vince naturally produces the China Root, Sassafras, Sassape∣rilla, Snakeweed, and that famous Vegetable called Calubria (in whose seedy Pod the Coochenial Fly germinates) is already transported, and thrives beyond Report. Besides which, there are many and various other profitable Plants, Druggs, and Roots designed the ensuing progress of some of the principal Projectors; which in due time may fall in with the reason of the people in general, to make them more Rich, and Happy; than otherwise their present Prospect directs
to: which to inspect, its necessary they consult the natural propensity of the Soil, whereby to enable the Planter, if solicitous after the Profits. But Gentlemen, whereas one material circumstance was omitted in the Present State of Carolina; I thought requisit and necessary to insert it in the Advice; and that is, whereas the pre∣sent Lords Proprietors of Corolina out of a singular tenderness to en∣courage the people coming on, as also the Planter already setled there, have ratified, and confirmed fifty Acres of Land to be estated for ever upon every individual Setler, or Setlers; he or they paying only one penny an Acre as a Quit Rent to the Lords Proprietors after two years time, So out of a serious and judicial consideration, and respect to the Setler, and others intending to settle there; the said Lords Proprietors have agreed among themselves, that whosoever sets dowm as a setler in Carolina may contract with them here to become purchasers, at the rate of five Pounds Sterling for one hundred Acres; and so to take up as much as they please, and stand acquitted forever of any Quit Rent, by the bare acknowledgment only of a Pepper Corn (or one Grane of Indian Corn) once a year, if when thereto required. So that Gentlemen, if you stand obleiged in more than a single capacity, in a double acknowledgement you ought to answer it; and the Expedient will hardly prove grevious; for if when to consider that the Lords Proprietors acquire on∣ly the reading the Fundamental Constitutions at the general Cession, or opening of every Parliament; the reason you are to consi∣der is, That the Laws being read, and made publick; the Interpre∣tation thereof will appear the more easie. And often to imprint them in the minds of the people, their frequent and constant use will insinuate into the Ignorant. Otherwise, how can he be said to sin, that never transgrest: nor can that People
be manifest Transgressors, where there's no known Law to offend. The Fundamental Constitutions therefore being to be read at the opening of every Parliament, its my Advice Gentlemen that you observe this Decorum, That his Majesty's Royal Grant be also praecedently read before the Constitutions; and the rather, be∣cause to furnish every Majestrate, and other inferiour Officer with Arguments to enervate the Prejudicate (if any) and such Emulators of Veoue as study to arrest, and would if possible subvert the Fundamentals themselves. Moreover, it will strengthen the Nerve of Unity, and Friendship of such as labour to promote the Prosperity of Carolina; and sup∣press the Endeavours of malicious Agents, that would stifle if possible the Welfair of the Settlement. So that as the te∣nour of this Formality nothing in it self degenerates from Loyalty; the Clemency, and Benignity of your Prince were a Sin to suspect: consequently an Evil unpardonable to dought the Honourable Intention of the Lords Proprietors. The residue Gentlemen are only some indigested Particulars that point to the Growth, Conveniency, and Manufacture of the Country; the Regularity of Living, and Reforma∣tion of Life: the Medium for Manners, and the good and happy issues of Prosperity to the Settlement, and its long Duration. The Incorporating of Towns, and enabling them with such soveraign and whosome Laws, and Privi∣lidges as may neither hurt the Planter, nor terrifie the Coun∣try man; nor raise ambitious hopes in Artizan or Cirizen to swell Corporations with unbounded Charters, that may bring an inconeniency upon the bordering Colonies. The introducing of Studds (from a good strain of Horses)
are of absolute Necessity; where note, every man of Abi∣bility ought to endeavour it. And such also as cultivate, and labour the Ground for encrease of English Grain, deserve a signal Encouragment. The building of Ships, and other Vessels for Transportation: and erecting Bridges for Horses, Carts, and Carridges; are also worthy your serious consi∣deration. So to lay out large, and regular High Wayes, and to raise formidable, and durable Fortifications; with many other requisit Circumstances, and Conveniences me∣rit a respect. But these will fall in course; and are more properly transmitted to the mature Gravity, and deliberate Consideration both of Council, and Parliament; so draw on to a Conclusion. But I hope Gentlemen, you'l excuse my Brevity (and my Errors too, when you meet them) its true, I present you but with a short prospect of so glorious a Country, that beyond dispute is inferiour to none on the Continent. And truly such were my Cautions, as cautiously kept me close to the truth of discovery; which has been handed to me by several good, and worthy Gentlemen; but principally from a Person of Honour, and Quality (a Setler amongst them) whose generous nature, and freedom to discourse the Coun∣try (and furnish me with all or most of his Discoveries) de∣serves a Recompence beyond my Acknowledgements: which with Gratitude I would readily publish to the World, but his Commands obleidge me tacitly to conceal him. Now Gentlemen, I shall leave you but one Caution more, (the rest I'le huddle in silence) and that is, to be cautious of your selves, whereby to think no dishonourable Thought; for I reckon it a Maxim in Philosophy, and I'me sure its
within the Rules of Christianity: That every man study the Prin∣ciples of Honesty. For to be dishonest within our selves, is to doubt the Faith of others; so at last our Scruples redounding too oft upon us, honesty it self will be brought into suspicion; and the Prudence and Justice of men in Government, but Toys, and Trifles of the times to play with. This contagi∣on let every man labour to suppress, because its a Child of Ingratitude; and Ingratitude's a Sin of that nature, that Heaven can hardly pardon. Wherefore Carolina beware of Ingratitude, and think no thought dishonourable; nor doubt the Faith of those that streneously labour to do you good. Reverence your Creator with a holy Fear; and with a na∣tural Love be charitable to your Country: with an awful respect give your Services to the Proprietors; and with a Loyal Duty your Obedience to your Soveraign, whom  preserve to enlarge his Empire, and strengthen the hands of the present Undertakers. FINIS. Advertisement. THere is one Mr. Nathan Sumers Engineer for Carolina, that hath undertaken [by a new Engin of his own] with the Lords Proprietors, and others, to un∣burden, and clear the Ground to fit it for Cultivation at 12 d. a Tree, if not exceed∣ing 6. foot diameter; and for 6 d. a Tree from one foot to more than 5 inches dia∣meter. And that the said Proprieters have contracted with the said Sumers, to se∣cure to him and his Hiers the sole use, and benefit of the said Invention for 14 years, as certify'd. Omissions and Errata's. Pag. 7 line 3 for salubrous read salubrious. p 13 l 10 f Cockawases r Cockarouses. l. 17 f un∣cultired r uncultivated. p 22 l 7 r Powers as to decline their Negative Voice. l 26. Conces∣siors, but those Concessions were falsly printed.
