V320 12137428 54778
The Opinion OF THE ROMAN JVDGES Touching Imprisonment, and the Liberty of the SUBJECT, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Abby at Westminster, at a late publique FAST, JAN. 25. 1642▪ ACTS 25. V. 27. It seemes unreasonable to me to send a Prisoner, and not to signifie the crimes against him. By J. V. Prisoner. Printed in the yeare of our Lord, 1643.
TO THE READER. THe occasion of this Ser∣mon was the importu∣nity of Prisoners, and by the same importunity it is printed without addition or de∣traction of any thing materiall,Acts 24. 1. not with a majestick style, like Tertullus the Oratour, but like Paul a Priso∣ner; neque altum semper urgendo, neque dum procellas, cautus horrescis nimium premendo, Littus iniquum: It was Preached on the day of Pauls Con∣version, and the Subject is Paul the Prisoner, and on a Fast day, a day of Humiliation, and who is so hum∣bled as a Prisoner: If any receive profit thereby, Let him pray for Prisoners. J. V.
A Sermon preached at the Ab∣by at Westminster, on the last pub∣lick Fast, January 25. ACTS 25. 27. It seemes unreasonable to mee to send a prisoner, and not withall to signifie his crimes against him. I Reade since our Saviour Christ of a fivefold persecu∣tion;. the first, the persecuti∣on of the high Priests, the Archierarchical persecution, Act. 4. 1. And when they spake these things to the people, there rose up against them the Priests and Sadduces, and Rulers of the Temple, being filled with rage against them, because they taught the people, they laid hands on them, and put them in custody, after∣wards
into the common Gaole: this is the Ju∣daicall persecution that lasted 40. yeares after Christ, as it is in the Syrian Paraphrase. Se∣condly, when this began to coole, then followed the persecution of. Arethas. old Rome by the Cesars, which continued about 600. yeares, till Constan∣tine the great. ByTres Fon∣tane. Nero Saint Paul was deca∣pitated at Rome at the. Epiphan. Oecumen. , Euseb. 13. Nero. three Fountaines, and Saint John banished to the Isle of Patmos. When Constantine came, then omnia nova, all things were new, and he saw a signe from Hea∣ven, In this signe thou shalt prevaile. Thirdly, there followed. persecutio Haeretico∣rum, whereof Epiphanius and others write. I begin with the Gnosticks, and I find in Epipha∣nius, first, Epi∣phan. they despise dominion, to which A∣nabaptists succeed. Secondly,, Epi. , Epiph. they deny the Law, as the Antinomians now doe, that say, God sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor perversenesse in Isra∣el, and all the sinnes they commit are workes of the outward man, not of the mind. Thirdly, they understand not, nor allow the Hebrew text: The Hebrew and Greek these unlearned men regard not, though they be the languages of the holy Ghost. Secondly, Euchitae, such as abused the saying of Saint Paul,. Pray continual∣ly, to vaine babling, and thinke that God is per∣swaded by Battalogies and Tautologies, yet in Eccles. 5. 1. it is said, God is in heaven, and thou on earth, therefore let thy words be few. Thirdly, the Pelagians and Semipelagians, to which the
Arminians now succeed for their Liberum arbi∣trium, free will. Fourthly, the Enthusiasts, that pretended Enthusiasme, and that they spake by the Spirit, as Brownists now doe. Fifthly, Ar∣rians, to whom the Socinians answer, that deny the Divinity of the Son of God. Sixthly,Donatistae, &c. S. Austin. Do∣natists, that are separated from the Church, and and so the Separatists. Seventhly, Marcianites, that heldEpiphan. second Baptisme, as Anabaptists now doe: Thus much of the persecution of the Here∣tickes, which were limbs and fore-runners of Antichrist. Fourthly, the persecution of the Turkes, which was about the yeare 666. by the compu∣tation of Lyranus. Fifthly, the persecution of Antichrist, which begun at the same time, Re∣vel. 13. ver. ult. The number of the Beast is 666. that is, the time of his rising, and his fall shall be 1260. yeares after, that is, neare a thousand yeares he hath already continued by Nauclerus, and the Magdeburg Centurists: then Constans the Emperour gave to Pope Vitalian, Imperium urbis, the rule of the City; and this is the worst persecution of all the former, because the Here∣tickes are incorporated into a body, and the uni∣ted force is stronger. The reason of my large Preface is this, because my Text falls under the second persecution: for Festus was Deputy un∣der bloudy Nero, who wished that Rome had onely one head, that hee might cut it off at one blow, who clothed Christians in beasts skins, and
after devoured them, who ript up Agrippina his mother, to see the place of his generation; yet I shall speake tria memorabilia, three memo∣rable things in commendation and discommen∣dation of this Deputy: HisDictamen rectae rationis. right opinion of the person, and of his cause, It seemes to mee un∣reasonable; therefore he had reason, and the Hea∣thens had the Law, Rom. 2. written in their hearts. And in Isa. 24. 5. They have made void the everlasting covenant, or covenant made with the whole world, this is the law of Nature: First, hee ap∣proves of his appeale to Cesar, as the chiefe of the Senate, Act. 25. 25. Because hee desires to be kept to the hearing of Cesar, I have determined to send him. Secondly, he approves of his cause, he had done nothing worthy of Syr.  death, or bonds. Third∣ly, he calls him to speak for himselfe, after eight or ten dayes he came to Cesarea, Act. 25. 6. and the next day sate on the Judgement seat, hee did not stay two or three yeares, or ten yeares; the Jewes after five dayes came downe, Act. 24. 1. they delayed not, but hastened his doom. Fourth∣ly, not before meane, ignoble men of no reason, birth or education, but by a, Oecumen. Roman Deputy, a King, Queen, Chiliarch, and chiefe of the City, he saith, I have brought him before you, and speci∣ally before thee, O King Agrippa. A King is of Royall bloud, and will not trample upon a worme; but a poore man oppressing the poore, is a sweeping raine, that will leave no food. The Lion is the King of Beasts, and is satisfied with homage,
Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni. Au∣gustus Caesar was calledPater atque Princeps, Hor. Father and Prince. Fifthly, he thinkes it unreasonable to send a pri∣soner, and not signifie the crimes. Sixthly, to signifie them in Syr. writing, for perpetuall me∣moriall. But here is a grand objection: Were not grievous crimes objected against the Apostle? as first, that hee was a pestilent fellow, that is, a man dangerous, as one infected with the pesti∣lence, or a Chrys. Gr. Ba∣sil. pernicious fellow, as it is in the Sy∣rian. Secondly, a sower of sedition among the Iewes in the whole world, Acts 24. 6. That he Syr. a  Syr. raised sedition, and spread it, andGr. . Epiphan. Be∣da, Jerom. obstinately maintained it. Thirdly, a Ring-leader of the sect of the Nazarens, this crimination over∣throwes the former; Nazarens were Christians, and Christ was Prince of Peace; and his Mini∣sters, Ministers of peace, how then should he sow division? Fourthly, a prophaner of the Tem∣ple, that is called by Iosephus the Antiq. 15. cap. 14. holy place: So Christ saith, When ye see the abomination of de∣solation stand in the holy place. These are the crimes objected against Saint Paul, and the Iews affirmed, or as the Father saith with impreca∣tion, that these things were so. To the first hee makes no answer;. Oecumen. for it was in generall, that he was a dangerous fellow: and a generall proves nothing, neither is worthy of an answer by the divine Apostolicall wisdome. To the second he answers by way of negation,
that hee was no sower of sedition, but that they themselves first caused the tumult, Syr. & Vatab. Acts 24. 19. The Iewes that came from Asia caused the tumult, for they saw him in the Temple, and stirred up the people against him, and laid hands on him in that sacred place and Sanctuary, Men of Israel, help, this is the man that teacheth against this people in every place, Acts 21. 27. he was accused by them that were the onely actors in the tumult. Hence we learne to stand for peace, and avoid sedition. In the 120. Psalme, ver. 5. Woe is mee that I se∣journe with Mesech, and have my dwelling in the tents of Kedar. Mesech and Kedar are Tuscany and Turky, by Kimchi out of Ioseph ben Gorion. Here are the two great enemies of the Church, in whose person David here speakes. His so∣journing with the Tuscans was tedious, and his dwelling with the Turkes called Kedar, so the tongue of Kedar is the Arab. in Abben Ezra, and in Arab. the Alcoran is written. My soule hath long dwelt, hee saith not his body; but hee was grieved at the heart that he dwelt with such ill neighbours, with him that hated peace, hee saith not with them, but with him, because there was one a ring-leader of the rest; neither doth hee say unquiet, but that hateth peace, and will never admit reconciliation. And hee addes, I am peace, God is love, Christ is out peace, and the Church is peace, yet not without truth, though it be not expressed, it is understood; for peace and truth doe meet together, and sweetly kisse
each other. Christ is our peace, and yet hee is truth: But when we speake for peace, they are for warre. If wee pray, or petition, or preach for peace, they are for warre; what shall I say of them? they are Mesech and Kedar. To the third he confesseth, that according to the way that they call Heresie, so he worshipped the God of his Fathers: Here we learne three things, Faith, Hope, and Charity. 1. Faith, to beleeve the Law and Prophets as he did, to worship the God of our Fathers, not new Gods, and in a new way; enquire for the old way and walke therin, that is, the way of the Law, not in the way of our Fathers, against the Law, Prophets and Apostles before the Refor∣mation; To the Law and the Testimony, if they walke not by this rule there is no light in them, with the heart man beleeveth, and with the tongue con∣fession is made to salvation. 2. Wee learne Hope, for if we beleeve wee shall have hope towards God, Acts 24. 15. no hope in our selves, but in him. 3. Wee learne Charity, the third Theologi∣call vertue, v. 16. for this cause I labour, this is the labour of love, love to all, as in Rom. 13. 8. Owe nothing to any man but love, pay to every man his due, Custome to whom custome, tribute to whom tribute, feare to whom feare, honour to whom honour; custome is ordinary, tribute extraordi∣nary, both due to the Roman Caesars, persecu∣tors of the Christians, Iustin Martyr, and Ter∣tullian
in their Apologetikes prove this duty from thence, and that Tribute they payed, was imployed for the eradication of the Christians, but they suffered, and the blood of Martyrs was the seed of the Church, the armes whereof were prayers and teares, so then feare God, and honour the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; Againe, love worketh no ill, shall I say that he who kills and robbs his brother loves him? seeing love fulfills the law, and if a man have this worlds good, and see his brother in want, and shut up his bowels of compassion, how dwells the love of God in that man?Micah. 6. Three things are requi∣red of a man, 1. to doe justly, 2. to love mercy, 3. and to walke humbly with God, Love is above all, above Tongues, faith of Miracles, Prophecy, Knowledge, Almes, Burning, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. It beareth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things; embrace this charity with peace, and the peace of God be with you. To the fourth he answereth and denyeth, that he was a prophaner of the Temple, but they pro∣phaned it by raising a tumult in it, as is shewed before, a thing abhorred of Heathens, I read in Herodotus, that certaine profane Atheists robbed the Temple of Venus, and the Goddesse, by way of punishment, sent the, Herod. faemineall disease a∣mong them, thought to be new, but Elder then Herodotus. Thus I have done with the right opinion of this Heathen deputy.
Now I proceed to shew how Antichrist is op∣posite in every particular, and his persecution worse then the Pagans, out of three prophecyes of Dan. 7. 25. he shall speake words on the side of the most high, this I take for granted, by the best expositors, that it is meant literally of An∣tiochus, mystically of Antichrist, that is, pro & contra, for and against Christ, a little home in his beginning, but hath eyes and pollicy, and a mouth, speaking great things, he shall weare out the Saints of the most high, those that have gray haires here and there upon them, he weares out by long imprisonments without cause, as in the Spanish and Italian Inquisitions he is kept 2. 4. yeares, all the dayes of his life, and no accuser known, but they ask him what he hath done, what enemies he hath, &c. The Romane deputy al∣lowed appeale to Caesar,In utroque jure sunt tituli de appellatio∣nibus. but the Conclave and their adherents deny all appeales, and trample upon Princes, and depose Kings upon suspition of another Religion: The Romans after a small time called the Apostle to his answer, and not before ignoble, but honourable persons; but An∣tichrists limbes to the greater disgrace, judge them by meane persons, of no birth, education, or religion: The Romans thought it reasonable to signifie the crimes, but these imprison with∣out any crime, except bare affirmation without oath prove a crime: The Iewes affirme these crimes forenamed against Saint Paul; but he saith, They cannot prove the things whereof they doe ac∣cuse
mee, Acts 24. 13. In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall stand. Thus by tedious delayes of judgment and imprisonment, Antichristians weare out the Saints, And he shall thinke to change times and lawes, Dan. 7. 25. he shall thinke to make a new Heaven and Earth, a new Church and State, a new Sun, Moone and Starres, which God made for times and seasons, he shall make new Lawes, abrogate the old, and all shall be delivered into his hand, for a time, and times and halfe a time, that is, three years and a halfe, In Queene Maryes time the presecution was about three yeares and a halfe, and in the last times of Antichrist shall be the like, Rev. 11. 7. The bodies of the witnesses lye unburied three yeares and a halfe: In Dan. 8. 10. it is said, the horne shall grow great to the host of Heaven, and shall cast to the earth some of the host, and of the starves, and trample on them, not only shall Antichrist throw out of their places, but by contumelies trample the Ministers of Christ in the mire, And he shall take away the dayly sacrifice, this signified the publike formes of GodsChrysost. worship, as in Ps. 141. 1. My prayers as incense▪ and lifting up of my hands as a dayly sacrifice, in Dan. 11. 36. it is said, that Antichrist shall presume to be a King, and do, or make Warre according to his will, by an ar∣bitrary government, not by any law, and shall ex∣alt himselfe Heb. above every God, that is, every King who is called a God in Scripture, so 2 Thess. 2. every. Augustus or Caesar, And be shall not regard
the God of his Fathers, but a new God, and a new Religion; Nor the desire of women, that is spiri∣tuall fornication with Idols he shall detest, but shall commit sacriledge, And he shall honour the God of forces, he shall ever be for warre, and not for peace; so Mahomet propagated his Religi∣on by warre, Christ Jesus by peace, A bruised reed shall he not breake, and smoaking flax shall he not quench, because David had shed much blood, he must not build the Temple, and in the building no Toole of Iron was heard, for it was a House of peace; but Antichrist is all for the God Dan. 11. of forces. Thus I have done with the first thing imita∣ble in this Roman Deputy, his Right Opinion. Secondly, his humanity, In sending a Prisoner, so saith the Text, and it is expressed in what manner he was sent elsewhere, Syr. Acts 27. 3. The Centurion shewed pity to S. Paul, and suffered him to goe to his friends to refresh himselfe, he suffered him to goe to his friends, a great favour, much more then to suffer his friends to come to him, he gave himPotestatem egredieuti, Cartluisian. power to goe forth, there was an opening of the Ports, that he might be refreshed with food and rayment necessary: Likewise the other Roman Deputy Petix, Acts 24. 23. Hee commanded a Centurion, no meaner man, to keepe him, not to hurt him;Syr.  with gentlenesse, not ri∣gour and fircenesse, (as the Gaoler in Acts 16. that put them in the hole, in the stockes) and
that he should forbid, or restrayne, orSyr.  discou∣rage none of his acquaintance to minister to him; And when he was in Rome two yeares, he dwelt in his owne hired house, and received all that came unto him, preaching the kingdome of God, and teaching with all liberty, no man forbidding him; but Antichristian sectaries forbid all to publish any doctrine against their way, as appeares in Waldus, the Albingers, Husse, Jerom, Luther, &c. neither will they afford bread to eate, rayment to put on, or house wherein to hide their heads, or bed to rest upon, more cruell then bloudy Nero to the Christians and Doctor of the Gen∣tiles. Some readDe suis sa∣cultatibus, Gloffa ordi∣naria. none of his goods were restrai∣ned from him in his Imprisonment, but such men take away both liberty and goods at once. Thirdly, observe the justice of the Romans, Acts 25. 16. It was not the manner of the Romans to give up a man, till his accuser came face to face, to justifie the crimes objected, and that he have Syr. space and place to answer for himselfe; but among Antichristians, no accuser shall appeare, but the same man shall be accuser, Judge, and wit∣nesse; or if he doe appeare, it shall be as a back∣biter, not face to face; or if he confront the de∣fendant, he shall have convenient place of Apo∣logy, but among his enemies, to be derided as Sampson was; or he shall have no space for his
defence, but he must answer Oretenus & ex tem∣pore, according to their ex temporary prayers and sermons: Is this justice? Likewise the Romans stood much for the Liberty of the Subject, Acts 22. 25. Is it lawfull for you to scourge a Roman, and uncondemned? The Orator said, that Citizens of Rome may not be scourged, whether they were borne Romans, orCives Roma∣ni verberibus caedi non pos∣sunt, Cicero. Nati, & Civi∣tate do nati Ci∣ceo.  made free, there were two kinds; now Saint Paul was borne free, for his Father was aOecumen, Roman, andChrysost. Oe∣cumen. Theo∣phylact. Cilicia was under Rome, or Tarsus was calledDio. Cassius. Juliopolis, howsoever it were, he had the Liberty of a Subject and Ci∣tizen of Rome; but if a mans goods be taken a∣way by violence, and himselfe imprisoned, where is the Roman Liberty? Pagans shall rise up in judgment against Antichristians: Yet more, the Romans rescued from violence such as were Freemen, Acts 23. 10. The chiefe Cap∣taine fearing lest Paul should be torne in peeces in a Tumult, sent Romans to deliver him; farre it was from him to send Troupes to destroy his owne Citizens, as Antichristians have done: and he further saith, Acts 23. 26. The Jewes tooke this man, and I came with theSyr.  Roman Souldiers and rescued him, understanding that he was a Ro∣man. Lastly, they opposed all private ordinances, and inventions of men, therefore Festus saith of Paul, his accusers stood up against him,Syr. and could prove no evill accusation against him as I supposed,
but had certain questions of their own superstition, private ordinances and inventions Act. 25. 18. 19. he stood for the Roman laws, which were so good that thePlutarc, in vita Cam. Falisci did chuse rather to serve the Romans then to be free. The use hereof is in Mal. 6. He hath told thee, O man, what the Lord requireth of thee, to doe justly, as this Romane, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God, which are the three and all to be imitated in this Romane spirit. Now briefly I come to the other three which are to be avoyded. First, Popularity. Secondly, Bribery. Thirdly, Obloquy. 1. Popularity, Acts 25. 2. Festus would doe the Iews a pleasure, and Felix Acts 24. 27. be∣cause he would doe the Iewes a pleasure he left Paul bound, but this popular Aire is but a staffe of reed bruised, and shaken with the winde, Gaius Marius, who was seven times Consul, and the thirdNobilium turba, Quiri∣lium Odi pro∣fanum vulgus & atceo. Malignum spernere vul∣gus. Horat. . Plutarch. in Mario. Founder of Rome, yet by envy expelled; so Coriolanus and Scipio Africanus that wonne his nameEjus qui domita nomen ab Africa, Lucratus re∣diit. Incendia Car∣thaginis im∣piae. Rejectaeque retrorsum Hannibalis minae. from the subduing of Afrike, the bur∣ning of Carthage, the victory over Hannibal, and had marble inscriptions to his honour, yet loo∣sing the popular respect, was banished for ever, de repetundis. The people almost in one breath cryed Ho∣sanna, and crucify him:Syr. Inscriproque notis marmo∣ra publicis. Herod Agrippa, Acts 12. 2. Killed Iames, and because it pleased the peo∣people imprisoned Peter, under the custody of
Syr. Non Vox hominem so∣nat.sixteen souldiers, but observe his end, the peo∣ple cryed, The voice of a God not of a man, and he became wormes meat. How can you please God that seek honour one of another? The second blemish in the Roman is bribery, not expressed in the text, but implyed, he desired to doe the Iewes a pleasure, it was hot for nothing. And of Felix his predecessour it is said, he hoped that money should have been given to him, by St. Paul, Act. 24. 26. The Romans were covetous, & therefore bitter was the Sarcasme of Methridate upon them, that the Founders of Rome, Romulus and Remus, were nursed bySome say Lupa was a Woman. a hungry wolfe, and therefore the posterity were so greedy of wealth, that Tertullian saith, he notNon solum spcrabat, sed clam tracta∣bat. onely ho∣ped, but privately dealt for bribes. The third fault in this Romane was obloquy, Acts 26. 24., Oecumen. out of wrath and fury, when St. Paul made his Apology, Festus exclaimed, Thou art mad, much learning hath made thee mad; so the limbes of Antichrist, Ieroboams, and Micah's Priests, cry out, of learned men that they are mad, because themselves cannot understand them: If they be mad, it is for Christ; and oppres∣sion oft times makes a wise man mad: but indeed they are not mad, but speak forth the words of truth and sobernesse,, 2 Tim. 1. They have not the spirit of bon∣dage or feare, but of a sound mind. Let us eschew bribery, popularity, and ob∣liquv,
loquy, for who shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle? First, He that backbitoth not with his tongue, that makes not his tongue, his foot to trample the reputation of his neighbour in the mire. Se∣condly, In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, therefore he is no man-pleaser. Thirdly, That takes no reward against the Innocent, yea saith Solomo Jarchi, that takes no reward to do ju∣stice; therefore he is no briber, He that doth these things shall never fall, Psal. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. &c. Thus I have described a Roman spirit, and compared the Romans and Antichristians to∣gether, who are the greater persecutors; which may be, first a premonition to us in these last dayes, to expect perilous times for three yeares and a halfe, Revel 11. 7. worse then those of Jewes, Turkes, and Infidels; even the times of Hypocriticall Antichristian Heretickes, 2. Tim. 3. 1. Secondly, an exhortation to patience, for he that kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword; he that now leads into captivity, shall be led; he that robbs, shall be robbed; here is the patienceRevel. 13. of the Saints,Zach. 9. 10. Returne to the strong hold, yee prisoners of Hope, this day I declare unto you, that I will restore double to you. And as I have preached for Love and Peace, so let us conclude with a Prayer, for the peace of God that passeth all understanding, to guide
our hearts and mindes in the knowledge and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy spirit, be honour and glory throughout all ages. Amen.
The prayer before SERMON. O Eternall, the high and only1. Tim. 6. Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, before whom thousands ofDan. 7. Angels doe minister, and ten thousand times ten Thousand doe stand before thee, who makest thy Angels Spirits, and thy Ministers a flame of fire, who ridest on the wings of the wind, and makest the cloud thyPsal. 104. 2. 3. v. Pavillion, and art clothed with glory and Majesty. At the foot-stoole of thy Throne are we prostrate, sinfull dust and ashes, be∣seeching theEzra 1. God of heaven to have mercy upon us mi∣serable sinners. Have mercy on us, O Lord, and accor∣ding to thePsal. 51. multitude of thy mercies blot out our offen∣ces, in thought, word, and deed, and thou that hast proclai∣med the name of the Lord, the Lord GodExod. 34. mercifull and gracious, long-suffering, abundant in kindnesse and truth, for giving iniquity, transgression and sinne, and shewing mercy to thousands: shew mercy to us the chiefe of sinners, forgive ourPsal. 51. originall sinne wherein we were borne, our actuall sinnes, the sinnes of our youth; Remember not how Psal. 25.ignorant we have been of thy truth:Psal. 19. Lord, who can understand his errours, who knowes how often he hath of∣fended. Then clense us from our secret sinnes, forgive our presumptuous sinnes, perpetrated with aNumb. 15. high hand, and our rebellions wherin we have warred with the Almigh∣ty, and keepe backe thy servants from the like iniquity, so shall we be innocent, and avoid the great transgression, and though we sin of weaknesse, or ignoranceEccles. 7. (for no man lives on earth that sinneth not) yet restrainus by thy grace from sins of stubbornnesse, which is as Idolatry, and from theMatth. 12. irremissible sin against the spirit of grace.Iohn 17. Holy
Father, we desire not only remission of sins, but the sancti∣fication of the Holy Ghost, though sin tyrannize and dwell in us,Rom. 5. Galath. 5. so that we cannot do the things we would, yet let not sinRom. 6. reigne in our mortall bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof, that we who are dead to sin, may live no longer therein, butRom. 6. as Christ is risen from the dead, so we may rise to newnesse of life, and as wee have yeelded our members servants to iniquity, so to yeeld them weapons of righteousnesse unto holinesse, the end whereof may be ever∣lasting happinesse, and as we rise, so help us to ascend with Christ to heaven, minding heavenly things,Col. 3. where Christ sits at Gods right hand, teach and enable us to doe justly, to love mercy,Micah 6. and walke humbly with our God, denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and walking holily, righ∣teously, and soberly in this present evill world, waiting for theTitus 2. appearing of the glorious Judge to Judgement. Wee believe O Lord, the way of man is not in himselfe, neither is it in man to guide his steps, it is not in him that willeth, nor that runneth, but in God that sheweth mercy, who hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth. Give therefore grace, O heavenly Father, for Christs sake: In whose name wee pray not onely for our selves, but for the whole estate of Christs Church on earth, distressed and dispersed. The Spouse ofLament. 1. Christ sits as a widow that is desolate, her haire hanging downe, rivers of teares falling from her eyes without intermissi∣on, and it is nothing to all them that passe by the way,Lament. 1. no sorrow is like to her sorrow, yet none of her sons doth com∣fort her, none doth turne out of the way to aske how shee doth,Lament. 2. the breach is like the wide sea, who can heale it? there is no balme in Gilead, there is no Physitian there. Ier. 4.O thou sword of the Lord, when wilt thou bee quiet, when wilt thou returne into the sheath, and bee at rest? When, O Father of mercies, and Lord of hoasts, wilt thou turne the edge thereof against the Heathen that know thee
not, and call not on thy Name? Shall thy wrath burne like fire against Germany, which before the Civill war was as the garden of Eden, but now is a desolate wilder∣nesse, and many yeares bath groaned under that unnatu∣rall intestine war?Psal. 90. Thou hast turned man to destru∣ction, say likewise returne to life yee sons of men. Just art thou, O Lord, to punish their Idolatry, sacriledge, and high contempt of the Ministry;Habak. 3. but in the middest of thy Justice remember Mercy: And forget not our bre∣thren in Ireland, who have suffered cruell mockings, scourgings, bonds, imprisonments, rapines, deaths under the mercilesse Rebels, that curseIsay 8. their God and their King, and looke upwards; They have bewed in pieces thy Prophets, throwne downe thy worship, and killed thy ser∣vants with a rage that2 Chron. 28. reacheth to heaven. Thy truth falleth in the streets, and righteousnesse cannot enter. O God of truth, justice, and vengeance, shew thy selfe, let not the sons of wickednesse ever prevaile. More especially we entreat for England, wherein we are aZephan. 2. Nation that is not worthy to be beloved, for there is no truth, or mercy, orHos. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4. knowledge of God in the Land, but by swearing, ly∣ing, killing and stealing, we breake out, and bloud touch∣eth bloud, wee have oppressed one another, and therefore are justlyGal. 5. devoured one of another, every one by the hand of his neighbour, friend, and brother, Manasses, Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and every one eats theIsay 9. flesh of his owne arme, the son riseth up against the father, and the father against the son, to put him to death, and they Iohn 16.thinke in so doing, they doe God good service. Who could have thought that this flourishing Countrey should have become a sea of bloud, and this Eden a dead sea? Oh the severity of Gods justice against our sinsEzek, 16. of Sodom, such fulnesse of bread, abundance of idlenesse, and oppression of the poore and needy; our crying sins have called for plagues of leading into captivity, and complaining in our
streets. Oh ever happy England, the glory of Nations is now become the seat of Sects and Heresies, the daughter of Babel, the mother of all confusion, Gods Temple pro∣phaned, his Ministers misused, Jeroboams and Micaes Priests of the lowest of the people substituted. To thee, O Lord, we make our complaint:Ezech. 20. last. This is, and shall be a lamentation,  Ierem. 13. O thou hope of Israel, the Saviour there∣of in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a wayfaring man, as a traveller that abides for a night? Awake, O Lord, have mercy on Sion, that sits as a woman,Ierem 30. or cast away, that none looketh after; build up the wals of Jeru∣salem, restore her Teachers, as at the beginning. Have mercy on our dread Soveraign Lord, CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britaine France and Ire∣land, Defender of the true ancient Catholike, and Apo∣stolike Faith, and in all causes, and over all persons Ec∣clesiasticall and Tempor all supreme moderator and Go∣vernour, bind up his Soule in the1 Sam. 25. bundle of life with the Lord his God, as for his enemies sling them as a stone out of the middle of a sling, cloth them with shame, but upon himselfe let his Crowne flourish. According to his pre∣sent afflictions let thy Comforts refresh his soule. Give not thy Honour to another, but for thy Names sake (who hast said of Princes, yee are Gods Vicegerents) save the face of thy Annointed from the tongues of men, and in the middest of weapons of war, that no weapon framed against him may prosper, that every tongue which shall rise up against him, may be condemned, and he in due time re∣stored to his former and greater royall splendor and digni∣ty, and after this triall may come forth as gold: And as a Father of the Country may pity his children, and lament the shedding of the bloud of his sons and daughters. Blesse the Queens most excellent Majesty, ourillustrious Prince CHARLES, and the rest of the Royall Progeny, that they may bee like Olive plants round about their Table, suffer not the sonnes of wickednesse to afflict them. Wee
pray likewise for the Lords of his Majesties most Hono∣rable Privy Counsell, the True hearted Peeres and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament: GiveEphes. 4. them the spirit of Vnity in the bond of Peace, the spirit ofPhil. 4. Moderation betweene the two extreames, that by the wise accomoda∣tion, this civill war may cease, the head and body may be united, Religion restored, Sectaries and Heresies restrai∣ned, and so Prince and people, Church and State their due repayed, that wee may owe nothing,Prov. 24. Rom. 13. but to feare God, honour the King, and love one another. Vphold the Ministers of thy holy Word, by what names or titles soever dignified or distinguished, though they be Dan. 8.trampled under foot by Antichristians, yet raise them up againe, to shine like Stars in the firmament, all clouds of obscuration and opposition scattered and consumed, and for a continuall supply of them, Blesse the two Vniversi∣ties, Cambridge and Oxford, that from thence religious and learned men may come forth, whoseMal. 2. lips may pre∣serve Knowledge, and disporse it thorow the whole Land, that thePsal. 107. mouth of ignorance and iniquity may be stop∣ped. Remember all that are afflicted, especially thy ser∣vant that desireth the prayers of this congregation: Oh Father of mercies, and God of all consolations, comfort those that be any Way cast downe. The living, the living, shallIsay 38. praise thee, the dead cannot praise thee, nor such as go downe into silence; O great Physition of the bodies and soules of thy servants, heale those whom thou hast woun∣ded; Ier. 10.Correct them, but in thy judgement, not in thy fu∣ry, lest they be confounded. Neither ought we in this day of humiliation, to forget our thankesgivings unto thee, O Father of mercies, who hast chosen us in Christ before the Ephes. 1.foundation of the world was laid, to the glory of thy grace, wherein we are accepted in thy beloved, who hast called us with an holy calling, and sealed us with the ear∣nest of the Spirit, who hast perswaded us of thy love here, Rom 8.and given us some hopes of glory hereafter, who hast fed
us all our life long, even from our mothers brests, and will beare us even in old age when our strength faileth us, who hast led us by the Word and Spirit, and drawn us by cords of love by theHos. 11. bands of a man, who hast delivered us in seven troubles and in eight, that they have not hurt us. To theeIoh. 5. bee glory and praise for ever and ever. Oh let the thoughts of our hearts, the words of our mouths, and the workes of our hands, bePsal. 19. now and ever accepta∣ble in thy sight. O Lord our strength and our Redeemer, Chro. 29.keepe these good imaginations in the hearts of thy people for ever, and prepare our hearts unto thee, put thy feare into us, and cause us to walke in the way of thy Comman∣dements, that wee may never depart from thee; at this time teach us the way, and lead us O God of our salva∣tion, for we are children and cannot go. Help us by power from on high, that wee may begin, continue, and end in thee, by the helpe of Iesus: In whose Name and words we conclude our prayers in the mostMatth. 6. absolute forme of Prayer which he hath taught us in his holy Gospell. Our Father, &c. FINIS.
