a1848 e2140_1 99867323 170584
The Womans Almanack: OR, Prognostication, for ever: Shewing the nature of the Planets, with the Events that shall befall Wo∣men and children born under them. With several Predictions very useful for the Female Sex. By Sarah Ginnor Student in Physick. London, Printed for J. J. 1659.
To the Reader. COurtious Reader, The gift of learning being so little set by in these days amongst those of our Sex, is the chief invitation which hath caused me to publish this smal Tract, thereby to stir up others, not to let their great worth with other learned Authors of our Sex ly in obscurity. I need not quote them for I think few of our Sex so igno∣rant but they have either read or heard of them, and though some of them have been abused by the quacksalving Mountibanks that would engrosse all knowledge into their own hands, yet have great & wonderful cures been done by our Sex, after these paper-sculd Mongrels have left them. Why then should we suffer these Cater-pillers to eat up our vine? Let me tell you, it is as lawful for us to be Judges & plead our own Causes in our own gowns as Lawyers to plead for others. Then lets rowse up our spirits, and show forth our Verues, for the knowledg in this Art will animate our husbands to excel us, no doubt but we shall make them sencible where the sign lies; and make them be in our stu∣dies many times when they would be in an Ale∣house; nay we shall find the nights will be more comfortable, and the days more pleasant. By this means we shall be counted instead of Mobs, maps of modesty, and for tattling Gossips, but Emblems of vertue, and parterns of civiliy to all the world. Yours whilst S.G.
A ROGNOSTICATION for ever. Astrological Observations. FIrst, I shall begin with what concerns our own Sex viz. If we find Mercury in a feminine House with Venus, then we must allow Mercury a female, in a feminine Sign, and drawing to a con∣junction with Venus, Mercury to a Quartile of Mars and Pisces, and Gemini, denotes some of our sex (not too much loaded with vertue) have a rare faculty in scolding, in other some sullenness and perversnesse. Venus in the 12 house in exaltation, applying to combustion with the Sun, denoteth that women will be more free then usual in bestowing the P— on their Clients. But if Luna go to Saturn in the sixth house in Libra, it shews that old covetious fools will dote on young wenches, therefore be∣ware of marrying, in the Spring, for if Scorpio be in the 7th house intercepted, it denotes unseemly wantonnesse, let chery and lightness in women. If Luna be in the 7th house in Pisces, it denotes frequent marrying, and is a fortunate position for Oyster-women, Fish-women, & others who are un∣der the sign Pisces. If Luna and Jupiter be in reception, the Moon
in Pisces and Jupiter in Cancer, it is a fortunate time of marrying, many of our Sex shall obtain gal∣lant matches, nay some better then they deserve. If Mercury and Venus be in Cancer, in conjuncti∣on in the eleventh house, to marry a Seaman is for∣tunate. If Venus be in Scorpio, the wantons of our Sex as well as the other sex will be pepper'd with the P— and then wo to your Noses, for its a fa∣tal plague to the roof of your mouth besides the downfal of Narrow-bridge and the drying up your Fish-ponds by the opperation of malignant fire∣works. For this my Judgement, do not take distast; But as I am, I wish you all, be chast: This is the only way, if you desire To be preserved from the Frenchmans fire. The Names of the Planets and the Dayes governd by each Planet. As Saturn stands for Saturday so Luna Sunday, Mars to Tuesday Sol stands up to Monday, Jupiter boldly doth to Thursday fly, To Fryday Venus Wedensday Mercury. The 12 signs ruling in the body are, Aries, Tau∣rus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.
IAnuary. If it be on New-years day that the Clouds in the morning be red, it shall be an an∣gry yeare with much War and great Tempests. If the Sun do shine on the 22. day of January there shall be much wind. If the Sun doth shine on Saint Pauls day, the 25 day of January, it shall be a fruitfull year, and if it do Rain or Snow, it shall be between both: If it be very misty it betokeneth great death: If thou hear it Thunder that day, it betokeneth great Winds, and great death and most especially among rich men that year. February. On Shrove-Tuesday whosoever doth Plant or Sow, it shall remain alwayes green. Item, how much the Sun did shine that day, so much he shall shine every day in Lent. And al∣wayes the next new Moon that falleth after Can∣dlemas day, and after that the next Tuesday, shall be alwayes Shrove-Tuesday. And when the Sun riseth and shineth early, then prospereth well all manner of Fruit: if you hear it Thunder, that it betokeneth great Wine and much Fruit. Saint Bede saith there be three dayes, and three nights, that if a Child be born therein, the body a∣bideth whole and shall not consume away untill the day of Judgment: that is in the last dayes of January, and the secrets thereof are full wondrous. And if a Tree be hewed at, on the same day, it shall never fall.
March. The more mists that there be in March, the more good doth it, and as many dayes as be in March, so many hoar frosts shall you have after Easter, and so many Mists in August. All manner of Trees that shall be cut down unto the two last Holy days in March, shall never fall. Item, If on Palm-Sunday be no fair weather, that betokeneth to goodness. If it do Thunder that day, then it signifieth a merry year, and death of great men. April. If it rain never so little on the Ascensi∣on day, it betokeneth dearth of all manner of food for Cattel. But when it is fair weather it is pros∣perous, and there shall be plenty of Tallow and much Wooll. May. If the Sun do shine on the 25 day of May, Wine shall prosper well; but if it doth rain, it doth much hurt. Item, if it rain on Whit-Sun∣day, it is not good. Item in the last of May, the Oak Trees begin to bear blossoms, if they blos∣som then, you shall have a good year of Tallow, and plenty of Fruit. June. If it rain ne'r so little on Midsummer-day, that is the 24 day of June, then do not the Hasel Nuts prosper: If the holy Sacraments day of our Lord be fair, then it is good and causeth Fruit plen∣ty, and the Lambs to dye. July, If it Rain the second day of July, such wea∣ther shall be forty days after, day by day, yet some imputed it to Swithin the 15.
August. If the Sun do shine on the 15 day of August, that is a good token, and speciall for Wine. September. If thou wilt see and know how it shall go that year, then take heed to the Oak Ap∣ples about Saint Michaels day, for by them you shall know how that year shall be: If the Apples of the Oak-Trees when they be cut; be within full of Spiders, then followeth a naughty year: If the Apples have within them Flies, that betokens a meetly good year. If they have Maggots in them, then followeth a good year. If there be nothing in them, then followeth great dearth: if the Ap∣ples be many and early ripe, so shall it be an early Winter, and very much Snow shall be afore Christ∣mas, and after that it shall be cold. If the inner part or kernall be fair, and clear, then shall the Summer be fair, and the Corne good also; but if they be very moist then shall the Sum∣mer also be moist. If they be lean then shall there be a hot and dry Summer. If it Thunder in this moneth it presageth plenty of Wine and Corne that year. October. When the leaves will not fall from the Trees, then followeth after a cold  or else a great number of Caterpillars on  ees. November. Whether the Winter be cold or warm, go on Alhollows day to a Beech Tree, and cut a chip thereof, and if it be dry then shall the Winter be warm: if thou wilt try on St. Andrews
even, whether it shall be a moist or dry year that followeth, you shall know by a glass full of water: if the year shall be moist, and much Raine shall fall, then shall the Water in the Glass run over. And if there shall follow a dry year, then shall not the water arise to the brink thereof. When there followeth a foggy Night, a good year after ensueth, that is, when it commeth on the Thursday Night, or on a flesh day at Night, and not on the Friday or Saturday, wherein some men will eat no other meat but Flesh: if there be Thundring, that betokeneth plenty of Fruit. December. When Christmas day commeth while the Moon waxeth, it shall be a very good year, and the nearer it commeth to the New Moon, the bet∣ter shall that year be. If it come when the Moon decreaseth, it shall be a hard year, and the nearer the later end there∣of it commeth the worse and harder shall the year be. And if any Wood be cut off on the two last dayes of December, and on the first day of January, it shall not rot nor wither away, nor be full of Worms, but alwayes wax harder, and in his age as hard as a stone. W ristmas Eve at midnight the wind waxeth  etokens a fruitfull year; and when the Sun shines on Twelfth day in the morning, it betokeneth foul weather, if it be fair that day it is happy and fortunate.
To find the time when the Sun shall be Eclipsed, and when not by his distance from these two sections called the head and tail of the Dragon. If the apparent latitude of the Moon at the time of the visible Conjunction be lesse then 30. min. 40 seconds, there must be an Eclipse. But if the apparent latitude of the Moon be more then 34 min. 51 seconds, there can be no Eclipse. If the apparent latitude be more then 30 min. 40 seconds, and lesse then 34 min. 51 seconds, there may be a smal Eclipse, as in this following Figure. North South East West Of the Eclipse of the Moon. If the Moon at the Noon at the time of her t opposition to the Sun, shall be distant from
either of the two forementioned points, lesse then 10 degrees, 21 mm. and 20 seconds, then must the Moon suffer an Eclipse. But if her distance be more then 13 degrees 5 min. and 13 seconds then the Moon cannot be Eclipsed. If her distance be more then 10 degrees 21 min. & 20 seconds, then she may Happen to be Eclip∣sed, but not necessarily. I shall not treat further on Eclipses, in regard the happiness of our Sex doth appeat in most splen∣dour, when the Moon appears so clouded, as in this following Figure, dark nights being to us as a fountain, whence flows all our mirth, joy, pleasure, sports, and melodious recreations. Expound you may the piece 'tis but a Riddle, The pleasure of our Sex lies in the middle.
The signification of Moles in these of our sex. If the Woman have a Mole on the left Breast, it denotes her undoubtedly wicked. If she have a Mole on her Belly, it denotes her a Clutton or great feeder. If a Mole right against the Spleen, it denotes she shall be often sick. If on the bottom of the Belly, it argues much debility and weakness. If near the privy Members it denotes unspeakable desires after Venery, and unsatiable in coacting. If a woman have a Mole on the right Knee, it de∣notes her honest, if on the left many Children. If on the Ankle of the foot, she shall take on her the mans part. Moles on the right side betokeneth ho∣nesty Riches, on the left side Calamity and Pover∣ty. If on the Forhead, it denotes that she shall come to high dignity. If she have a Mole about the overbrow, it argues she shall marry a rich comely person. But if on the overbrow she shall have five Husbands. If she have a Mole on the Nose some∣what Ruddy, and another in the privy place, it doth shew such a person is over much given to Venerial acts. If a Woman have a Mole on the neither jaw, it denotes she shall lead her life in sorrow, which shall hinder her from bearing Children. If a Mole on any of the Lips, it doth portend that shees a great glutton. If on the Chin, it portends wealth. If a Mole on any of her Ears, it portends she shall be Rich and much reverenced, and hath the like Mole on ber Thigh or Ham. If on the Neck, it likewise denotes Riches. If a Woman shall have a
Mole on her Loyns, it denotes poor Kindred, and alwayes wanting. If on the shoulders, it denotes Imprisonment and sorrow. If she have a Mole on the Throat, it signifies she shall Marry a Wealthy and Comely man. If in the Hand a Mole shall ap∣pear, it denotes good Luck and Prosperous Chil∣dren. If a Mole on the Breast, it denotes she shall be harmed by much poverty. How to know whether a VVoman be with Child of Boy or Girl. Write the proper names of the Father or Mo∣ther, and of the Moneth that she conceived with Child, and adding likewise all the numbers of those Letters together, divide them by seven, and if the remainder be even, it will be a Girle, if odd, it will be a Boy. To know whether the VVife be Honest or no. Write the name of the Wife, and of he Mother, and put all the number of those Letters together, and put to the totall sum 15, and divide it by 7, and if the remainder be un-even, she is honest, if even she is dishonest. Alwayes write the proper names in Latine. The same may be to know whether a Man or his Wife shall dye first, only add not the number 15, but divide by seven, if even the Woman shall dye, if odd the man.
What Thunder signifieth every Moneth. Thunder in January signifieth the same year great Winds, plentifull of Corn and Cattel perad∣venture. Thunder in February, signifieth that same year many rich men shall dye in great sickness. Thunder in March, signifieth that same year great Winds, plenty of Corn, and debate amongst peo∣ple. Thunder in April signifieth that same year to be fruitfull and merry, with the death of wicked men. Thunder in May, signifieth that year need, scarcenesse and dearth of Corn, and great hunger. Thunder in June, signifieth that same year that Woods shall be overthrown with Winds, and great rageing shall be of Lyons and Wolves, and so like of other harmfull Beasts. Thunder in July, signifi∣eth that fame year shall be good Corn, and losse of Beasts, that is to say, their strength shall perish. Thunder in August, signifieth the same year sor∣row, wailing of many, for many shall be sick. Thunder in September, signifieth the same year great Wind, plentifull of Corn, and much falling out between man and man. Thunder in October signifieth the same year great Wind, and scantness of Corn, Fruits and Trees. Thunder in November fignifieth that same year to be fruitfull and merry, and cheapnes of Corn. Thunder in December, sig∣nifieth that same year cheapnesse of Corn, and Wheat, with peace and accord among the peo∣ple.
Some memorable Accidents happened since 1639. The Parliament began the 3 of November, and continued 12 years. 1639 The Rebellion in Ireland began 23 October, 1641 Earl of Strufford beheaded 12 May, 1642 Earl of Essex made Gen. July 12 1642 Battel at Edg-hill Octob. 20. and at Brainford 12 November, 1642 Newbury fight 23 Sept. 1642 Scots enter into England Jan. 16. 1643 Bishop of Cant. beheaded Jan. 10 1644 Lord Fairfax made General Decemb. 31. 1644 Marst emore fight, June 14, 1644 House of Lords and King voted down, 1648 King Charles began his reign 27 March 1625 and beheaded 30 January, 1648 Colchester taken, and Lucas and Lisle shot to death, Aug. 28, 1648 Scots routed in Lancashire Aug. 7. 1648 Ormond beaten from Dublin Aug 2, 1649 The K. of Scott routed at VVorcester 3 Sep. 1649 Scots routed at Dunbar Sept. 3. 1651 The long Parliament dissolved by the Lord Pro∣tector, April 20 1653 Victory against the Dutch, Jan. 23 1653 The Protector having Governed four years, three months, and 5 days, departed his life the third of Sept. 1658
Some Signs of mirth for our sex. When the Dragons head is in Scorpio, and he upon the Cusp of the 7 house, the Moon being in Cancer, and Venus applying to a Sextile o the Moon, ther's hopes of abundance of satisfaction in the gallant recreation of night sport by a stranger, which questionless will make the merry wantons of out age tittle with laughter, at the tryal of the fundamentall Point of Mars, who shall venter to beat up their quarters to his own prejudice. When Mars sits at home to wash the dishes and skim the Pot, and Venus wal the Exchange, it denotes great change in houshold government. When men come sober home, and go to bed by day-light, our sex are in election to be merry at Candle-light. When men grow blind and can't see to tell mo∣ny at home, then our sex may be merry abroad. When husbands are jealous over night, it shews a fit time for out sex to go to St. Tantlins next morning. If a man be fortified strongly with the Scepter of Mars, it denotes a fit time for Venus to lye down, that mirth may be produced by the Turks entrance into Constantinople. Yet after mirth, I wish our Sex may mend, And Vertue guide them whilst I make An End.
