A732 E1371_1 99860248 112365
The Phrygian Fabulist: OR, THE FABLES OF AESOP: EXTRACTED From the Latine Copie, And MORALIZ'D. By LEONARD WILLAN Gent. Puerilia Ludibria Hominum Studia. LONDON, Printed by W. D. for Nicolas Bourn, at the South Entrance of the Roial-Exchange, 1650,
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Edward Earl of Dorset, Knight of the most noble Order of the GARTER. SIR, IN those happie daies, while yet Apollo's Tree (as a preservative against the wrath of Heav'n) flourisht at everie noble Patriot's Gate: your careless eie by chance surpriz'd a Virgin scarcely drest, Poor
Astraea, whose Tongue and Habit I had fa∣shion'd to our use; by Her Access to your Protection, pretending to have won fair shel∣ter from the blasts of Critick Tongues; and as the Right of my Respects, to have tender'd unto you, My Lord, the first fruits of my Pen; but e're her Pastoral Reed could vent her humble strains, 'twas silence't by the cla∣mours of the Drum. My Designs are the same they were, my Lord; the Subject's onely changed with the Times, which (since most Pens were fashion'd by the Sword) Weight want's not in the Election; In which regard, my Lord, by chance This falling to my hand, I have adventur'd to prefer to yours. Although perhaps the Character there∣of would in a vulgar eie scarcelie win Credit to move Acceptance or Perusal; A Piece so Antick, ev'n worn out of use. And truly had I as slightly it perus'd; I should in my Judg∣ment have blemisht your esteem, and in your
Judgment forfeited my Own, to have presum'd to give it so eminent an Introductor, as your Self; The publick Oracle to whom all Doubts appeal: But finding so large a Catalogue of the choisest Autors of everie Age, becom Inter∣preters to This (though I confess but slight Expositors) It added yet new Fervor to my Will, to make This your Divertisement, the onelie Object of my Industrie, wherein I hope the Errors you shall finde will meet a favoring Censure, when you, My Lord, are pleas'd to weigh the varietie of the Subject, not abso∣lutelie scrutable; The Troubles of the Times in which it formed was; and the Integritie of His Passion to your Interests; who is My Lord Your humble Servant LEONARD WILLAN.
THE LIFE of AESOP, Collected from Maximus Planudes. MAnie (in all Ages) have made it their peculiar studie to search into the na∣ture of humane things; but amongst those, whose Notions have com to the light of Posteritie, few or none have Aesop parallel'd; who, as by divine In∣spiration atteining the perfection of moral Knowledg, may justly bee said, therein, to have born awaie the Glo∣rie from them All: who neither by intricate definiti∣ons, nor abstruse reasoning nor from preceding exam∣ples admonishing, but onely by pleasant Fables instru∣cting, so won the affections of the Hearers, that it see∣med to them a shame, that they indued with reason, should not wisely act, and foresee those things that might bee for their advantage or prejudice, as did the Beast and Fowl hee figured. In which image of his Philosophical Common-wealth▪ seeming rather to Philosophize in works, then in words. Hee was a Native of Ammo∣ria a Citie of Phrygia, sirnamed the great; by fortune a slave; but the subjection of his Bodie could not cor∣rupt▪ nor yet inthral his Minde. As little gratious in his form had Nature likewise been to him, beeing of all
men of that Age the most deform'd: Sharp-headed, flat-nos'd, pouch-mouth'd, short-neck't, crook-back't, tun-bellied, Baker-kneed, bow-leg'd, inverst-footed, all which were varnish't with a hideous black, which gave him the distinction of his name, Aesop implying Aethiop. To these a voice obscure and inarticulate; so that in him all Pieces did agree, as hee were predesign'd to ignomie. But though in Bodie thus irregular▪ his wit was sudden, and invention sharp, yet becaus not com∣municable, his Master him (as fit for no domestick use) imploied onely to dig up the soil: to which with much alacritie hee still appli'd himself. The Steward to this Lord (to shew himself carefull to his Master's trust, and the Soil gratefull to his Master's cost) presented unto him the choisest Figs the Season had afforded, which to the trust of a domestick given, till hee disposed were thereof to eat: the Trustee with his Fellows privately contriv'd to eat the Fruit, and to charge Aesop with the theft thereof: who by these Mates accus'd, was judged guiltie, and to Supplice brought: But Aesop prostrate at his Master's feet, obteining a Repriev, a flaggon of warm water brought before them all, wherof part drin∣king, he to his Fellows the remainder gave, the warmnes of the water suddenly a loathing caussed in their Sto∣machs, provoking them to vomit: from Aesop onely the pure water came; but his Accusers with the waer straight disclos'd their guilt; who justly suffer'd what they had prepared for the Innocent: while Aesop with Applaus dismist, returned to his work. On which in∣tentive two of Diana's Priests, by chance, had lost their waie, to him repaired for direction, to which (after som small refection given them) Aesop became their Guide: for whose benevolence, the gratefull Priests addrest their zealous Preirs to Heav'n, like Grace from
thence might bee enlarg'd to him. Aesop return'd tra∣vel had soon o'recom his sens with sleep, in which hee dream't Fortune appear'd to him, loosing his fetter'd tongue, and him inspiring with this moral facultie; from which hee waking, found the success of what was figured; thankfull to Heav'n, Aesop, o'recom with joie, himself addressing to his task again, espied the Steward Zenas (for som slight fault) sharply correcting one of his Mates with blows: Aesop reproaching him his daily crueltie, threatned to make complaint unto his Lord. The Steward much amaz'd to hear him speak, and jea∣lous now hee might provoke his Master to displeasure against him: to frustrate which, hee against Aesop (with fals suggestions) prepossest his Lord, which credit winning, wrought so much dislike, that Aesop was surrendred solie to his hands, him to dispose of, as best liked him: whereon a passing Merchant requiring of him what hee had to sell; Zenas presented Aesop; the Merchant much incenst, as hee had mocked him, in contemt of the proffer turn'd suddenly awaie: accosting whom, Aesop desir'd him to accept the sale, hee might bee usefull to him; in that, perhaps hee might at home have som unhappie Boies, o're whom if hee might but preside to keep them in aw, hee should to them as an Hobgoblin bee. The Merchant pleas'd with the con∣ceit, tender'd his Price, and mongst his new Mates, bid him choos his Pack: Aesop heeron took a great Basket, which was fil'd with bread for their Provision, whereat his Fellows much derided him, in that hee had the greatest, might have took the least: but ere they travel'd far, few meals had Aesop's carriage made so light, they envied him his burden. The Merchant with his Troop to Sames com, exposed Aesop and his Mates to sale: whom Xanthus a Philosopher abourding
(neglecting Aesop) strictly examin'd of their Faculties, they made replie, That they could all things do; at which Aesop laughed scornfully: which Xanthus scho∣lars observing, they desir'd him, hee would Aesop prove; to whom addrest Xanthus ask't, What hee was? Ae∣sop said, Black: Xanthus said, hee mistook, hee ask't, Whence hee was born? Aesop replied, from his mothers womb. Xanthus said hee yet not apprehended him, hee asked him. In what Place hee was born? Aesop repli'd, His Mother ne're told him, whither it were above stairs or below. Xanthus ask't, What hee could do? Aesop said, Nothing; his fellows All but lately had ingrost, and nothing left to him. Xanthus ask't him if hee bought him, if hee'd not run awaie? Aesop repli'd, if such his purpose were, hee'd of his Counsel not his Master make. Xanthus objected, that he was deform'd; Aesop replied A Philosopher ought to make the Minde & not the Bo∣die the Object of his choice. The Scholars much deligh∣ted with his wit, tender'd his Price; & gave him to their Master for their use. The standers by o'rehearing of the Price, much wondering at the meanness of the same, ask't, who it was that bought him; who him sold. But (asham'd of his value) neither would declare themselvs: Whereon Aesop said, Hee was the Partie sold; Xan∣thus the Chapman; The Merchant made the sale; if neither this avouch't, then hee was free; Aesop brought home, no pleasing object was to Xanthus wife: But Aesop shewing her the prejudice a handsom slave might bee unto her Fame, restrain'd the violence of her Passi∣on; which better yet to pacifie, Xanthus to a Publike Garden went, to buie for her a Present of the choisest Fruits, with him Aesop taking to conveie them home. Arrived there, the fruit beeing gather'd and delivered; for which Xanthus beeing about to paie; the Gadner
prai'd him to accept of them, hee onely did desire of him solution to one doubt, which was, Why those Herbs planted by his hand, though water'd and manured dili∣gently, yet slowly took increas: but what sprung from the Earth of their accord, although neglected, sooner germinate? Xanthus (not knowing what els well to saie) replied, this, as other things was in the Government of Divine Providence: at which Aesop laughing; Xan∣thus incenst, ask't, if in it, hee had derided him? Aesop replied; not him, but who him taught: For what was by Divine Providence don, by wise men onely should bee scrutable: desiring that the resolution might bee left to him; which granted, Aesop thus answered it; A Woman having children by the first, became the Wife unto a second Husband, who children also by a former had: unto the children shee brought forth, the Wife a most indulgent Mother was; but unto those of which shee found her Husband prepossest, a churlish stepdame, whose rights shee often them abridg'd, to cherish more her own: So the Earth, to those that were her proper Issue, as Legitimate, plentifully administred: But unto those that planted were by Art, as Bastards, scarce afforded Nourishment. The Gardner with the Answer satisfied; bad Aesop fetch fruit gratis when hee would. When home return'd: Xanthus bad Aesop (among other things) prepare a pair of Hog's feet for his Supper, which on the fire set; Xanthus, occasion seeking to correct his Slave, as hee was busied on som other thing, took privately out of the Pot a foot; which Aesop not long after missing (foresaw som snare was laid to intrap him) ran forthwith to a Stall at hand, and from a Hog, lately shut up to fat, chopt off a foot, drest it, and cast it to the rest i'th Pot▪ Xanthus (in the Interim) doubting, when Aesop should miss the
foot hee took for fear of Punishment would run away, went secretly, and cast it in again: when they were boil'd, as Aesop pour'd them forth. Xanthus discover∣ing five feet in the dish, ask't, How that came to pass? Aesop abash't, required, How manie feet two Hogs should have? Xanthus said, eight; Aesop replied, the number then was right; five in the dish, and the other three the fat Hog had, was inclos'd in the Stall. Xan∣thus incensed; Aesop desir'd his Patience, saying, Hee well knew, that from addition and reduction in quan∣titie could happen no error in the whole sum. Next daie a solemn feast was held by Xanthus Scholars, where hee collecting of the choisest meats, to Aesop them delivered, with a charge, hee should to them present it, lov'd him best: hee on his Mistress thinking to bee reveng'd: came home, and in her hearing, ut∣tering his late charge, Licaena cal'd, a little Cur his Master of en plaid with in his lap, and gave to him the meat▪ his Mistress heeron high in rage and grief, with∣drew unto her Chamber, there with manie tears be∣wailing this affront, as suppos'd from her Husband. Aesop return'd; a great dispute arose amongst the Phi∣losophes, When the greatest disturbance should befall man∣kinde. The Question not at Table satisfied, Aesop had leav to speak, who said▪ This happen would in the last Resurrection of the dead, when each one should re∣quire, what once they had possest. Aesop's facetious wit heeron all much approved, and by them strait ano∣ther was propounded: Why Sheep led to the slaughter, as Swine no clamours vent: The Question at a stand; Aesop repli'd; Sheep usually were handled to bee milkt, and of the burden of their Fleece to bee devested; in which took from their feet, no ill suspected from the sight of iron: but Swine that neither milked were nor
shorn, well knew for these respects not to bee drawn, but for their flesh, which onely was of use; therefore just reason for their out-crie had. Aesop's conceit much laughter moved till the Feast broke up. Xanthus returned Home, his Wife reproach't him her indignitie, as judging it from him; who much amaz'd, cal'd Aesop to enlighten the disorder; Aesop said, hee perform'd but his commands in giving this his Present to the Dog; as to them lov'd him best: for though his Mistress seem'd benevolent, yet when reprov'd, shee would re∣vile again, the Dog though threat and beat, return'd with new endearments to his Master's Lap. But all this in his wives opinion could not Xanthus clear, who to her Parents strait in this distaste repair'd; to the di∣sturbance of her anxious Husband; whom Aesop fin∣ding much perplext, to pacifie this trouble, by his act procur'd; practis'd this slight, to fetch her home again. With a great Basket hee to Market went, which hee well stored with the choisest Fowl, then near the dwel∣ling where his Mistress was, enquired for such rarities, might grace a Nuptial Feast. Which beeing by one of the Domesticks over-heard, hee busily curious, unto Aesop came, to know for whom this Preparation was▪ Aesop (faining him not to know) repli'd; for Xanthus the Philosopher, who on the morrow should a fair Vir∣gin wed. The Servant home returning with this hastie news, fil'd Xanthus wife with rage and jealousie, who strait flew home to frustrate this design, where joifully received, with the Provision, feasting, shee was re∣concil'd. And to congratulate this new Union, Xan∣thus next daie his Scholars made his Guests; comman∣ding Aesop for the entertainment buie the best of things. Aesop (whose aim still was to mock his Master's learn∣ing) thought, hee would punish him for this his unad∣vis'd
Commission to Market went, where buying nought but tongues, home hee return'd and drest them sundrie waies. The Guest arriv'd; first boil'd tongues hee sent in, whereat they all commended Aesop's inge∣nuitie that to Philosophers for the first Mess thus had served Tongues, the Ministers of knowledg. For the next service, rosted Tongues was set, for the next bak't; So that in Sum they nothing had but Tongues; at which the Guests were much abash't, and Xanthus much in∣censt; who Aesop calling rebuked with much furie: Aesop returned thanks to him; in that hee favour'd him with that advantage in this his reproof, to cal him to ac∣count for this his default, in the presence of Philosophers, who had capacitie to judg the Nature of his Crime, if such there anie were, then turning to his Master, said, He bad him buie of all things the most excellent; Appea∣ling then to the Assemblie, ask't, What there could bee more excellent then Tongues; by them all knowledg was communicated. Cities erected, Laws establisht, Nupti∣als celebrated, Men protected, Friendship confirm'd; in brief the Commerce of man's whole life consisted onely in the use thereof: At which all smiling approv'd what Aesop said; Xanthus himself (on Aesop's fault) excusing to his Guests; said, they should sup with him; and to the end they should no farther bee abused in their Entertainment, they should bee witness to the charge hee gave; then calling Aesop, with purpose to in∣trap him, bad him for their Supper buie the worst of things: Which Aesop did; and for their Supper nothing serv'd but Tongues again. Summon'd heeron to an∣swer his Delinquencie: Aesop for his Defence insisted o'th particulars of his Charge, that nothing ever wors could bee then Tongues: By these, quarrels were be∣got, Men slain, Lies forged, Execrations dispensed,
Perjurie vented, Kingdoms overthrown; and in brief thereby the whole life entangled in error; whereat the Guests not so well pleas'd, one of them said, If Xanthus were not arm'd with Patience beyond the suffrance of a Man, Aesop would make him mad: whom Aesop strait reproving, said, Hee was a busie curious fellow to incens the Master so against his Servant. Xanthus occasion ta∣king to beat Aesop, in that hee blam'd his Friend as curi∣ous; impos'd a Charge on him to bring him One, that was not so. Which to effect, Aesop went forth into the street, where looking earnestly about him; hee descri∣ed a man a long time in a corner had sit still immov'd: Aesop (him judging som simple idle drone) invited him to Dinner from his Master; the Clown not asking who his Master was or where, went home with him. Xan∣thus admiring much this his new guest, askt Aesop, who hee was: Aesop repli'd a man not curious, such as hee had commanded him to bring. Xanthus his wife strait whispering in the ear; desir'd her to fulfill what ere hee bad her do, hee might advantage win to punish Aesop's Insolence: forthwith his voice exalting, bad her bring som water to wash the feet of this his welcom Guest: Prefiguring to himself, his Guest would in civilitie re∣fuse so mean a Ministrie from so fair a hand; and in so doing Aesop might bee convicted; of which his wife de∣sirous appli'd her self thereto with diligence. The Clown esteeming this as a peculiar grace to honor him, his feet extended without Cerimonie; which washt, as rudely hee sat down. Xanthus pursuing still his Purpose; bad fill his Guest som Wine imagining his Guest would in good manners move the Cup might first have been pre∣fer'd to him; the Clown esteeming this as right to his respect, accepted it, and cleared with the Cup the doubt; then eagerly fell on the Mess that nighest was to hand;
which, Xanthus following his design, condemned much in that it not well ordered was; and calling for the Cook, reviled him with sharp rebukes, which were pur∣su'd with blows; the Clown without intermission fee∣ding, said, The Meat was verie good, Xanthus might saie, and do his Pleasure, it not concerned him. Xan∣thus much vext hee could not trap his Guest; at last ser∣vice a Marchpane, seem'd much to mislike, and calling for the Pastrie-Cook, reproacht him manie defects i'th composure; who made replie, Had it not been well bak't, hee might have born the blame; but the fault beeing in the making, his Mistress therein was to bee condemn'd, who onely had a hand in it: Xanthus a private signal giving to his wife, stept in a furie to her, saying, since 'twas her fault, shee onely for it should bee burnt alive, then to the fire bearing her in his Arms, paused a while, exspecting when his Guest would run to rescue her. But hee fast tied by the teeth, praid Xan∣thus, if hee pleas'd to hold his hand awhile, hee would fetch his Wife too, they both might burn together. Xan∣thus admiring the immotion of the Clown, yielded the Victorie unto Aesop's choice: and forthwith sent him to the common Bath, to bee inform'd what companie there was, if few or none, his resolution beeing then to bathe himself. Aesop on his errand hasting, encountred the chief Magistrate; who knowing hee belong'd to Xan∣thus, askt him, Where hee went? Aesop in haste re∣pli'd. Hee did not know; the Magistrate believing this slight answer made in scorn of him, committed him to Prison: Passing to which, Aesop said to the Magistrate, hee now might see how pertinently hee had answer'd him, hee did not know that hee should go to Prison: The Magistrate much pleased with his readie wit, forth∣with enlarged him: Who coming to the Bath, observed
manie there, who at the entrie stumbling at a stone, past to and fro not much regarding it: Onely One came, and ere like chance befel him, it remov'd. Aesop return'd, inform'd his Master there was but one man onely in the Bath. But Xanthus thither com, finding a multitude, reproved Aesop for abusing him: Aesop repli'd; all com∣ing to and fro, had stumbled at a stone just in the entrie laie, One onely had remov'd it ere hee past, to whom the rest compar'd hee could not judg them men, giving such slight evidence of that facultie, which should for such distinguish them: heeron Xanthus not judging it a fit time to bathe, withdrew from thence unto a private Feast of his Societie, to which som time before hee was invited; where on discours of lustie Bibbers, hee high in wine and fancie boasted, hee onely would exhaust the Sea, by drinking it, which proffering by wager to make good, found an Accepter there, who from their hands deposited their rings, to confirm the Contract, which was the losers dwelling hous consigned was thereby un∣to the winner. Xanthus, his wits recovering with his sleep missed his ring next morning, as hee washt; where∣of Aesop hee examining, found to his grief the Error hee had don, and to his succor, with large proffers, sum∣mon'd Aesop's wit; Aesop repli'd, to win there was no possibilitie, but his Engagement to withdraw, that hee assur'd him of. Which as Aesop advis'd, was thus pur∣su'd: Th'Assemblie met the wager to determine; Xan∣thus immov'd no part of it deni'd, himself preparing to the enterprize; of the sea water taking a full Bowl; first loudly publisht the Particulars, which were, hee should the Sea drink drie, his adversarie therewith summon∣ing, as his part to stop all rivers fell into the deep, it bee∣ing the Sea hee onely was to drink, not the fresh waters thither issuing, which demand held but just, and either
Part impossible; the wager was withdrawn. Xanthus securing both his Fame and Goods by Aesop's subtiltie. When home return'd; Aesop requir'd his freedom for his recompens, to which unwilling, Xanthus bad him first to go forth, and if two Crows hee did discover, to bring him word thereof, it would bee to him a good Omen; if but one, it did protend ill hap. Aesop went forth, and spying two, return'd▪ informing thereof, Xan∣thus, who, hasting forth to see them, found but one; the other in the interim beeing flown awaie: whereon Xan∣thus believing Aesop had derided him, fell on his skirts with blows: during which fraie a Messenger came in to invite Xanthus to a Publick Feast. Which hearing▪ Aesop reproacht his Master this his Augurie: saying Hee that had two Crows seen was heaten, his Master that but One, was feasted: Xanthus to gratulate this Entertain∣ment; another made soon after: at which Aesop had charge to let in none but such were letter'd men. Aesop (as hee was wont) his Master's learning to deride, kept the Door shut, and as the Guests knockt, askt, what the Dog mov'd? At which without replie, distasted All return'd; but one, who when Aesop askt, What the Dog mov'd, repli'd, his Ears and Tale, to whom free entrie Aesop onely gave. Xanthus perplext to see his Guests, but this, had All deceived him, was at next meeting in∣form'd of the Caus: Aesop to judgment cal'd, objected in defens, his charge was onely the literate to admit; for Proof whereof, hee onely askt, What the Dog mov'd? But they not able to resolv, hee could not judg them of those Guests, his Master purpos'd to receiv. Xanthus (for shame, concealing his displeasure, till time produc'd a juster caus of Punishment) went forth with Aesop to view the Publike Monuments of the dead; where on a Column, Aesop finding this Inscription (.)
askt of his Master, If hee could interpet it; Xanthus confest his doubts; Aesop desir'd to know what his re∣ward should bee, if hee thereby a secret Treasure should disclose to him. Xanthus repli'd, His Libertie. Aesop heeron four Paces measuring from the Tomb, dig'd up the Earth, and found a Pot of Gold; which to his Ma∣ster bringing, hee his Promiss clame'd. Xanthus said, first hee should expound to him the Sens of the Chara∣cters, which hee more prized then the Gold, was by them figured; which Aesop thus did, : which is, Going from hence four Paces, digging thou shalt finde a Treasure of Gold. Xanthus said, Since hee was so subtil hee should not bee made free. Aesop vext▪ thus abus'd, said, Hee must further let him know, This Treasure should bee given to the Bizantian King. Xanthus demanded, Whence hee had learnt that. Aesop repli'd, the same letters did infer the same, . Which is, Give the Treasure of Gold which you have found to Dionysius the King. Xanthus now fearing to bee di∣spossest, bad Aesop silent bee, hee should enjoie his liber∣tie, with half the Gold to boot. Aesop said, half was his right without his Gift by the Intention of the Erector of the Monument. Xanthus askt▪ Where hee found that? Aesop repli'd, in the same Characters it was figured, : which is, Receiv'd, going away, di∣vide the Treasure of Gold, which you have found. Xan∣thus said, when hee came home hee should both have his share and libertie. Both beeing return'd: Xan∣thus in fear that Aesop should divulge his new adven∣ture; cast him in Prison. Where Aesop shamefully re∣proaching him the breach of his Promiss, was at length
set free: but not restored to his libertie: which Aesop him assur'd hee should ere long attein against his will; about which time hapned this accident in the Samian State. As they were in the Cerimonie of a so∣lemn Feast, an Eagle had trust up their Publick Seal, and dropt it in the bosom of a Slave. Amaz'd at this new Prodegie, the Magistrates repair'd to Xanthus as the chief Philosopher, t'expound the Mysterie: but hee as full of doubt as they, som time required thereon to de∣liberate. In which Aesop perceiving Xanthus full of trouble, knowing well the caus, desir'd him to cast the burden of his doubts on him, and the next daie to let the Samians know it was no part of his Profession to in∣terpret Auguries, but that hee had a Boie, who skilfull was therein, and what they sought was able to resolv; and if hee did enlighten the Presage, it would an honor to his Master be, who had in his Possession such a slave, but if hee fail'd therein, the hazzard of the Error would solie fall on him; to which persuaded, Xanthus next daie what Aesop had adviz'd, communicated to the Samians, whereon Aesop summon'd, Publickly stood forth and said, That Fortune (still the Minister of strife) had cast the prize of Glorie betwixt the Master and his slave, which if the servant from the Master bore, in envie hee should no∣thing gain but blows: and if hee failed in the Enterprize, like stripes would punish his Presumtion, which disadvan∣tage to avoid, Hee first desir'd the People to procure his libertie; the People heeron all with one assent, re∣quired Xanthus to enlarge his slave, as a peculiar Grace unto the Citie. Xanthus not verie forward to the mo∣tion was checked by the President, assuring him, if hee did not assent thereto, to make it their own Act. Xan∣thus perceiving no evasion, yielded his right, which by the common Crier published; Aesop the Augure thus
interpreted: The Eagle, as the King of Birds, impli'd a Regal Power; The publick Seal, the Government of their State, the ravishing of the same, and fal thereof into a Bond∣mans brest, prefigur'd the Power aforesaid should force from them their Libertie, reducing them to servilitie. The Sa∣mians on this Presage fil'd with grief, dissolv'd: Soon after Letters had from Craesus King of Lydia, by which they summon'd were to bee his Tributaries, which not accepted, to prepare for War. The Samians doubtful what heerin to do, ere farther they proceeded, would consult with Aesop, who them assur'd; there was, as then, no Place for Councel left; since the more pow'rfull still must bee obeied; to which at present hee advized them, saying, That Fortune had in each man's life laid forth two severall waies: The one of Libertie, the Entrie whereof was diffi∣cult and rough, but the end smooth and pleasant. The other was of servitude, whose entrie plain and easie was of access; but th'Issue thereof penable and rude. But his advice re∣jected by the Samians, Craesus thereof had soon intelli∣gence who straight resolved to decree a war against the Samians: But was advis'd by his Ambassadors, to faci∣late his Victorie, first to draw Aesop from them; which moved to the Samians by a second Embassie with releas of their purpos'd tribute, was accepted of, resolving to deliver Aesop to their hands. Which known to Aesop, hee to the People publickly declar'd his liking to their Purpose▪ but for Instruction told them, Hee had a Fable to commend to them, which was, When Beast had one with other conference, the Wolvs wag'd war against the Sheep, who had the Dogs for their confederates, 'gainst whom the Wolvs not able to prevail, sent to the Sheep an Embassie; whereby was promist peace, if they the Dogs would yield up to their hands, to which the Sheep assenting, became unto the Wolvs an easie Preie. The sens heerof was by the Sami∣ans
quickly understood, who thereon would retract their first intention. But Aesop not assenting thereto, with Promiss to bee helpfull to them, was disinist with the Ambassadors, who to Craesus brought, the Spectacle at first incensed him with scorn, so vile a thing should bee an obstacle to his Enterprize. Aesop said to the King (with great Humilitie) hee nor by force, nor by necessi∣tie was compel'd to his Presence, but of his own Ac∣cord; therefore desir'd his Pardon and Libertie to speak: which granted; Aesop said; A certain man, who Locust sought to slaie, by chance had took a Grashopper, whom hee about to kil; the Grashopper desired him, not to destroie him without anie Caus: shee did the Ear no hurt, nor yet in o∣ther Action injure him; the motion of her little tongue did but delight the Passenger. Th'Allusion heerof making to himself, surpriz'd the King with wonder and delight; who promis'd Aesop, hee would his Life not onely, but his Fate enlarge, commanding him to ask what hee de∣sir'd, it should forthwith confirmed bee to him. Aesop requested onely hee to the Samians would bee reconcil'd; of which the King assuring him, Aesop tendred him thanks, and thereon writ these Fables, which to the King presented by him esteemed highly were, and from that time preserv'd to future Ages. Soon after Aesop re∣ceiving letters to the Samians from the King, conteining that hee was in favor unto Aesop reconcil'd to them, with rich Gifts laden, to Samos sail'd again. The Samians at his return, receiving him in triumph, brought severall Crowns to him as their deliverer: whereon the Kings Concessions to them published, Aesop for this Benefi∣cence, was highly by the State rewarded. From whence departing. Aesop began his travels, disputing where hee came with the Philosophers. Coming to Babylon the reputation of his wisdom, brought him in great favor
with Licerus King thereof. In which times it was a cu∣stom 'mongst those Princes were at Peace together to send Aenigma's or dark Sentences one unto the other, and who resolved them, contracted tribute from the tender gain'd, or failing forfeited to him; In which, by Aesop's help Lycerus both enlarg'd his Fame and Treasurie, Ae∣sop beeing childeless, adopted for his son, one Ennus a young man of noble Familie, who falling into league with Aesop's Concubine, soon after was by him expelled from his hous. Ennus heeron incenst, a letter forg'd with Aesop's hand and seal, wherein expressed was Aesop's contriving with Licerus adversares to his Prejudice, in the Solution of their Problems, which by him to Licerus shewn, hee facile of belief, yielded no truce to ire; but forthwith strict command gave to Hermippo, hee should kill Aesop without more delaie. Hermippo beeing Aesop's friend belied not the Character, concealing Aesop in a secret vault, whither still privately hee convei'd him food, while Ennus by Licerus order seis'd on his Possessi∣ons; Soon after this, Nectenabo King of Aegypt hearing Aesop was slain, took that advantage, to send unto Lice∣rus Problematical Letters; requiring him to send him such Architects, could build a Tow'r might touch, nor Heaven, nor Earth and there with a man, that should resolv, what ever hee should ask, which if hee did, hee tribute should receive if not paie to him. Licerus on receit heerof, reflecting on the prejudice hee had (in Ae∣sop's loss) procured to his proper Interests, perplexed was in minde; which Hermippo distinguishing, laid hold on this occasion as auspitious, to let Licerus know, Aesop was by him yet preserv'd alive, least that the execution of his sudden wrath, might after by him bee repented of. At which Licerus overcom with joie for Aesop sent, with floods of tears restoring him to favor. Aesop his
accusation knowing, and licenst now to speak, soon clear'd himself in the discoverie of his Dilator's treach∣erie, for which Ennus by the King condemn'd to die, the sentence was repeal'd by Aesop's sute. who him receiv'd a∣gain to his Adoption: with gratious Councel him admo∣nishing, which gentle usage pierced so much his woun∣ded Conscience with the horror of his former guilt, that in the inward conflict thereof hee soon after died. Lycerus communicating to Aesop the Contents of Necie∣nabo's letter. Aesop the reat smiling, adviz'd him to re∣turn for Answer, That in the insuing Spring, hee should receiv from him what hee requir'd: With which the Am∣bassador dismist. Aesop in the Interim four chois Eag∣lets dressed so to hand, that each could bear into the up∣per Region of the Aër a Childe suspended in a Basket, and therewith make descent at his discretion. With this strange Aequipage, the Winter past, Aesop to Egypt came, where in the Presence of th'Egyptian King, hee let his Eaglets with their carriages in a square figure flie; who in the Aër exalted the Boies cal'd out to them that were below to bring up the materials for the Structure. The King abasht, said, Hee no flying men had for the carriages; and in this part of his demand confest himself convinc't. Next follow'd the Aenigma's, the first propounded by the King, was, That hee had in his Possession certain Mares, who hearing the Hors neigh in Babylon, forthwith conceiv'd. Aesop desiring respite till th'insuing daie, for the Soluti∣on; commanded his Attendants to take a Cat, which tied in a line, to draw her through the Streets, pursuing her with blows; This put in execution, The Egyptians, who worshipped this Animal, seeing her thus miserably treated, ran forthwith to her succour, and from her Per∣secutors rescuing her, complaint made of the outrage to the King; who Aesop summoning requir'd the reason,
why what they held in Reverence, hee us'd with such conteme. Aesop replied, That Cat had but last Night don to Licerus a signal displeasure, devouring a gene∣rous fighting Cock, hee had in great esteem. The King repli'd; That was impossible, the Cat could in one night so long a voiage make: at which Aesop smiling, said; So it likewise was, that Mares should at that distance bee conceiv'd with Fole. The King well pacified heerin, ap∣proved Aesop's ingenuitie. And for farther trial, assem∣bled the chief Sophisters of his Realm, inviting them with Aesop to a Feast; at which one of them addressing himself to Aesop, said, Hee by his God was sent to ask a Question of him. Aesop replied, Hee both his God abused and himself; God had no need of man's intelli∣gence; whereat hee silene't; Another thus accosted him; There was a mightie temple in which a Column stood twelv Cities had each one by thirtie beams supported, round which still ran two women. Aesop repli'd, With them, even children could expound such riddles. The Tem∣ple was the world; the Column was the year, the twelv Cities thereon, were the twelv months thereof; the thirtie Columns supported each were daies; the women that surrounded it continually were might and daie, which alternately succeed∣ed each other. The King heerat perplext hee could not Aesop foil, assembled all his Peers; to consult with them how hee might avoid the paiment of his tribute, made forfeit to Licerus by Aesop's subtiltie. One of them said, They Aesop should enjoin to propound a Question to them, that they neither knew, nor ever heard. Th'ad∣vice receiv'd, and of Aesop requir'd; who having respite till the following daie, framed a Contract, in which Necienabo confest himself a thousand talents indebted to Licerus, which at th'appointed time close seal'd deliver'd to the King in presence of his Nobles (ere the inscripti∣on
was unfolded, to o'rethrow Aesop's purpose) they said, they all had that oft heard and knew it to bee true. Ae∣sop repli'd, in respect of the paiment, hee was engaged to them for their testimonie. The King the writing open∣ing and purusing, said, Hee nothing was indebted to Li∣cerus, all they were present could it testifie; which, all confirming, said; They never knew nor heard of such a Matter. Aesop replied, If that were so, they had re∣ceived what they sought of him. Nectenabo heeron ap∣plauding Aesop's readie wit; tendered to him the con∣tracted tribute, and from his Court dismissed with much honor. Aesop return'd to Babylon, recited to Licerus what had past, presenting him his tribute hee had won. Licerus heeron to perpetrate to after ages Aesop's Fame and Memorie, in honor of him caussed his Statue to bee erected in Gold. Soon after Aesop obteining licence of the King to travel, on promiss to return and end his daies with him; passed thorough Greece with great ap∣plaus, and unto Delphos came: The Delphians curious to hear, but careless of what heard: made small Ac∣count of him: In reproof whereof, Aesop compared them to a Log at Sea. which floting on the instable Bil∣lows, seemed to them that were remote from it som∣thing of ualue; but when viewed neer at hand was found contemtible. The Delphians hearing this, ap∣pli'd the Allusion thereof to themselvs; which seised them with jealousie, that Aesop might this Judgment of them publish through the world, which if hee did the high esteem all held of him would much eclyps their Glorie: this to prevent, they privately took from Apol∣lo's shrine a Cup of Gold and secretly conveied it among Aesop's Goods; who on his departure thence was ap∣prehended and accus'd of Sacrilege: which Aesop deny∣ing, they unbound his carriages, discovering to the tu∣mult
they had rais'd the Cup; whereon Aesop into Pri∣son cast, his Judges his Accusers beeing, was soon con∣victed, and to supplice led; where calling to the mul∣titude, hee said; When Beasts could speak; the Mous made friends unto the Frog, invited him to Dinner; to gra∣tulate which the Frog the ensuing daie would have the Mous his Guest, and to avoid the danger of the Passage to his Cell, which was a Pool, the Mous unskil'd in swimming, the Frog his foot unto his Guests had fastened by a line, therewith to train him over; but having won the deepest of the flood, the Frog plung'd over head and ears the Mous: who drowning said; Hee treacherously was slain; but a more powerfull would avenge his death. When dead, the Mous laie floting on the stream was by an Eagle trussed for her Preie, and with him the suspending Frog, who likewise with the in∣jur'd was devour'd. The Application heerto Aesop made was that Licerus and all Greece, would for his death like vengeance take of them. But this restreining not the Del∣phians from their purpos'd Act: Aesop fled from them to Apollo's Temple for his Sanctuarie: But from thence also forced to the Precipice again. Aesop attemting far∣ther to dissuade them; said; An Eagle had pursu'd a Hare into a Beetle's Den, the distrest Beast requiring sbel∣ter; the Beetle praid the Eagle not to despise her impotence; but spare the refug'd Hare. The Eagle yet insulting more, struck down the Beetle with her wings, and made the Hare her unresisted Preie: The Beetle to revenge this outrage sought out the Eagle's Nest, and from thence cast her eggs unto the Earth; the Eagle to avoid this injurie shifted her Nest much higher then it was, yet not there also from her Foe secur'd: The Eagle beeing of Jove belov'd, took re∣fuge in his bosom, the Beetle this perceiving, dirt gathered from the Earth, and in Joves bosom cash it amongst the egs: Jove of the eggs unmindfull, shaking off the dirt, cast both
unto the Earth together, who reproving the Beetle for this revenge, as an indignitie to him. The Eagle arriv'd, and heard, by Jove was not excus'd; yet beeing unwilling that the Eagle's kinde should ceas, adviz'd them to bee recon∣cu'd, but that accord soon broken; Jove transfer'd the sea∣son of the Eagle's breeding to another time, in which the Beetle not able is to appear. The sens thereof Aesop to them, infer'd was, that they should not slight that God to whom hee fled, though but an image they had figured him, yet could not the impious scape his punishment: But this not availing also; Aesop thus concluded, A Husbandman, who in the Countrie had grown old, yet never saw the Citie, commanded his Domesticks to prepare for this his purpos'd Journie: who from their work not beeing to bee spared, in stead of Horses, as the more easie Beast, join'd Asses in a Car, and left them onely to the old Man's Dire∣ction: as on his waie a hideous storm arose, whose obscure shrouds advanc't the distant Night: wherein the Asses er∣ring, from off a steep rock overwhelm'd their Guide; who as hee fell, said, Jove, what had hee don, to merit such a shamefull end, not procur'd by the conduct of the generous Hors, or strenuous Mule, but of all Beast the most despi∣sed Ass: Like Fate, said Aesop, did enlarge his Grief. Whereon yet more incenst, they turn'd him off the Pre∣cipice; whose death beeing followed by an incessant Plague, the Delphians to their Oracle appealed for re∣dress: from whence was answer made, they first should expiate the Crime of Aesop's death; of which they con∣scious, erected to his Memorie a Monument. But the neighbouring Princes not satisfied heerwith, when in∣form'd what had past, to Delphos came; where making strict enquirie into Aesop's Death, became severe aven∣gers of the treacherous Murther.
ERRATA. PAg. 2 lin. 23. for often. read oft. p. 12. l. 4. for from, r. on. p. 21. l. 16. for strave, r strove, p. 42. l. 17. for shadow, r. shallow. p. 47. l. 11. for frame r. Fame, Pag. 75. l. 13. for Ears, r. Ear, p. 97. l. 9. for end, r. and. p. 122. l. 18 for soer, r. sower. p 141. l. 3. for evil, r. evils. p. 167. l. 13. for when, r. which. p. 167. l. 16. for which, r. when.
The Phrygian Fabulist: OR, THE FABLES OF AESOP. 1. The dunghill Cock. A Dunghill Cock, whose innate habits press To scrape the dirt, through want or wanton∣ness, A Jewel there disclos'd, thus did despise; What splendid trifl's this divert's mine eies? Or what blinde pow'r to mee this lot direct's? Welcom it were to him such toies affect's; But to my use, which limit's my esteem, A grain of Barley I more worthie deem. MORAL. A stupid temper of ignoble stock Is figur'd to us in the dung-hil Cock;
Who Nature's Beauties, and Art's Mysteries, Doth, when presented, with such scorn misprise, Whilst hee pursueth, with delightfull toil, Those sensual Pleasures, which the soul defile. 2. The Wolf and Lamb. A Wolf was drinking at the fountain head, Had far beneath a Lamb discovered, Refreshing Nature likewise; t'whom hee went, And thus exclaming did his furie vent; Why troubled'st thou the stream wherein I drunk? The Lamb, dismai'd, fain would away have shrunk; But urg'd again, alledged it could bee Unto the Wolf no incommoditie; Since from himself the water did descend. 'Tis not a month, the Wolf insisted, Friend, Since in like manner you affronted mee. Your pardon, Sir, that your mistake must bee, Replid the Lamb; for born I was, not then. Thou eat'st my Food, the Wolf affirm'd agen; The trembling Lamb yet hereto answered; Alas, I have not one tooth in my head. The Wolf cri'd out; thou art too like thy Sire, And for that crime thy life thou shalt exspire. MORAL. Licentious Powers, thus, often circumvent By fals-pretences the poor innocent.
But if those fail their purposes to form, Another's crime must then his guilt suborn, As Accesser to what the charge had mist; 'Tis crime enough that hee cannot resist. 3. The Mous and Frog. 'TWixt Mous and Frog there was a fraie, Who should the Fennish Empire swaie: The Mous more subtle; tufted Grass His sure Retreat and Ambush was: The Frog in agile strength prevail'd, His foe more openly assail'd: Their dreadfull weapons were of Rush, Wherewith each did at other push: The duel sharp, yet doubtful stood, Had, questionless, spilt little blood; Until a Kite did them surveie, Who made both Combatants her preie. MORAL. Here, weak, yet factious Cities are exprest, Who onely for improper Rule contest: While blinde Revenge is busie on th'effects Of hostile Acts, their safetie each neglect's; Till diverted, or spent their faculties, Both are expos'd to common Enemies.
4. The Dog and Shadow. A Leering Cur a piece of flesh had stole, Whereof to raven crep't into a hole: Sudden pursuit this ardeur yet suspent, And to soon force't him change that Element; Taking a brook with his beloved Rape: (The greater danger facilate's escape) The current and the skie were both so cleer, As each to other perfect Mirror were, And to the Cur, who there the figure view'd Of that dear Prize, for which hee was pursu'd. This unknown shadow soon his rage reviv'd, Chopping at which, hee was of both depriv'd. MORAL. So greedie mindes, although possest of store, Pursue vain hopes, attempting to have more; Till, thus, deluded in their eager chase, Their vanish't substance leav's them but disgrace. 5. The Lion and other Beast. A Daie of gen'ral Hunting was assign'd 'Twixt the Lion and Beast of sundrie kinde; The fearfull Hart became their tragick Game, Who, with much toil to all, at length was slain: Which to divide each Beast strait rushed in, And, as contracted, their parts challenging.
The Lion frowning, published that hee Held one part his by right of Dignitie; Another part did unto him belong, For that hee was then all the rest more strong. A third part his hee challenged, as gain; For in the Chase hee took the greatest pain, Onely for one part, rested, they could look, Which as a Present of their Loves hee took. Each eie'd the other with remiss dismaie, Silent and emptie shrinking all away. MORAL. Greatness invested with unbalanc't Pow'r Subvert's the Office of a Governor; Whence som infringe what their own Acts decree, As meer dependants to their Ministrie: But if such Notions will not All advance, The Rest is tender'd for their countenance. 6. The Wolf and Crane. A Wolf, a Lamb devouring, felt a bone Stick in his throat; but help could have of none, Though manie sought to; All reproach't him, hee The Price bore justly of his crueltie: With soothing words, and promisses as fair, The Crane was won to succou r his despair, Who in his Guel thrust her exalted Neck, And thence the bone extracted with her Beck;
Which don, forthwith shee her reward desir'd; The Wolf affirm'd, shee had, what shee requir'd, Nor in his pow'r, was greater good to give, 'Twas by his grace and suff'rance shee did live; For when her head was in his mouth, hee might Have sent her swiftly to her latest night. MORAL. To simple Natures, men indu'd with might, In their extreams, much promise; paie with slight. When in their powers, so, the wicked still Think they do good to them, they do no ill. 7. The Husbandman and Adder. A Countrie man, in a sharp winter storm, Went to secure his Cattle and his Corn; Where in a field hee saw, benum'd with cold, An Adder fetter'd in her native Fold. With pitie mov'd, her home with speed hee bring's And at the fire chafe'd her frozen limbs; Til shee her former vigor took again, With which, her Host attempted to have slain; Who, thus, with mortal strokes return'd the strife, Would'st thou give death to him, who gave thee life? MORAL. Mischievous men, when pres't with miseries, Seem to cast off their harmfull qualities;
Ʋnder which semblance, oft the bosoms win Of simple Natures no ill harbouring; But hee whose bountie their fal'n state erect's, Thus, of their Malice feel's the first effects. 8. The Ass and Bore. THe stupid Ass did the stout Bore deride; Who grin'd his tusks, and thereto thus repli'd, (With restrain'd ire) ill thou deserv'st of Mee, But not deserv'st, ill I should do to thee. Safely jeer on; thy meanness thee protect's; Revenge is wanting, where no worth reflect's. MORAL. Who from inferiors, thus, disgrace, despise, Turn's on their heads their purpos'd injuries; But where unequal Might pursue's Redress; That seem's the more, which wee would have seem less. 9. A Citie-Mous and Field-Mous. A Citie-Mous richlie arrai'd, To her Allies a Progress made. In a Champian seated stood The Palace of his noble Blood. Not far from whence encountred him The Field-Mous, top of all his kin. Which interview past solemnly, With all due Rites of Cerimonie.
Whence hee conduct's him to his Cel, The Roof whereof was Pimprenel; The Entrance traced sundrie waies, (Like to the windings of a Maze) For strength, not state, was order'd so, To keep out rain, or winde, or snow. Suddenly served was the Feast, Travel had Hunger-stroke our Guest; A Mushrome spread with Codlin-skin The Table was and Covering. A mightie Mess first usher'd came, Which did all sorts of Puls contein: Of Wheat, Oat, Pea, Tare, Rie and Rice, Of Bean, Buck, Barlie, mix't with Spice Of sundrie Seeds, contrived so; This may bee cal'd their Oleo. Next cours, of Roots was ordered, Of Parsnip, Carret, White and Red; Turnip, Radish, Potato sweet, Skerret, Oringo, and of Beet; Som were hatch't, som mince't, som slice't; And with post pouder all were spice't. And for their Ragou and Haugou Were Onions serv'd, and Garlick too. The Intercours did next succeed, To urge fresh Appetite to feed. Of Mellon, Pumpi'on, Cucumber, Cabbidg, Colwort, and Colli-flour; Of Thissel-succors hatched small Which were well pepper'd with Fusball.
Their Liquor from a Christal stream They had, whereon ne'r shined Beam. In which for Amber-Greece, or Musk, Infused was in Acorn-husk, A Pearl of Dew, or els of Hail; As Heat or Moisture did prevail The Deser, hereto closure put's; Of Wall, of Hair, of Hassel-nuts: Of Pears and Apples, Plums and Cheries, Dew, Straw, Raspe, Mull, Bill and Black-berries. Of Medler, Service, Corm, they fed, Of Grapes and Currens, white and red; But of Beech, Oak, Thorn, Bramble-Maste They far more sparingly did taste. The Grashopper, the Gnat, the Bee, In Consort were their Minstralsie. The Citie-Mous, the Feast thus past, Soberly seemed to distaste The meanness of the Countrie fare; Boasting the Cities to be rare. That which might bee no vapour thought, The Field-Mous hee to Citie brought; Where, in a Store-hous hee beheld Such Dainties, as there most excel'd: Here a Custard, there a Tart, Of a fat Capon there a part; Here a Gammon stuft with cloves; There did a Pie Red-Dear inclose; Here Pheasant, Partridge, Woodcock, Quail; There Knot, Snipe, Tiel, Turtle and Rail;
Spice, Sugar, Suckets wet and drie, Were all disper'st confusedly: Whereof so eagerly both fed, Order was none distinguished. E're long, i'th dore ratled a keie, Which scar'd both Host and Guest awaie. The Field-Mous who her cours forgot, For haste fell in a Honie-pot, Which beeing nigh full, and candid o're. Bemired much, hee got to shore. Thence in a Barrel skip't of Sope, Whence hee escaped by a Rope, The Balance fastned to the Scale, From thence hee rush't into a Frale Of Raisins, which, strugling therein, His clammie Coat stript from his skin. Thence to a hole, where both remain, Till they came in, went out again. Then issued out the Citie-Mous, Frisking with joie about the hous, While the poor Field-Mous therewith dread Remained trembling, almost dead. 'Til him the Citie-Mous invite's Again to taste of his Delights; Assuring him the Peril o're. Out snek't the Field-Mous, yet forbore To feed; jealous surpriz'd to bee, Asking the Citie-Mous, if hee Were often thus assaulted; who With confidence, repli'd thereto,
Each hour, each hour; Custom make's light, Where that is weigh  wants fore-sight. The Field-Mous much amazed, cri'd; Was ever sens so stupified! With my mean Cates, I rest secur'd; Rest thou with dang'rous sweets immur'd. MORAL. The humble, calm and innocent estate, This of a Countrie life doth intimate. Whose sober temper onely thus relie's On what succesfull Industrie supplie's. While Citie lives, their riot to support, Make Rapine, Fraud and Violence a sport: With whose Alarums hourly pursu'd: So oft their lusts, so oft are griefs renew'd. 10. The Eagle and Daw. AN Eagle had a Cockle got, Which hee to open knowing not; The prating Daw, searching for Game, E're sent for was, to Councel came. And him adviz'd so high to flie, As hardlie hee might earth descrie: From whence, if on a stone it fel, It, questionless, would break the shel. The Eagle that no art would scan, Her self to lessen strait began.
While the Daw leering for the prey Ne're to the Fall; snatch't it away. MORAL. High soaring mindes, from base suspicion free, Frame Others Trust from their Integritie. Whence Men of mean parts them oft circumvent, While on high speculations they are bent. So busie knaves whisp'ring to all new shifts, Level the waie to facilate their Drifts. 11. The Crow and Fox. A Crow had got a Prey, wherewith, a tree Exalted took, for more securitie. Thereon (joie scarce contain'd) with loftie strains, Shee her good Fortune through the woods pro∣clames. The subtile Fox, whose ears erected are, This understood, so soon as hee could hear: Continu'd clamor led him to the place, The Crow saluting with unusua'l grace; Hee, thus, accost's. Fame fam'd a liar, wee Have often heard; Now, finde it true in thee. Shee speak's thee black, and oft doth others stain With like Deformitie, implying but thy Name. Yet thou more white then Swans, my sens doth prove Far whiter then the Lillie, or the Dove. Had thy voice equal to thy Beautie been, I should style thee, of all the Birds, the Queen.
The Crow surprized thus, had at first sight (About to feed) prepar'd her self for flight; From Foot to Bill shifting her loved Prize; But staied was, with these sweet Fallacies; Which tickled so her sens, shee must applie To shew that Grace, might gain this Dignitie. But as her Bill op't, her Tone to give birth, Down drop't her envied Morsel to the Earth: Which the Fox seis'd on, & with scornful laughter, Left the Crow there her studied Notes to chatter. MORAL. In Man is found this strange Infirmitie; What Nature gave not, most affect to bee: Whence, soonest they are took with flatt'ries sounds, Who, in themselvs, have thereof smallest Grounds. So, craftie shirks use with success their Art; When, by the Ear, they thus infect the Heart. 12. The declined Lion. A Lion, who had been the terror of the Field; To Time's assaults was forc't his strength to yield: Which Impotence discover'd; by each Beast Hee was with equal violence oppre'st; The Bore with Tusks gor'd; the Bull with his Horn; But what most griev'd him, was the Asses scorn; Who to wipe out the blemish in his Fame, With far more Ardeur, then the others, came.
His heels assail'd him, while his words upbrai'd; At which the Lion much perplexed, sai'd, The ill I did, I justly have from them; Why then the good return'st not thou agen? MORAL. Injurious Powers, when divested, die By their Foe's vengeance, their friend's jealousie; Least having reap't the good, in former times, As Accessers they should th'ill of their crimes. In generous mindes grief is redoubled, thus, To fall by them are doublie infamous; Ingrates and cowards in one figur'd bee, There Love meet's Hate; Here Courage Crueltie. When Princes fall; none so injurious bee To their Persons, as the Rascalitie. 13. The Dog and Ass. A Painfull Ass afflicted was to see His Masters too parti'al Indulgencie Unto a little Cur. His hands did clap, Stroke, feed, and oft'entice unto his lap; Where eas and plentie pollish't so his skin, His wanton frisks invite new cherishing, While the more usefull Ass, still loaden, wrote; Felt manie lashes on his tatter'd coat: Knapt on a Thissel. Nor could gracious bee With his lov'd Master, or his Familie.
At which repining; with himself conclude's; If Sport gain'd this; Hee'd have his Interludes. Which, next his Master saw, hee practiseth. Fetching around, till almost out of breath, Then, as to kiss, his Master hee did meet, On either shoulder clap't his clubbed feet. Whereat his Master cal'd the Hindes for aid. Who, with their Flails, the Asses courtship paid. MORAL. How wanton Masters fawning servants prize More then the usefull. This to us implie's. Whose Artless rudeness, when to jeast they fall, Maie seek to tickle, seldom shun to gall. Nor can the seeds of Nature changed bee, But with ridiculous improprietie. 14. The Lion and Mous. A Lion tir'd with heat and action laie Under a shade; where Mice presum'd to plaie. Disturbing him; hee in a furie rose; And for example, one amongst them chose. The trembling Mous implor'd his clemencie, Smal Honor in his worthless death could bee. The Lion free'd the captive; but at length, The Lion snar'd, found little vail'd his strength, Where his vain strugling him intangl'd more: Restrained furie made him loudlie rore.
The gratefull Mous this nois distinguished; And by the same was to his succour led; Where with his teeth the knots hee did divide: And with like freedom thus him gratified. MORAL. Thus of frail Nature generous mindes obeie The first Motives, the next they overswaie. And that Revenge disgracefull think to bee, Which with themselvs hold's no equalitie. So gratefull Mindes to their requitall speed: Nothing so small the greatest may not need. Both, this Rule figure to Supremacie; 'Twixt such extremes, how usefull Amitie. 15. The sick Kite. A Young Kite sick, besought his mother, shee Would praie the gods for his Recoverie. Who repli'd, Son, No help exspect from thence, Their sacred Rites thou hast with violence From their bright Altars ravish't. Then no more Insist to move, that I their aid implore. MORAL. Those men, whose Actions do a God denie; When Death assail's, believe a Deitie: To whom rejecting Nature, thus, shall bee, Ev'n in themselvs condemning Testimonie.
16. The Swallow and other Birds. THe Season come the fatal Hemp to sow, The Swallow let's the lesser Birds to know Their ruine was at hand, for of that seed Should bee fram'd Nets, to catch them, and their breed: Which to avoid, hee wil'd them, e're too late, Devour the seed, which els would prove their fate. The sillie Fowl deride him, nor did flie, So to secure their future Libertie. The Hemp wax't green; the Swallow to them made, And wil'd them, yet in time, pull up the Blade: Which they neglecting, The Hemp ripe became; The Swallow to them bent his cours again. Wishing them then, in cloudie flocks appear, And stoop, like Thunder, on the shaking Ear. But none regarded what the Swallow said; Whereon hee left them, and a Covenant made Of Love, with Man. With whom hee dwel's with joie: While Hemp mak's Nets, wch Nets the Birds destroie. MORAL. Wisdom's true Object is the Publick good, Of few win's credit, is of all withstood: Nor by disgrac't repuls retract's her Flight. So long as Nature can yield Reason light, Shee may, without impeachment, Autor bee, If not of theirs, of her Securitie.
17. The Frogs and their King. THe Nation of the Frogs, who once were free, Would for more state, becom a Monarchie. Jove they petition, them assign a King; To whom, Jove smiling, down a log doth fling: Which waitie Lump shaking with nois the Flood; With silent Reverence, far retired stood The Frogs affrighted: which Agitation spent, With more assurance to their King they went. Whose passive Nature finding, Fear cast off, And make, in sport, their suff'ring King their scoff. Jove they importune, once again, to send A King, whose valor might from Foes defend. Jove give's the Crane, who stalk's to view his pow'r, And, in his waie, doth all the Frogs devour, Of which crueltie they to Jove complain. Who sought, must suffer. Jove they move in vain, And ev'rie Evening (when the Crain's not there) In their hoars Murmurs publish their despair. MORAL. Th'affected Glorie, here impli'd wee see, Of meaner States asspire to Sovereigntie: Who though from Heav'n they therewith bee indu'd: God cannot pleas the giddie Multitude: If milde and peacefull, they him Coward style; If warlike; Him with Tyrannie revile.
But in the issue, all conclude it just, Who could not bear the Best, should bear the worst. 18. The Doves and Kite. A Long War wag'd 'twixt Doves and Kite; The Doves, too feeble for the Fight, Elect the Hauk to bee their King, They might bee shelter'd by his wing. But hee, more fiercely then the Kite, Prei'd on Them for his Appetite. They open War now judg to bee Better than civil Tyrannie. MORAL. So weak States think their Freedoms to protect, When, then their Fo's, they greater strength elect: But such unequal Pow'r, by theirs more High, Thus, soon reduce them into Serviltie. 19. The Thief and Dog. A Thief to still a Dog, held Bread, Who, warie, thereto answered; Thy subtle snares I often mark; This thou giv'st mee, I might not bark: But I deceitful Presents hate, Other's Goods should remunerate: For if this Morsel I accept, Thou wilt my Master's Goods exspect.
MORAL. With surly Tempers, so, slie Craft proceed's: The pow'rfull'st Flatteries framed are on Deeds. But cautious men, when strangers gifts present, Thus wisely weigh the scope of their intent. 20. The Wolf and Sow. THe Sow her fertile Litter lai'd, Tender of whom, shee was affrai'd. The Wolf their Guardian sought to bee: The Sow thank't him most curteously: His Diligence shee did not want: But him desir'd this favor grant (Since Hee would so officious bee) Shee might not have His Companie. MORAL. All things, from All, believ not. Shadow'd bee Ʋnusual Favors with self-propertie. Where Office and Officiate not agree, Force't Nature tel's us, 'tis but Furberie. 21. The Mountain's birth. ARumor far and near was spread, A Mount should bee delivered
Of her huge Burthen; which to see, Of curious flock't great companie. With Fear and Wonder all were strook; And for som Prodigie did look: Immov'd and silent All becom; A Mous skip't from her pregnant womb: Whereat was raised such a laughter, The Mountain trembled at the clatter. MORAL. So swelling Rumors gather as they flie, Til they extend t'impossibilitie. Which with such frenzie do the Rout possess, Their Fears and Wonders, thus, are fathomless. But when Time doth, her issue, Truth produce; Of their Experience, Mirth's the onely use. 22. The old Hound. A Dog, grown old, pursuing of his Game, With frequent shouts, his Master strave t'in∣flame New ardeur in him; which not? much avail'd; His Limbs grew stiff. At length the Beast assail'd: But ere his Master got in to his Aid; (His teeth decai'd) the Beast escape had made. The Master's threats, far off, his furie show's; Which, nigh, descend upon the Dog in blows. The Dog cri'd faults of my Age (had'st thou truth) Might bee excus'd by th'service of my youth.
Nothing but Profit can thy favour win; Els mee thou'dst cherish, for what I had bin. MORAL. So churlish Masters greedie of their Gain, Think they lose that, which they cannot attain. And oft beyond their strength their Servants press, 'Caus they did more, they still must do no less. Ingratefull Mindes, not weighing their friends store, Forget what's don, when they can do no more. 23. The Hares in a Storm. THe Woods so roared with unusual storms, The fearfull Hares were frighted from their forms: Nor could bee staied in their erring cours; Til foll'wing danger drove them to a wors. A deep vaste Moor, where, to enlarge new dread, Laie floting Frogs, to them apeared dead: Whereat, step't forth One stouter then the rest; And, thus, the vainness of their fear expre'st: Rash speed but danger changes. Wee may see, Who in our Heels place our Securitie: Those with success are us'd, when thereto's join'd, For their direction, a well judging Minde, But that in us is wanting; els this storm, Is our disturbance, would have been our scorn. Extreams not lusting are: Nor need wee fear. That Danger much, which first salute's the Ear.
MORAL. From their repose, so, timed Natures rise, On everie emptie Terror them surprise: But while to shun vain Hazards they resolv, In real Dangers they themselvs involv: In which Distraction, finding th'Impotence Of that Arm Nature gave them for defence, Place higher their Tranquillitie; and teach, The strength of minde no accident can reach. 24. The Kid and Wolf. A Goat to pasture went to feed, Had shut the door upon her Kid: Commanding Her, til shee return, Not open it to any one. This, undiscern'd, the Wolf o're heard: The Dam beeing gon, soon thither steer'd, Who the Goats voice doth counterfeit; Bidding the Kid open the gate. This craft distinguishing, the Kid Said, I to open am forbid: Though that I hear a Goats voice bee Yet, through the chink, a Wolf I see. MORAL. Filial obedience is with safetie crown'd; Indulgent Nature yield's the surest ground:
To cheat the sens, though Art nigh Nature bee; Instinctive lights disclose an Enemie. 25. The Hart and Sheep. BEfore a Wolf, the Hart convinc't a Sheep, That shee from him a debt long due did keep: Which hee affirm'd, of wheat a Bushel was. Though fals it were; the Sheep agree'd to pass A daie of paiment; which e're long exspir'd, The Hart brought to him, who his Debt requir'd. The Sheep, what was assented, did denie: Alleadging, that the Wolf was now not by: Nor was that promiss to bee kep't, which shee Was forc't to make, for life's securitie. MORAL. When weak Abusers cannot circumvent, By their own Strength, the yielding Innocent: To their more pow'rful Foes appeal for Right, What could not bee by force, might bee by slight: Where the Defendant to fals Pleas give's waie, Rather then prove his cruel Judges preie. To deceive the Deceiver's no Deceit: What violence forged, Truth may violate. 26. A Countrie-man and Snake. A Clown a Snake aprivoised, With whom hee plai'd, and often fed:
Til the Clown into anger brake; And with an Ax wounded the Snake. Whereon her Host shee strait forsook, And to her native Grove betook. E're long the Clown became so poor, That quite exhausted was his store: Seeking what thereof caus should bee, Hee found it was the injurie Don to the Snake; whom out hee sought, And with kinde words, would home have brought. The Snake repli'd; shee him forgave; But would no more such traitment have: With him safe shee could not bee; where At hand, so many Axes were. The scar perchance outworn might bee, But ne're outworn the memorie. MORAL. Ʋnciviliz'd Mindes with Passion soon o'reflow, And rashly thus, the good they did o'rethrow: But therewith finde th'increas of Blessings bee By Heav'n restrain'd, crown'd Hospitalitie. (In her Emblem) wisdom shew's wrongs may bee Remembred, without stain to Pietie. 27. The Fox and Stork. THe Fox had made the Stork his Guest, And on the Table pour'd his Feast;
Which beeing liquid so diffus'd, The Stork her beak but vainly us'd: While the Fox, lapping up the stream, Left but his emptie Guest the steam. The Stork his slie Host to requite, Did him as formally invite: Where, in a strait neck't vessel stood, What shee provided had for food. The Strok, the Fox wil'd not to spare, Whose slender Beak extract's her fare: While the Fox, as hee did deserv, Might onely see his food and sterv. MORAL. Th'Insolent wils the simple to resort Ʋnto their Table, to becom their sport. But when th'affront reverted thus wee see, Of Disgrace, Mirth wipe's out the Infamie. 28. A Wolf and carved Head. A Wolf had to the Work-hous got Of a rare Sculptor; who had wrought A humane Head so perfectly, Such by the Wolf 'twas thought to bee, Til to and fro it of't hee drove, Yet thereof naught perceiv'd to move, Cri'd, strange it was, that noble part Should have no Sens, had so much Art.
MORAL. So curious Pedants, to enlarge their Fame, Their Works with Arts choice Ornaments do frame: Glorious Inscriptions, an elaborate Style; Crotestick Tearms, dark Mysteries compile: Which catch with wonder the illiterate Sens; Till farther search yield them Intelligence, Lifes civil Notions therein wanting bee, Who then thus mock their fruitless Industrie. 29. The Jaie. THe chatt'ring Jaie would once assume For Ornament, the Peacock's-plume: Who to himself appear'd so fair, His proper kinde disdainful were; Whence hee, to dignifie his stock, Intrude's into the Peacock-flock: Who soon discovering the cheat, With blows him of his Coat defeat. MORAL. Of mean extraction Mercenar'es, wee see, With tricks and toies fleece the Nobilitie: By which Investures, they of't mix't with them, Till Those by These devested are agen.
30. The Flie and Ant. A Desperate brabble rose 'twixt Flie and Ant; The Flie of his more noble Birth did vant: Hee flew, and did in Palaces reside; Shee crep't, and did her self in Dunge'ns hide: Shee knap't the sheaf, and water drank with pain: Hee feasted bravely; nor nigh labor came. The Ant repli'd, shee was of mean descent, But not ignoble, fram'd to her content. Hee wand'ring was, shee stable, her cours fare Gave her those sweets, as him his cates more rare: And what therein exalted her delight, Her travel rais'd, and fed her appetite: Shee safe and chearful was, grateful to All; Who Industrie's example her install. Hee, to his peril, incen'st other's wroth: And to all men th'example was of sloth. Shee mindeful was for Winter to provide, While hee then sterv'd, or e're that season di'd. MORAL. Obscurely bred, the Husbandman doth dwell Secure and chearful in his humble Cell: Whose care his hands to labor doth ingage; Which youth prolong's, and support's healthful Age. While roving Gallants Palaces resort, Inticed by th'allurements of the Court:
Where danger, fear and strife their youth oppress, Want cut's of Age, if not before Excess. 31. The Ox and Toad. THe Toad the Oxe's bulk to reach, Began her subtile skin to stretch Her Young thereon did her advize, Desist from this her enterprize: For to the Ox, shee might conclude, Shee nothing was in Magnitude. The Dam hereat, yet swelled more; Her Young adviz'd her to give o're: For e're that shee could equal him, Shee, certainly would crack her skin. Whereat the Dam (rage re-inforc't) Add's all her strength, and therewith burst. MORAL. Wise Nature doth appropriate to each thing Peculiar vertues, needfull to their beeing: And to what proper ev'rie man was born, His own productions, so will each inform. But Envie, thus, improper Forms take's on To Nature's utter dissolution. 32. The Hors and Lion. THe Hors the Lion purpos'd for his preie, But age had took the flow'r of strength away:
Art hee put's on; which unto Art pretend's; And for a Leech, him to the Hors commend's. The warie Hors, perceiving his intent, Feign'd in his foot a Thorn by accident; Which hee desir'd the Lion to pull forth, Since skil'd to do, to will hee knew his worth. To which the Lion seeming to applie; The Hors with kicks repai'd the Fallacie. Who breathless left him; bad him make his Will: Or on himself to practise his own skil. MORAL. When in such habits men to us appear, To use or Nature quite repugnant are. Wee may conclude, they are but so put on (Ev'n as a vizard) for Illusion. As open Force may resist open Foes, So privie slight may private craft oppose. More dang'rous This, therefore less Innocent: Fraud is no Fraud, which doth but Fraud prevent. Exposition. The aged Lion, here, doth intimate The declin'd Power of a Prince's State. The wandring Hors, the People doth explain, Whose stubbornness to check, ha's Bit nor Reign. The Art to which the Lion doth pretend, Is by good Laws, disorders to amend:
The Light, the Hors hath of's weak state and plot, Is what hee wil's, that hee commandeth not. The Foot, the Instrument of Libertie, Wherein the people complain griev'd to bee. Which, as the Prince to enlarge doth applie, In stead of Mast'rie, gain's his Destinie. 33. The Hors and Ass. A Hors in his rich Trappings beeing adorn'd, With loftie neighings (as if earth hee scorn'd) Ran on the waie, but where hee was to pass, Hee in his cours, met with a loaden Ass. More fierce, thus anger'd, champ't the foaming Bit, Threatning the Ass to tread him under feet, If waie hee gave not: The patient Ass stood by And gave him place, but therewith no replie. His renew'd speed the strugling winde declin'd, But e're his cours perform'd, had crack't his winde. By which sad accident, was useless made, Or for the Cours, or yet for the Parade. Away was took his Ornaments of Gold, And to a Carter was, for little, sold. E're long th'Ass Him in his new Function meet's, And, in derision, thus accosting greet's: Where are your studded Trappings, your gilt Bit? This your high minde doth better much befit.
MORAL. Vain, headie Natures this to us implie's, Who on their backs bear all their Patrimonies, Which gaudries so their self-conceit foment; O're suff'ring Natures th'insult with contempt; But when Excess ru'ns Person and Estate, The despis'd, then, with scorn them gratulate. 34. The Birds and Beast. 'TWixt Birds and Beast a Fight arose; Fear, peril, hope, each side oppose. The Bat his partie did desert; And to the Enemie convert; But to the Fowl victorie, at length, Was attain'd by the Eagles strength. Th'Apostate Bat they then condemn Never to associate them. And lest hee should distaste their sight, Injoin'd him onely flie by night. MORAL. The daily combat, this to us implie's, Betwixt the minde and senses faculties; Clear-sighted Reason, and who to her side, Are with a glorious vict'rie dignifi'd: But such functions from her revolted are Dare never after to the light appear.
35. The Wolf and Fox. THe Wolf of bootie got great store, And forth to rove had long forbore: The Fox desire's to know hereon The caus of his vacation: The Wolf believing this a fetch, The Fox might to his banquet reach; Fain's the caus sickness to have bin, And wil's the Fox to praie for him: The Fox craft follow'd by the sent; And forthwith to a Shepherd went, Whom hee shew's where securely lie's His heedless Foe; Which to surprize The Shepherd made no long delaie, But in his Den the Wolf did slaie: Hereby the Fox posse'st was then Both of his Preie and of his Den: But long herein hee had not joi'd E're him the Shepherd there destroi'd. MORAL. The wicked thus the wicked do detect, When those with these partake not of their theft: Ʋnder which shadow they more credit gain Of farther Ils to facilate the train; Till by the same discoveries they had made They traced bee, and thereby are betrai'd.
36. The Hart. THe Hart a stream his mirror made, Where hee his shadow oft'survaid: Hee was much taken with the Form Of his large Front, and branchie horn: Which in him much abated grew, The smalness of his shanks to view. While hee was in this extasie, Hee heard the Hounds pursuing crie; Away (like lightning, or the winde) Hee left the cloudie dust behinde. Til through a Thicket forcing waie, His horns were tangled in the spraie. Where hee was took, and too late prov'd, How much obnoxious, what hee lov'd; And what distasteful seem'd to bee, How useful was their propertie. MORAL. So simple mindes are took with specious shows, Which in the issue prove their overthrows. But what most useful Nature gave to bee, Or few, or none do prize that facultie. 37. The Viper and File. A Viper in a Work-hous found A File was scatter'd on the ground.
Which as to gnaw hee did begin, The ruffer File thus spoke to him; Fool, break thy teeth thou sooner mai'st, Then any whit my bodie waste: The hardness of what's hardest Steel'd, To my more hard assaults doth yield. MORAL. So malice will beyond her power attempt: Nor can the dead bee from her rage exempt. But when th'unblemish't, or more strong endure; They shame or Damage to themselvs procure. 38. The Wolf and Sheep. 'TWixt Wolves and Sheep, Nature wee see, Hath plac'd a great Antipathie, Yet they at length Agreement make; And in exchange do hostage take: From the slie Wolf, her young Cubs went; The Sheep to send their Dogs consent. Who then securely thought to graze; Til the young Cubs their howlings rais, Wanting their Dam, who thither came, And on the Sheep did much exclame; That void their League, and Faith was made; Nor for their answer hereto stai'd: But rush't on them with all her pow'rs, Whom, their Dogs wanting, shee devour's.
MORAL. The Sheep a Nation without fraud implie's: The Wolf a Nation full of treacheries: Those think they can exact no greater tie, Then where Nature enforceth pietie: These seem less strict, and strangers but demand: But such, whose skill and strength their craft withstand; Which when remov'd, their Pledges rescue may, And make their heedless foes their cruel Preie. 39. The Wood and Countrie-man. 'TWas in those daies that Trees had sens, A Rustick went with diligence; And o'th Grove did a Helv request Unto his Ax: the Grove expre'st Consent thereto, nodding her head; Which when the Clown had finished; Hee to cut down the Trees began: The Grove repent's, too soon the Man Her easie Nature had o'recom; More griev'd to bee herself her Doom. MORAL. So soft and debonarie Mindes, wee see, Want confidence to wave a courtesie: But Impudents hereby encouraged, Never desist, till by them ruined.
40. The Bellie and Members. THe Feet and Hands the Bellie often blam'd, Her sloth devour'd the profit they had gain'd: Her they command to labor, or not eat: The Bellie vainly did their help intreat, Til quite through want exhausted; at the length Began to fail the active Arters strength: The Hands relent, and would officious bee; But too late came their profer'd courtesie: The disus'd Bellie now debile became, And what receiv'd, return'd it back again: So that these Members this dissention bred Must justly perish with the envied. MORAL. As in the Nat'ral, so i'th Politick, wee Ought not to envie other's Ministrie: Nor from their use our Functions to restrain; Lest they declin'd, like Dammage wee sustain. Each hath a commerce with each facultie, From whence result's a perfect Harmonie: To ev'rie Office proper Gifts are lent; Nay ev'n the Exscreate serv's for Ornament.
41. The Ape and Fox. THe Ape doth of the Fox beseech Part of his Tail to hide her breech; What was a burthen unto him, Would use and honor to her bring. The Fox repli'd, yet ne're the less, Hee must hereto bee succourless: His tail hee on the ground would train, Rather then it should hide her shame. MORAL. So rich Churls often, burden'd with Excess, Refuse to cover the poor's nakedness: And rather had their coyn, as useless hide, Then other's wants should therewith bee suppli'd. 42. The Stag and Oxen. A Pursu'd Stag, for harbour fled Into a Stall, where Oxen fed; Of whom hee seek's himself to shroud, That hee their Crib might bee allow'd: They grant, but therewith tell him, hee E're long would there discovered bee, Or by the Master, or the Hinde, Whom suddenly hee there would finde, The Stag repli'd, Mee not betraie, The fear of them I do not weigh.
Soon after this, the Hinde came in, And forth return'd, but saw not him: Whereat the Stag exalt's his head, And quite shook off his former dread: But one Ox wiser then the rest, This fleeting joie quickly suppre'st: Assuring him, the Hinde to bee A Mole in perspicuitie. But what should crown the Enterprize, Was to charm his Lord's Argus-eies. Hereon what the Hinde might neglect, The Master enter's to correct: Whose hand, as hee the Crib would trie, Made o'th Stags horns discoverie. His Hindes hee summoned to him, Who quickly shut the Stag therein; Where hee with fruitless tears doth die In his assumed Sanctuarie. MORAL. The fearfull Stag unto us doth express, What slight helps men take hold of in distress. Th'Oxen plain, honest, painfull men implie, Willing to succour other's miserie. The Hinde's demeanor, herein represent's Of most servants the usual negligence. The Master's actions unto us do show, What ev'rie Master that would thrive should do.
43. The Lion and Fox. THe Lion sick, the Beasts to visit went, Onely the Fox was herein negligent; To whom the Lion send's an Embassie; Which shew's, how grateful should his presence be; Nor was there caus of peril hee should fear, Since antient ties of friendship 'twixt them were; Or if this were not, the Lion infirm, Ill if hee would, to act hee could not turn. The Fox repli'd, the Lion's health hee wish't, For which to praie hee would with zeal insist: But to this visit with Excuse deni'd: His visitants Foot-steps him much terrifi'd, Which all unto his Cave directed were, But from thence back not anie did appear. MORAL. Specious pretences of unusual Love From secret sources of bie-ends do move: But wisdom of her safetie circumspect, On ev'rie circumstance doth still reflect; So a-far off her danger to fore-see, Shunning her own by other's miserie.
44. The Fox and Weezel. A Fox with hunger lank becom, Through a strait cleft crep't to a room: Where his stuft panch so full did strain, Hee could not thence return again. As hee was strugling out to get, A Weezel came, far off was set, And scoffingly advised him, Emptie return, as hee came in. MORAL. When greedie Minds and emptie Fortunes meet Thus with vast gains, timely make not retreat: But to improper greatness them extend, And unadvis'dly so procure their end: Or els are forced to disgorge their Rape; They with their Persons onely might escape. 45. The Hors and Hart. THe Hart and Hors long warfare held; The Hors from Pasture was expel'd; Who then implored Humane aid, With whom hee did the Hart invade: Til hee had lost, the victrie gain'd: Yet to the victor's yoke restrain'd: For now the Man with bit and rein Make's use of him to save his pain.
MORAL. So meaner States, when foiled by their foes, Implore more potent Power, them oppose: But when supprest by their joint Aid they bee, Who win the vict'rie, lose their Libertie. 46. The two Young-men. TWo young Striplings, pretending meat to buie, Went to a Cook, who busied had his eie On other things; while from a basket, one Filch't a joint, and gave it his companion To hide with's coat; which when the Cook had mist, Either to charge did of the Theft insist. Who took it, swore by Jove that hee had none; Who had it, swore, that hee none took; whereon The Cook repli'd; the Thief will not bee known, Hee see's and know's, by whom yee both have sworn. MORAL. Who cal's to witness Ils, him Judg shall bee. Think's Ils are passed with impunitie. 'Tis not the shadow covert of our tongues, Can from his vengeance hide our secret wrongs. 47. The Dog and Butcher. A Cur meat from the Shambles steal's, Wherewith betake's him to his heels:
The Butcher troubled at the loss, Long silently confused was: At length his sens recovering, Thus afar off cried out to him; This time securely thou mai'st feed, Thy safetie now procur'd by speed; But I hereafter, thou shalt see, Will of thy slights more cautious bee. MORAL. So gross and stupid spirits becom wise, Onely by Expens of their Substances. To whom in vain, you Reason's lights reveal; These seldom understand but what they feel. The best use from Ils are past remedie, Is to prevent succeeding miserie. 48. The Dog and Sheep. A Dog summon'd a Sheep by Plea To answer to a debt, which hee Had lent the Sheep, the Sheep deni'd Anie Debt could bee verifi'd. The Kite, Wolf, Vultur called bee, To give hereto their Testimonie; Which they affirm; the Sheep condemn'd The rav'ning Cur doth soon distend.
MORAL. So greedie Misers, when as kept in aw, Secure snares to their rapine make the Law; They Innocents might ruine, to fals Pleas Producing, thus, int'ressed Witnesses. 49. The Lamb and Wolf. A Wolf a Lamb met following a Goat; The Wolf demand's, why under his rank Coat To shelter, shee her sweeter Dam had left, Whose pent Tets were with milk, e're then, nigh cleft; While she woo'd her return with mournful bleats; This to betraie hee fawningly repeat's: The Lamb repli'd, her careful Dam had chose Him for her Guardian, and safer it was Unto a Parent's purpose to obeie, Then by seducing Words becom his Preie. MORAL. So when by Parents frail Youth is resign'd To strangers conduct, Seducers they finde Tickle innate Propension to reflect On the Indulgence of the Armelet; T'intice them from Tuition's sower Aw, Them to their ruine in debauch to draw: But prudent Nature rather thus incline's To Parents pleasures, then strangers designs.
50. The Young-man and Cat. A Young-man much enamour'd on a Cat, Importun'd Venus in his Praiers, that Shee to a Woman would the Cat translate; Shee wrought the change, to Him compassionate; Whose form and color, so exact, so white, The Suppliant took with wonder and delight: With whom withdrawing to his chamber, hee In Mirth and Plaie the daie past pleasantly. Venus e're long desirous was to trie, If, with her shape, was chang'd her Propertie: This to determine; shee let slip a Mous Thorow the open Evings of the Hous; Which the translated Woman strait pursu'd; As ne're with other Form then Cat's indu'd: Which in the Goddess such an anger bred, Shee to a Cat her re-transfigured. MORAL. What form or semblance anie one put's on, None wipe out quite Nature's Impression: Art may embellish; Industrie restrain; But to her source Nature revert's again. 51. The Husband-man and his Sons. A Husband-man had manie youthful Sons Which disagree'd; the Father, as becom's,
Striving to draw them into mutual love; Bad, singly, ev'rie one of them to prove. If they could break a bundle bound of wands; Which they in vain attempting with their hands; The Father it unti'd, and to each one Giving a wand, bad trie their strength thereon; Which they with much eas breaking: even so Repli'd the Father, none can you o'rethrow, While thus you are united: but all may, When thus divided, make of you their preie. MORAL. This shew's unto us, how weak States becom Invincible by common union: And how great States by civil Discord may Ʋnto less Potent soon becom a preie. 52. The Countrie-man and Hors. AN emptie Hors a Clown drove with an Ass, By manie fardels, that sore loaden was: The wearied Ass requir'd for safetie's sake, The Hors but part would of his burden take: The Jade refus'd; the Ass e're long with weight Opprest, sunk down, and di'd beneath his freight. The Hors forthwith the Asse's place suppli'd, On whom was cast the Asse's load and hide. Who then conclude's, hee justly was oppre'st, That would the Ass not succour, when distre'st.
MORAL. In Familie or State, who will not free His joint Companion from extremitie Of Care and Travel; but laie's band to none, When these thus fail, bear's their share and his own. 53. The Collier and Fuller. THe Collier to his obscure Cel, Invite's the Fuller with him dwel: The Fuller said, their Trades were cross, This courtesie was to his loss: For what hee had took pains to scour, His trash would sullie ev'rie hour. MORAL. Who would unblemish't manners keep or fame, Must with the wicked seldom entertain. Societie insensibly doth pierce Ʋs with their habits, with whom wee convers; Whence all, or most mens characters are known, By th'image of their conversation. 54. The Fowler and Ring-dove. A Fowler on his Game intent, Espi'd a-far off, as hee went,
A Ring-dove nestling in a Tree, Whom hee abord's with treacherie, Take's in his net; but soon doth feel An Adder bite him by the Heel: Wherewith exspiring, cri'd, while I Others ensnare, ensnar'd I die. MORAL. So craftie mindes while they intentive are How they the heedless innocent may snare; Just Providence or'ecast's the natr'al Eie, Which should protect their own securitie: While on the ill they thus are too intent, They for the ill do meet the punishment. 55. The captive Trumpeter. A Trumpeter took Captive by his Foe, Intreat's, unharm'd, to let the harmless go; His Arms, his Trumpet was; had hee the will, Therewith hee could not any one man kill: His Foes hereat seem more incenst to bee; And threaten Death with present crueltie, For that hee had nor pow'r, nor skil to fight, Them to destroie did other Men incite. MORAL. Who by leud Counsel Prince's pow'r o'reswaie, More guiltie are, then who to act obeie:
Th'Instruments oft are sensless of the Ill; But they the proper Agents, move the Will. 56. The Wolf and Dog. A Wolf a Dog encountred on his waie, In a thick Wood, e're it was perfect daie; This Fortune they, saluting, gratulate: The Wolf demand's the Dog, how hee so fat, So clean, so neat became; the Dog repli'd His Master's strokes and Table all suppli'd: Hee never slept abroad; but welcom hee And gratious was to all the Familie. The Wolf admir'd the Dogs so happie state, And wish't thereof hee might participate. The Dog doth promiss him the like, if hee Would but cast off his late ferocitie, And bee more tractable, th'agreement past, They both together to the Town do haste. Pleasant discours less tedious made the waie, Until the Wolf discern'd, b'increasing daie, The Dog's neck was with a bald circuit mark't; The caus whereof hee prai'd him to impart. The Dog heeron relace's, how hee at first, Was both to known and unknown alike curst. Which his Master not brooking, with sharp blows▪ Bad him but onely thievs and Wolvs oppose: By which correction milde, did seldom bark, Yet of his former fierceness bore that mark.
The Wolf this hearing, bad the Dog farewell, His Master did too dear his friendship sell: Hee rather had, though barely, yet live free, Then to enjoie a wanton Serviltie. MORAL. To free born spirits manie things are rude, Even in the most glorious Servitude: Who can inthral the minde unto the Sens, Yet never tasted the minds Excellence. Hee according to Nature live's, live's free, Cares, fears and griefs tend Superfluitie. The meanest that but on themselvs depend Are to themselvs a King, a Lord, a Friend. Giving to great mindes, is felicitie: Receiving is a mutt'ring Injurie. 57. The Husband-man and Dogs. A Husband-man had in his Function past Manie sharp Winters, yet was force't at last (Through extreme want, which ruine menaceth) To put his Hogs, his Goats, his Sheep to death: At length his Oxen hee was forc't to slaie, Which the Dogs seeing, ran for fear away; Least their turns next should bee, alledging then, There was no hope of safetie left for them: Since now th'Oxen their Master slew for food, Who were Supporters of his livelihood.
MORAL. So greedie Masters may bee said to eat Their servants, when they scarce afford them meat: Nor are contented on their labors feed, But must devour their persons thorough need; But useless Drones beeing nourish't by Excess, Staie not to bear the bane of Greediness. But when thought useful, from their Masters flie, Leaving them first in their Necessitie. 58. A Fox and Lion. A Fox unused was to see The Lion's strange immensitie; The first and second time was strook With fear to see his awful look; And from his Presence therewith fled, Hee scarce himself recovered: But the third time his interview To such a bold Assurance grew; As hee (with confidence herein) Familiarly saluted him. MORAL. So Rustick men, who are unus'd to see Of Prince's States the Port and Majestie: With superstitious fear do shrink aside, Abash't by such a glorie to bee spi'd;
And so confused are som time: but when Assur'd by frequent visits th'are but men; They then to such a hardie rudeness grow, They scarce observ the distance which they ow. Exposition. A servile fear on Ignorance await's, Til Use confused Reason animate's. Whence Custom form'd, such Habits doth put on, Fear is transfigur'd to Presumtion. 59. The Fox and Eagle. A Fox's-Cub too soon abroad did straie, Was by an Eagle trussed for her Preie. The Cub implor'd the succour of his Dam, Unto whose rescue out forthwith shee ran; But him perceiving forth her reach to bee, The Eagle prai'd shee would her Captive free: But shee relentless to her Eaglets bore Her howling Rape, to bee for food their store. The Fox enrag'd, a fire-brand had caught, Wherewith pursued to enflame her Fort: The Tree asscending, th'Eagle shee forewarn'd, Then, if shee could to keep her young unharm'd; The trembling Eagle su'd to bee forbore, And what shee had of hers, shee would restore.
MORAL. So pow'rfull Rapine seiseth on the Poor, Who mov'd to Mercie, prosecute the more: Till Justice threats their Int'rests call to stake, To staie whose hand they Restitution make. 60. The Husband-man and Stork. FOr Cranes and Gees, that on his green Corn fed, A Husband-man his Nets had closely spread, Which to the heedless Fellons prov'd a Trap; With whom the harmless Stork had equal hap; Who su'd for pardon to her Innocent, Nor Goos, nor Crane, but the most excellent Of Nature's Volarie: With care shee fed Her aged Parents, when ev'n famished. Her Plea was vain: the Clown made this replie, Since with the guiltie took, with them you die. MORAL. Imprudent Youth, here warned are agen, How dang'rous 'tis t'associate wicked men: If present, though from th'Ill our Hands wee draw, As Accessers, w'are guiltie by the Law.
61. The Cock and Cat. A Cock surprized by a Cat, To justifie her purpos'd Act, Him of his clamors did condemn, So oft disturbed resting men: The Cock objected, hee thereby Summon'd to work mortalitie. The Cat alledged farther, hee His Parents knew incestuously. The Cock insisting him to clear; The Cat persev'ring bad forbear: For now of death the chiefest caus, Was that hee fell into her Claws. MORAL. So violent men, when they advantage win Over the heedless, no ill figuring, Endeavour all they can, their wrong may bee O're glozed with the form of Equitie: But if that reach not, shame not to fulfill, What undertook by unrestrained Will. 62. The Shepherds and Husbandmen. A Wanton Shepherd's-boie did keep O'th'upper plains his bleating Sheep, Had sundrie times cri'd out in sport, Help, help, the Wolf; to whom resort
The Husband-men on each side are, Who finding they deluded were, (When the Wolf thither came indeed, And hee cri'd out to bee reliev'd) Came not, stil thinking hee did plaie, While the Wolf made the Sheep her preie. MORAL. Who ask, yet want not, Charitie deride, When wanting thereof shall not bee suppli'd. Who use to lie, this wrong themselvs they do, They seldom are believ'd when they say true. 63. The Eagle and Crow. AN Eagle from a high Rock seiz'd A tender Lamb; which action pleas'd The rav'ning Crow so well, hee would Trie if another truss hee could, Which hee too weak away to bear, I'th wool his claws so fetter'd were, That thence himself hee could not free, But taken was immediately, His tow'ring Pinions plumed short, And to the Boies flung for their sport. MORAL. When greedie minds, yet with mean Pow'r indu'd, Would heat those Tracts the Potent have pursu'd,
To gain their Ends, do finde the subtile Laws, Which those broke, them intangle by som claus. With heedless Rapine, thus ensnar'd they bee, Themselvs procuring Shame and Povertie. 64. The Dog and Ox. A Dog to eas himself that laie Upon a Crib was stuf't with haie. The Ox whereof coming to feed, The snarling Cur did him forbid, The patient Ox thus by him cros't, Cri'd, how in envie art thou lost, That wilt not eat, nor yet agree That I thereof reliev'd should bee. MORAL. Such Churls there are, roost on their useless store, Yet with revilings aid denie the poor: But their own crime their punishment doth frame, From what they others, they themselvs restrain. 65. The Crow and Sheep. A Crow upon a Sheep's back rid, And there his Clamor published: The Sheep said, his loud Notes to him Would with som Dog, Misfortune bring.
The Crow repli'd; hee knew o're whom Hee thus insulting was becom; Hee on the Gentle might trespass; But to the fierce hee friendlie was. MORAL. O're suff'ring Natures Cowards domineer, Whose innate Mildness their Outrages bear: But by the hardie when encounter'd bee, Their Insolence stoop's to base Servil'tie. 66. The Peacock and Nightingale. THe Peacock besought Juno tel, Why sung so sweetly Philomel? And her hoars voice when anie hear'd, Derision mov'd, or els them scar'd? Juno repli'd, each One from Heav'n Had a peculiar Dow'rie giv'n. Thy Plumes then Hers much fairer bee, As shee in Voice excelleth thee. MORAL. Nature, that None despis'd, or env'ed bee, Her gifts to all dispenseth mutually: Great Imperfections great Orn'ments disguise; Som great Endowment great Defects supplie's.
67. The Aged Weezel and Mice. AN ag'd Weezel, wanting her preie, Her strength perceiving to decaie So much, shee could not now pursue The nimble Mice, that daring grew: In practice put this stratagem, Hee in a Meal-heap cover'd him: Whereof, when the Mice came to tast, Hee them devoured to the last. MORAL. The bodie's vigor when through Age declin'd, Nature supplie's it with an able minde: And to secure us, doth her Spirits shift, What shee took from the Arm, shee giv's the wit. Thus where the Lion's skin will not prevail, Advising thereto join the Fox's tail. 69. The Countrie-man, and his Citie-Lord. A Countrie-man had in a neighb'ring field, An Apple-tree, did ev'rie season yield Delicious fruit in plentie, of which hee Present's his Citie-Lord for their great raritie: The which so pleasant to his Palate prov'd, Hee to his Court would have the Plant remov'd: But the o're-aged stock so spread his root, That in transplanting died tree and Fruit:
Which told the Lord; passion check't passion, thus, Was't not enough, the fruit was pul'd for us. MORAL. So Lux and Avarice violate Nature's cours With their adult'rate Arts untimely force. But when Experience th'issue bring's to light, Her innate vertues found exstinguish't quite. Where Art Nature improv's; observ it thus, Wee follow her, shee will not com to us. 69. The Lion and Frog. A Lion heard indistinct nois, Whereat hee made a sudden paus; Starting aside, trembling stood hee, Exspecting som new prodigie. At length skip't from a neighb'ring bog, With active slight, a croking Frog. The Lion then shaking off dread, Did under foot his terror tread. MORAL. The Mindes first Motions Reason cannot reach, Nature th'obeie, yet Reason not impeach The most confirmed Resolutions are Somtime surprized with ridic'lous fear: Becaus the courage form'd is on discours, Which Master's not, what yet is in the source.
70. The Ant and Dove. A Thirstie Ant went to a Well Thereof to drink; but therein fel: A turtle-Dove, her thence to free, Dropped a Branch from off a Tree, Which shee asscending sav'd her life; But found her Saviour's was in strife: For to the Dove a Fowler came, Who lurking nigh, had took his aim. But to prevent his eager shoot, The Ant had bit him by the foot; Whereat hee starting, scar'd awaie What hee intended for his Preie. MORAL. Fate to that height doth no one man prefer, But may, if gratious, stoop to minister To th'meanest: None in so abject a State, But may, if grateful, good remunerate. Virtue from virtue no Distance divide's, Her secret tenor in each Heart reside's; In all Extremes they meet, as here wee see, Compassionate Love, and gratefull Industrie. 71. The Peacock and Pie. THe feather'd Nation, who were free, To chuse a King to them agree.
The Peacock him most worthie held, For that in Form the rest excel'd. To whom receiv'd for such, the Pie Propound's this Ambiguitie: During thy Reign most splendid King, If the swift Eagl's towring Wing, Do us, as they were wont, pursue; Us to secure, What will you do? MORAL. Sage Councel on the end doth first reflect, E're shee to Action doth her cours direct. Princes properties are not understood, Set up for show, but for their Peoples good; Which to th'exterior form is not assign'd, But t'th'Courage and Prudence of the minde. 72. The Patient and Physician. A Raw Physician took in cure An infirm man, did more indure In his Prescriptions, then his Grief; But could of neither finde relief, Till hee exspir'd; the Doctor then, Said, His Intemp'rance killed him. MORAL. Doubtful Conclusions knaves too often trie On others Intr'ests, their own to supplie:
But if they do miscarrie in th'event, The Faults cast on the suff'ring Innocent. 73. The Lion, Fox and Ass. THe Lion, Fox and Ass their force unite, To make a chase might feast their appetite. When fair success had fully crown'd the daie, The Lion bad the Ass divide the Preie; Wherein the Ass far more exact then wise, In equal parts laid forth their properties: Whereat the Lion much offended grew, And in contempt the unadvis'd Ass slew. Then on the Fox the fatal office laid, Who for himself the meanest Portion made. The Lion ask't, who taught him to carv so, The Fox repli'd, the Asse's overthrow. MORAL. So in their actions cautious men do steer, To shun those shelvs, where others ruin'd were. They at an easie rate may happie bee, On others harms frame their securitie. Who with the Potent would not disagree, Must think extreme Right, extreme Injurie. 74. The Kid and Wolf. A Kid did from a Window spie A roving Wolf was passing by;
With bitter taunts reviled him; To whom the Wolf repli'd agen: Thou wretch, dost mee not this disgrace, But I well know, it is the Place. MORAL. In times and places priviledged bee, Cowards presume to vent their Contumelie Against such persons before whom elswhere, They but at distance dare not to appear. 75. The Ass. A Gard'ners Ass besought great Jove to free Him from his Master's stubborn crueltie, And change his servitude: Jove hereto join'd, And to a Tiler the dull Ass resign'd; Who with far greater burdens loading him: The Ass for change to Jove return'd agen, Craving a milder yet; Jove smil'd, yet hee Would not resist his Importunitie; But to a Tanner him surrendered, Whom when the Ass knew his grief thus published, Wretch that I am was ne'r content herein, I'm now to one fal'n, will not spare my skin. MORAL. With their own Function no one is content: All covet change, though change bring Detriment.
In humane state each Office and degree Hath his peculiar Incommoditie. 76. The Old-wife and her Maids. AN Old-wife manie Maidens kep't, Much after Midnight seldom slep't; For at first Cock-crow (long e're light) Their Dame to work would them incite. The Maids with dailie labor spent, Sought this disturbance to prevent: And their Alarum (i'th'Hous fed) Attaching they chop't of his head: Hoping the Watch silent becom, They might molestless sleep til noon: But soon their hopes were frustrated, The Cock their Dame perceiving dead: As soon as they were lai'd to rest, The yawning Maids pul'd from their nest. MORAL. Each bodie move's more swiftly as't draw's neer Ʋnto the center of his proper sphear. Age bend's to Earth, and with more eager strains, Till Earth possest, pursueth earthly gains: What should allaie, exalt's their Appetites, While in their cours they o'rethrow Nature's Rites. None can escape their furie, if they shun One slight of theirs, they in a worser run.
77. The Ass and Hors. THe Hors's happie fate the Ass did pleas, Who fat and slick was, past his daies in eas: While hee unhappie was with burdens wrought, Gal'd, tatter'd, lean, and even to death nigh brought. E're long the envi'd Hors to War set forth, Was force't to yield more painful proofs of worth: His Back to th'armed Horsman hee impart's, His mouth to th'Bit, his Bodie to the Darts. Which when th'Ass saw, to Heav'n his thanks hee paid, That hee no Hors was, but a poor Ass made. MORAL. Clowns envie Peers eas and delicious fare, Til Glorie cal's to th'painfull Theäter: An anxious Minde doth Regal Power foil, While cheerful Hindes make musick to their toil. 78. A Lion and a Goat. A Goat that on a steep Rock fed, A Lion had distinguished, Whom hee advised to descend, And to the greener Meddow bend▪ The Goat repli'd; if hee were gon, Shee happily might feed thereon: It was not for her Pleasure's sake, That hee did this Proposal make;
But on her, that with eas hee might Supplie his ravenous appetite. MORAL. Civil or Nat'ral Lives are best secur'd, When unto pain and hardiness inur'd: Securitie alluring Plenties bring; Securitie neglect, Neglect Ruine. When unsought Councels would express our good, 'Tis then their own that should bee understood. 79. The Vultur and other Birds. THe Vultur feign'd his Natal Feast, To celebrate which, invite's for guest The smaller Birds: most thither came, Whom hee seem'd fairly t'entertain: But when they all were fully met, His craft remov'd the counterfeit: All Cerimonie cast aside, The Guests themselvs the Feast suppli'd. MORAL. When greedie mindes Inferiors entertain, Tis but the secret Preface to their gain; Where oft the freedom of the heedless Guest, Defraie's th'Exspenses of the bainful Feast.
80. The Geess and Cranes. A Flock of Geess and Cranes there fed Together in an unshorn Mead: Notice whereof to th'Rusticks came, Who on them flew for sport or gain. The Cranes that were of bodie light, Secur'd themselvs by sudden flight: The Geess surcharg'd with their own weight, The forfeit prov'd to their Deceit. MORAL. To shun th'Incursions of an Enemie, To sure Retreats the poor and emptie Flie: While the rich engag'd to his burd'nous Pelf, Nor that secure's, nor yet can save himself. 81. Jove and the Ape. OF mortal Creatures Jove desir'd to see. Which had produc't the fairest Progenie. The Convocation publish't, from each place, Flock't Fowl and Beast with their pretending Race: 'Mongst which th'Ape, in either arm enclos'd, Her deform'd Cubs to all their views expos'd: Whereat from laughter no one could refrain; Ev'n Jove Himself Himself could not contein: Th'Ape unabash't, said Jove their Judg knew well Her Cubs all present did in form excel.
MORAL. This innate follie is in all exprest, Their own Productions to each one seem best. And prudently proceeded Nature so, Few els would cherish, what wee All must ow. This hold's in Arts the like Analogie, T'extract Perfection from Infirmitie: Where stil the works self-blandishing delight's, Th'industrious hand t'unwearied toil excite's. 82. The Fox and Goat. A Fox and Goat opprest with extreme drought, Descend a Well, whence neither could get out. The Fox the Goat wil'd of good chear to bee, Hee had contriv'd a waie to set them free: Which was, the Goat himself upright t'erect, And 'gainst the Wall his former feet should set, Then to his brest inclining down his chin, By's back and horns the Fox the banck would win, Whereon escap't, hee forth would draw the Goat, Or by his horns, or by his shaggie Coat. Th'advice the Goat approv'd, thereto agree'd; And from the Well the Fox with success free'd. The Fox at libertie much joie exprest; But left th'exspecting Goat stil much distrest: Who, when thus gul'd himself perceiv'd to bee, Accus'd the Fox of Infidelitie:
Him in derision the Fox answered, Hadst thou had so much wisdom in thy head, As thou hast rev'rent Gravitie on thy Chin, T'hadst foreseen to get out, e're thou got'st in. MORAL. Necessitie's most men inventive make; But few observ the vows that then they take: Who in Affairs to fair success pretend, E're they begin, should first consult the End. Years bring experience, experience mak's wise, Age wanteth els his proper Dignities. 83. The Cocks and Partridg. A Certain man that manie Cocks had bred, A Partridg bought, made tame, & with them fed. The Cocks by turns, disliking their new Mate, Chace't too and fro, and with much furie beat. Th'afflicted Partridg much perplex't in minde, Imputed this to his estranged Kinde: Til hee astonish't had observ'd one daie Betwixt themselvs a bloodie mortal fraie; Said, 'mongst your selvs, since thus yee disagree, I'le weigh no more your Injurie to mee. MORAL. Where pow'rfull Nature and Societie, Slighted Engagements of true Concord bee.
Strangers to both may well bee pacifi'd, If they resent the outrage of their pride. 84. The boasting Traveller. A Vap'ring Youth som time had spent abroad, Swel'd with conceit, return'd to his abode; Boasting how manie brave adventures hee, In manie Regions had past manfully: Chiefly at Rhodes in leaping amplifie's, From all pretenders bore awaie the prize. In which most Rhodians then of Eminence, Were to his fame applausive evidence: If this bee true, repli'd a Stander by, Wee need thereof no farther testimonie: See! Rhodes is here! the contestation this! Then make's a leap, and bad him equal His. MORAL. Where proofs are present witnesses are vain; Truth is suspected onely words sustein. In man's own mouth ill sound's his proper prais, In stead of Honor, 'twill but Laughter rais. 85. Apollo's Tempter. A Wicked Fellow unto Delphos went, To trie th'Oracle; Apollo circumvent; Under his Cloke a Sparrow held in hand, And to the Tripod utter'd this demand:
What in my right hand I have covered, Tel mee Apollo, is't alive or dead? Had hee sai'd dead, thus did his craft contrive; Hee would have then produced it alive; If it was living, had been answered; Hee strait had kil'd it, and produce't it dead. But Apollo perceiv'd his subtiltie, And return'd, forthwith, thereto this Replie; That in thy hand, Consultor, thou do'st close, Living or Dead, as thou wilt it expose: The power and the choice rest in thy wil, Which thou approvest, that thou mai'st fulfil. MORAL. The deepest Base to the highest mischief, Is found to bee a prophane unbelief. Who vice affect, endeavour to make vain, What th'entrie threat's, or progress should restrain; In which conclusions the All-seeing Eie Sheweth his Truth, shewing their fallacie. 86. The Fisher and the small Fish. I'Th Sea his Net a toiling Fisher threw, Which hee from thence but with one smal Fish drew, Who thus crav'd freedom: I am of the Frie; Leav mee t'increas, and others multiplie; That I hereafter to thy profit may, With smal forbearance, bee thy better Preie.
The Fisher made Replie, to this pretens Should I yield, I had surely lost my sens. What is in hand, though small, did I remit, In hope of future good, though ne're so great. MORAL. The Futur's uncertain, that onely ours, Which wee possess within our present pow'rs; Who part's with this, alluring Hope to feed; Prejudgeth not the Hazzards may succeed. 87. The Man and Satyr. A Civiliz'd Man a League of Friendship made With a rough Satyr, from the Desart strai'd; Setting to eat from Heav'n a cold storm rose, Whereat the tender Man his fingers blow's: The Satyr seeing this, the caus demand's; The Man repli'd, hee blew to warm his hands: Soon after hotter meat to th'Table came; Whereon stil feeding, the Man blew again. The caus hereof the Satyr did intreat; The Man repli'd, hee blew to cool his meat. The Satyr hereat much astonished, With sudden haste, forth from his new Friend fled; Bad him farewel, hee'd no more comerce hold With him from one mouth could blow hot & cold.
MORAL. Nature and Truth unblemish't when they bee, Hold in their cours one single Ministrie: But when corrupted either are by Art, Deceit is introduc'd by common craft: From whence this caution follows; disguis'd wrong Lurk's alway shrouded in a double Tongue; A Base unfit for Love to build upon, Whose End still is one common Ʋnion. 88. The Fox and Leopard. 'TWixt Fox and Leopard variance fell, Which of them did in form excel. The Leopard much exalt's his Note In prais of's var'ing color'd Coat. The Fox seem'd heerto to aver, In that hee could not his prefer. Yet him returned this Replie; How much more beautiful am I! Who not in bodie, as you finde, But var'ing formed am of minde. MORAL. Frail are the Beauties onely meet the Sens, Compar'd to them guid the Intelligence: Time in his hastie summons those conclude's, While these withstand all Time's vicissitudes.
89. The Woman and her Hen. A Widdow kep't a Hen did laie An Egg on each ensuing daie. The Widdow her hopes cherished, Her Hen would more laie, better fed: Which don, the Hen so fat was grown, In-sted of more Eggs, shee lai'd None. MORAL. Thus Gluttonie fair Nature doth oppress, Ruine her Funct'ons by each wilde excess: And so blinde Av'rice is to All extent; Whilst her own waies thus weav her punishment. 90. A Man bitten by a Dog. A Man who by a Cur was bit, Finding no Remedie for it; Of all his Visitants hee sought, If they for Cure could tell him ought. Amongst the rest One him adviz'd, (If hee his present safetie priz'd) To take a Crust dip't in his Blood, And give it to the Dog for Food: The wounded Man in Exstasie, Returned thereto this Replie; If this I did, then worthily Of each Dog should I bitten bee.
MORAL. True Friends advize us to do Good for Ill; Heav'n might thereby his healing Balm distill: But pervers Nature figure's to the Sens, Ils are Encourag'd by such Recompens. 91. The two Friends and the Bear. TWo Friends together trav'ling on the waie, A Bear encounter'd both did much dismaie: The One more frighted ran unto a Tree, Which hee asscended with Dexteritie: The Other thus abandon'd, did suppose Himself too weak, should hee the Bear oppose; Fell to th'Earth, Him counterfeiting dead; Foreknowing Bears on Carrion never fed. The Bear approach't him, smel't his Neck and Ear, Who, with much pain, did long to breath forbear. The Bear, him dead believing, went awaie; Whereon descended Hee in Covert laie; And of his Friend required, what the Bear So closely to him whispered in his Ear: His Friend repli'd, Hee fairly warned Mee, No more to travel with such Friends as Thee. MORAL. Manie Companions Friends instyl'd there bee, Few stand the trial of Adversitie:
When proper Int'rests are in balance set With their friend's safetie, most prove Counterfeit. 92. The Reed and Olive-tree. STrife rose 'twixt Reed and Olive-tree Touching their strength and constancie. The Olive-tree reproach't the Reed, Hee was at each blast wavered. The patient Reed long silence kept; And farther trial did exspect. E're long arose a violent winde, With which the Reed was each waie twinde, While th'Olive strugling with the storm, From his seat by the root was torn. MORAL. Whose supple Natures their will pliant yield, Them from the furie of the Potent shield. Who to repugnant Times with slight give waie, Shall with success their malice overswaie: While stubborn tempers, strugling with their rage Both Lives and Fortunes oftentimes engage. 93. The Beaver. THe Beaver, 'bove all Beast beside, Doth in the water most reside: But in such close Retreat immur'd, From vigilant foes is not secur'd.
All for his Genitals are bent, In Med'cine held most excellent. When hee by Hunters is pursu'd, (As Instinct Knowledg had indu'd) His Genitals hee off doth bite, And cast's them in his follow'rs sight; Who having their desired Rape, Suffer the Beaver to escape. MORAL. Manie an Ambush for the Rich are lai'd, Who wealth reteining are by it betrai'd: But from his Person who divide's his Pelf, With timelie Exspence, wisely save's himself. 94. The Tunie and Dolphin. A Tunie 'fore a Dolphin fled, Who in his cours by fear misled: And beeing nigh took, to save himself, Had cast his bodie on a Shelf. The Dolphin, who himself had wound Into like danger, ran a-ground. Whom a-far off the Tunie view'd Exspiring, and did thus conclude; With joie my life I now resign, Seeing his Death that caussed mine.
MORAL. Fear doth disarm what Nature should defend, And too secure, doth oft procure our End. Thus wronged Men are somthing eas'd to see Their Persecutors in Adversitie; And greedie Mindes, with their blinde Furie led, So often perish with the injured. 95. The South saier. A South-sai'r in the Market sate Foretelling to the Rout their Fate: To whom a Messenger rush't in, Did wofull tidings to him bring; The Door of's Hous was open broke, And all his Goods from thence were tooke: The trembling Wizzard in his cours, To hasten Home add's all his force; Whom One espying, as He ran, Cri'd to the People; See the Man, By whom your Affairs are fore-shown! Why could Hee not fore-see his Own? MORAL. Who do beyond their Faculties pretend, With their own Dammage mock't are in the end. Truly Authentick hee his Councel make's, First on himself prove's what hee undertake's.
96. The Physician and his Patient. A Physician not long i'th Function delt, Asked his Patient how himself hee felt. Who answered, hee with distemper'd heat, As then laie bathed in a clammie sweat: The Physician replied, that was well; And for that visit, gave him the farewel. The like Question Hee mov'd when hee came next; The Patient said, hee was with griping vex't. The Physician said, that was well likewise; And therewith think's his Fears hee pacifie's. The third time Hee the same enquirie made: To which the Patient, much perplexed, said; Hee with a Flux was then brought very low: The Physician sai'd, that was well also. After Whom One of his Familiars came, And of the Patient demanded again; How yet hee did. The Patient made Replie; Well, well I am; but yet, alas, I die! MORAL. Manie such Charlatains each where there bee, Shadow their Ign'rance with like Flatterie: But who for want of Knowledg or of Will, Preside Another's, yet approve their Ill; To their dishonor, guiltily do thus Conspire with our Ils, but to ruine us,
97. The Wolf and Ass. UNto a Wolf thus spoke an Ass was lame: Behold! the Vultur's preie, or Yours I am! I die with pain! this favor onely I Request of your admired charitie. Pull from my gangren'd foot this stump, I may With lesser anguish close my latest daie. This glosing style his savage Nature charm's, 'Tis strange! a Wolf relent's at others harms: And therewith him appli'd to yield redress, Which suddenly was finish't with success. Th'Ass forgetfull of his late good turn, Did with the self-same heel his Healer spurn; Which laid him welt'ring in his blood, from whom The Ass risk't away, as if by him o'recom. The Wolf as giltie did himself impeach, That of a Butcher would becom a Leech. MORAL. For abject mindes who doth good Offices, Shall bee rewarded with such injuries: And who desert their Functions for the use Of those unpractis'd, reap Damage and Abuse. 98. The Fowler and Black-bird. A Fowler spreading of his Nets, To him a perking Black-bird jet's;
And busily made this demand, What present work hee had in hand? The Fowler (jealous of suspect) Said, hee a Citie would erect: And therewithall stepping aside; Went afar off himself to hide. The Black-bird facile of Belief; Hop't to the Bait for her Relief, (Was nigh the Net on purpose lai'd) Wherewith, poor Bird, shee was betrai'd, Seeing her caught, the Fowler ran: To whom the Black-bird cri'd, O Man! Truly, if you such Cities plant, You'l scarce have one Inhabitant. MORAL. The greatest mischiefs for Rapine or Blood Have still been shadow'd with the publick Good: To which the credulous Innocents give waie, Till they themselvs becom the heedless Preie: But where such Rulers do preside a State They quickly will the Land depopulate. 99. The Traveller. A Traveller about to undertake A long Journie, to Jove a vow did make, Half of his findings offered should bee; Whereon set's forth with great Alacritie:
Far on the Progress had hee not advance't, E're hee to finde a Bag of Almonds chance't Mixed with Dates, which greedily hee eat, To th'stones and shels, all that thereof was meat. These useless Reliques hee together cast's, With which to th'Altar most devotely hast's; Where unto Jove himself hee thus addrest, And no small Zeal there seemingly exprest; Behold! Great Jove! what without or within, I bring to Thee, as my vow'd Offering. MORAL. Som for sinister Ends themselvs applie To the exterior Forms of Pietie: But when their Actions truly are survei'd, Wee finde Devotion fraudulently pai'd. 100. The Boie and his Mother. A Little Boie but late to schole put forth, From thence a Horn-book stole, of little worth, Which to his Mother did, return'd, present; And shee receiv'd, neglecting Chastisement. This daily practice hee persever'd in, Till use to greater things encourag'd him: For which hee by the Magistrates condemn'd, Was to the Gallows led, to make his End. Whom his bewailing Mother following; Hee of his Guard crav'd, shee might speak to him:
To which assenting; Shee with speed drew near, And to his mouch applied close her Ear: Where in his teeth set (with such furie led) That strait her Ear hee pul'd off from her head, For which his Mother, and the standers by, Reproached him with this new Infamie: But unabash't, hee published that shee The onely caus was of his miserie: For th'Horn-books theft had shee corrected him, Hee had no farther Progress made therein. MORAL. Indulgent Parents to correct denie The seeming trifles ev'n of Infancie: To how imperi'us a Guid they resign Their pliant Wils, do truly not define: Custom a second Nature is, though blinde, O'reswai's the clearest functions of the Minde: "With what liquor wee vessels first inure, "Longest in them that Odor will endure. 101. The Shipwrackct Shepherd. A Wealthie Shepherd up and down did rove, Close to the Sea his scatter'd flock had drove; Which beeing calm, his wonder and delight, Had him transported at so rare a sight; That hee his present Function did despise, Resolv'd to plow the Sea for Merchandize.
To which effect, his Sheep hee forthwith sold, And into Dates converted all his Fold: Put forth to sea, a hideous storm arose, Did to much danger him and goods expose. Th'o'reladen Bark each coming wave took in; Which him enforce't, i'th'sea her freight to fling: Emtie escaping, home return'd again; A few daies after to the same place came: Where hee beheld the Sea's unwrinkled face, Smile again on him with alluring Grace. Whereon hee cri'd, In vain with mee you glose; Content your self; I've no more Dates to lose. MORAL. So glorious fools are took with spetious Shows, Nor knowledg gain but from their overthrows, By loss and danger grossest Mindes are taught, Their Wit is soundest, when the deerest bought. 102. The imprison'd Heir, and the painted Lion. A Noble-man, who was through Age declin'd, One onely Son had of a gen'rous Minde: Whose Inclination Hunting did o're-swaie, Wherein his Game was most for beast of Preie. On him th'indulgent Sire his fancie set, Nor could remov'd bee by Death's counterfeit: One Night hee dream't (to his no little pain) This hopeful Son was by a Lion slain:
At which much troubled, fear sought to prevent, That his Dream were not follow'd by event: A statelie Hous hee built, whose rooms for grace Had manie Pictures of each sev'ral chase; The Youth's minde to divert, herein confin'd, And to the vigilance of a Guard resign'd: This more his unrestrained Courage check't, And on the Caus yet caus'd him more reflect: Which, 'mongst the rest there viewing, drawn to life, Hee with the shadow enter's thus in strife; Oh: cruel Beast! must I, for fear of thee, Bee heer cag'd up depriv'd of libertie: Whereat attempting to pull out his eies, An unseen Nail his finger scarifie's; Which hurt so fester'd it a Fever bred, The raging Fever life exstinguished, MORAL. In things to com, shallow Man's curious Sens Is cheated still with like Aequivalence; Who by his Prudence Heav'ns Decree would shun, Weaveth the Thred wherewith his Fate is spun. 103. The Bald-man. ONe Bald through Age or accident, A Periwig wore for Ornament; Which, as a Hors hee managed, A blast of winde drove from his head▪
This laughter rais'd i'th Standers by, To whom, hee laughing, made Replie: No mar'l Fals hairs are from mee blown; Since they not on kep't were my Own. MORAL. Since Gifts of Nature fugitive are found; For staie in Fortunes there is little Ground: Hee from Disgrace the Blemishes take's off, That on his own Shame first revert's a Scoff. 104. The Eagle and Fox. THe Fox and Eagle, friendship made, agree (Frequent Commerce might confirm Amitie) To bee nigh Neighbors; th'Eagle, to that End, Did on a loftie Tree her Nest distend, Whose declin'd Age had level to the Foot Wrought a smal Concave in the disclos'd Root; Where the Fox quarter'd; som time past hereon; The Fox from's hole to quest for food beeing gon: The Eagle in like want, flew to his Hole, From whence the Fox-whelps for her Eaglets stole: The Fox return'd, finding her treacherous Rape, Whose tow'ring Wings made from Revenge escape: In Execrations his high furie vent's; The sole recours of wretched Impotents, His injur'd Love converted into Hate; Held now no ties too near to violate.
A rural Feast hereon soon issued A Goat for victime had immolished; Th'Eagle, th'Altar rounded, sharp for preie, Stooping for which, a Fragment bore awaie; Whereto fast cleaved a light fire-brand, Which to her nest brought, the winde theron fan'd, Till it the same had fier'd, of matter light; From whence th'Eaglets (bee'ng unapt for flight) (Yet Nature prompting to avoid the Flame) Drop't to the Earth, and by the Fox were slain: Who, unresisted, in the Eagle's sight, Glutted his Passion and his Appetite. MORAL. 'Twixt greedie Mindes what ties so e're there bee, Discord's fomented by Vicinitie: The Caus is evident; boundless Desires In smal Extents move with unequal Fi'rs: Their wants ev'n All's too little to supplie; Excess through use becom's Necessitie, All ties of Friendship with them needs must fail, Who for by-ends the Altar dare assail: But what from thence their Rapine bear's awaie, Will both their Hous and Familie decaie; While the oppressed by like vengeance shall Restored bee in their destructive fall.
105. The Eagle and Beetle. A Hare was by an Eagle long pursu'd, Who to resist with strength nor Art indu'd▪ In this extreme a Beetle met, implor'd That by his Aid her peace might bee restor'd; The Beetle of his new Electi'n proud, Solemnly forthwith, her protection vow'd: And as th'Eagle insisted to invade This his new charge, the Beetle to her made; Willing her not his Servant to molest: Th'Eagle, persev'ring, much contempt exprest Unto the Beetles little size and pow'r; And in his presence did the Hare devour. This Injurie the Beetle bore in minde; And where the Eagle built long sought to finde: Passion, at length, direct's him to her Nest; What had his speed, had there his force increast: Th'exalted Eggs down to the Earth hee fling's, And hasten's thence with yet more active wings: So joie's the Act, so fear's to bee surpriz'd. The Eagle to prevent the like, deviz'd Manie vain shifts; at length shee humbly mov'd Her Patron Jove (Jove her entirely lov'd) Hee to secure her Eggs, his bosom yield's: Who dare assault what Jove's own presence shields? Yet thither will the spiteful Flie attempt, And undescri'd, there lurk't to circumvent:
Jove saw th'Eggs move, Hee sought the caus to know, Shaking his Bosom, Both did overthrow. MORAL. Thus timid Minds, in their Extremitie; For succour to the meanest trifles flie: Yet let the Greatest not provoke the Least; Nothing so small may not the Great molest: Who his own safetie hath but once contemn'd, Is becom Master of Another's End. In vain to Heav'n for Refuge anie flie's, Who reconcile not old Inemnities. So blinde Revenge to th'Altar will asspire, Though with his Foe hee perish in one Fire. Exposition. The Hare, here, Fear (the Childe of Guilt) implie's, Who, th'Eagle, Wisdom (Truth's discoverer) flie's; Convinc't of Error by the Nat'ral Light; And of the Bane molested with fore-sight, Join's with the Beetle, here blinde Ignorance, By Unbelief to take awaie the Sens: Whose true Attendant Fear is, but th'Event Shew's such weak Safeguards, but haste puishment. The prosecution of the Beetl's Hate Against the Eagle, here, doth intimate; Though Ignorance can wisdom not impeach; Yet will his Malice her Productions reach,
In Arts and Sciences delivered us; Which to o'rethrow hee still endeavour's thus. Till Wisdom to th'Altar (Jove's Bosom) flie's, To shelter there her sacred Mysteries. Where yet attemted by her spitefull foe, Who working hers, work's his own overthrow. 106. The Nightyngale and Hawk. A Lone sate Philomel warbling on a Tree, (Passion affecting no Societie) On whom a sharp Hawk, roving for his Food, Suddenly seised for his livelihood: The harmless Bird now on the point to die, Humbly implor'd the fierce Hawk's Clemencie Her to dismiss, alledging in her right; Shee too smal was to serv his Appetite; For which hee onely should the Great regard, To Use and Travel might bring full reward. The Hawk upon her cast an Angrie Eie: And in new Furie, made her this Replie; Foolish it were, what wee hold to forsake, To pursue that wee are not sure to take. MORAL. Thus savage Natures never do relent At the sweet Musick of the Innocent. Nor greedie Mindes, although their aim bee All, In anie wise do yet neglect the Small.
All Hopes and Promisses to them are vain Objected to forbear their present Gain. 107. The tailless Fox. A Fox, who onely with loss of his Tale Escap't a snare, did much his Fate bewail: His Life more Grief, then Death approaching, bred; So much with Shame his Spirits languished: At length hee under shew of publick Good, Bethink's himself to cheat his Brotherhood; In them advising to desect their Train; Of his disgrace so to wipe out the stain: To which purpose a great Assemblie made: The taleless Fox did with much Art perswade His Fellows to cut off that burd'nous Freight, An Ornament but meerly in conceit: To whom One subtile as himself repli'd; Brother! this purpose you may cast aside; If this bee onely thy Commoditie, T'advize it other's, ill becometh thee. MORAL. 'Tis Good to sift all Councels by their End: Most do their own, when they our Good pretend. So vitious Natures, blemish't in their Fame, Would All corrupt to lessen their own Shame.
108. The Fox and Bramble. A Fox, whose clam'rous Foes did him pursue, A hedg asscended Peril to eschew; Where his rash Foot a lustie Bramble found The Pat thereof did in th'encounter wound: Trembling with Anguish; yet in Passion wilde, For this offence, the Bramble thus revil'd; Distressed I to thee for Refuge flie, And thou betrai'st mee with new Injurie: The Bramble answer'd; 'twas his Error, thought With craft to catch her, as hee others caught. MORAL. Extremes the soundest Judgments oft obscure, The Present Ils o're-balance the Future. But who for succour to rough Natures make, Must not blame them, but blame their own mistake. 109. The Crocodile and Fox. THe Crocodile and Fox contest, Of Race which was the Nobelest. The Crocodile most vainly high, The worth boast's and Antiquitie Of his Progenitors; which said, The scoffing Fox this Answer made; Friend, hadst thou not averred this, By thy Coat it apparent is,
Of all the Glories of thy Kin, Thou hast, long since, divested bin. MORAL. Virtue the Source is of Nobilitie: With which, whose Actions hold no Sympathie, To their Disgrace do extract from the Dead. An Honor in themselvs extinguished The emptie Titles of a lasting Name, But ruin'd Monuments are to Others Fame. 110. The Fox and Hunters. A Tier'd Fox by Hunters close pursu'd, A Woodard, cleaving Wood, by chance had viewd; To whom hee ran, requesting, by his Aid, To som close shelter hee might bee conveid: By whom directed to an obscure shed, The Fox, with speed, to hide him, entered: The Hunters, following, of the Woodman sought, If of the Fox hee could inform them ought: The Woodman's words, affirm'd hee did not know; But where hee laie did with his finger show: The Hunters not distinguishing this Sign, From farther pursuit did forthwith decline: Which when the Fox perceiv'd, without delaie, Hee creeping forth slunk silently awaie. In whose Retreat, him as the Woodman view'd, Hee him reproached with Ingratitude:
The Fox repli'd, had hand to tongue been true, What you now'challenge, I had tender'd you. MORAL. Mens words amd Actions seldom do agree, Yet All or Most pretend Integritie. But when Truth is discover'd by Event, Slight prov's th'Evasion from the true Intent. With the Performance weigh but what was spoke, For an Hyperbol, take an Aequivoque. 111. A Man and his Wooden Idol. A Certain Man a wooden Image made His Houshold-god, to whom hee often prai'd; The theam of his request was, all things might Flow in with Plentie, issue with Delight: But still as hee more fervent grew in Prai'r, All things at home went more against the hair: Whereon, at length, to Rage his Zeal being grown, Hee, in a Passion, had his God o're-thrown: Which in the Fall divided from the Head, From thence of Gold great plentie issued. At which the Suppl'ant joifully admir'd, O! Pervers Perfide! cri'd, when I requir'd Thy Aid with Rev'rence, nothing wouldst dispens, But to rude Blows yieldst up this affluence.
MORAL. Th'Object of vulgar Zeal, wee learn from hence, Who judg naught Good, but what affect's the Sens: Which not attain'd so, violate, as vain, Those sacred Rites their vices did restrain: Which once let loos; all Courses do pursue, By which they may their sensual Ends acrew: And if succesful, think they are suppli'd, Becaus they have such Powers vilifi'd. 112. The invited Dog. A Wealthie Man, little did cost regard, Friends to receiv a sumtuous Feast prepar'd: The Houshold Dog, by his Example led, A neighb'ring Cur to frolique summoned; Who thither com, transported was to see Of so great Dainties such varietie; Concluding in himself, so well to feed, For manie daies hee might no victu'll need: While for the Future thus his joie provide's: His fawning Tale clap't his yet emtie sides; The Cook this Rapture by his Gesture guest, Him by the Tale did silently arrest; Manie a Round him swinging; at the last, Th'affrighted Cur forth of a Window cast; Who from the Ground astonished arose, With flying Clamors publishing his woes.
The neighb'ring Curs him full of wonder met, Demanding him what dainties hee had eat; Who faintly said, with Cheer I so abound, In my Return, I never felt the Ground. MORAL. Alluring Hopes do emptie Mindes extend, But seldom reach to what they do pretend: Who for support on Other's Goods relie, Feed Exspectation with vacuitie. 113. The Man and Eagle. A Simple Countrie-man an Eagle snar'd; Her Pinions pul'd, and cast her in his yard: Amongst his Poultrie. Her another bought, And with new Plumes her emptie Pinions fraught: With which the Eagle flying trust a Hair, Wherewith reward's her Benefactor's Care. The Fox, observing this, the Man adviz'd, No more to cherish what hee so much priz'd: Lest, as o'th Hair, her yet asspiring Wing Should in like sort bee turned upon him: The facile Man with this to credit led, The grateful Eagle re-impov'rished. MORAL. By Ignorance Nature's high Works deface't, Are in improper Ʋses thus misplace't:
Which when restored by Industrious Art, Reward Anothers, prove their own Desert: Till All perverting Malice do detect Their approv'd Issues by unjust suspect. 114. The dying Husbandman. AN aged Husbandman, whose End drew nigh, Desirous was to cherish Industrie In his remiss Succession, cal'd his Sons, Told them that now his life to Period run's; The Goods end Treasure hee had to conveie Amongst them, onely in his Vineyard laie. The Father dead, the Sons believing hid This Treasure there, the Vineyard often dig'd; But found not what their eager Travel mov'd, Til the succeeding Season came, which prov'd More fertile by such Culture, then before Manie years were; and made them rich, were poor. MORAL. Wealth from persev'ring Industrie still flow's, Though somtimes meats not what it did propose: Error may guide the o're greedie Intent, But Success crown's it with unsought Event. 115. The sillie Fisher. A Sillie Youth in fishing inexpert, Yet with much Zeal pretending to the Art:
His Net and Pipe close to the River brought, Where hee sat piping, thinking to have caught The easie Fish with this his Melodie: Which finding not succesful, Pipe lai'd by; And to his Net betook him, which, in haste, Hee with fresh Ardeur in the River cast; From whence of Fish hee drew a numerous heap, Which on the shore cast, seeing them to leap; Cried, Sullen Race! to move Pipe could not win, But now I pipe not, you to dance begin. MORAL. T'improper Times and Subjects who applie The perfect'st Art, make void their Industrie: Proportion'd Functions first must meet our Skil, E're to our Purpose wee can form the Will. 116. The fortunate Fishers. A Troop of painful Fishers put to sea, Long tired were with fruitless Industrie: Hungrie and grieved that they naught could take, Homeward, perplex't, as they began to make; A Fish pursued 'fore Another swum, Who to secure him in their bottom sprung: On whom the joiful Fishers strait laid hold, And at a high Rate, when returned, sold.
MORAL. What Art and Labor could not bring to pass, A secret Providence unexspected has; None on their Strength or Knowledg might relie, Without due ref'rence to the Deitie. 117. The poor sick man. A Poor Man sick, made to the Gods a vow, A hundred Oxen hee would them allow In Sacrifice, for his Recoverie; The Gods to prove this his Integritie; Assent to his Request, and Health restore: The cured Suppl'ant, 'caus hee was but poor, And Biefs had none, a hundred Oxen bones Gathers together, and to th'Altar come's, To which addrest, thus publickly doth saie, Behold, you Gods! my vow to you I paie: The Gods intending to revenge the cheat, Him, sleeping in a vision, instigate Next Morning to the Sea-side to repair, And hee should finde an hundred Talents there: On his dream mindeful, hee got up e're daie, But was by Thievs encountred on his waie, To whom for Ransom hee a Promisse made, A thousand Talents should bee to them paid.
MORAL. Man in Extremes, oft to advance his Ends, Beyond his pow'r his promisses extend's: Wherein, who mock the all-discerning Eie, Will still paie Man with equal Fallacie. 118. The unfortunate Fishers. CErtain Fishers hailing to shore a draught, By the weight judg'd it succesfully fraught; Which did their senses with such joie elate, Hope the possession did anticipate: Until the Net upon the Coast was thrown With som few smal fish, and a mightie stone, Which to an Ebb return'd their tide of Mirth, As dul and silent as the passive Earth. Whereat one of them, most advance't in years, Thus sagely his dejected Fellows cheers. Appeas your trouble. Grief and Joie are Twins, Alternate Changes rule the cours of things. Think All the Ils will happen you, which may, That when they com, they may the lighter weigh. MORAL. Hopes are but shadows, mocking oft the Sens, Rais'd on th'Affections, not th'Intelligence: Which unprescribed in their loos Extent, Swoln Exspectations frustrate the Event:
But the best Arm the Minde can use 'gainst Chance, Is, e're it com's, t'exspect her Repugnance. 119. The Old man. A Feeble Man, through Age and Travel spent, To a remote Wood for his fuel went: Which on his shoulders in a bundle hee Bore to supplie his sad Necessitie. Returning home his Burden to conveie, With the weight tired, and the tedious waie: Again his Bundle to the Earth restor'd, And to end Grief, hee sadly Death implor'd: Death, unexspected, came as hee desir'd; And ask't the Man, what hee of him requir'd. Who made replie, that you would take the pain To help mee with my Burden up again. MORAL. Weak Resolution Death through dispair invite's, But in th'Approaches most prove Hypocrites: Life with what change of Ils soever spun, Frail Nature still would Dissolution shun. 120. The Woman and Physician. AN Old-Wife a thick film had in each Eie Oppressed much the visive Facultie, Was for the perfect Cure engag'd becom Unto a Doctor in a certain Sum:
Provided stil, his pains and cost imploi'd Should, if they fail'd, bee with the Cov'nant void. The Physicion on his Reward intent, T'effect his Cure on dailie visits went: And from his Patient's dwelling brought awaie, By secret slight, som parcel ev'rie daie, Til in the Issue, Hee (his cure beeing wrought) The Sum contracted of the Woman sought: Which shee refusing, summon'd was t'appear Before the Judg, hee might the Diff'rence hear: Who thither com, her contract not deni'd. But shee not cur'd was, thus shee justifi'd, E're in his hands, I saw my hous well fraught With Houshold-stuff, but there I now see naught. MORAL. Physicions visits somtime Health restore, But alwaies make the lingring Patient poor, Who to like slight may justly have recours, Since curing one ill, they still leav a wors. 121. The two Enemies. TWo Fencers in one Bark put forth to Sea Betwixt whom was invet'rate Emnitie; Which since neer Other neither would allow, One to the Poup got, t'other to the Prow: E're far advanc't, arose a hideous storm, Wherewith the strugling Bark extremelie torn:
To sink begining, Hee sat in the Prow Ask't of the toiling Sailers, which part now Of their wrack't vessel would the first bee drown'd, Who made Replie, The Poup caus first a ground; Whereat hee cri'd, Death's now no grief to mee, Since I my Foe to perish first shall see. MORAL. How strange distemper doth the Soul disguize, T'extract such Joie from others Miseries; While yet frail Nature cal's us to resent, With theirs, our own united Detriment: Malice doth proper Safetie little prize, Her thirstie Furie where shee satisfie's. 122. The Calf and Ox. A Fat Calf yet unyok't, beheld at Plow A painful Ox, to whom hee would allow, Compar'd to him in Esteem, but Contempt; In that th'Ox wrought, in eas his daies hee spent: But when the Daie of Sacrifice drew nigh, Th'Ox was dismis't; the Calf retain'd to die, Thou wert not wrought, th'Ox to him smiling sed, Becaus design'd to bee immolished. MORAL. Fair Industrie the nat'ral Life secure's; While wantnn Sloth untimely Ends procure's:
So the divine Judg doth inflict on those, Whom they would save, varietie of Woes: But pamper's with Excess of worldly joie, Whom hee intend's in Justice to destroie. 123. The Boie and Fortune. A Sillie Boie did Cattle keep, Neer to a Well was fal'n asleep. Fortune arriving, waked him, Thus saying, drew him from the spring. Rise idle Knave from hence bee gon, For thy own Follie blame will none: If thou heerin shouldst chance to fall, But I shall bee condemn'd of All. MORAL. Wee frail Man's common Error here express; His proper Error no Man will confess: But rather thus their ill Successes laie On som blinde Pow'rs their Action's overswaie. 128. The Mice and Cat. A Ravening Cat an antick Fabrick found, Where sporting Mice, with freedom did a∣bound: Thither hee went, & manie made his Preie, Till they themselvs perceiving their decaie, A Councel cal'd, wherein they did conclude, Within his Access no One should intrude.
But to an upper Seiling to confine Themselvs, whereto the Cat could no waie clime: The Cat their purpose soon discovered, Thus counterplotted, hee himself feign'd dead; Hanging himself up by the heels upon A hook was fast'ned to an inward stone. One of the Mice did downward sharply prie; Hee of the Cat might make discoverie: Cri'd to him, Friend! did I Cat thee know, Though thou wert dead, I'd not descend below. MORAL. So prudent Men from Others Harms collect, Where, and on whom to ground a just suspect: What Forms soever faithless Men put on, They circumvent not their firm Caution. 125. The Ape and Fox. THe Beast a gen'ral Councel held, Which of them in rare Parts excel'd: With the Ape's Frisks they so were tane, Most votes him for their King proclame. The Fox, with a repining Eie; Him envying this new Dignitie; Finding a snare laid in a pit, Had a flesh morsel baited it; To which that hee the Ape might lead, Thus his Prerogative did plead:
A hidden Treasure brought to light (Which by the Law, Sir, is your Right) Not far off lie's: this, if you pleas, Your own hands may assume with Eas: The Ape by his persuasion led, With thirstie Ardeur hastened, Whereat arriv'd with little Care, Became intrapped in the Snare: The chatt'ring Ape, with irefull Eie, Reproach't the Fox his Treacherie; Who repli'd, Others you'd protect, Yet cannot your own waies direct. MORAL. Who from the Judgment of the Multitude Election for a Government conclude: In th'Issue, finde, what Reason should despise, Misled their shallow giddie Fantasies: Since of Mankinde the greatest part are fools: Such must bee Hee, who by their Sentence rule's: Nor is it fit, such men preside a State, Who their own Actions cannot regulate; But on this erring light still fix the Eie, Which thus seduceth frail Mortalitie: Envie and Malice, this also infer's, Are unto Craft the sharpest Ministers.
126. Jove and the Crow. UNto the Fowl of ev'rie kinde A daie of Council Jove assign'd; Hee might elect him for their King, The fairest Ornaments could bring: Which when the Crow perceived, Hee, Conscious of his Deformitie, Of various Colors others Plumes To deck himself forthwith assume's: In which, when All assembled were; To Jove the fairest did appear; For whom about to give his Vote, Each Bird their own strip't from his Coat: Whereat the naked Crow became Expos'd to more then usual Shame. MORAL. On borrow'd Notions, swell the Memorie, Ostentive Mindes rais their Sufficiencie; Which in their shallow Judgments, groundless so, Fail in the use, and only serv for Show: But when each Autor is restor'd his own, Their innate weakness is with dishon'r shown. 127. The Smith and Dog. A Painfull Smith a dul Cur kep't, Who, while hee forged, alwaies slep't:
But when his Master went to eat, Then suddenly Hee up would get; And what was under Table thrown With nimble Gesture prei'd thereon. The Smith observing this, began Against his Cur thus to exclame; When I my self applie to work, In Sloth thou dost in corners lurk: But when I 'gin my Teeth to move, Thy fawning tail doth this approve. MORAL. So idle Drones on Others Labors feed, Shrink from the Action doth supplie their need: But when the Fruits of Industrie ensue, None so Officious as this fawning Crew. 128. The Mule. A Mule becom with plentie fat, Grew wanton in his present state; Soothing himself, Hee for his Sire, A Courser had, Active as Fire: To whom, in all things, like was hee, Chieflie in his Celeritie. Soon after this; without Respite, Forced to run with all his might; Hee restie in his cours became; Whereat, cri'd out, Wretch that I am!
To think mee of a Horses Race, Knowing my Sire was but an Ass. MORAL. Of mean Extraction ill bred Men there bee, Swell in conceit with their Prosperitie; Pretending to such S:ock and Faculties, As Other Persons truly Nobilize: But falt'ring in the Practice, soon reflect Both on their Nat'ral and Acquir'd defect. 129. The Physician and the Dead-Man. AN infirm Man did long fick lie, Happened under Cure to die: Unto whose Fun'ral manie went, Encountring there th'Impertinent Physician, who did much insert, To save the credit of his Art; Affirming, had the Deceast took Frequently Glisters, and forsook The use of Wine, hee had not died: To whom an Assistant repli'd; Friend! This Advice you should produce, Onely when it might bee of use: But now it nothing can avail, Your Purpose and our Proofs must fail.
MORAL. Ʋntimely Counsels sillie Bablers vent, Not for the future, but past Accident. Of mortal Judgments 'tis the erring Fate; All Men still wise are when it is too late. 130. The Dog and Wolf. A Dog without Door sleeping laie Was by a Wolf surpriz'd for Preie; Who to his slaughter beeing addrest; The fawning Cur made this Request: Sir Wolf; for present kill not mee, For lean I am, as you may see; At hand my Master's Nuptials are, Where I with such delicious fare, My self will glut, that fat I may Becom your more agreeing Preie: The Wolf relying on his word, Did freedom to the Dog afford: And thither soon return'd agin: But found the Dog sleeping within: Yet of him hee his Promisse clam'd; To whom the Dog this Answer fram'd; When you mee sleeping without Door Finde, Nuptials then exspect no more.
MORAL. The Rites of Nature first prefer'd should bee; Nor Rites held, which with these hold contrarietie: That Vow or Contract in it self is void, Injoin's us by our selvs to bee destroid. So cautious Men, when they a danger shun, Are in like Hazzard seldom seen to run. 131. The Bull and Lion. A Lion long a mightie Bull assail'd By sundrie slights, yet of his purpose fail'd: Approaching neer, the Bull did thus invite; Friend! if you pleas, praie Sup with mee to night; I have a Sheep slain, whereof wee will feast, Without more Cer'monie, praie bee my Guest: The Bull assenting, forthwith followed The leering Lion, who to his Den him led: The Bull arriv'd, saw manie a vast Cauldron, And mightie Spit, but Sheep hee there saw none: Whereon returning with unusual Haste; The Lion ask't, What moved this distaste. Who made Replie, those Instruments you keep To dress a Bull more fit are, then a Sheep. MORAL. When to Inferiors Potent men profess Ʋnusual Friendship, 'tis but to oppress:
But disproportion'd Entertainments may Shew such Pretences tend but to betraie. 132: The enamour'd Lion. A Lion of a Maid enamoured, Sought of her rustick Father her to wed; Who made Replie to his disdain'd Request; His Daughter was no Marriage for a Beast: But when the Lion hereon look't a-wrie, A grin'd his teeth; the Clown seem'd to complie; Affirming, what the Lion had requir'd; As earnestly hee had the same desir'd: So that his Teeth and Nails dissected were, Whereof the tender Virgin stood in fear. The Lion with excess of Passion lov'd, This his Objection suddenly remov'd; Then for the Maid unto the Sire return'd; Who seeing him of Teeth and Claws unarm'd, A club took up wherewith hee did oppose The Lion's pursuit with pursuing blows. MORAL. When as more potent Princes would becom Join'd to weak States in civil Ʋnion: By slights in Treaties, proper Strengths laie down, To blinde suspect of Ʋsurpation, Finde, so divested, their weak Foes insist To punish that which they could not resist.
133. The Lion and Fox. THe Fox reproach't, with Infamie, The Lioness's Infecunditie: In that shee never could bring forth But One Whelp onely at a Birth: Who repli'd; yet it came to pass, That onely One a Lion was. MORAL. Ʋnequally Worth measur'd is by Sens, When priz'd for Number, more then Excellence: Nature her self produceth on this Stage Scarce One exact Man in a treble Age. 134. The two fighting Cocks. TWo Cocks together long had strove Who Master of the Hens should prove. At length, One overcom became, Was force't to hide his Head for Shame. The Victor swel'd with vanitie, To the Ridg of the Hous did flie; Where hee with loud Applaus proclam'd The Trophies from his Foe obtein'd: While arrogant Boasts hee there crew out, An Eagle sharp, roving about, Trussed the Gallant for her Preie, And to her Young bore him awaie.
Which when the subdu'd Cock espi'd, (As on his Ruines glorifi'd) Hee publickly stalk't forth again, To take sole Freedom of his Game. MORAL. Vain Mindes, the Sens unapt to moderate, Becom extrav'gant with their Prosp'rous Fate; And thus insult o're their dejected Foe, Till Fate restore these by their Overthrow. Here Fortune's Changes shew to us how nigh Each Extreme is unto his Contrarie. 135. The Calf and Stag. A Calf, who with the Hinde yet went, Held with a Stag this Argument: Since thou the Dogs dost far exceed, Both in thy Magnitude and speed: And with thy branchie Frontlets might, Far better arm'd art for a Fight: What is the Reason then, my Friend, Thou do'st their Pursuit apprehend? To whom the Stag, smiling, repli'd; Though all thou sai'st bee verifi'd; Yet I can not my self assure, The yelping of the Hounds t'endure; But when I their fierce clamors hear, I take my sudden flight for fear.
MORAL. Nature there vainly doth her Gifts produce, Where shee give's not the Gift to lend them Ʋse: Reason unaptly travels to repair Defects by Nature that inherent are. 136. The Bee and Jove. THe Bee one daie to Jove her King Of Honie brought an Offering: With which Oblation Jove became So much delighted; bad her clame What ever her wish could suggest, Hee would assent to her Request. The Bee with Passion overswai'd, To Jove this her Petition made; Who ever came a Pilfering To her Hive, so shee might them sting, Therewith they might for this their theft Bee suddenly of Life bereft. To which Demand Jove doubtful stood, 'Fore Hers, preferring humane Good. At length returned this Replie; Let this thy blinde will satisfie; If anie com unto thy Hive, Thee of thy Treasure to deprive, And thou, by Chance, so prickest him To leav within the Wound thy Sting:
That Prick to thee thy Death shall bee, Let Life thy Sting accompanie. MORAL. Revenge the highest Passion of the Will Neglect's her Good to procure Others Ill: But the All-judging Eie, to check the Sens, As over-partial to her own Offence; Ordein's, who on his Foe inflicteth All Hee Can, shall by his proper Furie fall. 137. The Flie. A Flie chance't in a Flesh-pot fall, Nigh suffocated there withall; Thus, with himself, made his Retreat; So much I drunk have, so much eat, And so well bath'd my self, that I, In Right, may now contented die. MORAL. So prudent Men, in Ils they cannot flie, Reflect on their former Felicitie, To counter pois the weakness of the Sens, Ore-whelm's the Minde with headie Violence.
138. The Swallow und the Prodigal. A Youthful Gallant sensually had spent His Patrimonie to his vestement: Seeing a Swallow e're the Season came, Judg'd Summer nigh, and forthwith sold the same. But Winter from this Relaps soon arose, And pinch't the Gallant stripped of his Clothes; Who with the Cold seeing the Swallow dead; Cri'd, faithless Bird! Us both hast ruined. MORAL. Who on irrational Subjects do reflect The Progress of their Actions to direct. To their Destruction, in the issue, see How far they Err, trust such uncertaintie. From this Conclusion, here, collect wee may; Things out of Season don do soon decaie. 139. The Woodman and Mercurie. A Woodard selling Trees, a stream ran nigh, Was consecrated unto Mercurie; Wherein, by chance, his approv'd Hatchet fell, Which to his work was no small Obstacle. Down on the Bank hee much perplexed sate, Where his fresh Plaints his Griefs exagerate. To him, in Pitie, Mercurie appear's, Seeking the Caus of his excessive Tears:
Which to him shown, said Mercurie, Behold! Is this thy Ax? shewing an Ax of Gold: Which when the poor Man had for his deni'd, With One of Silver Mercurie him tri'd; This yet disclaming, Mercurie infer'd The Ax of wood, which hee for his aver'd. Mercurie heeron gave to him all three; So to reward this his Integritie. Who to his fellows coming, did relate The Circumstance of his auspitious Fate: Of whom, One this Adventure would pursue; Com to the Stream, therein his Ax hee threw: Then down sat weeping on the bank, til hee Discovered had officious Mercurie. To whom, when hee had his disaster told, Mercurie to him shew'd an Ax of Gold: Asking, if that were his? Hee void of shame, Stoutly affirmed, 'twas the verie same. Whose Impudence to Mercurie thus known; Hee nor gave that, nor yet restor'd his Own. MORAL. So honest Mindes by their Afflictions tri'd, From Heav'n, have their Possessions amplifi'd: While fraudulent men, ensnar'd by their Deceit, Their proper Substance justly ruinate.
140. The Woman and her Hen. A Woman kept a Hen of old, That each daie laid an Egg of Gold. Shee thinking her all Gold within, Her Head did from her carcase wring: Then to dissect her went about, Pulling her hopeful Entrails out: Where finding her like Others made, Desiring more, lost what shee had. MORAL. So greedie Mindes would bounteous Nature force, Till from her Functions virtue they divorce. Contemning thus the Good they did enjoie, To pursue More, the Means of both destroie. 141. The Frog and Fox. A Frog sat croking in a Fen To Other Beast incountring him; That hee a skilful Surgeon was: To whom repli'd a Fox, did pass; If thou wilt this to us assure: Thou thy own limping first must cure.
MORAL. Who Others Errors to reform pretend Must their Own Imperfections first amend, Present Example is a pow'rful Guide, Place't in their Persons would our Works preside. 142. The Husbandman and Adder. AN Adder near a Countrie-man His lurking Hole had; to which ran His wanton Son, and with a Blow Incence't the heedless Adder so; On him shee with such Furie flew, That shee forthwith the Infant slew. At which the Father much perplex't, This to Revenge himself addrest; Taking an Ax her to assail, Wherewith cut off the Adders Tail. The Man at length Agreement sought; Meal, Water, Salt, and Honie brought To reconcile this Injurie; And make a League of Amitie: Then Hee the Adder cal'd upon; Who lying underneath a Stone: Thus, hissing, said, Thou work'st in vain, Friendship betwixt us now to frame: Reason with Sens will not prevail, While thou thy Son want'st, I my Tail.
MORAL. Debates Subject not remov'd from the Sens Again take's fire on slight Accidents: Nor is firm Reconciliation made Where Restitution is not to bee had. 143. The Hen and Fox. A Fox had to a Hen-roost prest, Found there a Hen sick on her Nest: On whom with fierce Aspect hee star'd; Asking her, How in Health shee far'd? Who repli'd, shee should better bee, If hee would leav her Companie. MORAL. Ʋnusual Favours from professed Foes, Suspected Trains are to our Overthrows: Wee on our Safeties most should jealous bee, When to our Aid wee them Officious see. 144. The Lion and Man. A Man and Lion to travel set forth, As in discours each amplified his worth; They to a Pillar came of Stone, whereon Was cut a Lion by a Man o'rethrown.
The Man this Figure to the Lion show's, His Subject by Example to oppose: Saying, how far Men Lions do exceed In Strength and Courage, here you plainly read; The Beast repli'd, as Men, had Lions Art, Far more such Marks you'd finde of our Desert. MORAL. Vain Boasters, so, on feigned Trophies rais Ʋnequal Proofs to their affected Prais: While the Deserver doth in Silence pass Worthily those Acts hee atchieved has. 145. The Fox and Grapes. A Fox on Grapes had cast his Eie Were in their full Maturitie: Which hee desirous to attein, Attempted often had in vain: At length his will thus pacifie's, Defisting from the Enterprize. Tush! let them pass; I fondly fret: They are, as yet, but sowr meat. MORAL. When Prudent Men their Ends cannot attein, Thus, the blinde Passion of the Will restrein: And to the Motions of the Sens implie, I'th Subject sought som Incommoditie.
146. The Childe and Scorpion. AN Infant seeking Lobsters on the sand, Laid on a Scorpion, by mistake, his hand: Who on his tender years casting an Eie; Thus piti'd much the Childe's Simplicitie. Sweet Boie! in Peace, withdraw thine hand from mee, Least Ignorance procure thy Miserie. MORAL. So headie Mindes, their Purpose to pursue, Fall oft on that, which they should first eschew. And so the Harmfull somtime do relent, Charm'd with the Image of the Innocent. 147. The Fowler and Partridg. A Fowler had a Partridg tain, Who on the Period to bee slain; Cri'd, trembling, Fowler! let mee flie; I will thy favor gratifie: For by my Call I will intreat Manie more Partridg to thy Net: To which the Fowler made Replie; For this thou more deserv'st to die: That would'st betraie, for private Ends, To secret Snares thy native Friends: Nor canst thou true bee to thy Foe; That to thy Friends wilt not bee so.
MORAL. Who from Oppression would their Persons free By the suggestion of base Treacherie; Just Caus administer, where there was None, By their Oppressors to bee overthrown. For som Advantage Treason lov'd was ever; But as suspected, was the Traitor never. 148. The Hare and Snail. A Hare, by chance, a Snail espi'd, Whose creeping shee did much deri'd. The Snail for wager would becom Engag'd with Her a Race to run. The Hare this proffer took in Scorn, Yet could for shame but it perform, The Fox (of all the Beast most wise) Elected was for Compremise, Who limit should the Cours, and bee Discider of the Victorie. Sloth and Neglect laid by, the Snail Set forth, with Success to prevail: Nor Intermission suffered, Till hee his Cours had finished. The Hare, relying on her speed, Laie loitring without farther heed, Till sleep from limbs did sens divorce, Starting from which ran forth her Cours,
Where the Snail finding ere shee came, Was force't to yield it lost, with shame. MORAL. The perfect'st Gifts that Nature can Imploie Sloth and Neglect insensibly destroie. While with success, persev'ring Industrie To Subject's none had yield's Capacitie. 149. The Willow and Ax. THe Ax to cut the Willow laid; First of the same som Wedges made; The solid Stock might thereby bee Cloven with more facilitie. Which when the Willow had perceiv'd, Trembling, thus, inwardly shee griev'd; I not so much bewail my Fate, To feel the Ax mee ruinate: As I these Wedges am to see My Bodie tear, were part of Mee. MORAL. Foes by their Art divide us from our Friends: And make these Agents to advance their Ends: But wrongs from them most sensible must bee, Where Love and Nature fram'd an Ʋnitie.
150. The Pomegranate and Apple-tree. TWixt Apple-tree and Pomegranate, Touching their Beautie, rose Debate: Manie and bitter Outrages Past to foment their Vanities. At length to reconcile these Foes, From the next Hedg a Bramble rose; Who, with reproof, bad them no more, Shame to avoid, make such uprore. MORAL. Shame of Dissention doth salv up the Breach, When the Contentious do Agreement preach: It ill becom's the Mod'rate not give waie, When the Licentious stickle to the Fraie. 151. The Mole and her Dam. THe Mole, a Beast by Nature blinde, His Dam told, he felt, from the Winde; An unknown Odor pass to him. Not long after, affirm'd agin; That hee the Forgers hammers heard Beat on the Anvile: next aver'd; Hee did a mightie Furnace see: At which the Dam replied; shee Should judg by this; hee, as his Eies, Had lost his other Faculties.
MORAL. Vain Boasters so to light betraie their Lies, Extending them t'Impossibilities: Who, to have don More then they Can, recite, Afford just Proofs they have not what they Might. 152. The Wasp, Partridg and Husbandman. THe Wasp and Partridg, which extreme thirst prest, Themselvs together for Relief addrest Unto a Husbandman, who water drew, And with large Proffers, thus for water sew; The Partridg said; shee would his Vineyard dig, Replenish't Clusters might enrich each Twig. The Wasp said, hee the Vineyard oft would round, To keep off Theevs from ent'ring on his Ground. The Husbandman repli'd, hee had two Beevs, That nothing promist, yet perform'd both These. To whom far fitter 'twas his water give, Then by his Travel hee should them reliev. MORAL. More fit it is, our Gratitude to show, T'acquit our selvs of Benefits wee ow, Then to fair Promisses present our Gifts, Which, in their Trial, leav us to our shifts.
153. Jove. AS Jove his Nuptials celebrate's, Each Beast on him with Off'rings wait's, To gratulate the Cerimonie To ev'rie one's Capacitie. The Serpent for his Present chose, Sprinkled with Dew a fragrant Rose; Which in his mouth hee brought to Jove, Who strait affirm'd, hee did approve Of ev'rie Beast the Offering, Save what the Serpent brought to him. MORAL. Not onely Man, but God himself detest's Sweet flowing Words spring from malitious Brests. Man may secure himself from any wrong, But from the Poison of a Glozing Tongue. 154. The Indulgent Ape. AN Ape at once two Whelps had laid, Onely for One affection had: Which shee brought up in much Delight; The Other shee abandon'd quite; It hap'ned that in Pleasure bred, The sleeping Dam had stifeled. The Other had neglected been, Heeron became the Dams darling:
Which shee nurst to Maturitie With equal Love and Industrie. MORAL. The ill success, wee may collect from hence, Of Parents over-partial Indulgence Ʋnto their Issue, whom with cock'ring, they, Seeking to cherish, to ruine do betraie. While the neglected oft restored are; So Fortune's power exceed's humane Care. 155. The Captive Flea. A Flea a Man had sharply bit, By him was captive took for it. The Man ask't, who it was that fed On his Limbs with pain nourished. The Flea said, shee was of that kind, Whom Nature so to live design'd: Nor did shee him intend to kill, For shee could do but little ill. The Man heerto repli'd again; For this you rather shall bee slain; In that Hurt much, or little, you, In any wise, ought not to do. MORAL. Guilt by the Damage measur'd should not bee, But by the Agents true Capacitie:
Who to his Pow'r in Evil hath excel'd, Of all the Evils guiltie may bee held; So, in small wrongs who priviledg'd would bee, Should perish, as to Right an Enemie. 156. The escaped Flea. A Flea, by Nature prompted to't, A Man stung smartly by the Foot; Which him incensed so, shee tane; Hee would between his nails have slain: The Flea beeing active in the strife, Escap't his Hands, and sav'd her Life. The Man cried out, O Hercules, Exterminer of villanies! Why present wer't thou not with mee To suppress this my Enemie? MORAL. So shallow Men, prest with Impatience, call To Heav'n for Aid, on Subjects trivial: Whereas the Object of our Prai'rs should bee From all relation to the Senses free. 157. The Ants and Grashopper. THe Winter Solstice beeing past; The Ants their Wheat a Sunning cast; The Grashopper this discovered, Who was with want nigh famished;
With humble sute did them aboard, They would thereof him Alms afford. The Ants ask't, what in Summer hee Had don? or why past slothfully? The Grashopper replied; hee then Sung cheerfully to passing Men, To take from Them the dull delaie, And tedious travel of the waie. Which heard, the smiling Ants repli'd; Their Suters follie to deride. Since thou in Songs hast Summer spent, For Passenger's Divertisement: In dancing now thy Limbs unfold, Least thou bee starved with the cold. MORAL. Who hath their Youth in idle pastimes spent In Age may vainly beg their Nourishment: While the Industrious on his Plentie Feasts, And make's their Wants the subject of his Jests. 158. The Man and his two Wives. A Sensual Man his life in Pleasure led; When wasting time half grisled had his Head, Two Wives of diff'rent Ages, to him took: But neither Partner could a Rival brook. The Elder of them well advanc't in years, Scratching his head, pul'd off his youthful hairs;
By such resemblance to procure his Love Solely to her, the like effect would prove The Younger also; scratching everie daie For the like purpose, pul'd out all the Graie: Till hee, at length, betwixt them bald became, And with much Laughter was expos'd to shame. MORAL. This figure's to us, how ill disagree Declining Years with Sensualitie. To diff'ring Tempers who resign's his Will, Shall neither Theirs, nor yet his Own fulfill; This Inconvenience must inherent bee To all their Actions prove Polygamie. 159. The poor sick Man. A Poor Man sick had long time kept his bed, When the Physitions him abandoned, Unto the Gods addrest himself; to whom Hee for his Safetie vow'd a Hecatomb, His Wife this hearing, ask't where hee would get, When well, the hundred Oxen should compleat This Sacrifice; who said, shall I well bee, Think'st thou, the Gods might this require of mee. MORAL. When humane Aid fail's Man's Extremitie, To Heav'n for Succour Ʋnbelievers flie.
Who to their Powers limit not their Vow, 'Caus, whom they make them to, they not avow. How can they then exspect to bee supplied By them, whom they intend but to deride. 160. The Frogs. TWo Frogs, who in a Fen were bred By Summers drought when exhausted, Forsook the same, and rov'd about, To finde a waterie Region out. At length a Well profound they met, Wherin o'rejoi'd, One would have leapt: Till, thus, his Fellow checked him; If wee should, Friend, descend heer in; And this also bee dri'd with Heat, From hence how shall wee then retreat? MORAL. First with the Issue wise-men do advize, E're undertaken is the Enterprize: And by their Reason Accidents fore-run, To finde th'evasion e're the Evil com. 161. The Dog and Cock. A Dog and Cock in friendship join'd, 'Twixt whom a journie was design'd: Set forth; the Evening com; a Tree The Cock resolv'd his Roost should bee:
The Foot whereof a hollow had, Wherein the Dog his kennel made. The Cock, as hee was wont to do, Soon after Mid-night often crew. Which new Alarum thither brought A roving Fox, for Preie that sought: Who standing underneath the Tree, Requir'd the Cock most earnestly Descend from his exalted Place, Hee much desired to imbrace So rare a Singer as hee was: In vain that passion should not pass: The Cock replied; advizing him, The Porter wake to let him in: Who underneath the Root was laid, To which, the Fox no small haste made: But when, so rous'd, the Dog forth came, The Fox was by the Porter slain. MORAL. With the deceitfull who in Treaties join, Finde Craft to Craft the surest Countermine. So by their Craft who Others circumvent, Somtime by Craft do meet their Punishment. 162. The Lion and Bear. A Lion and a Bear together caught A tender Fawn; for which they fiercely fought;
Each one so Other sharply had assail'd, That in the Combat both their vigors fail'd, E're the Strife was decided, breathless they, And tired, in a Truce, fell by their Preie. Whom when the prying Fox had prostrate seen, With the affected Prize that laie between: This hee snatch't from them with a nimble slight; And from the Peril sav'd himself by flight, Which they, for Pursuit both unapt, lament, That for the Fox they had their labors spent. MORAL. So Potent Men will in the Pursuit bear A Partner, when they will not in the share: While in Contention for th'affected Prize They quite exhausted have their Faculties, Som busie Knave their Actions did surveie, Of their Industrie bear's the Fruit awaie. 163. The Bat, the Bramble and Cormorant. THe Corm'rant, Bramble, Bat together made A League, agreed to drive a Forreign Trade. The Bat much monie on Exchange had sought. The Bramble Garments for his venter-brought. The Cormorant, for his Commoditie, Imbarked Brass: so forth they put to Sea. As in their hopeful voiage, rose a storm, Wherewith the Bark was under-water borne:
They with much hazzard, only gain'd the Cost, Where still the Corm'rant dive's for what hee lost: The Bat his Creditors t'avoid, by Night Dare's for Provision onely take his flight: The Bramble ev'rie Passenger goe's by Take's by the Coat to finde his Propertie. MORAL. So greedie Tempers tempted with the Itch, In their frail Mindes, to becom sudden Rich; Attempt unpractiz'd Hazzards; till they bee Involv'd i'th snares of pressing Miserie; Som walk in Darkness; Others shift their Clyme: Som Others Goods by violence purloin. 164. The Fox and a singular Beast. A Singular Beast, that in a tree was set, Though unprovok't, began his teeth to whet: The Fox this seeing ask't the Caus, why hee Sharp'ned his teeth without Necessitie? Who made Replie ingenuously heerto; When Danger com's, this bee not then to do. MORAL. This Notion is for Princes singular; In time of Peace thus to provide for War: In vain it is our Weapons then to frame, When to the Fight Alarums crie, Arm, Arm.
165. The Lark. A Lark was taken in a snare, Thus groned forth her last dispair; Nor Gold, nor Silver have I tane, To make Another's Loss my Gain, For one poor grain of Wheat 'tis I Must, to my Grief, untimely die. MORAL. To loftie Mindes 'tis double Grief to fall In those Attempts whose Ends were trivial: Where the Sens onely meet's not present Pain; But Reason wound's the Soul with future Shame. 166. The covetous Man. A Covetous Man his Land and Goods had sold, And All converted to a Mass of Gold, Which hee to hide, in secret dig'd a hole, Wherein intomb'd his Treasure and his Soul: This Idol Hee to worship oft repair'd, Till frequent visits had the caus declar'd Unto a prying Workman, who e're Daie Enter'd the Shrine, and bore the Saint awaie: Soon after th'Devotare thither bound With wonted Zeal, the Temple emptie found: Whereat hee much lamented, tore his Hair; And in strange Passions figur'd his Despair.
Which deploration when a Neighbour had Observed; thus adviz'd him not bee sad; For having Treasure, thou, alas, hadst none, Therefore again fill up the Hole with stone: Then think it Gold, and such 'twill bee to thee; Since to thy Use both serv indifferently. MORAL. Possessions can but small Content produce, Where the Will is restreined from the Ʋse: If Fancie can but overswaie the Sens, 'Twixt This or That is little Difference. 167. The Tortois and Eagle. THe Tortois of the Eagle sought, Shee might by Him to flie bee taught. The Eagle bad her change her minde; This was repugnant to her kinde: The Tortois, in her sute, heerat Became far more importunate. The yielding Eagle heer to prest, Her in his Talent did invest; With whom to'th upper Region flew, From whence, to practice, hee her threw; Who falling on a heap of Stones, Shatter'd to pieces Shell and Bones.
MORAL. Earth creeping Mindes to Speculations press, Ʋnapt thereto, seldom meet fair Success: Beyond their Pow'r things strugling to comprize, Extinguish oft their nat'ral Faculties. 168. The Stag. A Stag, an Eie by chance had lost, Was feeding near to the Sea-coast, The perfect Eie to Earth imploi'd, Hee might the Hunter's Wiles avoid: The Other turned to the Sea, For which hee had no Jealousie. A Man sail'd by observ'd his Craft, And to Death struck him with a Shaft. Who thus in Tears his Fate bewail'd, Where I most fear'd, no Ill assail'd: But where I thought none could invade, From thence to Ruine am betrai'd. MORAL. On our Defects wee should most cautious bee, For which Advantage wait's our Enemie. Those Forts or Places double guarded are; Or Art, or Nature leav Irregular: What Both most strengthen, let no One neglect, That part is weakest, which wee least suspect.
169. The Stag and Lion. A Stag before the Hunters fled, A Cave, for safetie, entered: Where hee was by a Lion tane, Who on the Period to bee slain: Lamented thus, from Man I flie, To fall by a Beast's Crueltie. MORAL. The Lights of Nature sudden fears obscure, And to avoid Ill, greater Ils procure: A humane Foe to act restrein's his Will; But savage Furie more then once would kill. 170. The Stag and the Vine. THe Hunters pursute to decline A Stag him shelter'd with a Vine; Who when they all were by him run, The leafs thereof to knap begun, Till having round nigh pul'd them clear: The Hunters back returned were: Supposing him (as then hee did) To bee in som thick Covert hid: Where so exposed to their view, With unexspected shafts him slew: Who dying said; Just is my End; To ruine that did mee defend.
MORAL. So barbrous Mindes (their Extremes past) oppress Who gave them Refuge in their sad Distress: But when again like Evil on them com, Finde, by such loss, themselvs they have undon. 171. The Ass, the Lion, and Cock. A Cock was feeding by an Ass, Neer whom a Lion chance't to pass. The Cock in his shrill Clamour crew, Whence, terror struck, the Lion flew. The Ass confirm'd 'twas from his fight The timid Lion took his flight; Pursued him til past the Nois Of the fierce Cocks redoubted voice; The Lion then return'd on him, And from his carcass pul'd his skin: Who dying cried, wretch that I am, I not of fighting Parents came: What Ground should move mee then, I durst My self into such conflict thrust. MORAL. So shallow Men in Self-opinion strong, Take to themselvs more then to them belong; Which in their Mindes Presumtions form so high, They tempt those Hazzards they should rather flie:
Till in the Issue their own Ruine show, What their frail Natures first them framed to. 172. The Gardner and his Dog. A Gardner's-Dog by mischance fell Into the bottom of a Well; The Gardner, him to draw from thence, Descended in great diligence; Where (as to rate him hee begun, No more into such danger run) Th'incensed Cur turned on him; And sharply bit him by the shin. Who cried, I justly suffer, have Endeavoured my Murth'rer save. MORAL. Who churlish Tempers, with Reproof, reliev, To reward Bountie, Damage oft receiv: They seldom Gratefull prove unto their Friends, Who dislike Advice, but to their Good tend's. 173. The Sow and Dog. A Sow and Dog at variance were; Th'incensed Sow by Venus sware: Shee with her teeth would him divide; The subtile Cur heerto repli'd: Thou vow'st to Venus for our Aid; As if shee thee in Favor had.
Who doth thy foul flesh so defpise, Shee will thereof no Sacrifice: The Sow repli'd, shee doth mee love, Your Argument doth rather prove. Since neither mee to hurt or kill Can bee agreeing to her Will. But thou art neither quick nor dead To anie one well savoured. MORAL. Weak are Conclusions drawn from humane Sens, Since double Senses meet our Arguments. But they the happiest Orator must bee, With his own Proofs convince their Enemie. 174. The Sow and Bitch. THe Sow and Bitch could not agree Concerning their Fertilitie: The Bitch said, herself to prefer, That no Beast heerin came nigh her: The Sow repli'd, but yet wee finde, You still produce your Puppies blinde. MORAL. Nor Speed, nor Number give to works the Prize; But the Perfection of the Enterprize. Abortive Labors seldom do produce But Fruits imperfect and unfit for Ʋse.
175. The Serpent and Crab. A Crab and Serpent did agree To enter in Societie. The Crab, whose Manners were sincere, The Serpent wil'd his Craft forbear; Who little weigh'd admonishing; But still persevered therein: Till the Crab sleeping took her Mate; And to Death prest him with her weight; To whom (extended forth) when dead, The Crab this Notion uttered, Thus simple to haue been you ought, You had not suffer'd what you taught. MORAL. In Commerce who themselvs to Craft applie, Against themselvs fraud teach and justifie: For such Disguise aim's but at private Ends, Which would supplant the Int'rest of their Friends: Nor can in Friendship long Agreement bee, Where Nat'ral Habits hold Antipathie. 176. The Shepherd and Wolf. A Wolf's Cub, lately whelpt, a Shepherd caught, Wch with his Dogs to foster home hee brought: Who, as to riper Age and Strength hee grew, With his Companions would the Wolvs pursue.
When from the Flock they had surpriz'd their rape, Who from the Dogs although they made escape, The foster'd Cub continued still his waie, Hee with the Wolvs might partake of their Preie: Then Home return'd; but if they none had tane, Then by himself One privately was slain, Which with the Dogs, hee eat; thus often hee Feasted himself with Friend and Enemie. Until the Shepherd found how it was don, And on a Tree the subtile Fellon hung. MORAL. The seeds of Nature, in their Blosoms ta'ne, Soft Education may a while restrein: But when their vigor is assum'd, wee finde, They still retein the Habits of their kinde. Of All the Ils this should avoided bee, To harbour a Domestick Enemie. 177. The Lion and Wolf. AN aged Lion Bedrid long had lain, To visit whom (except the Fox) all came. On which Occasion the fell Wolf laid hold▪ T'accuse the Fox of Defaults manifold, How useless hee was unto him their King, And of his neglect now in visiting: The Fox arriving in the Int'rim heard The latter words the Wolf had uttered:
Which 'gainst him did the Lion much incens, Till the Fox made his Excuse in Defence; Which thus was follow'd; none about him stood, Had so much labor'd for his Soveraigns good, As hee, who had each Climate traced round, To learn his Cure, which hee in seeking found: The Lion, thus appeas'd, commanded strait, Hee should the Med'cine to him intimate. To whom the Fox with low Obedience, said, Command great King! a living Wolf bee flai'd, And forthwith, thereof, make the yet warm skin Unto thy Grief a helpfull covering. Then, smiling, thus, the prostrate Wolf reprov'd, Thou should'st our King to Love, not Hate have mov'd. MORAL. With Slanders who foment a Prince's Ire, By their Foes craft, prove fuel to the Fire. For others Harms first having dig'd a Pit Are justly thus the first that fall in it. 178. The Woman and her drunken Husband. A Woman had a drunken Husband wed, For Cure thereto, this Device practised. When Natures lights, in drink, she perceiv'd drown'd And Hee, as dead, laie sensless on the Ground; Shee on her shoulders took him, to inter In an obscurely vaulted Sepulchre.
Where laid, shee left him, till the time drew nigh, Nature might work her own recoverie. Then to the vault returned, often where At Door shee knock't, til hee ask't, who was there? The Wife repli'd; 'tis I that com to bring Food to the Dead, their usual offering: To which Hee answer'd; Bring Mee not to eat; But bring mee drink, I humbly thee intreat: When thou of Meat rememb'rest mee, I'am sad; But give mee drink, and thou wilt make mee glad: Whereat the Wife thus mourning, strook her Brest, By slight or reason thou naught profitest: So far from mending, wors thou wilt return, This thy Diseas an Habit is becom. MORAL. Of all the vices humane Frailties have, This, as the last, associate's to the Grave: Age and Diseas disable us for som; But unto This both Ministers becom. 179. The Swan. A Rich man bred together Swans and Gees, For Pleasure Those, and for the table These. Whenas the Gees to suffer were the End, To which the Owner did them first intend; The Night was so obscure there could not bee Distinction had in this Societie:
Which caussed a Mistake: for on the Swan The fatal Lot beyond Intention ran. The mournful Bird heeron her self applie's In Songs to celebrate her Obsequies: By which her Nature was discover'd soon, And with her sweet Notes so her freedom won. MORAL. Approaching Death those shadows do dispers Man is disguiz'd with in civil Commerce: Defects or Virtues then disclos'd are All, Man's perfect'st Trial is his utmost Fall. The force of Musick, this may yet implie, Asswaging thus the Rage of Crueltie. 180. The Blackmore. A Wealthie man a Niger bought; Whose Color hee assumed thought By his Neglect who first him bred, Thereon him to his dwelling led: Where hee by sundrie washings tried How the Skin might bee purifi'd: But found unchanged still the hew, While from the Pain a sicknes grew. MORAL. Art and Industrie thus are both left void, When on Subjects incapable imploid.
Who strive the force of Nature to o'recom, Sooner then change, work Dissolution. 181. The Crow and Swallow. THe Crow and Swallow did contend, Which of them did in Form transscend. The Crow objected against him; His Color flourish't but in Spring: Whereas her tincture was so pure, It ev'rie Season would endure. MORAL. Those Parts of Beautie best affect the Sens On which Time's changes have no Influence: The Superficial varnish may the skin, But that win's Prize that take's his Source within. 182. The Bittour. A Bittour in a Window hung, The Bat ask't, why by night hee sung, And cheerfull Daie past silently? To whom the Bittour made Replie; I, heertofore singing by daie, Became the Fowlers heedless Preie: From whence I cautious am to vent Such Seasons my Divertizement. The Bat said, now 'twill little stead; Before the Ill thou shouldst take heed.
MORAL. So shallow Judgments out of Season shun Those fatal Tracts by which they were undon: And after practise, what they should before; When the Steeds stoln they shut the Stable Dore. 183. The Cockles. A Rustick Boie som Cockles had, Which hee to rost i'th fire laid: VVherein the Cockles hissing, hee Cri'd out, worst of Mortalitie; Do you so pleasantly now sing, Your Houses when on fiering? MORAL. Man's exterior Demeanour, Decencie Wil's with his present Fortune to agree: Philosophie with Reason doth commence; Nor is that Reason which belie's the Sens. Extremes are but distempers, which arise From strugling Natures too weak Faculties. But when th'Effect's contrarie to the Caus, Reason revolteth from her proper Laws.
184. The Sorceress. A Sorceress, who undertook t'appeas The divine wrath in humane miser'es: Manie strange things t'effect perserver'd had, Whereby shee long had no small profit made. At length, accus'd, detected and condemn'd, Shee was led forth to make a shameful end: To see whose execution manie flock't, VVhere One amongst them thus her follie mock't: You the Decrees that could decline of Heav'n; VVhy could you not the Councels change of men? MORAL. Vain Boasters so when in Distress they fal, With their Defects derided are of All: While vulgar Scorn, evil on evil set's, When their own Damage prov's them counterfeits. 185. The Husbandman. A Husbandman digging the Ground, A secret heap of Treasure found: For which hee thankfull crown'd the Earth, To him enlarg'd this fruitfull Birth. Fortune, arriving, ask't why hee Asscribed her Benignitie Unto the Earth? Since if the time His late found treasure should resign
Unto Another's Hand; hee then Would for the Loss strait Her condemn. MORAL. So worldly Men to the exterior Means Attribute still the caus of all their Gains: But of their Loss the Autor judg to bee Som secret Pow'r in the Divinitie. 186. The Travellers. TWo Men together travelled, One whereof an Ax finding, sed Unto the Other, I have found, For a share to frame som Ground: The Other thereto made Replie; Saie, Wee have found, and saie not, I. Soon after, who it lost them view'd; And in great Haste them both pursu'd. Who found it, seeing this, cried, Wee Shall perish now infallibly. Whereto the Other answered, Not wee, saie I, as you first sed. MORAL. In civil Commerce faithless Men do use With doubtfull Words thus to plaie fast and loos: They in the Profit sharers may disclame; But in the Damage might them entertain.
187. Two Frogs. TWo Frogs there were nigh Neighbours bred, Whereof One in a deep Pool fed. In shallow slows the Other laie, Adjoining were to the High-waie. The Frog, who in the Pool was fed, His Fellow oft admonished To com to him into the Flood, More safe to get his livelihood: The slow Frog not assenting, said; Custom had that his firm seat made: Till a Cart passing on him rush't, And suddenly to pieces crush't. MORAL. Custom the use of Reason take's awaie, Where Practice onely can the Will o're swaie. Error most Men hold well Authorized, When time hath Error once established: But like Success will in the Issue prove, What need may bee long habits to remove: So manie Changes in a State wee see, Good Laws prove bad, if they not chang'd may bee. 188. The Bees. A Pilf'ring Knave, the Owner beeing from home, Went to a Bee-hive, whence he took the Comb.
Th'Owner return'd, finding the Stock bereft, Sta'd there, amuz'd, to gather what was left: The Bees returning met the Fellon fled, And with their Stings him sharply punished: Who cri'd, i'th'theft yee mee dismist unhurt, On your work busied; will you mee subvert? MORAL. So vitious Men do conceal from their Friends The secret Scope of their sinister Ends: But rashly their Disorders do expose Ʋnto the view of circumventing Foes. 189. The Halcedon. THe Halcedon, a Bird, which usually, In solitude, frequent's the vastest Sea: Shee, lest by men her young should be supprest, On a Sea-coasting Rock, erect's her Nest; Whence issuing, abroad to seek for food, Wherewith might bee reliev'd her helpless brood: The swelling Sea chafe't with a ruffling winde, Within her limits could not bee confin'd: In whose wilde tumor the Nest overspred, The strugling Nestlings, at length perished: The Dam, return'd; soon the disaster found, Thus, her sad Plaints did mournfully resound; Earth, as suspected, rashly I desert, To seek thy Refuge, far more faithless art.
MORAL. Without more slights, A watchfull Jealousie, Secure's Man from a constant Enemie: But his Assurance in unconstant Friends Betraie's him soonest to their private Ends. 190. The subtile Fisher. A Fisher had a clear stream met, Extended o're the same his Net, Which with the stream left floating, Hee To either line ti'd cunningly A weightie stone, wherewith hee stood Alternately beating the Flood, That so the frighted Fish might get, More heedlesly into his Net: Which by the bord'ring Dwellers seen, 'Gainst him exclame'd troubled the stream, Whereby 'they could not from the Brink, Attein clear water for their drink, Who made Replie; content you Friends; My Success on my Art depend's: Should I the stream forbear to beat, I certainly shall nothing eat. MORAL. Desp'rate Fortune's Dissentions move in State, Securely so wealth to accumulate,
By their shelter'd disorders; when as they In Peace naught act, free Laws do not betraie. 191. The Ape and Dolphin. IT much in use was among Seaf'ring-men, Monkies and Apes to have Abord with them To bee their sport; it hapned one of these, With Men, made Shipwrack in the Attick Seas. Nature or Imitation taught the Ape To swim, as did the Men, for their escape. A passing Dolphin seeing the Ape swim Among the Men, for such believed him, Whom hee took up, and to the Landward swum, Til to th'Athenian Naval harbour com, Was cal'd Pyraeus. The kinde Dolphin there Ask't of the Ape, if hee Athenian were? The Ape for such affirm'd himself to bee, And in that Place of noble Familie. The Dolphin ask't, if hee Pyraeus knew? Whereon the Ape yet more assured grew; Believing it to bee a humane Name, Affirmed thereto, that the verie same His Ancient friend was; the Dolphin this Lie Incensed so, Hee left him there to die. MORAL. When Ign'rant Men in their discours would seem To know more then they do, to win esteem.
The shallow currant of their babling Sens Is soon betrai'd by their Impertinence: Whereby they are expos'd to more contemt; And often times meet farther Detriment. 192. The Flie. OF Honie in a Store-hous shed, The eager Flies with freedom fed, Till thereto cleaved were their Feet, That full, from thence they could not get. Where drowning, cri'd, O wretched brood! To perish for a little Food! MORAL. Their stupid Follie here wee figur'd see, Who hasten Death through sensualitie: The End of eating Life is to afford: Yet more die by the Mouth, then by the Sword. 193. Mercurie and the Statuist. MErcurie beeing desirous once to know In what esteem men held him here below, A Statuist's yard enter'd in humane Guize, Where of Jove's Statue hee requir'd the Price: The Statuist said, a Drachme the least would bee: Passing from which, thereat smil'd Mercurie; And turn'd to Juno's; Asking, how much that; The Statuist said, that was of higher rate.
Then of his Own ask't, thinking still the Prize Would in the value, as the Order rise: The Statuist thereto this slight answer gave; If Those you buie; you That to boot shall have. MORAL. By Herme's, Jove's and Juno's Statues bee Figur'd to us, Wisdom, Wealth, Dignitie: That more then this depraved Mankinde prize; Th'Other with them wee scarce assimulize: Who these two have, shall in their high Repute, By vulgar Credit, that possess to boot. Exposition. Virtue no Object hath beyond her Sphere, Despising that which tickle's but the Ear: Whence emptie Souls, but mov'd with common Fame, Seeking their Glorie, needs must finde their Shame. 194. Mercurie and Tiresias. MErcurie curious beeing once to trie The truth of blinde Tiresias Prophesie. His Oxen from the pasture stole, then came To him disguised, and declar'd the same: Tyresias busied on the Augurie, Bad Hermes tell what Bird hee could discrie: Mercurie told him, An Eagle took flight From the Left hand, and flew unto the Right.
Tiresias said, that nothing did pertain Unto his Purpose; bad him look again. The second time Hermes inform'd him, hee A Crow beheld descending from a Tree, Now to the Earth, then mounting to the Skie, To that, then this, directing oft her Eie. The Prophet said, By Heav'n and Earth shee swore, Hee, if hee would, his Cattle could restore▪ MORAL. Men's secret'st vices shall not rest conceal'd; But by their Mouths their guilt shall bee reveal'd, Whilst creatures void of Reason thus shall bee Perfect Dilaters to their Treacherie. 195. The Dogs. A Countrie-man two Dogs together bred, One for the Chase, th'other to guard his Shed. When as the Hunter did his Preie Home bring, The Hous Cur thereof would pertake with him: Th'Hunter not brooking this, revil'd his Mate, For that hee idle, of his Labors eat. The Other said, My Master reprehend Who taught mee heeron onely to depend. MORAL. By Education Nature's Gifts are led To Ʋse, which els thus lie extinguished:
Whence, who preside Youth, yet neglect the same, Shall of their Errors justly bear the blame. 196. The Husband and Wife. A Quiet Man a Shrew had to his Wife, Who with his Servants alwaies was at strife. The Good-Man heeron (beeing resolv'd to trie How to her own Paternal Familie. Shee stood affected) with a fair Pretens, Sent her unto her Father's Residence. Soon after shee return'd, hee of her sought, What of her Parents Domesticks shee thought? Shee made Replie, the Hindes and Herdsmen bee Possessed with a Jealousie of mee: The Husband heeron said, O Wife! if these Are earlie forth, and late return displeas. What then, alas! of all those judg I may, Who were Conversant with thee all the Daie. MORAL. To froward Mindes nor Time, nor Place agree, 'Caus their Distemper Them accompanie: How then should Others have Peace in their life, When with Themselvs they alwaies are at Strife. 197, The Kid and Wolf. A Kid, who from the Flock was straid, To her pursuing Foe thus said,
O Wolf! Since I thy Preie must bee, Permit mee to die merrillie. Plaie on thy Pipe, that dance I maie: The Wolf assenting set to plaie: While the Kid to his Measures dance't, Which notes to hear the Dogs soon chance't, And suddenly pursued him, The frisking Kid so rescuing: At which the Wolf afflicted, said, I by my follie am betrai'd; Since I a Cook ought onely bee, No medler with the Ministralsie. MORAL. What Ʋse and Nature have Ʋs fram'd unto, That with Success the meanest Mindes maie do: But in our Practice when both these wee leav, Wee with disgrace must our own Damage weav. 198. The Crab and Fox. A Crab asscended with the tide, From Sea to Land, would there reside; On whom a Hungrie Fox, past by, Casting, by chance, his searching Eie, Unto her went without delaie, And of her made his welcom Preie: Who, on the Period of her Death, Expired sadly thus her Breath:
I justly die; since of the Sea, I coveted of Earth to bee. MORAL. Such Damage simple Men incur (wee see) Affecting Change, seek strange Communitie: Long Habits onely Them have Judgment lent; Whence they thrive not, but in that Element. 199. The Harp. A Harp, imperfect, long i'th Hous had lain 'Mong chalk & rubbish, crusted with the same▪ As it was wont to do, began to plaie: Whose untun'd Notes much hoarsness did betraie; But shee, heeron, Her self esteem'd to bee The onely Paragon of Harmonie: And in this Rapture, would her self prefer, To bee the wonder of the Theatre; To which set forth, her disagreeing Tones From thence was driven with a showr of stones. MORAL. Ʋnpractiz'd and imperfect Men swel'd high In Self-conceit of their Sufficiencie; 'Caus they the Theorie of the Schools have read; And undigested Notions uttered: When to the practick they in Publick com▪ To shew those seeds of Ostentation;
They so defective in the Action prove, Instead of wonder, they derision move. 200. Theevs and the Cock. THeeves in a Hous themselvs had wound, Where nothing but a Cock they found. Who on the Period slain to bee Desired them, they would him free: Saying, Hee useful was to Men, By night to labor waking them. The slie Theevs heerto made Replie, For this thou more deserv'st to die; In that them waking to their Thrift, Thou us to steal wilt not permit. MORAL. Who on his Audients would work his Intent, To their Affections fit's his Argument: Vertues win Favor; but 'tis understood, When as This Object onely meet's the Good. 201. The Crow and Raven. A Crow the Raven envying, that hee By Augurie should Prophesie: As on the waie shee men saw travelling, Leapt to a Tree where shee sat clamoring: The Men stai'd with the nois, astonisht were, So fierce a Clamour from one Bird to hear:
Until One of them had distinguished What Fowl it was, who to his Fellows sed; Let us pass on, it onely is a Crow, Which nothing can in Augurie foreshow. MORAL. As Shadows Bodies in the Light succeed: Virtue in Fame from Envie ne'r is freed: But when in Act, shee would her Equal bee, Disgrace still follow's this her Mimiqu'rie. 202. The Crow and Dog. A Crow proclamed with loud cries, Shee'd to Minerva sacrifice: Unto the Plentie of which Feast, Invite's the Dog to bee her Guest: The Dog demand's, why vainly shee To her held such Solemnitie; Since her the Goddess could not brook, But from her had her Augure took? Much rather I (the Crow replie's) Her to appeas should sacrifice. MORAL. So worldly Men in their Afflictions urge They should desist to honor who them Scourge: But pious Mindes a Motive thence collect, More earnest Zeal should reconcile th'effect.
203. The Raven and Serpent. A Hungrie Raven chance't to spie, Beaking i'th Sun, a Serpent lie: Which shee trust up with eager speed, Intending thereon largely feed. The nimble Serpent 'bout her wound; And bit her so, she fel to th'ground. Who dying, cri'd, unhappie I! To finde the Food whereby I die. MORAL. So greedie Mindes at all gains rashly flie, Whereof their Sens can make discoverie: But with more Potent when they grapple, they Becom destroied by their purpos'd Preie. 204. The Daw and Doves. A Daw had Pige'ns spi'd well fed, Himself with Lime white colored; Then to the Dove-coat slily went, Hee might receiv like Nourishment: The Doves thinking him one of them, While silent, to eat suffer'd him; But having once his craft forgot, When chattering by chance a Note: His Nature they did soon disclose, Chasing him thence with manie blows.
Who thus deprived of his Food, Return'd to feed among his Brood: Which him not knowing for his Hew, To drive him thence, upon him flew. Thus coveting of both the Gain, Of neither hee possest became. MORAL. Disguiz'd with Art, so double hearted Men Side with that Faction most advantage them: But where th'Intern with th'Extern not agree, Practice soon shew's Professions Fallacie: When disclos'd to bee led by private Ends, By Foes are cast off, forsook by their Friends. 205. The Daw. ONe, having taken a Jack-Daw, Tied a string above the Claw; Then him deliver'd to his Son, Hee might to plaie therewith bee won. The Daw not brooking servile bands, At length, escaping from his hands. With joifull speed, himself addrest Unto the Refuge of his Nest, Abording which, the trained Line About a Bough did chance to twine; Where Hee again ensnared, cri'd, I have my Evil multiplied;
While from Man's bondage thus I strive, My self I of my Life deprive. MORAL. Prest with Impatience present ils to shun, So giddie Heads do into greater run. The sillie Rout, unfit their Guides to bee, Break Civil ties to reach at Libertie: But such Disorders follow the Attemt, That common Ruine meet's with the Event. 206. Mercurie. JOve once commanded Mercurie A Potion mix might move to Lie: Then charged him it to prefer Unto ev'rie Artificer. When in a certain Measure don; Hee equally gave each one som. The Tailor onely mist his share, Which yet remained much to spare: Which hee, least anie lost should bee, Quaft up with great Alacritie: Whence Lying to all Trades befell, While Tailers therein all excell. MORAL. Gain the Supplanter of the Truth doth tie All Tradesmen's words to this Necessitie:
'Tis for their Living, with deceitfull Lies To set more value on their Merchandize: But they heerin will act a double share, Who in the Profit their own Carvers are. 207. Jove. JOve having framed all mankinde, With each habit indu'd the Minde: Modestie onely hee forgot; Whereof hee Leven having not: Commanded Her into the Troop, To which, by no means, shee would stoop: Till Jove it oft with Anger prest, Agreeing yet to her Request; Which was, if Lusts impurer fire In Mankinde came, Shee might retire: From whence to pass it after came, That all Whores still are void of shame. MORAL. All sorts of Vices in Appearance show A kinde of Sens to fail in what they do: But raging Lust inflamed by Defence, To cast Restraint off, put's on Impudence. 208. Jove. JOve celebrating his Nuptial Feasts, All Animals receiv'd for Guests.
The Snail alone arriving late, Jove would the Caus capitulate: Asking, why sooner shee came not? The Snail (her Courtship had forgot) Repli'd, her Hous, her Hous so dear: At which Jove angrie did appear; Condemning her dear Hous to bee Born on her back eternallie. MORAL. Neglect in pious Rites worldlie Men use With their Domestick Bus'ness to excuse: But whose dull Souls thereto so wedded are, Shall for their curs bee burd'ned with that Care. 209. The Wolf and Sheep. A Wolf by Dogs had bitten been, So long in blood laie weltering, Unable on his Feet to get, Hee nigh starv'd was for want of meat: Till hee at length a Sheep espied, To whom hee pitifully cri'd; Shee would from the o'reflowing Spring, To quench his thirst, som water bring: If this of her hee might intreat, Hee should himself provide him meat. The Sheep repli'd, if from the Flood I bring thee drink, I am thy food.
MORAL. Deceitfull men, at last Extremitie, Can not cast off their innate Treacherie: But prudent men their Purposes forerun; And by their Theam finde their Conclusion. 210. The Hares. THe fearfull Hares long, heretofore, With the fierce Eagles warfare bore. The Hares too weak, the Preie beeing made, The subtile Fox cal'd to their Aid. The Fox said, thereto I agree, But first I, of Necessitie, Must bee informed, who you are, Then next, with whom it is you war. MORAL. Weak States t'oppose more potent Foes, elect Craftie confederates, wise and circumspect; To counterbalance their unequal might By the Diversion of som pow'rfull slight: Who wisely thus their Faculties compare, E're on the Action they intentive are.
211. The Ant. VVHo now an Ant is, hath been heertofore, A Husbandman, not content with his store; But of his Neighbour's fruits had ev'rie daie, Unto his own, born a large part awaie: Till Jove his angrie judgment had let fall; And him transformed to this Animal: Who though in figure thus hee changed bee, Yet still retein's his former qualitie: Of others Labors daily taking still, Which hee hoard's up, ev'n to the Earth men Till MORAL. What form soever greedie Man indue's, Gain is the Object which his Toil pursue's: Of Means thereto, the nighest hee prefer's, Without distinction of the Ministers; Wherein the Passion is so blindelie led, Oft useless things are not distinguished. 212. The Bat and Weezel. A Bat, by chance, that fell to ground, Was by a roving Weezel found: Of whom, shee, on the point to die, Required freedom earnesilie: The Weezel said, Hee could not free To Fowl so great an Enemie:
The Bat repli'd, shee was a Mous No Bird: And by that slight got loos. Soon after to Earth fall'n again, Shee by another Weezel ta'ne: Of him her freedom sought likewise: The Weezel said, shee was to Mice An Enemie: The Bat aver'd Shee no Mous was; shee was a Bird. Whereon dismist, her twice chang'd Name Her Life's securitie became. MORAL. So variformed are frail Man's designs, Securest hee is, can change with the Times: Man to the world may lend th'Exterior part; Provided still hee keep intire the Heart. 213. The Travellers. TWo Men together trav'lling near the Sea, Entring a Cave, had made discoverie Of Boughes and Branches floting on the flood, Where, with Impatience, both expecting stood, With Belief it a great Ship was, at hand, Which, to their Gain, would make wrack on the sand. But as the Winde had driv'n it nigher them, They but a Fisher's Boat suppos'd it then: Till it approaching, they drew it a ground, And the true Nature of the Subject found.
Whereon t'each Other said, abash't with shame, That wee for nothing should exspect in vain. MORAL. Remotest Hopes the largest Objects frame, As they Approach, they still are in the Wain: The Caus is, they proportion'd to the Sens, Which Bounds meet's none, can no Equivalence. 214. The wilde Ass. A Wilde Ass had an Ass domestick view'd Beaking i'th Sun half cover'd in his food: To whom hee went, applauding much his Fate, That had design'd him to so happie State. But when soon after, hee him saw agin Loaden, his foll'wing keeper whipping him: Said, Thee no more I happie judg to bee, Since such lls mix with thy Felicitie. MORAL. So rustick Mindes ev'n envious are to see The splendid Lux of Rich men's vanitie; Ʋntil their second thoughts reflect again O'th Cares and Troubles that associate them; Then are their Judgments so from Error led, They even Pitie what they worshipped.
215. The Asses. ASses (of old) 'caus they o'reburdned were, For Eas, to Jove had sent a Messenger. To whom Jove fig'ring this could not bee don, Said, they from Labor then should free becom, When they by pissing had a River made. Which they believing in the Sens, as said, From thence forth ever after pissing stood, Where Piss they saw, striving to rais a Flood. MORAL. Weak men, by care toil'd, Heav'n appeal them free From this condition of Mortalitie: And by the Error of their Sens are led To think their state may so bee perfected, With som ridiculous Means, attemting still Their Translation by Miracle to fulfil. 216. The Ass and Fox. AN Ass hid in a Lion's skin Thorough the Forest wandering: All but the Fox had put to flight, With terror of this awfull sight, But him attemting to have fear'd: The craftie Fox his voice had heard, Said, trulie, I had been affrai'd, If that, by chance, thou hadst not brai'd.
MORAL. With glorious Spoils invested, mean Men may At Distance move their Betters to give way: But when the Tongue hath once betrai'd the Minde, Slight borrow'd shadows for deceit design'd. 217. The Ass and Frogs. AN Ass sore loaden was with wood, Passing a Fen, fell in the Flood: Whence hee not able to arise, Proclame'd his Grief in hideous cries: Which when th'astonisht Frogs had heard; They all about him gathered. What hee would do, demanding him, So long as they, were hee therein? MORAL. Accustom'd troubles, though they grievous bee, Weak Mindes oft brook with much indifferencie: Yet yield to Passion, ev'n in slight Events, When surpriz'd with unusual Accidents. 218. The Ass and Raven. AN Ass at Pasture, had his back Sore galled with a heavie Pack: A Raven to the raw flesh came, And with his Claws pinched the same.
The Ass began to kick and fling; While nigh his Keeper laugh'd at Him; Which when a passing Wolf had seen, Said, if his ils tickle your Spleen. Woe bee to us, wretches! when you Shall our disclosed Tracts pursue. MORAL. Who can deride their Mis'ries do him Good, Without more Proofs, it may bee understood; Relentless will with crueltie fulfill On them his vengeance, who have don him Ill. 219. The Ass and Fox. AN Ass and Fox, did League imbrace, Set forth together for the Chase: Where both a Lion did pursue, The Fox the Danger to eschew; Said, if the Lion would him spare, Hee'd lead the Ass into his snare. On which contract forbearance gain'd, The Ass was to the Ambush train'd, Where beeing fast. The Lion flew Upon the Fox, and first him slew. MORAL. The Fox and Ass, implie's to us two States, Craftie and simple, made Confederates:
When by more pow'rfull these assailed bee, The craftie thus betraie's by Treacherie His joint associate, himself to secure: Which when their potent Foes have once made sure, They seis on that, who farther'd bad their end, And ruine first, who ruin'd had his Friend. 220. The Hen and Swallow. A Hen had Serpents Eggs found out, To hatch them fondly went about. The Swallow seeing this, said, shee Possessed was with Lunacie. To nourish them, who as they grow, Will first attempt thy overthrow. MORAL. The rage of Malice charm'd is by no ties, When time hath fully form'd her Faculties: On him, who in his Bosom hath her bred, Shall this her rancor first bee vomited. 221. The Camels. VVHen Camels first discover'd were, Their mightie Bulk strook Men in fear, So much, that these astonisht fled, While those could bee distinguished. But when succeeding Time had shown Their gentleness to everie One: Men then so confident became, By them aborded were the same: And after this a little while, They finding in the Beast no Bile.
With more contemt went to them yet, On them imposing Rein and Bit. Then as too mean a care for Men, Gave them to Boies to govern them. MORAL. Ʋnusual Objects terrifie the Sens, Till Judgment bee through use inform'd from thence The Nature of the Subject, which once known T'have with the Fancie no proportion. Men by degrees from this so far dissent, What was their Terror becom's their Contemt. 222. The Serpent. THe Serpent by Men trodden on, Complain'd of this Oppression To Jove; who said, if who thee kickt, Thou wouldst before but him have bit, The second Progress could not bee By them offensive unto thee. MORAL. The first Evasion who can but repell, Shake's off his Foes, to them redoubtable: But they, with Suff'rance, i'th first shock sit still, Encourage the Pursuit to farther ill. 223. The Dove. A Dove opprest with thirst extreme, For water roving long had been, Espi'd a Picture as hee went, A Cup thereof did represent.
On which, shee it believing true, With more exalted rage shee flew; So that her Pinions thereon broke, Shee fal'n to Earth, was captive took. MORAL. Who, in Extremes, th'Emotions of the Sens Pursue with unrestrained violence; Those Faculties therein they did imploie, Misled by Error, in th'Event destroie. 224. The Pigeon and Crow. A Pigeon of the Dove-coat free, Grew proud in her fertilitie. Which heard, the Crow unto her came, Wil'd her not glorie in the same: For look how manie shee had bred, So high her Griefs were numbered. MORAL. The Pains and Troubles; This to us implie's, Inherent are to heads of Families; Birth, Education and Provision, are Alternate marks of their incessant Care: And if all these bee need full unto One; What Measure tend's on vast Succession? 225. The rich Mourner. A Wealthie Man two Daughters had, For One, late dead, a Fun'rall made: At which, such was their custom then, Hir'd Women did lament o're them.
The living Maid abasht heerat, The sens of Grief to aggravate, Said, Wretches wee! to whom this woe Belong's, to utter it not know: While they, it nothing doth concern; Express Groans make our bowels yearn! To which the Mother made Replie; Wonder not Daughter at their crie; Since what thou seest or hear'st them do, The Gain of monie promt's them to. MORAL. Nature hath limits; Art extremes put's on, That tend's to Ʋse, this but to Fiction: No wonder then if this do that exceed, When Monie lends high Action to the Deed. For which man so bewitched is, that hee Would take on him Anothers miserie. 226. The Shepherd. A Shepherd on his flock attend's, A neighb'ring Oak, to shake, ascends, While under it his Coat was spread, To catch the Fruit hee shattered. The Sheep drew near, seeking their meat, Who of the Acorns could not eat, Began his Coat to knaw and tear, Til they by him discover'd were. Who strait descending in a rage, Found his Coat in sad Equipage. Whereon he cri'd, You worst of things! To make your sport my Sufferings:
To others you do Garments give; Mee, who you feed, of mine bereav. MORAL. So sillie Men endamage oft their Friends, Without advantage to their proper Ends: And without respect, unto them do good, Relation none have to commerce or blood. 227. The Heardsman. A Heardsman of his Cattle negligent, A Calf had lost, in search whereof hee went. Manie vast places trace't hee had in vain, Till hee, at length, despairing of his Pain, To Jove a Kid vow'd for an offering, If who his Calf stole hee'd disclose to him: Whence onward going, to a Grove hee came, Where hee his Calf saw by a Lion slain; Whereat hee trembling rais'd his hands to Heav'n, Saying, a Kid I promist should bee giv'n To thee great Jove in wonted Sacrifice, If thou the Thief wouldst present to mine eies: But now a Bull thy offering shall bee, If thou from him wilt but deliver mee. MORAL. Weak men, in extrems, guide their Praier by sens, Finde, in th'Event their own Improvidence: If God to Man's will should in all assent; His vain Requests would work his Punishment. 228. The Eagle. A Stone an Eagle made his stand, His view might more extent command.
Where watching for a Hare, his eie Neglected his securitie. By which, the Fowler with small craft Approaching, him struck with a shaft; The fether'd notch whereof stuck right Before the wounded Eagle's sight: Who said, 'tis double Grief to see These my own feathers ruine mee. MORAL. So greedie mindes for others harms do watch, What they intend to Other often catch: While all their Force is on their purpose bent: They thus lie open to their detriment; But by how much the Agents neer us bee, So much more weightie is our miserie. 229. The Worm and Fox. A Worm long in the dirt conceal'd, At length, himself to sight reveal'd. Proclaming him to everie Beast, A Physician the perfectest: Betwixt whom andApollo the Gods Physician Poean the Gods, There was, or none, or little ods. The Fox said, canst thou others cure, Yet that thy lameness wilt endure. MORAL. When our own Int'rest the first Rites do clame; If proofs bee wanting, words no credit gain: Experience then his Master-piece hath wrought, When with the Subject the Example's brought.
230. The Wolf and Nurs. A Hungrie Wolf roving for Preie Came where hee heard a Nurs to saie T'her crying Childe. Peace, or this hour, The greedie Wolf shall thee devour▪ The Wolf, these words believing, stood, Exspecting manie hours this food, Until declined was the daie, Where listning still hee heard her saie, If that the Wolf com to my Boie, Wee will the howling Cur destroie. Whereat the Wolf return'd to wood, To seek more certain livelihood. MORAL. Men's Speeches oft reflect on others Ends; Such promiss fair, not often prove our Friends. Who onely for their livelihood relie On emptie Words, scarce Nature satisfie: Till tir'd with Exspectation, pressing need Enforce them rather in a Desert feed. 231. The Gnat and Lion. A Gnat unto a Lion came, His furie thus sought to inflame; I fear thee not, though I bee less, Thy strength equals not my Address: In fight thou usest Tooth and Nail, As vixen women men assail: But if thou darst give proof of might, I challenge thee with mee to fight.
The Gnat (heerto the Summons rung) Her Foe by th'Nostrils sharply stung; Then to his tender eie-lids flew, By slight the peril to eschew: With rage this made the Lion roar, Who to catch her, his own flesh tore: The Lion vanquisht, judg'd to bee, The Trumpet sounded victorie Unto the Gnat; who from thence fled Into a Spider's cunning Web: Where shee surpriz'd bewail'd her fate Did life so vildely terminate: Since shee the mightie could o'rethrow, Should fall by so despis'd a Foe. MORAL. Mean mindes somtimes great Ils immov'd withstand, Mastring themselvs, even Fate it self command: Yet when to Passion is inclin'd the Sens, Yield up their Reason to slight Accidents. Exposition. When with the needie Potent men do strive, In vain themselvs of Fame and wealth deprive; Such naked Trunks, nor Honor have, nor gold; Where Injurie might for Revenge take hold. With Beggers who contend Themselvs may fret, Yet in th'Advantage but a Lous shall get: But to their Equals when they vent their brags, They meet with those divest them of their Rags.
FINIS.
