B3239 45504330 171631
A bloudy Fight at Sea, BETWEEN The Parliament of England's Fleet, commanded by General Blague, and Prince Ru∣perts Navie, neer Carthaginia Road, upon the Coast of Spain: With a most true and infallible Narrative of the manner of the Fight, continuing for the space of 7 houres; the number of ships sunk, burnt, and taken, with 500 Pieces of Ordnance; the number of men killed, sunk, and taken, and Colonel Welch, the Rear-Admiral drowned, with 700 Officers and Sea-men: the total routing and dispersing of the whole Navie; the manner of Prince Ruperts getting off and flying away with the Swallow; the retaking of the London-Marigold, and the rest of the Malligo Fleet; and a List of the names of both Navies. The Dclaration of the King of Spain, concerning Prince Rupert, and the Parliament, and his setting forth 40 Sayl of Ships & Gallies. With the Desires of King John of Portingal, touching the States of England. Certified by several Letters from Madridin Spain, to Marchants at the Royal Exchange in London on Saturday last; and printed, to be published in all Cities, and Market-Townes, throughout England, Scotland, Irland, and VVales. FOR THE PRINCE.—FOR THE PARLIAMENT. depiction of sea battle LONDON, printed for G. W, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Coil▪ 165
A great Fight at Sea, between Prince Ruperts Fleet, and the Parliament of ENGLAND. BY Letters from Madrid in Spain, we have received a true and infallible Narrative of the great and bloudy fight, between Prince Rupert and Gen: Blaque, Admiral for the Parliament of England▪ the manner thus. Gen. Blaque having received intelligence of Prince Ruperts sailing towards the Coast of Spain, with a Resolution to surprize the Malligo Fleet, bound for England, left no means
unattempted, for the preventing his design; but it so fell out, that before he could come up to secure them, they were all surprized by the E∣nemy; insomuch, that Prince Ruperts pride was so exceedingly heightned, that he swore God dam him, Blaque should never return to England alive, but that he would have him, within a dayes time, either alive or dead, and was now resolved to fight him; in order where∣unto, gave out, that each Ship should prepare for battery, for that he had received informati∣on, that the English Fleet were within six Leagues of them; which indeed; he soon found to be truth, for within two hours time, they discovered several Sail of Ships making towards them, and with a Prospective-Glasse discovered the English Colours, which did not a little dant the courage of this vanting Prince: insomuch, that he seemed to decline Engagement, and with a half Gale, endeavoured to make from them; whereupon, Gen. Blaque with all haste made after to them, and divine providence so decreed his expedition, that by a fair Gale of wind, he soon came within Cannon shot of them, their Rear-Admiral the Convertine, and with the English Vice-Admiral, gave them a broad side, Prince Rupert answered with ano∣ther
Volley, and seconded the first with two broad sides from the Swallow; after which, the rest of the Fleets came near each other; in∣somuch, that divers times they vvere upon the motion of grapling and boarding, the Dispute being very hot, and with great gallantry per∣formed on both sides. Then came up General Blaque with the Bonadventure, and Constant-Warwick, presenting three broad sides, gi∣ving a Volley from threescore piece of Ordnance; which was well taken, and again answer'd; till at the last, the Elizabeth Frigat, carrying forty piece of Canon, came in by the leeward, and having resolutely discharged all her Guns against one of Prince Ruperts ships, called the Lew∣is of France, immediatly fell to grappling and boarding; but finding the work somewhat difficult, presently be∣took themselves to their fire-works, casting hundreds of Granado's aboard the French, and within a quarter of an hour, fired her tacklings, burnt all her sayls, which fire; with great vehemency, soon descended down, both to dek and keel, the fiercenesse whereof, could not possibly be allay'd or quenched; so that she presently sunk, with 44 pieces of Ordnance, and about one hundred men there perished in the sea. No sooner was this achievement accomplished, but a∣nother Trophy attended the English, for by the dexterity and courage of the rest of our Mariners, they fired two more of the Princes ships, took five, dispersed the rest; some running themselves aground, to the end, the men might get ashore, and Prince Rupert narrowly escaped with the Swallow and another ship, both exceedingly rent and torn. This fight continued for the space of seven
hours, victory seeming very dubious a long time, till at the last, it pleased Divine Provience, to crown his saints and servants, with triumphant success and mercies, in not onely giving a dreadful blow to the adversary, but also by retaking the London Marigold, and the rest of the Mal∣ligo Fleet, which are of great value and estimation. For the further particulars hereof, I shall refer thee to the en∣suing Letter. Another Letter in confirmation of the aforesaid Fight. SIR, IT hath pleased God to appear wonderful∣ly for the ParliamentsNavy at Sea, as well as to their Army at Land, having given them a great Ʋictory over their most inso∣lentest Enemy, as appears by this ensuing Narrative, viz About the 4. of this in∣stant Decemb. Gen. Blake with about 13 Sayl▪ a List whereof I have here inclosed. met with P. Rupertnear Carthaginia, up∣on the Coast of Spain, consisting of 27 Sayl▪ or thereabouts; ad after a bloudy Fight, fired
some of them, sunk others, dispersed the rest, the Prince getting off only with two Ships; all which was performed with little losse on the Parliamentsside, having about 30 slain, and 60 wounded: Ou intelligence from Carthaginia saith, that P. Maurice perish∣ed in the Sea, being in one of the Ships that were sunk, that Col. Welch the Rear-Ad∣miral is also drowned, and about 40 other Commanders of note, 700 Seamen, with at least 500 piece of Cannon▪ In this fight di∣vers Portingals perished, being very resolute and stout Mariners. We hear that King John of Portugal desires a peace with the Parl, of England. His Maj. of Spain hath likewise declared to be assistant to the Parl. of England; General Blaque is at present upon the Coast of Spain, some of his Fleet are gone into the Downs, Carthaginia 12 December, 1650,
A List of the two Fleets, and the number of ships, Men, and Ordnance, sunk and taken. Gen. Blague's Fleet.   Guns Leopard 50 Bonadventure 42 Happy Entrance 42 Eliz. Frigat 42 Warwick. 32 Expedition 30 John 30 Phenix 20 And about five more. Ships gone to General Blague.   Guns. Centurion 42 Swiftsure 38 Foresight 38 Pellican 38 Ginny Frigat 20 Prince Rupert's Fleet.   Guns Swallow 44 Convertine 40 Lewis of France 40 Royal Dolphin 40 Royal John of Portingal. 40 And about 22 other Ships and Frigats. Sunk 5 Burnt 3 Routed the whole Navy. Killed about 700 Sunk and taken five hun∣dred piece of Ordnance. Prince Rupert narrowly escaped with the Swal∣low, and one more. Published according to Order. FINIS.
