E3745 E117_13 99860356 156071
EXCEEDING Joyfull Newes from HIS EXCELLENCE The Earle of ESSEX. Declaring His Proceedings since his setting forth from London. Likewise a Famous Victory obtained by His Excellence in Leicestershire against the Cavaleers, with the manner of the Fight. Also declaring a great Conspiracie against his Excellence at Northampton, Sept. 11. there being a bullet shot into his Chamber where hee lay. Sent in a Letter from a well-willer of the Earle of Essex. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cooke. Sept. 15.
Joyfull Newes from His Excellence the Earle of ESSEX. THe Earle of War∣wicks proceedings and fortunate suc∣cesse at Sea is very joyfull and dele∣ctable to all true Christians, as will appeare by these particulars fol∣lowing, for it hath been often times spe∣cisied unto divers worthy persons of this Realme, from many of their Friends, that have now offices under his Lordship, of
his brave and heroicke actions against the Malignant party, that now lye lurking in many corners of the Sea, and of his brave adventures in divers places therea∣bouts, as Humber, and the Irish Seas, and the courage that all the Seamen and Ma∣riners take against all such persons, vow∣ing to lose their lives in the defence of his Majesties person, the Honourable Court of Parliament, and the Lawes and liber∣ties of the Subjects of England, and that they will sight it out to the last man, who∣soever they encounter with, being resolved never to yeeld unto Englands Foe or Ene∣mie. The Honourable Court of Parliament (the great Councell of this Kingdome) upon Munday last received advertisement and information of the proceedings of Captaine Kettleby and Captaine Stradling upon the Irish Seas, to the hazzard of that Kingdome, and the utter ruine and de∣struction of all the true Protestants in that Kingdome; therefore the Honourable
Court of Parliament having taken into serious consideration the proceedings of these Pyrars, and resolved to send a Mes∣sage to the Earle of Warwicke, and in the same propounded these following Propo∣sitions: Whereby he might destroy those wicked and cruell persons, who continu∣ally lye in waite to destroy and ruine the true Protestants both in England and Ire∣land: That they having had information of the proceedings of the aforesaid Cap∣taines, and that they had taken an English Ship that was going with Beefe to the di∣stressed Protestants, having in the same di∣vers suites of clothes to cloath the poore Souldiers that are now in a miserable and naked condition, therefore they desired the said Earle of Warwicke to send some of his Ships to the Irish Seas, for the ap∣prehending of those wretched and Ma∣lignant Persons, which questionlesse hee will suddenly doe, and I pray God that all such and the like persons as they
are, may be catcht in their owne snares, but because I am loth to leave and con∣clude with these sad tydings, I am there∣fore resolved to lay open to the Readers view many joyfull and remarkable passa∣ges, which hath hapned since his Excel∣lence the Earle of Essex setting forth from London, upon Friday night last His Excel∣lence tooke up his lodging at Saint Al∣bans, and from thence, upon the next day, being Saturday, he tooke his Journey to∣wards Northampton, and as it is credibly reported, he arrived there that night, and from thence his resolved to march into Leicestershire, intending to scour that Coun∣tie of all those Cavaleers that doe now in a most tyrannicall way execute the poore distressed Inhabitants, taking from them Horses, Kine, Sheepe, and all other kinde of Cattell, but it is thought that when he appeares in that County that many of the Cavaleers will betake themselves to flight, as divers of their Companions hath done in Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire, for
when that they heard that His Excellen∣cie the Earle of Essex was marching and comming neere those places, where many was billited, they duest not withstand him but betooke themselves to their heeles, and so they doe in many other places, when they heare that the Lord Generall is neer. The County comes in very fast to aid and assist his Excellence, and such is the cou∣rage of him, that I hope the Lord of Hosts will crowne him with Fame and Victory, and make him able to resist all that shall oppose him, for he is resolved, and thereupon set downe his Resolution to lose his dearest blood in the mainte∣nance of that cause which he hath under∣tooke, being comfortable tidings and hap∣py intelligence for all those that wisheth well to this happy Reformation, that wee have such a worthy Generall, that doth not thinke his deare blood too much to be spilt in our cause, and I hope that he will make Englands foes in a short time feare and tremble at his very Name, as they
did his Fathers before him in forraign Countries, God grant him happy and fortunate successe in this his constant Resolution, and let all good Chri∣stians daily send their prayers to the Almighty for his preservation from all treacherous conspiracies, that so we may have joy and comfort from him, as our Predecessours have had from his Father, a man who was infinitely beloved throughout all England. Septem. 11. the Earle of Essex came to Northam∣pton, which was great joy and comfort to us all, but in the night there was a Pistoll Bullet shot in at his Chamber window, which mist him narrowly, that caused the Towne to be up in Armes on a sudden, but who it was that did it, we cannot finde as yet, my Lord Wilmor and the High Sheriffe of Leicester wee have taken prisoners upon Friday last. FINIS.
