f1783 e844_10 99862530 114693
A DECLARATION Against all Poperie, and popish points: and is renoun∣ced from them and by them whom the Scorners in scorn call Quakers: And likewise some Queries to the Pope and his Priests that are guarded with his law: to be answered in writing or print; and to be sent them called Quakers at London in England. FOrasmuch as a Proclamation is set forth by O.P. and his Coun∣cil, in which is an oath to be profered, to be taken, of Ab∣juration, against all Popish supremacie and authority over the Catholique Church in generall: and we who are, by the World scornfully called Quakers, who own the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, who saith, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your yea be yea and your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation: Jam. 5.12. In Christs Doctrine and the Apostles Doctrine we do abide, and oaths is denied, and forbidden: and so those who were called Chri∣stians which was in Christ Jesus, who abode in his Doctrine and the Apo∣stles Doctrine, suffered as they do now that doth the same: as in particu∣lar John Morland who had been a Captain, was fined and imprisoned, be∣cause he could not swear, but kept to yea and nay in his communica∣tions, and many others fined that cannot swear: but with the light which comes from Christ Jesus, from him by whom the World was made, we do deny and condemn, with the light, all Popish wayes, and their Supremacy and authority over the Catholique Church in General, root and branch▪ and therefore many of us which are called Quakers have suffered and suffereth, and layen long imprisoned by the Popish law which guarded the Jesuits, and Crucifixes and Imagess: which now guards many of the Priests in England and their Church, which law did guard the Jesuits and their Church: therefore the authority of the Catholique Church in Ge∣nerall, and the supremacy of the Popes power we do utterly deny and renounce, as knowing their works of darkness: and condemn them all with the light; and the branch which comes from the root: by which branch many suffers now in England for declaring against all Popish wayes and the authority derived from him, by which the Church was guarded, freely without an oath; for God doth us command, for we see the sword of the Lord is drawn against it: And so over our selves in particular we cannot suffer any of his preheminency to bear rule, for it is an usurped authority. So with the light of the Lord Jesus Christ we are brought to declare against it; for with the light it is condemned, and here the power of the Lord Jesus Christ is reteined: And we do know with the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, That bread and wine is carnall; which our Lord Jesus Christs body and blood is not: but is
pretious, He saw no corruption, and is a mystery: which is not bread and wine, let them consecrate it never so: And so to declare to you plainly, we do denie the Sacrament, for we know there is no Scripture for it: And the Lords Supper is not carnall, where it is said he will make his abode with you, and sup with you: the Lord is not carnall: but is the mysterie and his bo∣dy is glorious, and not beggerly Elements, as outward bread or wine: for this is the blood of Jesus which washeth away our sin; and this is the body of Je∣sus which makes us free from the law: which stands not in meats and in drinks and carnall Ordinances, for the body is Christ: and so we do denie and condemn all that worship that sacrament of Elements of bread and wine, and that supper which stands in those things: and we wit∣nes Christ is come, who is the summe and the substance, and so need not have a remembrance of any Element: but we which be dead with Christ and live in his life, from the beggarly Elements, them that lives in them goes about to slay us; so as it is written they that are born after the flesh persecutes them that are born after the spirit: And again we do deny that there is any purgatory, and declare against it as knowing the blood of Jesus which cleanseth us from sin, which is an holy thing; and know him who takes away our sin and destroyes the works of the Devil: which many hath the bread and wine which know nothing of the body and blood of Christ, no more then the Jews which turned from Christ, when he told them, that, except they did eat his Flesh and drink his Blood they had no life in them, and they looked upon him carnally as the Papists do now, which are deluded & deceived. And again with the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, him who was not born by the will of man, him by whom the world was made, with his light do we deny and condemn all their consecrated Hoast, Crucifixes, and Images, and they are not to be worship∣ped but to be condemned with the light, which will let them see they are enemies of the Cross of Christ which be in things before mentioned, and all them that worship them. And to you this is the word of the Lord God: the light of your consciences shall witnes it: God is a Spirit and is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth: and all that make Crucifixes, or Images, or worship them, they are the South sayers and familiar spirits: the Founder of the Images and the worshipper of the Image, from the living God is confounded, accursed, and with the light condemned, and God worshipped in the spirit: which spirit judges all Images, and Image-makers, & sees there is no due worship to them, or them that makes them, but condemnation and judgment: the light in the conscience shall it witnes: And again we declare against the Papists, and them which say Sal∣vation is to be merited by works: for then it is not of faith, in him who was not born by the will of man, which light condemns mans runnings and willings, and that which he call merits, there is no such Scripture: and therefore we denie the word merit & know that man doth not attain any thing by his wil, of him who was not born by the wil of man; for he knows him not, for he is a mysterie, which light condemns all works of darknes and all evill, sinne, and unrighteousness, and all them which acts it: and who are in Christ are new Creatures: and to them there is no condemna∣tion, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit: so every one shall have a reward according to his works whether they be good or evill. And with
the light, which comes from Christ Jesus, which never changes, all points and Doctrines of Papists and the World, is condemned, and them who do affirm them: And the same light is the condemnation of them that takes oaths, out of Christs Doctrine and from Christ Jesus, and so knows not his will, who abides not in his Doctrine: So as Gods children have found his power and strength which hath carried them on, when he hath commanded them to declare against all false wayes, false Teachers, and Popish wayes, and Popish lawes, and often have been almost murthered, but the Lord hath been their present help in time of need, and trouble. And so Popish wayes are renounced without any equi∣vocation, mentall reservation, or secret evasion whatsoever: So we cannot go out of Christs Doctrine and swear by any oath: for if we do, we break the command of Christ and go out of his Doctrine, and the Apostles which said, Swear not at all: They that say, so help me God, and act contrary to the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, are with the light condemned from God, and are in another Doctrine: but who be in the light of Christ Jesus, have Gods help. And so all such as use their tongues and make a trade of the Scriptures, which were spoken forth from the Spirit of the Lord, they are judged and denyed, and turned away from, though they have the form of Godlines and not the power, but denies it. And such by such are the dear children of God cast in prison, who are the cause of it. And again in the presence of the Lord God, we declare against all Popish wayes, and the Priests, and their church: and their autority, and all that belong to it, the root, and ground, and branches: and with the light do see them, and all who have any of their power, to be condemned with the light: And to you this is the word of the Lord God, and all who wait in the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, receives power from him which is the Head and go∣verns his Church which is the Head of it; which Light is the con∣demnation of the changeable Priesthood. And with the light we see all Papists, and who be in the Popery, to be enemies of the Crosse of Christ, and so imitate a cross, some this way, some that way, who are all with the light to be condemned. And to you this is the word of the Lord God. I am the light of the World and doth enlighten every one that cometh into the World, saith Christ. And if you do love the light which comes from Christ and receive Christ ye shall receive the light of life: and as many as receives him to them he gives power to become the sons of God, which are the children of light and do beleeve in the light. But ye that do hate the light, and will not bring your deeds to the light, because your deeds be evill, and the light will reprove you; this is your condemnation, the light, saith Christ: so here is your Teacher, if you love the light, and here is your condemnation that hate the light, the Light. And remember that you are warned in your life time. And if you do love the light which comes from Christ it will lead you to the Church, which is in God, 1 Theff. 1.1. And bring you to testifie against the World, that the works thereof are evill: and will let you see that the whole world lyes in wickednes: And it will let you see that the Scriptures which were declared from the light, and life; they that was in it, was in unity: and all the sects are mong them that have the good words, and lives in their
meanings, and thinkings, and strife, contention, and persecution; and be such that hate the light, whose deeds be evil which Christ testified against, which be strangers from the life of God and Christ Jesus, the Covenant of promise: and so all such are with the light comprehended, seen, fatho∣med, judged, and condemned. The light which lighteth every man that cometh into the World, is my witnes: Forasmuch as the enemies of God in all ages, have gone about to slan∣der the Truth of God, and to cast reproaches upon righteous servants, whom he sent forth to bear witnesse for the Truth against all the unrigh∣teousnes of men without respect of persons: So now also the enemies of Christ Jesus, and of his righteous seed, (shewing themselves to be of the same generation of their fore-fathers, which ever persecuted the righ∣teous seed, which shewed before of the coming of the just one, Act. 7.52) labour by all means to render the truth odious, and to slander, and re∣proach the people of God, by them scornfully called Quakers, fulfilling the word of Christ, Matth. 5.11. which saith, They shall say all manner of evil against you falsly for my sake; and crying out to the Magistrates, as the multitude of the Jews did against Paul, that they ought not to live any longer: Act. 25.25. Act. 22.22. And as the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Councel sought false witnesses against Jesus to put him to death, but found none, Matth. 26.59, 60. even so do they now. The high Priests of this age with the multitude of the ungodly, who go about to accuse the people of God called Quakers (to be Jesuits, Fryars, Popish-Priests, Ro∣mish Frogs, Morrisdancers, and persons Popishly affected) to the Magi∣strates, as appears by an Information given to the Magistrates at Bristol: and by Books, or Pamphlets put sorth in Print by William Prinn, and others; and one Thomas Andrews Priest at Welling burrough in Northamptonshire, who accused one John Whitehead, who by him and the World is called a Quaker, to one Thomas Pentloe called Justice, and caused nim to be carried before the said Thomas Pentloe, the 15 day of the first moneth called March now last past; who after he had examined him said, if he would go home to his wife; and abide with her, and go towards her the next morning, he should have his liberty. To whom the said John Whitehead answered, he stood not in his own will, but in the will of God, and could make no such promise, not knowing what the morning would bring forth. Whereupon the said Thomus Pentloe gave the Constables, charge over him till further Order, who kept him in their custody two nights and a day, (which was, and is contrary to the Laws of the Nation) And then when he was carried again before the said Pentloe, and one John Brown, called a Justice, with whom was the said Andrews and another Priest, who asked John White∣head many questions laboring to ensnare him; but they not finding him to have broken, or transgressed any known Law of the Nation, then they consulted together, as the Presidents and Princes did against Daniel, to finde an occasion against him, concerning the Law of God, Daniel. 6. and one Marmaduke Storre another of the People, by them called Quakers, who came to visite his brother, who was formerly by the said Pentloe sent to prison at Northampton: And thereupon the said Pentloe and Brown ten∣dered to them the oath of Abjuration: appointed for such as are suspected to be Popishly affected, but their souls being subject to the Com∣mands
of Christ Jesus not only because of wrath but also for conscience sake, who saith: Matth. 5.34. Swear not at all, but let your communication be yea yea, nay nay; for whatsoever is more then these cometh of evil, v. 37. And the Apostle James saith: But above all things my brethren swear not, neither by hea∣ven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, least ye fall into condemnation, were made to deny to swear at all: But did in the presence of the Lord, renounce al things in the form of the said oath named before the said called Justices: who notwithstanding did thereupon require them to find suerties to be of the good behaviour: and to appear at the next Sessions: then the said John, and Marmaduke did desire them to read a law that they had transgressed: or to shew them wherein they had broken the peace or good behaviour: but the said called Justice did refuse; and said they was Judges, and did judge it to be so: then the said John and Marmaduke told them they ought to Judge them accor∣ding to the law: and if they would not read them a law: that they might be convinced by it to be of evil behaviour, they would not find su∣reties: wherupon thy sent them to prison at Northampton, where they yet remain prisoners, though the breach of no known law can be justly laid to their charge: thus they and many others who in faithfulness served the late Parliament and hazarded their lives, and suffered the plunder∣ing of their Goods, in expectation to have had righteousness set up, and all oppressers and oppressions removed and taken forth of the way, as was then largely promised: But behold, nothing is brought forth but winde there is not any deliverance wrought in the earth, neither have the inha∣bitants of the World faln: for they that depart from evil are made a prey to this generation of Priests, and Magistrates who persecute the innocent and imprison them that in obedience to the commands of Christ Jesus, dare not swear at all: do ye thus requite the Lord, ch foolish people and unwise? who seek after the life of the righteous, and daily lay snares for the inno∣cent: and say in your hearts who who shall see you: understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise, he that planted the ear shall he not hear, he that formed the eye shal he not see, he that cha∣stiseth the Heathen shall he not correct? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall he not know?, yea, the Lord knoweth the thoughts of men that they are va∣nity, Psal. 94.8, 9, 10, 11. Therefore cease from your persecution of the children of God and from your wicked inventions, and snares which you make to ensnare the simple by, whom you in scorn and derision call Qua∣kers, and Jesuits, and Fryers, and Popish priests, and many other such like names of reproach you cast upon them: But they who you call Qua∣kers in the presence of the living God of Heaven and Earth do you who are reproachers with all your reproachfull names deny; and the Pope, and his supremacy and authority over the Catholique Church in general, and over every one of themselves in particuler: And do beleeve and know that there is not any Transubstantiation in the called Sacrament of the Lords Supper: or in the Elements of bread and wine after consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever: And they, and every of them the peo∣ple of God called Quakers, do believe and know that there is not any Pur∣gatory: And that the consecrated Hoast Crucifixes or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither that any worships is due to any of them; And they,
and every of them also beleeve, and know that salvation cannot be me∣rited by works: and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said points they and every of them, we do renounce and bear witnes against. And do deny all equivocation, mentall reservation, and secret evasion whatsoever, speaking the words of Truth in plainess by the help of God: And for so doing they are persecuted, stoned, stocked, mocked, reproached, and imprisoned by those who cannot endure plainess of speech: who are equivocaters, mentall reservers, and secret evaders: who cannot receive the words of Truth, the yea and the nay in their communications: but contrary to the commands of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom every knee must bow, labour to bring people out of his doctrine: and so into the condemnation of the Devill: but the Righteousnesse of the perfect shall direct his way: when the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness, Prov. 11.5. A word and a warning to all people, whether Priests, Magistrates, or others who are plotting in secret against the innocent, with the children of light you are seen, and comprehended, and with the light of Christ Jesus in every one of you I speak, which is my witnes, and your condemnation that acts contrary to it; Take warning in time, least you say you had time when it is past. And remember you are once more warned, in your life time. From them whom you in scorn call Quakers. Signed by George Fox, Francis Howgill, Edward Burroughs, Alexander Parker, Thomas Adam, Anthony Pearson, Gervase Benson, Thomas Rawlinson, Robert Rich, Robert Dring, Gerard Roberts, Simon Dring, Amos Stodart, John Bolton, West, William Rayman, Henry Clark, In the name of themselves, and the rest. Some Queries to the Pope, and to all his Adherents and Followers. 1 VVHether is not the ground of your works from that which would murder, yea or nay? and whether is not the Ground of your works from that which knowes not the Life of God, yea or nay? 2 Whether doth not that Ground from which your works proceed, prison the just? Whether doth not the Life of God remove the ground of your works, and so overthrow the life of your Kingdom, yea, or nay? 3 Whether doth not he which Imitates a Cross, follow the fancie of his own minde, and so set up Images: and whether God doth require this, yea or nay? 4 whether doth not God forbid, and say thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image of male or female or any creeping thing upon the earth, or any fowl in the air, or fish in the sea? whether God doth not forbid the making of those Images, and you that make those Images, whether you be not out of Gods command, and judged with the Life that gave forth the Scriptures, yea or nay? 5 Whether any Image should be bowed down unto, of male female, yea or nay? 6 Whether you that say, bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ be not they that minds earthly things, and are carnall and naturall; whose God is your belly, whose end will be destruction; who are enemies to the cross of Christ, which Crosse denies self? 7 Whether selfe will feeds not upon bread and wine, and whether may not
man feed upon that in his will, and know not Christ nor his body; who is not born by the will of man, which will is condemned with the light? 8 If that wine be the blood of Christ, whether that be it which washes away sin, yea or nay: and if that bread be the body of Christ, whether is it that body that makes free from the Law: for the Apostle said, they were made free from the Law by the body of Christ? 9 If it be another body that you eat; and another blood that you drink than that which makes free & washes away sin, then whether do you not deceive the world yea or nay? 10 Whether every one may not purchase bread and wine for money; and whether any can purchase the body and blood of Christ for money to cleanse them from sin withall: though Judas may sell him; whether is that which sells him for money, and which buies him for money cleansed with him, yea or nay? 11 Whether Jesus Christ the Son of God, be Glorified with the same Glory, in the same body, as he had with the Father before the World was, yea or nay? and whether he is not the same as he is last, when the World is not; as he was, when he was first, before the World was made, yea or nay? 12 Whether there be any worship of God, but that which where is the Life: out of all Images and Likeness, yea or nay? 13 Whether all you that observe Maries and the names of the Saints, be not they that worship names and words, yea or nay: and so are turned from the Spirit which gave forth names, with which spirit God should be worshipped with∣all. 14 Whether all Charity and Works that do not proceed from the Spirit of the living of God, is not all to be condemned for the fire which are not wrought in God, yea or nay? 15 Whether all mens merits be not in his will, and that then free-will; and whether the Cross be not mans will, and to his Merits, and so then to that out of which his Merit ariseth, but saith the Spirit, It is not him that wills, but God that shewes mercy? 16 What is the will of man, and out of what had it its rise, and what Glory must it be that must be stained, and what is the seat of envie, and whether any murderer hath eternall Life abiding in him yea or nay; and whether he that en∣vies, is not a murderer, yea or nay? 17 Whether, where there is works professed and merits pretended, and envie lived in, this sacrifice God doth accept; where faith is strangled and shipwrack made of it: read Cain and Abell who can? 18 What is your Ground that you eat fish some set dayes; and whether the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ be not inward: to that mind that runs outward into visible things as set fish, and set flesh, and set dayes? Whether such be not observers of dayes? and whether the Cross be not to the seat of lust and envie; and to that minde which makes outward Crosses, Likenesses, and Images: which are to perish and turn to dust yea or nay; whether outward crosses, likenesses, and Images and observing meats and dayes be not of the World; yea or nay: and whether that nature, which holds them up be not of the world, yea or nay? 20 Whether the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ is not that which crucifieth to the World, and from all Wordly things in the ground; yea or nay?
21 Whether ever any of you received the Substance since that which you call the signe was practized by you, and so bears witnes to the substance, and denies the signe yea or nay? 22 If that bread and wine be the body and blood of Christ, then was there a body and blood of Christ before Christ was manifest in the flesh, yea or nay; for bread and wine was before Christ was manifest in the flesh, and when he was Manifest in the flesh, then was there another body and blood of Christ; and all that have the bread and wine, do they know the body and blood of Christ, yea or nay? 23 Whether do you hold a Purgatory for men to be clensed, after they be dead and laid in their graves: and what is it that clenseth in that purgatory, seeing the Saints witnessed nothing clensed them but the blood of Christ which blood is in∣corruptible? 24 Whether that your bread and your wine which you call the body and blood of Christ will not corrupt yea or nay? and whether he that eats and drinks that, shall not dye and see corruption; and be never the clearer; nor be made free from his sin: but shall dye and see corruption: and whether Christ doth not say; who saw no corruption; He that eats of his Flesh and drinks of his Blood shall never die? 25 Whether you do beleeve in the New Covenant; which God promised in giving his Son; and whether there be any remission of sin: but by him; yea or nay: and whether he forgives not sin upon the earth; whether you can witnes this, yea, or nay? 26 Whether you do beleeve that any shall come to that state to be taught of God; that they need no man to teach them yea or nay? and whether any are children of God, but who are in this state: and whether such have not their sins blotted out and forgiven on earth, yea or nay? 27 Whether do you wait for and beleeve in to be made heirs with Christ yea or nay, and to have the same minde which was in Christ, who thought it no Rob∣bery to be equall with God, whether you witnes this yea or nay? 28 What is your ground of the knowledge of God, and whether you had known there had been a God or Christ, or Gospell or Cross, if the Scripture had not declared of them; and whether the Scripture is the foundation of the true knowledge of these things; yea or nay? if so whether is not this to lay another foundation then the holy men of God builded upon; which knew these things be∣fore Scripture was written, yea or nay? 37 Whether do you beleeve that Christ hath Lightned every one that comes into the World; and whether you beleeve any shall be made free from sin, while upon the earth yea or nay? 30 Whether is not that the Light of Christ which doth convince all men of sin, and whether any be justified, or have received the conforter, while they are convinced, and condemned for sin, yea or nay; and if that light be not the light of Christ, shew the difference between the light of Christ, and that light which convinces all men of sin, in their Operation and Motion? 31 Whether all that man sees visibly with a naturall eye, is not naturall in the naturall knowledg: and whether in this State the Religion which is not pure doth stand the wisdome and knowledge, which differs not from the beasts of the field, yea or nay? 32 What is the eye in the unbeleever, which the God of the World hath
blinded that they cannot see the, light of the glorious Gospel: and what is the light of the glorious Gospel which is hid from them: whose eye is blinded and what is the God of this World that doth blind the eye; whether the gospel be a visible thing, and whether the God of the world doth not keep open the visible ey, which leads into temptations: and what is the ey which the true God hath blinded; lest they should see and be converted? 33. Whether the Act of Philip and Mary was not made by the authority of the Church of Rome, and had not authority to rule over the Church of Rome, and to guard the Jesuits and Priests, which law now guards many of the Priests of England; and whether that be not a branch which comes from the root which they make use of: and whether that be not to be renounced, as well as other the points of Popery which was the guard of their Church: And whether the Priests of England will renounce Popery in words; and have that law to guard their Churches as guarded the Jesuites; and if so, whether this be not hypocrisie, yea or nay? These Queries are to all the Priests in England that are guarded with a Popish Law, which guarded the Jesuites; and to be sent to the Popish Priests, the Jesuits, and to the Pope at Rome, to be answered by them in writing, and the answer to be returned to those people who are depised with all Sects, who are scornfully called Quakers in England, at London And we do deny the making the likeness of any thing that is in Hea∣ven or in the earth, or in the waters; for the Lord our God forbids it: and furthermore, he saith, Thou shalt not bow down to them. God saith Deut. 4. That thou shalt not make the likeness of any beast that is on the earth; nor the likeness of any feathered fowl that flyes in the aire, and God saith, thou shall not make the likeness of any thing that creeps upon the earth, least thou liftest up thy eyes to Heaven and thou seest the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Hoast of Heaven thou be driven to worship them; and God saith, corrupt not your selves with making any graven Image, or representation of any figure, whether it be the likeness of male and female; and the Lord God saith rake heed to your selves, lest you forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, which he hath made with you; & least you make any graven Image or the likens of any thing, as the Lord thy God hath charged thee; and if ye corrupt your selves, and make any graven image, I call Heaven and earth to record against you this day, that ye shall shortly perish from the land, v. 26. And the Lord God saith in Deut. 5. Thou shalt not make any graven image of any thing in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. For thus saith the Lord, ye shall deal with them, ye shall overthrow their altars, and break down their pillars, cut down their groves, and burn their images with fire; for thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God; the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people to himself above all people that be upon the face of the earth. The graven images was to be burnt with fire, for they was the cursed thing from God, and God drave out the na∣tions from before his people which made images, which his people was not; for the Heathen did so make likenesses whom the Lord spewed forth of the Land, which defiled it with their liknesses and images. Baal
had images, 2 Kin. 3. And the Lord said put away the images, and break down the images of Baal; and in 2 Chron. there you may read of the image work, and the graved image the idoll, 2 Chron. 33.7. and Psal. 73. When thou wakest, O Lord, and raisest us up, thou shalt make their images despised; and the Lord hath awaked, and hath raised us up, and their images are despised, and so, confounded be all they that worship graven images, and in the Psalms you may read how they worshipped molten images, Psal. 106. And Nebuchadnezzar made a great image, and them that would not worship his image, was to be thrown into the fiery furnace, and the worshipers of God would not worship his golden image, Dan. 3. and in the Revel, ye may see that they that do worship the Beast and his image shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the holy Lamb. And the servants of God song which had got the victo∣ry over the image and the beast, Rev. 15. and the children of Israel shall remain without an image, and they shall seek David their King, Hos. 3. And Rom. 1. ye may see how they turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the image of a corrupt man, and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and creeping things; such God gave up to hardness of heart, and they turned the truth of God into a lye such their minds was reprobated and fil'd with unrighteouss and deceit, taking all things in the evil, and these were and are the image-makers: and ye may read in the Acts, they of Ephesus were worshipers of images which the Apostle witnessed against, Act. 18. And though the Lord did com∣mand the children of Israel they should not make an image, yet they made a molten image which Moses stampt to peeces, and burnt with fire, and the Lord was angry with them; they turned from his counsel, Deut. 9. And in Judg. 17. there ye may read and see the molten images; and in Judg. 18. ye may read of Michaels image, and the molten image, and how they set up Idolatry, and the Lord sent Jeremiah to tell them the founder of the graven image is confounded, for his melting is but fals∣hood, for there is no breath in them, they are vanity, the works of err∣ors, in the time of visitation they shall perish; and Jacobs portion is not like unto them, he is the maker of all things. Israel is the rod of his in∣heritance, the Lord of Hoasts is his name. Laban had images who would have wronged Jacob, Gen. 31. The Lord saith, Exod. 23. thou shalt utterly overthrow and break down their images. And in Exodus, The Lord saith, they shall break in peeces their images. And the Lord saith, I will destroy your high places, and cut away your images, and cast your carcasses upon the bodies of your idols, and my soul abhors you, Levit. 26.30. Num. 39. The Lord saith, ye shall destroy all their pictures, and break asunder all their images of mettal, and pluck down all their high places: and in 1 Sam. 6. there ye may read the Philistines, Priests, and South-sayers and their images, and simiitudes of Mice, which de∣stroyed the land, vers. 11. And ye may read how David burnt the Phili∣stines Images, 2 Psal. and Jeroboam which was not as the servant of God, as David was, but he did evil in the sight of God, and made molten im∣mages to provoke God; and therefore, saith the Lord, I will bring evil
upon Jeroboams house, and cut them off. And ye may read how they went into Baals house and destroyed it, and his images and their altars; and the children of Israel did not that which was not upright before the Lord their God, and made images, as those that profess themselves Chri∣stans do now, and these angryed the Lord, 2 King. 17. and made molten images and calves, and so worshipped the Hoast of Heaven, and served Baal; therefore the Lord was exceeding wrath with them; and he said break down their images, 2 King. 18. and he brake their images in peeces, 2 King. 23. And Josiah took away their familiar spirits, and South-sayers and images, and idols, and Asa destroyed the idolatry, and commanded Juda to seek God; he break down the images and altars of the strange idols, and the images thereof, and the kingdom was quiet before him, 2 Chron. 14. And the people of God went and destroyed the house of Baal, and his image, 2 Chr. 23. And you may see how Ahaz did not upright in the sight of the Lord like David his father, but he made molten images, and provoked the Lord to anger, 2 Chron. 28. And you may read how Juda brake down the images, and cut down the Groves, 2 Chron. 31. And how Amon sacrificed to the images which Manasses his father had made, which did evil in the sight of God; and Josiah did upright in the sight of God, he began to purge Juda and Jerusalem from their groves and high places, and carved images, and molten images, and stamped them to powder, and cut down their images, 2 Chron. 34. and the Lord sent Isaiah to cry out against their images; which their fingers had made and said they had forgotten God, Isaiah 17. and he saith, the graven images may not stand, Isa. 27. and he said the image of silver and of gold should be cast away as a monstrous City; the ornaments and the covering; Isa. 9. And behold, saith he, they are all nothing, their images are wind and confusion, Isa. 41. and the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against their images of Bethel that is in the land of Egypt, and said they should be burnt and the house of their Gods, Jer. 43. and the Lord sent Ezekiel, to cry against their images, who said your images of the Sun should be broken: I will cast down your slain men before your idols and your images of the Sun shall be cut in peeces, and your works shall be abolished, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, the slain shall fall in the midst of you: And the Lord turned his face from them that made images, Ezek. 7. And the Lord said thou tookest gold and silver and made the images of men; wo, wo, unto thee saith the Lord, Ezek. 16. And the King of Baal consulted with Images, Ezek. 21. and there ye may see in what generations the Images were, and who turned from God, turned from the Images, and Jerusa∣lem and Samaria painted upon the walls, the Images of the Chaldeans painted with Verinilion, and so discovered their fornication from the Lord; and the Lord said, I will deliver thee into the hands of them whom thou hatest; and thy shame and thy fornication shall be disco∣vered: do not you all people paint upon the wall Images of other people, though not of the Chaldeans, and doth not this manifest your whordom: or will you say you are delivered to do these abhominations, Ezek. 23. and the Lord saith, I will destroy their Images, and cause their Idols to cease, Ezek. 30. and Amos was sent to cry against their Images,
and their Gods, Amos 2.5. and the Lord sent Micab to cry that he would cut down the Images in the midst of them, Mich. 5. and the Lord sent Hos. to cry against the Images, how they made them fair, and now they sin more and more, they have made them molten Images of their silver, and Idols, according to their understanding, and they are all the works of craftsmen; he shall break down their images, Hos. 10.3. declare a∣mong the Nations, and publish it; set up a standard and proclaim it, and conceal it not, Babel is taken; Bell is confounded, Meredoch is broken down, her idols are confounded, and their images are burst in peeces. FINIS.
