F1680 E119_29 99860323 112443
Fourteen ARTICLES OF PEACE. Propounded to the King and Parlia∣ment by the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of York: being subscribed to by these Knights and Gentlemen, whose names are here specified, in the name of all the Gentry and Commo∣nalty of the said County. VVherein is contained their Resolu∣tion to maintain the peace of that County against all those that shall endeavour to disturb it. Also the Copie of a Letter sent from Prince Robert to His Majesty. LONDON, Printed for E. Blackmore. Octo. 4. 1642.
Fourteen ARTICLES OF PEACE. 1. THat all Forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire, our Countie or City of York, shall be disbanded, and all those under the conduct of Cap. Hotham, now in Doncaster, and all other Forces in any o∣ther part of the Countie, under any other Comman∣ders, belonging to the Garrison at Hull, shall retire to Hull with all speed possible, and the said Cap. Hotham shall begin to march from Doncaster towards Hull on Saterday next. 2. It is agreed that no hostile or violent act shall here∣after be done by the Garrison at Hull, either directly or indirectly, by pretence of any aid or assistance whatso∣ever, upon the persons of any men within the Countie of York, or within the Countie or Citie of York, either upon the goods either in the Countie aforesaid, or in the Countie of Kingstone upon Hull.
3. It is agreed the Commission of Array and orders or ordinances of Parliament for the Militia, be wholly suspended in this Countie, untill such time as some course be agreed upon for the ordering of the Militia for the King and Parliament, and this without disputing the legality or illegality of either, but as finding nei∣ther of them so necessary at this time as for the setting them on foot to involve this great County in bloud. 4. It is agreed that no Commission be imposed upon this County, but such as are legall, and presented in good termes. 5. It is agreed that no Ammunition, Forces whatso∣ever, shall be suffered to enter the Countie in a hostile manner, by vertue of any Pretence or Command what∣soever; and they who shall attempt to doe it, the whole Countie shall rise against them with force, as enemies against Peace, to be suppressed. 6. It is agreed that if any carriage for the Houshold either of the King or Queene be to passe this Countie, that to prevent all other armed Forces under pretence of such a conduct to come amongst us, we shall take or∣der to see them quietly conducted by the Sheriffe of the Countie with such a Convoy as he shall appoint, & we like, and with no others. And if it shall happen the Queens Majesty shall return out of Holland through this County, that we shall humbly beseech her Majestie to forbear bringing with her any multitude of armed For∣ces, but to beleeve we shall wait upon her Majesty with such a safe, honourable, and quiet Convoy, as shall be∣fit our duty and her honour. 7. It is agreed that if any warlike provision be desi∣red to be passed this County, that he would be pleased
to convey the same some other way, being it may be an occasion to interrupt our peace. 8. It is agreed that none shall be arrested in this Countie as delinquents for either partie, but a legall, peaceable, and quiet way, that is, by the legall officers, and their Assistants onely, and not by armed men and souldiers, who may be an occasion to bring fire a∣mongst us. 9. It is agreed that whosoever in this Countie shall be made appeare, either to be the author, contriver, or assisting to the burning or pillaging Sir Edward Roods house, or any other mans house in the Countie, we shall see them if they be able to make reparation, and howe∣ver to be brought to justice. 10. It is agreed that a generall amity be made be∣ween all the Gentlemen and others of this Countie of all former unkindnesses and differences that have been bred by these unhappy distractions, and that we hereaf∣ter will all be as one man to defend one another accor∣ding to the Law, against all others, leaving all offences to be punished by the law of the Land, and not by force or violence. 11. It is agreed that it is intended by disbanding of the Armies, that his Majestie shall have all liberty for the removing all Canons and Ammunition, as he hath in this Countie. 12. It is agreed that all the Arms which do belong to any of the Trained Bands of this County, which have had taken from them since 21. of this instant Septemb. by either partie, shall be presently restored, and that Cap. Hotham shall leave behind him, and when he re∣turnes into Hull all those Brasse Peeces belonging to
his Majesty, which is now in Doncaster, excepting such as he himselfe brought thither from Hull. 13. It is agreed that no further Forces shall (during this difference betwixt the King and Parl.) be either raised in or payed by this County for this warre, other then such as shall be already levied or really raised, and as such also presently to goe out of this County with∣out raising any more. 14. It is agreed that a humble Remonstrance & De∣claration of these our Resolutions be presently sent both to the King and Parliament, accompanied with a humble Petition from us all, that according as we have all unanimously agreed for our particular peace, so they would be pleased so far to commiserate this distracted Kingdome to doe the same for the peace of the whole. Henry Bellace. William Savill. Edw. Osborne. Iohn Romsden. Iohn Hopton. Francis Nevill Tho: Fairfax. Tho: Maliverey. Will. Lyster. Tho. Stockdall.
A True Coppy of a LETTER sent by Prince RUPERT to His MAJESTIE. SIR, THe Bearer will with all the Circumstances tell Your Majesty our Proceedings at Worcester I shall onely say this, That upon Your Majesties Commands to succour the Town, we went thither with our Forces and found the Rebels on both sides of the Town, no Ammunition, nor nothing fitting to enter∣tain so great a Force as the Lord of Essex would have brought that Night. But all things in so great a disor∣der, that certainly we had all been lost, had we not by a great chance met with 10. Troops of their horse, and five of their Dragooners; which we did entirely rout, and killed most of their chiefest Officers. The Man∣ner and the Names, I leave for the said Bearer to tell you. Your Majesty will be pleased to accept this, as a beginning of Your Officers and my Duty; and I doubt not, as (certainly) they behaved themselves all very bravely and gallantly, that hereafter Your Majesty shall finde the same behaviour against a more considerable number. Of this Your Majesty may be very confident, as also of the endeavours of SIR, Your Majesties Most Obedient Nephew and humble Servant, RUPERT. From Bobfort this 24. of Sept. 1642
Sir, This Gentleman hath behaved himselfe so gallantly, That I must needes humbly desire your Majesty, to Knight him; which will encourage him and all others to continue the Affe∣ction for Your Service. The Circumstances Related by Master CRANE who is Knighted. He is (I heare) Prince RUPERTS Cornett. THat at the first Charge, Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, Master Foxe, and two more, charged and defeated a Troop, whom they knew not to be enemies till they were upon them, by their O∣range colour Scarfes. That seven Cornets are taken, some I saw. That severall Officers are kild on their side, particu∣larly, Douglas and Sandis; that the last repented before his Death, for having borne Arms against the King. That severall Men are taken: as Captain Wingat of the House of Commons, and others. That we have but three kild in all. That but three of ours of quality have beene hurt; Mr. Welmott in the back, and the worst of any: but yet he marches in a coach and is merry, Sir Lewis Dives through the Shoulder. Mr. Byron (a Brother of Sir Johns) over the Face. I heare he hath said, That Prince Maurice is a little hurt, but I understood him but those three. That Browne, who commanded in chiefe as Colonel of Dragooners, was one of the first that ran away. That our men are very hearty with their Victory, &
the spoyles of the killed (as Horses, Armes, Buff-coats, Money in their pockets) & the Enemie (as they heare) much disheartned, and not likely to make so great haste from about Worcester as they meant. THE CORNETTS MOTTOES. PRo Rege & Regno. Exurgat & Discipabuntur. Pro Rege & Religione, Si pro Patria Morior non Moror. The rest so torne, the Mottoes could not bee Read. FINIS.
