F2343A E97_6 99859455 155828
A FVLL DECLARATION OF ALL PARTICULERS Concerning the March of the Forces under Collonel Fiennes to Bristoll, and their carriage upon their enemies approach. AS ALSO A Relation of the late bloody abominable conspiracy against the City of Bristoll, as appeareth by the Examinations of the parties, disovering their Plot and Intention. Together with sundry Letters Annexed. With the certaine Information, touching the death of WILL: KENDALL a Trooper of Collonel Essex, who was shot by the said Collonel. From a Noble hand. Aprill, 18. London: Printed for R.D. 1643.
A more full DECLARATION Of all particulars, concerning the March of the Forces under Col. Fiennes to Bristoll, & their carriage upon their enemies approach. Right Honourable, I know Colonell Fiennes (our Governours) modestie to be such, that I presume he hath altogether omitted the relation of divers passa∣ges, and beene sparing in specifying others, lest hee should be thought the publisher of his own praises, or else to affect them, the which he no way doth; but such have bin his pains, care; industry, vigilancy in this expedition, that I thinke my selfe bound in con∣cience to make a full Narration of all his proceedings since the beginning of our March, that you, and the Honourable Committee, may not onely know it, but that he, and all under his Command; may have their deserved prayses, and that infamy, and reproach, may fall to their lots, who have deserved it. Let your Honour therefore Deigne to know, that on Sunday the fifth of February last. Orders were sent, by his Excellence to the said Colonel Fiennes, his brother Captaine Ihn Fiennes, Captaine Walter Longs Lievtenant, Captaine Alban Coxe and my selfe; to march the next day, to Hertly bridge with our Troopes, where we were to meete with Captain Mason and his Dragoneers, and there were we all to receive further Orders from the said Colonel; and accordingly we all met there, but as Captaine Coxe and I marched from Wargrove thither wards, by Twyford with our Troopes the enemy appeared, on the other side of the River in a vaporing man∣ner, and told us, that they had provided for us, entertainment upon the way as we should goe to our Rende-vous, whereunto answer was made, that they were knowne to be more talkative, then active in honourable wayes, and therefore they should not make us to digresse one step out of our way, and so continued our march (although we heard the drums beate, and the trumpets sound) neere unto the way we were to march, till we arrived at the said bridge, where wee found the Colonell his brother, and Captaine Longs Lievtenant, with their troops in battalia; expecting to be charged by the enemies, who were not farre from thence, and we all stayed there at least an houre for Captaine Mason, who bring∣ing with him his Lievtenant, and some 25. Dragoniers, resigned them over to
him & so we sent away our quarter-Masters to Basing-stoke, to take up quarter for us there, and whither we marched after them: but after their arrivall there, they were told by the Constables, that 400. of the enemies Forces had appeared but one houre before, within a mile of the Towne, yet notwithstanding they tooke up quarters for us there; and when Colonel Fiennes and I had viewed the advenues to the Towne, and made choise of a court of guard, we entered thereinto with our Troopes; but heard no more of the enemy that night, nor the next day, as wee marched towards Andever, but there we heard that some of their Forces were about Malborough, so that the Colonel, and I tooke the same care and paines there for our securitie, that we had done before, and barrocaded up most of the wayes, as we found them at Easingstoke, and from Andever we marched the next morning towards the Devices and as we passed over Way-hill our scoutes discovered some of the enemies scoutes, whereupon wee made an Alarme and sent after them, so that two of them were taken the others saved themselves by flight but those that were taken, proved to be knowne Malignants of the Coun∣trie, and would confesse nothing, so that they were released leaving their horses and furniture behinde them, and thereupon we continued our march, and arri∣ved at the Devices late, where we found a great disorder in that garison, by rea∣son of the officers overmuch indulgencie towards the souldiers, and the souldiers insolency and incivility towards them: who were exceeding disobedient and mutinous pretending want of pay to be the cause of it, but our Troopes some∣what awed them, from the houre of our arrivall, and encouraged the Officers to speake of action: and the next day being Tueseday occasion was offered for it, re∣port being brought thither that the Cavaliers were entred into Ma'msbury, yet was the question put at the Counsell of warre, whether we should goe thither to beate them out therehence, or to Salisbury, to disperse a crew of Malignants, that were there assembled to assist the High Sheriffe; but after much debate although Colonel Fiennes, would have had us, to march towards Ma'msbury, yet by the im∣portunity of Sir Edward Hungerford it was ordered, that wee should march to Salisbury on Fryday night with 500. of his foot, and our party of horse, but on Fry∣day morning, he sent one Stevens of the Devices to the Major of the city to adver∣tise him of our intention, and to know if he would facilitate our entrance there, or no whereunto he made no answer himselfe; although at the delivery of the message he had promised so to doe: but intimation was made to the said Stevens to get him gone from thence or else some injury might befall him, whereupon he let the town and went, as if he had had no intention to return towards the Devi∣ces, so that we heard not of him, till aray tenne of the clocke, that wee were within foure miles of the city, and then and not before knowing of this message and the Majors proceedings, it was determined that wee should enter the city by divers wayes, the which was accordingly performed, but by means of this adver∣tisement, the Sheriffe, and other Malignants were fled, so that we had nothing to actuate but to get mony and horses and to disarme the citizens. But Sir Edward was so indulgent towards them (though Malignants) that we tooke therehence but very few horses and armes and but 500 li. in money, and then being much importuned by some honest men of Bristoll, to goe thither, with our Forces, (see∣ing just cause for it,) and our Colonel having received two Orders from his Ex∣cellence to goe thither, it was ordered that it should be so, the which being knowne to Sir Edward, he intreated us and Lievtenant Colonel White also; that
we would then passe by the Devices, whereunto our Colonel consented, and forthwith we left Salisbury, to march thither-wards where wee arrived late at night but of our 500 foot 200 thereof disbanded in Salisbury, or by the way backe to the Devices, and the other 300 quartered by the way, but the next morning being a very foule and snowie morning news was brought to us at the Devices that the enemy was before Shipnam, whither wee marched with all expedition, although wee had no foot to march thither with us; but we found no enemy there, so that we entred the Towne and quartered there all night, and the next morning we drew our forces into a field betweene the Towne and Malmsbury, where we stood in battalia two hours, but no enemy appearing, wee marched therehence towards the Pathe, where we arrived that night, and found 200 com∣manded men of Colonel Essex his Regiment, who suffered us to enter the City, and to quarter there, without any opposition, yet did the chiefe commander of them testified the next day by some insolent words and carriage, that our for∣ces were not welcome thither: but we that were bent to doe our best service to the state and City of Bristoll, marched thitherwards, where we were welcomed by Colonel Essex, Colonel Popham and divers other gentlemen and citizens, but being setled there, we soone perceived that the then Governour Colonel Essex was much distrusted by the best affected of the City, and that those that were then suspected to be Malignants (and now approved Conspirators) were his most intimate friends and continuall or frequent associates, the which incited all well Wishers to Sion, and their Countrey, to beleeve what had beene said of him by those that perswaded us thither; and our now Governour Colonel Fiennes to la∣bour to prevent his evill designes, and that he might the better do it, he perswa∣ded Colonel Essex and the Committee that was then here to call in all the Citi∣zens armes, whereunto he yeelded; as also that no man should take them backe againe, but such as would take a Protestation to this effect. That they should to the uttermost of their power with their lives and fortunes defend this city against all forces that should come against it, raysed without consent of Parliament, and that they should discover all plots that should bee laid to ensnare and entrap the Forces sent hither for the defence of it by the Parliament. I know you have had a copy of it, and therefore I will not stay upon it, but when these armes were brought into Guild-hall by the Captaines of Colonel Pophams regiment and Co∣lonel Hungerfords, and that they were there placed, whereas the Major had al∣wayes kept the key thereof before▪ Colonel Essex now would keepe it himselfe, and as is now apparent to no other end, but that good men should not have their armes backe againe; and that none should be armed but such as he should approve of, and what were they, as he declared unto me himselfe (but Clubbers, and now convicted conspirators) the which he then termed honest men, but as for Bridge-men (alias Round-heads) as infamous creatures tearme them, he pro∣tested that they should have no armes backe, and as for Captaine Birch Captaine of the Voluntiers, he said he was a coward and should have no command, and to shew that he was an enemy to him committed him, upon so slight an occasi∣on that he was easily perswaded by our Colonel to release him the next morning, so that by these meanes the bad grewe to be most insolent and our good and ho∣nest men much dejected, so that they thought of nothing more, then of leaving the city, and of carrying avvay their goods, supposing it to be betrayed by the
said Colonel Essex, These vvere the sad complaints, and more then murmurings of the good citizens and gentlemen of these parts, so that it was novv time, to thinke of some courses, to prevent these inconveniences, and so did Colonel Fi∣ennes, vvho communicated unto me, an Order that he had received from his Ex∣ellence, vvhereby he vvas enjoyned, to send Colonel Essex to Windsor or the Parliament; in case he saw cause for it, and having given me reasons to see, and know that there was cause so to doe, he asked me whether I would assist him in the execution thereof or no; the which seeing cause for, I promised to doe: and promised likewise, that all under my command should serve him in it, to the ut∣termost of their powers, so that then we consulted of the place and time for it, and after deliberation, intended to have seized his person on Saturday the 25. of Feb. on which he was to have a coursing day, but the day proving very wette, he went not, but on Munday the 27. he was invited to a feast by one Captaine Hil, whither he went, his house being a mile from this city, whither the Colonell and I went with a party of horse, and then, and there as he was feasting and revelling with divers Gentlemen and Ladies after his accustomed manner, we acquainted him with his Excellencies Order, whereunto he promised to obey, and to de∣part therehence forthwith with a partie that wee left there to convoye him to Berkely-Castle; but the Governour Colonel Fiennes returning to settle all in good order at Bristoll commanded me to stay with him till his departure: but he being gone, he began to stand on tearmes and to say that he would goe to his Excel∣lence the straightest way for Windsor, and intreated me to move the Colonel that he might doe so, whereupon I returned hither and acquainted Colonel Fiennes with it, who told me that Prince Rupert was about Basing-stoke, or Hertly-bridge so that the surest and safest way would be to go by Glocester: I acquainted Colo∣nel Essex with so much that night, and intimated unto him, and to the Captaines Lievtenant, that convoyed him to Windsor, that their safest course would be to march that night, to Berkly-castle, yet would hee not march, although he was much urged thereunto by the said Captaine, but went to bed, and would not march the next day till ten of the clocke; that I appeared with a strong party of horse neere to Captaine Hills house, wherewithall I convoyed him halfe the way to Berkly-castle but it happened out well that Collonel Fiennes returned the night before to Bristoll as he did otherwise all might have beene in combustion, by the insolencie of an Ensigne of Colonel Essex his Regiment, who hurt a horse of Captaine Longs Troope to enter into the castle, and there offered a great affront to Lievtenant Colonel White whose company was then upon the relieving of of that whereof he was Ensigne, both by striking the said Leivetenant Colonell as also by commanding his men to give fire on the other company, but Colonel Fiennes hearing of it, hasted thither with a party of horse and so the tumult was appeased and the insolent Ensigne imprisoned, but these proceedings infinitely enraged our Malignant souldlers and citizens, so that they forthwith sent to call Prince Rupert to their assistance the which incited our now Governour to looke about him and to proclaime that those that would take the aforesaid Protestati∣on should have their Armes backe againe, and those that would not, should see theirs disposed of to those that would; and that for the defence of the city, so that we suddainly armed of well affected men some five hundred of the citizens the
which were put into five companies, and the workes of the Towne had more done unto them in foure dayes then they had done unto them in sixe weekes before: But whilst these things were in agitation Captaine Iohn Fiennes and a companie of Dragoneers were sent by our Colonell to Glocester with much am∣munition and some money by meanes whereof the citizens had a new life put into them, and Captaine Coxe his Troope, and other Forces vvere sent into Som∣mersetshiere, vvhereby all the Malignants vvere chased there hence: but vvhilst these our Forces were absent, we on Sunday the fift of this said March, that Prince Robert was at Salisbury vvith an Army of five thousand men marching this vvay, some sayed more, but for certaine there came and presented themselves before this Citie. On Wednesday the eight of this moneth, at least foure thousand Horse and Foote, but with very few carriages, some of his Forces appeared the evening before on Dur∣don Downe, so that we all stood upon our Guards, but at ten at night, we had intelli∣gence that the Malignants of the Citie had meetings in severall Houses thereof, namely at one Yeomans house, whereupon our Captaine Buck with some foot, and I with a party of Horse were sent thither, where we found 24. Persons that stood upon their guards at the said Captaines entrance thereinto; but when they saw my party, and said that I had sent for a canon to batter the House, they yielded and laying downe their Armes, I conveyed them all to the Castle, but as I went thither with them, one of them told me, that if I would have compassion of him, he would impart unto me some things of importance, whereupon I told him I would, and bid him relate what be had to say, and if it were of consequence, be should finde favour, and hereupon he told me that divers of their party were assembled at one Butchers neere Fromegate that night, and would doe mischiefe, if they were not prevented▪ so that I went thither in all haste, having delivered up my first Prisoners. But as approached neere to the said house, I saw some of Captaine Goodiers souldiers, breaking open the doore, and why? because they of the house would hang out noe Lights upon this Alarme, who entring thereinto we found at least 60. men well armed, whereof we could take that night but fixe, by meanes of a back Doore, thorough the, which as also thorough a river they escaped, but I have taken many of them since, and what these men should have done, you may see by the Narration that I herewithall send unto you, and who are the principall conspirators; you shall likewise know by the List, that you shall likewise receive therewithall; but we have discovered that there were at least 2000. confederates thereunto, and you shall know more of their names very suddenly, but many of them are of the parishes, neere adjacent to this Citie, but when I had convoyed those that were in Butchers house, likewise to the Prison I was commanded by my Colonell to send a party, of horse and Dragoneers, to give an Alarme to some of the Princes Forces that were quartered neere unto Captaine HILLS house, the which I did about foure of the clock in the morning the partie consisting of tvventie Horse, and like number of Dragoneers, who went neere to the said House, and seeing a fire neere thereunto, the Commander thereof sent some six of them, vvho went neere unto the said fire, and gave fire upon them that Were about it, who de∣fended not themselves, but run away to their rendezvouze at Dordon Downe, where their body of Horse appeared: then Wednesday morning by seven of the clock, in fight of our Fort made on Brandon Hill, where our Go∣vernour then was, and caused three shot to be made at them, whereby as is re∣ported some eminent men were slaine, but sure we are that one white Horse was there killed, and thereupon the whole body wheeled about, and marchd
away, whereof I being advertised, with the colonells consent, sent some smal parties after them, whereof one being but of foure Troopes, encountred with seven of the Enemies, and those men of qualitie, but they fled after the first Pi∣stoll discharged by our men but yet not so fast, but that two of them were con∣strained to svvimme to save their lives, and to leave their Horses, Pistolls, and rich Coates behinde them, vvith the Horses Coates, and Pistolls of tvvo others that saved themselvs in woods, so that of 7. but three went off, but if we may give credit to the Trumpeter that came hither the Thurseday following to demand two dead bodies, vve must say that tvvo of them vvere killed, one of them a Weston, and an other vvhose name it is thought he had order to conceale: but vvhilst vve vvere thus in some danger and distresse, we implored often the assi∣stance of Sir William Waller, but his engagements vvere such that he came not hither till Monday night the 13th. of this moneth, and stayed here till Sunday the 19th. and then marching out of the Citie, the Counsell of Warre having or∣dered at the intreatie of the Citizens, that I should stay here vvith the Governour for the defence of Citie, yet did he then order vvhen I vvas very sicke of an Ague, that part of my Troope should convey to Berckeley Castle those Officers of Colonell Essex his Regiment, vvho had refused to march vvith him out of the Citie, and that the rest of my Troope should follow him to the Bathe, so that I should have been left alone, and unable to doe Service, yet I knovving that I am not to contest vvith higher Powers, acquainted my Troopes vvith his Or∣ders, they obeyed the first, and declared that they vvould sooner lay down their Armes, then be commanded by any other then my selfe; First because I drevv them into the Service, and next because I have furnished them often vvith mo∣ney and other necessaries, vvhen I could not have it from the State, I found that their refusall to leave me vvas not much offensive to my olonell, but I percei∣ved that it pleased very vvell the Major, Aliermen, and Citizens, vvho sent after Sir William to intreate him to leave my Troope vvith me, for the better defence of their Citie, by many of the chiefest of them, vvho carried vvith them a Petiti∣on subscribed by hundreds of them for that purpose, and vvith them I sent my Coronet vvho vvas at the taking of Malmesbury, vvhereof I vvill vvrite nothing; since I am certaine that it shall be specified unto you by a better penne, but then Sir William was so full of businesse, that he could make no answer to the said Petition, but commanded that I should send unto him to Glocester, whether I sent my Lievtenant on Saterday last, who was then at the taking of the Welch, but of this as of Malmesbury; but he brings me word, that my Troope may not stay here with me, the which I am glad of, that I may have the Honour to continue in so good a Citie, as now it is likely to become, and with so good a Colonel, who tells me that I shall bee his Major, so his Excellence will thereunto consent, howsoever I desire to to be, where I may doe best service to God, my King, and Country, yet that I may so doe. I most humbly intreat that I may have my Troope alwayes with me, since I can doe nothing without it, and since it is none of the worst of the Army, I desire to keep, and to have it put into some Regiment, where it may firmely stand, and not be at every ones disposall. More I have not to say at this present, but that our Governour continues to fortifie this place, and to secure the Countries adjacent with as much care and industry as can be required, and that I shall manifest my selfe to be a faith∣full Souldier and Your Honours most obedient and humble Servant, Hercules Languish. From Bristoll the last of March, 1643.
A Short Relation of the late bloudy, abomi∣nable Conspiracy, against this City of Bristoll, as ap∣peareth by the Examination of the Parties. Together with sundry Letters annexed. A Malignant and traiterous party within this City, having long endea∣voured to bring in the Forces of the Enemy, into this Towne; They hoped they had gotten an opportunity to effect their designes; on Tuesday last at night being the 7th. of March, when by their invitation, Prince Rupert having drawne a great partie of Horse, and Dragoneers, with some Foot, to Durdam Downe, within one mile of the Citie; the Enemy before that night▪ these treacherous and bloudy persons within that Towne, had framed a partie to fall upon the backs of their Guards; and to surprise them: and cut them off, and to let in the Enemy; whereupon the ringing of two Bells, viz. St. Iohns and St. Nicholas, were to set upon the Towne without as the Conspira∣tours were to fall upon the Guards within the ringing of these two Bells, being a common signe both to them without and within the Towne, for the bet∣ter effecting of this treacherous and wicked conspiracie the Chiefe heads there∣of had that night assembled together in their houses those of their Confederacie, with divers Sailers and Halliers; with all sorts of Armes, Musquets, Pistolls, Swords Clubs, and barrells of old nailes to charge the Ordinance withall; af∣ter they had surprised them; and these severall Companies under their severall Leaders were to have fallen upon the severall Courts of Guard. Mr. Robert Yeomans, who is the head of the Conspiracy; and pretends that he had a Commission from his Majestie, for what he hath done (being to fall upon the maine Guard, and Mr. George Butcher with his company was to have fallen upon the guard at Froomgate, and to have opened it to have had the Enemie to enter by; others no doubt had their parts to play; and that better to distinguish themselves, from those that were destined to destruction; those of their party had a word which was Charles) and certaine markes of white Tape tyed upon their brests before, and upon their Hats behinde, and such as were to be spared within doores had certain markes set upon the inside of their doores, for the rest, if we may beleeve the speeches of an Officer: amongst the Enemies Forces one of them was heard to say, that Prince Rupert had commanded to give no quarter to man, woman, nor child; that had not their markes upon their persons or houses; and that at the same time, that they were to fall into the Towne; the Sailers were to set the Towne on fire in divers places, which as is conceived was Captaine oonewrk, but God of his mercy delivered us from this dangerous and devilish Conspiracie;
by some notice that we had given us of their meeting at Yeomons house; about an houre or two before the plot should have been put in execution; which was to have been upon the ringing of the Bells, about one or two of the clock in the morning; having secured Mr. Robert Yeomons and his Company, and after Mr. Boutcher and his Company; the neck of the plot being broken within the Towne, the Enemie without (whose designes as it should seeme depended much upon it;) having shewn themselves before the Towne, departed the next morn∣ing after; and so God put a hooke in their nostrills and commanded them back againe; for which great mercy in delivering us from a dangerous invasion from the Enemy from without, and a damnable po & conspiracie of some traiterous Inhabitants within the City; both this Towne and the whole Kingdome, so far as it is concerned in the preservation of this City, have great cause to give thanks to Almighty God, unto whom alone the praise is due. THis is a short Narration of the late detestable, and bloody Plot against this City whereof I doubt not but more hereafter will appeare; the matter being yet under ex∣amination, onely one writings which was found in Robert Yeomon's house, I thought fit to adde as followeth. ALL Inhabitants of Bridge-high-Street, and Corne-Street, keepe within your Dores upon paines of your Lives. All other Inhabitants of this City, that stand for the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the City, let them forthwith appeare at the High-Crosse with such Armour, as they have for the Defence of their Wives and Children; and follow their Leaders for the same defence. THere was also a Protestation taken amongst them to this effect, viz. that they were to oppose all Forces whatsoever that were or should be among them; or that should come in without consent of the King.
The Names of the chiefe Confederates in the late Conspi∣racie aginst this City of BRISTOLL. ROuland Searchfield, Merchant. Iohn Waldon, Hornmaker. Mr. Brent, Minister. George Boucher, Merchant. Iohn Boucher. Francis Belcher, Sope-boyler. Thomas Barret, Cutler. Thomas Browne. Philemon Barrow. Iohn Cosbie. Robert Taylor. Cap. Bounde Rich. Edward Bounde. Iohn Nickins, Trunk maker. Toby Goodyar. Iohn Williams, Hatter in Broad-Street. The two Haynes, William and Iohn Halliars in Halliar Lane, both Sonnes to Widdow Haynes. The two Tristrams, bothers, John a Chaundler, and William. Richard Howell. Ephraim Goodyar. Richard Yeomans Grasiar. William Yeomans. Merchant. Robert Yeomans. Merchant. John Broadway, Vintener. Mr. Milward of St. Michaels. Mr. Brooks of St. Michaels. William Deane. Edward James, a Rope-maker. George Tetge. Richard Lacket, a Cooke. Iohn Taylor, Merchant. Iohn Taylor, Rope-maker. Edmund Arundell, Merchant. Edmund Dacres, Plumber. Iohn Dimmock, Carpenter. Iohn Throupe. Dr. Markes. Iohn Pestor. Mr. Thomas Bursell. Iohn Collins. Robert Blackborrough. Robert Browne of Clifton. Lawrence Browne. Thomas Heyman, Merchant in St. Augustines. Iohn Carey, Cooper. Capt. Doughtie. Capt. Coale. William Colston. Edward Capell. Richard Grigson. Iohn Godman. Iohn Swetman. William Etans. John Boucher, Sonne of Nathaniel Boucher, Merchant. Walton Cugly. Nathaniel Dowles. Thomas Hilman. Mr. Greene, Lawyer, Steward of Bristoll. Iames Sterry, Griffin Batten. Nathaniel Streete. William Pope. Iohn Peverell. Cornelius Broadway. Samuel Warin. Henry Russell. Thomas Martin.
Edward Hungerford. Iames Abbotte. Edward Hunt. William Oubler. Ioseph Browne. Edmund Lewes. Henry Priest. William Coxe of Long-Ashton. Iohn Tilly Mercer. Iohn Councell. Iohn Rowden. Edward Taylor. William Ioane Thomas Radding. Iames Thomas. Nathaniel Blaunch. Besides these mentioned of certaine knowledge, there are at least 2000. in the City, suburbs, and Coun∣try adjacent, that were Confederates in the forenamed Conspiracy. As for the Relation of what should have been acted, when, and how, it is already sent at large, to the Houses of Parliament, by Colonell Fi∣nnes, therefore I shall here omit that, as at this time unnessary. But it will be necessary here to annex the reasons that caused Co∣lonel Fiennes to put in execution the order given him by my L. Gene∣rall to send up Colonel Essex from Bristoll, not as an accusation against Colonel Essex in this place (let that be followed by those to whom it ap∣pertaines) but by way of vindication of Col. Fiennes, that he hath done nothing herein but what the trust reposed in him, and the safety of that important place did require of him; and that the rather because by Col. Essex his owne speeche, giving out as it it is reported in the twn) that he hath cleared himself, and is to return to his government again; it begins so far to reflect upon C. Fiennes, as if he had done him injury. & there had bin no plot at all, but a plot to put himselfe into the Governours place: the Malignants here in Towne taking up this, and spreading it, and adding strength to it by Col. Essex his owne speeches, and carriages, it will be a great injustice to him who hath done his duty, and therein no inconside∣rable services, to be requited with calumnie: there shall here therfore be laid downe a true Relation of the grounds and reasons first in a Letter written by Col. Fennes: then the examinations taken both concerning the killing of the Trooper, and the invitation of Prince Rupert to come to Bristoll, with a Letter of Sir Edward Hungerfords about it: And to all this, agreeth a passage that fell out betweene Capt. Freeman and an Officer of Prince Ruperts at Andover, where Captain Freeman was constrained to counterfeit himselfe to bee of Prince Ruperts partie, and after they had drunk Prince Roberts health, after Capt. Freeman demanded of the other why they did not goe to Glocester? the Officer answered that the Round-heads had made that place too strong; but they had an easier designe and of farre greater consequence which was Bristoll; for said he there we have a sure party, there is not the turning of a hand there, but Prince Robert
hath intelligence of it: Cap. Freeman demanding what party they had there? the Officer answered him the Governour, Tom. Essex; for saith hee he gives Prince Robert intelligence of all things; there might be added also the relation of the Apothecary. My Lord, IF your Lordship had been an eye witnesse (as some have been) how li∣tle time I have had to eate, or drinke, or sleepe, or to write, speake, or thinke of any thing but what was necessary for our present preservation, your Lordship would not have thought, that I had been altogether so much to blame, in being so short in the sending of particulars concerning Colonell Essex, and the late Plot, and yet I am sure (if it miscaried not) I sent a Letter long enough, and full enough of particulars concerning Colonell Essex, and which I thinke were sufficient to satisfie any man, that it was necessary hee should be removed from hence before the Towne could be put in any possibili∣tie of securitie, although he had not been touched in the point of his Fidelity: such was his excessive prodigality and profusenes in feasting gaming, and drink∣ing, whilst his souldiers were fasting and perishing for hunger; and such was his carelesenesse of the safety of the Towne, that he never went about to strength∣en the Towne by any workes without, till two or three dayes before I came. nor to confirme it within by disarming and suppressing the Malignants, but ra∣ther on the otherside being himselfe familiar, and intimate with the chiefe Ma∣lignants, and siding with them against the good partie, and that in so high a degree that even after I came to the Towne, he imprisoned Captaine Birche (who is and alwayes was the most active man in the Towne for the Parliament) and swore that neither he nor any of his men, nor any of the Bridge men (who are knowne to be the honestest men in the Towne, and who onely appeared in their Armes for us, when Prince Rupert came before the Towne) should have any Armes or any command in the Citie, and this I can testifie my selfe, for hee swore it deeply in my presence: and after he swore he would commit Lievtenant Colonell White and so by degrees began to make approaches upon me, swearing that I should have nothing to doe there, whereby I perceived, I washed a Black-moore white, if I went about to do any thing for the reclaiming of him, or the put∣ng of the Citie in a posture of safetie whilst he was there, and I saw evidently hat either I must send him away, or that all the good people in the Town would leave it, and devert both it and me; he had a little before framed a Protestati∣on, which should be a test of mlignant & ill affected persons, which was such, as many of the best affected would not take lest they should be thereby obliged to to keepe out any other Parliament Forces that might come in, and to thrust out those that were already in it, and on the other side was taken by knowne Ma∣lignants (and as I thinke by some of the chief Conspiratours in this late plot) and they did fter make that use of it, that they were thereby tied to suffer no Forces in the Towne but such as were by the consent of the King and Parliament, be∣cause they had protested to oppose all Forces that should make any attempt up∣on
the Town without the consent of the King and Parliament, as they concluded all the Parliament Forces did without the Kings consent. These and many other particulars which are notorious to all the World, I wrote at large, his being here I found inconsistent with the good and safetie of this Citie and though there were no apparent proofe of his falshood, which I never affirmed, yet there were shrewd grounds of jealousie, as may appeare by the Depositions: whereof I have sent your Lordship a Copie, together with this Letter, and for that barba∣rous and bloudy act of killing an honest man in his Troop, there is no honest man in this Towne but abhorreth the memory of it, and I have sent up the evi∣dence against him, under the hand of sixe or seaven of those that were eye, and eare witnesses, of what was done and sayed, which was onely this, that being five or sixe moneths behinde of their pay▪ or a very long time, they comming with their Captaine some twentie of them, to desire him to take some course for it, when this man had said onely these words, (Noble Governour, give mee leave to speake a vvord or two to you) he immediately shot him through the head▪ and both the Sheriffes and the Coroner having been hitherto hindered to make and enquirie concerning it, since Colonell Essex his removall desired me that they might examine witnesses concerning it, and have a verdict about it, alleadging that they vvere likely to be deeply fined for not doing it, that I told them I must acquaint my Lord Generall first with it, because it may somewhat intrench upon his power by Martiall law, and besides if it should be done im∣mediately upon Colonell Essex his removall, it might appeare to have something of spleen in it, and that I did not carry matters so farrely in his absence: for my part so my Lord Generall and the World be satisfied that I had good reason to send him avvay from hence according to his direction, I would not have things prosecuted too hard against him, although I am very much deceived, if many a Governour of a Town hath not been called to an accompt, in point of his fidelitie upon weaker grounds then those that I have sent, nay it vvere suffi∣cient to question his fidelitie, that in so long time that he hath been here, when he knew that the Towne without any workes. and with so slender a Company as he had in it (being so malignant as for a great part of it, it was) could not be kept, if any considerable Force should come against it, made no provision at all to have the Towne better fortified without, and better furnished with a Garri∣son within, but spent his time in drinking and feasting, and so hee would have done till the Enemie had come to the Gates, and whether then hee would have let them in upon this ground, that it was not probable, that such a Towne should be kept with such a Force; I have cause to feare by what I have heard from the Fountaine in case he had stayed here till the Enemie came before the Towne; and that it was the expectation of the Enemy, and the Resolution of Colonell Essex, although he reserved himselfe from declaring his minde till the Enemie had been at the Gates; for as to that which Colonell Essex spake off, as the only course he intended to take (which was to goe out▪ and meet the Enemie out of the Towne it was agreed by all his owne Officers when the Enemy was approachin that could not be done for unlesse we would have left the Towne whly unguarded & unto it self (which in the condition it then was, and still is in great part, was to leave it to the Enemy) we could not draw out 200. men
to meet them, and what then would Colonell Essex have drawne out to meet them, before I brought in sixe Companies of Sir Edward Hungerfords Regiment into the Towne. First I had it from divers good hands, and amongst the rest from a Knight of good qualitie that be heard his Son in Law who is on the other side, say tha he saw a Letter of Colonell Essex which was sent to the Malignants in Sommers∣shiee and particularly from Mr. Coventrie to his wife, to assure them of Colo∣nell Essex, and that in that Letter there was a clause to this purpose. Let men dispute of me what they will by God I am for the King. Secondly, he was familiar and intimate with some of the chief Conspiratours in this late Plot, as Robert eomons, Duk. Wekes who presently upon Colonell Essex his removall, rode to Neford to bring Prince Ruperts forces against this Towne and was heard to say as he went through Siencester to the Governour of that place, that this Citie was worth the taking. Thirdly, his Captaine Lievtenant of his owne Company was a chiefe mah in this plot, and Prince Rupert in his addresses to him, and some of Bristoll makes that as one of the grounds of his comming hither to revenge the Affront done to Colonell Essex, and his Ensigne hath also been suspected to encline that way, by his discourse, and by his kindred and Friends; and one of servants that very night, that his Colonell was removed from hence drunke a health to Prince Rupert upon his knees, and forced others to doe so likewise. The Examination of William VValker of Thorneborough, Souldier under Capt: Seymore in the fight at Cirencester. HEE saith, that one Dr. Hiskins being Chaplaine to Prince Rupert comming to a Church in Oxon, where this William Walker was a wounded Prisoner, and understanding by his fellowes that he was son to a weal∣thy man; The Chaplaine told him, while he intreated for pity (being almost dead with his wound, cold and hunger) that he should come forth the morrow; when accordingly he came, and fetched him out of prison, and inquired of him, where his father lived, writing a letter in his name to his Father for 40 l. for his ran∣some, after he had carried to his Father in the Country this letter, at his com∣ming againe to Oxon, in the Chamber where this William Walker was stan∣ding by the fire, one Monsier Mattanne, Prince Ruperts Gentleman came to this Dr. asking him what newes in the Country. I heare that Tom Essex will let Prince Maurice have no wine at Cirenceste; no, saith the Dr. no answered the Monsier but it is not his fault, but those in the City, that will not let it come forth far saith he there is a letter from Tom Essex to Prince Ru∣pert, I saw it,  him,  keepe the Castle for him, as long as his life lasts and will never shoote a sho against him: after which hee presently tooke the Dr. into the window whispering, and then went out, and whispered in the
ext Room a while, and came in againe and parted. The Dr. bringing this man Walker down to receive his Ransome. So it is, WILLIAM WALKER. The Examination of Guido Syllcockes the 27. of Febr. HEE saith, that one William Walker, that is now at Thorneborough, and was taken at Cirencester told him, that when he was at Oxford, he saw a Letter in the hand of one of Prince Ruperts Gentlemen, signed Tho∣mas Essex, wherein hee promised, that if Prince Rupert pleased to come to Bristoll, he would not shoot a shot against him, but would spend his life for him; and that for the Castle hee had possessed himselfe of it, and hee should be sure to have no hurt from thence; or to this effect. GuY. SYLCOCKE. Jun. THat I was informed at Cirencester by one Courdeene who is Groom of the Chamber unto Prince Maurice, that his Prince did dayly receive Letters from Essex, and they were sure of the Town of Bristoll at the first summons by his meanes, and most of the Cavaliers confir∣med in their language his opinion That I heard the Prince say at the Table, that if the Parliament would find Essex money, hee could tell how to spend it, and cheat them too: and dranke to him, and said, he hoped hee would not stay their Sacke that came from Bristoll, meaning from Essex. That in the hands of the Prince his Secretary, I saw Letters about to be Sealed to be directed to Essex. That from diverse of his Officers, I have heard word, of a mutiny intended by Essex to which effect they had gotten some of the best Ci∣tizens to side with them, such as they thought Malignant; but to en∣quire the secret truth I durst not, because they did distrust me, but in the Company of those Townesmen I once was, and heard how Tray∣terously they stood affected; but I know not their Names. I am willing to be deposed upon the premises, not out of any envy, that I owe him, but to protect the lives of the then half betrayed souldiers. WILLIAM APSELEY.
Sir, I understand by some of Chippenham, who were upon Tuesday night with Colon Lunsford at Malmsbury, That newes being then brought unto him of Colonell Es∣sex his removall from Bristoll, he strucke his breast, and seemed to be much troubled therat, so were all the rest of the Cavaliers thou present. These of Chippenham do likewise informe me that they conceive there are not 200 souldiers at Malmssbury not 500 at Ci∣rencester (but of this I shall be better informed before night.) And that most of the  hath beene collected in Wilts and there abouts, being (a the said Chippenham-men are in∣formed) neare upon 6000 l. remaineth yet there in . A good booty in my opinion to invite some of our Forces thither, and Captaine Lewes a meete man to bring on the Foote: But you must then needes spare a troope of horse, which with those horse I have) ought to guard the Avenues there towards Cirencester, if you have any inten to assist me in this designe, then to keepe it as private as possibly may be. I heare nothing for certainty of Prince Ruperes Armie more then yesterday you were as ed withall. I rest, Bath this second of March, 1642. Your humble servant. Thomas Hungerford.
To the Honourable Colonell NATHANIEL FJENNES, Governour of the Army, of the City of Bristoll. The Certaine Information of Richard Kent, John Vernon, and Iohn Smith, late Troopers to Colonell Thomas Essex, touching the Death of VVilliam Kendall, one of their fellow Troopers, (viz.) THAT whereas the said William Kendall did on the 25th. of Ianuary last at night, come unto severall men of the said Troope, desiring them to goe with him the next morning to their Captaine, and with him to goe to their Colo∣nell, to lay open their grievances as to a father (having no in∣tent to demand their pay, but to acquaint him that they were forced for want of ready money, to pay 6 d. for that, which o∣ther men (having ready money) payed but 4 d for, And they being quartered in such houses, where was none (but very bad) hay and provender for their horses, they having no money could not in conscience remove their Horses to better, untill they had discharged the house where they were, and they ha∣ving not money, were constrained to buy their Oates at the Innes, which cost them more by sixe pence in a Bushell, then they could have bought better for in the Market (there being due unto each of them at that time, 4. l. 15. s. And they ha∣ving a very considerable Precedent, therefore (viz.) that for∣merly at Worcester, about ten or twelve of the same Troop, (then under the Command of Colonell Sands) having lost thei
Horses in that fight (whereof the said William Kendall was one) their Colonell giving Order they should have but halfe their pay, they then (as now) in all humility, repaired to the Lord Generall the Earle of Essex, and having admittance to his cham∣ber doore sent in their grievances, and presently received a gracious Answer, having their wrongs speedily redressed) And upon the 24. of Ianuary last in the morning, the said William Kendall and about twenty or more of the said Troopers, think∣ing that by the expressions of griefe of so many, it would have caused the mote pitie and speedie redresse from their Captaine and Colonell) presently went to their Captaine, and meeting with him just at the dore of his lodging, thinking to have ope∣ned their griefe unto him as formerly they had done, he pre∣vented them by telling of them, he had not then received any money for them, but was going to the Governours to see for some, bidding them presently to follow him, and make their case knowne unto the Governour, whereupon they followed him in an orderly manner, as Souldiers with their Swords only by their sides; and comming to the Governours, they went into the house after their Captaine, where some stayed in a little Parlour, and some in the entry, quietly waiting till the Go∣vernour was stirring; and having waited there about a quarter of an houre, the Governour came downe unto them, without his doublet on, having a fire lock Pistoll in his hand with the cock downe, and as it afterwads appeared, it was charged with a Bullet ready span'd and primed, and comming to one of the Troopers, he spake to him after this manner (viz.) Sirra is your Horse ready, whereunto he replyed, yes and please your Honour, then said the Governour, sirra goe and fetch him, ta∣king the Trooper by the Arme, and thrusting of him out of the Parlour doore, speaking the like words, & doing the like action to two or three more of them, they making the like answer as before. And the said then Governour Thom: Essex spake in like manner to the said William Kendall deceased, and after some short pause (not one word more passing between them, he shot the said
William Kendall into his head with his said Pistoll, whereupon he immediately fell downe dead in the place, as Samuell Car Thomas Coset, William Sedwell, VVilliam Smith, the said Richard Rent, Iohn Colstacke, Iames Polle, and Benjamin Parnell who were eye witnesses thereunto, canne and will testifie. All which they knowing to be true, have thought fit to certifie under their hands this fourth day of March. 1642. And they doe further certifie, that the said William Kendall, after the said Colonel Essex had bid him make ready his Horse, desired his Honour to heare him speake two or three words un∣to him, for which cause onely and for no other, the said Co∣lonell Essex immediately shot him with his Pistoll as before, which the eye witnesses before named can testifie at large. Richard Kent. Iohn Cowlstock. William Siddell. Benjamin Parnell. Thomas Coset. James Polle. THese things considered, if a Town of that consequence had here  the losse whereof would have drawn with it the losse of all the we part of England, besides the dangerous consequences to this Kingdom at this time from Ireland, let any impartiall man iudge whether Colonell Fiennes seeing and ob∣serving upon the place what he did, and being advertised of all these particulars, would not in the opinion of the world, have lien under the censure of being  a Knave or a Foole, if to prevent it he had not executed the command be  ed from my Lord Generall. FINIS.
