G1969B E461_7 99872585 162162
OLD ENGLISH BLOOD Boyling afresh in LEICESTERSHIRE MEN: Occasioned by the late barbarous inva∣sion of the SCOTS. As appears by this Letter from my LORD GREY, To Major Generall SKIPPON. LONDON, Printed by H. for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle, at the West end of Pauls. 1648.
OLD ENGLISH BLOOD Boyling a fresh in LEICESTERSHIRE MEN: Occasioned by the late barbarous Invasion of the Scots. SIR, BEcause your ancient and well appro∣ved faithfulnesse speakes it selfe through the Kingdome; I have thought good to communicate the state of our affaires in this County unto you: which is thus. When wee understood that our proclaimed ene∣mies (the Scots) were drawing towards us, even to fall upon this Nation when it was weak; as hee did, on his Brother (and this Esa is Edom, red and
bloody) or as those brethren in iniquity, did upon the Shechamites, when they were sore. We thought all lay at stake, and the God of our mercies awa∣kened us here, to see what might be done for our safety; wee tryed what volunteers would appear, which were not a few, that tendred themselves and their own horses, and those that wanted wee horsed upon those that were dissenters; insomuch that (by the blessing of God) wee have mounted a considerable number for so inconsiderable a County, and shall be able to march with a good strength very suddenly: and this course we have and doe propound with all earnestnes to all our neighbouring Counties; not waiting upon the customary way of pay and quarter, which would retard us, and such a work as this. Wee had our men so willing to goe forth as if they should finde theit wages in their worke; yea, though in the highest of their harvest, and this un∣seasonable weather; At our meeting a March be∣ing propounded, they cryed, ONE AND ALL. Sir, Wee are prest forwards hereunto by the violent call of necessities surrounding us; nor can wee be blamed for neglecting some punctilioes, since selfe-safety, and our present preservation admit no delay. It would rejoyce our hearts to see English blood stirring in the veignes of men at this juncture; pro∣fessing
to your selfe that your honourable carriage in order to the good of this poor shattered Nati∣on makes us to assure you, we can (through mer∣cy) readily live and dye with you upon your pi∣ous and noble principles. I have inclosed sent you a Copy of the last from Lancashire, whereby you may judge of the inhumane temper of the enemy, and the sad con∣dition of our friends. I wish every Tribe in Israel had this laid at their doors. Alas (Sir) did these men bring to us more Holines, Justice▪ Truth, and faithfulnesse, or ra∣ther did they not undermine that Gospel, they say they come to settle; wee would meet them with open armes and bended knees: But I wish their in∣viters hither doe not feel to their cost the ill con∣sequence of the bargaine. Sir, (with our worthy Neighbours in the East∣erne Association, or any others like minded) wee resolve (by Gods help) rather to dye free Eng∣lish men, then to live hewers of wood, and drawers of water to base men whose mercies are Cruel∣ties. Our Horse appearing last Munday at our Ren∣dezvouz, were neer three thousand, all of this County; who expressed much forwardnesse in this service, ambitiously desiring to be in action, waiting only upon a call, which we daily expect from our friends in the North, and for which wee
making our selves ready upon an hours warn∣ing. My request unto your selfe, and all honest Eng∣lish hearts is, that you send us all the help you can through your prayers; and I beseech you to conti∣nue to improve your interest in Heaven and Earth to preserve a Kingdome, that must be saved a∣gainst its will, for which God hath so immediat∣ly and even miraculously spoken from Heaven within three or 4 months last past, in curbing the malice of men, appearing in such desperate tu∣mults every where: The Great Monnuments whereof remain in these places, viz. London, Nor∣wich, South-Wales, Kent, Bury, Willoby, Kingston, Needs, Hereford, Shropshire, Stafford, Nottingham, Woodcraft, Scarborow Yarmouth, Tinmouth, Cum∣berland, Bristall, Isle of weight, Chester, Exceter, North-wales and Cambridge, &c. Oh that men would see these wonders, and bow before the Lord that hath smiten them, and trem∣ble before his foot-stool. To whose grace I commend you, and all the faithfull with you. I remain Sir,  Yours really to serve you Thomas Grey. August 24. 1648.
POST-SCRIPT. Sir, SInce I degan to write the Scots are beaten, twelve thousand prisoners are taken; their Ar∣my broken: three thousand Horse of theirs where Duke Hambleton is, we are this morning pursuing with my forces, who bend towards the North: but are in desperate confu∣sion, wee hope to give agood ac∣compt of them. Yours, Thomas Grey.
