H1960 669.f.17[23] 99870266 163273
A HIGH AND HEAVENLY ECCHO. Explanatory Verses, conteining, as the occasion of, so cautions for the understanding the following Scripture-Ecchoes. NIgh to ones house an answering Eccho is; Many have heard it, and they say it is A None-such Eccho, the like not having found, With some content hearing the same re-sound, Once, and again, mean while 'twas well remember'd What had long since been out of Pulpit heard; Another Eccho, That God commanded Seeke ye my face, It was returned, Lord we will seeke thy face: not properly, This then was call'd an Eccho, certainly: Eccho the self-same words, as spoken, doth re-sound, The words which now are here, now there are found: On this occasion musing, 'twas thought A Scripture-Eccho, sure might be found out. Great is (indeed) Gods blessed condescension, Who teacheth man by man, to the same passion Subject, And in the self-same condemnation, That men might learn, being taught with much compassion Not only thus; but God to help mans faith, Teacheth things heavenly by the things on earth. The print on Wax answers the Seal that made it; So doth Gods grace in man unto the God who gave it. Or as a face doth answer unto face in Glasse, So doth mans heart to God, where there is grace. Men speaking to an Eccho, Eccho doth answer them, Even so Gods grace in man doth answer unto him. Great familiarity 'twill seeme there is 'Twixt God and such men as are neerly his. That you mistake not then the following Ecchoings, Observe well first some premis'd cautions: What of the Lord is said, with reverence is said, Not God debasing, but let him be ador'd: God being infinite, the distance then, Is infinite betwixt our God and men. What's said by him, he not depending on them, 'Tis said, but what's by them's depending on him. He from himself is what he is to them, Saints from their God are what they are to him. God what he is, 'tis without bounds to them; What measure men receive, they are to him. They not beginning thus, and thus with him. But he beginning thus, and thus with them, What's done by God, is done with great perfection, What's done by Saints on earth hath its pollution. Reserving thus to God what's due to him as God, To Gods dishonour dreading to pen a word; Reading what follows to be read, therefrom Improvement make (with care) first to inform. The Lord is not to them a portion, no: Whose hearts answer not him, Ecchoing so; But in whose hearts the Lord his Law hath put, They happy are; examine we our state. As print to Seal, as face to face, and Eccho answereth; Doth so thy heart to God? if there be grace in truth It will; if yet it do not, do not thou Conclude it never will; no, do not so. The Lord may seize upon thy heart, and make Thy heart to him, as follows, Eccho back. But as for such as Eccho to the Lord, Answering him according to his Word; They may not boast: for all the good they have, Was first in Christ, from him they did receive. Such thanks should give to Christ, as from a Spring, From him they have this blessed Ecchoing. Comfort most safe as well as sweet may such suck out from this, Who Ecchoing truly unto God, there God they know he is. These cautions taken as an Antidote, More uses may be made then here are wrote. Twelve Syllables at once that Eccho well repeateth, Twelve Syllables in this [Reader] each line rehearseth, THE ECCHO. God speaketh. I Chusing did chuse thee, Thou chusing did'st chuse me. Thousands I passed by, I pitch'd my love on thee. Thousands thou passedst by, And sett'st thy love on me. Thousands I might have lov'd, And might have past by thee. Thousands thou might'st have lov'd, And might'st have past by me. Precious I do think thee, Precious thou do'st think me. Alone I let not thee, Alone thou lett'st not me. I have took hold on thee, Thou hast took hold on me. Seized on thee have I, Seized on me hast thou. I ioyn my selfe to thee, Thou ioyn'st thy self to me. Possession thou art mine, Possession I am thine. I dwell alwayes in thee, Thou dwell'st alwayes in me. I walk alwayes in thee, Thou walk'st alwayes in me. I gave my selfe to thee, Thou gav'st thy self to me. I set my heart on thee, Thou sett'st thy heart on me. Portion I am to thee, Treasure thou art to me. Thou art, beloved, mine; I am, beloved, thine. Contented I'le not be with thine, but with thy self. Contented thoul't not be with mine, but with my self. All that I am it's thine, All that thou art it's mine. I do abide in thee, Thou do'st abide in me. Mine eye is still on thee, Thine eye is still on me. I rest my love on thee, Thou rest'st thy love on me. I do delight in thee, Thou do'st delight in me. I am a friend to thee, Thou art a friend to me. Kindnesse to them shew I, which kindnesse shew to thee. Kindnesse to them shew'st thou, which kindnesse shew to me. Foes who are so to me, Thou countest foes to thee. I never will have peace with such as war with thee. Thou never wilt have peace with such as war with me. I take part still with thee against thy foes that be. Thou tak'st part still with me against my foes that be. I am somewhat like thee, thou art somewhat like me. Both just and true am I, Both just and true art thou. Just in dealings am I, Just in dealiings art thou. True of my words am I, True of thy words art thou. Bent to mercie am I, Bent to mercie art thou. Such as serve me in love, Although they do not well, I accept of their wils; Thus likewise doest thou. For evill good do I, For evill good do'st thou. Holy likewise am I, Holy likewise art thou. Patient also am I, Patient also art thou. Such as do anger me, Such long forbear do I: Such as do anger thee, such long forbearest thou. Such Angels and such men, as good and holy are: Such are prized by me, Such are prized by thee. What hated is by me, That hated is by thee. Sins of all kindes hate I, Sins of all kindes hat'st thou. Such doings and such words, as hated are by me, Such doings and such words are hatefull unto thee. What is belov'd by me, That is belov'd by thee. Those Angels and those men, which holy are and good, Beloved are by me, Such are belov'd by thee. That which well pleaseth me, That also pleaseth thee. Such Angels and such men obeying do please me: Such Angels and such men obeying do please thee. The Believer Eccho's. I Chusing did chuse thee, Thou chusing did'st chuse me. Thousands I passed by, I pitch'd my love on thee. Thousands thou passedst by, And sett'st thy love on me. Thousands I might have lov'd, And might have past by thee. Thousands thou might'st have lov'd, And might'st have past by me. Precious I do think thee, Precious thou do'st think me. Alone I let not thee, Alone thou lett'st not me. I have took hold on thee, Thou hast took hold on me. Seized on thee have I, Seized on me hast thou. I ioyn my selfe to thee, Thou ioyn'st thy self to me. Possession thou art mine, Possession I am thine. I dwell alwayes in thee, Thou dwell'st alwayes in me. I walk alwayes in thee, Thou walk'st alwayes in me. I gave my selfe to thee, Thou gav'st thy self to me. I set my heart on thee, Thou sett'st thy heart on me. Portion I am to thee, Treasure thou art to me. Thou art, beloved, mine; I am, beloved, thine. Contented I'le not be with thine, but with thy self. Contented thoul't not be with mine, but with my self. All that I am it's thine, All that thou art it's mine. I do abide in thee, Thou do'st abide in me. Mine eye is still on thee, Thine eye is still on me. I rest my love on thee, Thou rest'st thy love on me. I do delight in thee, Thou do'st delight in me. I am a friend to thee, Thou art a friend to me. Kindnesse to them shew I, which kindnesse shew to thee. Kindnesse to them shew'st thou, which kindnesse shew to me. Foes who are so to me, Thou countest foes to thee. I never will have peace with such as war with thee. Thou never wilt have peace with such as war with me. I take part still with thee against thy foes that be. Thou tak'st part still with me against my foes that be. I am somewhat like thee, thou art somewhat like me. Both just and true am I, Both just and true art thou. Just in dealings am I, Just in dealiings art thou. True of my words am I, True of thy words art thou. Bent to mercie am I, Bent to mercie art thou. Such as serve me in love, Although they do not well, I accept of their wils; Thus likewise doest thou. For evill good do I, For evill good do'st thou. Holy likewise am I, Holy likewise art thou. Patient also am I, Patient also art thou. Such as do anger me, Such long forbear do I: Such as do anger thee, such long forbearest thou. Such Angels and such men, as good and holy are: Such are prized by me, Such are prized by thee. What hated is by me, That hated is by thee. Sins of all kindes hate I, Sins of all kindes hat'st thou. Such doings and such words, as hated are by me, Such doings and such words are hatefull unto thee. What is belov'd by me, That is belov'd by thee. Those Angels and those men, which holy are and good, Beloved are by me, Such are belov'd by thee. That which well pleaseth me, That also pleaseth thee. Such Angels and such men obeying do please me: Such Angels and such men obeying do please thee. God speaketh. Good doings and good words of such as holy be, They pleasing are to me, They pleasing are to thee. What doeth anger me, That doeth anger thee. Ill doings and ill words of such as wicked are: 'Tis such that anger me, 'Tis such that anger thee. What grievous is to me, That grievous is to thee. Divisions of the good, They grievous are to me: Divisions of the good, They grievous are to thee. Afflictions of the Saints are grievous unto me: Afflictions of the Saints are grievous unto thee. Acquaintance I am thine, Acquaintance thou art mine. Suitablenesse (it seems) is between me and thee: Reconciled am I to thee, and thou to me Art reconciled so, that peace shall ever be. Because I am agreed with thee, and thou with me: Therefore I walk with thee, Therefore thou walk'st with me. Much assurance have I given that I am thine, And ever shall remain, The same thing hast thou done. I give my word I'me thine, Thou giv'st thy word thou'rt mine: Mine Oath thou hast I'me thine, Thy Oath I have thou'rt mine. I seal to assure thee, Thou seal'st to assure me. I witnesse have thou'rt mine, Thou witness hast I'me thine. I earnest give to thee, Thou earnest giv'st to me. I will never leave thee, nor will I thee forsake: Thou wilt never leave me, nor wilt thou me forsake. I will not lose what I have done ere now for thee: Thou wilt not lose what thou hast done ere now for me. That commerce which have I with thee shall more increase, Be full, and never end: Thus likewise 'tis with thee. If I should now leave thee, Then all I 've done is lost: If thou should'st now leave me, Then all thou'st done is lost. I'le ne're have done with thee, Till that thou be with me: Thou'lt nere have done with me, Till that I be with thee. When I get thee to me, And thou gett'st me to thee: I'le never part from thee, Thou'lt never part from me. The Believer Eccho's. Good doings and good words of such as holy be, They pleasing are to me, They pleasing are to thee. What doeth anger me, That doeth anger thee. Ill doings and ill words of such as wicked are: 'Tis such that anger me, 'Tis such that anger thee. What grievous is to me, That grievous is to thee. Divisions of the good, They grievous are to me: Divisions of the good, They grievous are to thee. Afflictions of the Saints are grievous unto me: Afflictions of the Saints are grievous unto thee. Acquaintance I am thine, Acquaintance thou art mine. Suitablenesse (it seems) is between me and thee: Reconciled am I to thee, and thou to me Art reconciled so, that peace shall ever be. Because I am agreed with thee, and thou with me: Therefore I walk with thee, Therefore thou walk'st with me. Much assurance have I given that I am thine, And ever shall remain, The same thing hast thou done. I give my word I'me thine, Thou giv'st thy word thou'rt mine: Mine Oath thou hast I'me thine, Thy Oath I have thou'rt mine. I seal to assure thee, Thou seal'st to assure me. I witnesse have thou'rt mine, Thou witness hast I'me thine. I earnest give to thee, Thou earnest giv'st to me. I will never leave thee, nor will I thee forsake: Thou wilt never leave me, nor wilt thou me forsake. I will not lose what I have done ere now for thee: Thou wilt not lose what thou hast done ere now for me. That commerce which have I with thee shall more increase, Be full, and never end: Thus likewise 'tis with thee. If I should now leave thee, Then all I 've done is lost: If thou should'st now leave me, Then all thou'st done is lost. I'le ne're have done with thee, Till that thou be with me: Thou'lt nere have done with me, Till that I be with thee. When I get thee to me, And thou gett'st me to thee: I'le never part from thee, Thou'lt never part from me. &c. &c. here is put to what is above said, To what invented is 'tis easie for to add. Say so it is will holy hearts unto these Ecchoings; But gracelesse hearts perhaps will think they are very strange things. As if six Bels were rung just at the Vale Where th' Eccho is, Eccho would answer all: So here, this Eccho [Reader] may be sung Unto the Tune, as when six Bels are rung. By a faithful Minister of the Gospel. London, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in Cheapside, 1653.
